 Paul Maurice Kelly was born on 13 January 1955 in Adelaide , to John Erwin Kelly , a lawyer , and Josephine ( née Filippini ) , the sixth of eight surviving children . According to Rip It Up magazine , " legend has it " that Kelly 's mother gave birth to him " in a taxi outside North Adelaide 's Calvary Hospital " . In the lyrics for his Comedy ( 1991 ) album track , " It 's All Downhill from Here " Kelly wrote : 
 I was born in a crowded taxi 
 Daddy scooped me right up off the floor 
 And he carried me up the path through the big swinging doors 
 Although Kelly was raised as a Roman Catholic , he later described himself as a non @-@ believer in any religion . He is the great great grandson of Jeremiah Kelly , who emigrated from Ireland in 1852 and settled in Clare , South Australia . His paternal grandfather , Francis Kelly , established a law firm in 1917 , which his father , John , joined in 1937 . John Kelly died in 1968 at the age of 52 , after being diagnosed with Parkinson 's disease three years earlier . Paul Kelly was thirteen years old when his father died . Kelly described his father : " I have good memories , he was the kind of father that , well , I missed him when he died very much . The older children were growing into him at the time he died . He was not well enough to play sport with me " . In his song , " Adelaide " , from Post ( 1985 ) , he wrote : 
 Dad 's hands used to shake but I never knew he was dying 
 I was 13 I never dreamed he could fall 
 And all the great aunts were red in the eyes from crying 
 I rang the bells I never felt nothing at all 
 All the king 's horses all the king 's men 
 Cannot bring him back again 
 Kelly 's maternal grandfather was an Argentine @-@ born , Italian @-@ speaking opera singer , Count Ercole Filippini , a leading baritone for the La Scala Opera Company in Milan . Filippini was touring Australia in 1914 with a Spanish opera company when World War I broke out ; Filippini stayed and later married Anne <unk> , one of his students . As <unk> Anne Filippini , she was Australia 's first female symphony orchestra conductor . She sang the role of Marguerite in Australian Broadcasting Corporation ( ABC ) Radio Perth 's performance of Faust in 1928 . Kelly 's grandparents started the Italo @-@ Australian Opera Company , which toured the country in the 1920s . 
 Josephine raised the younger children alone after John 's death , but found time to assist others in need . Paul 's oldest sister , Anne , became a nun and went on to write hymns , while a younger sister , Mary @-@ Jo , plays piano in Latin bands and teaches music . An older brother , Martin , works for Edmund Rice International , with another brother , Tony , a drug and alcohol counsellor , who ran as an Australian Greens candidate in the 2001 and 2004 federal elections . Josephine Kelly moved to Brisbane , where she died in 2000 , at the age of 76 . 
 Kelly attended <unk> College , a Christian Brothers school , where he played trumpet and studied piano , became the first XI cricket captain , played in the first XVIII football ( Australian rules ) , and he was named dux of his senior year . Kelly studied arts at Flinders University in 1973 , but left after a term , disillusioned with academic life . He began writing prose and started a magazine with some friends . Kelly spent several years working odd jobs , travelling around the country and learning guitar before he moved to Melbourne in 1976 . 
 = = 1974 – 84 : Early career and with the Dots = = 
 While travelling around Australia , Paul Kelly made his first public performance in 1974 in Hobart . He later recalled : 
 I was living there at the time and there was a folk club at Salamanca Place . They had a night , I think a Monday night , where anyone could get up . I sang Dylan 's " Girl from North Country " and " Streets of Forbes " , a traditional Australian song about Ben Hall . I can 't really remember how it went – I remember I had a lot to drink afterwards from relief . I was incredibly nervous . 
 His first published song , " It 's the Falling Apart that Makes You " , was written after listening to Van Morrison 's Astral Weeks at the age of 19 , although in an interview with Drum Media he recalled writing his first unpublished song : " It was an open @-@ tuning and had four lines about catching trains . I have got a recording of it somewhere . It was called ' Catching a Train ' . I wrote a lot of songs about trains early on , trains and fires , and then I moved on to water " . In 1976 , Kelly appeared on <unk> , a compilation album featuring various Melbourne @-@ based artists , and joined pub @-@ rockers The High Rise Bombers from 1977 to 1978 . The High Rise Bombers included Kelly ( vocals , guitar , songwriter ) , Martin Armiger ( guitar , vocals , songwriter ) , Lee Cass ( bass guitar ) , Chris Dyson ( guitar ) , Sally Ford ( saxophone , songwriter ) , John Lloyd ( drums ) , and Keith Shadwick ( saxophone ) . Chris Langman ( guitar , vocals ) replaced Dyson in early 1978 . In August , after Armiger left for The Sports and Ford for The Kevins , Kelly formed Paul Kelly and the Dots with Langman and Lloyd . The High Rise Bombers recorded two tracks , " She 's Got It " and " Domestic Criminal " , which appeared on The Melbourne Club , a 1981 compilation by various artists on Missing Link Records . 
 Kelly had already established himself as a respected songwriter — other Melbourne musicians would go to see him on their nights off . Richard Guilliatt , writing for The Monthly , later described Kelly from a 1979 performance at Richmond 's Kingston Hotel , the singer was " a skinny guy with a head of black curls framing a pale face and a bent nose ... singing with his eyes closed , one arm outstretched and the other resting on the body of the Fender Telecaster " . Kelly was introduced to Hilary Brown at one of the Dots ' gigs and they later married – the relationship is described in " When I First Met Your Ma " ( 1992 ) . Brown 's father supplied Kelly with a gravy recipe – used on " How to Make Gravy " ( 1996 ) . Their son , Declan , was born in 1980 . 
 The Dots included various line @-@ ups from 1978 to 1982 . The band released their debut single " Recognition " in 1979 , which did not reach the Australian Kent Music Report Singles Chart top 50 . Paul Kelly and the Dots signed to Mushroom Records and issued " Billy Baxter " in November 1980 , which peaked at No. 38 . Rock music historian , Ian McFarlane described it as a " delightful , ska @-@ tinged " track . Kelly 's first television performance was " Billy Baxter " on the national pop show Countdown . Their debut album , Talk , followed in March 1981 , which reached No. 44 on the Kent Music Report Albums Chart . Late in 1981 Paul Kelly and the Dots recorded their second album , Manila , in the Philippines ' capital . It was issued in August 1982 , but had no chart success . Release was delayed by line @-@ up changes and because Kelly was assaulted in Melbourne – he had his jaw broken . 
 In an October 1982 interview with The Australian Women 's Weekly , Kelly indicated he was more pleased with Manila than Talk as " It has more unity ... with this one we didn 't have people dropping into the studio to play . " Years later Kelly disavowed both Dots albums : " I wish I could grab the other two and put ' em in a big hole " . The 1982 film , Starstruck , was directed by Gillian Armstrong and starred Jo Kennedy . Paul Kelly and the Dots supplied " Rocking Institution " for its soundtrack and Kelly added to the score . Kennedy released " Body and Soul " , a cover of Split Enz ' " She Got Body , She Got Soul " as a shared single with " Rocking Institution " . Acting in a minor role in Starstruck was Kaarin Fairfax , who later became Kelly 's second wife . Kelly was without a recording contract after the Dots folded in 1982 . 
 Paul Kelly Band was formed in 1983 with Michael Armiger ( Martin Armiger 's younger brother , bass guitar ) , Chris Coyne ( saxophone ) , Maurice Frawley ( guitar ) and Greg Martin ( drums ) . By 1984 Michael Barclay replaced Martin on drums and Graham Lee ( guitar , pedal steel guitar ) joined . Kelly 's involvement in the Melbourne drug culture — he described his heroin addiction as " a long period of occasional use " — resulted in erratic performances . Problems with his marriage and drug use disrupted his career , and by 1984 the marriage had broken up . Hilary had moved to Sydney , leaving their young son with Kelly . He disbanded the group three months later and relocated to Sydney so he could share parenting responsibilities with Hilary while Declan grew up . 
 = = 1985 – 91 : Coloured Girls to Messengers = = 
 Paul Kelly stayed with Don Walker ( Cold Chisel ) in Kings Cross – Walker had lived with Hilary 's sister – and wrote new songs on Walker 's piano . Kelly then moved into a flat with Paul Hewson ( Dragon ) in Elizabeth Bay . Both Walker and Hewson encouraged Kelly to continue with his song @-@ writing . By January 1985 , he recorded the self @-@ funded album — at a cost of $ 3 @,@ 500 — Post . Session musicians included Michael Barclay ( Weddings Parties Anything ) on harmonies , guitarist Steve Connolly ( The <unk> ) , and bass guitarist Ian <unk> ( Rose Tattoo , X ) . They spent two weeks recording at Clive Shakespeare 's studio . Shakespeare engineered the album and co @-@ produced with Kelly . It was released in May 1985 on the independent label White Records , and licensed to Mushroom Records . 
 Kelly dedicated Post to his former flatmate , Hewson , who had died of a heroin overdose in January . According to McFarlane : " [ it 's ] a stark , highly personalised collection of acoustic songs that showcased the extraordinary breadth of Kelly 's songwriting skills . " Rolling Stone ( Australia ) hailed Post as the best record of 1985 . AllMusic 's Mike DeGagne felt " While he focuses on life 's daily tragedies and tribulations , there is a missing element in the music , as it lacks any vigor or flash " . A single , " From St. Kilda to King 's Cross " , was released from the album , but did not chart . Russell Crowe , during his first trip to the US , visited the tourist venue of Death Valley and used Post to refocus himself : " [ his ] concise insights and acerbic wisdom are exactly the music for strolling the bottom of ancient oceans , both literal and metaphoric " . After recording Post , Kelly established a full @-@ time band , which included Armiger , Barclay , and Connolly , bass guitarist Jon Schofield , and keyboardist Peter Bull . 
 Paul Kelly and the Coloured Girls were named through a joke based on Lou Reed 's song " Walk on the Wild Side " . Armiger soon left , and the Coloured Girls line @-@ up stabilised in late 1985 as Barclay , Bull , Connolly , and Schofield . Stuart Coupe , Kelly 's manager , advised him to sign with Regular Records due to difficulty re @-@ signing with Mushroom 's Michael Gudinski . Michelle Higgins , Mushroom 's public relations officer , was a Kelly supporter and locked herself into a <unk> Townhouse Hotel room — at Mushroom 's expense — for nearly a week in mid @-@ 1986 , and refused to leave until Gudinski had signed Kelly to a two @-@ album recording contract . Kelly performed for The Rock Party , a charity project initiated by The National Campaign Against Drug Abuse , which included other Australasian musicians . The Rock Party released a 12 " single , " Everything to Live For " , which was produced by Joe <unk> , Phil Rigger , and Phil Beazley . 
 In September , Paul Kelly and the Coloured Girls released a 24 @-@ track double LP , Gossip . The album included remakes of four songs from Post , and also featured " Maralinga ( Rainy Land ) " , a song about the effects of British nuclear tests on the Maralinga Tjarutja ( indigenous people of Maralinga , South Australia ) . Gossip peaked at No. 15 , with singles chart success for " Before Too Long " which peaked at No. 15 , and " Darling It Hurts " which reached No. 25 . A single LP version of Gossip featuring 15 songs was issued in the United States by A & M Records in July 1987 . DeGagne noted that " [ it ] bursts at the seams with blustery , distinguished tunes captivating both the somberness and the intrigue thrown forward from this fine Australian storyteller " . 
 Gossip was co @-@ produced by Kelly and Alan Thorne ( Hoodoo Gurus , The Stems ) who , according to music journalist Robert Forster ( former The Go @-@ Betweens singer @-@ songwriter ) , helped the band create " a sound that will not only influence future roots @-@ rock bands but , through its directness , sparkle and dedication to the song , will also come to be seen as particularly Australian . Ultimately , it means the records these people made together are timeless " . Due to possible racist connotations , the band changed its name for international releases to Paul Kelly and the Messengers . They made a US tour , initially supporting Crowded House and then headlining , travelling across the US by bus . " Darling It Hurts " peaked at No. 19 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock chart in 1987 . The New York Times rock critic Jon Pareles wrote " Mr. Kelly sang one smart , catchy three @-@ minute song after another – dozens of them – as the band played with no @-@ frills directness " following the band 's performance at the Bottom Line Club in New York . 
 Paul Kelly and the Coloured Girls ' second album , Under the Sun , was released in late 1987 in Australia and New Zealand , and in early 1988 in North America and Europe ( under the name Paul Kelly and the Messengers ) . On the Kent Music Report Albums Chart , it reached No. 19 . The lead single " To Her Door " , written by Kelly , peaked at No. 14 on the related singles chart . Forster indicated that the song demonstrated one of Kelly 's finest qualities as a songwriter which is his unforced empathy . DeGagne observed a style similar to Elvis Costello and Steve <unk> , and said the album provided " acoustically bright story songs and character @-@ based tales with unlimited substance " . 
 Another single , " Dumb Things " , was released in early 1989 and attained No. 36 on the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) Singles Chart . In the US , it reached No. 16 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart . The song was included on the soundtrack for the 1988 Yahoo Serious film Young Einstein . The video , directed by Claudia Castle , won an ARIA Award for ' Best Video ' . Kelly met Kaarin Fairfax , his second wife , in 1988 and they married in 1993 . From 1989 to 1992 Fairfax supplied backing vocals on tracks by Paul Kelly and the Messengers . In 1990 , as country music artist Mary @-@ Jo Starr , she released three singles and an album , Too Many Movies , using the Messengers and Kelly as session musicians . Michael Armiger , Connolly , and Frawley were in her backing tour band , The Drive @-@ in Motel . Fairfax and Kelly 's two children are Madeleine ( born 1991 ) and Memphis ( born 1993 ) . 
 So Much Water So Close to Home was released in 1989 by Paul Kelly and the Messengers in all markets . It peaked at No. 10 on the ARIA Albums Chart , but none of its singles reached the ARIA Top 40 Singles Chart . Forster stated that , with " Everything 's Turning to White " , Kelly shows mastery in condensing a Raymond Carver tale of fishermen who discover a dead woman 's body but continue to fish before reporting their find . The same short story was used for the 2006 film , Jindabyne , for which Kelly composed the soundtrack . DeGagne preferred " Everything 's Turning to White " and " Sweet Guy " to the other album tracks , which " seem a little weak in the content department " . Kelly relocated back to Melbourne after having lived in Sydney for six years . Another US tour was undertaken , but there was no further chart success for albums or singles released in the US market . 
 In 1991 the band released Comedy , which peaked at No. 12 on the ARIA Albums Chart . DeGagne noticed " a folk @-@ filled tinge to each song , but the occasional quickened pace balances out these tunes rather nicely " . " From Little Things Big Things Grow " , a seven @-@ minute track from the album , was co @-@ written by Kelly and Kev Carmody . It highlights the <unk> Strike and Vincent <unk> as part of the Indigenous Australian struggle for land rights and reconciliation . Forster indicates it has Dylanesque influences , and shows Kelly " honing the skills of a fine balladeer and storyteller " . A cover version that was released in May 2008 by The GetUp Mob , part of the GetUp ! advocacy group , peaked at No. 4 on the ARIA singles charts . This version included samples from speeches by Prime Ministers Paul Keating in 1992 and Kevin Rudd in 2008 . It featured vocals by Carmody and Kelly , as well as other Australian artists . Kelly collaborated with members of indigenous band Yothu Yindi to write " Treaty " , which peaked at No. 11 in September 1991 . 
 " To Her Door " and " Treaty " were voted into the APRA Top 30 Australian songs of all time in 2001 . Paul Kelly and the Messengers gave their last performance in August 1991 , with Kelly set to pursue a solo career . He justified his decision : " We forged a style together . But I felt if we had kept going it would have got formulaic and that 's why I broke it up . I wanted to try and start moving into other areas , start mixing things up " . Paul Kelly and the Messengers ' final album , Hidden Things , was a collection of previously released B @-@ sides , stray non @-@ LP tracks , radio sessions , and other rarities . It was released in May 1992 , and reached No. 29 . One track , " Rally Around the Drum " , written with Archie Roach , was about an indigenous tent boxing man . 
 = = 1992 – 99 : Solo career and with others = = 
 Since 1992 Paul Kelly has had a solo career , fronted the Paul Kelly Band , and worked in occasional collaborations with other songwriters and performers . In 1992 he was asked to compose songs for Funerals and Circuses , a Roger Bennett play about racial tensions in small @-@ town Australia . Kelly took the role of a petrol attendant when the play premiered at the Adelaide Fringe Festival that year and was directed by his wife , Fairfax . Kelly co @-@ wrote " Hey Boys " with Mark Seymour ( Hunters & Collectors ) for the soundtrack of the 1992 Australian film , Garbo ; when released as a single it peaked at No. 62 . Kelly contributed songs and vocals to the soundtrack of the 1993 television series Seven Deadly Sins . 
 Kelly 's first post @-@ Messengers solo release was the live double CD Live , May 1992 , released in November 1992 . AllMusic 's Brett <unk> noted that Kelly 's band had fleshed out his songs in the studio , but he was still able to show " his vignettes of life , love , and the underbelly of both have plenty of power on their own " . Kelly had relocated to Los Angeles and signed with Vanguard Records to tour the US as a solo artist . While in Los Angeles he produced fellow Australian Renée Geyer 's album Difficult Woman ( 1994 ) . Kelly returned to Australia in 1993 and wrote a collection of lyrics , aptly titled Lyrics , which opens with a quote from Anton Chekhov : " I don 't have what you would call a philosophy or coherent world view so I shall have to limit myself to describing how my heroes love , marry , give birth , die and speak . " 
 His next album Wanted Man , released in 1994 , reached No. 11 . Kelly also composed music for the 1994 film <unk> ... <unk> , directed by <unk> <unk> . It is set in the notorious H division of Victoria 's Pentridge Prison . Kelly 's next solo releases were Deeper Water in 1995 and Live at the Continental and the Esplanade in 1996 . Between March and May 1995 Kelly undertook a seven @-@ week tour of North America , appearing on several dates with Liz Phair and Joe Jackson . 
 By 1996 , Paul Kelly Band members included Stephen Hadley ( bass , ex @-@ Black Sorrows ) , Bruce Haymes ( keyboards ) , Peter Luscombe ( drums , ex @-@ Black Sorrows ) , and Shane O 'Mara ( guitar ) . Spencer P. Jones ( Beasts of Bourbon ) was guest guitarist on some performances . This line @-@ up issued the CD @-@ EP How to Make Gravy , with the title track earning Kelly a ' Song of the Year ' nomination at the 1998 Australasian Performing Rights Association ( APRA ) Music Awards . APRA 's Debbie Kruger noted Kelly 's " attraction to the theatrical " where the same protagonist is described in " To Her Door " , " Love Never Runs on Time " ( from Wanted Man ) and " How to Make Gravy " . 
 In 1997 , Kelly released his compilation album , Songs from the South : Paul Kelly 's Greatest Hits , on Mushroom Records . The 20 @-@ track album peaked at No. 2 , and has achieved quadruple platinum certification , indicating sales of over 280 @,@ 000 . Kelly won the ARIA Award in 1997 for ' Best Male Artist ' , having been previously nominated in 1993 , 1995 , and 1996 . At 20 September 1997 ceremony , he was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame . Kelly won the ' Best Male Artist ' award again in 1998 , and has been nominated for the same award a further seven times . 
 Kelly 's next album , Words and Music , appeared in 1998 , which peaked at No. 17 , and included three singles that did not reach the Top 40 . Andrew Ford interviewed Kelly for ABC radio 's The Music Show in May . Ford found the album " very exciting , very visceral ... you can almost smell the sex " . Kelly admitted that he preferred R & B music which deals with sex , love , and joy without becoming " either banal or smug " . He finds such songs more difficult to write but believes he has started to do so . 1998 also saw Kelly undertaking a three @-@ week tour of Canada and the US to promote Words and Music . 
 Smoke was released by Paul Kelly with Uncle Bill ; the latter is a Melbourne bluegrass band comprising Gerry Hale on guitar , dobro , mandolin , fiddle , and vocals ; Adam Gare on fiddle , mandolin , and vocals ; Peter Somerville on banjo and vocals ; and Stuart Speed on double bass . The album featured a mix of old and new Kelly songs treated in classic bluegrass fashion . " Our Sunshine " , newly written , was a tribute to Ned Kelly , a famous Australian outlaw ( not related ) . Kelly had previously recorded a Slim Dusty track with Uncle Bill , " Thanks a Lot " , for the compilation Where Joy Kills Sorrow ( 1997 ) . Smoke was issued on Kelly 's new label , <unk> , through EMI Records in October 1999 , and peaked at No. 36 . It won three awards from the Victorian Country Music Association : ' Best Group ( Open ) ' , ' Best Group ( Victorian ) ' , and ' Album of the Year ' in 2000 . In September Kelly performed at the Spiegeltent at the Edinburgh Festival , as well as shows in London and Dublin . 
 In 1999 Kelly formed the band Professor Ratbaggy with Hadley ( bass guitar , backing vocals ) , Haymes ( keyboards , organ , backing vocals ) and Luscombe ( drums ) . Kelly provided guitars and vocals for their debut album , Professor Ratbaggy , on EMI Records . Songs were written jointly by all group members and their work was a more groove @-@ oriented style compared to Kelly 's usual folk or rock formula , using samples , synthesiser and percussion . Kelly 's second anthology of lyrics entitled Don 't Start Me Talking was first published in 1999 , with subsequent songs appended in the 2004 edition . This second edition was added to the Victorian Certificate of Education English reading list for Year 12 ( final year of secondary schooling ) in 2006 . 
 = = 2000 – 09 : Soundtracks and tribute albums = = 
 During the 2000s Paul Kelly worked as a composer for film and TV scores and soundtracks , including Lantana ( also as a member of Professor Ratbaggy ) , Silent Partner , and One Night the Moon in 2001 , Fireflies in 2004 , and Jindabyne in 2006 . These works have resulted in five award wins : ARIA ' Best Original Soundtrack ' for Lantana ( with Hadley , Haymes and O 'Mara ) ; Australian Film Institute ( AFI ) ' Open Craft Award ' , Film Critics Circle of Australia Awards ' Best Music Score ' , and Screen Music Award ' Best Soundtrack Album ' for One Night the Moon ( with Mairead Hannan , Carmody , John <unk> , Deirdre Hannan , and Alice Garner ) ; Valladolid International Film Festival ' Best Music ' award for Jindabyne ; and six further nominations . 
 Kelly also acted in One Night the Moon alongside his then wife , Fairfax , and with their younger daughter Memphis . All three sing on the soundtrack , including together for the lullaby , " One Night the Moon " ( see pictured ) . According to Romaine Moreton , Australian Screen Online curator , the " lullaby that the family sings , written by Paul Kelly , sets the tone of the film ... The song is used in this film as a vehicle to explore the characters ' interior worlds , something very unusual for a film " . Kelly and Fairfax separated before the film 's release . 
 Roll on Summer was released in 2000 as a four @-@ track EP , which peaked at No. 40 on the ARIA singles charts . Kelly issued ... Nothing but a Dream in 2001 , returning to his core singer @-@ songwriter style . It peaked at No. 7 on the albums chart , and achieved gold record status . The North American version of ... Nothing but a Dream added all four tracks from the Roll on Summer EP as bonus tracks . Murray Bramwell appraised four Kelly @-@ related works in Adelaide Review , " each of them indicative of the rich variety of his gift " . On the album ... Nothing but a Dream , he preferred the opening track , " If I Could Start Today Again " , to the radio single , " Somewhere in the City " , and found the album generally to be " full of familiar Kelly riffs and trademarks " . On Silent Partner Kelly 's songwriting with Hale provides " some splendid instrumentals " with " a delightfully airy sound " . The Lantana soundtrack showed Kelly 's " confidence as a composer and his strong grasp of a wide range of musical styles " . Finally , One Night the Moon included Mairead Hannan 's " richly melodic Irish airs " which " beautifully counterpoint Kelly 's work " and Carmody 's " distinctive ballads " . 
 In March 2001 Kelly was a support act for Bob Dylan 's tour of Australia . Between August and November Kelly performed a series of acoustic shows in New Zealand , the United Kingdom , Ireland , Spain , and France ( the latter supporting Ani DiFranco ) . In 2002 he undertook a six @-@ week tour of North America , which was followed by a tour of the UK and Ireland later that year . In 2002 and 2003 two tribute albums of Kelly 's songs were released : Women at the Well featured songs performed by female artists , including Bic <unk> , Jenny Morris , Renée Geyer , Magic Dirt , Rebecca Barnard ( Rebecca 's Empire ) , Christine Anu , and Kasey Chambers ; and Stories of Me , which featured fellow songwriters James Reyne , Mia Dyson , and Jeff Lang . Chambers , a country music artist , sees Kelly as a role model : " He 's the perfect example of the storyteller that I would love to be " . In 2003 Kelly undertook a tour of North America , the UK , and Ireland , performing at the Edmonton International Fringe Festival and again at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe . 
 Ways & Means was issued in 2004 and peaked at No. 13 . Though identified as a solo record , it was more of a group effort , with a backing band , later dubbed the Boon Companions , co @-@ writing most of the tracks . The Boon Companions consisted of Kelly 's nephew Dan Kelly on guitar , Peter Luscombe on drums , his brother Dan Luscombe on guitar and keyboards , and Bill McDonald on bass guitar . Bramwell was impressed with their live performance in May : " Kelly steers and shapes not only his music , but the way he presents it . A live show is never just knocked together ... the details are always careful " . In February ABC Television started broadcasting the series Fireflies , which featured a score by Kelly and Stephen Rae . The associated soundtrack CD , Fireflies : Songs of Paul Kelly , included tracks by Kelly , Paul Kelly and the Boon Companions , Professor Ratbaggy , and Paul Kelly with Uncle Bill . Sian Prior sang with the Boon Companions on the Fireflies track " Los <unk> " , which later appeared on Stardust Five . Prior , an opera singer , became Kelly 's girlfriend in 2002 . They met when she interviewed him for Sunday Arts on ABC Radio . Prior is also a journalist and university lecturer . 
 In March 2004 Kelly performed across North America , including New York , Boston , Chicago , Seattle , and Los Angeles . This was followed by a more extensive series of shows between July and September throughout North America and Europe . In December , in Melbourne , Kelly performed 100 of his songs in alphabetical order over two nights . A similar set of shows were performed in a studio at Sydney Opera House in December 2006 , these and similar sets became known as his A to Z shows . Foggy Highway was a second bluegrass @-@ oriented album for Kelly , credited to Paul Kelly and the Stormwater Boys and issued in 2005 . It peaked at No. 23 on the ARIA albums charts . The line @-@ up for the majority of the tracks was Kelly , Mick Albeck ( fiddle ) , James Gillard ( bass guitar ) , Rod McCormack ( guitar ) , Ian Simpson ( banjo ) , and Trev Warner ( mandolin ) . As with Smoke ( his previous bluegrass release ) , Foggy Highway consisted of a mix of new compositions and rearranged Kelly classics . The Canadian edition of the release included a four @-@ song bonus EP of out @-@ takes . 
 In June 2005 Kelly put together Timor Leste – Freedom Rising , a collaboration of Australian artists donating new recordings , unreleased tracks , and b @-@ sides to make connections between a wide range of music to raise money for environmental , health , and education projects in East Timor ( Timor @-@ Leste ) . Funds raised from the album went to Life , Love and Health and The Alola Foundation . On 26 March 2006 Kelly performed at the Commonwealth Games closing ceremony in Melbourne , singing " Leaps and Bounds " and " Rally Around the Drum " . On 8 October Paul Kelly and the Boon Companions , Hoodoo Gurus , and Sime Nugent performed at the Athenaeum Theatre in Melbourne to again raise funds for Life , Love and Health , and to help support their ongoing programs in Timor @-@ Leste in response to the needs of the people during the humanitarian crisis . 
 Kelly formed Stardust Five in 2006 , with the same line @-@ up as Paul Kelly and the Boon Companions from Ways & Means . They released their self @-@ titled debut album in March , with each member contributing by composing the music and Kelly providing lyrics . The album has backing vocals by Prior on two tracks . Kelly toured North America again in 2006 , appearing together with The Waifs at clubs and festivals in several US states and the Canadian province of Alberta . In November – December Kelly undertook his A @-@ Z tour , a series of solo acoustic performances playing 100 of his songs in alphabetical order over four nights , at the Brisbane Powerhouse , Melbourne 's Spiegeltent , and at the Sydney Opera House . 
 In 2007 Kelly released Stolen Apples , containing songs based on religious themes ; it peaked at No. 8 , and achieved gold record status . Following the album 's recording , Dan Luscombe left to join The Drones . He was replaced by Ashley Naylor ( Even ) on guitar and Cameron Bruce ( The Polaroids ) on keyboards . A tour in support of the album saw Kelly perform the entire album plus selected hits from his catalogue . One of the last performances , on 20 September 2007 in Toowoomba , was filmed and released on DVD as Live Apples : Stolen Apples Performed Live in its <unk> Plus 16 More Songs , in April 2008 . 
 Kelly made his first appearance at the Big Day Out concerts across Australia in early 2008 , while in March he performed at the South by Southwest music festival in Austin , Texas . Kelly released Stolen Apples in Ireland and the UK in July , and followed with a tour there in August . In June The Age newspaper commemorated 50 years of Australian rock ' n ' roll ( the anniversary of the release of Johnny O 'Keefe 's " Wild One " ) by selecting the Top 50 Australian Albums . Kelly 's albums Gossip and Post rated at No. 7 and No. 30 on the list . Kelly was nominated as ' Best Male Artist ' for " To Her Door ( Live ) " and ' Best Music DVD ' for Live Apples at the 2008 ARIA Awards . In September he announced that he had reacquired the rights to his old catalogue , including those originally released by Mushroom Records — later bought out by Warner Bros. Records . 
 In November , as a result of the acquisition EMI released Songs from the South – Volume 2 , a collection of Kelly 's songs from the last decade , following on from Songs from the South – Volume 1 . The new compilation featured the first physical release of Kelly 's song , " Shane Warne " . Volume 1 and Volume 2 are available separately but also as a combined double album . EMI released a DVD , Paul Kelly – The Video Collection 1985 – 2008 , a collection of Kelly 's home videos made over the past 23 years . Also included are several live performances . Songs from the South – Volume 2 included one new song , " Thoughts in the Middle of the Night " , which he described as " It 's a band song , we all wrote it together . There 's a poem by James Fenton , a British poet , called " The Mistake " , which is probably an influence on the lyrics . It 's a waking up in the middle of the night song , for anyone who 's woken up at 3 am and not been able to get back to sleep " . 
 In the beginning of 2009 he supported Leonard Cohen 's tour of Australia – his first return in 24 years . Kelly 's duet with country singer Melinda Schneider , " Still Here " , won ' Vocal Collaboration of the Year ' at the 2009 <unk> Country Music Awards of Australia . In February , in response to hearing about the devastation to the Yarra Valley region of Victoria in Australia , Cohen and Kelly donated $ 200 @,@ 000 to the Victorian Bushfire Appeal in support of those affected by the extensive Black Saturday bushfires that razed the area just weeks after their performance at the Rochford Winery for the A Day on the Green concert . Kelly performed at the Melbourne Cricket Ground on 14 March for Sound Relief , a multi @-@ venue rock music concert in support of victims of the bushfires . The event was held simultaneously with a concert at the Sydney Cricket Ground . All proceeds from the Melbourne concert went to the Red Cross Victorian Bushfire relief . Also performing at the Melbourne concert were Augie March , Bliss n Eso with Paris Wells , Gabriella Cilmi , Hunters & Collectors , Jack Johnson , Chambers and Shane Nicholson with Troy Cassar @-@ Daley , Kings of Leon , Jet , Midnight Oil , Liam Finn , Split Enz , and Wolfmother . 
 On 13 and 14 November , radio station Triple J presented a Kelly tribute concert — marking his 30th anniversary as a solo artist — at the Forum Theatre in Melbourne , and highlighted his contribution to Australian music . The line @-@ up included Missy Higgins , John Butler , Paul Dempsey ( Something for Kate ) , Katy Steele ( Little Birdy ) , Bob Evans , <unk> <unk> ( The Herd ) , Dan Kelly , Clare Bowditch , Jae Laffer ( The Panics ) , <unk> <unk> ( Magic Dirt ) , Dan Sultan , and Megan Washington interpreting Kelly 's songs , with members of Augie March as the backing band and Ashley Naylor as musical director . A recording of the concerts was released by ABC Music as a DVD and a double CD , Before Too Long , with a bonus CD featuring original songs by Kelly , on 19 February 2010 . Kelly 's national ' More Songs from the South ' tour in December 2009 included band members Vika Bull on vocals , Peter Luscombe on drums , Bill McDonald on bass guitar and backing vocals , Naylor on guitar , and Cameron Bruce on keyboards . Kelly contributed to the national magazine , The Monthly , from 2009 to 2010 . 
 = = 2010 – present : Memoir to biopic = = 
 Paul Kelly has written a memoir , How to Make Gravy , which was published by Penguin Books ( Australia ) on 22 September 2010 . " It 's a mongrel memoir . It 's a bit hard to describe at the moment . It 's not traditional ; it 's writing around the A @-@ Z theme – I tell stories around the song lyrics in alphabetical order . It 's slow , so it will be a while coming , but I 'll get there " . As a companion to his memoir , he issued an 8 × CD box set , A – Z Recordings , with live performances from his A – Z Tours from 2004 to 2010 . The 105 tracks are listed alphabetically , and were typically performed over four nights . The set includes a booklet of photographs . The related audio book on 16 × CDs has Kelly joined by Australian actors , Cate Blanchett , Russell Crowe , Judy Davis , Hugh Jackman and Ben Mendelsohn each reading a chosen chapter . 
 Maurice Frawley , a guitarist for Kelly in various groups who co @-@ wrote " Look So Fine , Feel So Low " ( 1987 ) , died of cancer in May 2009 . Kelly worked with Charlie Owen and others to create a 3 × CD tribute album , Long Gone Whistle – The Songs of Maurice Frawley , which was released in August 2010 . In July that year , Kelly performed at Splendour in the Grass . On 15 December he was inducted into The Age EG Awards Hall of Fame . In April 2011 Kelly performed at the East Coast Blues & Roots Music Festival ( Bluesfest ) , which was followed by appearances as a special guest on Dylan 's concerts in Sydney and Melbourne . Later that month , Kelly co @-@ headlined a show with Neil Finn at Red Hill Auditorium in Perth ; it was the first music concert at the new venue . In May his memoir , How to Make Gravy , was short @-@ listed for the Prime Minister 's Literary Award in the non @-@ fiction category ; while in July it was co @-@ winner of ' Biography of the Year ' at the Australian Book Industry Awards – with Ahn Do 's The Happiest Refugee . 
 On 29 September 2012 Kelly performed " How to Make Gravy " and " Leaps and Bounds " at the AFL Grand Final although most of the performance was not broadcast on Seven Network 's pre @-@ game segment . Nui Te Koha of Sunday Herald Sun declared " Kelly , an integral part of Melbourne folklore and its music scene , and a noted footy tragic , deserved his place on the Grand Final stage – which has been long overdue ... broadcaster Seven 's refusal to show Kelly 's performance , except the last verse of ' Leaps and Bounds ' , was no laughing matter " . On 19 October that year , Kelly issued a new studio album , Spring and Fall , which debuted at No. 8 . It was recorded with Dan Kelly and Machine Translations ' J Walker . Guest musicians include former band members Peter and Dan Luscombe , Vika and Linda Bull , and new collaborator , Laura Jean . 
 Also in October , a biographical film , Paul Kelly : Stories of Me , directed by Ian Darling , was released . Darling had worked on the project for two years and it included " insights from family , friends , musicians and music journalists , as well as Kelly himself " . The Australian Financial Review 's Katrina Strickland described the documentary as " not a critique of his music , nor an intrusive look at his personal life " which uses a " much less linear approach to the life of a musician whose career has spanned four decades " . After it appeared on ABC @-@ TV in October of the following year , Andrew P. Street of The Guardian noted it " brings an ambitious , complex young Kelly to life – making a <unk> of his work essential " . 
 During February and March 2013 Kelly and Neil Finn undertook a collaborative tour of Australia . Their performance on 10 March at the Sydney Opera House was recorded for the live album , Goin ' Your Way ( 8 November 2013 ) . It was issued as a 2 × CD , which peaked at No. 5 on the ARIA Albums Chart ; and also as a DVD , which peaked at No. 1 on the related ARIA Music DVD Chart . Later in March he toured New Zealand with his nephew to promote Spring and Fall by playing in church venues . 
 = = Musical style and song writing = = 
 Paul Kelly has been acknowledged as one of Australia 's best singer @-@ songwriters . His music style has ranged from bluegrass to studio @-@ oriented dub reggae , but his core output comfortably straddles folk , rock , and country . His lyrics capture Australia 's vastness both in culture and landscape ; he has chronicled life about him for over 30 years and is described as the poet laureate of Australia . According to music writer Glenn A. Baker , his Australian @-@ ness may be a reason Kelly has not achieved international success . David Fricke from Rolling Stone calls Kelly " one of the finest songwriters I have ever heard , Australian or otherwise . " 
 Fellow songwriter Neil Finn ( Crowded House ) has said , " There is something unique and powerful about the way Kelly mixes up everyday detail with the big issues of life , death , love and struggle – not a trace of pretence or fakery in there " . Ross <unk> , writing for Rolling Stone , described Kelly : " [ W ] hile he was ( rightly ) lauded for his ability to sing of injustice without ranting , or deal with the darker sides of human nature non @-@ <unk> , often overlooked was the fact he could write a damn fine melodic hook to go with those words " . Tim Freedman ( The Whitlams ) acknowledges Kelly , Peter Garrett ( Midnight Oil ) , and John Schumann ( <unk> ) as inspiring him by " [ furnishing ] our suburbs with our own myths and social history " . However , Kelly has been quoted as saying " Song writing is mysterious to me . I still feel like a total beginner . I don 't feel like I have got it nailed yet " . In 2007 Kelly donated his ' Lee Oskar ' harmonica to the Sydney Powerhouse Museum . The museum 's statement of significance cites Kelly 's talent as a songwriter , his distinctive voice , and his harmonica playing , particularly on Live , May 1992 . 
 Kelly described his songwriting as " a scavenging art , a desperate act . For me it 's a bit from here , a bit from there , fumbling around , never quite knowing what you 're doing ... Song writing is like a way of feeling connected to mystery . " He has resisted the label of ' storyteller ' and insists that his songs are not strictly autobiographical ; " they come from imagining someone in a particular situation . Sometimes a sequence of events happens which makes it more a story , but other times it 's just that situation " . Sometimes the same character is found in different songs , such as in " To Her Door " , " Love Never Runs on Time " , and " How to Make Gravy " . 
 Kelly has also provided songs for many other artists , tailoring them to their particular vocal range . Women at the Well ( 2002 ) had 14 female artists record his songs in tribute . According to Kelly , he adapted his song " Foggy Highway " for Renée Geyer because " I admired her deep soul singing , ferocious and vulnerable ... When I heard the finished version ... the hairs rose up on the back of my neck . " Kelly and The Stormwater Boys recorded it in a bluegrass style as the title track for the 2005 album Foggy Highway . Divinyls ' lead singer Christina Amphlett recorded " Before Too Long " — she was attracted by the lyrics — she interpreted the song 's narrator as being a stalker , and provided a female perspective in a darkly menacing manner à @-@ la Fatal Attraction . 
 Kelly has written songs with and for numerous artists , including Mick Thomas , Geyer , Kate Ceberano , Vika and Linda Bull , Nick Cave , Nick Barker , Kasey Chambers , Yothu Yindi , Archie Roach , Gyan , Monique Brumby , Kelly Willis , Missy Higgins , and Troy Cassar @-@ Daley . He has described how some songs he writes are suited to other vocal ranges . " Quite often , I 'm trying to write a certain kind of song and it 's more ambitious than what my voice will get to . That 's how I started writing songs with other people in mind " . Kelly and Carmody 's " From Little Things Big Things Grow " was analysed by Sydney University 's Linguistics professor James R Martin . " [ They ] render the story as a narrative ... with the familiar Orientation , Complication , Evaluation , Resolution and Coda staging " . Martin finds that Kelly and Carmody made the point that when people exert their rights with support from friends , they may defeat those with prestige . 
 Kelly understands that co @-@ writing with other songwriters lends power to his songs . " You often write songs with collaborators that you would never write by yourself . It 's a way of dragging a song out of you that you wouldn 't have come up with " . One of his collaborators , Linda Bull , described Kelly 's process : they would start with a simple chat . " We 'd just chuck ideas around and he 'd pick the best bits . He 'd take all the bluntness and crudeness out of it and make it beautiful ; that 's his magic ... It 's conversations that you have everyday [ sic ] " . Forster summarised his 2009 review of Kelly 's compilation , Songs from the South , with " [ his songs ] sound easy and approachable ... Then you think : If the songs are so simple and the ideas behind them so clear , why aren 't more people writing like Paul Kelly and sounding as good as he does ? " In 2010 Carmody and Kelly 's " From Little Things Big Things Grow " was added to the National Film and Sound Archive 's Sounds of Australia Registry . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Paul Kelly 's first marriage ( 1980 – 84 ) was to Hilary Brown ; the couple had a son , Declan , who later worked as a radio presenter on <unk> 's Against the Arctic from 2006 . As of 2007 , he was a DJ around Melbourne and played the drums . For Paul Kelly : Stories of Me Declan recalled his feelings whenever he hears " When I First Met Your Ma " , which describes Kelly 's courtship of Hilary . Hilary remembered " songs written especially for and about her " but also about other women , she quipped " [ t ] here are too many girls out there ! One for every song ! " 
 Kelly 's second marriage ( 1993 – 2001 ) was to Australian actress Kaarin Fairfax . The Monthly 's Richard Guilliatt travelled with Kelly , his band and " his new love and future wife , the diminutive " Fairfax on a section of the group 's US tour prior to the release of Under the Sun . The couple have two daughters , Madeleine ( born 1991 ) and Memphis ( born 1993 ) . From 1989 – 92 , Fairfax supplied backing vocals on tracks by Paul Kelly and the Messengers . In 1990 , as Mary @-@ Jo Starr , a country music artist , Fairfax released three singles , and an album , Too Many Movies . Memphis Kelly starred alongside her parents in the Rachel Perkins short film , One Night the Moon ( 2001 ) , for which Paul Kelly composed the score . After the couple separated in 2001 , Madeleine and Memphis stayed with Fairfax , but Kelly maintained contact with his daughters . In 2010 Madeleine and Memphis formed a pop indie trio , Wishful , with Sam Humphrey ; they were later joined by Harley Hamer and Caleb Williams . In March 2014 , Wishful performed at the Port Fairy Folk Festival . 
 Kelly was in a relationship with Sian Prior , a journalist , university lecturer and opera singer , from 2002 to 2011 . They met when Kelly was interviewed on her Sunday Arts ABC radio program . Kelly wrote " You 're 39 , You 're Beautiful and You 're Mine " for Prior who was already 40 by the time he finished . Prior has played clarinet and provided backing vocals on some of Kelly 's songs , as well as with the Stardust Five . She has performed live with Kelly on several occasions including clarinet on six tracks of his A – Z Recordings boxed set . In his memoir , Kelly credited Prior with inspiring him to give up his long @-@ term heroin addiction , " I got lucky , I met a woman who said : ' It 's me or it ' . She gave me the number of a counsellor ... I thought about ' it ' every day for a long time . Less now " . The couple had separated during the making of Kelly 's biopic , however the separation is not mentioned and Prior is not interviewed in the film . 
 Kelly 's brother , Martin , is the father of Dan Kelly , a singer @-@ guitarist . Dan has performed with his uncle on several of Kelly 's albums , including Ways and Means , as a member of Paul Kelly and the Boon Companions , and on Stolen Apples ; Dan and Paul were both members of Stardust Five , which released Stardust Five . Dan has released three albums , two of which received ARIA Award nominations . Kelly 's younger sister , Mary Jo Kelly , is a Melbourne @-@ based pianist who performed with him on the track " South of Germany " for Paul Kelly Live at the Athenaeum , May 1992 ( 1992 ) . She has performed in Latin bands and worked as a music teacher at the Victorian College of the Arts Secondary School . Mary Jo provided piano on Archie Roach 's album Charcoal Lane ( 1990 ) , which was produced by Kelly and Connolly . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Paul Kelly has won several awards , including ten ARIA Awards from the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , and three APRA Awards from either the Australasian Performing Right Association ( APRA ) alone or together with the Australian Guild of Screen Composers . APRA named " To Her Door " , solely written by Kelly , and " Treaty " , written by Kelly and members of Yothu Yindi , in their Top 30 best Australian songs of all time in 2001 . Kelly was inducted into the ARIA Hall of Fame in 1997 , alongside the Bee Gees and Graeme Bell . He has won six Country Music Awards from the Country Music Association of Australia , and four Mo Awards ( Australian entertainment industry ) . Kelly was a Victorian State Finalist for the 2012 Australian of the Year Award . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Talk ( 1981 ) 
 Manila ( 1982 ) 
 Post ( 1985 ) 
 Gossip ( 1986 ) 
 Under The Sun ( 1987 ) 
 So Much Water So Close to Home ( 1989 ) 
 Comedy ( 1991 ) 
 Hidden Things ( 1992 ) 
 Wanted Man ( 1994 ) 
 Deeper Water ( 1995 ) 
 Words and Music ( 1998 ) 
 Smoke ( 1999 ) 
 Professor Ratbaggy ( 1999 ) 
 ... Nothing but a Dream ( 2001 ) 
 Ways & Means ( 2004 ) 
 Foggy Highway ( 2005 ) 
 Stardust Five ( 2006 ) 
 Stolen Apples ( 2007 ) 
 Spring and Fall ( 2012 ) 
 The Merri Soul Sessions ( 2014 ) 
 Seven Sonnets and a Song ( 2016 ) 
 = = Films = = 
 Paul Kelly : Stories of Me ( 1 October 2012 ) is an Australian documentary by Shark Island Productions . The film is an intimate portrait of Kelly that follows his 40 @-@ year career as Australia 's foremost singer @-@ songwriter . 
 The film won the Film Critics Circle Award in 2012 for Best Documentary , and the <unk> Award in 2013 for Best Documentary Editing . Nominations include the ADG Award in 2013 for Best Documentary Feature and AACTA Award 2013 for Best Sound in a Documentary . 
 The film was part of the Official Selection at the Melbourne International Film Festival 2012 and the Canberra International Film Festival 2012 
 = Belgian Resistance = 
 The Belgian Resistance ( French : Résistance belge , Dutch : <unk> <unk> ) collectively refers to the resistance movements opposed to the German occupation of Belgium during World War II . Within Belgium , resistance was fragmented between a large number of separate organizations , divided by region and political stances . The resistance included both men and women from both Walloon and Flemish parts of the country . Aside from sabotage of military infrastructure in the country and assassinations of collaborators , these groups also published large numbers of underground newspapers , gathered intelligence and maintained various escape networks that helped Allied airmen trapped behind enemy lines escape from German @-@ occupied Europe . 
 During the war , it is estimated that approximately five percent of the national population were involved in some form of resistance activity , while some estimates put the number of resistance members killed at over 19 @,@ 000 ; roughly 25 percent of its " active " members . 
 = = Background = = 
 German forces invaded Belgium , which had been following a policy of neutrality , on 10 May 1940 . After 18 days of fighting , Belgium surrendered on 28 May and was placed under German occupation . During the fighting , between 600 @,@ 000 and 650 @,@ 000 Belgian men ( nearly 20 percent of the country 's entire male population ) served in the military . Many were made prisoners of war and detained in camps in Germany , although some were released before the end of the war . Leopold III , king and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the army , also surrendered to the Germans on 28 May along with his army and was also held as prisoner by the Germans . The Belgian government fled first to Bordeaux in France , and then to London where it formed a government in exile . 
 = = = Growth of resistance = = = 
 Among the first members of the Belgian resistance were former soldiers , and in particular officers , who , on their return from prisoner of war camps , wished to continue the fight against the Germans out of patriotism . Nevertheless , resistance was slow to develop in the first few months of the occupation because it seemed that German victory was imminent . The German failure to invade Great Britain , coupled with aggravating German policies within occupied Belgium , especially the persecution of Belgian Jews and conscription of Belgian civilians into forced labour programmes increasingly turned patriotic Belgian civilians from liberal or Catholic backgrounds against the German regime and towards the resistance . With the German invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 , members of the Communist Party , which had previously been ambivalent towards both Allied and Axis sides , also joined the resistance en masse , forming their own separate groups calling for a " national uprising " against Nazi rule . During the First World War , Belgium had been occupied by Germany for four years and had developed an effective network of resistance , which provided key inspiration for the formation of similar groups in 1940 . 
 Most of the resistance was focused in the French @-@ speaking areas of Belgium ( Wallonia and the city of Brussels ) , although Flemish involvement in the resistance was also significant . Around 70 percent of underground newspapers were in French , while 60 percent of political prisoners were Walloon . 
 = = Resistance during the German occupation = = 
 = = = Passive resistance = = = 
 The most widespread form of resistance in occupied Belgium was non @-@ violent . Listening to Radio Belgique broadcasts from London , which was officially prohibited by the German occupiers , was a common form of passive resistance , but civil disobedience in particular was employed . This was often carried out by Belgian government institutions that were forced to carry out the administration of the territory on behalf of the German military government . In June 1941 , the City Council of Brussels refused to distribute Star of David badges on behalf of the German government to Belgian Jews . 
 Striking was the most common form of passive resistance and often took place on symbolic dates , such as the 10 May ( anniversary of the German invasion ) , 21 July ( National Day ) and 11 November ( anniversary of the German surrender in World War I ) . The largest was the so @-@ called " Strike of the 100 @,@ 000 " , which broke out on 10 May 1941 in the Cockerill steel works in Seraing . News of the strike spread rapidly and soon at least 70 @,@ 000 workers came out on strike across the province of Liège . The Germans increased workers ' salaries by eight percent and the strike finished rapidly . Future large @-@ scale strikes were repressed by the Germans , although further important strikes occurred in November 1942 and February 1943 . 
 King Leopold III , imprisoned in the palace in Laeken , became a focal point for passive resistance , despite having been condemned by the government @-@ in @-@ exile for his decision to surrender . 
 = = = Active resistance = = = 
 Active resistance within Belgium developed from early 1941 and took several directions . Armed resistance , in the forms of sabotage or assassinations , took place , but was only part of the " active " resistance 's scope of activity . Some groups had very specific forms of resistance and became extremely specialized . The Service D group , for example , had many members in the national postal service and used them to intercepting letters of denunciation , warning the denounced person to flee . In this way , they succeeded in intercepting over 20 @,@ 000 letters . 
 Membership of the active resistance , which had been quite low in the early years of the resistance , swelled exponentially during 1944 as it was joined by so @-@ called " resistors of the eleventh hour " ( <unk> de la <unk> <unk> ) who could see that Allied victory was close , particularly in the months after D @-@ Day . It is estimated that approximately five percent of the national population were involved in some form of " active " resistance during the war . 
 = = = = Structure and organisation = = = = 
 The Belgian resistance effort was extremely fragmented between various groups and never became a unified organization during the German occupation . The danger of infiltration posed by German informants meant that some cells were extremely small and localized , and although nationwide groups did exist , they were split along political and ideological lines . They ranged from the very left @-@ wing , like the Communist Partisans Armés or Socialist Front de l 'Indépendance , to the far @-@ right , like the monarchist Mouvement National Royaliste and the Légion Belge which had been created by members of the pre @-@ war Fascist Légion Nationale movement . However , there were also other groups like Groupe G which , though without an obvious political affiliation , recruited only from very specific demographics . 
 = = Forms of active resistance = = 
 = = = Sabotage and assassination = = = 
 Belgium 's strategic location meant that it constituted an important supply hub for the whole German army in Northern Europe and particularly northern France . Sabotage was therefore an important duty of the resistance . Following the Normandy landings in June 1944 on orders from the Allies , the Belgian resistance began to step up its sabotage against German supply lines across the country . Between June and September alone , 95 railroad bridges , 285 locomotives , 1 @,@ 365 wagons and 17 tunnels were all blown up by the Belgian resistance . Telegraph lines were also cut and road bridges and canals used to transport material sabotaged . In one notable action , 600 German soldiers were killed when a railway bridge between La Gleize and <unk> in the Ardennes was blown up by 40 members of the resistance , including the writer Herman <unk> . Indeed , more German troops were reportedly killed in Belgium in 1941 than in all of Occupied France . Through its sabotage activities alone , one resistance group , Groupe G , required the Germans to expend between 20 and 25 million man @-@ hours of labour on repairing damage done , including ten million in the night of 15 – 16 January 1944 alone . 
 Assassination of key figures in the hierarchy of German and collaborationist hierarchy became increasingly common through 1944 . In July 1944 , the Légion Belge assassinated the brother of Léon Degrelle , head of the collaborationist Rexist Party and leading Belgian fascist . <unk> and suspected double agents were also targeted ; the Communist Partisans Armés claimed to have killed over 1 @,@ 000 traitors between June and September 1944 . 
 = = = Clandestine press = = = 
 During the occupation an underground press flourished in Belgium from soon after the Belgian defeat , with eight newspapers appearing by October 1940 alone . Much of the resistance 's press focused around producing newspapers in both French and Dutch language as alternatives to collaborationist newspapers like Le Soir . At its peak , the clandestine newspaper La Libre Belgique was relaying news within five to six days ; faster than the BBC 's French @-@ language radio broadcasts , whose coverage lagged several months behind events . Copies of the underground newspapers were distributed anonymously , with some pushed into <unk> or sent by post . Since they were usually free , the costs of printing were financed by donations from sympathisers . The papers achieved considerable circulation , with La Libre Belgique reaching a regular circulation of 40 @,@ 000 by January 1942 and peaking at 70 @,@ 000 , while the Communist paper , Le Drapeau Rouge , reached 30 @,@ 000 . Dozens of different newspapers existed , often affiliated with different resistance groups or differentiated by political stance , ranging from nationalist , Communist , Liberal or even Feminist . The number of Belgians involved in the underground press is estimated at anywhere up to 40 @,@ 000 people . In total , 567 separate titles are known from the period of occupation . 
 The resistance also printed humorous publications and material as propaganda . In November 1943 , on the anniversary of the German surrender in the First World War , the Front de l 'Indépendance group published a spoof edition of the collaborationist newspaper Le Soir , satirizing the Axis propaganda and biased information permitted by the censors , which was then distributed to newsstands across Brussels and deliberately mixed with official copies of the newspaper . 50 @,@ 000 copies of the spoof publication , dubbed the " Faux Soir " ( or " Fake Soir " ) , were distributed . 
 = = = Intelligence gathering = = = 
 Intelligence gathering was one of the first forms of resistance to grow after the Belgian defeat and eventually developed into complex and carefully structured organizations . The Allies were also deeply reliant on the resistance to provide intelligence from the occupied country . This information focused both on German troop movements and other military information , but was also essential for keeping the allies abreast of the attitudes and popular opinion of the Belgian public . Each network was closely organized and carried a codename . The most significant was " Clarence " , led by Walthère <unk> , which had over 1 @,@ 000 members feeding it information which was then communicated to London by radio . Other notable networks were " Luc " ( renamed " Marc " in 1942 ) and " <unk> " . In total 43 separate intelligence networks existed in Belgium , involving some 14 @,@ 000 people . The Belgian resistance provided around 80 percent of all information received by the Allies from all resistance groups in Europe . 
 = = = Resistance to the Holocaust = = = 
 The Belgian resistance was instrumental in saving Jews and Roma from deportation to death camps . In April 1943 , members of the resistance group , the Comité de Défense des Juifs successfully attacked the " Twentieth convoy " carrying 1 @,@ 500 Belgian Jews by rail to Auschwitz in Poland . Many Belgians also hid Jews and political dissidents during the occupation : one estimate put the number at some 20 @,@ 000 people hidden during the war . There was also significant low @-@ level resistance : for instance , in June 1941 , the City Council of Brussels refused to distribute Stars of David badges . Certain high profile members of the Belgian establishment , including Queen Elizabeth and Cardinal van Roey , Archbishop of Malines , spoke out against the German treatment of Jews . 
 In total , 1 @,@ 612 Belgians have been awarded the distinction of " Righteous Among the Nations " by the State of Israel for risking their lives to save Jews from persecution during the occupation . 
 = = = Escape routes = = = 
 As the Allies intensified their strategic bombing campaign from 1941 , the resistance began to experience a significant increase in the number of Allied airmen from the RAF and USAAF who had been shot down but evaded capture . The resistance 's aim , assisted by the British MI9 organization , was to escort them out of occupied Europe and over the Pyrenees to neutral Spain where they might return to England . The best @-@ known of these networks , " Comet " , organized by Andrée de Jongh , involved some 2 @,@ 000 resistance members and was able to escort 700 Allied servicemen to Spain . The line not only fed and provided civilian clothing for the pilots , but also forged French identity cards and rail fares . Since the airmen also needed to be hidden in civilian houses for prolonged periods of time , escape lines were particularly vulnerable . During the course of the war , 800 members of the " Comet " line alone were arrested by the Gestapo of whom 140 were executed . 
 = = German response = = 
 The German Geheime Staatspolizei ( " Secret state police " ) , known as the Gestapo , was responsible for targeting resistance groups in Belgium . Resistance fighters who were captured could expect to be interrogated , tortured and either summarily executed or sent to a concentration camp . The Gestapo was effective at using informants within groups to betray whole local resistance network and in examining resistance publications for clues about its place of production . 2 @,@ 000 resistance members involved in underground press alone were arrested during the war . In total , 30 @,@ 000 members of the resistance were captured during the war , of whom 16 @,@ 000 were executed or died in captivity . 
 The Germans requisitioned the former Belgian army Fort Breendonk , near Mechelen , which was used for torture and interrogation of political prisoners and members of the resistance . Around 3 @,@ 500 inmates passed through the camp at Breendonk where they were kept in extremely degrading conditions . Around 300 people were killed in the camp itself , with at least 98 of them dying from deprivation or torture . 
 Towards the end of the war , the militias of collaborationist political parties also began to participate actively in reprisals for attacks or assassinations by the resistance . These included both reprisal assassinations of leading figures suspected of resistance involvement or sympathy ( including Alexandre Galopin , head of the Société Générale , who was assassinated in February 1944 ) or retaliatory massacres against civilians . Foremost among these was the Courcelles Massacre , a reprisal by Rexist paramilitaries for the assassination of a Burgomaster , in which 20 civilians were killed . A similar massacre also took place at Meensel @-@ Kiezegem , where 67 were killed . 
 = = Relations with the Allies and Belgian government in exile = = 
 The Belgian government in exile made its first call for the creation of organized resistance in the country from its first place of exile in Bordeaux , before its flight to London after the French surrender : 
 We trust fully in the power of Britain to deliver us from German bondage ... We claim the right to share in the burden and honour of this fight in the measure of our modest but not altogether negligible resources We are not <unk> ... We will have nothing to do with those faint @-@ hearted countrymen of ours , who , despairing of the victory of the allied cause , would be willing to come to terms with the invader . We know that neither Belgium nor the Congo will be saved until Hitlerism is crushed . 
 Nevertheless , the apparent isolation of the government in exile from the day @-@ to @-@ day situation in Belgium meant that it was viewed with suspicion by many resistance groups , particularly those whose politics differed from that of the established government . The government , for its part , was afraid that resistance groups would turn into ungovernable political militias after liberation , challenging the government 's position and threatening political stability . Nevertheless , the resistance was frequently reliant on finance and drops of equipment and supplies which both the government @-@ in @-@ exile and the British Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) were able to provide . During the course of the war , the government @-@ in @-@ exile delivered between 124 @-@ 245 million francs , dropped by parachute or transferred via bank accounts in neutral Portugal , to the Armée Secrète group alone , with smaller sums also distributed to other organisations . 
 In the early years of the war , contact with the government in exile was difficult to establish . The Légion Belge dispatched a member to try to establish contact in May 1941 , it took a full year to reach London . Radio contact was briefly established in late 1941 , however , the contact was extremely intermittent between 1942 and 1943 , with a permanent radio connection to the Armée Secrète ( codenamed " Stanley " ) only established in 1944 . 
 In May 1944 , the government @-@ in @-@ exile attempted to rebuild its relationship with the resistance by establishing a " Coordination Committee " of representatives of the major groups , including the Légion Belge , Mouvement National Belge , Groupe G and the Front de l 'Indépendance . However , the committee was rendered redundant by the liberation in September . 
 = = The Resistance during the Liberation = = 
 After the Normandy Landings in June 1944 , the Belgian resistance increased in size dramatically . In April 1944 , the Armée Secrète began to adopt an official rank hierarchy and uniform ( of white overalls and armband ) to be worn on missions in order to give their organization the status of an " official army " . 
 Though they usually lacked the equipment and training to fight the Wehrmacht openly , the resistance played a key role in assisting the Allies during the liberation of Belgium in September 1944 , providing information on German troop movements , disrupting German evacuation plans and participating in fighting . The resistance was particularly important during the liberation of the city of Antwerp , where the local resistance from the Witte Brigade and Nationale Koninklijke Beweging , in an unprecedented display of inter @-@ group cooperation , assisted Canadian forces in capturing the highly strategic port of Antwerp intact , before it could be sabotaged by the German garrison . Across Belgium , 20 @,@ 000 German soldiers ( including two generals ) were taken prisoner by the resistance , before being handed over to the Allies . 
 The Free Belgian 5th SAS was dropped by parachute into the Ardennes where it linked up with members of the local resistance during the liberation and the Battle of the Bulge . 
 All together , almost 4 @,@ 000 members of the Armée Secrète alone were killed during the liberation . 
 = = = Disarmament = = = 
 Soon after the liberation , the reestablished government in Brussels attempted to disarm and demobilize the resistance . In particular , the government feared the organizations would degenerate into armed political militias which could threaten the country 's political stability . In October 1944 the government ordered members of the resistance to surrender their weapons to the police and , in November , threatened to search the houses and fine those who had retained them . This provoked significant anger among resistance members , who had hoped that they would be able to continue fighting alongside the Allies in the invasion of Germany . On 25 November , a large demonstration of former resistance members took place in Brussels . As the crowds moved towards the Parliament , British soldiers fired on the crowd , which they suspected to be trying to make left @-@ wing coup d 'état . 45 people were wounded . 
 Nevertheless , large numbers of former members of the resistance enlisted into the regular army , where they formed around 80 % of the strength of the Belgian Fusilier Battalions which served on the Western Front until VE Day . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Belgian resistance was praised by contemporaries for its contribution to the Allied war effort ; particularly during the later period . In a letter to Lieutenant @-@ General <unk> , commander of the Armée Secrète , General Eisenhower praised the role that the Belgian resistance had played in disrupting German supply lines after D @-@ Day . The continuing actions of the resistance stopped the Germans ever being able to use the country as a secure base , never fully becoming pacified . 
 The attempt of the resistance to enter mainstream politics with a formal party , the Belgian Democratic Union , failed to attract the level of support that similar parties had managed in France and elsewhere . Associations of former members were founded in the years immediately after the war and campaigned for greater recognition of the role of the resistance . The largest association , the Fondation Armée Secrète , continues to fund historical research on the role of the resistance and defending the interests of its members . 
 In December 1946 , the government of Camille Huysmans inaugurated a medal to be awarded to former members of the resistance and bestowed various other benefits on other members , including pensions and a scheme of state @-@ funded apprenticeships . Individuals were accorded military rank equivalent to their status in the movement during the war , entitling them to title and other privileges . Today the role of the resistance during the conflict is commemorated by memorials , plaques and road names across the country , as well as by the National Museum of the Resistance in Anderlecht . 
 = Thermal low = 
 Thermal lows , or heat lows , are non @-@ frontal low @-@ pressure areas that occur over the continents in the subtropics during the warm season , as the result of intense heating when compared to their surrounding environments . Thermal lows occur near the Sonoran Desert , on the Mexican plateau , in California 's Great Central Valley , the Sahara , over north @-@ west Argentina in South America , over the Kimberley region of north @-@ west Australia , the Iberian peninsula , and the Tibetan plateau . 
 Over land , intense , rapid solar heating of the land surface results in heating of the lowest layers of the atmosphere via <unk> energy in the infrared spectrum . The resulting hotter air is less dense than surrounding cooler air . This , combined with the rising of the hot air , results in the formation of a low pressure area . Elevated areas can enhance the strength of the thermal low as they warm more quickly than the atmosphere which surrounds them at the same altitude . Over the water , instability lows form during the winter when the air overlying the land is colder than the warmer water body . Thermal lows tend to have weak circulations , and can extend to 3 @,@ 100 metres ( 10 @,@ 200 ft ) in height . Thermal lows over the western and southern portions of North America , northern Africa , and southeast Asia are strong enough to lead to summer monsoon conditions . Development of thermal lows inland of the coastline lead to the development of sea breezes . Sea breezes combined with rugged topography near the coast can encourage poor air quality . 
 = = Formation = = 
 In deserts , lack of ground and plant moisture that would normally provide evaporative cooling can lead to intense , rapid solar heating of the lower layers of air . The hot air is less dense than surrounding cooler air . This , combined with the rising of the hot air , results in a low pressure area called a thermal low . Over elevated surfaces , heating of the ground exceeds the heating of the surrounding air at the same altitude above sea level , which creates an associated heat low over the terrain and enhances any thermal lows which would have otherwise existed . During the cold season , ( winter ) , warm water bodies such as the Great Lakes can induce an instability low . Thermal lows which develop near sea level can build in height during the warm season , or summer , to the elevation of the 700 hPa pressure surface , which lies near 3 @,@ 100 metres ( 10 @,@ 200 ft ) above sea level . Heat lows normally are stationary and have a weak cyclonic circulation . As they are strongest at the surface and warm near their center , and weaker aloft where the air is more stable , the thermal low is considered warm core . The strongest versions of these features globally are over Arabia , the northern portion of the Indian subcontinent , Arizona , Mexican plateau , northwest Argentina , southwestern Spain , Australia , and northern Africa . The formation of the heat low over northern Africa leads to a low @-@ level westerly jet stream from June into October . 
 = = Role in the monsoon regime = = 
 Monsoons are caused by the larger amplitude of the seasonal cycle of land temperature compared to that of nearby oceans . This differential warming happens because heat in the ocean is mixed vertically through a " mixed layer " that may be fifty meters deep , through the action of wind and buoyancy @-@ generated turbulence , whereas the land surface conducts heat slowly , with the seasonal signal penetrating perhaps a meter or so . Additionally , the specific heat capacity of liquid water is significantly higher than that of most materials that make up land . Together , these factors mean that the heat capacity of the layer participating in the seasonal cycle is much larger over the oceans than over land , with the consequence that the air over the land warms faster and reaches a higher temperature than the air over the ocean . The hot air over the land tends to rise , creating an area of low pressure . This creates a steady wind blowing toward the land , bringing the moist near @-@ surface air over the oceans with it . Similar rainfall is caused by the moist ocean air being lifted upwards by mountains , surface heating , convergence at the surface , divergence aloft , or from storm @-@ produced outflows at the surface . However the lifting occurs , the air cools due expansion in lower pressure , which in turn produces condensation . 
 In winter , the land cools off quickly , but the ocean keeps the heat longer due to its higher specific heat . The hot air over the ocean rises , creating a low pressure area and a breeze from land to ocean while a large area of drying high pressure is formed over the land , increased by wintertime cooling . Monsoons are similar to sea and land breezes , a term usually referring to the localized , diurnal ( daily ) cycle of circulation near coastlines everywhere , but they are much larger in scale , stronger and seasonal . 
 = = Role in sea breeze formation = = 
 The sea is warmed by the sun to a greater depth than the land due to its greater specific heat . The sea therefore has a greater capacity for absorbing heat than the land , so the surface of the sea warms up more slowly than the land 's surface . As the temperature of the surface of the land rises , the land heats the air above it . The warm air is less dense and so it rises . This rising air over the land lowers the sea level pressure by about 0 @.@ 2 % . The cooler air above the sea , now with higher sea level pressure , flows towards the land into the lower pressure , creating a cooler breeze near the coast . The strength of the sea breeze is directly proportional to the temperature difference between the land and the sea . If the environmental wind field is greater than 8 knots ( 15 km / h ) and opposing the direction of a possible sea breeze , the sea breeze is not likely to develop . 
 Along the California coast , the cooler water sets up a surface marine layer that is much cooler than inland areas during the summer . At the same time , the intense heating inland creates a pronounced thermal trough aligned with the Great Central Valley and typically linked to the broader thermal low across the North American deserts . As a consequence , a strong pressure gradient is created which draws cool marine air landward . As temperatures plummet , fog and stratus stream in and through the gaps of the Coast Ranges , and especially through the Golden Gate at San Francisco ( see San Francisco fog ) . The same thermal trough is sometimes pushed toward the coast , especially in late Fall as higher pressure develops to the east due to cooling further east . This setup often brings the warmest temperatures of the year to the normally cool coastline as the <unk> stops or is even replaced by a dangerously dry land breeze . 
 = = Role in air pollution = = 
 In areas where it is hilly or mountainous near the coastline , thermally @-@ forced sea breezes combined with wind circulations up the sides of the mountains can encourage the production of chemicals which can lead to the development of smog . Pollution has been tracked into the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere in the form of ozone , which is concentrated over the circulation of the thermal low as well as adjacent oceanic areas . 
 = Nick Stuart = 
 Nick Stuart ( April 10 , 1904 - April 7 , 1973 ) was an Austro @-@ Hungarian @-@ born American actor and bandleader . His career spanned five decades , during which he appeared in over 50 films , more than half of them features , as well as film shorts , serials , and even one television appearance . He rose to stardom in such films as Girls Gone Wild and Chasing Through Europe , prior to expanding his business interests by creating a talent agency , and a popular upscale club in Hollywood . 
 After being introduced to music by Guy Lombardo , he established his own band , " The Man with the Band from Movieland " , which played for over twenty years . When he dissolved the band in 1961 , he opened a haberdashery in Biloxi , Mississippi . He met his first wife , Sue Carol , while working on a film , and the two had a daughter , actress Carol Lee Ladd . While his first marriage was short @-@ lived , his second marriage to Martha Burnett lasted over thirty years , until his death from cancer in 1973 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Stuart was born <unk> <unk> on April 10 , 1904 , in <unk> ( <unk> ) , Transylvania , then part of Austria @-@ Hungary . He immigrated to the United States as a child in 1913 , growing up in Dayton , Ohio . 
 Stuart was married twice . The first time was to Sue Carol on November 28 , 1929 ; the two had a child , actress Carol Lee Ladd ( born July 18 , 1932 ) . The " Lee " in Carol Lee was named for Carol 's best friend , Dixie Lee , the wife of Bing Crosby . Initially , the couple attempted to hide their marriage from the public , with the help of the <unk> . Stuart would make public appearances with Dixie Lee , while Bing Crosby would feign romantic interest with Sue Carol in public . While on a personal appearances tour in 1931 , the couple had $ 35 @,@ 000 of jewelry stolen . The jewelry was taken from their parked car on Michigan Avenue in Chicago . 
 Less than a year after the birth of their child , reports began to circulate that their marriage was in trouble . By August 1933 Stuart and Carol were estranged and living separate lives , and divorced in 1934 . After the divorce , Stuart was romantically linked with several other women , including nightclub singer <unk> <unk> ( recently divorced from Johnny Weissmuller ) , and Dorothy Lee . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1920s Nick Prata ( as he was then known ) began working in the film industry , doing odd jobs around the set for Fox Film , such as prop boy , script clerk , and assistant cameraman . While working as an assistant on Raoul Walsh 's What Price Glory ? in 1926 , Prata was given a screen test , after which his name was changed to Nick Stuart . Shortly after , he became Howard Hawks 's personal assistant . He appeared in minor roles in two film shorts , before being given an opportunity to act in a featured role by Hawks , in 1927 's , The Cradle Snatchers . After the success of The Cradle Snatchers , Stuart would star in several shorts , many of which again paired him with his Snatchers co @-@ star , Sally Phipps , which included Gentlemen Prefer Scotch , and Cupid and the Clock ( based on a short story by O. Henry ) . The two would star in Stuart 's next three films in 1927 and 1928 : High School Hero , Why Sailors Go Wrong , and News Parade . Stuart 's next role was that of Sandy , starring alongside Victor McLaglen in William K. Howard 's The River Pirate in 1928 . Stuart and Sue Carol had been linked together romantically since early in 1928 , and would co @-@ star in Stuart 's next project , Girls Gone Wild . 
 Stuart and Phipps appeared together in his next film , although Phipps was in a secondary role . Stuart 's co @-@ star in 1929 's Joy Street , was Lois Moran , who had also been his love interest in The River Pirate . Stuart and Phipps were again slated to co @-@ star in Chasing Through Europe , the sequel to their successful film , News Parade . However , she was replaced by June Collyer in July 1928 , who was replaced in turn by Sue Carol in September . Stuart and Carol appeared in several films together over the next few years , including 1933 's Secret Sinners . 
 = = = Agency days = = = 
 In 1933 Stuart , along with David Kay , opened an agency in Hollywood , which represented actors , writers , and directors . Later that year , their company signed an agreement with the Canadian film company , British Commonwealth Productions , to cast all of their films . The first film they cast was The Crimson West ( released in the United States as Fighting Playboy ) , which would be the first full @-@ length talking film produced in Canada . The following year , he became the founder of the Bath and Tennis Club in Hollywood . The club was modeled on upscale clubs in the east , particularly those in Palm Beach and Long Island , New York , and included recreational facilities for tennis , squash , swimming , badminton , and handball . 
 = = = Entrance into music and later acting career = = = 
 In the midst of his film career , after Guy Lombardo got him interested in music , Stuart began his own big band , and became known as " The Man with the Band from Movieland " . Stuart had become friendly with Lombardo when he and his wife , Carol , had helped Lombardo 's brother adopt a child in 1932 . By 1937 , Stuart 's band had achieved a modicum of fame , and had appeared in several film shorts , including 1938 's Twenty Girls and a Band . After the creation of his band , Stuart would only sporadically appear in films over the next 20 years . In the 1940s , he appeared in two of the Bowery Boys films , starring Leo <unk> and <unk> Hall , Mr. Muggs Steps Out ( 1943 ) , and Pride of the Bowery ( 1946 ) . Stuart 's last starring role would be in the 1946 film , Gunsmoke . 
 From 1946 through 1963 Stuart would appear in only four more films , although he appeared in several film serials , such as The Lost Planet ( 1953 ) , Blackhawk : Fearless Champion of Freedom ( 1952 ) , and King of the Congo ( 1952 ) . Stuart 's one and only television appearance came in a featured role in the final episode of Navy Log , which aired on September 11 , 1958 . In the 1960s , he would make his final appearance in a small role in Sydney Pollack 's drama This Property Is Condemned , starring Natalie Wood , Robert Redford , and Charles Bronson . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Stuart married Martha Burnett in 1942 , with whom he remained married until his death in 1973 . Stuart dissolved his band in 1961 , after which he opened a haberdashery in Biloxi , Mississippi , located in the Broadwater Beach Hotel . Stuart died from cancer on April 7 , 1973 in Biloxi , Mississippi . He was buried in Southern Memorial Park in Biloxi , where his wife would be buried next to him upon her death in 1991 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 ( Per AFI database , and <unk> Feature films except as noted . ) 
 = Chess in Armenia = 
 Chess has been played in Armenia since the early Middle Ages ; however , it was institutionalized during the early Soviet period . Highly popular in Armenia today , chess gained widespread recognition during the 1960s , when Soviet Armenian grandmaster Tigran Petrosian became the World Chess Champion . A country of about three million people , Armenia is considered one of the strongest chess nations today . Among countries , Armenia has one of the most chess grandmasters per capita . 
 Since the country 's independence , the Armenian men 's chess team has won the European Team Championship ( 1999 ) , the World Team Championship ( 2011 ) and the Chess Olympiad ( 2006 , 2008 , 2012 ) . The women 's team had its crowning victory at the 2003 European Championship . As of February 2016 , Armenia ranks seventh in the world by the average rating of its top players . Levon Aronian , Armenia 's best chess player , is currently world No. 4 in the FIDE rankings . Aronian was a World Champion candidate several times . 
 Since the 2011 – 12 school year , chess lessons have been made part of the curriculum in every public school in Armenia , making it the first country in the world to make chess mandatory in schools . 
 Garry Kasparov has compared the popularity of chess in Armenia with the popularity of football ( soccer ) in Latin America . 
 = = Name = = 
 Until the early 20th century , chess was known in Armenian as <unk> ( <unk> ) , from Middle Persian <unk> . Today , that term — pronounced <unk> — is only used in Western Armenian , which is spoken in the Armenian diaspora . In modern Eastern Armenian , which is the variation of Armenian used in the Republic of Armenia , chess is known as <unk> <unk> [ <unk> ] . It is derived from Russian <unk> ( <unk> ) , itself a derivative from Persian <unk> <unk> ( شاه <unk> ) , literally meaning " the king is at a loss . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 In <unk> : The Book of Chess ( 1936 ) , orientalists Joseph Orbeli and Kamilla <unk> suggest that chess was known in Armenia since at least the 9th century , when Armenia was under Arab rule . According to them , the game was brought to Armenia by the Arabs from India , where the game is believed to have been originated in the 6th century as <unk> . In 1967 , chess figures were found in the citadel of Dvin , the medieval Armenian capital . Chess is mentioned in manuscripts from the 12th century – 13th century kept in the Matenadaran Institute of Ancient Manuscripts in Yerevan , including a 13th @-@ century manuscript by Vardan Areveltsi . Until the mid @-@ 20th century villagers in <unk> near <unk> were using homemade chess figures similar to medieval ones . 
 = = = Soviet period = = = 
 Chess in Armenia was institutionalized after the establishment of Soviet rule in 1920 . In 1926 – 27 , by the initiative of chemist Simon <unk> ( 1869 – 1942 ) , sections about chess started appearing in many Armenian newspapers . <unk> contributed to the popularization of chess in Armenia by giving lectures about it . He translated books by Emanuel Lasker , Ilya <unk> ( ru ) , and Yakov Rokhlin ( ru ) into Armenian . 
 The first chess competitions were held in 1927 , when the Armenian Chess Federation was founded . Until 1934 chess players from Armenia competed in the Transcaucasian championship . In 1934 the first Armenian Chess Championship was held in Yerevan . <unk> Kasparyan became its winner . In later years Kasparyan won the championship nine times and became the most @-@ titled Armenian chess player with ten national championship wins . The women 's championship was also held the same year , <unk> <unk> and Margarita Mirza @-@ <unk> shared the champion title . The first Armenian chess club was founded in 1936 . Chess clubs were also founded in Leninakan ( now Gyumri ) and <unk> ( now <unk> ) in the 1950s . 
 Chess became particularly popular with the unprecedented success of Tigran Petrosian in the 1960s . Born in Tiflis , the current capital of Armenia 's neighbor Georgia , he started his ascent in Armenia with a 1946 victory at the national championship . He then won the Soviet champion title four times ( 1959 , 1961 , 1969 , 1975 ) . In 1963 Petrosian became the World Chess Champion , defeating Mikhail Botvinnik , another Soviet representative . Petrosian 's victory not only popularized the game of chess , but also " led to an outpouring of patriotic fervour " in the smallest Soviet republic . " From that moment on , chess became a national obsession . " Many couples named their sons Tigran , after Petrosian . Besides being World Champion for six years ( 1963 to 1969 ) , Petrosian won the Chess Olympiad nine times with the Soviet team ( 1958 to 1974 ) . 
 In 1962 , there were 30 @,@ 000 chess players in Soviet Armenia , as well as 3 @,@ 000 instructors and judges . By 1986 the number of chess players had increased to 50 @,@ 000 , including three grandmasters : Rafael Vaganian , Smbat Lputian , and <unk> Petrosian . In the late Soviet period , Rafael Vaganian ( 1989 ) and Artashes Minasian ( 1991 ) became Soviet Champions . Vaganian also won the Olympiad with the Soviet team twice in 1984 and 1986 . 
 In 1985 , Garry Kasparov , born in Baku , Soviet Azerbaijan to an Armenian mother and Russian Jewish father , became World Champion . Although he never represented Armenia and is only half @-@ Armenian , some sources preferred to call him Armenian , partly because his last name is the Russified form of his mother 's Armenian last name Kasparyan . 
 = = = Independent Armenia = = = 
 Armenia gained its independence from the Soviet Union in 1991 . Since then , Armenian chess players have had the opportunity to represent the Republic of Armenia . Three major chess tournaments have taken place in independent Armenia : the 32nd Chess Olympiad was held at the Sports & Music Complex in Yerevan in 1996 ; the 2001 World Team Chess Championship and the 2014 European Individual Chess Championship were held at the Yerevan Opera Theater . 
 Armenia earned its first medal at the 1992 Chess Olympiad , finishing third . Armenia won bronze medals at the 2002 and 2004 Olympiads as well . The Armenian team made a breakthrough with the sensational victory at the 2006 Chess Olympiad . They also won the 2008 and 2012 Chess Olympiads . Their record at the World Team Championships has been similarly outstanding , finishing third in 1997 , 2001 , and 2005 , and winning in 2011 . At the European championships the team performed somewhat more poorly , placing third in 1997 , first in 1999 , and second in 2007 . 
 = = = = Teaching of chess in schools = = = = 
 In 2011 , the Ministry of Education of Armenia made chess part of the primary school curriculum along with such standards as math and history for children over the age of 6 . Chess is compulsory for second , third and fourth graders . Over $ 1 @.@ 5 million was spent on the program . The inclusion of chess in schools was generally received positively by the public , but some parents claimed that their children 's school program was already complicated and overloaded . Grandmaster Smbat Lputian argues that " bringing chess into schools is the best way to build the future . " 
 The decision was widely reported in the international media . Journalists , chess experts and officials in various countries praised the program and advised its adoption in their respective countries . During his visit to Armenia in 2014 Magnus Carlsen stated : " I think Armenia 's experience of teaching chess in schools is a great example for the whole world . " 
 = = Institutions = = 
 The national governing body for chess , the Armenian Chess Federation , was founded in 1927 . President of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan was elected its president in 2004 ( when he was Defence Minister ) and was reelected in 2011 . Sargsyan " is known for enthusiastically supporting Armenian chess players . " On one occasion , Sargsyan stated that " We don 't want people to know Armenia just for the earthquake and the genocide . We would rather it was famous for its chess . " The Armenian government provides grandmasters with salaries and perks . 
 The Chess Academy of Armenia ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , " one of the leading chess @-@ teaching institutions in the country " , was " founded in 2002 in Yerevan by the initiative of grandmaster Smbat Lputian , supported by the Prime Minister Andranik Margaryan " . The academy has organized international and national chess tournaments . 
 = = National championship = = 
 The first Armenian championship occurred in 1934 when it was part of the Transcaucasian SFSR . Championships were held sporadically in the Armenian SSR until 1945 , when they became an annual event ; this practice has been continued in independent Armenia . <unk> Kasparyan has won it the most times ( 10 times ) , followed by Ashot Anastasian ( 8 times ) , Levon <unk> ( 6 times ) and Artashes Minasian ( 6 times ) . 
 The first woman 's championship also took place in 1934 , but was not held again till 1939 . Some of the most notable women champions include Elina <unk> ( 6 times ) , <unk> <unk> ( 4 times ) and <unk> <unk> ( 3 times ) . 
 = = Media = = 
 In 1972 , the magazine Chess in Armenia ( <unk> Հայաստան <unk> Hayastan ) was founded by <unk> Oganessian . It was published monthly until 1997 , when it became a weekly magazine . In 1972 , the TV show Chess @-@ 64 ( originally named Chess School ) started to be aired by the Public Television of Armenia . Hosted by <unk> Oganessian , it is the " longest lived program series " in the channel 's history . Another more recently created show , Chess World , is aired after the First News . 
 = = Individual statistics = = 
 FIDE , the World Chess Federation , lists 24 active Armenian grandmasters , 4 woman grandmasters , 17 international masters and 4 woman international masters . 
 = = = Men = = = 
 The Top 10 Armenian grandmasters as of May 2016 are listed below . 
 Levon Aronian is currently No. 7 in the FIDE World Rankings . In 2005 he won the Chess World Cup . 
 = = = Women = = = 
 The Top 10 women Armenian chess players are listed below as of May 2016 . 
 = = Team records = = 
 = = = Chess Olympiads = = = 
 Men 's 
 Women 's 
 = = = World Team Championships = = = 
 Men 's 
 Women 's 
 = = = European Team Championships = = = 
 Men 's 
 Women 's 
 = = = Club championships = = = 
 In 1995 , the Yerevan city club won the European Chess Club Cup men 's tournament . In 2006 , the Yerevan <unk> club won the European Club Cup women 's tournament . 
 = Netley Abbey = 
 Netley Abbey is a ruined late medieval monastery in the village of Netley near Southampton in Hampshire , England . The abbey was founded in 1239 as a house for Roman Catholic monks of the austere Cistercian order . Despite being a royal abbey , Netley was never rich , produced no influential scholars nor churchmen , and its nearly 300 @-@ year history was quiet . The monks were best known to their neighbours for the generous hospitality they offered to travellers on land and sea . 
 In 1536 , Netley Abbey was closed by Henry VIII of England during the Dissolution of the Monasteries and the building was converted into a mansion by William Paulet , a wealthy Tudor politician . The abbey was used as a country house until the beginning of the eighteenth century , after which it was abandoned and partially demolished for building materials . Subsequently the ruins became a tourist attraction , and provided inspiration to poets and artists of the Romantic movement . In the early twentieth century the site was given to the nation , and it is now a Scheduled Ancient Monument , cared for by English Heritage . The extensive remains consist of the church , cloister buildings , abbot 's house , and fragments of the post @-@ Dissolution mansion . Netley Abbey is one of the best preserved medieval Cistercian monasteries in southern England . 
 = = Foundation = = 
 Netley was founded in 1239 by Peter des Roches , a powerful politician , government official , and Bishop of Winchester from 1205 – 1238 . The abbey was one of a pair the bishop conceived as a memorial to himself ; the other is La <unk> @-@ Dieu in Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> , France . Des Roches began to purchase the lands for Netley 's initial endowment in about 1236 , but he died before the project was finished and the foundation was completed by his executors . According to the Chronicle of Waverley Abbey , the first monks arrived to settle the site on 25 July 1239 from neighbouring Beaulieu Abbey , a year after the bishop 's death . As its founder had died before the vital task of collecting the endowment was complete , the abbey started its life in a difficult financial situation . It is thought that little work took place on the permanent stone monastery until the house was taken under the wing of Henry III , who became interested in the abbey in the mid @-@ 1240s and eventually assumed the role of patron in 1251 . 
 = = Buildings = = 
 = = = Church = = = 
 The fruits of royal patronage were demonstrated by the construction of a large church ( 72 metres ( 236 ft ) long ) , built in the fashionable French @-@ influenced Gothic style pioneered by Henry 's masons at Westminster Abbey . The high quality and elaborate nature of the church 's decoration , particularly its mouldings and tracery , indicate a move away from the deliberate austerity of the early Cistercian churches towards the grandeur appropriate to a secular cathedral . Construction of the church proceeded from east to west . The presbytery and transepts were built first to allow the monks to hold services , and the nave was filled in over time . It is not known precisely when the building work began , but major gifts by King Henry of roofing timber and lead from Derbyshire in 1251 and 1252 indicate that some of the eastern parts of the church , and probably of the east cloister range too , had by then reached an advanced stage . The presence of a foundation stone at the base of the southeast pier of the crossing inscribed " H. DI . GRA REX <unk> " ( Latin for Henry by the Grace of God King of the English ) shows that the foundations of the centre of the church reached ground level after 1251 , the year Henry III formally became the abbey 's patron . The church took many decades to complete , and was probably finished between 1290 and 1320 . Dating the various parts of the building is predominantly done on stylistic grounds . 
 The church was vaulted and cruciform in shape , with a square presbytery and a low central tower containing bells . It was aisled throughout , with a pair of chapels on the east side of each transept . There was no triforium , but a narrow gallery surmounted by a clerestory of triple lancet windows ran above each bay of the arcade , as can be seen in the surviving section in the south transept . The vaulting sprang directly from the top of the arcade . The wall at the eastern end the presbytery , probably built after 1260 , has a large window which features an upper rose and elaborate tracery ; the aisle windows are simple paired lancets recessed within an arch . In the nave , the south aisle has plain triple lancets set high in the wall to avoid the cloister roof . The north aisle windows by contrast have richly decorated cusped tracery , reflecting the changes in taste over the long period of construction , and suggesting that this was among the last parts of the church to be finished , probably in the very late thirteenth or early fourteenth centuries . The west wall of the church also has a large window , the tracery of which was destroyed in a collapse during the eighteenth century . Surviving fragments show that it was built in a " freer and more advanced style " than other parts of the church , and suggest a date around the turn of the fourteenth century . 
 Internally , the church was subdivided into several areas . The high altar was against the east wall of the presbytery , flanked by two smaller altars on the side walls . To the west , under the tower , were the monks ' choir stalls where they sat during services , and further west was a pulpitum or rood screen , which blocked access to the ritual areas of the church . In the nave , the lay brothers had their own choir stalls and altar for services . The monks of Netley kept up a schedule of services and prayer both day and night following the canonical hours ; a staircase in the south transept went up to the monks ' dormitory , allowing them to conveniently attend night services . The lay brothers had their own entrance to the church at the west end via a covered gallery from their accommodation . 
 Unlike rival orders such as the Benedictines , who allowed the nave to be used by parishioners and visitors , the Cistercians officially reserved their churches solely for the use of the monastic community . Others had to worship in a separate chapel in the abbey grounds close to the main gate . Over time this rule was relaxed to allow pilgrims to visit shrines , as at Hailes Abbey with its relic of the Holy Blood , and to allow the construction of tombs and chantries for patrons and wealthy benefactors of the house , as in the churches of other orders . Excavated sculpture shows that the church at Netley featured a number of elaborate tombs and monuments . 
 The interior of the church was richly decorated . The walls were plastered and painted in white and maroon with geometric patterns and lines designed to give the impression of ashlar masonry . Architectural detail was also picked out in maroon . The floors were covered in polychrome encaustic tiles featuring foliage , heraldic beasts , and coats of arms including those of England , France , the Holy Roman Empire , Queen Eleanor of Castile , Richard of Cornwall and many powerful noble families . The chapels in the south transept had tiles with symbols of Edward the Confessor and the Virgin Mary . The windows of the church were filled with painted glass , six panels of which have been discovered . They show scenes from the life of the Virgin Mary , the Crucifixion , monks , monsters and humorous animals . 
 = = = Cloister and east range = = = 
 South of the church stands a cloister surrounded by ranges of buildings on three sides , the church forming the fourth . The cloister was the heart of the abbey , where the monks spent most of their time when not in church , engaged in study , copying books and the creation of illuminated manuscripts . The monks ' desks were placed in the north walk of the cloister , and a cupboard for books in current use was carved into the external wall of the south transept . 
 The east range , which was started at the same time as the church and probably took about 10 years to build , contained many of the abbey 's most important rooms . The vaulted library and sacristy were on the ground floor , adjacent to the church . To the south was the chapter house , where the government of the abbey took place and the monks met to transact business and to listen to a daily reading of a chapter of the Rule of St Benedict . It was a magnificent apartment divided into three aisles with vaults springing from four columns ; a stone bench ran around the walls for the monks to sit on , and the abbot 's throne was in the centre of the east wall . The entrance to the chapter house from the cloister is via an elaborately moulded arched doorway , flanked on each side by a window of similar size . The windows had sills and columns of Purbeck Marble , the whole forming an impressive composition appropriate to the second most important space in the abbey after the church . The windows on either side of the door would have been unglazed , so as to allow representatives of the <unk> ( who were not members of chapter ) to listen to debates . The chapter house was also used for burials , traditionally those of the abbots of a monastery . When the room was excavated , archaeologists discovered scattered human remains and evidence of graves beneath the medieval floor level , indicating that a number of people were once buried there . 
 The parlour lies south , an austere , barrel vaulted room little more than a passageway through the building . Here the monks could talk without disturbing the silence in the cloister , which Cistercian rules insisted on . South of this runs a long vaulted hall with a central row of pillars supporting the roof . This room was much altered over time and probably served several purposes during the life of the abbey . Initially , it may have served as the monks ' day room and accommodation for novices , but as time went on it may have been converted into the misericord where the monks — initially only the sick , but by the later middle ages the whole convent — could eat meat dishes not normally allowed in the main dining hall . 
 The monks ' dormitory was on the top floor of the east range , a long room with a high pitched roof ( the mark of which can still be seen on the transept wall ) which ran the length of the building . This was entered by two staircases : the day stair went down into the cloister in the south @-@ east corner ; the night stair led into the south transept of the church to allow the monks to get easily from bed to choir at night . Initially the dormitory was an open hall , with the monks ' beds placed along the walls , one under each of the small , slit @-@ like windows . During the fourteenth century , when views of the necessity of sleeping together for the common life changed , the dormitory at Netley would , as at other houses , have been divided into panelled chambers to give every monk his own private room , each leading off a central corridor . The treasury , a tiny vaulted room , was at the north end of the dormitory , probably placed there so the brothers could guard it at night . 
 = = = <unk> and infirmary = = = 
 Another large building lies crosswise at the south end of the east range . The lower level consists of a vaulted hall . It is equipped with a grand thirteenth century hooded fireplace and has its own garderobe . It is not clear what this chamber was used for , but it may have been the monastic infirmary — if so , it was a most unusual , perhaps unique , arrangement . Normally in a medieval Cistercian monastery an infirmary with its own kitchens , chapel and ancillary buildings would have been located east of the main buildings around a second , smaller cloister , but at Netley these seem to be absent . So far , excavations have not revealed whether Netley had a separate infirmary complex . 
 The upper floor of this building was the reredorter or latrine . It is a large room with a door conveniently leading into the monks ' dormitory . The stalls were in the south wall and the effluent dropped into an underground stream which runs in a vaulted passage underneath the building . 
 To the west of the reredorter block was the buttery , a room where the monks ' wine ( some of it direct from the king 's cellars at Southampton ) and beer were stored . Excavations in this area have revealed fragmentary remains which may be part of a separate kitchen for the richer meat diet allowed to the residents of the infirmary . 
 = = = South range = = = 
 During the Tudor conversion of the abbey to a house the south range was extensively rebuilt , and only the north wall of the medieval structure remains , which makes tracing the monastic layout difficult . Going east to west , first came the day stair , then the warming house where the communal fire burned constantly to allow the monks to warm themselves after long hours of study in the unheated cloister . The room was probably vaulted and had its great fireplace on the west wall to allow heat to go to the refectory or dining hall next door . It is likely that , as at Netley 's great sister house of Fountains Abbey , the chamber above the warming house was the <unk> room , where the abbey 's charters , records and title deeds , as well as those of local lords , were kept . 
 The refectory projected south from the centre of the range , as was usual in Cistercian monasteries . It has been almost completely demolished save for the north wall , although the foundations survive underground and have been excavated . It was a long hall with a dais for the abbot and important guests at the south end . There was a pulpit in the west wall to allow a monk to read to the brothers while they ate . The kitchen lies west ; it had a central fireplace , as was Cistercian custom , and was placed to allow food to be served through hatches both to the monks ' refectory and to the separate dining hall for the lay brothers on the west side . 
 = = = West range = = = 
 The west range at Netley is small and does not run the full length of the west side of the cloister . It is divided in two by the original main entrance to the abbey , with an outer parlour where the monks could meet visitors . North of this on the ground floor were cellars for food storage , and to the south was the lay brothers ' refectory . The upper floor , reached by a stair from the cloister , was the dormitory for the lay brothers . Netley was a late foundation , built at a time when the lay brothers were a declining part of the Cistercian economy , and it is probable that they were few in number , hence the small size of the accommodation needed . By the time the west range was completed in the fourteenth century they were rapidly disappearing , and had all but vanished by the end of the century . During the late fourteenth and fifteenth centuries most Cistercian houses took advantage of the large area of the monastery then left empty and converted the lay brothers ' quarters to new uses . At some houses , such as Sawley Abbey , a series of comfortable chambers for the use of monastic officials or guests were built ; elsewhere , such as Hailes Abbey , the west range was turned into a luxurious private home for the abbot . The ruins of the west range at Netley are too fragmentary to be sure of the use these buildings were put to in the latter part of the medieval period . 
 All the buildings around the cloister were finished in the fourteenth century . There were subsequently few major structural changes during the monastic period aside from the re @-@ vaulting of the south transept of the church at the end of the fifteenth century . It is likely , however , that there were many internal changes to match the rising standards of living during the later Middle Ages ( as seen at Cleeve Abbey ) that have left no evidence on the surviving remains . 
 = = = Precinct = = = 
 A stone building to the east of the main complex is thought to have been the abbot 's house . It contains two levels of vaulted apartments consisting of two halls , bedchambers , a private chapel and service rooms . The upper level was reached by an external staircase , which allowed this floor to be used independently if needed . 
 The central core of the monastery was surrounded by a precinct containing an outer ( public ) courtyard and an inner ( private ) courtyard , gardens , barns , guesthouses for travellers , stables , fishponds , the home farm and industrial buildings . The site was defended by a high bank and moat , part of which remains east of the abbey . Entrance was strictly controlled by an outer and inner gatehouse . A chapel , known as the capella ante <unk> ( Latin for chapel outside the gates ) was placed by the outer gatehouse for the use of travellers and the local community . Of the precinct buildings , only the abbot 's house , the moat and the fishponds have left visible remains . 
 Netley 's fresh water was supplied by two aqueducts which ran for several miles east and west of the abbey , up into the areas of modern Southampton and Eastleigh . The remains of the eastern aqueduct , now known as <unk> Gully , can be seen in Wentworth Gardens , Southampton . 
 = = Monastic history = = 
 Henry III added to the endowment left by Peter des Roches . The king donated farmland , urban property in Southampton and elsewhere , and spiritual revenues from churches . By 1291 , taxation returns show that the abbey had a clear annual revenue of £ 81 , a comfortable income . However , shortly afterwards a period of bad management resulted in the abbey accruing substantial debts , and it was soon almost bankrupt . In 1328 the government was forced to appoint an administrator , John of Mere , to address the crisis . Despite forcing the abbot to apply revenues to debt repayment and to sell many of the estates , he was only partly successful . Ten years later the abbey was again appealing to the king for help with a disastrous financial situation . The monks blamed their problems on the cost of providing hospitality to the many travellers by sea , and the king 's sailors who landed at the abbey . The king provided some small grants enabling the abbey to overcome its difficulties but the property sales meant that the abbey 's income never recovered and it settled into what has been described as genteel poverty . 
 Nevertheless , Netley remained a much respected institution by its neighbours until the end of its life as a monastery . It was not known for scholarship , wealth , or particular fervour , but it was highly regarded for its generosity to travellers and sailors , and for the devout lives ( " by <unk> of good Religious conversation " ) led by its monks . The abbot was summoned on many occasions to sit in Parliament with fellow prelates in the House of Lords as one of the Lords Spiritual . Surviving reports indicate the abbey had a peaceful and scandal @-@ free domestic life . 
 = = Dissolution = = 
 In 1535 the abbey 's income was assessed in the Valor Ecclesiasticus , Henry VIII 's great survey of church finances , at £ 160 gross , £ 100 net , which meant the following year that it came under the terms of the First Suppression Act , Henry 's initial move in the Dissolution of the Monasteries . At the beginning of the following year , the king 's commissioners , Sir James Worsley , John Paulet , George Paulet and William Berners , delivered a report to the government on the monasteries of Hampshire which provides a snapshot of Netley on the eve of the Dissolution . The commissioners noted that Netley was inhabited by seven monks , all of them priests , and the abbey was : 
 A <unk> house of <unk> of <unk> of <unk> , <unk> of large <unk> and situate upon the <unk> of the Sees . To the <unk> 's Subjects and Strangers <unk> the same Sees great Relief and <unk> . 
 In addition to the monks , Netley was home to 29 servants and officials of the abbey , plus two Franciscan friars of the strict Observant part of that order who had been put into the abbot 's custody by the king , presumably for opposing his religious policies . The royal officers also found plate and jewels in the treasury worth £ 43 , " ornaments " worth £ 39 , and agricultural produce and animals worth £ 103 . The abbey 's debts were moderate at £ 42 . 
 Abbot Thomas Stevens and his seven monks were forced to surrender their house to the king in the summer of 1536 . Abbot Thomas and six of his brethren — the seventh opted to resign and become a secular priest — crossed Southampton Water to join their mother house of Beaulieu . Abbot Thomas was appointed abbot of Beaulieu in 1536 and administered it for two years until it in turn was forced to surrender to the king in April 1538 . The monks received pensions after the fall of Beaulieu ; Abbot Thomas ended his days as treasurer of Salisbury Cathedral , and died in 1550 . 
 = = Country house = = 
 Following the dissolution of Netley , on 3 August 1536 , King Henry granted the abbey buildings and some of its estates to Sir William Paulet , his Lord Treasurer and subsequently Marquess of Winchester . As soon as he took over , Sir William started the process of turning the abbey into a palace suitable for one of the most important politicians in England . He converted the nave of the church into his great hall , kitchens and service buildings , the transepts and crossing became a series of luxurious apartments for his personal use , the presbytery was retained as the chapel of the mansion . The monks ' dormitory became the long gallery of the mansion and the latrine block became several grand chambers . He demolished the south range and refectory and built a new one with a central turreted gatehouse to provide the appropriate seigneurial emphasis needed for a classic Tudor courtyard house . He likewise demolished the cloister walks to make a central courtyard for his house and placed a large fountain in the centre . The precinct buildings were demolished to create formal gardens and terraces . 
 His eventual successor William Paulet , 4th Marquess of Winchester ( <unk> @-@ 1629 ) of Basing House , Hampshire , on encountering financial difficulties , sold Basing and Hound in 1602 to Edward Seymour , 1st Earl of Hertford ( 1539 @-@ 1621 ) , of Tottenham House in Wiltshire , who used it as a residence , and died there in 1621 . His eventual descendant William Seymour , 3rd Duke of Somerset ( 1652 @-@ 1671 ) died aged 19 without progeny when his title passed by law to his heir male but his <unk> estates including Netley and Hound , passed top his sister Elizabeth Seymour , wife of Thomas Bruce , 2nd Earl of Ailesbury ( 1656 @-@ 1741 ) , who sold Netley in 1676 to Henry Somerset , 3rd Marquess of Worcester ( 1629 @-@ 1700 ) , later Duke of Beaufort . 
 Theophilus Hastings , 7th Earl of Huntingdon , inhabited the abbey until the close of the seventeenth century . 
 = = Romantic ruin = = 
 Around 1700 , Netley Abbey came into the hands of Sir Berkeley Lucy ( also spelled Sir " Bartlet " ) who decided in 1704 to demolish the by now unfashionable house in order to sell the materials . Sir Berkeley made an agreement with a Southampton builder , Mr Walter Taylor , to take down the former church . However , during the course of the demolition , the contractor was killed by the fall of tracery from the west window of the church and the scheme was halted . 
 The abbey was subsequently abandoned and allowed to decay . In the 1760s Thomas Dummer , who owned estates in the area , moved the north transept to his estate at Cranbury Park near Winchester where it can be still be seen as a folly in the gardens of the house ( at 51 ° 00 ′ 08 ″ N 01 ° 21 ′ 49 ″ W ) . 
 By the second half of the eighteenth century , the abbey , by then partially roofless and overgrown with trees and ivy , had become a famous ruin that attracted the attention of artists , dramatists and poets . In the nineteenth century , Netley became a popular tourist attraction ( the novelist Jane Austen was among those who visited ) and steps were taken to conserve the ruins . Archaeological excavations directed by Charles Pink and Reverend Edmund Kell took place in 1860 . During the same period the owners decided to remove many of the Tudor additions to the building to create a more medieval feel to the site , resulting in the loss of much evidence of the abbey 's post @-@ Dissolution story . 
 In 1922 , the abbey was passed into state care by the then owner , Tankerville Chamberlayne , one time M.P. for Southampton . Conservation and archaeological work on the abbey has continued . 
 = = In literature and art = = 
 Soon after the abbey had been allowed to fall into ruin , it began to attract the attention of artists and writers , and was a popular subject throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . In 1755 , the antiquarian Horace Walpole praised the ruins in his letters following a visit with the poet Thomas Gray , claiming they were " In short , not the ruins of Netley , but of Paradise " . In 1764 , George Keate wrote The Ruins of Netley Abbey , A poem , which showed a romantic appreciation of the ruins and evoked sympathy for the life formerly led there by the monks . He prefaced his poem with a heartfelt plea for the preservation of the remains . 
 Keate was followed by other romantic poets including William Sotheby ( Ode , Netley Abbey , Midnight , 1790 ) . Sotheby 's view of the abbey was gothic ; he peoples the ruins with spectral processions and ghostly Cistercians . Nor was he the only one ; in 1795 Richard Warner wrote a potboiler entitled Netley Abbey , a Gothic Story in two volumes , featuring skullduggery at the abbey during the middle ages . Dark deeds before the Dissolution also appeared in the section of Richard Harris Barham 's Ingoldsby Legends ( 1847 ) covering Netley . This complex satire pokes fun at the medieval church and the monks ( whom he accuses of having walled up an erring nun in one of the vaults and ensuring God ’ s revenge upon them ) and the tourists who crowded contemporary Netley , while at the same time showing appreciation of the beauty of the ruins . 
 Netley Abbey , an Operatic Farce , by William Pearce , was first performed in 1794 at Covent Garden . The set of the first production featured an elaborate mockup of the abbey ruins seen in the moonlight . 
 The earliest surviving depiction of the abbey is by the engravers Samuel and Nathaniel Buck , who specialised in landmarks and great ruins . Their engraving ( 1733 ) shows the church of the abbey much as it is today , with the exception of the high vault of the south transept still present . The picture has notable errors and was clearly done from memory and rough sketches . The most famous artist to paint the ruins was John Constable , whose 1833 painting of the west end of the church shows it among trees . 
 = = Present day = = 
 = = = Condition = = = 
 The visitor today will find the shell of the church and monastic buildings around the cloister plus the abbot 's house . Little of the post @-@ Dissolution mansion remains aside from the south range , foundations , alterations to the medieval structure in red Tudor brick and traces of the formal gardens . In most places the abbey stands close to its original height . The sacristy / library , the south transept chapels , the treasury , the reredorter undercroft and the lower floor of the abbot 's house still have their vaults intact . Medieval heraldic polychrome tiles found on the site can be seen in the sacristy , and Henry III 's foundation stone remains in the church . The abbey ruins are set in wooded parkland to the west of the village of Netley and constitute the most complete surviving Cistercian monastery in southern England . The site is maintained by English Heritage , and is open to the public . Netley is an Ancient Monument protected by law . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 During the summer months the abbey is occasionally host to events such as open @-@ air theatre and was the site of a flashmob wedding on 25 June 2011 . 
 = = Local legends = = 
 = = = Walter Taylor = = = 
 Over the years several legends have grown up around the abbey , the best attested of which is that of Walter Taylor , the builder contracted to demolish the church . Legend has it that before starting the work he was warned in a dream that he would be punished if he committed sacrilege by damaging the building . The story is recounted by the eighteenth century antiquary Browne Walters : 
 The earl ( sic ) , it is said , made a contract with a Mr. Walter Taylor , a builder of Southampton , for the complete demolition of the Abbey ; it being intended by Taylor to employ the materials in erecting a town house at Newport and other buildings . After making this agreement , however , Taylor dreamed that , as he was pulling down a particular window , one of the stones forming the arch fell upon him , and killed him . His dream impressed him so forcibly that he mentioned the circumstance to a friend , who is said to have been the father of the well @-@ known Dr. Isaac Watts , and in some perplexity asked his advice . His friend thought it would be the safest course for him to have nothing to do with the affair , respecting which he had been so alarmingly forewarned , and endeavoured to persuade him to desist from his intention . Taylor , however , at last decided upon paying no attention to his dream , and accordingly began his operations for the pulling down of the building ; in which he had not proceeded far , when , as he was assisting at the work , the arch of one of the windows , but not the one he had dreamed of ( which was the east window still standing ) , fell upon his head and fractured his skull . It was thought at first that the wound would not prove mortal ; but it was aggravated through the <unk> of the surgeon , and the man died . 
 = = = Blind Peter = = = 
 Another local legend states that during the dissolution of the monasteries the abbey 's treasure was hidden down a secret tunnel with a lone monk to guard it . After many years of searching a treasure hunter called <unk> is said to have entered an underground passage he had discovered only to return a few moments later screaming , " In the name of God , block it up , " before dropping dead . 
 = = = The walled up nun = = = 
 The story of the nun walled up in a small room recounted in Barham 's Ingoldsby Legends was a creation of the author and has no basis in fact or genuine folklore , as the author himself admits with a smile in his notes to the poem , attributing his story to one James Harrison : 
 a youthful but intelligent cab driver of Southampton , who " well remembers to have heard his grandmother say that ' Somebody told her so ' . " 
 = Children of Men = 
 Children of Men is a 2006 British @-@ American science fiction thriller film directed and co @-@ written by Alfonso Cuarón . The screenplay , based on P. D. James ' 1992 novel of the same name , was credited to five writers , with Clive Owen making uncredited contributions . The film takes place in 2027 , where two decades of human infertility have left society on the brink of collapse . Illegal immigrants seek sanctuary in the United Kingdom , where the last functioning government imposes oppressive immigration laws on refugees . Owen plays civil servant Theo Faron , who must help a refugee ( Clare @-@ Hope <unk> ) escape the chaos . Children of Men also stars Julianne Moore , Michael Caine , Chiwetel Ejiofor , and Charlie Hunnam . 
 A co @-@ production of the United Kingdom and the United States , the film was released on 22 September 2006 in the UK and on 25 December in the U.S. Critics noted the relationship between the U.S. Christmas opening and the film 's themes of hope , redemption , and faith . Despite the limited release and low earnings at the box office compared to its budget , Children of Men received wide critical acclaim and was recognised for its achievements in screenwriting , cinematography , art direction , and innovative single @-@ shot action sequences . It was nominated for three Academy Awards : Best Adapted Screenplay , Best Cinematography and Best Film Editing . It was also nominated for three BAFTA Awards , winning Best Cinematography and Best Production Design , and for three Saturn Awards , winning Best Science Fiction Film . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2027 , after 18 years of global human infertility , civilization is on the brink of collapse as humanity faces extinction . The United Kingdom , one of the very few stable nations with a functioning government , is deluged by asylum seekers fleeing the chaos and war which have taken hold around the world . In response , the UK has become a militarized police state as British government forces round up and detain immigrants . Theo Faron , a former activist turned cynical bureaucrat , is kidnapped by the Fishes , a militant immigrants ' rights group . They are led by Theo 's estranged wife , Julian Taylor , from whom he separated after their son Dylan 's death during a 2008 flu pandemic . 
 Julian offers Theo money to acquire transit papers for a young refugee named Kee , which Theo obtains from his cousin Nigel , a government minister who runs a state @-@ sponsored collection of salvaged art from around the world . The transit papers require that the bearer must be accompanied , so Theo agrees to escort Kee in exchange for a large sum . Luke , a Fishes member , drives them and former midwife Miriam towards the coast to a boat . They are ambushed by an armed gang and Julian is killed . Luke kills two police officers who stop their car , and they bury Julian in the forest as Theo breaks down crying over her death , ditching their car for another to escape to a Fishes safe house . 
 Kee reveals to Theo that she is pregnant as Julian had told her to trust only Theo , intending to hand Kee to the " Human Project " , a supposed scientific group in the Azores dedicated to curing infertility . However , Luke persuades Kee to stay , and he is later voted as the new leader of the Fishes . That night , Theo eavesdrops on a meeting of Luke and other Fishes , discovering that Julian 's death was orchestrated by the Fishes so Luke could take over as leader , that they intend to kill Theo in the morning , and that they intend to use the baby as a political tool to support the coming revolution . Theo wakes Kee and Miriam and they steal a car , escaping to the secluded hideaway of Theo 's aging friend Jasper Palmer , a former political cartoonist turned pot dealer . 
 The group plans to board the Human Project ship Tomorrow , which will arrive offshore from the Bexhill refugee camp . Jasper proposes getting Syd , a camp guard to whom he frequently sells drugs , to smuggle them into Bexhill masquerading as refugees . The Fishes discover Jasper 's house , and the group flees while Jasper stays behind to stall the Fishes , before being brutally murdered by Luke as Theo watches on . They wait for Syd in an abandoned school , where Miriam confides in Theo how many children were lost at the beginning of the infertility crisis , and her sadness of how " as the sound of the playgrounds faded , the despair set in . Very odd , what happens in a world without children 's voices " . The group then meets with Syd , who transports them to Bexhill , where they see refugees being beaten , tortured , robbed and executed by camp guards and police . When Kee 's contractions begin on a bus , Miriam distracts a suspicious guard by feigning mania and is taken away and hooded . 
 At the camp , Theo and Kee meet a Romanian woman , Marichka , who provides a room where Kee gives birth to a girl . The next day , Syd finds them in their room and informs Theo and Kee that war has broken out between the British Army and the refugees , including the Fishes . Having learned that they have a bounty on their heads , he attempts to capture them , but Marichka and Theo fight him off and the group escapes . Amidst the fighting , the Fishes capture Kee and the baby . Theo tracks them to an apartment under heavy fire , and confronts Luke who is then killed by a tank shell , and escorts her out . <unk> by the baby , the combatants temporarily stop fighting , staring at the screaming baby and allowing them to leave . Marichka leads Theo , Kee , and the baby to a boat in a sewer and Theo rows away . As they watch the bombing of Bexhill by the Royal Air Force from a distance , Theo reveals that he had been shot by Luke . He tells Kee how to wind her baby to sooth her crying , and Kee tells him that she will name the baby after Theo and Julian 's lost son , because " Dylan can be a girl 's name too " . He loses consciousness from his wounds as the Tomorrow approaches through the fog and it is uncertain whether or not he dies . 
 The film ends with the movie title played on a black screen , accompanied by the sound of happy children playing in the background , suggesting perhaps that infertility had been cured and that world repopulation was possible once again . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Hope = = = 
 Children of Men explores the themes of hope and faith in the face of overwhelming futility and despair . The film 's source , the novel The Children of Men by P. D. James , describes what happens when society is unable to reproduce , using male infertility to explain this problem . In the novel , it is made clear that hope depends on future generations . James writes , " It was reasonable to struggle , to suffer , perhaps even to die , for a more just , a more compassionate society , but not in a world with no future where , all too soon , the very words ' justice , ' ' compassion , ' ' society , ’ ' struggle , ' ' evil , ' would be unheard echoes on an empty air . " 
 The film switches the infertility from male to female , but never explains its cause : environmental destruction and divine punishment are considered . This unanswered question ( and others in the film ) have been attributed to Cuarón 's dislike for expository film : " There 's a kind of cinema I detest , which is a cinema that is about exposition and explanations ... It 's become now what I call a medium for lazy readers ... Cinema is a hostage of narrative . And I 'm very good at narrative as a hostage of cinema . " Cuarón 's disdain for back @-@ story and exposition led him to use the concept of female infertility as a " metaphor for the fading sense of hope " . The " almost mythical " Human Project is turned into a " metaphor for the possibility of the evolution of the human spirit , the evolution of human understanding . " Without dictating how the audience should feel by the end of the film , Cuarón encourages viewers to come to their own conclusions about the sense of hope depicted in the final scenes : " We wanted the end to be a glimpse of a possibility of hope , for the audience to invest their own sense of hope into that ending . So if you 're a hopeful person you 'll see a lot of hope , and if you 're a bleak person you 'll see a complete hopelessness at the end . " 
 = = = Contemporary references = = = 
 Children of Men takes an unconventional approach to the modern action film , using a documentary , newsreel style . Film critics Michael <unk> , Jason Guerrasio and Ethan Alter observe the film 's underlying touchstone of immigration . Alter notes that the film " makes a potent case against the anti @-@ immigrant sentiment " popular in modern societies like the United Kingdom and the United States , with Guerrasio describing the film as " a complex meditation on the politics of today " . 
 For Alter and other critics , the structural support and impetus for the contemporary references rests upon the visual nature of the film 's exposition , occurring in the form of imagery as opposed to conventional dialogue . Visually , the refugee camps in the film intentionally evoke Abu Ghraib prison , Guantanamo Bay detention camp , and The Maze . Other popular images appear , such as a sign over the refugee camp reading " Homeland Security " . The similarity between the hellish , cinéma vérité stylized battle scenes of the film and current news and documentary coverage of the Iraq War , is noted by film critic Manohla Dargis , describing Cuarón 's fictional landscapes as " war zones of extraordinary plausibility " . 
 In the film , refugees are " hunted down like cockroaches " , rounded up and put into cages and camps , and even shot , leading film critics like Chris Smith and Claudia Puig to observe symbolic " overtones " and images of the Holocaust . This theme is reinforced in the scene where an elderly refugee woman speaking German is seen detained in a cage , and in the scene where British Homeland Security strips and beats illegal immigrants ; a song by The Libertines , " <unk> macht frei " , plays in the background . " The visual allusions to the Nazi roundups are unnerving , " writes Richard A. Blake . " It shows what people can become when the government orchestrates their fears for its own advantage . " 
 Cuarón explains how he uses this imagery to propagate the theme by cross @-@ referencing fictional and futuristic events with real , contemporary , or historical incidents and beliefs : 
 They exit the Russian apartments , and the next shot you see is this woman wailing , holding the body of her son in her arms . This was a reference to a real photograph of a woman holding the body of her son in the Balkans , crying with the corpse of her son . It 's very obvious that when the photographer captured that photograph , he was referencing La Pietà , the Michelangelo sculpture of Mary holding the corpse of Jesus . So : We have a reference to something that really happened , in the Balkans , which is itself a reference to the Michelangelo sculpture . At the same time , we use the sculpture of David early on , which is also by Michelangelo , and we have of course the whole reference to the Nativity . And so everything was referencing and cross @-@ referencing , as much as we could . 
 In the closing credits , the Sanskrit words " Shantih Shantih Shantih " appear as end titles . Writer and film critic Laura Eldred of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill observes that Children of Men is " full of tidbits that call out to the educated viewer " . During a visit to his house by Theo and Kee , Jasper says " Shanti , shanti , shanti . " Eldred notes that the " shanti " used in the film is also found at the end of an Upanishad and in the final line of T. S. Eliot 's poem The Waste Land , a work Eldred describes as " devoted to contemplating a world emptied of fertility : a world on its last , teetering legs " . " Shanti " is also a common beginning and ending to all Hindu prayers , and means " peace , " referencing the invocation of divine intervention and rebirth through an end to violence . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Like Virgil 's Aeneid , Dante 's Divine Comedy , and Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales , the crux of the journey in Children of Men lies in what is uncovered along the path rather than the terminus itself . Theo 's heroic journey to the south coast mirrors his personal quest for " self @-@ awareness " , a journey that takes Theo from " despair to hope " . 
 According to Cuarón , the title of P. D. James ' book ( The Children of Men ) is a Catholic allegory derived from a passage of scripture in the Bible . ( Psalm 90 ( 89 ) : 3 of the KJV : " Thou <unk> man to destruction ; and <unk> , Return , ye children of men . " ) James refers to her story as a " Christian fable " while Cuarón describes it as " almost like a look at Christianity " : " I didn 't want to shy away from the spiritual archetypes , " Cuarón told Filmmaker Magazine . " But I wasn 't interested in dealing with dogma . " 
 This divergence from the original was criticised by some , including Anthony Sacramone of First Things , who called the film " an act of vandalism " , noting the irony of how Cuarón had removed religion from P.D. James ' fable , in which morally sterile nihilism is overcome by Christianity . 
 The film has been noted for its use of Christian symbolism ; for example , British terrorists named " Fishes " protect the rights of refugees . Opening on Christmas Day in the United States , critics compared the characters of Theo and Kee with Joseph and Mary , calling the film a " modern @-@ day Nativity story " . Kee 's pregnancy is revealed to Theo in a barn , alluding to the manger of the Nativity scene , when Theo asks Kee who the father of the baby is she jokingly states she is a virgin , and when other characters discover Kee and her baby , they respond with " Jesus Christ " or the sign of the cross . Also the Archangel Gabriel ( among other religious figures ) is invoked in the bus scene . 
 To highlight these spiritual themes , Cuarón commissioned a 15 @-@ minute piece by British composer John Tavener , a member of the Eastern Orthodox Church whose work resonates with the themes of " motherhood , birth , rebirth , and redemption in the eyes of God . " Calling his score a " musical and spiritual reaction to Alfonso 's film " , snippets of Tavener 's " Fragments of a Prayer " contain lyrics in Latin , German and Sanskrit sung by mezzo @-@ soprano , Sarah Connolly . Words like " mata " ( mother ) , " <unk> mam " ( protect me ) , " avatara " ( saviour ) , and " <unk> " appear throughout the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 The adaptation of the P. D. James novel was originally written by Paul Chart , and later rewritten by Mark Fergus and Hawk Ostby . The studio brought director Alfonso Cuarón on board in 2001 . Cuarón and screenwriter Timothy J. Sexton began rewriting the script after the director completed Y tu mamá <unk> . Afraid he would " start second guessing things " , Cuarón chose not to read P. D. James ' novel , opting to have Sexton read the book while Cuarón himself read an abridged version . Cuarón did not immediately begin production , instead directing Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban . During this period , David Arata rewrote the screenplay and delivered the draft which secured Clive Owen and sent the film into pre @-@ production . The director 's work experience in the United Kingdom exposed him to the " social dynamics of the British psyche " , giving him insight into the depiction of " British reality " . Cuarón used the film The Battle of Algiers as a model for social reconstruction in preparation for production , presenting the film to Clive Owen as an example of his vision for Children of Men . In order to create a philosophical and social framework for the film , the director read literature by Slavoj Žižek , as well as similar works . The film Sunrise was also influential . 
 = = = Location = = = 
 A Clockwork Orange helped contribute to the futuristic , yet battered patina of 2027 London . Children of Men was the second film Cuarón made in London , with the director portraying the city as a character itself , shooting single , wide shots of the city . While Cuarón was preparing the film , the London bombings occurred , but the director never considered moving the production . " It would have been impossible to shoot anywhere but London , because of the very obvious way the locations were incorporated into the film , " Cuarón told Variety . " For example , the shot of Fleet Street looking towards St. Paul 's would have been impossible to shoot anywhere else . " Due to these circumstances , the opening terrorist attack scene on Fleet Street was shot a month and a half after the London bombing . 
 Cuarón chose to shoot some scenes in East London , a location he considered " a place without glamour " . The set locations were dressed to make them appear even more run @-@ down ; Cuarón says he told the crew " ' Let 's make it more Mexican ' . In other words , we 'd look at a location and then say : yes , but in Mexico there would be this and this . It was about making the place look run @-@ down . It was about poverty . " He also made use of London 's most popular sites , shooting in locations like Trafalgar Square and Battersea Power Station . The power station scene ( whose conversion into an art archive is a reference to the Tate Modern ) , has been compared to Antonioni 's Red Desert . Cuarón added a pig balloon to the scene as homage to Pink Floyd 's Animals . Other art works visible in this scene include Michelangelo 's David , Picasso 's Guernica , and Banksy 's British Cops Kissing . London visual effects companies Double Negative and Framestore worked directly with Cuarón from script to post production , developing effects and creating " environments and shots that wouldn 't otherwise be possible " . 
 The Historic Dockyard in Chatham was used to film the scene in the empty activist safehouse . 
 = = = Style and design = = = 
 " In most sci @-@ fi epics , special effects substitute for story . Here they seamlessly advance it , " observes Colin Covert of Star Tribune . Billboards were designed to balance a contemporary and futuristic appearance as well as easily visualizing what else was occurring in the rest of the world at the time , and cars were made to resemble modern ones at first glance , although a closer look made them seem unfamiliar . Cuarón informed the art department that the film was the " anti @-@ Blade Runner " , rejecting technologically advanced proposals and downplaying the science fiction elements of the 2027 setting . The director focused on images reflecting the contemporary period . 
 = = = Single @-@ shot sequences = = = 
 Children of Men used several lengthy single @-@ shot sequences in which extremely complex actions take place . The longest of these are a shot in which Kee gives birth ( 199 seconds ; 3 : 19 ) ; an ambush on a country road ( 247 seconds ; 4 : 07 ) ; and a scene in which Theo is captured by the Fishes , escapes , and runs down a street and through a building in the middle of a raging battle ( 378 seconds ; 6 : 18 ) . These sequences were extremely difficult to film , although the effect of continuity is sometimes an illusion , aided by CGI effects . 
 Cuarón had experimented with long takes in Great Expectations , Y tu mamá <unk> , and Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban . His style is influenced by the Swiss film Jonah Who Will Be 25 in the Year 2000 , a favorite of Cuarón 's . Cuarón reminisces : " I was studying cinema when I first saw [ Jonah ] , and interested in the French New Wave . Jonah was so <unk> compared to those films . The camera keeps a certain distance and there are relatively few close @-@ ups . It 's elegant and flowing , constantly tracking , but very slowly and not calling attention to itself . " 
 The creation of the single @-@ shot sequences was a challenging , time @-@ consuming process that sparked concerns from the studio . It took fourteen days to prepare for the single shot in which Clive Owen 's character searches a building under attack , and five hours for every time they wanted to reshoot it . In the middle of one shot , blood splattered onto the lens , and cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki convinced the director to leave it in . According to Owen , " Right in the thick of it are me and the camera operator because we 're doing this very complicated , very specific dance which , when we come to shoot , we have to make feel completely random . " 
 Cuarón 's initial idea for maintaining continuity during the roadside ambush scene was dismissed by production experts as an " impossible shot to do " . Fresh from the visual effects @-@ laden Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , Cuarón suggested using computer @-@ generated imagery to film the scene . Lubezki refused to allow it , reminding the director that they had intended to make a film akin to a " raw documentary " . Instead , a special camera rig invented by Gary <unk> of <unk> Systems was employed , allowing Cuarón to develop the scene as one extended shot . A vehicle was modified to enable seats to tilt and lower actors out of the way of the camera , and the windshield was designed to tilt out of the way to allow camera movement in and out through the front windscreen . A crew of four , including the director of photography and camera operator , rode on the roof . 
 However , the commonly reported statement that the action scenes are continuous shots is not entirely true . Visual effects supervisor Frazer Churchill explains that the effects team had to " combine several takes to create impossibly long shots " , where their job was to " create the illusion of a continuous camera move . " Once the team was able to create a " seamless blend " , they would move on to the next shot . These techniques were important for three continuous shots : the coffee shop explosion in the opening shot , the car ambush , and the battlefield scene . The coffee shop scene was composed of " two different takes shot over two consecutive days " ; the car ambush was shot in " six sections and at four different locations over one week and required five seamless digital transitions " ; and the battlefield scene " was captured in five separate takes over two locations " . Churchill and the Double Negative team created over 160 of these types of effects for the film . In an interview with Variety , Cuarón acknowledged this nature of the " single @-@ shot " action sequences : " Maybe I 'm spilling a big secret , but sometimes it 's more than what it looks like . The important thing is how you blend everything and how you keep the perception of a fluid choreography through all of these different pieces . " 
 Tim Webber of VFX house Framestore CFC was responsible for the three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minute single take of Kee giving birth , helping to choreograph and create the CG effects of the childbirth . Cuarón had originally intended to use an animatronic baby as Kee 's child with the exception of the childbirth scene . In the end , two takes were shot , with the second take concealing Clare @-@ Hope <unk> 's legs , replacing them with prosthetic legs . Cuarón was pleased with the results of the effect , and returned to previous shots of the baby in animatronic form , replacing them with Framestore 's computer @-@ generated baby . 
 = = = Sound = = = 
 Cuarón uses sound and music to bring the fictional world of social unrest and infertility to life . A creative yet restrained combination of rock , pop , electronic music , hip @-@ hop and classical music replaces the typical film score . The mundane sounds of traffic , barking dogs , and advertisements follow the character of Theo through London , East Sussex and Kent , producing what Los Angeles Times writer Kevin Crust calls an " urban audio rumble " . For Crust , the music comments indirectly on the barren world of Children of Men : Deep Purple 's version of " Hush " blaring from Jasper 's car radio becomes a " sly lullaby for a world without babies " while King Crimson 's " The Court of the Crimson King " make a similar allusion with their lyrics , " three lullabies in an ancient tongue " . 
 Amongst a genre @-@ spanning selection of electronic music , a remix of Aphex Twin 's " <unk> Switch 7 " , which includes the ' Male This Loud Scream ' audio sample by <unk> , not present on the original ( nor indeed on the official soundtrack ) can be heard during the scene in Jasper 's house , where Jasper 's " Strawberry Cough " ( a potent , strawberry @-@ flavoured blend of marijuana ) is being sampled . During a conversation between the two men , Radiohead 's " Life in a Glasshouse " plays in the background . 
 A number of dubstep tracks , most notably Anti @-@ War Dub by Digital Mystikz , as well as tracks by Kode9 & The Space Ape and Pressure are also featured . 
 For the Bexhill scenes during the film 's second half , the director makes use of silence and cacophonous sound effects such as the firing of automatic weapons and loudspeakers directing the movement of " <unk> " ( illegal immigrants ) . Here , classical music by George Frideric Handel , Gustav Mahler , and Krzysztof Penderecki 's " Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima " complements the chaos of the refugee camp . Throughout the film , John Tavener 's Fragments of a Prayer is used as a spiritual motif to explain and interpret the story without the use of narrative . 
 A few times during the film , a loud , ringing tone evocative of tinnitus is heard . This sound generally coincides with the death of a major character ( Julian , Jasper ) and is referred to by Julian herself , who describes the tones as the last time you 'll ever hear that frequency . In this way , then , the loss of the tones is symbolic of the loss of the characters . 
 = = Release = = 
 Children of Men had its world premiere at the 63rd Venice International Film Festival on 3 September 2006 . On 22 September 2006 , the film debuted at number 1 in the United Kingdom with $ 2 @.@ 4 million in 368 screens . It debuted in a limited release of 16 theaters in the United States on 22 December 2006 , expanding to more than 1 @,@ 200 theaters on 5 January 2007 . As of 6 February 2008 , Children of Men had grossed $ 69 @,@ 612 @,@ 678 worldwide , with $ 35 @,@ 552 @,@ 383 of the revenue generated in the United States . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Children of Men received critical acclaim ; on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film received a 92 % approval rating based on 237 reviews from critics ; the consensus states : " Children of Men works on every level : as a violent chase thriller , a fantastical cautionary tale , and a sophisticated human drama about societies struggling to live . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 84 out of 100 , based on 38 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Dana Stevens of Slate called it " the herald of another blessed event : the arrival of a great director by the name of Alfonso Cuarón . " Stevens hailed the film 's extended car chase and battle scenes as " two of the most virtuoso single @-@ shot chase sequences I 've ever seen . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times called the film a " superbly directed political thriller " , raining accolades on the long chase scenes . " Easily one of the best films of the year " said Ethan Alter of Film Journal International , with scenes that " dazzle you with their technical complexity and visual virtuosity . " Jonathan Romney of The Independent praised the accuracy of Cuarón 's portrait of the United Kingdom , but he criticized some of the film 's futuristic scenes as " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill future fantasy . " Film Comment 's critics ' poll of the best films of 2006 ranked the film number 19 while the 2006 readers ' poll ranked it number two . On their list of the best movies of 2006 , The A.V. Club , the San Francisco Chronicle , Slate and The Washington Post placed the film at number one . Entertainment Weekly ranked the film seventh on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade , top ten list , saying , " Alfonso Cuarón 's dystopian 2006 film reminded us that adrenaline @-@ juicing action sequences can work best when the future looks just as grimy as today . " 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone ranked it number 2 on his list of best films of the decade , writing : 
 I thought director Alfonso Cuarón 's film of P.D. James ' futuristic political @-@ fable novel was good when it opened in 2006 . After repeated viewings , I know Children of Men is indisputably great ... No movie this decade was more redolent of sorrowful beauty and exhilarating action . You don 't just watch the car ambush scene ( pure camera wizardry ) — you live inside it . That 's Cuarón 's magic : He makes you believe . " 
 According to Metacritic 's analysis of the most often and notably noted films on the best @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade lists , Children of Men is considered the eleventh greatest film of the 2000s . 
 = = = Top ten lists = = = 
 The film appeared on many critics ' top ten lists as one of the best films of 2006 : 
 In 2012 , director Marc Webb included the film among his list of Top 10 Greatest Films when asked by Sight & Sound for his votes for the BFI The Top 50 Greatest Films of All Time . In 2015 , the film was named Number One on an all time list of Top 10 Movies by the blog Pop Culture Philosopher . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 P. D. James , who was reported to be pleased with the film , and the screenwriters of Children of Men were awarded the 19th annual USC Scripter Award for the screen adaptation of the novel ; Howard A. Rodman , chair of the USC School of Cinematic Arts Writing Division , described the book @-@ to @-@ screen adaptation as " writing and screen writing of the highest order " , although <unk> , writing in Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , noted that the screenplay bore very little resemblance to the novel , in the gender of the baby , and the character who was pregnant ( Julian , in the novel ) and the death of Theo , who in fact , did not die in the novel . The film was also nominated in the category of Best Adapted Screenplay at the 79th Academy Awards . 
 Children of Men also received Academy Award nominations for Best Cinematography ( Emmanuel Lubezki ) and Best Film Editing ( Alfonso Cuarón and Alex Rodríguez ) . The British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated Children of Men for Best Visual Effects and honored the film with awards for Best Cinematography and Best Production Design at the 60th British Academy Film Awards . Cinematographer Emmanuel Lubezki won the feature film award for Best Cinematography at the 21st American Society of Cinematographers Awards . The Australian Cinematographers Society also awarded Lubezki the 2007 International Award for Cinematography for Children of Men . 
 The Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films bestowed the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film on Children of Men , and it received the nomination for Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form by the members of the World Science Fiction Convention . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The HD @-@ DVD and DVD were released in Europe on 15 January 2007 and in the United States on 27 March 2007 . Extras include a half @-@ hour documentary by director Alfonso Cuarón entitled " The Possibility of Hope " . The documentary explores the intersection between the film 's themes and reality with a critical analysis by eminent scholars : the Slovenian sociologist and philosopher Slavoj Žižek , anti @-@ globalization activist Naomi Klein , environmentalist futurist James Lovelock , sociologist Saskia Sassen , human geographer Fabrizio Eva , cultural theorist Tzvetan Todorov , and philosopher and economist John N. Gray ; " Under Attack " features a demonstration of the innovative techniques required for the car chase and battle scenes ; Clive Owen and Julianne Moore discuss their characters in " Theo & Julian " ; " Futuristic Design " opens the door on the production design and look of the film ; " Visual Effects " shows how the digital baby was created . Deleted scenes are included . The film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc in the United States on 26 May 2009 . 
 = Harry Glicken = 
 Harry Glicken ( March 7 , 1958 – June 3 , 1991 ) was an American volcanologist . He researched Mount St. Helens in the United States before and after its famous 1980 eruption , and blamed himself for the death of fellow volcanologist David A. Johnston , who had switched shifts with Glicken so that the latter could attend an interview . In 1991 , while conducting avalanche research on Mount Unzen in Japan , Glicken and fellow volcanologists Katia and Maurice Krafft were killed by a pyroclastic flow . His remains were found four days later , and were cremated in accordance with his parents ' request . Glicken and Johnston remain the only American volcanologists known to have died in volcanic eruptions . 
 Despite a long @-@ term interest in working for the United States Geological Survey , Glicken never received a permanent post there because employees found him eccentric . Conducting independent research from sponsorships granted by the National Science Foundation and other organizations , Glicken accrued expertise in the field of volcanic debris avalanches . He also wrote several major publications on the topic , including his doctoral dissertation based on his research at St. Helens titled " Rockslide @-@ debris Avalanche of May 18 , 1980 , Mount St. Helens Volcano , Washington " that initiated widespread interest in the phenomenon . Since being published posthumously by Glicken 's colleagues in 1996 , the report has been acknowledged by many other publications on debris avalanches . Following his death , Glicken was praised by associates for his love of volcanoes and commitment to his field . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Glicken was born in 1958 to Milton and Ida Glicken . He graduated from Stanford University in 1980 . Later that year , while a graduate student at the University of California , Santa Barbara , he was temporarily hired by the United States Geological Survey ( USGS ) to help monitor the volcano Mount St. Helens in Washington state . St. Helens , dormant since the 1840s and 1850s , resumed activity in March 1980 . 
 As seismic and volcanic activity increased , volcanologists working for the USGS in its Vancouver branch prepared to observe any impending eruption . Geologist Don Swanson and others placed reflectors on and around the growing lava domes , and , on May 1 , 1980 , established the Coldwater I and II observation posts to use laser ranging to measure how the distances to these reflectors changed over time as the domes deformed . Glicken monitored the volcano for two weeks , taking shelter in a trailer at the Coldwater II site located a little more than 5 miles ( 8 km ) northwest of the volcano . On May 18 , 1980 , after working for six days straight , Glicken took the day off to attend an interview for his graduate work with his professor , Richard V. Fisher , in Mammoth , California . His research adviser and mentor David A. Johnston replaced him at his post , despite expressing concerns about its safety given indications of mobile magma within the volcano . After a magnitude 5 @.@ 1 earthquake centered directly below the north slope triggered that part of the volcano to slide at 8 : 32 a.m. , Mount St. Helens erupted . Johnston was killed after he was enveloped by swift pyroclastic flows that traveled down the mountain 's flanks at near supersonic speeds . 
 After the eruption , Glicken went to Toutle High School , the center for relief efforts , where he joined Air Force Reserve Rescue Squadron officials in a helicopter to look for Johnston or any sign of his post . Despite searching with three separate crews over a span of nearly six hours , Glicken found no trace . He attempted to enlist a fourth helicopter crew to aid his search , but they declined , fearing dangerous conditions . In his distraught state , Glicken refused to accept Johnston 's death , and had to be comforted by Swanson before calming down . 
 In mid @-@ 1980 , after the May eruption , USGS Survey scientists decided to establish the David A. Johnston Cascades Volcano Observatory ( CVO ) in Vancouver , intending to closely monitor volcanoes in Oregon , Washington , and Idaho . Glicken returned to St. Helens to analyze the remains of the volcano 's lateral blast . However , as other CVO employees had already commenced their research at the mountain , Glicken 's offer to help USGS on his own was declined by senior scientists . Instead , he found work with newly appointed Survey employee Barry Voight , a specialist in landslides . Under Voight 's guidance , Glicken absorbed himself in his work , motivated to earn a job at the Survey , and to relieve some of his anguish over Johnston 's death . Glicken and a team of geologists mapped the debris field left over from St. Helens 's structural collapse , which consisted of roughly a quarter of the mass of the volcano . Through extensive , meticulous analysis , the team traced the origins and the means of movement of each piece of debris , ranging from blocks 100 yards ( 91 m ) in width to mere fragments . 
 With his group , Glicken compiled a landmark study in the field of volcanic landslides , establishing the principle that tall volcanoes have a tendency to collapse . The study garnered praise for its unique conclusions and attention to detail , inspiring volcanologists to identify similar deposit mounds at volcanoes around the world . After the findings from his dissertation were published in several shorter articles throughout the 1980s , Glicken earned recognition as the first geologist to explain the creation of hummock fields near tall volcanoes . 
 = = = Research after St. Helens and death = = = 
 In the years following the eruption , despite earning rapid fame and opportunities to research internationally in Japan , New Zealand , and Guadeloupe , Glicken still failed to obtain a job at USGS . Senior employees at the Survey found his behavioral oddities unsettling . Activity at Mount St. Helens diminished , prompting USGS to reduce CVO 's budget and contemplate closing the station . He continued helping the Survey until 1989 , also serving as an assistant researcher at the University of California at Santa Barbara . 
 From 1989 to 1991 , Glicken continued his volcanological studies in Japan as a postdoctoral fellow at the Earthquake Research Institute of the University of Tokyo , supported by grants from the U.S. National Science Foundation . Later , while a research professor and translator at Tokyo Metropolitan University , Glicken became involved with research at Mount Unzen . The volcano had recently resumed eruptive activity in November 1990 , after being dormant for 198 years . In the months after its first activity , it erupted sporadically , and the government evacuated its vicinity near the end of May 1991 . On June 2 , 1991 , Glicken visited the mountain with Katia and Maurice Krafft . The three entered a danger zone near the base of the volcano the following day , assuming that any potentially hazardous pyroclastic flows would follow a turn in the landscape and safely bypass them . Later that day , a lava dome collapsed , sending a large flow down the valley at 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) . The current reached the turn before separating into two parts , and the upper , hotter part swiftly overcame the volcanologists ' post , killing them upon impact . In total , 41 or 42 people died in the incident , including press members who had been watching the volcanologists . The volcano burned down 390 houses , and the remains of the flow extended 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 km ) in length . Glicken 's remains were found four days later , and were cremated according to his parents ' wishes . To date , Glicken and Johnston are the only American volcanologists known to have been killed by a volcanic eruption . 
 = = = Posthumous report = = = 
 At the time of his death , Glicken had been seeking to publish his doctoral dissertation in one piece , having earlier published elements as shorter articles . He had already defined the criteria for debris avalanches on the slopes of volcanoes , and authored several publications on the subject ; Swanson named him one of the foremost experts in the field . After the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens , research in the niche grew as more studies identified debris at well @-@ known volcanoes . His work on flows at Mount St. Helens is considered the most complete in the field to date . It was later published in 1996 as a single report by his acquaintances Carol <unk> , John Costa , Dan <unk> , and Jon Major , among others , at the United States Geological Survey . In his preface to Glicken 's publication , Major comments that " the Mount St. Helens deposit will never be mapped in such detail again . " 
 Glicken 's report is titled " Rockslide @-@ debris Avalanche of May 18 , 1980 , Mount St. Helens Volcano , Washington " . It comprises his extensive laboratory and field work , supplemented by photographs of the eruption , writings that describe St. Helens before the eruption , and references to previous publications , including Voight 's work . In the report , Glicken constructed a map of the landslide deposit at a scale of 1 : 24000 , followed by a <unk> map describing rock varieties at a scale of 1 : 12000 . The report also provides a conclusion for the movement of each slide block , using photographs and other data to estimate the velocity of each landslide , describing the composition of each , and recounting the interactions between blocks . 
 = = Tributes and legacy = = 
 Despite their appreciation of his work , many of Glicken 's associates considered him eccentric and highly disorganized . Chatty , noted for being extremely sensitive , and often considered a " nut " by his peers , Glicken also paid meticulous attention to detail . One of his friends writes , " Harry was a character his whole life . ... Everyone who knew him was amazed he was such a good scientist . " Regarding Glicken 's driving habits , the same acquaintance describes him as " a cartoon character " who " would drive at full speed down the road , talking about whatever was important to him , and ... come to a four @-@ way stoplight and he 'd sail through it , never knowing he 'd just gone through " . 
 Glicken 's father said in 1991 that his son died pursuing his passion , and that he was " totally absorbed " with volcanology . United States Geological Survey co @-@ worker Don Peterson adds that Glicken was keen in his enthusiastic approach to observation , and praises his accomplishments throughout his career and as a graduate student . Speaking about Glicken 's personal passion for his field , his mentor and professor Richard V. Fisher writes , " What happened at St. Helens is something that troubled [ Glicken ] deeply for a very long time , and , in a way , I think it made him even more dedicated than he was before . " Associate Robin Holcomb remarks that " Harry was very enthusiastic , very bright , and very ambitious , ambitious to do something worthwhile on volcanoes . " Many studies have utilized Glicken 's criteria for volcanic landslide recognition , and many subsequent papers on avalanches have acknowledged or referenced Glicken 's 1996 report . Reflecting on Glicken 's body of work , USGS employee Don Swanson names him as " a world leader in studies of volcanic debris avalanches " . 
 Glicken was closely connected to the University of California , Santa Barbara , where he earned his doctorate and conducted research . To remember his association with the university , each year the Department of Earth Science awards an outstanding graduate geology student the " Harry Glicken Memorial Graduate Fellowship " , established by the Harry Glicken Fund , which aims to support students " who will pursue research relating to the understanding of volcanic processes " . 
 = = Selected publications = = 
 Most of Glicken 's published work centers around the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens . He also coauthored works with other volcanologists that focused on debris avalanches . Colleague Jon Major writes that " The full scope of Harry 's work ... has never been published . " 
 " The 1980 eruptions of Mount St. Helens , Washington . USGS Professional Paper No. 1250 " . United States Geological Survey . 1981 : <unk> . 347 – 377 . 
 " The effects of ground water , slope stability , and seismic hazards on the stability of the South Fork Castle Creek blockage in the Mount St. Helens area , Washington . USGS Professional Paper No. 1345 " . United States Geological Survey . 1981 . 
 " The effects of ground water , slope stability , and seismic hazard on the stability of the South Fork Castle Creek blockage in the Mount St. Helens area , Washington . USGS Open File No. 84 – 624 " . United States Geological Survey . 1984 . 
 " Geology and ground @-@ water hydrology of Spirit Lake blockage , Mount St. Helens , Washington , with implications for lake retention . USGS Bulletin No. 1789 " . United States Geological Survey . 1989 . 
 " Rockslide @-@ debris avalanche of May 18 , 1980 , Mount St. Helens Volcano , Washington . USGS Open File No. 96 @-@ 677 " . United States Geological Survey . 1996 . 
 = Progressive rock = 
 Progressive rock ( first known as progressive pop , later prog rock , prog , and sometimes art rock ) is a rock music subgenre that originated in the United Kingdom and United States throughout the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1960s . It developed from psychedelic rock , and began as an attempt to give greater artistic weight and credibility to rock music . Songs were replaced by musical suites that often stretched to 20 or 40 minutes in length and contained symphonic influences , extended musical themes , fantasy @-@ like ambience and lyrics , and complex orchestrations . 
 The style was an outgrowth of retrospectively termed " proto @-@ prog " bands who abandoned the short pop single in favor of instrumentation and compositional techniques more frequently associated with jazz or classical music as part of an effort to give rock music the same level of musical sophistication and critical respect . It saw a high level of popularity throughout the 1970s , especially in the middle of the decade , but faded soon after . Conventional wisdom holds that the rise of punk rock caused this , although in reality a number of factors contributed to the decline . Music critics , who often labeled the concepts as " pretentious " and the sounds as " pompous " and " overblown , " tended to be hostile toward the genre or to completely ignore it . Some bands achieved commercial success well into the 1980s , albeit with changed lineups and more compact song structures . 
 Most of the prominent bands from the genre 's 1970s heyday fall into the " symphonic prog " category , in which classical orchestrations and compositional techniques are melded with rock music . Other subgenres exist , including the more accessible neo @-@ progressive rock of the 1980s , the jazz @-@ influenced Canterbury sound of the 1960s and 1970s , and the more political and experimental Rock in Opposition movement of the late 1970s and onward . Progressive rock has influenced genres such as krautrock and post @-@ punk , and it has fused with other forms of rock music to create subgenres , such as progressive metal . A revival , often known as new prog , occurred at the turn of the 21st century and has since enjoyed a cult following . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Progressive rock originally referred to progressive pop or " classical rock " in which a band performed together with an orchestra , but the term 's use broadened over time to include Miles Davis @-@ style jazz fusion , some metal and folk rock styles , and experimental German bands . It does not refer to a single style but to an approach that combines elements of diverse styles . Jerry Ewing , editor of Prog Magazine , explains that " Prog is not just a sound , it 's a mindset , " and Dream Theater guitarist John Petrucci points out that it is defined by its very lack of stylistic boundaries . The advent of the concept album and the genre 's roots in psychedelia led albums and performances to be viewed as combined presentations of music , lyrics , and visuals . 
 Bands abandoned the short pop single in favor of instrumentation and compositional techniques more frequently associated with jazz or classical music as part of an effort to give rock music the same level of musical sophistication and critical respect . Progressive rock abandons the danceable beat that defines earlier rock styles and is more likely than other types of popular music to experiment with compositional structure , instrumentation , harmony and rhythm , and lyrical content . It may demand more effort on the part of the listener than other types of music . 
 Musicians in progressive rock typically display a high degree of instrumental skill , although this is not always the case . Virtuoso instrumental skills are so closely associated with progressive rock that authors such as Bill Martin consider it as a defining element and exclude bands such as Pink Floyd from consideration . It is not uncommon for musicians to have received a higher @-@ than @-@ average level of formal training . Players from the genre frequently appear in readers ' polls of publications that cater to musicians . 
 = = = Musical aspects = = = 
 = = = = Form = = = = 
 Progressive rock songs often avoid common popular music song structures of verse / chorus form , and their extended lengths allow complex themes that cannot be fully developed within the span of a three @-@ minute single . Musical forms are blurred through the use of extended sections and of musical interludes that bridge separate sections together , which results in classical @-@ style suites . These large @-@ scale compositions are similar to medleys , but there is typically more thematic unity between the sections . Transitions between electric and acoustic sections provide dynamic contrast . Extended instrumental passages often mix composed , classical @-@ style sections with group improvisation . These sections emphasize group virtuosity rather than individual skill , and they are a break from other pop forms in which a single , dominant singer or soloist is accompanied by a band . 
 These extended pieces are usually considered to be the result of experimentation with classical music forms , although an alternative viewpoint holds that they are explorations of the complexities possible within the popular music format . Many bands did , however , use compositional techniques borrowed from classical music . Elements of classical music are sometimes borrowed for the cultural significance they carry . 
 = = = = Instrumentation = = = = 
 = = = = = Traditional = = = = = 
 Early progressive rock groups expanded the timbral palette of the then @-@ traditional rock instrumentation of guitar , keyboard , bass guitar , and drums by adding instruments more typical of folk music , jazz or music in the classical tradition . A number of bands , especially at the genre 's onset , recorded albums in which they performed together with a full orchestra . 
 Progressive rock bands often use instruments in ways different from their traditional roles . The role of the bass may be expanded from its traditional rhythm section function into that of a lead instrument . Bassists often play contrapuntal lines that are more independent and melodic than conventional bass lines , which emphasize the chord root . This is often accompanied by the use of an instrument such as a Rickenbacker bass , whose sound contains an unusually large amount of treble frequencies . Some bassists use the Chapman Stick , which is operated with both hands on the fretboard and allows polyrhythmic and chordal playing . Treble may be emphasized by the choice of strings , by playing with a pick , and by use of the instrument 's higher registers . Drum kits are frequently expanded with orchestral percussion such as timpani and gongs . Acoustic guitar becomes more prominent and often appears as interludes played in the classical style of Andrés Segovia . Piano is played in a style derived from the classical piano repertoire rather than from the blues or boogie @-@ woogie styles previously in use . Guitar may be dispensed with altogether , and traditional rhythm guitar is almost never used , as chordal backgrounds are typically played on a keyboard instrument such as the Hammond organ . 
 = = = = = Electronic = = = = = 
 In the 1960s , it was impractical to work together with an orchestra on a regular basis . As a substitute , the Mellotron is a keyboard instrument that contains tape @-@ recordings of individual notes of various instruments and voices , and plays back their sounds as the keyboard is pressed . Its sounds included woodwinds , choirs , brass and , perhaps most famously , strings . The technology available meant that its sounds were not exact reproductions of the instruments , but instead had a haunting quality that many bands prized . 
 The Hammond organ is another instrument closely associated with progressive rock . It is a versatile instrument that can function like a pipe organ , can be played through a guitar amplifier for a distorted tone , is capable of sustained notes and rapid melodic runs , and can make percussive sounds . The ability to adjust its timbre while a note is held and its capabilities of vibrato and , when a rotating Leslie speaker is used , tremolo , make it a very expressive lead instrument . The use of organs and choirs reflects the background in Anglican church music shared by many of the genre 's founders . Various other electronic and electro @-@ mechanical keyboard instruments were in common use . 
 The birth of progressive rock roughly coincided with the commercial availability of synthesizers . Early modular synthesizers were large instruments that used patch cords to route the signal flow . Programming the instruments meant placing the patch cords to connect the individual modules . The Minimoog , a smaller , simplified synthesizer that needed no patch cords , began production in 1971 and provided keyboardists with a more @-@ easily programmed instrument that could imitate other instruments , could create new sounds of its own , and was highly portable and affordable . Progressive rock was the genre in which the synthesizer first became established as a common part of popular music . Synthesizers could be used to play the rapid , virtuosic lines that changed the perception of keyboard instruments . 
 The reliance on the use of multiple keyboard sounds meant that some keyboardists appeared onstage surrounded by ten or more keyboards . Modern digital synthesizers and samplers have reduced the need for huge keyboard stacks , as they typically allow sounds to be layered or for one keyboard to trigger another 's sounds through a MIDI connection . They also provide a reliable alternative to instruments such as Mellotrons , whose delicate mechanical apparatus is prone to breakdowns , and are much more portable than bulky instruments such as the Hammond organ . Digital synthesizers are also suitable chordal instruments , unlike early analog synthesizers such as the Minimoog , Moog Taurus and ARP Odyssey , which could play only one note at a time and so were mainly suitable for drones , basslines and lead playing . 
 The concept of the studio as an instrument led certain audio effects units to become identified with progressive rock . Progressive rock guitarists showed a distinct preference for Hiwatt amplifiers . Advancements in recording technology were key in enabling the production of progressive rock albums . As multitrack recording with as many as 64 separate tracks became available , bands took advantage of the additional tracks and created increasingly dense arrangements . 
 = = = = Rhythm , melody and harmony = = = = 
 There is a tendency towards greater freedom of rhythm than exists in other forms of rock music . Progressive rock artists are more likely to explore complex time signatures such as 5 / 8 and 7 / 8 . Tempo , key and time signature changes are common within progressive rock compositions . Complex time signatures are sometimes used to create a polyrhythmic effect . Progressive rock often discards the blues inflections and pentatonic scale @-@ based melodies of mainstream rock in favor of modal melodies . Compositions draw inspiration from a wide range of genres including classical , jazz , folk music and world music . Melodies are more likely to comprise longer , developing passages than short , catchy ones . 
 Chords are typically standard triads , although many keyboardists would alter these triads by playing a <unk> tone in the bass . Chord changes are typically based on modes , as is typical of rock music , and deviate significantly from the tonality of music from the classical era . Unexpected chord changes in the style of impressionist composers like Claude Debussy are common . 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 Progressive rock lyrics tend to avoid common rock and pop subjects such as love and dancing . Bands also avoid such youth @-@ oriented themes as violence , nihilism , rebellion , and the macabre . Sex is not a common subject . Themes found in classical literature , fantasy and folklore occur frequently , and intellectual topics such as psychological theories may be addressed . Romantic poetry and J. R. R. Tolkien are frequent sources of inspiration . 
 Medievalism and science fiction themes are common and often appear as metaphors for spiritual transformation and the quest for an ideal society . Many early lyrics express utopian themes that reflect the genre 's origins in psychedelic rock and address the subject of spiritual transformation . Spiritual and religious themes are common . Monty Python and Bonzo Dog Doo @-@ Dah Band @-@ influenced humour appears in some progressive rock lyrics . This is especially pronounced in the more eccentric , <unk> approach adopted by some of the Canterbury bands . Several groups valued lyrics so strongly as to employ a lyricist as a full @-@ time band member . 
 Social commentary is frequently present . Many progressive rock bands were strongly rooted in British folk music , and this resulted in a tendency toward pastoralism in the lyrics . As social and economic problems increased in Britain within the 1970s , many artists gravitated away from pastoralism and ecology at varying degrees , with temporary to near @-@ permanent shifts towards modernism , contemporary political satire , and realism . Awareness of nature sometimes combined with social criticism to produce lyrics that expressed concern over the ecology . Ecological themes were sometimes carried out to an extent that even genre fans found embarrassing , and they were frequently satirized by Frank Zappa as naive . 
 = = = = Concept albums = = = = 
 The late 1960s and early 1970s saw a general trend among rock and pop artists toward albums in which many or all of the songs shared a common theme . This tendency was especially pronounced in progressive rock . Experimentation with expanded musical forms contributed to this , as songs that were more or less thematically related were often combined into suites made up of several movements . 
 These extended pieces carry on in the Romantic @-@ era tradition of program music , which is intended to tell a story , and they often are inspired by works of literature . Story arcs are sometimes spread out over several albums . The advent of multi @-@ part suites that occupy an entire LP side roughly coincided with the rise of FM radio and its practice of playing albums , or album sides , in their entirety . Some bands stretched the format beyond their audiences ' capacity to tolerate . 
 = = = Visual aspects = = = 
 = = = = Stage presentation = = = = 
 Some bands had elaborate stage presentations . Some acts indulged in pure showmanship . Progressive rock visual styles sometimes extended to the stage sets . This enthusiasm for showmanship was not shared by all progressive rock bands . 
 = = = = Album art = = = = 
 Album covers prior to the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band usually consisted of a photograph of the group , but the trend toward concept albums was accompanied by a move toward artwork that depicted the album 's concept . This artwork often contains science fiction and fantasy motifs executed in a surrealist style . 
 A number of artists became closely associated with the genre . Artwork was sometimes commissioned from artists who were famous in their own right . This combination of music and artwork is intended to function as a total work of art , which is a further use of concepts borrowed from high culture . The practice of connecting an album 's artwork to its concept still exists , but its effectiveness is limited by the smaller display area used by compact discs and mobile devices . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Precursors = = = 
 When it emerged , progressive rock music was called progressive pop . Upon release , the Beach Boys ' Pet Sounds ( 1966 ) was called " the most progressive pop album ever " by British newspapers . Later , some would retroactively characterize the term as a milder form of progressive rock . Bob Dylan 's poetry , the Mothers of Invention 's album Freak Out ! ( 1966 ) , and the Beatles ' album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ( 1967 ) , have all been mentioned as important in progressive rock 's development . The productions of Phil Spector were key influences , as they introduced the possibility of using the recording studio to create music that otherwise could never be achieved . The same is said for Pet Sounds , which itself influenced Sgt. Pepper 's . 
 Bob Dylan introduced a literary element to rock through his fascination with the Surrealists and the French Symbolists and his immersion in the New York City art scene of the early 1960s . The trend of bands with names drawn from literature , such as the Doors , Steppenwolf and the Ides of March , were a further sign of rock music aligning itself with high culture . Literary concepts such as Nietzsche and the Apollonian and Dionysian dichotomy were referenced by Doors singer Jim Morrison . Dylan also led the way in blending rock with folk music styles . This was followed by folk rock groups such as the Byrds , who based their initial sound on the work of Brian Wilson . In turn , the Byrds ' vocal harmonies inspired those of Yes , and British electric folk bands such Fairport Convention , who emphasized instrumental virtuosity . Some of these artists , such as the Incredible String Band and Shirley and Dolly Collins , would prove influential through their use of instruments borrowed from world music and early music . 
 = = = = Pet Sounds and Sgt. Pepper 's = = = = 
 Pet Sounds and Sgt. Pepper 's , with their lyrical unity , extended structure , complexity , eclecticism , experimentalism , and influences derived from classical music forms , is largely viewed as beginnings in the progressive rock genre and as turning points wherein rock , which previously had been considered dance music , became music that was made for listening to . Pet Sounds was key to the development of progressive rock specifically for the way it widened the scope of pop music by using complex harmonies , inverted chords , challenging progressions , key changes and alternative instrumental choices , and it advanced rock music by anchoring it with classical sensibilities . 
 Between Pet Sounds and Sgt. Pepper 's , the Beach Boys released the single " Good Vibrations " ( 1966 ) , dubbed a " pocket symphony " by Derek Taylor , who worked as a publicist for both groups . The song contained an eclectic array of exotic instruments and several disjunctive key and modal shifts . Scott <unk> of Popmatters wrote that its influence on progressive rock and the psychedelic movement " can 't be overstated " . Beatles biographer Jonathon Gould writes that " of the many ambitious pop singles released during the fall of 1966 , none had a stronger influence on the Beatles " . Martin likened the song to the Beatles ' " A Day in the Life " from Sgt. Pepper 's , elaborating that they showcase " the same reasons why much progressive rock is difficult to dance to " . 
 Although it was preceded by several albums that had begun to bridge the line between " disposable " pop and " serious " rock , Sgt. Pepper 's successfully gave an established " commercial " voice to an alternative youth culture while it marked the point at which the LP record emerged as a creative format whose importance was equal to or greater than that of the single . Bill Bruford , a veteran of several progressive rock bands , said that Sgt. Pepper transformed both musicians ' ideas of what was possible and audiences ' ideas of what was acceptable in music . He believed that : " Without the Beatles , or someone else who had done what the Beatles did , it is fair to assume that there would have been no progressive rock . " LP sales first overtook those of singles in 1969 . 
 = = = = Psychedelic and symphonic rock = = = = 
 According to AllMusic : " Prog @-@ rock began to emerge out of the British psychedelic scene in 1967 , specifically a strain of classical / symphonic rock led by the Nice , Procol Harum , and the Moody Blues ( Days of Future Passed ) . " The availability of newly affordable recording equipment coincided with the rise of a London underground scene at which LSD was commonly used . Pink Floyd and Soft Machine functioned as house bands at all @-@ night events at locations such as Middle Earth and the UFO Club , where they experimented with sound textures and long @-@ form songs . Many psychedelic , electric folk and early progressive bands were aided by exposure from BBC Radio 1 DJ John Peel . Jimi Hendrix , who rose to prominence in the London scene and recorded with a band of English musicians , initiated the trend toward virtuosity in rock music . The Scottish band 1 @-@ 2 @-@ 3 , later renamed Clouds , were formed in 1966 and began performing at London clubs a year later . According to Mojo 's George <unk> : " some claim [ that they ] had a vital influence on prog @-@ rockers such as Yes , The Nice and Family . " 
 Symphonic rock artists in the late 1960s had some chart success , including the singles " Nights in White Satin " ( The Moody Blues , 1967 ) and " A Whiter Shade of Pale " ( Procol Harum , 1967 ) . The Moody Blues established the popularity of symphonic rock when they recorded Days of Future Passed together with the London Festival Orchestra , and Procol Harum began to use a greater variety of acoustic instruments , particularly on their 1969 A Salty Dog album . Classical influences sometimes took the form of pieces adapted from or inspired by classical works , such as Jeff Beck 's " Beck 's Bolero " and parts of the Nice 's Ars Longa Vita Brevis . The latter , along with such Nice tracks as " Rondo " and " America " , reflect a greater interest in music that is entirely instrumental . Sgt. Pepper 's and Days both represent a growing tendency toward song cycles and suites made up of multiple movements . 
 In March 1966 , the Byrds released " Eight Miles High " , a pioneering psychedelic rock single with a guitar lead inspired by the " sheets of sound " soloing style of jazz saxophonist John Coltrane . The Who later that year recorded " A Quick One While He 's Away " , a miniature rock opera considered to be the first example of the form . The rock opera was more fully realized in S.F. Sorrow , an influential 1968 album by the Pretty Things . " Going Home " ( 1966 ) by the Rolling Stones was the first long " jam " recorded expressly for an album with its over 10 minutes length . Love 's " Revelation " from album Da Capo ( 1966 ) is also a notable early side long rock epic . 
 = = = = Jazz = = = = 
 Several bands that included jazz @-@ style horn sections appeared , including Blood , Sweat & Tears and Chicago . Of these , Chicago in particular experimented with suites and extended compositions , such as the " Ballet for a Girl in <unk> " on Chicago II . Jazz influences appeared in the music of British bands such as Traffic , Colosseum and Canterbury scene bands such as Soft Machine . Canterbury scene bands emphasized the use of wind instruments , complex chord changes and long improvisations . Jethro Tull began as a heavy blues band fronted by Ian Anderson , a flautist deeply influenced by jazz musician Rahsaan Roland Kirk . 
 = = = Early 1970s classic era = = = 
 The Nice , the Moody Blues , Procol Harum and Pink Floyd all contained elements of what is now called progressive rock , but none represented as complete an example of the genre as several bands that formed soon after . Almost all of the genre 's major bands , including Jethro Tull , King Crimson , Yes , Genesis , Van der Graaf Generator , ELP , Gentle Giant and Curved Air , released their debut albums during the years 1968 – 1970 . Most of these were folk @-@ rock albums that gave little indication of what the band 's mature sound would become , but King Crimson 's In the Court of the Crimson King ( 1969 ) was a fully formed example of the genre . The term " progressive rock , " which appeared in the liner notes of Caravan 's 1968 self @-@ titled debut LP , came to be applied to these bands that used classical music techniques to expand the styles and concepts available to rock music . Most of the genre 's major bands released their most critically acclaimed albums during the years 1971 – 1976 . 
 Progressive rock experienced a high degree of commercial success during the early 1970s . Jethro Tull , ELP , Yes and Pink Floyd combined for four albums that reached number one in the US charts , and sixteen of their albums reached the top ten . Tull alone scored 11 gold albums and 5 platinum albums . Pink Floyd 's 1970 album Atom Heart Mother reached the top spot on the UK charts . Their 1973 album The Dark Side of the Moon , which united their extended compositions with the more structured kind of composing employed when Syd Barrett was their songwriter , spent more than two years at the top of the charts and remained on the Billboard 200 album chart for fifteen years . Mike Oldfield 's Tubular Bells , an excerpt of which was used as the theme for the film The Exorcist , sold 16 million copies . A number of progressive bands released singles that became pop hits . 
 The genre has always had its greatest appeal for white males . Most of the musicians involved were male , as was the case for most rock music of the time , although Curved Air vocalist Sonja Kristina and Renaissance singer Annie Haslam were prominent exceptions . Renaissance 's lyricist also was female , and their feminine storytelling perspective is particularly prominent in their album art and in the songs " Ocean Gypsy " and " The Song of Scheherazade , " both from Scheherazade and Other Stories . Female singers were better represented in the progressive folk bands , who displayed a broader range of vocal styles than the progressive rock bands with whom they frequently toured and shared band members . 
 British and European audiences typically followed concert hall behavior protocols associated with classical music performances , and they were more reserved in their behavior than were audiences of other forms of rock . This confused musicians during US tours , as they found that American audiences were less attentive and more prone to outbursts during quiet passages . 
 = = = = North America = = = = 
 Progressive rock came to be appreciated overseas , but it mostly remained a European , and especially British , phenomenon . Few American bands engaged in it , and the purest representatives of the genre , such as <unk> and Happy the Man , remained limited to their own geographic regions . This is at least in part due to music industry differences between the US and Great Britain . Radio airplay was less important in the UK , where popular music recordings had never been played on official radio ( as opposed to on pirate radio ) until the 1967 launch of BBC Radio 1 . UK audiences were accustomed to hearing bands in clubs , and British bands could support themselves through touring . US audiences were first exposed to new music on the radio , and bands in the US required radio airplay for success . Radio stations were averse to progressive rock 's longer @-@ form compositions , which hampered advertising sales . Cultural factors were also involved , as US musicians tended to come from a blues background , while Europeans tended to have a foundation in classical music . 
 North American progressive rock bands often represented hybrid styles such as the complex metal of Rush , the psychedelic @-@ driven hard rock of Captain Beyond , the Southern rock @-@ tinged prog of Kansas , the jazz fusion of Mahavishnu Orchestra and Return to Forever , and the eclectic fusion of the all @-@ instrumental Dixie Dregs . British progressive rock acts had their greatest US success in the same geographic areas in which British heavy metal bands experienced their greatest popularity . The overlap in audiences led to the success of arena rock bands , such as Boston , Kansas and Styx , who combined elements of the two styles . 
 = = = = Europe = = = = 
 Progressive rock achieved popularity in Continental Europe more quickly than it did in the US . Italy remained generally uninterested in rock music until the strong Italian progressive rock scene developed in the early 1970s , and Van der Graaf Generator were much more popular there than in their own country . Genesis were hugely successful in Continental Europe at a time when they were still limited to a cult following in Britain and the US . Few of the European groups were successful outside of their own countries , with the exceptions of bands like Focus , who wrote English @-@ language lyrics , and Le Orme and <unk> , whose English lyrics were written by Peter Hammill and Peter Sinfield , respectively . 
 Some European bands played in a style derivative of English bands . This can be heard in <unk> , an organ trio in the style of ELP ; Ange and Celeste who have had a strong King Crimson influence . Others brought national elements to their style : Spain 's Triana introduced flamenco elements , groups such as the Swedish Samla Mammas Manna drew from the folk music styles of their respective nations , and Italian bands such as Il <unk> di Bronzo , <unk> & <unk> , leaned toward an approach that was more overtly emotional than that of their British counterparts . 
 The " <unk> music " scene in Germany came to be labeled as " krautrock " internationally . Bands such as Can , which included two members who had studied under Karlheinz Stockhausen , tended to be more strongly influenced by 20th century classical music than the British bands , whose musical vocabulary leaned more toward the Romantic era . Many of these groups were very influential even among bands that had little enthusiasm for the symphonic variety of progressive rock . 
 = = = Late 1970s decline = = = 
 Political and social trends of the late 1970s shifted away from the early 1970s hippie attitudes that had led to the genre 's development and popularity . The rise in punk cynicism made the utopian ideals expressed in progressive rock lyrics unfashionable . Virtuosity was rejected , as the expense of purchasing quality instruments and the time investment of learning to play them were seen as barriers to rock 's energy and immediacy . There were also changes in the music industry , as record companies disappeared and merged into large media conglomerates . Promoting and developing experimental music was not part of the marketing strategy for these large corporations , who focused their attention on identifying and targeting profitable market niches . 
 Four of the biggest bands in progressive rock ceased performing or experienced major personnel changes during the mid @-@ 1970s . Robert Fripp disbanded King Crimson in 1974 and said later that the genre had gone " tragically off course . " ELP went on hiatus the following year . Genesis moved in a more mainstream direction after the 1975 departure of Peter Gabriel and especially after the 1977 departure of Steve Hackett . Yes experienced lineup changes throughout the 1970s before fragmenting in 1980 . A number of the major bands , including Van der Graaf Generator , Gentle Giant and U.K. , dissolved between 1978 and 1980 . Some decided that it was time to move on because they , as Caravan leader Pye Hastings admitted , had " got quite stale . " 
 Many bands had by the mid @-@ 1970s reached the limit of how far they could experiment in a rock context , and fans had wearied of the extended , epic compositions . The sounds of the Hammond , Minimoog and Mellotron had been thoroughly explored , and their use became clichéd . Those bands who continued to record often simplified their sound , and the genre fragmented from the late 1970s onward . Corporate artists and repertoire staff exerted an increasing amount of control over the creative process that had previously belonged to the artists , and established acts were pressured to create music with simpler harmony and song structures and fewer changes in meter . This simplification can be heard as a softer , pop orientation in such albums as Genesis ' ... And Then There Were Three ... , Renaissance 's A Song for All Seasons , and the Moody Blues ' Octave . A number of symphonic pop bands , such as Supertramp , 10cc , the Alan Parsons Project and the Electric Light Orchestra , brought the orchestral @-@ style arrangements into a context that emphasized pop singles while allowing for occasional instances of exploration . Jethro Tull , Gentle Giant and Pink Floyd opted for a harder sound in the style of arena rock . 
 Few new progressive rock bands formed during this era , and those who did found that record labels were not interested in signing them . The short @-@ lived supergroup U.K. was a notable exception , although they tended to carry on in the style of previous bands and did little to advance the genre . Some of the genre 's more important development at this time occurred in its influence on other styles , as several guitarists with European ties brought a progressive rock approach to heavy metal and laid the groundwork for the future progressive metal style . Michael Schenker , of UFO , and Uli Jon Roth , who replaced Schenker in Scorpions , expanded the modal vocabulary available to guitarists . Roth studied classical music with the intent of using the guitar in the way that classical composers used the violin . Finally , the Dutch @-@ born and classically trained Alex and Eddie Van Halen formed Van Halen , who redefined the standard for rock virtuosity and paved the way for the " shred " music of the 1980s . 
 = = = = Post @-@ progressive = = = = 
 In Fripp 's opinion , once " progressive rock " ceased to cover new ground – becoming a set of conventions to be repeated and imitated – the genre 's premise had ceased to be " progressive " . According to Hegarty and Halliwell : " Post @-@ progressive identifies progressive rock that stems from sources other than progressive rock . This does not spread the net to include all avant @-@ rock from the 1980s and 1990s ... post @-@ progressive rock feeds a more explicit return to prog : in other words , a return that is not one . This trend is best exemplified by two British avant @-@ rock acts of the 1980s and early 1990s : David Sylvian and Talk Talk . " 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 = = = = Commercialisation = = = = 
 Some established bands moved toward music that was simpler and more commercially viable . Echoes of progressive rock complexity could be heard in arena rock bands like Journey , Kansas , Styx , GTR , ELO and Foreigner , all of which either had begun as progressive rock bands or included members with strong ties to the genre . These bands retained some elements of the orchestral @-@ style arrangements , but they moved away from lyrical mysticism in favor of teen @-@ oriented songs about relationships . Genesis transformed into a successful pop act , and a reformed Yes released the relatively mainstream <unk> , which yielded their only US number @-@ one single , " Owner of a Lonely Heart " . These radio @-@ friendly groups have been called " prog lite " . One band who did experience great 1980s success while maintaining a progressive approach was Pink Floyd , who released The Wall late in 1979 . The album , which brought punk anger into progressive rock , was a huge success and was later filmed as Pink Floyd – The Wall . 
 = = = = Neo @-@ progressive rock = = = = 
 A second wave of progressive rock bands appeared in the early 1980s and have since been categorized as a separate " neo @-@ progressive rock " subgenre . These largely keyboard @-@ based bands played extended compositions with complex musical and lyrical structures . Most of the genre 's major acts released debut albums between 1983 and 1985 and shared the same manager , Keith Goodwin , a publicist who had been instrumental in promoting progressive rock during the 1970s . The previous decade 's bands had the advantage of appearing during a large countercultural movement that provided them with a large potential audience , but the neo @-@ progressive bands were limited to a niche audience and found it difficult to attract a following . Only Marillion and Saga experienced international success . 
 Neo @-@ prog bands tended to derive their sound and visual style from the symphonic prog bands of a decade earlier . The genre 's most successful band , Marillion , suffered particularly from accusations of similarity to Genesis , although they used a different vocal style and a sound with more of a hard rock element . Authors Paul Hegarty and Martin Halliwell have pointed out that the neo @-@ progressive bands were not so much plagiarizing progressive rock as they were creating a new style from progressive rock elements , just as the bands of a decade before had created a new style from jazz and classical elements . Author Edward Macan counters by pointing out that these bands were at least partially motivated by a nostalgic desire to preserve a past style rather than a drive to innovate . 
 A predecessor to this genre was the Enid , who fused rock with classical but were more heavily influenced by Ralph Vaughan Williams than by more modern composers . The change of approach can be heard in the shift toward shorter compositions and a keyboard @-@ based sound in Rush albums such as Grace Under Pressure . Neo @-@ progressive bands emphasized individual solos instead of group improvisation , and they included more world @-@ music elements . Lyrics became more personal and less esoteric . Concept albums were still created , but not as frequently and on a smaller scale . Digital synthesizers took over many of the roles formerly filled by bulkier keyboards such as Mellotrons and organs , and their modern sound tended to minimize the folk influences that had been typical of 1970s progressive rock . Heavy metal bands such as Iron Maiden and Queensrÿche began to explore the mythological themes and extended concepts that had previously been the territory of progressive rock . 
 = = = = Crossover with post @-@ punk styles = = = = 
 Progressive rock 's influence was felt in the form of the post @-@ punk bands , although these bands tended not to draw on classical rock or Canterbury bands as influences but rather Roxy Music and krautrock bands , particularly Can . Groups such as Public Image Ltd , Magazine , Wire , <unk> and Simple Minds showed some influence of prog along with their more usually recognized punk influences . Julian Cope of the Teardrop Explodes wrote a history of the krautrock genre , <unk> . New wave bands tended to be less hostile toward progressive rock than were the punks , and there were crossovers , such as Robert Fripp 's and Brian Eno 's involvement with Talking Heads , and Yes ' replacement of Rick Wakeman and Jon Anderson with the pop duo the Buggles . A number of bands in New York 's no wave scene were impressed with punk 's energy but not with its primitivism . This led to experiments that combined that energy with greater musical sophistication , such as the guitar orchestras of Glenn Branca and the noise experiments of Sonic Youth . 
 Punk and prog were not necessarily as opposed as is commonly believed . Both genres reject commercialism , and punk bands did see a need for musical advancement , as evidenced by the albums London Calling , by the Clash , and My War , by Black Flag . Sex Pistols frontman Johnny Rotten famously wore a T @-@ shirt that read " I hate Pink Floyd , " but he expressed admiration for Van der Graaf Generator , Can , and Pink Floyd themselves . Brian Eno expressed a preference for the approach of the punk and new wave bands in New York , as he found them to be more experimental and less personality @-@ based than the English bands . 
 One progressive rock artist who was very supportive of the punk and new wave movements was former King Crimson leader Robert Fripp , who relocated to New York after a three @-@ year retirement and collaborated with the new wave groups Blondie and Talking Heads . He formed a new band that experimented with gamelan music in a similar way to Talking Heads ' approach on their Remain in Light album . The band was to be called " Discipline " but instead became a revived King Crimson . This edition featured new instrumentation that included Bill Bruford 's electronic drums , Tony Levin 's Chapman Stick , and guitar synthesizers played by Fripp and Adrian Belew , who was familiar to Fripp from the Remain in Light sessions . Their sound was highly percussive , featured tightly interconnected minimalist instrumentals with industrial noise influences , and often had a metallic edge . It was a new form of progressive rock that de @-@ emphasized solos and overt virtuosity , but the music was nevertheless very complex and difficult . 
 Gamelan and minimalism also influenced Brian Eno , who after departing Roxy Music had collaborated with Fripp . Rush borrowed elements from world music and new wave , as on the reggae @-@ tinged " The Spirit of Radio " and " Vital Signs . " 
 = = = 1990s and 2000s = = = 
 = = = = Third wave = = = = 
 A third wave of progressive rock bands , who might more properly be described as a second generation of neo @-@ progressive bands , emerged in the 1990s . The use of the term " progressive " to describe groups that follow in the style of bands from ten to twenty years earlier is somewhat controversial , as it has been seen as a contradiction of the spirit of experimentation and progress . These new bands were aided in part by the availability of personal computer @-@ based recording studios , which reduced album production expenses , and the Internet , which made it easier for bands outside of the mainstream to reach widely spread audiences . Record stores specializing in progressive rock appeared in large cities . 
 The shred music of the 1980s was a major influence on the progressive rock groups of the 1990s . Some of the newer bands , such as the Flower Kings , Spock 's Beard , and Glass Hammer , played a 1970s @-@ style symphonic prog but with an updated sound . A number of them began to explore the limits of the CD in the way that earlier groups had stretched the limits of the vinyl LP . " The Garden of Dreams , " from the Flower Kings ' Flower Power album , is nearly 60 minutes in length and is composed of 18 separate sections , and Transatlantic 's The Whirlwind consists of a single track of 77 minutes in length . 
 Folk influences resurface on " The Garden of Dreams , " a trend that also appears in Mostly Autumn 's 2008 album Glass Shadows . The Decemberists use folk themes and influences as a means of connecting with the past , while <unk> use them to express pastoralism and Shanghai 's Cold Fairyland use them for nationalist purposes . 
 On their 2001 album Origin of Symmetry , Muse included the new prog song " Citizen Erased , " a 7 @-@ minute track with unusual structure , hard rock , classical , and electronic elements . With their return to space rock in 2006 's Black Holes and Revelations , featuring the epic , satirical " Knights of Cydonia , " they began to experiment more in the subsequent album ; 2009 's The Resistance was their most progressive to date , featuring the space rock opera " <unk> : Symphony " and progressive arena rock anthem " United States of Eurasia . " Frontman Matthew Bellamy confirmed that their 2015 album , Drones , " does indeed include the sequel to fan favourite ' Citizen Erased ' – and that the track in question is a crazy , ten minute prog nightmare . " 
 = = = = Progressive metal = = = = 
 Progressive rock and heavy metal have similar timelines . Both emerged from late @-@ 1960s psychedelia to achieve great early @-@ 1970s success despite a lack of radio airplay and support from critics , then faded in the late 1970s and experienced revivals in the early 1980s . Each genre experienced a fragmentation of styles at this time , and many metal bands from the new wave of British heavy metal onward displayed progressive rock influences . Progressive metal reached a point of maturity with Queensrÿche 's 1988 concept album Operation : Mindcrime and Voivod 's 1989 Nothingface , which featured abstract lyrics and a King Crimson @-@ like texture . 
 Progressive metal drew attention when the US band Dream Theater 's 1994 album Awake debuted at # 32 on the album charts . King Crimson themselves returned in 1994 with a more metallic sound , as did Van der Graaf Generator in the following decade . Arjen Anthony <unk> 's Ayreon project , backed by an array of talent from the progressive rock genre , produced a series of innovative prog @-@ metal concept albums from 1995 onward . 
 Several bands in the prog @-@ metal genre , including the US bands Queensrÿche , Fates Warning and Dream Theater as well as Sweden 's Opeth , name Rush as a primary influence . These bands also exhibit influences from more traditional metal and rock bands , such as Black Sabbath and Deep Purple . Tool have toured together with King Crimson and named them as an influence on their work , although Robert Fripp feels that the reverse is true and that there is a strong Tool influence on latter @-@ day King Crimson . 
 Progressive rock elements appear in other metal subgenres . Black metal is conceptual by definition , due to its prominent theme of questioning the values of Christianity . Its guttural vocals are sometimes used by bands who can be classified as progressive , such as Mastodon , Mudvayne and Opeth , whose In Live Concert at the Royal Albert Hall DVD featured packaging that referenced vintage progressive rock albums such as Deep Purple 's Concerto for Group and Orchestra . Symphonic metal is an extension of the tendency toward orchestral passages in early progressive rock . Progressive rock has also served as a key inspiration for genres such as post @-@ rock , post @-@ metal and avant @-@ garde metal , math rock , power metal , and neo @-@ classical metal . Stoner metal bands frequently point to Hawkwind as a main influence . 
 = = = = New prog = = = = 
 New prog describes the wave of progressive rock bands in the 2000s who revived the genre . According to Entertainment Weekly 's Evan Serpick : " Along with recent success stories like System of a Down and up @-@ and @-@ comers like the Dillinger Escape Plan , Lightning Bolt , and Coheed and Cambria , the Mars Volta create incredibly complex and inventive music that sounds like a heavier , more aggressive version of ’ 70s behemoths such as Led Zeppelin and King Crimson . " 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 Progressive rock continues to appeal to its longtime fans and is also able to attract new audiences . The Progressive Music Awards were launched in 2012 by Prog Magazine to honor the genre 's innovators and to promote its newer bands . <unk> , however , are not invited to perform at the awards ceremony , as the promoters want an event " that doesn 't last three weeks . " 
 = = Festivals = = 
 Many prominent progressive rock bands got their initial exposure at large rock festivals that were held in Great Britain during the late 1960s and early 1970s . King Crimson made their first major appearance at the 1969 Hyde Park free concert , before a crowd estimated to be as large as 650 @,@ 000 , in support of the Rolling Stones . Emerson , Lake & Palmer debuted at the 1970 Isle of Wight Festival , at which Supertramp , Family and Jethro Tull also appeared . Jethro Tull were also present at the 1969 Newport Jazz Festival , the first year in which that festival invited rock bands to perform . Hawkwind appeared at many British festivals throughout the 1970s , although they sometimes showed up uninvited , set up a stage on the periphery of the event , and played for free . 
 Renewed interest in the genre in the 1990s led to the development of progressive rock festivals . <unk> , organized by Greg Walker and David Overstreet in 1993 , was first held in UCLA 's Royce Hall , and featured Sweden 's <unk> , the UK 's IQ , Quill and Citadel . <unk> was held annually in Whittier , California during the 2000s . The North East Art Rock Festival , or NEARfest , held its first event in 1999 in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania and held annual sold @-@ out concerts until 2012 's NEARfest Apocalypse , which featured headliners U.K. and Renaissance . Other festivals include the annual <unk> ( the longest @-@ running and only outdoor prog festival ) in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , the annual Rites of Spring Festival ( <unk> ) in Gettysburg , Pennsylvania , The Rogue Independent Music Festival in Atlanta , Georgia , Baja Prog in Mexicali , Mexico , <unk> USA in Atlanta , Georgia and <unk> Europe in <unk> , Netherlands . Progressive Nation tours were held in 2008 and 2009 with Dream Theater as the headline act . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The genre has received both a great amount of critical acclaim and criticism throughout the years . Progressive rock has been described as parallel to the classical music of Igor Stravinsky and Béla Bartók . This desire to expand the boundaries of rock , combined with some musicians ' dismissiveness toward mainstream rock and pop music , insulted critics and led to accusations of elitism . Its intellectual , fantastic and apolitical lyrics and its shunning of rock 's blues roots were <unk> of the very things that many critics valued in rock music . Progressive rock also represented the maturation of rock as a genre , but there was an opinion among critics that rock was and should remain fundamentally tied to adolescence , so that rock and maturity were mutually exclusive . Criticisms over the complexity of their music provoked some bands to create music that was even more complex . 
 These aspirations toward high culture reflect progressive rock 's origins as a music created largely by upper- and middle @-@ class , white @-@ collar , college @-@ educated males from Southern England . The music never reflected the concerns of or was embraced by working @-@ class listeners , except in the US , where listeners appreciated the musicians ' virtuosity . Progressive rock 's exotic , literary topics were considered particularly irrelevant to British youth during the late 1970s , when the nation suffered from a poor economy and frequent strikes and shortages . Even King Crimson leader Robert Fripp dismissed progressive rock lyrics as " the philosophical meanderings of some English half @-@ wit who is circumnavigating some inessential point of experience in his life . " Bands whose darker lyrics avoided utopianism , such as King Crimson , Pink Floyd and Van der Graaf Generator , experienced less critical disfavor . Critics similarly came to regard krautrock as a genre separate from progressive rock . 
 = = List of progressive rock bands = = 
 = Berengaria of Castile = 
 Berengaria ( Castilian : <unk> ; 1179 or 1180 – 8 November 1246 ) was Queen of Castile in 1217 and Queen consort of León from 1197 to 1204 . As the eldest child and heir presumptive of Alfonso VIII of Castile , she was a sought after bride , and was engaged to Conrad , the son of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa . After his death , she married her cousin , Alfonso IX of León , to secure the peace between him and her father . She had five children with him before their marriage was voided by Pope Innocent III . 
 When her father died , she served as regent for her younger brother Henry I in Castile until she succeeded him on his untimely death . Within months , she turned Castile over to her son , Ferdinand III , concerned that as a woman she would not be able to lead Castile 's forces . However , she remained one of his closest advisors , guiding policy , negotiating , and ruling on his behalf for the rest of her life . She was responsible for the re @-@ unification of Castile and León under her son 's authority , and supported his efforts in the Reconquista . She was a patron of religious institutions and supported the writing of a history of the two countries . 
 = = Early family life = = 
 Berengaria was born either in 1179 or 1180 , in Burgos . She was the eldest daughter of King Alfonso VIII of Castile and Eleanor of England . Those who cared for the young <unk> were generously rewarded . Her nurse , <unk> , received land from Alfonso and Eleanor on her retirement in May of 1181 . Another nurse , Elvira , received a similar retirement gift in 1189 at Berengaria 's request . 
 As the eldest child of king Alfonso and Eleanor , she was the heiress presumptive of the throne of Castile for several years , because many of her siblings who where born after her died shortly after birth or in early infancy , so Berengaria became a greatly desired partner throughout Europe . 
 Berengaria 's first engagement was agreed in 1187 when her hand was sought by Conrad , Duke of Rothenburg and fifth child of Holy Roman Emperor Frederick I Barbarossa . The next year , the marriage contract was signed in <unk> , including a dowry of <unk> <unk> . Conrad then marched to Castile , where in Carrión the engagement was celebrated and Conrad was knighted . Berengaria 's status as heir of Castile when she inherited the throne was based in part on documentation in the treaty and marriage contract , which specified that she would inherit the kingdom after her father or any childless brothers who may come along . Conrad would only be allowed to co @-@ rule as her spouse , and Castile would not become part of the Empire . The treaty also documented traditional rights and obligations between the future sovereign and the nobility . 
 The marriage was not consummated , due to Berengaria 's young age , as she was less than 10 years old . Conrad and Berengaria never saw each other again . By 1191 , Berengaria requested an annulment of the engagement from the Pope , influenced , no doubt , by third parties such as her grandmother Eleanor of Aquitaine , who was not interested in having a Hohenstaufen as a neighbor to her French fiefdoms . Those fears were neutralized when the duke was assassinated in 1196 . 
 = = Marriage to Alfonso IX = = 
 In order to help secure peace between Castile and León , Berengaria married Alfonso IX of León , her first cousin once removed , in Valladolid in 1197 . As part of the marriage , and in accordance with Spanish customs of the time , she received direct control over a number of castles and lands within León . Most of these were along the border with Castile , and the nobles who ran them in her name were allowed to seek justice from either king in the event of being wronged by the other . In turn , these knights were charged with maintaining the peace along the border in the queen 's name . 
 Berengaria and Alfonso IX had five children : 
 Eleanor ( 1198 / 1199 – 1202 ) . 
 Constance ( 1200 – 1242 ) , a nun in the Abbey of las Huelgas . 
 Ferdinand III ( 1201 – 1252 ) , King of Castile and León . 
 Alfonso ( 1203 – 1272 ) , Lord of Molina and Mesa by his first marriage . He married , first , <unk> de Lara , heiress of Molina and Mesa , second , Teresa Núñez , and third , Mayor Téllez de Meneses , Lady of Montealegre and <unk> , by whom he was the father of María of Molina , wife of King Sancho IV of León and Castile . 
 Berengaria ( 1204 – 1237 ) , married John of Brienne , King of Jerusalem . 
 Starting in 1198 , Pope Innocent III objected to the marriage on the grounds of consanguinity , though the couple stayed together until 1204 . They vehemently sought a dispensation in order to stay together , including offering large sums of money . However , the pope denied their request , although they succeeded in having their children considered legitimate . Her marriage dissolved , Berengaria returned to Castile and to her parents in May 1204 , where she dedicated herself to the care of her children . 
 = = Between <unk> = = 
 Though she had left her role as queen of León , she retained authority over and taxing rights in many of the lands she had received there , including Salamanca and <unk> , which she gave to her son Ferdinand in 1206 . Some of the nobles who had served her as queen followed her back to the court in Castille . The peace which had prevailed since her marriage was lost , and there was war again between León and Castille , in part over her control of these lands . In 1205 , 1207 , and 1209 , treaties were made again between the two countries , each expanding her control . In the treaties of 1207 and 1209 , Berengaria and her son were given again significant properties along the border , including many key castles , including Villalpando . The treaty in 1207 is the first existing public document in the Castilian dialect . 
 In 1214 , on the death of her father , Alfonso VIII of Castile , the crown passed to his only surviving son , Berengaria 's 10 @-@ year @-@ old brother , Henry I. Their mother Eleanor assumed the regency , but died 24 days after her husband . Berengaria , now heir presumptive again , replaced her as regent . At this point internal strife began , instigated by the nobility , primarily the House of Lara . They forced Berengaria to cede regency and guardianship of her brother to Count Álvaro Núñez de Lara . 
 In 1216 , an extraordinary parliamentary session was held in Valladolid , attended by such Castilian magnates as Lope Díaz II de Haro , Gonzalo Rodríguez Girón , Álvaro Díaz de <unk> , Alfonso Téllez de Meneses and others , who agreed , with the support of Berengaria , to make common cause against Álvaro Núñez de Lara . At the end of May the situation in Castile had grown perilous for Berengaria , so she decided to take refuge in the castle of <unk> de Campos , which was held by Gonzalo Rodríguez Girón ( one of her allies ) and sent her son Ferdinand to the court of his father . On 15 August 1216 , an assembly of all the magnates of Castile was held to attempt to reach an accord that would prevent civil war , but disagreements led the families of Girón , Téllez de Meneses , and Haro to break definitively with Álvaro de Lara . 
 = = Queen of Castile = = 
 Circumstances changed suddenly when Henry died on 6 June 1217 after receiving a head wound from a tile which came loose while he was playing with other children at the palace of the Bishop of Palencia . His guardian , Count Álvaro Núñez de Lara , tried to hide the fact , taking the king 's body to the castle of <unk> , although it was inevitable that the news would reach Berengaria . 
 The new sovereign was well aware of the danger her former husband posed to her reign ; being her brother 's closest <unk> , it was feared that he would claim the crown for himself . Therefore , she kept her brother 's death and her own accession secret from Alfonso . She wrote to Alfonso asking that Ferdinand be sent to visit her , and then abdicated in their son 's favor on 31 August . In part , she abdicated as she would be unable to be the military leader Castile needed its king to be in that time . 
 = = Royal advisor = = 
 Although she did not reign for long , Berengaria continued to be her son 's closest advisor , intervening in state policy , albeit in an indirect manner . Well into her son 's reign , contemporary authors wrote that she still wielded authority over him . One example was how she arranged the marriage of her son with princess Elisabeth of Hohenstaufen ( known as Beatriz in Castile ) , daughter of Duke Philip of Swabia and granddaughter of two emperors : Frederick Barbarossa and Isaac II Angelos of Byzantium . The wedding took place on 30 November 1219 at Burgos . Another instance in which Berengaria 's mediation stood out developed in 1218 when the scheming Lara family , still headed by former regent Álvaro Núñez de Lara , conspired to have Alfonso IX , King of León and King Ferdinand 's father , invade Castile to seize his son 's throne . However , the capture of Count Lara facilitated the intervention of Berengaria , who got father and son to sign the Pact of Toro on 26 August 1218 , putting an end to confrontations between Castile and León . 
 In 1222 , Berengaria intervened anew in favor of her son , achieving the ratification of the Convention of <unk> , thereby making peace with the <unk> by arranging the marriage of <unk> , daughter and heiress of the Lord of Molina , Gonzalo Pérez de Lara , to her own son and King Ferdinand 's brother , Alfonso . In 1224 she arranged the marriage of her daughter Berengaria to John of Brienne , a maneuver which brought Ferdinand III closer to the throne of León , since John was the candidate Alfonso IX had in mind to marry his eldest daughter Sancha . By proceeding more quickly , Berengaria prevented the daughters of her former husband from marrying a man who could claim the throne of León . 
 Perhaps her most decisive intervention on Ferdinand 's behalf took place in 1230 , when Alfonso IX died and designated as heirs to the throne his daughters Sancha and Dulce from his first marriage to Theresa of Portugal , superseding the rights of Ferdinand III . Berengaria met with the princesses ’ mother and succeeded in the ratification of the Treaty of las <unk> , by which they renounced the throne in favor of their half @-@ brother in exchange for a substantial sum of money and other benefits . Thus were the thrones of León and Castile re @-@ united in the person of Ferdinand III , which had been divided by Alfonso VII in 1157 . She intervened again by arranging the second marriage of Ferdinand after the death of Elisabeth of Hohenstaufen . Although he already had plenty of children , Berengaria was concerned that the king 's virtue not be diminished with illicit relations . This time , she chose a French noblewoman , Joan of Dammartin , a candidate put forth by the king 's aunt and Berengaria 's sister Blanche , widow of King Louis VIII of France . Berengaria served again as regent , ruling while her son Ferdinand was in the south on his long campaigns of the Reconquista . She governed Castile and León with her characteristic skill , relieving him of the need to divide his attention during this time . 
 = = Patronage and legacy = = 
 She met with her son a final time in <unk> de Calatrava in 1245 , afterwards returning to Toledo . She died 8 November 1246 , and was buried at Las Huelgas near Burgos . 
 Much like her mother , she was a strong patron of religious institutions . She worked with her mother to support the Abbey of Santa María la Real de Las Huelgas . As queen of León , she supported the Order of Santiago and supported the Basilica of San Isidoro , not only donating to it , but also exempting it from any taxes . She re @-@ established the tradition of <unk> royal women supporting the Monastery of San Pedro de <unk> , last performed by her great @-@ grand aunt , Sancha <unk> . 
 She is portrayed as a wise and virtuous woman by the chroniclers of the time . She was also concerned with literature and history , charging Lucas de Tuy to compose a chronicle on the Kings of Castile and León to aid and instruct future rulers of the joint kingdom . She herself was discussed in the works of Rodrigo Jiménez de Rada , whose work was sponsored by her son Ferdinand , and Juan of <unk> , who was chancellor of Castile under Ferdinand . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Hugh Downman = 
 Hugh Downman ( c . 1765 – 4 January 1858 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who saw service during the American War of Independence and the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars , eventually rising to the rank of Admiral . 
 Downman spent most of the American War of Independence as a midshipman , with a spell in French captivity after his ship was wrecked off the coast of Ushant while chasing an enemy frigate . He was promoted to lieutenant shortly before the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars and served with distinction during operations in the Mediterranean . Downman served under several Admirals , and fought with Jervis at Battle of Cape St Vincent . Shortly after the battle he was rewarded with his own command , going on to capture several privateers and fighting off an attack by a larger vessel . Promoted to post @-@ captain and given a frigate to command , he operated in the Mediterranean and performed services for the nobles and monarchs of the Italian states . Downman went on to command several ships of the line , often as a flag @-@ captain , and took part in the capture of the Cape Colony and operations on the Río de la Plata . 
 Left without active employment after the end of the wars with France , he briefly returned to service in 1824 @.@ before being promoted to flag rank the following year . Downman continued to rise through the ranks , reaching the rank of full admiral before his death in 1858 . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Hugh Downman was born in Plympton , Devon around 1765 . His uncle was Dr Hugh Downman , a physician and poet , who obtained for his nephew an offer to serve aboard the 32 @-@ gun HMS Thetis as a midshipman . Downman took up the offer , joining the ship , which was then under the command of Captain Mitchell Graham , on 10 October 1776 . He served aboard Thetis for the next two years , leaving the ship in August 1778 and joining HMS Arethusa . The Arethusa was wrecked off Ushant on 19 March 1779 while chasing a French ship , and Downman and the rest of the crew were taken prisoner by the French . <unk> in January 1780 Downman went on to serve aboard HMS Emerald under Captain Samuel Marshall , before moving into the 74 @-@ gun HMS Edgar in May 1782 . Edgar at this time was flying the broad pennant of Commodore William Hotham , and in October that year was part of the fleet sent out under Lord Howe to relieve Gibraltar . In the brief encounter with the Spanish fleet that followed on 20 October Edgar had six men wounded . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 Little is known of Downman 's activities during the years of peace that followed , until his appearance in February 1789 with the fleet despatched to the East Indies under Commodore William Cornwallis . Cornwallis promoted him to lieutenant while serving in the East Indies on 5 March 1790 . He returned to England at the start of 1793 . With the commencement of the French Revolutionary Wars , Downman joined the 74 @-@ gun HMS Alcide and went out to the Mediterranean , where served with Commodore Robert Linzee 's squadron . He was present at the occupation of Toulon and assisted in the attack on the tower and redoubt at <unk> in September 1793 . While helping in the reduction of Corsica , Downman cut out a French gunboat from under the guns of a battery at St Fiorenzo , and later led a party of 100 seamen and marines in scaling a cliff to place a gun overlooking the enemy 's defences . For these actions he received the thanks of Lieutenant @-@ General David Dundas . 
 Linzee was advanced to rear @-@ admiral on 11 April 1794 and shifted his flag to the 98 @-@ gun HMS Windsor Castle , bringing Downman with him as his second lieutenant . He was then moved into the 100 @-@ gun HMS Victory , the flagship of Admiral Lord Hood , and returned with Hood to England . Hood was preparing to return to the Mediterranean aboard Victory , when on 2 May he was ordered to strike his flag . Victory then went out to the Mediterranean as a private ship , whereupon she became the flagship of Rear @-@ Admiral Robert Mann , and then Sir John Jervis . Under Mann Downman saw action at the Naval Battle of Hyères Islands on 13 July 1795 , and under Jervis he was at the Battle of Cape St Vincent on 14 February 1797 . 
 = = Command = = 
 = = = Speedy = = = 
 Several months after Cape St Vincent , on 20 July , Downman was promoted to the rank of commander and appointed to command the 14 @-@ gun brig HMS Speedy . He made several cruises with Speedy , capturing a number of enemy vessels . On 3 February 1798 she encountered the large enemy privateer Papillon , mounting 18 guns and carrying 160 men , while sailing off Vigo . The Papillon attacked Speedy , which had a reduced crew owing to her master Mr Marshall , and 12 men , being absent in command of a prize Speedy had taken earlier . The two ships fought each other for two days , and by the second Downman had exhausted his supply of shot , and resorted to firing nails and pieces of iron hoop at his opponent . Having observed the difficulty his captain was in , Master Marshall secured the Spanish crew of his prize below deck , and then took the prize crew off in a small boat to come to Downman 's assistance . After a fierce fight the Papillon was driven off , with Speedy suffering losses of five killed and four wounded . Downman then recaptured his prize that the master had been compelled to abandon , and returned to Lisbon to carry out repairs . During his time in command of Speedy Downman captured five privateers , altogether mounting 17 guns and 28 swivels , and carrying 162 men . For his efforts protecting British trade out of Oporto , the merchants presented him with a letter of thanks , and a piece of plate valued at £ 50 . 
 = = = Santa Dorothea = = = 
 As a reward for his good service Downman was advanced to post @-@ captain on 26 December 1798 and was appointed to command the 32 @-@ gun HMS Santa Dorothea , a frigate that had recently been captured from the Spanish . On 28 November that year Santa Dorothea , operating in company with HMS Perseus , HMS <unk> and HMS Bulldog captured the 16 @-@ gun San Leon on the Lisbon station . Captain William Brown was to have succeeded Downman in 1799 , but he was given another ship instead , and Downman retained Santa Dorothea . He cut out vessels from <unk> on 11 January 1800 and <unk> on 11 February 1800 , before taking command of a small squadron blockading Savona . The town surrendered after 41 days , on 15 May . Downman then destroyed all the fortifications on the Gulf of Spezia . He went on to land the Duke of Savoy at Naples and evacuated the gallery of Florence to Sicily , ahead of the invading French . For his services to the monarchies of Italy he received several presents of money and rings . In July 1801 he conveyed troops to Egypt and received the Order of the Crescent . Also during this time Downman captured three vessels sailing from Egypt carrying General Dessaix and some of Napoleon 's staff . 
 = = = Caesar , Diomede and Diadem = = = 
 Downman then took command of the 80 @-@ gun HMS Caesar , which was then the flagship of Sir James Saumarez on the Lisbon station . Downman was flag @-@ captain to Saumarez until Caesar was paid off at Portsmouth on 23 July 1802 . Saumarez then requested Downman to serve as his flag @-@ captain aboard the 50 @-@ gun HMS Diomede on the Guernsey station , where he spent the next 14 months . In November 1805 he took command of the 64 @-@ gun HMS Diadem , flying the broad pennant of Commodore Sir Home Popham . He was supported the operations under Lieutenant @-@ General Sir David Baird to capture the Cape Colony , and landed in Table Bay at the head of a party of marines and two howitzers . He was sent home with the despatches announcing the capture of the colony , after which he was sent out to the Rio de la Plata , where he resumed command of his old ship , Diomede . Downman supported the British assaults , and was present at the capture of Montevideo . After this he returned home , carrying General William Beresford . Diomede was paid off in September 1807 , and Downman went ashore . 
 = = = Prison ships and Princess Charlotte = = = 
 Downman 's next appointment was to superintend the prison ships moored at Portsmouth , a task he carried out until January 1811 , when he was given another seagoing command , the 74 @-@ gun HMS Princess Carolina and attached to the fleet in the North Sea . He took part in the destruction of the 40 @-@ gun French frigate Amazone off Cape Barfleur , conveyed a fleet of East Indiamen to Madeira and carried out cruises in the North Sea . In November 1813 he landed marines at Scheveningen in support of the Prince of Orange , and went on to visit Spitsbergen . Princess Carolina was paid off in 1814 and Downman spent the next ten years with no active service . 
 = = Later years , family and legacy = = 
 Downman briefly returned to active service in 1824 , taking command of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Windsor Castle . He commanded her until being promoted to flag rank in May 1825 . He was advanced to vice @-@ admiral in 1837 and a full admiral in 1847 . From 1851 he received a service pension of £ 150 a year . On 4 January 1858 , he died at his seat in Hambledon , Hampshire . 
 Downman married Dorothea Palmer , the youngest daughter of Peter Palmer of Portsmouth on 23 June 1803 . The couple had a son , the Reverend Hugh Downman , and two daughters , Dorothea Frances and Caroline . Caroline married Edward Hale and had two sons , Henry George Hale who joined the navy , and William Godfrey Hale , who joined the army . Henry Hale distinguished himself in the Baltic campaign during the Crimean War and was twice mentioned in despatches by Vice @-@ Admiral Richard Saunders Dundas . Lieutenant @-@ General T. Downman , superintendent at Woolwich , was a first @-@ cousin of Admiral Hugh Downman . 
 Politically Downman was an ardent supporter of Whig Charles James Fox and opposed the Melvilles , Henry and his son Robert , who were for a number of years powerful at the Admiralty . Downman attributed this political interest as being the cause of his period of unemployment after having reached flag @-@ rank . He was described as a " strict disciplinarian , but an accomplished gentleman ; well @-@ read ... [ and ] temperate ... " Whilst serving in the Mediterranean he was apparently especially disliked by Emma Hamilton , with Downman 's obituary noting that " from this fact some slight judgement of his character may be formed . " 
 = Clifton Hall , Cumbria = 
 Clifton Hall was a fortified manor house in the Clifton , Cumbria , England . Dating from around 1400 , it was constructed by either Elianor Engaine or her son @-@ in @-@ law William Wybergh , and was held by the Wybergh family until the 19th century . Initially taking the form of an " H " -plan design built around a central hall , around 1500 a three @-@ story stone pele tower was added , providing both additional security and acting as a status symbol for the family . At the start of the 17th century a new stone hall was added to the south of the tower . 
 The <unk> were able to retain Clifton Hall , despite the challenges of the English Civil War , but the house was caught up in the Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745 . In the early 19th century most of Clifton Hall was pulled down to make way for a new farmhouse , and only the pele tower survived . In the 21st century the tower is in the care of English Heritage and operates as a tourist attraction . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 15th – 16th centuries = = = 
 Clifton Hall was originally built around 1400 in the village of Clifton , south of Penrith , Cumbria , by either Elianor Engaine or her son @-@ in @-@ law William Wybergh . The <unk> had held the manor of Clifton since at least the 12th century , providing military service to the regional feudal lords in exchange for the land , and may have built an earlier manor house on a different site , possibly close to the village church of St Cuthbert . Clifton Hall was initially constructed around an " H " -plan , with a central hall bracketed by two cross @-@ wings , one wing containing the family 's living accommodation , the other the kitchen and the other service rooms . This style was popular at this time across Cumbria , and indeed England more generally . 
 William Wybergh and his descendants owned and lived in Clifton Hall until the 19th century . Around 1500 , the three @-@ storey tower that survives today was built onto the western end of the range , replacing the existing buildings there . " H " -plan houses with towers were common during this period , but the towers were often added on subsequently ; the tower was probably constructed by Elianor 's grandson , another William Wybergh . The tower was probably built in response to the security situation along the troubled Anglo @-@ Scottish border at the time , but it would also have made a social statement about the status and wealth of the Wybergh family , and would have provided additional accommodation . A timber building was then built early in the 15th century to the south of the tower , probably to provide further chambers . 
 = = = 17th – 18th centuries = = = 
 At the start of the 17th century , possibly around 1600 , a new hall was built in stone to replace the older timber @-@ framed one ; it was positioned to the south , replacing the earlier 15th @-@ century extension . The new hall was slightly anachronistic , having only one floor , unlike most new halls from this period which had two storeys . The old hall was then probably adapted for use as a service area . 
 After this investment , the Wybergh family 's fortunes began to deteriorate . When the English Civil War broke out in 1642 between the supporters of King Charles I and Parliament , Thomas Wybergh was a Royalist supporter and found himself on the losing side in the war . He was fined by Parliament as a Royalist " delinquent " in 1652 , and mortgaged the surrounding manor to Sir John Lowther for £ 846 , but not the hall itself or the lands immediately to the north . The mortgage led to a prolonged legal dispute , and in 1706 John 's grandson successfully claimed the mortgaged estates , in exchange for giving the Wybergh 's £ 400 . 
 Further work was done on the property in the early 18th century , providing an additional service room and bedrooms . The Jacobite risings of 1715 and 1745 impacted on the hall , which was close to the Scottish border . In 1715 , William Wybergh , the owner , was abducted by Scottish soldiers , and in 1745 , shortly before the Clifton Moor Skirmish , it was occupied and looted by the rebel forces . 
 = = = 19th – 21st centuries = = = 
 By the early 19th century , the medieval structure of the property had become quite limiting for the owners . The buildings on either side of the tower were then pulled down to allow for the construction of Hall Farm , including a more modern farm house ; only the tower survived to become an ancillary farm building . In 1973 the Lonsdale Estate , who owned Hall Farm , placed the tower into the guardianship of the Department of the Environment , who decided to open it to the public . An archaeological excavation of the site took place between 1977 and 1979 , making it one of only a handful of such sites in Cumbria to have been investigated in this way . In the 21st century the tower is in the care of English Heritage as a tourist attraction , and is protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The only surviving part of Clifton Hall is the early 16th @-@ century tower wing of the hall , often referred to as a pele tower . Despite this label , its construction date is relatively late compared to similar fortifications , and it is less robustly designed than equivalent towers in the region . 
 The tower measures 33 ft ( 10 m ) by 26 ft ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) , with red sandstone walls around 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) thick and 37 ft ( 11 m ) high . The ground floor was originally the parlour , with a carved wooden ceiling and a fireplace , with doors leading externally and into the hall . Originally , the stairs did not reach down to the ground floor . The first floor formed the principal chamber in the tower , accessed from stairs in the hall ; it had a fireplace , a garderobe and its walls would have been plastered and painted , with wood panelling . Stairs led up to the second floor , again equipped with a fireplace and wood panelling , and up onto the roof . 
 Few of the original windows survive in the tower , but those that remain are larger than in some of the other older <unk> , suggesting it may have been built with defence less in mind than in some earlier pele towers . The originals have mainly been replaced by 17th- and 18th @-@ century versions . The original roof would have resembled that at nearby <unk> Hall , but was replaced at a later date with the current hipped @-@ roof design , probably during the late 16th or 17th centuries . The current roof was further restored in 1979 . 
 = Barn swallow = 
 The barn swallow ( Hirundo rustica ) is the most widespread species of swallow in the world . It is a distinctive passerine bird with blue upperparts , a long , deeply forked tail and curved , pointed wings . It is found in Europe , Asia , Africa and the Americas . In Anglophone Europe it is just called the swallow ; in Northern Europe it is the only common species called a " swallow " rather than a " martin " . 
 There are six subspecies of barn swallow , which breed across the Northern Hemisphere . Four are strongly migratory , and their wintering grounds cover much of the Southern Hemisphere as far south as central Argentina , the Cape Province of South Africa , and northern Australia . Its huge range means that the barn swallow is not endangered , although there may be local population declines due to specific threats . 
 The barn swallow is a bird of open country that normally uses man @-@ made structures to breed and consequently has spread with human expansion . It builds a cup nest from mud pellets in barns or similar structures and feeds on insects caught in flight . This species lives in close association with humans , and its insect @-@ eating habits mean that it is tolerated by man ; this acceptance was reinforced in the past by superstitions regarding the bird and its nest . There are frequent cultural references to the barn swallow in literary and religious works due to both its living in close proximity to humans and its annual migration . The barn swallow is the national bird of Austria and Estonia . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult male barn swallow of the nominate subspecies H. r. rustica is 17 – 19 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) long including 2 – 7 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 2 @.@ 76 in ) of elongated outer tail feathers . It has a wingspan of 32 – 34 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 6 – 13 @.@ 6 in ) and weighs 16 – 22 g ( 0 @.@ 56 – 0 @.@ 78 oz ) . It has steel blue upperparts and a rufous forehead , chin and throat , which are separated from the off @-@ white underparts by a broad dark blue breast band . The outer tail feathers are elongated , giving the distinctive deeply forked " swallow tail " . There is a line of white spots across the outer end of the upper tail . The female is similar in appearance to the male , but the tail streamers are shorter , the blue of the upperparts and breast band is less glossy , and the underparts paler . The juvenile is browner and has a paler rufous face and whiter underparts . It also lacks the long tail streamers of the adult . 
 The song of the barn swallow is a cheerful warble , often ending with su @-@ seer with the second note higher than the first but falling in pitch . Calls include witt or witt @-@ witt and a loud <unk> @-@ <unk> when excited ( or trying to chase intruders away from the nest ) . The alarm calls include a sharp <unk> for predators like cats and a <unk> @-@ <unk> for birds of prey like the hobby . This species is fairly quiet on the wintering grounds . 
 The distinctive combination of a red face and blue breast band render the adult barn swallow easy to distinguish from the African Hirundo species and from the welcome swallow ( Hirundo <unk> ) with which its range overlaps in Australasia . In Africa the short tail streamers of the juvenile barn swallow invite confusion with juvenile red @-@ chested swallow ( Hirundo lucida ) , but the latter has a narrower breast band and more white in the tail . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The barn swallow was described by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 as Hirundo rustica , characterised as H. <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> , macula alba <unk> . Hirundo is the Latin word for " swallow " ; <unk> means " of the country " . This species is the only one of that genus to have a range extending into the Americas , with the majority of Hirundo species being native to Africa . This genus of blue @-@ backed swallows is sometimes called the " barn swallows " . 
 The Oxford English Dictionary dates the English common name " barn swallow " to 1851 , though an earlier instance of the collocation in an English @-@ language context is in Gilbert White 's popular book The Natural History of Selborne , originally published in 1789 : 
 The swallow , though called the chimney @-@ swallow , by no means builds altogether in <unk> [ sic ] , but often within barns and out @-@ houses against the rafters ... In Sweden she builds in barns , and is called <unk> , the barn @-@ swallow . 
 This suggests that the English name may be a calque on the Swedish term . 
 There are few taxonomic problems within the genus , but the red @-@ chested swallow — a resident of West Africa , the Congo basin and Ethiopia — was formerly treated as a subspecies of barn swallow . The red @-@ chested swallow is slightly smaller than its migratory relative , has a narrower blue breast @-@ band , and the adult has shorter tail streamers . In flight , it looks paler underneath than barn swallow . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 Six subspecies of barn swallow are generally recognized . In eastern Asia , a number of additional or alternative forms have been proposed , including <unk> by Robert Ridgway in 1883 , <unk> by <unk> <unk> in 1883 , ambigua by Erwin Stresemann and <unk> by Wilhelm Meise in 1934 . Given the uncertainties over the validity of these forms , this article follows the treatment of Turner and Rose . 
 H. r. rustica , the nominate European subspecies , breeds in Europe and Asia , as far north as the Arctic Circle , south to North Africa , the Middle East and Sikkim , and east to the Yenisei River . It migrates on a broad front to winter in Africa , Arabia , and the Indian subcontinent . The barn swallows wintering in southern Africa are from across Eurasia to at least 91 ° E , and have been recorded as covering up to 11 @,@ 660 km ( 7 @,@ 250 mi ) on their annual migration . 
 H. r. <unk> was described by Ernst Hartert in 1910 . It breeds in the Middle East from southern Turkey to Israel and is partially resident , though some birds winter in East Africa . It has orange red underparts and a broken breast band . 
 H. r. <unk> , the resident Egyptian subspecies , was described by James Stephens in 1817 and named for French zoologist Marie Jules César Savigny . It resembles <unk> , which also has orange @-@ red underparts , but <unk> has a complete broad breast band and deeper red hue to the underparts . 
 H. r. gutturalis , described by Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in 1786 , has whitish underparts and a broken breast band . Breast chestnut and lower underparts more pink @-@ buff . The populations that breed in the central and eastern Himalayas have been included in this subspecies , although the primary breeding range is Japan and Korea . The east Asian breeders winter across tropical Asia from India and Sri Lanka east to Indonesia and New Guinea . Increasing numbers are wintering in Australia . It hybridises with H. r. tytleri in the Amur River area . It is thought that the two eastern Asia forms were once geographically separate , but the nest sites provided by expanding human habitation allowed the ranges to overlap . H. r. gutturalis is a vagrant to Alaska and Washington , but is easily distinguished from the North American breeding subspecies , H. r. erythrogaster , by the latter 's reddish underparts . 
 H. r. tytleri , first described by Thomas Jerdon in 1864 , and named for British soldier , naturalist and photographer Robert Christopher Tytler , has deep orange @-@ red underparts and an incomplete breast band . The tail is also longer . It breeds in central Siberia south to northern Mongolia and winters from eastern Bengal east to Thailand and Malaysia . 
 H. r. erythrogaster , the North American subspecies described by Pieter Boddaert in 1783 , differs from the European subspecies in having redder underparts and a narrower , often incomplete , blue breast band . It breeds throughout North America , from Alaska to southern Mexico , and migrates to the Lesser Antilles , Costa Rica , Panama and South America to winter . A few may winter in the southernmost parts of the breeding range . This subspecies funnels through Central America on a narrow front and is therefore abundant on passage in the lowlands of both coasts . 
 The short wings , red belly and incomplete breast band of H. r. tytleri are also found in H. r. erythrogaster , and DNA analyses show that barn swallows from North America colonised the Baikal region of Siberia , a dispersal direction opposite to that for most changes in distribution between North America and Eurasia . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Habitat and range = = = 
 The preferred habitat of the barn swallow is open country with low vegetation , such as pasture , meadows and farmland , preferably with nearby water . This swallow avoids heavily wooded or precipitous areas and densely built @-@ up locations . The presence of accessible open structures such as barns , stables , or culverts to provide nesting sites , and exposed locations such as wires , roof ridges or bare branches for perching , are also important in the bird 's selection of its breeding range . 
 It breeds in the Northern Hemisphere from sea level to typically 2 @,@ 700 m ( 8 @,@ 900 ft ) , but to 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) in the Caucasus and North America , and it is absent only from deserts and the cold northernmost parts of the continents . Over much of its range , it avoids towns , and in Europe is replaced in urban areas by the house martin . However , in Honshū , Japan , the barn swallow is a more urban bird , with the red @-@ rumped swallow ( Cecropis <unk> ) replacing it as the rural species . 
 In winter , the barn swallow is cosmopolitan in its choice of habitat , avoiding only dense forests and deserts . It is most common in open , low vegetation habitats , such as savanna and ranch land , and in Venezuela , South Africa and Trinidad and Tobago it is described as being particularly attracted to burnt or harvested sugarcane fields and the waste from the cane . In the absence of suitable roost sites , they may sometimes roost on wires where they are more exposed to predators . Individual birds tend to return to the same wintering locality each year and congregate from a large area to roost in reed beds . These roosts can be extremely large , one in Nigeria had an estimated 1 @.@ 5 million birds . These roosts are thought to be a protection from predators , and the arrival of roosting birds is synchronised in order to overwhelm predators like African hobbies . The barn swallow has been recorded as breeding in the more temperate parts of its winter range , such as the mountains of Thailand and in central Argentina . 
 Migration of barn swallows between Britain and South Africa was first established on 23 December 1912 when a bird that had been ringed by James Masefield at a nest in Staffordshire , was found in Natal . As would be expected for a long @-@ distance migrant , this bird has occurred as a vagrant to such distant areas as Hawaii , Bermuda , Greenland , Tristan da Cunha and the Falkland Islands . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The barn swallow is similar in its habits to other aerial insectivores , including other swallow species and the unrelated swifts . It is not a particularly fast flier , with a speed estimated at about 11 m / s , up to 20 m / s and a wing beat rate of approximately 5 , up to 7 – 9 times each second , but it has the manoeuvrability necessary to feed on flying insects while airborne . It is often seen flying relatively low in open or semi @-@ open areas . 
 The barn swallow typically feeds 7 – 8 m ( 23 – 26 ft ) above shallow water or the ground , often following animals , humans or farm machinery to catch disturbed insects , but it will occasionally pick prey items from the water surface , walls and plants . In the breeding areas , large flies make up around 70 % of the diet , with aphids also a significant component . However , in Europe , the barn swallow consumes fewer aphids than the house or sand martins . On the wintering grounds , Hymenoptera , especially flying ants , are important food items . When egg @-@ laying , barn swallows hunt in pairs , but will form often large flocks otherwise . 
 Isotope studies have shown that wintering populations may utilise different feeding habitats , with British breeders feeding mostly over grassland , whereas Swiss birds utilised woodland more . Another study showed that a single population breeding in Denmark actually wintered in two separate and different areas . 
 The barn swallow drinks by skimming low over lakes or rivers and scooping up water with its open mouth . This bird bathes in a similar fashion , dipping into the water for an instant while in flight . 
 Swallows gather in communal roosts after breeding , sometimes thousands strong . Reed beds are regularly favoured , with the birds swirling en masse before swooping low over the reeds . Reed beds are an important source of food prior to and whilst on migration ; although the barn swallow is a diurnal migrant that can feed on the wing whilst it travels low over ground or water , the reed beds enable fat deposits to be established or replenished . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The male barn swallow returns to the breeding grounds before the females and selects a nest site , which is then advertised to females with a circling flight and song . The breeding success of the male is related to the length of the tail streamers , with longer streamers being more attractive to the female . Males with longer tail feathers are generally longer @-@ lived and more disease resistant , females thus gaining an indirect fitness benefit from this form of selection , since longer tail feathers indicate a genetically stronger individual which will produce offspring with enhanced vitality . Males in northern Europe have longer tails than those further south ; whereas in Spain the male 's tail streamers are only 5 % longer than the female 's , in Finland the difference is 20 % . In Denmark , the average male tail length increased by 9 % between 1984 and 2004 , but it is possible that climatic changes may lead in the future to shorter tails if summers become hot and dry . 
 Males with long streamers also have larger white tail spots , and since feather @-@ eating bird lice prefer white feathers , large white tail spots without parasite damage again demonstrate breeding quality ; there is a positive association between spot size and the number of offspring produced each season . 
 Both sexes defend the nest , but the male is particularly aggressive and territorial . Once established , pairs stay together to breed for life , but extra @-@ pair copulation is common , making this species genetically polygamous , despite being socially monogamous . Males guard females actively to avoid being cuckolded . Males may use deceptive alarm calls to disrupt <unk> copulation attempts toward their mates . 
 As its name implies , the barn swallow typically nests inside accessible buildings such as barns and stables , or under bridges and wharves . The neat cup @-@ shaped nest is placed on a beam or against a suitable vertical projection . It is constructed by both sexes , although more often by the female , with mud pellets collected in their beaks and lined with grasses , feathers , algae or other soft materials . Barn swallows may nest colonially where sufficient high @-@ quality nest sites are available , and within a colony , each pair defends a territory around the nest which , for the European subspecies , is 4 to 8 m2 ( 43 to 86 sq ft ) in size . Colony size tends to be larger in North America . 
 In North America at least , barn swallows frequently engage in a mutualist relationship with ospreys . Barn swallows will build their nest below an osprey nest , receiving protection from other birds of prey that are repelled by the exclusively fish @-@ eating ospreys . The ospreys are alerted to the presence of these predators by the alarm calls of the swallows . 
 Before man @-@ made sites became common , the barn swallow nested on cliff faces or in caves , but this is now rare . The female lays two to seven , but typically four or five , reddish @-@ spotted white eggs . The eggs are 20 mm × 14 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in × 0 @.@ 55 in ) in size , and weigh 1 @.@ 9 g ( 0 @.@ 067 oz ) , of which 5 % is shell . In Europe , the female does almost all the incubation , but in North America the male may incubate up to 25 % of the time . The incubation period is normally 14 – 19 days , with another 18 – 23 days before the altricial chicks fledge . The fledged young stay with , and are fed by , the parents for about a week after leaving the nest . Occasionally , first @-@ year birds from the first brood will assist in feeding the second brood . 
 The barn swallow will mob intruders such as cats or accipiters that venture too close to their nest , often flying very close to the threat . Adult barn swallows have few predators , but some are taken by accipiters , falcons , and owls . Brood parasitism by cowbirds in North America or cuckoos in Eurasia is rare . 
 There are normally two broods , with the original nest being reused for the second brood and being repaired and reused in subsequent years . Hatching success is 90 % and the fledging survival rate is 70 – 90 % . Average mortality is 70 – 80 % in the first year and 40 – 70 % for the adult . Although the record age is more than 11 years , most survive less than four years . Barn swallow nestlings have prominent red gapes , a feature shown to induce feeding by parent birds . An experiment in manipulating brood size and immune system showed the vividness of the gape was positively correlated with T @-@ cell – mediated <unk> , and that larger brood size and injection with an antigen led to a less vivid gape . 
 The barn swallow has been recorded as hybridising with the cliff swallow ( Petrochelidon <unk> ) and the cave swallow ( P. fulva ) in North America , and the house martin ( Delichon urbicum ) in Eurasia , the cross with the latter being one of the most common passerine hybrids . 
 = = Parasites and predators = = 
 Barn swallows ( and other small passerines ) often have characteristic feather holes on their wing and tail feathers . These holes were suggested as being caused by avian lice such as <unk> malleus and <unk> rustica , although other studies suggest that they are mainly caused by species of Brueelia . Several other species of lice have been described from barn swallow hosts , including Brueelia domestica and Philopterus <unk> . In Texas , the swallow bug ( Oeciacus vicarius ) , which is common on species such as the cliff swallow , is also known to infest barn swallows . 
 Predatory bats such as the greater false vampire bat are known to prey on barn swallows . Swallows at their communal roosts attract predators and several falcon species make use of these opportunities . Falcon species confirmed as predators include the peregrine falcon and the African hobby . 
 = = Status = = 
 The barn swallow has an enormous range , with an estimated global extent of 51 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 km2 ( 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and a population of 190 million individuals . The species is evaluated as least concern on the 2007 IUCN Red List , and has no special status under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , which regulates international trade in specimens of wild animals and plants . 
 This is a species that has greatly benefited historically from forest clearance , which has created the open habitats it prefers , and from human habitation , which have given it an abundance of safe man @-@ made nest sites . There have been local declines due to the use of DDT in Israel in the 1950s , competition for nest sites with house sparrows in the US in the 19th century , and an ongoing gradual decline in numbers in parts of Europe and Asia due to agricultural intensification , reducing the availability of insect food . However , there has been an increase in the population in North America during the 20th century with the greater availability of nesting sites and subsequent range expansion , including the colonisation of northern Alberta . 
 A specific threat to wintering birds from the European populations is the transformation by the South African government of a light aircraft runway near Durban into an international airport for the 2010 FIFA World Cup . The roughly 250 m ( 270 yd ) square Mount Moreland reed bed is a night roost for more than three million barn swallows , which represent 1 % of the global population and 8 % of the European breeding population . The reed bed lies on the flight path of aircraft using the proposed La Mercy airport , and there were fears that it would be cleared because the birds could threaten aircraft safety . However , following detailed evaluation , advanced radar technology will be installed to enable planes using the airport to be warned of bird movements and , if necessary , take appropriate measures to avoid the flocks . 
 Climate change may affect the barn swallow ; drought causes weight loss and slow feather regrowth , and the expansion of the Sahara will make it a more formidable obstacle for migrating European birds . Hot dry summers will reduce the availability of insect food for chicks . Conversely , warmer springs may lengthen the breeding season and result in more chicks , and the opportunity to use nest sites outside buildings in the north of the range might also lead to more offspring . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The barn swallow is an attractive bird that feeds on flying insects and has therefore been tolerated by humans when it shares their buildings for nesting . As one of the earlier migrants , this conspicuous species is also seen as an early sign of summer 's approach . 
 In the Old World , the barn swallow appears to have used man @-@ made structures and bridges since time immemorial . An early reference is in Virgil 's Georgics ( 29 BC ) , " Ante garrula quam <unk> <unk> <unk> hirundo " ( Before the twittering swallow hangs its nest from the rafters ) . 
 Many cattle farmers believed that swallows spread Salmonella infections , however a study in Sweden showed no evidence of the birds being reservoirs of the bacteria . 
 = = = In literature = = = 
 Many literary references are based on the barn swallow 's northward migration as a symbol of spring or summer . The proverb about the necessity for more than one piece of evidence goes back at least to Aristotle 's Nicomachean Ethics : " For as one swallow or one day does not make a spring , so one day or a short time does not make a fortunate or happy man . " 
 The barn swallow symbolizes the coming of spring and thus love in the <unk> Veneris , a late Latin poem . In " The Waste Land " , T. S. Eliot quoted the line " Quando <unk> uti <unk> [ ut <unk> <unk> ] ? " ( " When will I be like the swallow , so that I can stop being silent ? " ) This refers to a version of the myth of Philomela in which she turns into a nightingale and her sister Procne into a swallow ; in less familiar versions , the two species are reversed . On the other hand , an image of the assembly of swallows for their southward migration concludes John Keats 's ode " To Autumn " . 
 The swallow is also notably cited in several of William Shakespeare 's plays for the swiftness of its flight ; for example : " True hope is swift , and flies with swallow 's wings " from Act 5 of Richard III , and " I have horse will follow where the game Makes way , and run like swallows o 'er the plain . " from the second act of Titus Andronicus . Shakespeare also references the annual migration of the species poetically in The Winter 's Tale , Act 4 : " Daffodils , That come before the swallow dares , and take The winds of March with beauty " . 
 = = = In culture = = = 
