 Gilbert White studied the barn swallow in detail in his pioneering work The Natural History of Selborne , but even this careful observer was uncertain whether it migrated or hibernated in winter . Elsewhere , its long journeys have been well observed , and a swallow tattoo is popular amongst nautical men as a symbol of a safe return ; the tradition was that a mariner had a tattoo of this fellow wanderer after sailing 5 @,@ 000 nmi ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) . A second swallow would be added after 10 @,@ 000 nmi ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at sea . In the past , the tolerance for this beneficial insectivore was reinforced by superstitions regarding damage to the barn swallow 's nest . Such an act might lead to cows giving bloody milk , or no milk at all , or to hens ceasing to lay . This may be a factor in the longevity of swallows ' nests . Survival , with suitable annual refurbishment , for 10 – 15 years is regular , and one nest was reported to have been occupied for 48 years . 
 It is depicted as the Martlet , <unk> or Merlot in heraldry , where it represents younger sons who have no lands . It is also represented as lacking feet as this was a common belief at the time . As a result of a campaign by ornithologists , the barn swallow has been the national bird of Estonia since 23 June 1960 . 
 = Denbies = 
 Denbies is a large estate to the northwest of Dorking in Surrey , England . A farmhouse and surrounding land originally owned by John Denby was purchased in 1734 by Jonathan Tyers , the proprietor of Vauxhall Gardens in London , and converted into a weekend retreat . The house he built appears to have been of little architectural significance , but the Gothic garden he developed in the grounds on the theme of death achieved some notoriety , despite being short @-@ lived . The estate was bought by Lord King of Ockham following Tyers ' death in 1767 , and the macabre artefacts he had installed , including two stone coffins topped by human skulls , were removed . 
 Joseph Denison , a wealthy banker , purchased the estate in about 1787 , and it remained in the Denison family until 1849 , when it passed to Thomas Cubitt , a master builder . At the time , Cubitt was working on Osborne House for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert , and the mansion he designed to replace the old one was a more modest version of Osborne . It was still a substantial building though , in the Italianate style , with almost 100 rooms on three storeys . 
 The payment of death duties and the difficulty of maintaining a large estate during the Second World War forced the Cubitt family to begin selling packets of land . Cubitt 's mansion was abandoned until its demolition in 1953 , by which time the family was living in a Regency @-@ style house converted from the housing that had been provided for the garden and stable staff in more affluent times . 
 What remained of the estate – about 635 acres ( 2 @.@ 57 km2 ) – was put on the market in 1984 and bought by <unk> , a water @-@ treatment company . Two years later the company chairman Alan White established Denbies Wine Estate , using 268 acres ( 1 @.@ 08 km2 ) on a south @-@ facing piece of land to plant vines . 
 = = History = = 
 A farmhouse originally owned by John Denby in the mid @-@ 16th century , after whom the estate is named , stood at the heart of Denbies . The lands were sold by William Wakefield ( or <unk> ) to Jonathan Tyers in 1734 , to be developed as a weekend retreat . Tyers was the owner of London 's Vauxhall Gardens – known at that time as New Spring Gardens – and was responsible for developing that venue into a " fashionable place of evening entertainment " . A simple two @-@ storey house in the Georgian style was built by converting some of the old farm buildings . Set on top of a hillside about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) northwest of Dorking , the house had views of the Surrey landscape and backed onto Ranmore Common . Tyers installed a well beside the house ; a note in The Gentleman 's Magazine of 1781 gives the well 's measurements , recorded on 4 October 1764 , as being six feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in diameter and reaching a depth of four hundred and thirty @-@ eight feet ( 134 m ) . On that day it contained water to a depth of twenty @-@ two feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) supplied from a spring . The front of the house had a pediment in the central wing decorated with a coat of arms ; the rooms were not large but were conveniently situated . According to historian Brian Allen the house was not architecturally significant and scant information is available about it ; the garden established by Tyers , however , gained notoriety . 
 = = The Valley of the Shadow of Death = = 
 In contrast to the cheerful , brightly lit atmosphere of Vauxhall , the garden Tyers developed at Denbies was of a more Gothic nature . Its theme was " memento mori ( or ' reminders of death ' ) " , and the development was given the name of " The Valley of the Shadow of Death " . Tyers continued to live in his house in the grounds of Vauxhall after purchasing Denbies , visiting the latter only on Sundays , which has been suggested may go some way towards explaining the garden 's gloomy nature . David Coke and Alan Borg , authors of Vauxhall Gardens : A History ( 2012 ) , have alternatively suggested that the mood of the garden may have been symptomatic of " some sort of psychological imbalance " within Tyers , perhaps even " a form of bipolar disorder " . The garden 's main feature was a wooded area of about eight acres ( 3 @.@ 2 ha ) , Il <unk> , which was criss @-@ crossed by a labyrinthine network of paths leading down to a small tributary of the River Mole . 
 Just outside the entrance to the wood was a small hermitage known as The Temple of Death . It had a thatched roof and internal enclosures formed by fake stonework panels , each covered in verses reminding the reader of " the vanity , the shortness and insufficiency of human pleasures " . To the right @-@ hand side of the temple entrance , hidden out of sight , was a clock that chimed every minute , which in the words of William Bowyer , was " admonishing us that Time is fleeting , and even the least portion of it to be employed in reflections on Eternity " ; it was faced on the opposite side by a large white raven with a label in its mouth conveying the same message . Chained to a sloping desk in the centre of the temple was a copy of Edward Young 's poem Night @-@ Thoughts and Robert Blair 's The Grave , bound in black leather . 
 At the end of the temple farthest from the door was a substantial monument to Robert Petre , a renowned 18th @-@ century horticulturist . Executed in stucco and probably crafted by Roubiliac , it depicted an angel blowing the last trump , causing a stone pyramid to crumble and revealing the corpse within to be rising from the dead . 
 Visitors were met at the entrance to the wood by the Latin inscription <unk> <unk> , <unk> , which translates as " away all you who are unhallowed " , a quotation from the sixth book of Virgil 's Aeneid . The iron entrance gate was mounted between two upended stone coffins supporting the portico , each one topped by a human skull , one male one female . Each coffin was inscribed with a poem , addressed to the male and female visitor respectively . One proclaimed that " Men , at their best state , are altogether vanity " , while the other reminded women that " beauty is vain " . The author of the poems is unknown , but may have been <unk> Jenyns , although topographer Edward <unk> was not entirely convinced this was correct . 
 A large alcove close by in the garden , entered through a portal of grey Sussex marble , formed an amphitheatre that contained an effigy representing Truth crushing a mask , again probably the work of Roubiliac . It drew the visitor 's attention towards two life @-@ sized pictures by Francis Hayman , depicting a Christian and an Unbeliever as they died , set into compartments in the wall . 
 Following Tyers ' death in 1767 the estate was sold to Lord King of Ockham . The macabre artefacts were removed and the grounds extensively altered . 
 = = Subsequent history = = 
 Soon after Lord King 's death , in 1781 , his son sold the estate to James White . It remained in White 's ownership for six years until around 1787 , when it was purchased by Joseph Denison , a wealthy banker . 
 = = = Denison family ownership = = = 
 Denison was brought up in West Yorkshire . His parents were of low rank and had little means , and it is unclear how he made his fortune . It seems that he moved to London , where he fell in with the Heywood family of bankers , later becoming a partner in their company . Richard <unk> Taylor described the immense wealth Denison accumulated as being gained through " unabated industry and the most rigid frugality " . Five years after purchasing Denbies , the <unk> estate , near Scarborough , Yorkshire , was added to his portfolio after he acquired it from the Duke of Leeds . Denison had a son , William Joseph , and two daughters , Elizabeth and Anna Maria , with his second wife . By the time of the Regency era the family were the personification of prosperity and social status . Denison senior died in 1806 and the estate and all other properties were inherited by his son , who added to the acreage of the estate by purchasing additional land from the Earl of Verulam and the Duke of Norfolk . A new driveway was installed , entering from the direction of <unk> via some woodland , replacing the steep roadway that came from Dorking . Writing in 1830 , topographer Thomas Allen described the expansive well @-@ designed gardens as being under the direction of a " scientific and experienced horticulturist " . The lawns at the front of the mansion featured sprinklings of evergreens and shrubs together with formal low @-@ level flower beds . Local people were permitted access to the estate grounds . 
 Like his father , Denison junior was a banker and became a senior partner in his father 's banking company , Denison , Heywood , and Kennard , of Lombard Street , London . He continued to add to the wealth inherited from his father , and when he died a bachelor on 2 August 1849 he was probably one of the ten richest British businessmen of his era . He left his fortune , estimated at £ 2 @.@ 3 million , to his nephew Albert , on condition that he changed his surname from Conyngham to Denison . Albert was elevated to Baron <unk> on 4 March 1850 , and later that year he sold the 3 @,@ 900 @-@ acre ( 16 km2 ) estate at Denbies to the master builder , Thomas Cubitt . 
 = = = Cubitt family ownership = = = 
 Cubitt was originally a carpenter and , like Denison senior , had acquired his wealth through his own business acumen , building up a successful company and business empire . At the time he purchased Denbies , Cubitt was nearing completion of the work on Osborne House for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert on the Isle of Wight . Cubitt wanted a mansion of his own to emulate that of the neighbouring Georgian country house of <unk> owned by the affluent Hope family of bankers and at that time in the possession of Henry Thomas Hope , a patron of the arts . For the practical purpose of continuing to reside in the existing house while building took place , the new mansion was constructed on a site slightly to the southwest of its predecessor , which was demolished once the new mansion was completed in 1854 . 
 = = = = Cubitt 's new mansion = = = = 
 Constructed to Cubitt 's own designs , the new mansion had a very similar style to that of Osborne House . Cubitt 's attention to detail was such that he even manufactured his own bricks at a brickworks he set up for the purpose , using lime extracted from the chalk quarries on the eastern edge of the estate . Almost one hundred rooms made up the Italianate structure 's three storeys , stretching across nine bays in a square formation . Cubitt contrived his own form of soundproofing by concealing seashells between levels . The flat roof was edged with a parapet embellished with balustrades , and a matching decoration was incorporated round the first floor , both made from Portland stone . Gibbs surrounds were used on the windows on the ground floor whereas triangular pediments featured on the windows included on the three central canted bays of the first floor . Segmented pediments adorned all the remaining windows . The water supply was provided by the well installed by Tyers , which was close to the southeast corner of the new mansion , via a corridor that spanned the entire outside of the mansion . The entrance had an attached porte @-@ cochère enabling visitors to gain undercover access to the outer hall directly from their transport . 
 = = = = Interior = = = = 
 Internally , the ground floor of the west wing housed the dining room , service areas and led through to the kitchen and bakehouse . The service area was fitted with a mezzanine floor to provide sleeping facilities for male servants ; the sleeping quarters for female servants were on the top floor of the mansion to keep the two sexes a good distance away from each other . On the same level , the east wing had a study with ante @-@ room set in the northwest corner , a boudoir , two drawing rooms and a billiard room . An expansive library , divided into sections by pillars , was between the boudoir and study , beside the large bay window . The first floor , accessed via the main staircase positioned within the entrance hall , had all the family bedrooms , and featured balconies . Hip baths were carried to the bedrooms each evening as no bathrooms were incorporated . Cubitt had furniture workshops in London where the majority of the mansion 's furnishings and fittings were crafted from mahogany . Nurseries were on the top floor beside the female servant accommodation . Around thirty rooms made up the basement , among them a smoking room where editions of Punch and The Illustrated London News were supplied as reading material . The remaining rooms on the basement level were workshops , wine cellars and individual parlours for the butler , housekeeper and other principal servants , together with general storerooms . 
 = = = = Grounds = = = = 
 Adjoining the mansion , accessed through a conservatory so there was no need to go outside in inclement weather , an expansive collection of glasshouses and conservatories stretched for 1 @,@ 230 feet ( 370 m ) . These were maintained by thirteen staff under the jurisdiction of a head gardener . The kitchen garden occupied about two acres ( 0 @.@ 81 ha ) . 
 Prince Albert visited the estate in July 1851 , and planted two trees in front of the terrace to commemorate his visit . There was speculation that the mansion was to be used as a residence for Prince Albert 's eldest son and newspapers carried reports that the commemorative trees were possibly " intended to grow up side by side with England 's future monarch " ; Cubitt strongly denied the suggestion , and on 14 April 1855 he had a rejection of the rumour included in The Builder . The grounds had been well maintained by the <unk> , but Cubitt further enhanced and overhauled them ; large plantations of hardwoods and conifers were added , and general improvements and development of the estate and farm were undertaken . Specimens of rare plants and shrubs were added , sourced through William Hooker , the director of Kew Gardens , who was a friend of Cubitt 's . William Nesfield was commissioned to design the gardens . 
 Access routes to the estate were also added to and enhanced ; there were three driveways giving approaches from the North Downs , Dorking and from the railway at the west . Cubitt was responsible for building a siding on the north side of Dorking Town railway station , which was initially used for trains delivering building materials required for the mansion 's construction . 
 = = = = Cubitt 's death and legacy = = = = 
 Following Cubitt 's death at Denbies on 20 December 1855 , his assets were valued at more than £ 1 million . The estate passed to Cubitt 's eldest son , George , who continued the development and expansion of the property and local area . George had lived at Denbies since his father purchased it , and it remained his main residence until 1905 after the death of his wife , Laura , whom he had married in June 1853 . He was a politician , first elected as a member of parliament in 1860 , and was elevated to a peerage in 1892 , becoming the first Lord Ashcombe . The couple had eight children , three sons and five daughters ; two of the boys died as babies , only the youngest son , Henry , survived to inherit the estate after his father 's death . 
 During a period of expansion and prosperity under the ownership of Ashcombe a further 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 km2 ) of land were secured , and gradually other acquisitions were made ; the estate then stretched as far as <unk> Court , near Bramley and <unk> . As a landlord and employer – by that time he had about 400 workers on the estate – he was a benevolent master and ensured he fulfilled his obligations . He commissioned Sir George Gilbert Scott , a friend and regular guest at Denbies , to design an estate church on Ranmore Common . Completed in 1859 , it was named after St Barnabas . Ashcombe also ensured that the basic medical needs of his workers were attended to , by having a cottage built to serve as a dispensary and a place for physicians from the nearby towns to hold twice @-@ weekly surgeries . The cottage was also the venue for a domestic training school where the daughters of his workers received a year of education in the rudiments of domestic service before either being employed in his household or those of other country houses . 
 = = Decline and dispersal = = 
 Lord Ashcombe 's son , Henry , married Maud , whose father was Colonel Archibald <unk> Calvert , in 1890 . The couple lived on the estate near Bramley and had six sons . Their three eldest sons were killed in the First World War while on active service . Like his father , Henry followed a political career , becoming Lord Lieutenant of Surrey in 1905 ; that year Henry moved to the mansion house after his father decamped to London following the death of Henry 's mother . He inherited the title and extensive estate after the death of his father in 1917 . The payment of death duties and the upkeep of large estates during the war resulted in large parts of the estate being auctioned on 19 September 1921 . A total of £ 30 @,@ 400 was raised by the sale of sixty @-@ nine lots – tallying around 232 acres ( 0 @.@ 94 km2 ) – of land and property on the periphery of the estate just south of the railway line . Further land situated closer to Dorking town centre was sold for development in the 1930s . The break up of the estate continued after Henry 's death on 27 October 1947 when it was inherited by his fourth son Roland , who became the third Lord Ashcombe . 
 Roland was born on 26 January 1899 and initially followed a career in the army . He married Sonia Rosemary Keppel on 16 November 1920 and they had three children : two sons , Henry and Jeremy ( 1927 – 1958 ) ; and a daughter , Rosalind . Death duties and the Second World War impacted greatly on the estate : staffing was a problem , and maintenance and general repair costs were unsustainable . The Home Guard requisitioned a section of the mansion as its headquarters and based a training school there . Hugh Pollock , husband of the author Enid Blyton , re @-@ ignited his adulterous affair with Ida Crowe after arranging work there for her as a civilian secretary . Roland transformed the buildings that had previously been used as housing for the garden and stable staff into a Regency @-@ style house . <unk> and doors were stripped from the old mansion to be incorporated in the new house , leaving just the basic structure of Cubitt 's original mansion , which had been empty since 1947 . Furniture was disposed of in a clearance sale at Dorking in mid @-@ July 1952 . Cubitt 's mansion was within a designated preservation area , causing the local council to refuse any suggestions that were put forward for the old mansion to be used for commercial purposes . Contractors were brought in to demolish the mansion in 1953 ; the company may have encountered financial problems , as the basement was not fully destroyed and was left filled with rubble from the higher levels . 
 = = = Transfer to National Trust and sale = = = 
 Death duties were still outstanding , but in 1959 the Treasury accepted about 1 @,@ 128 acres ( 4 @.@ 56 km2 ) of land in lieu of payment , which it passed on to the National Trust . At the end of 1963 an additional 245 acres ( 0 @.@ 99 km2 ) from Denbies hillside was secured by the Trust via the same route . The Trust also received 800 acres ( 3 @.@ 2 km2 ) directly from Lord Ashcombe in 1958 after the mansion was demolished . There had been thirty cottages on the estate in its heyday , but a policy of selling them began with a cottage given to the Trust in 1959 . Roland died on 28 October 1962 and the break up and sale of the estate continued under his son Henry , who succeeded him ; by this time what remained of the estate amounted to the Regency @-@ style house with land at the eastern end of Ranmore Common , a handful of estate cottages , an adjoining farm – known as Bradley Farm – and some estate outbuildings . 
 Henry 's third marriage was to Elizabeth , the widow of his friend Mark Dent @-@ Brocklehurst , in 1979 ; she had inherited Sudeley Castle , and the couple made it their family home . Five years later the last of the Denbies estate was offered for sale , bringing to an end more than a century of ownership by the Cubitt family . 
 = = Recent times = = 
 When what remained of the estate was marketed in May 1984 the selling agents , <unk> , described it as being about 635 acres ( 2 @.@ 57 km2 ) . This figure included 312 acres ( 126 ha ) attached to Bradley Farm together with the farmhouse , four cottages and some farm buildings . Denbies House – as the Regency @-@ style house conversion was named – had a lodge , a flat and two cottages , 45 acres ( 0 @.@ 18 km2 ) of parkland , arable land covering 32 acres ( 0 @.@ 13 km2 ) and 239 acres ( 0 @.@ 97 km2 ) devoted to sporting and amenity woodland . The centrally heated , eight @-@ bedroomed mansion house featured six bathrooms and four reception rooms . There were also tennis courts , stables , garages and a heated swimming pool together with <unk> . <unk> , a water @-@ treatment company , purchased it during the 1980s . In 1986 the company chairman Alan White established Denbies Wine Estate , planting vines on 268 acres ( 1 @.@ 08 km2 ) of south @-@ facing land . 
 = Dragon Quest II = 
 Dragon Quest II : Luminaries of the Legendary Line , also titled Dragon Quest II : <unk> No Kamigami ( <unk> <unk> , Doragon Kuesuto Tsū <unk> No Kamigami , " Dragon Quest II : Gods of the Evil Spirits " ) in Japan and Dragon Warrior II in earlier North American releases , is a role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) developed by Chunsoft and published by Enix ( later merging with Square to become Square Enix ) in 1987 for the Family Computer ( or Famicom ) as a part of the Dragon Quest series . Enix 's U.S. subsidiary published the American version of Dragon Quest II for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( or NES ) in 1990 . Dragon Quest II is set one hundred years after the events of the first game . 
 The game 's story centers on the prince of Midenhall , who is ordered to stop an evil wizard named Hargon after Hargon destroys Moonbrooke Castle . On his adventure , he is accompanied by his two cousins , the prince of Cannock and the princess of Moonbrooke . Dragon Quest II greatly expands on the series formula from the first game by having a larger party , more areas to explore , multiple heroes and enemies in a battle , and a sailing <unk> game 's successor , Dragon Quest III : And Into the Legend ... , follows the ancestor of the main characters , the legendary hero Erdrick ; and the three games are collectively called " Erdrick Saga Trilogy " . 
 Planning began a month before the original Dragon Quest was released . One major goal was the development of a more exciting combat system , which was inspired by similar multi @-@ character party systems such as the one found in Wizardry . The artwork that was used as the basis for the characters and monsters was painted by Akira Toriyama and then translated into pixel art . The game was hit with delays due to game balance , which were only fully corrected in the early sections of the game . This , combined with a staff that included students not familiar with the coding and debugging process , pushed back the release by a month . The developers also had many ideas that had to be discarded due to the technical limitations of the Famicom system , though some were later incorporated into subsequent remakes and the game 's sequel , Dragon Quest III . 
 Dragon Quest II was successful in Japan ; the original Famicom version shipped 2 @.@ 4 million copies . Later , the game was remade for the Super Famicom and the Game Boy Color and combined with the original Dragon Quest game in a release entitled Dragon Quest I & II . A version of the game for Android and iOS was released in Japan on June 26 , 2014 and worldwide on October 9 , 2014 , as Dragon Quest II : Luminaries of the Legendary Line . The game was praised for improving on almost all aspects of the original , including having better graphics , having a larger world to explore , and more characters to participate in a more dynamic combat system . It was also known as one of the most difficult Dragon Quest games , especially late game , and retained that reputation despite adjustments made when it was ported to other platforms . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Dragon Quest II is a role @-@ playing video game . It allows the player to control more than one character , each of whom has their own characteristics , and it is the first game in the Dragon Quest series to do so . The game introduced a party system where , instead of beginning the game with an entire party as was common in previous computer RPGs , the player begins the game with only one character and gradually recruits more party members during the course of the game . The player controls his or her characters as they move in the game world . They can search treasure chests , talk and trade with villagers , equip themselves with weapons and armor , and cast spells . 
 While wandering fields , towers , caves , seas , and dungeons , the player randomly encounters monsters , after which the game shifts to battle mode . The game 's battle mode introduces groups of monsters , which is an upgrade from the one @-@ on @-@ one battles of Dragon Quest . In the battle mode , the player gives orders to the characters on how to fight the monsters . Once the player defeats all of the monsters , the characters gain experience points and gold . The experience points raise the characters ' experience levels . This improves the characters ' attributes , and they may also learn new spells . 
 To win , the player must fight monsters to improve the characters ' experience levels and get gold to buy better weapons and armor . Eventually , the player 's characters become strong enough to make it to the next town or dungeon . This repeats until the player reaches the final boss and defeats him . However , the gameplay is not necessarily linear , especially after the player gets the boat . Exploration is a key component of the game . The game offers a few spots to save the game . In most of the towns , talking to a king or minister saves the game . In the American version , which incorporated a battery for saved games rather than the password system of the original , talking to the king also allows for the deletion and moving of saved games . 
 Dragon Quest II is noted for greatly expanding upon the gameplay of the previous game , Dragon Quest . The game is the first in the series to feature multiple heroes and enemies in a battle , as well as a sailing ship . It also allowed the player to land the ship anywhere , making it possible to explore the entire game world in an open @-@ ended manner . It included other new gameplay features such as weapons which cast spells when used in battles . Compared with its predecessor , Dragon Warrior II offers a wider array of spells and items and a much larger world . The game also expanded the inventory management system of its predecessor by giving each character an individual inventory that holds up to eight items , placing a greater emphasis on conservative item management between the characters . Dragon Quest II : Luminaries of the Legendary Line was also the first Dragon Quest game to include a game of chance ( played with Lottery Tickets that the player finds ) , and was also the first Dragon Quest game to use multiple key types and to include travel doors ( warp gates ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dragon Quest II is set one hundred years after Dragon Quest . The story begins with an attack upon Moonbrooke Castle by the wizard Hargon , who seeks to summon the demon Malroth to destroy the world . A wounded soldier escaped the battle and fled to the kingdom of Midenhall , where he informs the king of the attack before he dies . The king then commands his son , who is a descendant of Erdrick ( known as Loto in Japanese translations and later localizations ) , to defeat Hargon . 
 The Prince begins his quest alone , but is later joined by two cousins : the Prince of Cannock and the Princess of Moonbrooke . After finding the Prince of Cannock , who began a similar journey at the same time as the Prince of Midenhall , they save the Princess of Moonbrooke from Hargon 's assault on Moonbrooke Castle , which is reduced to ruins . As the trio quest to find and defeat Hargon , they secure a ship that allows them to travel across oceans to reach new continents , including Alefgard , which is where Dragon Quest took place . There they meet the grandson of Dragonlord , the villain from the previous game , who gives the party valuable information . He tells them that by collecting the five crests hidden around the world , the party can create the Charm of Rubiss , allowing them to defeat Hargon and his illusions . After obtaining the Charm of Rubiss , the party travels to Hargon 's castle in the ice @-@ covered plateau of Rhone and confronts Hargon in his throne room . Hargon is defeated , but he offers himself to Malroth and the demon emerges to destroy the heroes . Together , the three heroes slay Malroth and return to Midenhall , where the Prince is named the new king . 
 = = Development = = 
 Like other main games in the Dragon Quest series , Yuji Horii wrote the story for Dragon Quest II , Akira Toriyama did the artwork , and Koichi Sugiyama composed the music . Co @-@ creator Koichi Nakamura , Chunsoft 's president , directed the game and did half of the programming . 
 Planning for Dragon Quest II began in April 1986 , a month before the release of the original Dragon Quest . With the system and memory map decided , they started development in early July . At the beginning of development , producer Yukinobu Chida asked director and programmer Koichi Nakamura for a definite release date , and he offhandedly set one . Then the development team was divided into two groups , with one designing the story , as well as the monsters , and one doing the programming . The initial deadline was set for early November , but the game ultimately suffered a small delay . The development team had finished programming almost everything by the time of the initial release and believed the game could be released by the end of that year . In the Japanese magazine Weekly Shōnen Jump , published on November 11 , 1986 , it was announced that the game would be released in late December . However , the developers found that the game was too difficult , so it was delayed for month to adjust the balance . They had to finish the final version in mid @-@ December , which they did , and then rushed to deliver to Nintendo to make the physical game cartridges . The game was released on January 26 , 1987 . 
 The developers believed that Dragon Quest 's one @-@ vs @-@ one combat system was " tedious " and too simple , and that the leveling system was " boring " , so they decided to have Dragon Quest II use a party system with players controlling multiple characters . In another game from the time entitled Wizardry , players can control a party of up to six characters directly ; Nakamura saw this , liked the idea , and wanted to do something similar . Due to technical restrictions , they decided to use only three characters ; the Famicom video game system supports the display of up to eight sprites side by side , and one game character used two units in a direction , so it was possible for up to three characters to talk with a non @-@ playable character ( NPC ) . Yuji Horii believed many players would play Dragon Quest II without first playing Dragon Quest , and thus had players search for the other party members . During development , the staff discussed the idea of deprecating the " stair " command of the predecessor several times . Nakamura has stated that the Cave of Rhone found in the game is inspired by a classic trick to exit mazes , that of always moving forward while sticking to the right hand side wall to avoid traps . 
 In the story group , monsters were the first thing designed . The monsters ' names , skills , and personalities were decided first , after which they were drawn by artist Akira Toriyama . Yuji Horii allowed Toriyama to paint full drawings rather than directly create the pixel art that would be shown in the game . The artwork was then converted into computer graphics ; as Toriyama was unfamiliar with computer graphics technology , other staff took charge of this . Many new monsters needed to be designed to make the game feel real , and the process was laborious for Toriyama . But he has also said that , compared to the manga comics he was used to , he enjoyed painting more , so on balance the experience was positive . Yuji Horii stated that for his process , like other manga and film creators , he quickly outlines the story 's plot in his mind . With regard to map design , a blank map was used to create the physical shape of the place , like a castle , cave , or tower , and then the key elements and story were created together afterwards . The scenarios were mainly written by his friend Hiroshi <unk> . Compared with write lines in writing paper and design map in graph paper , staff wrote both two in 5 mm graph papers of A4 , as they felt that 's easy for organization ; their manuscript thickness is 15 cm . 
 Compared with its predecessor , the game was more advanced in nearly all technological aspects . Koichi Nakamura programmed with several students , but since it was his first time working with a team , he didn 't know how to delegate work or communicate his goals . Since the students were unfamiliar with the coding process , they did not know how to debug or to keep track of whose code it came from , so Nakamura had to do it himself , which caused delays . In programming , they did the maps first . Then they worked on characters , including numbered characters in maps for assigned lines , and designed the NPC 's moving route . The next step was programming the items , while the final step was setting the monsters data and converting Toriyama 's artwork . This work was completed by the end of October . 
 Due to the aforementioned balance issues , the game was initially very difficult , especially in the later stages . Nakamura had written a program that simulated every single combat that he used to adjust the games setting for character leveling and the strength of enemies players would encounter . This program failed to account for larger monster groups , however , which fell outside the model and caused the game to be very difficult . Further more , enemies leveling and weapons power were designed by area , but Koichi Nakamura didn 't think over the boat , so if player get the boat to some land might be quickly killed . The developers realized there was a balance problem and did some modifications , such as limiting the number of enemies in Midenhall to groups of three , and moving the Cannock Castle closer to Midenhall Castle . 
 Due to a lack of cartridge space , many ideas were abandoned during development , such as an alternate ending that the <unk> Prince is killed by the Prince of Cannock 's sister if he dies in the final battle . Some elements were later used in remakes or sequels : a subplot about the Prince of Cannock being cursed was added to the Super Famicom remake and later remakes . Also , the Promontory of Olivia in Dragon Quest III was initially an idea for Dragon Quest II . The game cartridge 's ROM capacity is 1 Mbit , but only about 10 bytes of free space remains in final products . 
 The North American release of the game as Dragon Warrior II was created by Enix themselves and published in 1990 . Unlike the original Japanese Famicom version , which used passwords for saving , the NES version used an internal battery backup instead to record the player 's progress . The storyline introduction in Moonbrooke is presented exclusively in Dragon Warrior II . In the Japanese original , the game starts right with the injured soldier from Moonbrooke entering Midenhall castle , seeking help from its king . The dialogue of the American localization often used ( intentionally ) archaic English vocabulary , among other differences from the Japanese version . Like Dragon Warrior , the American version of Dragon Warrior II was censored in some aspects ; for example , it used a ghost @-@ like sprite instead of the original defeated character 's coffin with cross sprite . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Koichi Sugiyama composed and directed the music for the game . The first album of Dragon Quest II , Suite Dragon Quest II ~ Gods of the Evil Spirits ~ , was released in February 1987 . It covers ten orchestra version soundtracks with a twenty @-@ five minute " original sound story " ; this suite was performed by the Tokyo Strings Ensemble . Some of the tracks are classical and some are jazz . On August 20 , 1987 , the first " Family Classic Concert " was held . In this concert , Dragon Quest and Dragon Quest II 's music was performed by the Tokyo Strings Ensemble . Later in October 1987 , the concert recording was released as symphonic suite CD under title Dragon Quest in Concert . Music of Dragon Quest II were also released as a piano CD , a Drama CD and several Symphonic Suite albums . Dragon Quest II 's musics were also collected in music compilations , like Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest Best Selection Vol.1 ~ Roto ~ ( 1997 ) , Dragon Quest Game Music Super Collection Vol . 1 – 3 ( 2001 – 2002 ) , Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest Complete CD @-@ Box ( 2003 ) and Symphonic Suite Dragon Quest Scene @-@ Separated I ~ IX ( 2011 ) . 
 " Only Lonely Boy " the background music in the game 's name and password input interface , is a single by Anna Makino . Since the original Dragon Quest opened with a pop song , Sugiyama decided to use this song make the games stylistically connected . This music is also used for Japan professional baseball team Chiba Lotte Marines ' fight song . The song that is played when wandering the fields of Dragon Quest , " Unknown World " , is also played when the Hero is in that area . The ending theme " My Road , My Journey " is also the ending song of related anime Dragon Quest : Dai 's Great Adventure . 
 = = = Remakes = = = 
 Dragon Quest II was ported to MSX computers in February 1988 , but the ported version had many issues like choppy scrolling , black @-@ surround characters titles , poor graphics , along with sluggish combat and menus . The MSX2 ported version was released in May 1988 in Japan . 
 On December 18 , 1993 , Dragon Quest II was remade and combined with Dragon Quest as part of Dragon Quest I & II for the Super Famicom , which used Dragon Quest V 's engine . Besides enhanced in graphics and sound , gameplay was also improved . The Super Famicom remake features an improved enemy targeting system : if an enemy is defeated before a character who was assigned to attack can perform its attack move , the character will attack another enemy rather than do nothing like in the Famicom version . And like its successors , players can find stat @-@ improving items from pots or dressers . The Super Famicom remake was only released in Japan . 
 In 1999 , Dragon Quest I & II was released for Game Boy Color ; the game is also compatible with Game Boy . A year later , it was localized in America as Dragon Warrior I & II . This remake is similar to the Super Famicom version , bit with 8 @-@ bit graphics . Compared with the NES version , it featured better graphics and was less difficult . The remake also provided a quick @-@ save function to allow players save and load game anywhere unless they reset the Game Boy . In the Game Boy Color localization , the main characters ' and towns ' names were retranslated to be similar to the original Japanese names : legendary hero " Erdrick " was retranslated as " Loto " , and the castle name " Midenhall " was re @-@ dubbed " <unk> " . The original translation had a lot of errors , and Enix changed the names to help fix that . 
 Dragon Quest II was remade for Japanese NTT DoCoMo brand cell phones in 2005 . The remakes size was four times bigger than the original Dragon Quest port , and since phone capacity was limited , the game was divided into two parts . The first part was pre @-@ installed in cell phones and the second part could be downloaded for free . The world map was provided by a pre @-@ installed PDF file . In 2006 Japanese mobile companies BREW and SoftBank also started selling the game on their mobile platforms . 
 Both the Famicom and Super Famicom versions of this game , along with Dragon Quest and Dragon Quest III , were re @-@ released under the Dragon Quest 25th Anniversary Collection compilation for the Wii in Japan on September 15 , 2011 . The Wii compilation featured interruptive save functions for each games . The compilation also included original copies of the strategy guides for the games , along with original artwork and material on the games ' development . 
 Square Enix announced the first eight Dragon Quest titles would be re @-@ released on Android and iOS in Japan . This Dragon Quest II was based on the previous cell phone version while optimized for smartphones and was released on June 26 , 2014 in Japan . An English version was released on October 9 , 2014 under the title Dragon Quest II : Luminaries of the Legendary Line . Square Enix <unk> this trademark in Japan in 2013 , and in United States in early 2014 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Several guide books were published : the first was published by Shueisha in February 1987 , the second by Tokuma Shoten in July 1987 , and the third by game publisher Enix in 1988 as an " official guide book " . 
 Similar to other early main games in the series , Dragon Quest II was novelized and adapted to game books . The Dragon Quest II Novel was written by Hideo Takayashiki and published in 1989 ; it was reprinted in 1991 and 2000 . The Dragon Quest II Game Book series was also published in 1989 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The Famicom version sold approximately 2 @.@ 4 million copies in Japan . Together , both the Super Famicom and Game Boy Color remakes shipped in excess of 1 @.@ 92 million copies worldwide . The Japan Mobile version was downloaded more than one million times . The game was included in a 2011 compilation called Dragon Quest Collection for the Wii , which sold 403 @,@ 953 copies . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Dragon Quest II received both critical and financial success in Japan . Readers of Family Computer Magazine gave it a score of 28 @.@ 02 out of 30 , and named it the best overall cartridge game of the year . In 2006 , readers of Famitsu magazine voted the game the 17th best video game of all time . 
 The game is generally known for fixing problems found in the first game , including improvements such as allowing parties of three characters , having a larger world , better graphics , and the ability to carry more items . Other noted improvements were keys that can be used multiple times and new strategic elements introduced because of larger parties and larger groups of enemies . The game 's music is often praised , despite its limited 8 @-@ bit capabilities . Considered a classic for the RPG genre , the game is regarded as praiseworthy . Japanese reviews highlighted the Famicom version 's difficulty , stemming from issues such as the many traps in the Cave of Rhone , and the final boss 's ability to cast a " <unk> " spell , and this has led to some critics calling the game " the most difficult Dragon Quest " . After Dragon Quest III released , director Koichi Nakamura said " In result , Dragon Quest II received favourable from everybody , but as me creator 's side , I feel that I did about only half what I wanted to do . " 
 Remakes of Dragon Quest II were also successful and well received . Famitsu awarded the Japanese Super Famicom remake a 35 / 40 . The Game Boy Color remake got a 30 / 40 from Famitsu , and the U.S. version , Dragon Warrior I & II , received fairly high marks , including an 8 @.@ 0 out of 10 from IGN , a 9 @.@ 6 out of 10 from GameSpot , and 8 out of 10 from Nintendo Power . It also received the RPGamer 's Game Boy Color Award of the Year for 2000 . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 The release of Dragon Quest II also promoted sales of the original Dragon Quest , and with the success of Dragon Quest II , the series became a Japanese cultural phenomenon . The sequel to Dragon Quest II , Dragon Quest III : And Into the Legend ... , was released in 1988 in Japan . It serves as a prequel to the first two games and follows the ancestor of the main characters , the legendary hero Erdrick ; the three games are collectively called " Erdrick Saga Trilogy " . Also with the success of Game Boy Color remake , Enix released a Game Boy Color Dragon Warrior III in 2001 , which was based on a previously unreleased Super Famicom update of the original Famicom Dragon Quest III . The world of Dragon Quest II was later used as the setting of Dragon Quest Monsters : Caravan Heart on the Game Boy Advance . 
 = HMS Pegasus ( 1917 ) = 
 HMS Pegasus was an aircraft carrier / seaplane carrier bought by the Royal Navy in 1917 during the First World War . She was laid down in 1914 by John Brown & Company of Clydebank , Scotland as SS Stockholm for the Great Eastern Railway Company , but construction was suspended by the start of the war . The ship was converted to operate a mix of wheeled aircraft from her forward flying @-@ off deck and floatplanes that were lowered into the water . Pegasus spent the last year of the war supporting the Grand Fleet in the North Sea , but saw no combat . She spent most of 1919 and 1920 supporting British intervention against the Bolsheviks in North Russia and the Black Sea . The ship remained with the Mediterranean Fleet until 1924 , but was placed in reserve in 1925 after a brief deployment to Singapore . Pegasus was sold for scrap in 1931 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship had an overall length of 332 feet 4 inches ( 101 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 43 feet ( 13 @.@ 1 m ) , and a draught of 15 feet 9 inches ( 4 @.@ 8 m ) at deep load . She displaced 3 @,@ 315 long tons ( 3 @,@ 368 t ) . Her two direct @-@ drive steam turbines , each driving a propeller shaft , were designed to produce a total of 9 @,@ 500 shaft horsepower ( 7 @,@ 100 kW ) and a speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . On sea trials in December 1914 , Pegasus made 9 @,@ 722 shp ( 7 @,@ 250 kW ) and reached 20 @.@ 8 knots ( 38 @.@ 5 km / h ; 23 @.@ 9 mph ) . The ship was converted from coal to fuel oil at the suggestion of her builders . She carried 350 long tons ( 360 t ) of oil which meant that she could steam for 1 @,@ 220 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 260 km ; 1 @,@ 400 mi ) at her maximum speed . Her crew numbered 258 , including 100 aviation personnel . 
 Pegasus 's main armament consisted of four 40 @-@ calibre , 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns . Two of these were mounted on the forecastle as low @-@ angle guns , but the other two were mounted aft as anti @-@ aircraft guns . They fired 12 @.@ 9 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 9 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 235 ft / s ( 681 m / s ) ; this gave a maximum range of 11 @,@ 750 yd ( 10 @,@ 740 m ) against surface targets and an anti @-@ aircraft range of 19 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 791 m ) . They had a rate of fire of 15 rounds per minute . 
 HMS Pegasus was fitted with a flying @-@ off deck forward , intended for aircraft with wheeled undercarriages , and a prominent hangar aft . Two electric cranes were fitted aft and a twin @-@ boom derrick forward to handle her aircraft . The smaller forward hangar was built under the ship 's bridge and the aircraft were raised to the flight deck overhead by one of the first lifts in the Royal Navy . The forward hangar could fit five single @-@ seat fighters and the rear hangar had a capacity of four floatplanes . The ship could lower them into the water while steaming at 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) and recover the floatplanes at 6 knots ( 11 km / h ; 6 @.@ 9 mph ) . When Pegasus commissioned in 1917 she was assigned four Short Type 184 torpedo bombers and four Beardmore W.B.III fighters . In late 1918 she carried four Sopwith Camel <unk> , one Type 184 and three Fairey Campania reconnaissance aircraft . In 1919 she began to operate various models of the Fairey III . 
 Pegasus carried 1 @,@ 300 imperial gallons ( 5 @,@ 900 l ; 1 @,@ 600 US gal ) of petrol for her aircraft . Her magazines had the capacity for eight 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedoes , 72 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) , 108 65 @-@ pound ( 29 kg ) , and 68 , later 84 , 16 @-@ pound ( 7 kg ) bombs . 
 = = Career = = 
 HMS Pegasus was laid down in 1914 by the John Brown & Company of Clydebank , Scotland as SS Stockholm for the Great Eastern Railway Company , but her construction was suspended by the beginning of the First World War . The ship was purchased by the Royal Navy on 27 February 1917 and was launched on 9 June 1917 . She was commissioned on 14 August 1917 and completed on 28 August 1917 . She joined the Grand Fleet on completion and was assigned to support the Battle Cruiser Force . She participated in a few uneventful operations in the North Sea , but was mostly occupied with pilot training and ferrying aircraft to ships equipped with flying @-@ off platforms . Pegasus supported the British intervention in the Russian Civil War between May to September 1919 and was based at Archangel . The ship returned to Rosyth and was briefly decommissioned . She recommissioned on 2 December 1919 and was transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet in March 1920 . Pegasus ran aground on 9 March off Kerch , but was pulled off without suffering any significant damage . She supported the evacuation of Novorossiysk by the Whites later that month and remained with the fleet until 1924 . In 1923 the forward flying @-@ off deck was removed and the ship was re @-@ rated as an aircraft tender . She was stationed at Singapore in 1924 – 25 . On 5 July 1925 she was placed in reserve at Devonport , but was briefly recommissioned in 1929 . On 22 August 1931 the ship was sold for scrap at Morecambe . 
 = History of Burger King = 
 The predecessor to what is now the international fast food restaurant chain Burger King was founded in 1953 in Jacksonville , Florida , as Insta @-@ Burger King . Inspired by the McDonald brothers ' original store location in San Bernardino , California , the founders and owners , Keith J. Kramer and his wife 's uncle Matthew Burns , began searching for a concept . After purchasing the rights to two pieces of equipment called " Insta " machines , the two opened their first stores around a cooking device known as the Insta @-@ Broiler . The Insta @-@ Broiler oven proved so successful at cooking burgers , they required all of their franchises to carry the device . After the original company began to falter in 1954 , it was purchased by its Miami , Florida , franchisees James McLamore and David R. Edgerton . The two initiated a corporate restructuring of the chain ; the first step being to rename the company Burger King . The duo ran the company as an independent entity for eight years , eventually expanding to over 250 locations in the United States , when they sold it to the Pillsbury Company in 1967 . 
 Pillsbury 's management made several attempts at reorganization or restructuring of the restaurant chain in the late 1970s and early 1980s . The most prominent change came in 1978 when Burger King hired McDonald 's executive Donald N. Smith to help revamp the company . In a plan called Operation Phoenix , Smith initiated a restructuring of corporate business practices at all levels of the company . Changes to the company included updated franchise agreements , a broadening of the menu , and new store designs to standardize the look and feel of the company . While these efforts were initially effective , many of them were eventually discarded , resulting in Burger King falling into a fiscal slump that damaged the financial performance of both Burger King and its parent . Poor operating performance and ineffectual leadership continued to bog the company down for many years , even after it was acquired in 1989 by the British entertainment conglomerate Grand Metropolitan and its successor Diageo . Eventually , the institutional neglect of the brand by Diageo damaged the company to the point where major franchises were driven out of business and its total value was significantly decreased . Diageo eventually decided to divest itself of the loss @-@ making chain and put the company up for sale in 2000 . 
 In the twenty @-@ first century the company returned to independence when it was purchased from Diageo by a group of investment firms led by TPG Capital for $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( USD ) in 2002 . The new owners rapidly moved to revitalize and reorganize the company , culminating with the company being taken public in 2006 with a highly successful initial public offering . The firms ' strategy for turning the chain around included a new advertising agency and new ad campaigns , a revamped menu strategy , a series of programs designed to revamp individual stores , and a new restaurant concept called the BK Whopper Bar . These changes re @-@ energized the company . Despite the successes of the new owners , the effects of the financial crisis of 2007 – 2010 weakened the company 's financial outlooks while those of its immediate competitor McDonald 's grew . The falling value of Burger King eventually lead to TPG and its partners divesting their interest in the chain in a $ 3 @.@ 26 billion ( USD ) sale to 3G Capital of Brazil . Analysts from financial firms UBS and Stifel Nicolaus agreed that 3G will have to invest heavily in the company to help reverse its fortunes . After the deal was completed , the company 's stock was removed from the New York Stock Exchange , ending a four @-@ year period as a public company . The delisting of its stock was designed to help the company repair its fundamental business structures and continue working to close the gap with McDonald 's without having to worry about pleasing shareholders . 3G later took the company public again after a series of changes to its operations and structure . Burger King would eventually be merged with Canadian @-@ based donut and coffee chain Tim Hortons , igniting a political controversy in the United States over tax inversions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Insta @-@ Burger King = = = 
 Burger King was founded in 1953 in Jacksonville , Florida , as Insta @-@ Burger King by Keith J. Kramer and his wife 's uncle , Matthew Burns . Their first stores were centred around a piece of equipment known as the Insta @-@ Broiler , which was very effective at cooking burgers . It proved so successful that , as they grew through franchising , they required all of their franchises to carry the device . 
 While the Jacksonville chain kept expanding , two friends named James McLamore and David R. Edgerton , both alumni of the Cornell University School of Hotel Administration , were seeking an opportunity to open their own business . McLamore had visited the original hamburger stand belonging to Dick and Mac McDonald in San Bernardino , California , and sensing potential in their innovative assembly line @-@ based production system , decided to open a similar operation . 
 McLamore and Edgerton acquired a license to operate an Insta @-@ Burger King franchise and opened their first location on 4 December 1954 at <unk> NW 36th Street in Miami . By 1959 , the pair had stores at several locations within the Miami @-@ Dade area , and operations were growing at a fast rate . However , the partners discovered that the insta @-@ broiler units ' heating elements were prone to degradation from the drippings of the beef patties . The pair eventually created a mechanized gas grill that avoided the problems by cooking the meat patties a different way inside the unit . The new cooking appliance , which they called a flame broiler , moved the patties over the flame vertically on a chain link conveyor over the heating elements , a design that imparted grill lines on the patties similar to those made on a charcoal grill . The new unit worked so well that they made the decision to replace all of their Insta @-@ Broilers with the newly designed unit . 
 Even though the original Insta @-@ Burger King had rapidly expanded throughout the state and its operations totaled more than 40 locations by 1955 , the group ran into financial difficulties . McLamore and Edgarton purchased the national rights to the chain in 1959 and rechristened the company as Burger King of Miami . The company eventually became known as Burger King Corporation and began selling territorial licenses to private franchisees across the US by 1959 . 
 Besides the creation of the company 's signature piece of equipment , the flame broiler , the company added two more features during this period that have since become closely associated with the chain . The first to be created was its mascot , the Burger King in 1955 . The character would become a staple of its advertising over the next 60 years . The second creation was the company 's signature sandwich , the Whopper . It was created in 1957 by James McLamore and originally sold for 37 cents . McLamore created the burger after he noticed that a rival restaurant was having success selling a larger burger . Believing that the success of the rival product was its size , he devised the Whopper . The name was chosen because he felt that it conveyed " imagery of something big " . Finally , the company made its first forays into advertising in the new medium of television with commercials for the chain in 1958 . 
 = = = Pillsbury Company = = = 
 In 1967 , the Pillsbury Company acquired Burger King and its parent company Burger King Corporation from McLamore and Edgerton . At the time of the purchase , BK had grown to 274 restaurants in the United States and had an estimated value of US $ 18 million . With the acquisition , Pillsbury was faced with a lack of consistency within the franchise framework . The Burger King Corporation franchising system set up by McLamore and Edgerton allowed the company to expand a great pace , but the lack of contractual restraints and controls on its franchisee operation led to inconsistencies in its products that in turn were a drag on the reputation of the chain . Additionally , the agreements gave the company too little power to prevent its franchises from doing as they wished with the business . 
 One of the prime examples of the deficiencies in its former franchise structure can be illustrated by the relationship between Burger King and a Louisiana @-@ based franchisee . Chart House , owned by brothers Billy and Jimmy Trotter , opened its first BK franchise in that state in 1963 . By 1970 the Trotters ' company had grown to over 350 stores across the country , with its own purchasing system , training program and inspection system . In 1973 Chart House attempted to purchase the chain from Pillsbury for $ 100 million , but Pillsbury declined . The Trotters then put forth a second plan that would have Pillsbury and Chart House spin off their respective holdings and merge the two entities into a separate jointly controlled company , which Pillsbury also declined . After the failed bids , the relationship between <unk> and the Trotters soured . When Chart House purchased several restaurants in Boston and Houston in 1979 , Burger King sued the selling franchisees for not respecting their contractual right of first refusal and won , preventing the sale . The two parties eventually reach a settlement where Chart House kept the Houston locations in their portfolio . In the early 1980s Chart House spun off its Burger King restaurants to focus on its higher end chains ; its Burger King holding company , DiversiFoods , was eventually acquired by Pillsbury $ 390 million in 1984 and folded into Burger King 's operations . 
 With the ongoing conflict with Chart House on the mind of the company 's board in 1978 , Burger King hired McDonald 's executive Donald N. Smith to help revamp the company . Smith initiated a restructuring of all future franchising agreements . New owners were barred from living more than an hour 's drive from their restaurants , corporations were not permitted to own franchises , and franchisees could no longer operate other chains . This new policy effectively limited the size of franchisees and prevented larger franchises from challenging Burger King as Chart House had . It also became a requirement for the corporation to own the properties of any new store and lease them to franchisees . This policy would allow the company to take over the operations of failing stores or evict those owners who would not conform to the company guidelines and policies . Beyond the changes to the franchise system , Smith also restructured Burger King 's corporate operations to better compete against his former employer as well as then up and coming chain Wendy 's . He broadened the product offering by adding the Burger King specialty sandwich line in 1979 , and also added many non @-@ hamburger sandwiches including new chicken and fish offerings . The new line was one of the first attempts by a major fast food chain to target a specific demographic , in this case adults aged between 18 and 34 years , members of which were presumably willing spend more on a higher quality product . The new products were successful and the company 's sales increased by 15 % . 
 After Smith 's departure from the company for soft drinks producer PepsiCo in 1980 , the company began to see a system @-@ wide decline in sales . Pillsbury executive vice president of restaurant operations Norman E. Brinker was tasked with turning the brand around and strengthening its position against its main rival , McDonald 's . One of his first acts was to initiate an advertising plan emphasizing claims that Burger King 's flame @-@ broiled burgers were better and larger than its rival 's . The program , arguably the first attack ads on a food chain by a competitor , was controversial in that before it fast food ads only made allusions to the competition without ever mentioning them by name . McDonald 's sued Burger King , their ad agency at the time J. Walter Thompson . The child actress Sarah Michelle Gellar was also implicated in the lawsuit because of her appearance in these television commercials . The suit was settled the following year on undisclosed terms . Despite the controversy , the ad plan , dubbed the Burger Wars , boosted same store sales . Brinker continued working for the company in this capacity until 1982 when he was promoted to president of Pillsbury 's food service division , which included the company 's other chains beyond Burger King . Brinker left the company in 1984 to take the helm at Dallas @-@ based gourmet burger chain Chili 's . 
 With the departure of Smith and Brinker , Pillsbury allowed many of their changes to be relaxed , as well as scaled back on construction of new locations which had the effect of stalling corporate growth . By failing to follow through on the changes of the two men , Pillsbury caused its own value to diminish as it derived more than one third of its sales and two thirds of its profits from the burger chain . When the British alcoholic beverages company Grand Metropolitan PLC made a hostile bid for Pillsbury , the company devised a plan to spin off the financially flailing restaurant unit in hopes to raise an estimated US $ 2 billion that could be used to fend off the unwanted suitor . The complex potentially tax @-@ free stock split plan would have led to the chain , along with its distribution system Distron , becoming a separate entity for the first time in over twenty years . 
 Hoping that the special dividends created by the spin @-@ off would have convinced shareholders not to accept the hostile bid , Pillsbury had its plans partially scuttled when the company 's franchisees rejected the plan despite parts of which that would have given the franchises part ownership in the company and a seat on its new board . In a letter to Pillsbury chairman Phillip L. Smith , franchise representative Bill N. <unk> stated that franchisees disapproved of the transaction on the grounds that they " strongly oppose this proposed course of conduct for one reason and one reason alone : It so restricts the ability of the Burger King Corporation to engage in future competitive growth and reinvestment in the Burger King system that our economic interests and investments will be placed in jeopardy . " Another option floated by the company in December 1988 was to sell Burger King to a third party , a proposal that drew a favorable response from its franchises , never came to fruition . 
 On top of the failure of the franchises to approve the spin @-@ off , a series of lawsuits complicated the divestiture . Two legal challenges to the parent company were filed by investors , one in Pillsbury 's home state of Minnesota and another in the state where it was incorporated , Delaware , in which the legality of the stock tender plan was questioned . These three events eventually forced Pillsbury to give up its bid to fend off Grand Metropolitan and agree to be acquired in November 1988 for a sum of US $ 5 @.@ 7 billion . 
 = = = Grand Metropolitan = = = 
 Between the time of the initial sales agreement in November 1988 and the finalization of the acquisition of Pillsbury in January 1989 , Grand Metropolitan set about putting its own corporate stamp on Burger King ; the stated goal of Grand Met CEO Allen Sheppard was to upgrade the overall performance of the chain and improve its standing as the second largest fast @-@ food burger chain globally . To that end , he had the company initiate a three @-@ prong strategy of evaluation of operations , personnel moves , and structural changes and improvements to fortify the company . 
 Following through on the CEO 's opinion that the company needed a consistent marketing plan and management team to succeed , the company began its moves by replacing its chairman and CEO Jerry W. Levin with its own choice of executives , Barry J. Gibbons , chairman and managing director of Grand Metropolitan Retailing , Ltd . , as chief executive and Ian A. Martin , Grand Met 's top executive in the United States , as chairman . The moves came to no surprise to Wall Street analysts and franchisees , as they were expected due to reservations about Levin after his appointment by the outgoing management at Pillsbury . Grand Met 's first major restructuring move was the dismantling of Burger Kings 50 @-@ year @-@ old purchasing and distribution arm , Distron . Unhappy with the distribution group , the company originally thought to dispose of the division after the purchase but instead decided to reorganize it into two separate groups , one for procurement ( Burger King Purchasing or BKP ) and another for distribution ( Burger King Distribution Services or BKDS ) . With the restructuring , the company eliminated many positions and ended up laying off over a hundred staff members as a consequence . 
 During the five years that led up to the purchase , the restaurant chain had a series of a half dozen ad programs accompanied by even more marketing directors , a situation that led Adweek to describe it as " ill @-@ conceived marketing and downright sloppy strategic planning " in 1987 . In order to reverse the trend , in December 1988 Grand Met set about reevaluating all aspects of the programs from the messages the company was sending to the customer through its commercials to the possibility of dropping its advertising agency of record , N. W. Ayer . After a six @-@ month evaluation , BK dropped Ayer in favor of a two @-@ way combination of D 'Arcy Masius Benton & Bowles ( DMB & B ) for overall programs and Saatchi & Saatchi for specific advertising programs such as the introduction of new products . The company hoped that the " dual @-@ agency partnership " would provide a synergy that would bring together " some of the best minds in the advertising business " to establish a brand identity , or as a company spokesman stated , " what the consumers take away with them after they visit <unk> we stand for ... " 
 Grand Met also made several moves in an attempt to broaden BK 's business operations while expanding its presence globally . The first move by the company was the creation of the BK Expressway business concept , a new store format designed for locations where a traditional stand @-@ alone restaurant was impractical . The company introduced two separate formats designed to operate in different business environments ; the first concept was intended as a kiosk @-@ type store that would be placed in locations such as sports venues and airports . The second concept store , designed with two drive @-@ <unk> and a minimal or even non @-@ existent dining room , was designed to go in locations that were limited by high land costs or limited space . Both types of these new , smaller stores operated with a condensed menu prepared on new equipment designed specifically for the more compact footprints of the new locations . Expressway locations were also designed with lower start @-@ up costs in mind ; franchisees were wooed with the promise of a much smaller investment , approximately one third as much , than would be required to open a more traditional location . In August of the same year , Grand Met set about expanding Burger King 's operations in Europe by acquiring UK @-@ based United Biscuits restaurant operations , including the nearly 400 @-@ location burger chain Wimpy . With the purchase , described as a " rare opportunity " by CEO Sheppard , Grand Met set about converting certain Wimpy locations that employed a counter service system into Burger King locations . The merger of the United Biscuits properties with BK grew the company from about 30 restaurants in the UK to more than 60 within a year of the purchase , with another 30 locations added in early 1990 . While other " Wimpy " locations are still in operation presently , they are now independent from BK and no longer have the presence they once did . 
 The 1990s led off with Grand Met taking Burger King 's soft drink contract to Coca @-@ Cola from Pepsi . Traditionally Burger King had sold soft drinks from the Coca @-@ Cola Company in the United States , but in 1983 , PepsiCo was able to garner the US $ 444 million beverage supplier contract from its rival . Despite extreme market debate over the future of the contract , it was renewed for a second term in 1987 . A sweetened contract that strengthened marketing and advertising program ties between Burger King and itself allowed Pepsi to keep supplying soft drinks to BK . Leading up to the decision , Pepsi had sponsored over 100 separate cross @-@ promotions and product tie @-@ ins , including a Fourth of July promotion where BK gave away a free Pepsi with each purchase . This fit into the goals of BK , which was looking for a partner that would provide " outstanding , impactful promotional support . " However , the contract only lasted three more years when , partially based upon Pepsi 's growth as a restaurant operator with its Tricon Restaurants division , Burger King moved its beverage contract back to Coca @-@ Cola . Accompanying the reintroduction of Coca @-@ Cola , BK introduced its first major chicken sandwich since 1977 ; the new BK Broiler sandwich was a broiled sandwich targeting more health @-@ conscious customers . The BK Broiler was a rapid hit and within six months of its introduction was selling more than a million units daily system wide . 
 The company made an advertising coup that same year when it signed a 10 @-@ picture contract with the Walt Disney Company . The deal , which included such Disney films as The Lion King , Aladdin and Toy Story , came at the height of Disney 's commercial rebirth . Accompanied with the new BK Kid 's Club program , the company saw an impressive growth within the children 's market . The company 's new Kid 's Club , its first major foray into a children 's targeted ad campaign since the Burger King / Burger King Kingdom program of the 1970s , saw phenomenal growth with more than one million children signing up for the program within two months of its introduction . 
 While many of the moves made by Grand Met were successful in generating additional sales and growth , the company continued to experience problems . While Fortune Magazine named CEO Gibbons as its Turnaround Champion for his success in reversing the fortunes of the company , several news outlets claimed that the changes he introduced were problematic because they deprived the company of valuable assets . 
 In 1992 , Hurricane Andrew destroyed the company headquarters . The building , located on Old Cutler Rd. in Miami , was right in the center of the path of the hurricane . Located on the shoreline at the terminus of 184th St. ( Eureka Drive ) , the highest storm surge levels was recorded ( 16 @.@ 9 ft ) at the site . The building suffered more than $ 24 million ( USD ) in damage and pushed the company from its offices during one of its more significant product pushes . Not only was the company forced from its facilities , roughly 300 members of its 700 + staff were left homeless . Immediately after the storm , Gibbons began a program to help get the company back on track . The company 's recovery was helped due to pre @-@ planning before the storm 's landfall ; Corporate <unk> data was moved to Seattle , Washington before the storm struck in order to safeguard critical records , and the company established a temporary " command center " at the Doral Resort and Country Club in Miami within eight days of the hurricanes passing . Additional operations were temporarily decentralized by temporarily shifting some corporate functions to regional offices . The facility would eventually take more than a year to rebuild , finally opening in September 1993 . 
 Not only did Gibbons work to repair the damage to the company offices , he made it a priority to allow its staff to deal with their personal situations . He made staff members job descriptions more flexible , encouraging staff members to take the initiative to perform a wide range of tasks . A corporate day care system was established , allowing staff to bring their children to work . Staff members were allowed to take off as much time as needed to reestablish themselves and corporate dress codes were relaxed . The company brought in counselors , insurance experts , tax consultants , child care advisers and construction companies to help the staff reorient themselves . The company also went so far as to arrange emergency loans for its employees . By 1993 , Gibbons had tired of the post , and named a new successor to the post . He initially resigned his post as CEO of the company and was replaced by his chosen successor , COO James B. Adamson . Gibbons retained his position as chairman until he left the company 
 Adamson continued the company 's plans to expand into new markets such as universities , gas stations , airports and sports arenas with the intention of looking into new channels of distribution . Over the next year and a half he worked on a series of initiatives to strengthen the company ; in a back to basics campaign , he oversaw a streamlining Burger King 's menu and worked to improve and strengthen relations with franchisees . His changes were credited with a 28 percent increase in sales in BK 's fiscal year 1995 and same store sales that were up 6 percent . He left in early 1995 when Denny 's made him an offer to take the reins of the competitor ; he left the company credited with fixing the deficiencies left by Gibbons and was temporarily replaced with David Nash . He was elevated to Chairman in July , with Robert Lowes as CEO . Lowes became chairman in November . 
 = = = Diageo = = = 
 In 1997 , Grand Metropolitan merged with Guinness to form a company called Diageo in a deal worth US $ 22 billion . Franchisees alleged that Diageo ignored the chain in favor of its liquor business ; there were two more CEOs in the time Diageo owned the company . 
 This institutionalized neglect further hurt the standing of the brand , in turn causing significant financial damage to Burger King 's franchisees . By the time of the sale , Burger King 's revenues and market share had declined significantly , and the company had fallen to a near tie for second place with rival Wendy 's in the US market for hamburger chain restaurants . For many years leading into the early 2000s , Burger King and its various owners plus many of its larger franchisees closed many under @-@ performing stores . Several of its largest franchisees entered bankruptcy due to the issues surrounding the performance of the brand . 
 Diageo maintained ownership of BK until 2000 when Diageo decided to focus solely on their beverage products and divest itself of the chain . In 2001 , the company put forth a plan to float approximately 20 percent of BKC on the NYSE . Burger King 's franchises representation group , The National Franchise Association ( NFA ) , sought to block this because it believed that any money raised from the issue would not be put into helping bolster the then flagging BK , but would instead end up being used to help Diageo bolster its liquor brands . Instead , the NFA sought to purchase the chain from Diageo , but the deal collapsed when the NFA was unable to put together an acceptable financing package . 
 = = = TPG Capital = = = 
 In 2002 , a troika of private equity firms led by TPG Capital , <unk> with associates Bain Capital and Goldman Sachs Capital Partners agreed to purchase BK from Diageo for $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( USD ) , with the sale becoming complete in December of that year . The new owners , through several new CEOs , moved to revitalize and reorganize the company , the first major move was to rename the BK parent as Burger King Brands . The investment group initially planned to take BK public within the two years of the acquisition , this was delayed until 2006 . On 1 February 2006 , Out @-@ going CEO Greg Brenneman announced TPG 's plans to turn Burger King into a publicly traded company by issuing an Initial Public Offering ( IPO ) . 
 On February 16 , the company announced it had filed its registration for the IPO with the Securities and Exchange Commission . Burger King began trading on the New York Stock Exchange under the ticker symbol BKC on May 18 , 2006 . The stock sale generated $ 425 million in revenue , the largest IPO of a US @-@ based restaurant chain on record . The proceeds from the sale were used by the company help pay back a loan taken out taken by the company in February used to pay dividends to the investment firms . According to one analyst at Renaissance Capital , Wall Street investors were not alarmed by the large payout due to the increased financial stability of the company resulting from changes made by the investor groups during the interim between the purchase in 2002 and the stock offering . Incoming CEO John W. Chidsey backed the payouts , stating that the financial firms spent considerable time and capital turning the company around . 
 By the middle of its fiscal year 2008 , the company had seen significant domestic growth for the first time in several years ; for more than a dozen financial quarters , the company showed revenue increases and domestic expansion . During the first half of the calendar year 2008 , the company initiated a plan to revitalize its stores with a program to replace or remodel almost all of its North American locations by the beginning of its fiscal year 2009 in July 2008 . The renovation plan was credited with helping the company increase same @-@ store sales by as much as 5 @.@ 4 percent over the previous fiscal year versus its competitors McDonald 's and Yum Brand 's 3 percent increase , but the total costs of the renovation program affected the company 's revenue stream for the final quarters of its 2008 fiscal year . Wall Street analysts had originally projected net income to be approximately 27 ¢ per share , but the company only reported a 25 ¢ per share profit . The smaller profit announcement temporarily drove Burger King 's stock prices down after the announcement . Despite the lower than expected profit and small decline in stock value , Wall Street analysts were upbeat about Burger King 's future earnings because it was felt that the renovations would contribute to future profits ; one such analyst stated that the renovations would " pay for themselves " . 
 Further modernization plans were introduced in 2009 with the company 's " 20 / 20 " store designs and its " BK Whopper Bar " concept . The 20 / 20 concept , officially unveiled in Amsterdam on 10 October , featured a radical new design that featured bright colors , corrugated metal accents and plain brick walls that are designed to compete with chains in the fast casual restaurant market segment . A new system of in @-@ store advertising was also introduced as part of the new format , static menu boards are to be replaced with high definition video displays . With the introduction of the 20 / 20 format , all future Burger King locations will be constructed using the design framework . Additionally , any future restaurant renovations must also conform to the new standard . The primary drawback of the design is its costs to the individual owners of BK restaurants ; franchises must pay between $ 300 @,@ 000 – $ 600 @,@ 000 ( USD ) to renovate their buildings to Burger King specs . 
 The Whopper Bar is a concept from the company that upends its traditional fast food operations with a newer high end concept designed to compete with fast casual and casual dining restaurants . The new format is described by the company as a more " playful " variation on the standard Burger King location . The locations feature an open kitchen with a semi @-@ circular metal counter top designed to allow customers to watch as its " <unk> " put together the order . The exposed kitchen concept allows customers to view the preparation of their foods . Decoration of the new locations is limited to plasma televisions playing looped videos of open flames . The concept is similar to the McCafe concept from rival McDonald 's , and like the McCafe locations they are designed to go into malls , airports and casinos and other areas with limited amounts of space . 
 With the opening of its Whopper Bar locations in the United States during 2010 , Burger King reported that it would be the first time in its North American locations that beer would be available for purchase . Although beer is available at fast food restaurants throughout Europe , including Burger King , this is the first time a major fast food chain has attempted to sell beer in the United States . The company will be selling products from SABMiller and Anheuser @-@ Busch including Budweiser , Bud Lite and Miller Lite in aluminum bottles designed to maintain temperature . The move , designed to target the important 30 @-@ and @-@ under demographic , has been called risky by industry analysts because of the company is known as a fast food purveyor and not as an alcoholic beverages seller . Other industry consultants have disagreed with the assessment , believing that the move is a practical one because the company is growing with its aging customer base . 
 = = = 3G Capital = = = 
 The latest chapter in the company 's ownership history began in September 2010 when TPG and its partners announced it would sell their 31 percent stake in Burger King to another private equity company , 3G Capital , for $ 24 per share , or $ 3 @.@ 26 billion ( USD ) . Between March 2004 and March 2009 , the company experienced a score of consecutive profitable quarters that were credited with re @-@ energizing the company , however with the slowing of the economy during the financial crisis of 2007 @-@ 2010 the company 's business has declined while its immediate competitor McDonald 's grew . Analysts , including John Glass of Morgan Stanley and David Tarantino of Robert W. Baird & Co . , part of the reasons for the company 's slowed performance is its continue reliance on the super fan . Market @-@ research firm <unk> & Associates reported that this segment had seen a decline in visits by this demographic group by more than 50 percent during the recession , while restaurant industry analyst Bonnie Riggs at market @-@ research firm NPD Group reported the 18 – 24 transferred much of its business from the fast food segment to the fast casual segment , compounding the decline . 
 The offer , representing a 46 percent premium over the stocks selling price at the time , came as a surprise to Burger King CEO John Chidsey . The proposed sale was expected to help the company repair its fundamental business structures and continue working to close the gap with McDonald 's . Analysts commenting on the transaction stated that 3G will have to invest heavily in the company to help reverse its fortunes . David Palmer from UBS stated the company will need to work with its large group of franchise owners to brighten its locations and stabilize sales which could take several years and require significant reinvestment , while Steve West of Stifel Nicolaus stated that Burger King will need at least a year to right its fundamentals . 
 Upon completion of the acquisition in October 2010 , 3G began an immediate restructuring of the company . Seven of the top executives were released , while another 261 employees were laid off from the company 's headquarters . Chidsey eventually resigned in April 2011 , being replaced Alex Behring , one of 3G 's managing partners . The position of CEO was taken over by Bernardo <unk> shortly after the acquisition . 
 As part of the restructuring , 3G also moved to change many aspects of corporate operations throughout 2011 @-@ 2012 . One of the first moves was to terminate Burger King 's relationship with ad agency Crispin Porter + Bogusky , replacing it with McGarryBowen . 3G also began a menu restructuring , with the first product being a revamped version of BK 's Chicken Tenders product . Other new or reformulated products would follow . In terms of its franchise operations , Burger King initiated a move to become more like competitors Subway and KFC and began to sell off the majority of corporately owned restaurants in order to become an exclusive franchised operation . 3G also moved to mend relations with its American franchises , which had become rather rancorous during TPG 's tenure . Several lawsuits were settled and corporate policies that were at the center of the corporate disputes with the franchises were ended or amended . 
 In 2011 they partnered with British venture capital firm Justice Holdings to take the company public again . They also initiated a massive expansion of operations via franchising in the BRIC nations and Africa with more than 2500 new planned locations . 
 In August 2014 , Burger King announced its intent to acquire the Canadian restaurant and coffee shop chain Tim Hortons . 3G Capital purchased Tim Hortons at $ 65 @.@ 50 per @-@ share , and a new holding company was formed , based in Oakville , Ontario , Canada . 3G holds a 51 % majority stake , Tim Hortons ' existing shareholders owning 22 % , and a 27 % stake held by Burger King shareholders . Berkshire Hathaway partially funded the purchase by buying $ 3 billion worth of preferred shares . Burger King CEO Daniel Schwartz became CEO of the company , with existing Tim Hortons CEO Marc <unk> becoming vice @-@ chairman and director . The two chains retained separate operations post @-@ merger , with Burger King remaining in its Miami headquarters . The deal was subject to approval by Tim Hortons shareholders and Canadian regulatory authorities . A Tim Hortons representative stated that the proposed merger would allow Tim Hortons to leverage Burger King 's resources for international growth . The combined company became the third @-@ largest international chain of fast food restaurants . From 1995 to 2005 , Tim Hortons had been owned by Wendy 's Restaurants , a competitor to <unk> King . 
 Although " tax inversions " ( in which a company decreases the amount of taxes it pays by moving its headquarters to a country with lower rates , but maintains the majority of their operations in their previous location ) have been a recent financial trend , it will not have as much of an impact on Burger King 's reincorporation in Canada : the corporate tax rate in the United States is 39 @.@ 1 % , Canada 's corporate tax rate is only 26 % , but Burger King had used various sheltering techniques to reduce its tax rate to 27 @.@ 5 % . As a high @-@ profile instance of tax inversion , news of the merger was criticized by U.S. politicians , who felt that the move would result in a loss of tax revenue to foreign interests , and could result in further government pressure against inversions ( which had , until the Burger King merger , been primarily invoked by pharmaceutical firms ) . 
 = = Timelines = = 
 = = = Key dates = = = 
 Some key dates include : 
 1953 : Insta @-@ Burger King is founded in Jacksonville , FL , by Kieth Kramer and Matthew Burns . 
 1954 : James McLamore and David Edgerton purchase Insta @-@ Burger King and rename it Burger King . 
 1955 : The Burger King character is created . 
 1957 : The Whopper is launched . 
 1958 : BK releases its first TV advertisement . 
 1959 : Burger King establishes its franchising system . 
 1967 : Burger King ceases to be an independent entity when the Pillsbury Company purchases it for USD $ 18 million ( USD $ 128 @.@ 3 million adjusted for inflation , 2014 ) . 
 1977 : Donald N. Smith is brought in from rival McDonald 's to help restructure the company and its franchising system . 
 1980 : Smith leaves the company for PepsiCo . 
 1981 : Norman E. Brinker is made head of Pillsbury 's restaurant division , including Burger King . 
 1982 : Burger King produces one of the first attack advertisements when it airs several commercials disparaging its competitor 's fried burgers . 
 1984 : Brinker leaves the company when he purchases Chili 's . 
 1989 : Pillsbury is purchased by British liquor company Grand Metropolitan for USD $ 5 @.@ 7 billion ( bn ) / GBP ₤ 3 @.@ 6 bn . 
 1996 : Company co @-@ founder James McLamore dies . 
 1997 : A USD $ 22 bn / GBP ₤ 13 @.@ 9 bn merger between Grand Metropolitan and Guinness results in the formation of a new parent company , Diageo . 
 2000 : Diageo investigates a possible IPO or sale of the company . 
 2001 : A North American franchise group seeks to purchase the company . 
 2002 : Capital investment firm Texas Pacific Group purchases Burger King from Diageo in a deal initially worth USD $ 2 @.@ 2 bn / GBP ₤ 1 @.@ 4 <unk> deal between TPG and Diageo nearly fails , but eventually goes through at USD $ 1 @.@ 6 bn / GBP ₤ 1 bn . 
 2006 : Burger King is listed on the NYSE with the stock symbol BKC when the chain goes public in an IPO . 
 2009 : Company opens its <unk> store , located in Beijing . 
 2010 : Brazil @-@ based 3G Capital acquires Burger King in a deal worth USD $ 3 @.@ 26 bn / <unk> $ 5 @.@ 6 bn . 
 2011 : Burger King begins a yearlong revamp of its menu and advertising programs . 
 2012 : Burger King is taken public once again on the NYSE with the symbol <unk> . 
 2014 : Burger King merges with Canadian donut / coffee chain Tim Hortons in a deal worth USD $ 18 bn / CAD $ 19 @.@ 6 bn . 
 = = = Ownership history = = = 
 Since being founded in 1954 , Burger King has undergone five changes of ownership . Further , during the ownership tenure of Grand Metropolitan , Grand Met merged with Guinness in 1997 to form a new company , Diageo . TPG Capital 's ownership was shared with Bain Capital and Goldman Sachs Capital Partners , both of which held minority shares . During 3G Capital 's ownership , 3G divested a 29 % stake of the chain to Justice Holdings of Great Britain when the chain was again taken public in 2012 . When Burger King merged with Tim Hortons in 2014 , Berkshire Hathaway bought into the newly combined chain as part of an debt @-@ equity financing deal . 
 = = = CEO history = = = 
 Since its founding , Burger King has had more than twenty CEOs . 
 = 1988 – 89 Calgary Flames season = 
 The 1988 – 89 Calgary Flames season was the ninth season for the Calgary Flames and 17th for the Flames franchise in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . They won their second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy as the NHL 's top regular season club and went on to win the first Stanley Cup championship in franchise history , defeating the Montreal Canadiens in the 1989 Stanley Cup Final . Al MacInnis won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs . 
 The regular season saw the debut of Theoren Fleury , who went on to become the Flames ' all @-@ time leading scorer , and Sergei Pryakhin , who became the first Soviet player allowed to play in the NHL . Four players represented the Flames at the 1989 All @-@ Star Game : Gary Suter , Joe Nieuwendyk , Joe Mullen and Mike Vernon . Mullen received several awards following the season . He was named the winner of the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for gentlemanly conduct , won the Emery Edge Award for having the top plus @-@ minus in the league and was named a First Team All @-@ Star . 
 Co @-@ captain Lanny McDonald scored his 1,000th point and 500th goal late in the season . He ended his Hockey Hall of Fame career by scoring a goal in the game that clinched the Stanley Cup before announcing his retirement in the summer . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 The Flames ' season began with a major trade . Mike Bullard finished the 1987 – 88 season second in team scoring at 103 points , but his disappointing performance during the playoffs left general manager Cliff Fletcher desiring a trade . Late in the summer , he dealt Bullard , and two players to the St. Louis Blues for a package of four players that was led by Doug Gilmour , who had scored 105 points two years previous . 
 Head Coach Terry Crisp favoured a defensively responsible system , and as a result , the Flames had given up the fewest goals in the league after two months while goaltenders Mike Vernon and Rick Wamsley were first and third in the NHL respectively in goals against average ( GAA ) . The team maintained its defensive focus throughout the season , allowing 79 fewer goals – just under one per game less – than in 1987 – 88 , surrendering a franchise record low total of 226 . 
 Fletcher proclaimed in December that this Flames team was the best he had ever built . Calgary lost just four of its first 28 games , and on December 8 set a franchise record with its 13th consecutive game without a loss in a 5 – 3 victory over the Edmonton Oilers . The team also went unbeaten in its first 17 home games , compiling a 14 – 0 – 3 record in that time that featured victories of 11 – 4 over the Los Angeles Kings , 6 – 1 over the St. Louis Blues and 9 – 0 over the Hartford Whalers . 
 Though the Flames were established as the Smythe Division leaders , the team struggled around the Christmas break . After winning only one of five games towards the end of December , the team recalled two players from their minor league affiliate , the Salt Lake Golden Eagles . Paul Ranheim was brought up on December 27 , but played only five games in Calgary . Theoren Fleury was brought up on January 1 . He was leading the International Hockey League in scoring with 74 points in 40 games at the time of his recall , and immediately became a fan favourite in Calgary for his aggressive style despite his small , 5 ' 6 " stature . Fleury scored three assists in his second career game , and his first two goals in his third , a 7 – 2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers . 
 Four players were chosen to represent the Flames at the 40th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game in Edmonton . Mike Vernon was the winning goaltender in the Campbell Conference 's 9 – 5 victory , while forwards Joe Mullen and Joe Nieuwendyk , and defenceman Gary Suter also played in the Game . 
 Co @-@ captain Lanny McDonald , a veteran of 16 NHL seasons , reached two of the league 's most important milestones late in the season . He scored a goal against Bob Essensa of the Winnipeg Jets on March 7 to score the 1,000th point of his NHL career . Two weeks later , on March 21 , McDonald scored his 500th goal against Mark Fitzpatrick in a 4 – 1 victory over the New York Islanders in Calgary . 
 On the same night that McDonald scored his 500th , Joe Nieuwendyk scored his 50th goal of the season , becoming the third player in NHL history after Mike Bossy and Wayne Gretzky to reach the 50 @-@ goal mark in his first two seasons . Nieuwendyk scored his 100th career goal in just his 144th game . He reached the milestone in the third fewest games in league history , behind Mike Bossy ( 129 games ) and Maurice Richard ( 134 games ) . 
 Joe Mullen also topped 50 goals for the Flames . He finished seventh in league scoring with 110 points , and broke Jimmy Carson 's NHL record for most points in a season by an American @-@ born player . 
 The Flames made NHL history when they successfully completed a deal with the Soviet Ice Hockey Federation that allowed 25 @-@ year @-@ old forward Sergei Pryakhin to become the first Soviet player permitted by his native federation to play in the NHL . Pryakhin made his debut on March 31 in a game against the Winnipeg Jets . 
 The Flames finished the season with 54 wins , a franchise record , and became the fifth team in NHL history to win 50 games in a season after the Montreal Canadiens , Boston Bruins , Philadelphia Flyers and Edmonton Oilers . Calgary was nearly unbeatable on home ice , winning 34 of 40 games , and losing just four . They won their second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy as the top regular season team in the NHL . 
 The Flames finished first in the League in penalty @-@ killing percentage , with 82 @.@ 93 % . 
 = = = Season standings = = = 
 Note : GP 
 = Games played , W = 
 Wins , L 
 = Losses , T = 
 Ties , Pts 
 = Points , GF = 
 Goals for , GA = Goals against 
 Note : Teams that qualified for the playoffs are highlighted in bold . 
 = = Schedule and results = = 
 = = Playoffs = = 
 Though they finished 43 points behind the Flames in the regular season , the Vancouver Canucks proved a significant challenge in the Smythe Division semifinal . Calgary produced an uninspired effort in the opening game that resulted in a 4 – 3 loss as former Flame Paul Reinhart scored the winner for Vancouver in overtime . The Flames rebounded with 5 – 2 and 4 – 0 victories , but the Canucks continued to battle . Vancouver won the fourth game and after losing the fifth , staved off elimination with a 6 – 3 victory in game six , setting up a seventh and deciding game . 
 The seventh game went to overtime , tied 3 – 3 , and the extra period was dominated by fast offensive rushes as both teams sought to end the series . Both goaltenders were forced to make spectacular saves , highlighted by Mike Vernon 's glove save to stop Vancouver 's Stan Smyl on a breakaway . That save was a defining moment of Vernon 's career , and has since been called " the save that won the Cup " . With less than a minute remaining in the first overtime period , Jim Peplinski fired a wide @-@ angle shot towards the Vancouver goal that deflected off Joel Otto 's skate and into the net , winning the game and series for the Flames . 
 Calgary faced Wayne Gretzky and the Los Angeles Kings in the Smythe Division final . The Flames won the series in four straight , holding the highest scoring team in the league to 11 goals for the series . The Smythe final was most remembered for a controversial goal the Flames scored in the second game at Calgary . Vernon was knocked down in his crease by the Kings ' Bernie Nicholls , and believing the goaltender was injured , Flames ' trainer Bearcat Murray jumped onto the ice to tend to the fallen player as the Flames rushed the puck into the Los Angeles zone . Al MacInnis scored on the play as the Kings vehemently protested the goal should have been disallowed because Murray was on the ice . The goal stood and ended up the winning goal in an 8 – 3 victory . 
 The Chicago Blackhawks were the Flames ' opponents in the Campbell Conference final . The Flames won the series with relative ease , dropping only a 4 – 2 decision in the second game en route to a five @-@ game series victory . Calgary won their second Clarence S. Campbell Bowl in franchise history as conference champions , and advanced to the Stanley Cup championship to face the Montreal Canadiens in a rematch of the 1986 final . 
 The final opened in Calgary where the Flames emerged with a 3 – 2 win on the strength of two Al MacInnis goals before Montreal evened the series with a 4 – 2 victory in game two . The third game , in Montreal , went to overtime with the score tied 3 – 3 . Late in the second extra period , Calgary 's Mark Hunter was penalized for boarding , allowing Montreal to win the game at 38 : 08 of overtime . The penalty call was controversial , and members of the press spent the following days arguing the legitimacy of the call . 
 The Flames entered the pivotal fourth game believing it was key to maintaining their chances of winning the title . Colin Patterson referred to it as being a " do @-@ or @-@ you 're @-@ gonna @-@ die game " . Calgary emerged with a 4 – 2 victory to even the series at two wins apiece heading back home for game five . The Flames rushed out to a 3 – 1 first period lead in the fifth game , and though Montreal scored in the second period to close within one goal , Vernon prevented Montreal from tying the game , and the Flames took a 3 – 2 series lead . 
 For the sixth game , coach Terry Crisp added 36 @-@ year @-@ old Lanny McDonald to the lineup after sitting him out the previous three games . The veteran forward was the sentimental favourite to win the Cup , and Crisp wanted to give him the opportunity to win the title on the ice . The move paid dividends as after serving a penalty in the second period , McDonald stepped out of the penalty box and joined the rush where he took a pass from Joe Nieuwendyk and shot it over Montreal goaltender Patrick Roy to give the Flames a 2 – 1 lead . Doug Gilmour added two third period goals , including the eventual winner , as the Flames won the Stanley Cup by a 4 – 2 score . In doing so , they became the only team to ever defeat the Canadiens on Montreal Forum ice to win the championship . 
 Al MacInnis was named the Conn Smythe Trophy winner as the most valuable player of the playoffs , and with 31 points became the first defenceman to lead the league in post @-@ season scoring . He finished with a 17 @-@ game scoring streak , the longest by a defenceman in NHL history . 
 Lanny McDonald announced his retirement on August 28 , 1989 , ending his career with the Stanley Cup championship . The Flames named him their Vice President in charge of corporate and community affairs . Three years later , McDonald was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Hakan Loob also ended his NHL career as a champion ; he had announced during the season that he intended to return to his home in Sweden at the end of the year . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Skaters = = = 
 Note : Pos 
 = Position ; GP = 
 Games played in ; G 
 = Goals ; A = 
 Assists ; Pts 
 = Points ; PIM = 
 Penalty minutes ; + / - 
 = Plus / minus ; PPG = 
 Power @-@ play goals ; SHG 
 = Short @-@ handed goals ; GWG = 
 Game @-@ winning goals 
 † Denotes player spent time with another team before joining Calgary . Statistics reflect time with the Flames only . ‡ Traded mid @-@ season 
 = = = Goaltenders = = = 
 Note : Min , TOI 
 = Minutes played ; W = 
 Wins ; L 
 = Losses ; T , T / OT = 
 Ties ; OTL 
 = Overtime losses ; GA = 
 Goals @-@ against ; GAA 
 = Goals @-@ against average ; SO = 
 Shutouts ; SA 
 = Shots against ; SV = 
 Shots saved ; SV % = Save percentage ; 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 Joe Mullen had the best season of his NHL career , recording personal bests in goals ( 51 ) , assists ( 59 ) and points ( 110 ) , and led all players in the playoffs with 16 goals . As a result , Mullen won numerous post @-@ season awards . He won the Emery Edge Award for leading the league in plus @-@ minus at + 51 , and captured the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy as the league 's most gentlemanly player , earning only 16 penalties in minutes during the regular season . The Flames named him their winner of the Molson Cup for having the most three star selections on the team during the season , and he was named to the First All @-@ Star Team at centre by the league . Mike Vernon was named to the Second All @-@ Star Team at goal , and Al MacInnis on defence . In addition to winning the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs , MacInnis was named a finalist for the James Norris Memorial Trophy as the league 's top defenceman for the first time . Vernon was named a finalist for the Vezina Trophy as the league 's top goaltender . 
 Eight members of the team have subsequently gained induction into the Hockey Hall of Fame . Five players – Lanny McDonald ( 1991 ) , Joe Mullen ( 2000 ) , Al MacInnis ( 2007 ) , Joe Nieuwendyk ( 2011 ) and Doug Gilmour ( 2011 ) – were joined by General Manager Cliff Fletcher ( 2004 ) and two owners : Harley Hotchkiss ( 2006 ) and Doc Seaman ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Transactions = = 
 General Manager Cliff Fletcher made two trades in the days leading to the start of training camp . Mike Bullard , who scored 103 points for the Flames the season previous , feared that the team was set to trade him , but admitted that he was still shocked when Calgary sent him to the St. Louis Blues along with Craig Coxe and a prospect on September 5 , 1988 . In return , the Flames received four players led by Doug Gilmour and Mark Hunter . The Flames then sent oft @-@ injured defenceman Paul Reinhart to the Vancouver Canucks with Steve Bozek in exchange for a draft pick the following day . Calgary made the second deal to alleviate a glut of veteran players and to give young defencemen Brian Glynn and Dana <unk> greater responsibility . 
 The Flames made one deal at the trade deadline , sending Shane <unk> and Perry Berezan to the Minnesota North Stars for rugged winger Brian MacLellan and a draft pick . Calgary made the deal anticipating that MacLellan 's size would help the team compete with some of their larger opponents within the Smythe Division , and benefit the Flames ' power play . 
 = = = Trades = = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 = = Draft picks = = 
 The Flames entered the 1988 NHL Entry Draft with the 21st overall pick by virtue of finishing with the best record in the NHL the year previous . They hoped to make a trade to acquire a pick in the top ten as the team coveted Martin Gelinas and Teemu Selanne . When Los Angeles selected Gelinas seventh overall , the Flames tried to pry the eighth pick from Chicago , but balked at the Blackhawks ' demands . Chicago wanted Perry Berezan , another roster player and Calgary 's first round selection in return . The Flames retained their original pick , and selected goaltender Jason Muzzatti as their first pick . In total , the Flames made 12 selections . 
 Of note for the Flames was their 12th round pick , Sergei Pryakhin . The Soviet Ice Hockey Federation was expected to provide a list of players it would be willing to release to play in North America ahead of the draft , but that expectation failed to materialize . Several Soviet players were drafted regardless , including Pryakhin . General Manager Cliff Fletcher noted that Pryakhin had been dropped from the Soviet national team , and figured that decision could make him eligible to join the Flames . Fletcher was able to complete negotiations with Soviet officials for the player , and Pryakhin became the first Soviet player permitted to play in the NHL , making his debut in Calgary on March 31 , 1989 . 
 = Forgotten Realms = 
 Forgotten Realms is a campaign setting for the Dungeons & Dragons ( D & D ) fantasy role @-@ playing game . Commonly referred to by players and game designers alike as " The Realms " , it was created by game designer Ed Greenwood around 1967 as a setting for his childhood stories . Several years later , Greenwood brought the setting to the D & D game as a series of magazine articles , and the first Realms game products were released in 1987 . Role @-@ playing game products have been produced for the setting ever since , as have various licensed products including sword and sorcery novels , role @-@ playing video game adaptations ( including the first massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game to use graphics ) , and comic books . The Forgotten Realms is one of the most popular D & D settings , largely due to the success of novels by authors such as R. A. Salvatore and numerous role @-@ playing video games , including Pool of Radiance ( 1988 ) , Baldur 's Gate ( 1998 ) , Icewind Dale ( 2000 ) and Neverwinter Nights ( 2002 ) . 
 Forgotten Realms is the name of a fantasy world setting , described as a world of strange lands , dangerous creatures , and mighty deities , where magic and supernatural phenomena are quite real . The premise is that , long ago , the Earth and the world of the Forgotten Realms were more closely connected . As time passed , the inhabitants of planet Earth have mostly forgotten about the existence of that other world – hence the term Forgotten Realms . On the original Forgotten Realms logo , which was used until 2000 , small runic letters read " <unk> lie the lost lands " , an allusion to the connection between the two worlds . 
 = = The world = = 
 The focus of the Forgotten Realms setting is the continent of Faerûn , part of the fictional world of Abeir @-@ Toril , usually called simply Toril , an Earth @-@ like planet with many real @-@ world influences . Unlike Earth , the lands of the Forgotten Realms are not all ruled by the human race : the planet Toril is shared by humans , dwarves , elves , goblins , orcs , and other peoples and creatures . Technologically , the world of the Forgotten Realms is not nearly as advanced as that of Earth ; in this respect , it resembles the pre @-@ industrial Earth of the 13th or 14th century . However , the presence of magic provides an additional element of power to the societies . There are several nation states and many independent cities , with loose alliances being formed for defense or conquest . Trade is performed by ship or horse @-@ drawn vehicle , and manufacturing is based upon cottage industry . 
 = = = Geography = = = 
 Toril consists of several large continents , including Faerûn , the western part of a continent that was roughly modeled after the Eurasian continent on Earth . Faerûn was first detailed in the original Forgotten Realms Campaign Set , published in 1987 by TSR . The other continents include Kara @-@ Tur , <unk> , Maztica , and other yet unspecified landmasses . Kara @-@ Tur , roughly corresponding to ancient East Asia , was later the focus of its own source book Kara @-@ Tur : The Eastern Realms , published in 1988 . There is also a vast subterranean world called the Underdark beneath the surface . 
 Various products detailing specific areas of Faerûn , such as the 2nd edition <unk> <unk> ( 1991 ) , <unk> Gold and Glory ( 1992 ) , <unk> The Shining South ( 1993 ) , and FRS1 The <unk> ( 1993 ) , have been released , and through these much of the continent has been heavily detailed and documented , creating a highly developed setting . 
 In early editions of the setting , The Realms shared a unified cosmology with various other campaign settings called the Great Wheel . In this way each of the Dungeons & Dragons campaign settings were linked together to form one interwoven world connected by various planes of existence . With the release of the 2001 Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting , the setting was given its own distinct and separate cosmological arrangement , with unique planes not explicitly connected to those of the other settings . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Religion plays a large part in the Forgotten Realms , with deities and their followers being an integral part of the world . They do not have a passive role , but in fact interact directly in mortal affairs , answer prayers , and have their own personal agendas . All deities must have worshipers to survive , and all mortals must worship a patron deity to secure a good afterlife . A huge number of diverse deities exist within several polytheistic pantheons ; a large number of supplements have documented many of them , some in more detail than others . 
 Much of the history of The Realms detailed in novels and source books concerns the actions of various deities and The Chosen ( mortal representatives with a portion of their deities ' power ) such as Elminster , <unk> <unk> , Midnight ( who later became the new embodiment of the goddess of magic , <unk> ) , and the Seven Sisters . Above all other deities is Ao , the Overlord . Ao does not sanction worshipers and distances himself from mortals . He is single @-@ handedly responsible for the Time of Troubles , or <unk> , as seen in The Avatar Trilogy . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The setting is the home of several iconic characters popularized by authors , including Elminster the wizard , who has appeared in several series of novels created by Greenwood himself , and Drizzt Do 'Urden , the highly popular Drow , or dark elf , ranger created by R. A. Salvatore . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Ed Greenwood began writing stories about the Forgotten Realms as a child , starting around 1967 ; they were his " dream space for swords and sorcery stories " . Greenwood came up with the Forgotten Realms name from the notion of a multiverse of parallel worlds ; Earth is one such world , and the Realms another . In Greenwood 's original conception , the fantastic legends of Earth derive from a fantasy world , the way to which has been lost . Greenwood discovered the Dungeons & Dragons game in 1975 , and became a serious role @-@ playing enthusiast with the first AD & D game releases in 1978 . The setting became the home of Greenwood 's personal campaign . Greenwood began a Realms campaign in the city of Waterdeep , then started another group known as the Knights of Myth Drannor in Shadowdale . Greenwood felt that his players ' thirst for detail made the Realms what it is : " They want it to seem real , and work on ‘ honest jobs ’ and personal activities , until the whole thing grows into far more than a casual campaign . Roleplaying always governs over rules , and the adventures seem to develop themselves . " Greenwood has stated that his own version of the Forgotten Realms , as run in his personal campaign , is much darker than published versions . 
 Beginning with the periodical 's 30th issue in 1979 , Greenwood published a series of short articles that detailed the setting in The Dragon magazine , the first of which was about a monster known as the <unk> . Greenwood wrote voluminous entries to Dragon magazine , using the Realms as a setting for his descriptions of magic items , monsters , and spells . In 1986 , the American game publishing company TSR began looking for a new campaign setting for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons game , and assigned Jeff Grubb to find out more about the setting used by Greenwood as portrayed in his articles in Dragon . According to Greenwood , Grubb asked him " Do you just make this stuff up as you go , or do you really have a huge campaign world ? " ; Greenwood answered " yes " to both questions . TSR felt that the Forgotten Realms would be a more open @-@ ended setting than the epic Dragonlance setting , and chose the Realms as a ready @-@ made campaign setting upon deciding to publish AD & D 2nd Edition . Greenwood agreed to work on the project , and began working to get the Forgotten Realms officially published . Greenwood sent TSR a few dozen cardboard boxes stuffed with pencil notes and maps , and sold all rights to the Realms for a token fee . Greenwood noted that TSR altered his original conception of the Realms being a place that we could travel to from our world , " Concerns over possible lawsuits ( kids getting hurt while trying to ' find a gate ' ) led TSR to de @-@ emphasize this meaning " . 
 = = = Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 1st edition = = = 
 Although the Realms were yet to be an official campaign world , the module H1 : Bloodstone Pass , released in 1985 by TSR , is now considered to be a part of the Forgotten Realms , although it wasn 't until module H3 The Bloodstone Wars was released that Forgotten Realms became the official setting for the module series . The first official Forgotten Realms product was Douglas Niles 's Darkwalker on Moonshae , the first book in The Moonshae Trilogy , which predates the Forgotten Realms Campaign Set by one month . 
 The Campaign Set ( often referred to as the " Grey Box " ) was later released in 1987 as a boxed set of two source books ( Cyclopedia of the Realms and DM 's Sourcebook of the Realms ) and four large maps , designed by Greenwood in collaboration with author Jeff Grubb . The set introduced the campaign setting and explained how to use it , and reserved space on the map for SSI 's Gold Box computer role @-@ playing games set in the Forgotten Realms . 
 The Forgotten Realms became an instant hit . The compilation module Desert of Desolation was reworked to fit into the Forgotten Realms . The module N5 : Under Illefarn bears the Forgotten Realms logo on the cover , as do the two modules released in 1988 , H4 : The Throne of Bloodstone and <unk> : Swords of the Iron Legion . 
 The Crystal Shard was released in 1988 , and was the first novel to feature the successful character Drizzt Do 'Urden , who has since appeared in more than seventeen subsequent novels , many of which have appeared on the New York Times Best Seller list . In 1988 , the first in a line of Forgotten Realms role @-@ playing video games , Pool of Radiance , was released by Strategic Simulations , Inc . The game was popular , winning the Origins Award for " Best Fantasy or Science Fiction Computer Game of 1988 " . In 1992 , the game was ported to the Nintendo Entertainment System . 
 Several supplements to the original boxed set were released under the first edition rules , including <unk> Waterdeep and the North and <unk> Moonshae in 1987 , and <unk> Empires of the Sands , <unk> The Magister , <unk> The Savage Frontier , <unk> Dreams of the Red Wizards , and <unk> Lords of Darkness in 1988 . Also in 1988 came the City System boxed set , containing several maps of the city of Waterdeep . Ruins of Adventure , a module based on the computer game Pool of Radiance , was released in 1988 . 
 The boxed set Kara @-@ Tur : The Eastern Realms was released in 1988 , giving details of the lands of Kara @-@ Tur which had previously appeared in the 1986 book Oriental Adventures , and were now officially placed in the Forgotten Realms world . The same year , the module <unk> : Mad Monkey vs. the Dragon Claw was released for the Kara @-@ Tur setting as a Forgotten Realms product . 
 In 1989 , DC Comics began publishing a series of Forgotten Realms comics written by Jeff Grubb . Each issue contained twenty @-@ six pages , illustrated primarily by Rags Morales and Dave Simons . Twenty @-@ five issues were published in total , with the last being released in 1991 . A fifty @-@ six page annual Forgotten Realms Comic Annual # 1 : <unk> Nights , illustrated by various artists , was released in 1990 . 
 = = = Advanced Dungeons & Dragons 2nd edition = = = 
 An eponymous module , based on the role @-@ playing video game Curse of the Azure Bonds , was released in 1989 , as was the The Avatar Trilogy series of novels , consisting of Shadowdale , Tantras , and Waterdeep that detailed the storyline which became known as the " Time of Troubles " . A series of module adaptations for these novels ( Shadowdale , Tantras , and Waterdeep ) were released in the same year , along with the Hall of Heroes accessory , detailing many of the major characters appearing in Forgotten Realms novels published up through that time . In early 1990 , the hardcover Forgotten Realms Adventures by Jeff Grubb and Ed Greenwood was released , which introduced the Realms setting to the second edition of the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons game and detailed how the Time of Troubles had changed the setting . The RPGA used the Forgotten Realms city of Ravens Bluff as the setting for their first living campaign . Official RPGA support for this product line included the Living City modules series . A number of sub @-@ settings of the Forgotten Realms were briefly supported in the early 1990s . Three more modules were produced for the Kara @-@ Tur setting . The Horde : Barbarian Campaign Setting , released in 1990 , detailed The <unk> , which also featured a series of three modules . The Maztica Campaign Set , released in 1991 , detailed the continent of Maztica . 
 The original gray boxed set received a revision in 1993 to update it to the second edition Advanced Dungeons & Dragons ( AD & D ) rules system , with the release of a new Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting boxed set , containing three books ( A Grand Tour of the Realms , Running the Realms , and Shadowdale ) and various " monster supplements " , with a new graphic look . Additional material for the setting was released steadily throughout the 1990s . Forgotten Realms novels , such as the Legacy of the Drow series , the first three books of The Elminster Series , and numerous anthologies were also released throughout the 1990s , which led to the setting being hailed as one of the most successful shared fantasy universes of the 1990s . These novels in turn sparked interest in role @-@ playing activity by new gamers . 
 Numerous Forgotten Realms video games were released Between 1990 and 2000 . The Eye of the Beholder PC game was released in 1990 . This game was later followed by two sequels , the first in 1991 , and the second in 1992 . All three games were re @-@ released for DOS on a single disk in 1995 . Another 1991 release was Neverwinter Nights on America Online , the first graphical Massively Multiplayer Online Role @-@ Playing Game ( MMORPG ) . In 1998 , Baldur 's Gate was released , the first in a line of popular role @-@ playing video games developed by BioWare and " considered by most pundits as the hands @-@ down best PC roleplaying game ever " . The game was followed by a sequel , Baldur 's Gate II : Shadows of Amn in 2000 as well as Icewind Dale , a separate game that utilized the same game engine as Baldur 's Gate . Pool of Radiance : Ruins of Myth Drannor was released in 2001 . Several popular Forgotten Realms characters such as Drizzt Do 'Urden and Elminster made minor appearances in these games . 
 = = = Dungeons & Dragons 3rd edition = = = 
 With the release of the 3rd edition Dungeons & Dragons rules system in 2000 by Wizards of the Coast , the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting was released as a hardcover , in 2001 , updating the official material and advancing the timeline of the game world . In 2002 , the Forgotten Realms Campaign Setting won the Origins Award for Best Role @-@ Playing Game Supplement of 2001 . 
 Several additional rulebooks were released for the new edition , including Monster Compendium : Monsters of Faerûn ( 2001 ) , Magic of Faerûn ( 2001 ) , Lords of Darkness ( 2001 ) , Faiths and <unk> ( 2002 ) , Silver Marches ( 2002 ) , Races of Faerûn ( 2003 ) , and <unk> East ( 2003 ) . Adventure modules included Into the Dragon 's Lair ( 2000 ) , Pool of Radiance : Attack on Myth Drannor ( 2001 ) , and City of the Spider Queen ( 2002 ) . 
 In 2002 , Bioware released Neverwinter Nights , set in the northern reaches of Faerûn and operating on the revised 3 @.@ 0 rules for D & D. It was followed by two expansion packs , Shadows of <unk> and Hordes of the Underdark . A sequel using version 3 @.@ 5 of the rules was produced by Obsidian Entertainment in 2006 , itself followed by the expansion sets Mask of the Betrayer and Storm of Zehir . The Forgotten Realms Deluxe Edition compilation was released in 2006 , containing the Baldur 's Gate series ( excluding the Dark Alliance games ) , Icewind Dale series , and all Neverwinter Nights games before Neverwinter Nights 2 . 
 With the release of the version 3 @.@ 5 update to the rules , the Forgotten Realms product line continued to expand . Accessories released included Underdark ( 2003 ) , Player 's Guide to Faerûn ( 2004 ) , Serpent Kingdoms ( 2004 ) , Shining South ( 2004 ) , Lost Empires of Faerûn ( 2005 ) , Champions of Ruin ( 2005 ) , City of <unk> : Waterdeep ( 2005 ) , Champions of Valor ( 2005 ) , Power of Faerûn ( 2006 ) , Mysteries of the Moonsea ( 2006 ) , Dragons of Faerûn ( 2006 ) , and The Grand History of the Realms ( 2007 ) . Adventure modules released included Sons of <unk> ( 2005 ) , The Twilight Tomb ( 2006 ) , Expedition to <unk> ( 2007 ) , <unk> : The Tearing of the Weave ( 2007 ) , Shadowdale : The Scouring of the Land ( 2007 ) , and <unk> : The Empire of Shade ( 2007 ) . 
 = = = Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition = = = 
 With the release of the Dungeons & Dragons 4th Edition , the Forgotten Realms were updated again to the new rules system , featuring a very changed Realms and moving the fictional world 's timeline 104 years into the future . The Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide , released August 2008 , is a 288 @-@ page book for Dungeon Masters . The Forgotten Realms Player 's Guide was released the following month , and contains information for players to help create Forgotten Realms characters . An adventure , Scepter Tower of <unk> , was also released in September 2008 and can be used in combination with the adventure in the Forgotten Realms Campaign Guide to start a Forgotten Realms campaign . In 2008 , the Forgotten Realms also became the setting for the RPGA 's sole living campaign , Living Forgotten Realms , replacing Living Greyhawk . In 2011 , the Neverwinter Campaign Setting was released . 
 = = = Dungeons & Dragons 5th edition = = = 
 With the release of the Dungeons & Dragons 5th Edition , Wizards of the Coast announced that the Forgotten Realms would continue to serve as the official campaign setting for its upcoming published adventure materials . To date four officially licensed products set in the Forgotten Realms have been published : Hoard of the Dragon Queen ( September 2014 ) , Rise of Tiamat ( October 2014 ) , Princes of the Apocalypse ( April 2015 ) and Out of the Abyss ( September 2015 ) . The official campaign guide , Sword Coast Adventurer 's Guide , was released in November 2015 . With the 5th edition the world of Forgotten Realms was again returned to its previous , 3rd edition geography , and the event called The Sundering resulted in the worlds of Abeir @-@ Toril to be split in two . Wizards of the Coast has also announced that its upcoming adventure series will also be set in the Forgotten Realms . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In his book The Fantasy Roleplaying Gamer 's Bible , Sean Patrick <unk> describes the Forgotten Realms as being " the most ambitious fantasy game setting published since <unk> " , and that it " may be the most widely played @-@ in game setting in RPG history . " Similarly , in literature , the novels written in the Forgotten Realms setting have formed one of " the industry 's leading fantasy series " . Over time these novels have gained " unprecedented popularity " , which led , as Marc Oxoby noted in his book , The 1990s , to the novels having an " extraordinary shelf life " , remaining in print for many years . This popular reception has also been reflected in public libraries . For example , Joyce <unk> states in The Readers ' Advisory Guide to Genre Fiction that the novels have been among the most requested books by fans of the fantasy genre . 
 = Central Recreation Ground = 
 The Central Recreation Ground was a cricket ground in Hastings , East Sussex , used for first @-@ class and List A cricket between 1864 and 1996 . The ground was frequently used by Sussex County Cricket Club as one of their outgrounds from 1865 ; in total , Sussex played 143 first @-@ class and 17 List A matches at the ground . Between 1887 and the 1960s , the Central Recreation Ground also played host to the Hastings & St Leonards cricket festival , which attracted many other teams and notable players . In the early twentieth century , the ground hosted seven Gentlemen v Players matches , and notable players to have played at the ground include W.G. Grace , Don Bradman , Jack Hobbs and Denis Compton . Grace made over 40 appearances at the ground , whilst both Hobbs and Compton broke the record for most first @-@ class centuries in a season at the Central Recreation Ground . The ground also hosted a women 's one @-@ day international between England and New Zealand in 1984 . In the 1980s , planning permission was given for the ground be demolished , and the land used to build a shopping centre . After the demolition of the ground in 1996 , the Priory Meadow Shopping Centre was built on the site . 
 = = Cricket history = = 
 In total , the Central Recreation Ground hosted 228 first @-@ class matches , and 14 List A matches . The ground was initially leased from the Cornwallis family ( the descendants of Charles Cornwallis , 1st Marquess Cornwallis ) , until 1869 when the ground was purchased by the cricketing trust . Between 1887 and the 1960s , the ground hosted the Hastings & St. Leonards Festival in September , which was the southern equivalent of the Scarborough Festival . During these festivals , seven Gentlemen v Players matches were played on the ground between 1889 and 1903 , and in 1907 & 1909 , matches took place between Gentlemen of the South and Players of the South . The 1909 match was the only first @-@ class match played by British Army officer Leonard Slater , and was a victory for the Players of the South by 228 runs . 
 W. G. Grace played at the ground over forty times , and during the 1894 Hastings Festival , he scored his 98th first @-@ class century for the Gentleman against the Players . Grace had captained a South of England team against an 18 of Hastings team in 1877 , a match which was described as " a great success , and revived the game in Hastings " . In 1900 , a match took place between a combined Sussex and Surrey team against a Rest of England team containing Grace ; the Rest of England team scored 355 in 3 hours 50 minutes . In 1902 , a joint Sussex and Kent team played a Rest of England team , this time captained by Grace . In the 1902 Gentlemen v. Players match , Grace and Walter Reed made a partnership of 99 as the Gentleman scored 211 ; Reed top @-@ scored with 56 , whilst Grace 's score of 53 was the only other score above 30 . 
 During the 1925 Hastings Festival , Jack Hobbs scored 266 , in a Gents v Players match ; this was his record first @-@ class score , and was also his 15th first @-@ class century in the season , a new record . At the 1947 Hastings Festival , Denis Compton broke Hobbs ' record by scoring a 17th first @-@ class century of the season , in a match against South Africa . Compton was eventually dismissed for 101 , although South Africa won the match by 9 wickets . In 1948 , Don Bradman scored his 115th first @-@ class century in a Hastings Festival match against a South of England team ; his innings lasted 133 minutes . 
 The Central Recreation Ground also hosted many games aside from Hastings Festival matches . Australian teams played at the ground 18 times , with one match in 1878 involving a side with eighteen Hastings players , of whom six played for Kent , three played for Sussex and three played for Surrey . In a 1902 match between Sussex and Surrey at the ground , C.B. Fry and Joe Vine scored an opening partnership of 238 runs , and KS Ranjitsinhji scored the first double @-@ century at the ground , as Sussex scored 705 – 8d , the highest total in a first @-@ class match at the ground . The match also saw Surrey batsmen Bobby Abel and Thomas Hayward score an opening partnership of 246 , the highest partnership ever for the first wicket in a match at the Central Recreation Ground . In 1908 , a match took place at the ground between an English 11 and the Melbourne Cricket Club . A first @-@ class match between Sussex and Kent in 1984 ended in a tie . In the same year , the England women 's cricket team played a 55 overs a side One Day International match against New Zealand . Jan Brittin scored 101 , as England scored 194 – 8 , and in reply New Zealand made 148 – 7 . The last Sussex first @-@ class match at the ground took place in 1996 . 
 In 1954 , The Cricketer magazine noted that Sussex and Kent used to frequently play their matches at Nevill Ground , Tunbridge Wells and the Central Recreation Ground in Hastings ; the article saying " amongst typical considerations which affect the issue are county weeks and festivals " . The players ' tea @-@ room at the Ground had graffito saying " Victoria 1066 " ; Guardian cricket correspondent Matthew Engel joked that " Since the cricket ground is the only place in town not full of French students , this must have been put there by one of William 's soldiers and could well constitute the longest @-@ running gloat in history " . 
 = = Other history = = 
 In 1869 , the ground hosted an archery meeting for the Royal St. Leonards Archers . During the 1890s , the ground hosted local football matches for Rock @-@ a @-@ <unk> ( now Hastings United ) ; in 1895 , it hosted Rock @-@ a @-@ <unk> ' matches in the Hastings Carlisle Cup Competition . In 1896 , the ground hosted a charity match between Hastings and Eastbourne , to raise money for Hastings Rowing Club ; Hastings won the match 3 – 1 , and the match raised almost £ 10 , which was most of the money needed for the rowing club 's new galley . Later in the year , it hosted another match between Hastings and Eastbourne , which Eastbourne won 7 – 2 . 
 In 1905 , the ground hosted a circus , in which American tight rope champion Hermann Davidson fell 60 feet ( 18 m ) to his death after falling off the balancing pole during a performance . Davidson was 45 years old , and had begun training to be a tight @-@ rope walker at the age of 10 . 
 In September 1922 , the ground held a Grand Fete , to raise money to repair the tower of Blacklands Church . In 1948 , the ground was flooded , and the Public Health Committee report into the storm floods had to be withdrawn after a magistrate appeared to provide misinformation in his statutory declaration . In his declaration , he had claimed to have been at the Central Recreation Ground for two 15 minute time periods during the flooding period and claimed to have seen the flooding , but at those times , the ground had not yet been flooded . The ground had previously flooded in 1866 , when one resident noted that it had been underwater many times within their memory . 
 = = Demolition = = 
 In 1982 , Hastings Council voted to relocate the Central Recreation Ground to <unk> , and use the ground 's current location for a shopping centre . However , this proposal was rejected by the Government in 1984 , before the Central Cricket Ground Committee decided to move in 1986 . Planning permission for the shopping centre was granted in 1988 , and the ground was eventually demolished between 1996 and 1997 , being replaced by Priory Meadow Shopping Centre . The shopping centre has a 10 @-@ foot sculpture entitled " The Spirit of Cricket " , with an inscription about the location of the ground there for 130 years . 
 = = Ground records in first @-@ class matches = = 
 Highest total : 705 – 8d Sussex v Surrey , 1902 
 Lowest total : 53 England XI v Australians , 1888 
 Highest individual score : 246 KS <unk> , Sussex v Kent , 1929 
 Best bowling figures : 9 – 28 DL Underwood , Kent v Sussex , 1964 
 Best match figures : 17 – 50 CTB Turner , Australians v England XI , 1888 
 = The X @-@ Files ( season 2 ) = 
 The second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files commenced airing on the Fox network in the United States on September 16 , 1994 , concluded on the same channel on May 19 , 1995 , after airing all 25 episodes . The series follows Federal Bureau of Investigation special agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully , portrayed by David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson respectively , who investigate paranormal or supernatural cases , known as X @-@ Files by the FBI . 
 The second season of The X @-@ Files takes place after the closure of the department following the events of the first season finale . In addition to stand @-@ alone " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " episodes , several episodes also furthered the alien conspiracy mythology that had begun to form . Season two introduced several recurring characters — X ( Steven Williams ) , an informant to Mulder ; Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , Mulder 's partner @-@ turned @-@ enemy ; and the Alien Bounty Hunter ( Brian Thompson ) , a shape @-@ shifting assassin . 
 The storylines were widely affected by the pregnancy of actress Gillian Anderson ; it was decided that Scully would be kidnapped and abducted by aliens , explaining her absence and allowing her to appear comatose two episodes later , which ultimately added more intricacies to the mythology . The season earned seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations . The premiere " Little Green Men " , debuted with a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 and was viewed by 9 @.@ 8 million households , marking a noticeable increase in viewership since the previous year . The series rose from number 111 to number 63 for the 1994 – 95 television year . In addition , the show 's second season has generally received positive reviews from television critics . 
 = = Plot overview = = 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) is reassigned to teach at the FBI Academy while Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) is given lowly surveillance assignments . After he investigates extraterrestrial cases at the Arecibo Observatory in Puerto Rico , Mulder is given a new partner , Alex Krycek ( Nicholas Lea ) , and meets a secretive informant , X ( Steven Williams ) . Mulder is recruited to assist in a hostage negotiation when Duane Barry , an alien abductee , captures four people . Barry eventually kidnaps Scully , believing that if he brings her to his original abduction site , Skyland Mountain , aliens will take her instead of him . Mulder follows but is delayed by Krycek , who is revealed to be a mole working for Cigarette Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) . When Mulder reaches Skyland Mountain , Scully is gone . Barry , who insists that aliens took him , dies soon after an interrogation by Krycek . When Krycek vanishes , Skinner re @-@ opens the X @-@ Files , claiming that is what the conspirators will fear most . 
 Scully turns up comatose in a hospital three months later with no explanation about how she got there . X provides Mulder with information allowing him to take revenge on her captors , but Mulder is instead convinced by Scully 's sister Melissa to visit her bedside . Scully recovers and returns to work shortly thereafter . The agents later investigate a case involving alien biology being injected into teenagers in Wisconsin , and once again they encounter Deep Throat 's killer , who is killed by the local sheriff . 
 When investigating a case involving the murder of identical doctors , the agents come across a shapeshifting Alien Bounty Hunter ( Brian Thompson ) responsible for executing a series of alien clones . During this case a grown woman claiming to be Mulder 's sister Samantha appears , telling Mulder of the Bounty Hunter 's objectives and that she has the ability to identify him . When Scully is kidnapped by the Bounty Hunter , Mulder is forced to trade Samantha for her . During a botched attempt to kill the Bounty Hunter , Samantha is killed . However , it is discovered that this was simply one of many alien clones of Samantha . With the help of X , Mulder pursues the Bounty Hunter to a submarine in the Arctic . Mulder is nearly killed when exposed to the Bounty Hunter 's toxic blood , but is saved by Scully . 
 When a hacker downloads decades ' worth of classified information about aliens onto a digital tape , he gives it to Mulder , who finds that the entire tape is written in Navajo . Cigarette Smoking Man begins searching for the tape and visits Mulder 's father , who calls Mulder to see him shortly afterwards . Before he can reveal anything to Mulder however , he is murdered by Alex Krycek . Scully brings Mulder to New Mexico where she introduces him to Albert Hosteen , a code @-@ talker who can translate the digital tape . Albert 's grandson shows Mulder a boxcar filled with alien corpses . Cigarette Smoking Man tracks Mulder 's location however and orders the boxcar burned . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and development = = = 
 The season premiere was originally supposed to have been written by series creator Chris Carter . In his initial pitch , Mulder would have been sent to Moscow . In fact , the producers wanted to film the episode in Russia , but they were not able to secure the appropriate arrangements . In the end , Carter was unable to complete the script idea , which would have also featured the reopening of the X @-@ Files . Instead , co @-@ executive producers Glen Morgan , James Wong and Howard Gordon penned the opening premiere , " Little Green Men " ; the episode was the first entry to actually show an alien in the series . This delay gave Carter time to write " Duane Barry " , the start of the first two @-@ parter and also the entry wherein the X @-@ Files are re @-@ opened . 
 As the series ended its first season , a problem had arisen for the producers : the pregnancy of Gillian Anderson , who played Dana Scully . Some network executives wanted the role recast , which Carter refused to do . Though they considered having Scully giving birth to an alien child , the producers decided to work around Anderson 's pregnancy by having her abducted and appearing comatose several episodes later . This was described by executive producer Frank Spotnitz as " the best thing that ever happened to the series " as it helped form the intricate mythology that would run throughout the show . The writers decided to close the X @-@ Files at the end of the first season and thus separate Mulder and Scully in the earlier episodes of the season . To hide Anderson 's pregnancy in the early episodes , the producers disguised it with " very fancy trick angles , trench coats , and scenes where she is seated rather than standing " . Anderson was not featured at all in the episode " 3 " , as she was giving birth to her daughter at the time . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The season introduced the character X , played by Steven Williams , who replaced Deep Throat as Mulder 's informant , following Deep Throat 's assassination in the first season finale , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " . X was originally intended to be a woman with Natalija Nogulich already cast in the role , but was replaced by Williams as the writers did not believe she had the " right chemistry " with her co @-@ stars . X was written to be different than Deep Throat ; Deep Throat had been selfless , while X was intended to be selfish and scared . Nicholas Lea , who had previously appeared in a small part in the season one 's " Gender Bender " , was cast as Alex Krycek . Krycek was originally intended as a temporary replacement for Scully when she was abducted , but grew into a character who would last seven seasons on the show . 
 During the production of the season , Duchovny asked Carter " wouldn 't it be great if we had like an alien bounty hunter ? " Carter was positive towards the idea and acted upon it , creating with <unk> the character of the Alien Bounty Hunter for the two @-@ part episodes " Colony " and " End Game " . Actor Brian Thompson auditioned for the role in a casting session , where he was competing with another actor . Spotnitz and Carter did not have much time to cast the character , but they knew this casting would be important since they intended the character to become a recurring character . Thompson was chosen according to Spotnitz because he had a very " distinctive look " about him , most notably his face and mouth . Megan Leitch also appeared in " Colony " and " End Game " as a grown @-@ up clone version of Samantha Mulder , and would return to play Samantha or one of her clones over the other seasons . Carter did not want it to be the real Samantha , since that would have been " straight science fiction " and it was too " ridiculous " to give too many answers . Darren McGavin , star of Kolchak : The Night Stalker , was sought out for the part of Senator Matheson in " Little Green Men " and Mulder 's father in " Colony " and " End Game " , but the roles went to Raymond J. Barry and Peter Donat respectively , while McGavin agreed to play X @-@ Files founder Arthur Dales in season five . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Carter also served as executive producer and showrunner and wrote seven episodes . Co @-@ executive producers and writing team Glen Morgan and James Wong wrote five episodes for their final season as regular writers for the series , although they would both return as consulting producers for part of season four . Supervising producer Howard Gordon wrote five episodes . Frank Spotnitz joined the series , writing two episodes . Cast member David Duchovny collaborated with Carter for two episodes receiving story credit . Glen Morgan 's younger brother Darin Morgan joined the series , contributing the story for an episode written by his older brother and James Wong , and writing another script solo . Paul Brown joined the series as a producer and wrote two episodes . Sara B. Charno wrote two freelance episodes . Vince Gilligan joined the series , writing one episode . Former supervising producer Alex Gansa returned to co @-@ wrote one episode with writing partner Howard Gordon . Chris Ruppenthal returned to write one more freelance episode after last season . Steve De Jarnatt also contributed one freelance episode for the season . Line producer and production manager Joseph Patrick Finn was promoted to producer with this season . Paul Rabwin continued to serve as co @-@ producer for the show . 
 Producing @-@ directors for the show included Rob Bowman , David Nutter , Kim Manners and co @-@ executive producer R. W. Goodwin , who all directed the most of the season ; Bowman with seven , Nutter with five , and Manners and Goodwin each with two . Series creator Chris Carter directed one episode , making his directorial debut , while Daniel Sackheim , Michael Lange , James Contner , James Whitmore , Jr . , Michael Vejar , Nick Marck , Stephen Surjik and Win Phelps each directed one episode . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main cast = = = 
 David Duchovny as Special Agent Fox Mulder ( 25 episodes ) 
 Gillian Anderson as Special Agent Dana Scully ( 24 episodes ) a 
 a ^ She does not appear in " 3 " . 
 = = = Recurring cast = = = 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Episodes marked with a double dagger ( ) are episodes in the series ' Alien Mythology arc . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The second season of The X @-@ Files debuted with " Little Green Men " on September 16 , 1994 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 3 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was viewed by 9 @.@ 8 million households , an increase from the first season 's finale , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " , which was viewed by 8 @.@ 3 million households . " Little Green Men " was , at the time , the highest @-@ rated episode of The X @-@ Files to air . As the season continued , ratings began to grow . The season hit a high with the fifteenth episode , " Fresh Bones " , which was viewed by 10 @.@ 8 million households . The season hit a low with the twenty @-@ first episode , " The Calusari " , which was viewed by 7 @.@ 9 million households and received a rating of 8 @.@ 3 / 16 . The season finale , " Anasazi " , earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , with an 18 share , and was viewed by 9 @.@ 6 million households , marking a 13 @.@ 5 percent increase in households when compared to the previous season finale . The series was ranked as number 63 during the 1994 – 95 television season , a significant increase in ratings when compared to the first season , which finished at number 111 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The DVD Journal gave the season four out of four stars , calling it a " memorable season " . The review highlighted " The Host " , " Duane Barry " and " Ascension " , the cliffhanger finale " Anasazi " , the " unforgettable " " Humbug " , and meeting Mulder and Scully 's families in " Colony " and " One Breath " . IGN gave the season a rating of 9 out of 10 , with the reviewer noting it was an improvement upon the first as it had " started to explore a little " and the " evolution of the characters makes the product shine even though the plotlines have begun to seem familiar " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated several episodes across the season highly , awarding five stars out of five to " Little Green Men " , " Duane Barry " , " One Breath " , " Irresistible " , " Die Hand Die Verletzt " , and " Anasazi " . However , several episodes rated poorly , with " 3 " , " Excelsis Dei " , and " The Calusari " being considered particularly poor . 
 Many critics considered the " Duane Barry " / " Ascension " / " One Breath " story arc to be the best part of the season . Shearman singled out the three @-@ parter as the highlight of the season , noting that the " intimacy " and " sincerity [ of ] the emotion " of the episodes allowed the mythology of The X @-@ Files to play out for a further seven seasons . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files named the story arc the top episode of The X @-@ Files and wrote , " to this day , this remains the defining moment in the series run . So much sprang forth from this trio of episodes . ... Sensational . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The second season earned the series seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations , including its first for Outstanding Drama Series . The episode " Duane Barry " received four nominations for different categories ; CCH Pounder for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series ; Chris Carter for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing for a Drama Series ; James Coblentz for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Editing for a Series – Single Camera Production ; and for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Editing for a Series . Other nominations included John S. Bartley for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series for " One Breath " and Stephen Mark for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Editing for a Series – Single Camera Production for " Sleepless " . This season would also earn the series its first of three wins for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Drama . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 = The Swimming Hole = 
 The Swimming Hole ( also known as Swimming and The Old Swimming Hole ) is an 1884 – 85 painting by the American artist Thomas Eakins ( 1844 – 1916 ) , Goodrich catalog # 190 , in the collection of the Amon Carter Museum in Fort Worth , Texas . Executed in oil on canvas , it depicts six men swimming naked in a lake , and is considered a masterpiece of American painting . According to art historian Doreen Bolger it is " perhaps Eakins ' most accomplished rendition of the nude figure " , and has been called " the most finely designed of all his outdoor pictures " . Since the Renaissance , the human body has been considered both the basis of artists ' training and the most challenging subject to depict in art , and the nude was the centerpiece of Eakins ' teaching program at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts . For Eakins , this picture was an opportunity to display his mastery of the human form . 
 In this work , Eakins took advantage of an exception to the generally prudish Victorian attitude to nudity : swimming naked was widely accepted , and for males was seen as normal , even in public spaces . Eakins was the first American artist to portray one of the few occasions in 19th @-@ century life when nudity was on display . The Swimming Hole develops themes raised in his earlier work , in particular his treatment of buttocks and his ambiguous treatment of the human form ; in some cases it is uncertain as to whether the forms portrayed are male or female . Such themes had earlier been examined in his The Gross Clinic ( 1875 ) and William Rush ( 1877 ) , and would continue to be explored in his paintings of boxers ( Taking the Count , <unk> , and Between Rounds ) and wrestlers ( Wrestlers ) . 
 Although the theme of male bathers was familiar in Western art , having been explored by artists from Michelangelo to Daumier , Eakins ' treatment was novel in American art at the time . The Swimming Hole has been " widely cited as a prime example of homoeroticism in American art " . In 2008 , the art critic Tom Lubbock described Eakins ' work as : 
 a classic of American painting . It shows a scene of healthy , manly , outdoor activity : a group of young fellows having stripped off for a dip . It is based on the swimming excursions that were enjoyed by the artist and his students . Eakins himself appears in the water at bottom right – in signature position , so to speak . " 
 = = Title and composition = = 
 Eakins referred to the painting as Swimming in 1885 , and as The Swimmers in 1886 . The title The Swimming Hole dates from 1917 ( the year after Eakins died ) , when the work was so described by the artist 's widow , Susan <unk> Eakins . Four years later , she titled the work The Old Swimming Hole , in reference to the 1882 poem The Old Swimmin ' -Hole ; by James Whitcomb Riley . The Amon Carter Museum has since returned to Eakins ' original title , Swimming . 
 The painting shows Eakins and five friends or students bathing at Dove Lake , an artificial lake in Mill Creek outside Philadelphia . Each of the men is looking at the water , in the words of Martin A. Berger , " apparently lost in a contemplative moment " . Eakins ' precise rendering of the figures has enabled scholars to identify all those depicted in the work . They are ( from left to right ) : Talcott Williams ( 1849 – 1928 ) , Benjamin Fox ( c . 1865 – c . 1900 ) , John Laurie Wallace ( 1864 – 1953 ) , Jesse Godley ( 1862 – 1889 ) , Harry the dog ( Eakins ' Irish Setter , c . 1880 – 90 ) , George Reynolds ( c . 1839 – 89 ) , and Eakins himself . The rocky promontory on which several of the men rest is the foundation of the Mill Creek mill , which was razed in 1873 . It is the only sign of civilization in the work — no shoes , clothes , or bath houses are visible . The foliage in the background provides a dark background against which the swimmers ' skin tones contrast . 
 The composition is pyramidal . The figure reclining at left leads the viewer 's eye to the seated figure , whose gesture in turn points to Godley at the apex of the compositional pyramid . The diving figure at right leads to the swimming form of Eakins , who painted himself into the scene and whose leftward movement directs attention back into the painting . Eakins enforces this pyramidal structure by manipulating the focus of the painting : the center area containing the swimmers is extremely precise , while the outer areas are diffuse , with " virtually no moderating zones in between " . The lighting within the picture is unnatural — too bright in some places , and too dark in others — although the effect , which tends to accentuate the body lines of the swimmers , is generally subtle . 
 The composition is notable for both its adherence to academic tradition ( the mastery of the figure as an end in itself ) , and its uniqueness in transposing the male nude to an outdoor setting . The depiction of someone diving into water was very rare in the history of Western art . The other figures are artfully arranged to imply a continuous narrative of movement , the poses progressing " from reclining to sitting to standing to diving " ; at the same time , each figure is carefully positioned so that no genitalia are visible . As in his previous works , Eakins chose to include a self @-@ portrait , here as the swimmer at bottom @-@ right . Unlike his appearances in The Gross Clinic or Max Schmitt in a Single Scull , here the artist 's presence is more ambiguous — he may be seen as companion , teacher , or voyeur . The ripple in the water next to Eakins , and the bubbles around the diver , are the only indications of movement in a painting where motion is otherwise arrested ; the water next to the red @-@ headed figure in the lake is still enough to offer a clear reflection . This contrast underscores the tension in the picture between classical prototypes and scientific naturalism . 
 The positioning of the bodies and their musculature refers to classical ideals of physical beauty and masculine camaraderie evocative of Greek art . The reclining figure is a paraphrase of the Dying Gaul , and is juxtaposed with the far less formal self @-@ depiction by the artist . It is possible that Eakins was seeking to reconcile an ancient theme with a modern interpretation ; the subject was contemporary , but the poses of some of the figures recall those of classical sculpture . One possible influence by a contemporary source was Scène d 'été , painted in 1869 by Frédéric Bazille ( 1841 – 70 ) . It is not unlikely that Eakins saw the painting at the Salon while studying in Paris , and would have been sympathetic to its depiction of male bathers in a modern setting . 
 In Eakins ' oeuvre , The Swimming Hole was immediately preceded by a number of similar works on the Arcadian theme . These correspond to lectures he gave on Ancient Greek sculpture and were inspired by the Pennsylvania Academy 's casts of Phidias ' Pan @-@ <unk> procession from the Parthenon marbles . A series of photographs , relief sculptures , and oil sketches culminated in the 1883 Arcadia , a painting that also featured nude figures — posed for by a student , a nephew , and the artist 's fiancée — in a pastoral landscape . 
 = = Studies = = 
 Eakins made several on @-@ site oil sketches and photographic studies before painting The Swimming Hole . It is unknown whether the photographs were taken before the oil sketches were produced or vice versa ( or , indeed , whether they were created on the same day ) . 
 By the early 1880s , Eakins was using photography to explore sequential movement and as a reference for painting . Some time in 1883 or 1884 , he photographed his students engaged in outdoor activities . Four photographs of his students swimming naked in Dove Lake have survived , and bear a clear relationship to The Swimming Hole . The swimmers are seen in the same spot and from the same vantage point , although their positions are entirely different from those in the painting . None of the photographs closely matches the poses depicted in the painting ; this was unusual for Eakins , who typically adhered closely to his photographic studies . " The divergence between these sets of images may hint at lost or destroyed pictures , or it may tell us that the photographs came first , before Eakins ' mental image had crystallized , and before the execution of his first oil sketch . " The poses in the photographs are more spontaneous , while those of the painting are deliberately composed with a classical " severity " . Although no photographic studies have survived that would suggest a more direct connection between the photographs and the painting , recent scholarship has proposed that marks incised onto the canvas and later covered by paint indicate that Eakins made use of light @-@ projected photographs . 
 Eakins combined his studies into a final oil sketch in 1884 , which became the basis for the finished painting . The basic composition remained unchanged , as all six men and the dog appeared in the sketch ; however , Eakins , who usually adhered closely to his sketches when developing a final work , made several uncharacteristic alterations to the specific movements and positions of the figures . A friend and student , Charles <unk> , described the process : 
 ... For a picture ... like the Swimming Hole , a small sketch was made 8 x 10 inches [ 20 x 25 cm ] , then separate studies of the landscape and figures , to get the true tone and color , etc . The diving figure being the most difficult to paint , was first modelled in wax . This gave him a thorough knowledge of every form . 
 = = Commission and reception = = 
 The painting was commissioned in 1884 by Edward <unk> Coates , a Philadelphia businessman who chaired the Committee on Instruction at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , where Eakins taught . Coates intended to pay Eakins $ 800 ( $ 21 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) , which at the time was the largest commission Eakins had been offered . 
 Coates intended the painting for an exhibition at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , and it was shown at the Academy 's exhibition in the fall of 1885 . However , Coates rejected it as unrepresentative of Eakins ' oeuvre . In a November 27 , 1885 letter to Eakins , Coates reasoned : 
 as you will recall one of my chief ideas was to have from you a picture which might some day become part of the Academy collection . The present canvas is to me admirable in many ways but I am inclined to believe that some of the pictures you have are even more representative , and it has been suggested would be perhaps more acceptable for the purpose which I have always had in view . You must not suppose from this that I depreciate the present work - such is not the case . 
 It is not known precisely why Coates failed to purchase the painting ; however , it seems likely that Coates felt the work was too controversial to acquire . Coates , as Head of Instruction at Eakins ' academy , would have been familiar with the subject matter of Eakins ' works , and thus it seems unlikely that the nudity in the painting would have surprised or shocked him . Rather , it seems certain that Coates would have recognized the majority of men in the painting , as all but one were students of Eakins at the academy . He was undoubtedly familiar with the site depicted in the painting too , as it was only a half a mile ( 800 m ) from Haverford College , where Coates studied as an undergraduate . The depiction of a professor and his students together in the nude would have been a sensitive subject for the academy 's directors , who had forbidden Eakins from using Academy students as models , as modeling was considered indecent . Coates chose to exchange The Swimming Hole for the " less controversial genre scene " of Eakins ' The Pathetic Song — today housed in the Corcoran Gallery of Art — and paid Eakins the $ 800 he had offered for the original commission . 
 On February 9 , 1886 , Eakins was forced to resign from the Academy because of his removal of a loincloth from a male model in a class where female students were present . In a letter to Coates on February 15 in which Eakins explained his reasons for resigning , he addressed the issue of nudity in his artwork : 
 My figures at least are not a bunch of clothes with a head and hands sticking out but more nearly resemble the strong living bodies that most pictures show . And in the latter end of a life so spent in study , you at least can imagine that painting is with me a very serious study . That I have but little patience with the false modesty which is the greatest enemy to all figure painting . I see no impropriety in looking at the most beautiful of Nature 's works , the naked figure . If there is impropriety , then just where does such impropriety begin ? Is it wrong to look at a picture of a naked figure or at a statue ? English ladies of the last generation thought so and avoided the statue galleries , but do so no longer . Or is it a question of sex ? Should men make only the statues of men to be looked at by men , while the statues of women should be made by women to be looked at by women only ? Should the he @-@ painters draw the horses and bulls , and the she @-@ painters like Rosa Bonheur the mares and cows ? Must the poor old male body in the dissecting room be mutilated before Miss <unk> can dabble in his guts ? ... Such indignities anger me . Can not anyone see into what contemptible inconsistencies such follies all lead ? And how dangerous they are ? My conscience is clear , and my suffering is past . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Following its rejection by Coates , the painting remained in Eakins ' possession until his death . It was exhibited just twice more during Eakins ' lifetime : at the 1886 Southern Exposition in Louisville , Kentucky , and in 1887 at Chicago 's Inter @-@ State Industrial Exposition , and ignored by critics on both occasions . The painting then disappears from the historical record — there is no further reference to the painting in any records from Eakins or his circle of friends during Eakins ' lifetime . Following Eakins ' death , the painting was exhibited in Philadelphia and New York at memorial exhibitions in 1917 . 
 In 1925 , The Swimming Hole was purchased from the artist 's widow by the community of Fort Worth , Texas for $ 750 ( $ 10 @,@ 100 in 2016 dollars ) . Thereafter it was in the collection of the Fort Worth Art Association , the institutional predecessor of the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth , and was displayed in the city 's public library . In 1990 , the museum announced it intended to sell the painting to build an endowment for the purchase of contemporary art . A public outcry ensued , prompting the museum to search for a local buyer . Eventually , after tumultuous negotiations , the Amon Carter Museum agreed to purchase The Swimming Hole for $ 10 million ( $ 18 million in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = Restorations = = 
 Before its purchase by the Amon Carter Museum , The Swimming Hole appears to have undergone seven different conservatory treatments . It may have been restored prior to its inclusion in Eakins ' memorial exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in 1917 . A photograph from that time reveals cracks in the glazes and a drip mark , possibly caused by the splash of a caustic liquid . After the painting was acquired by the Fort Worth Art Association , it was often lent out for exhibitions and was damaged as a result . In 1937 it was relined by a private gallery in New York City and the drip was painted out . In 1944 it was relined and restored and in 1947 it was restored again , both times by a private New York dealer . The Brooklyn Museum performed two minor restorations in 1954 and 1957 . Although it continued to travel frequently , The Swimming Hole received no comprehensive treatment until 1993 . 
 Following its purchase by the Amon Carter Museum , in June 1993 , Claire M. Barry and staff from the Amon Carter and the Kimbell Art Museums began a major restoration of the painting . According to Barry , " The restoration revealed relatively little significant damage or deterioration not previously visible . Several layers of discolored varnish and overpaint were removed , exposing a rich and varied surface with brushwork ranging from the controlled , almost <unk> strokes forming the figures to the freer treatment of the landscape elements . " 
 Much effort went into distinguishing the original glazes from those added during subsequent restorations . Previous <unk> were removed and a natural resin varnish was applied . The painting 's original frame , long missing , was located in 1992 . It too was cleaned , restored , and reinstalled to the painting . 
 During the restoration , it was discovered that a long @-@ standing ascription of the painting 's date to 1883 was the result of a misinterpretation : the artist 's original inscription of 1885 was painted in a fugitive red @-@ lake pigment that had faded , and was mistakenly repainted by a conservator to the earlier date . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 The Swimming Hole represented the full range of Eakins ' techniques and academic principles . He used life study , photography , wax studies , and landscape sketches to produce a work that manifested his interest in the human form . Lloyd Goodrich ( 1897 – 1987 ) believed the work was " Eakins ' most masterful use of the nude " , with the solidly conceived figures perfectly integrated into the landscape , an image of subtle tonal construction and one of the artist 's " richest pieces of painting " . Another biographer , William Innes Homer ( b . 1929 ) , was more reserved and described the poses of the figures as rigidly academic . Homer found inconsistencies in paint quality and atmospheric effect , and wrote that the painting was unsuccessful in reconciling antique and naturalistic ideals . For him , " it is as though these nudes had been abruptly transplanted from the studio into nature " . 
 Before the mid @-@ 19th century , the subject of the nude male figure in Western art had long been reserved for classical subject matter . In the 19th century , it was not unusual for boys and men to swim without clothing in public , but there was no precedent for this subject in American painting . Although there was an informal convention for multiple @-@ figure compositions featuring female nudes , in America such paintings were exhibited in saloons rather than galleries ; Eakins altered the gender and presented the subject as fine art . Viewed in a broader context , The Swimming Hole has been cited as one of the few 19th @-@ century American paintings that " engages directly with a newly emerging European tradition " — that of the male bather . Eakins ' picture , although not as stylistically progressive as the works of his French contemporaries , parallels the novel thematic direction taken by Bazille in Summer Scene , Georges Seurat ( 1859 – 91 ) ( Bathers at Asnières , 1884 ) and Paul Cézanne ( 1839 – 1906 ) in his numerous explorations of the subject . 
 Eakins ' work influenced the subsequent generation of American realists , particularly the artists of the Ashcan School . George Bellows ' ( 1882 – 1925 ) Forty @-@ two Kids , painted in 1907 , bears obvious similarity to The Swimming Hole , although Bellows ' painting has been interpreted as a parody of the Eakins , and the many naked children of the title are playing in the urban Hudson River of New York City rather than in a rural setting . In a sentiment that reflected Eakins ' philosophy , Bellows later explained his motivation for painting Forty @-@ two Kids : " <unk> and swimmers are the only types whose muscular action can be painted in the nude legitimately . " 
 Eakins ' widow 's retitling of the picture after his death reinforced the popular association with the nostalgic sentiment of Riley 's poem . More recently , the painting 's subject has been compared to the poem " Song of Myself " by Walt Whitman ( 1819 – 92 ) , particularly the section " Twenty @-@ Eight Young Men Bathe by the Shore " , given the shared interest in the imagery of men bathing in the nude . Whitman may have provided inspiration : the celebration of nudity , which in Whitman 's case was an open expression of his homosexuality , informs the art of both men . In 1895 , one of Eakins ' male students reminisced about " us Whitman fellows " , which has been interpreted as a reference to homosexuality . " But for their marital status , however , virtually nothing concrete is known of the private realms or sexual propensities of any of the men depicted ( in The Swimming Hole ) , with the exception of Eakins . " 
 Although the painting has been viewed as a platonic vision of the male nude seen unselfconsciously in a natural setting , by the 1970s some American writers were beginning to see Eakins ' work , and specifically The Swimming Hole , as having homoerotic implications . Critics have paid particular attention to the compositional prominence of the standing figure 's buttocks , which has been interpreted as suggestive of " homoerotic interests " . According to Jonathan Weinberg , The Swimming Hole marked the beginning of homoerotic imagery in American art . Eakins left a record simultaneously provocative and ambiguous on matters of sex . On the basis of the same visual evidence , that of the photographs , oil sketches , and the finished painting of swimmers , art historians have drawn markedly varying conclusions as to the artist 's intent . 
 = Samlesbury witches = 
 The Samlesbury witches were three women from the Lancashire village of Samlesbury – Jane Southworth , Jennet Bierley , and Ellen Bierley – accused by a 14 @-@ year @-@ old girl , Grace Sowerbutts , of practising witchcraft . Their trial at Lancaster Assizes in England on 19 August 1612 was one in a series of witch trials held there over two days , among the most famous in English history . The trials were unusual for England at that time in two respects : Thomas Potts , the clerk to the court , published the proceedings in his The Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches in the Countie of Lancaster ; and the number of the accused found guilty and hanged was unusually high , ten at Lancaster and another at York . All three of the Samlesbury women were acquitted however . 
 The charges against the women included child murder and cannibalism . In contrast , the others tried at the same assizes , who included the Pendle witches , were accused of maleficium – causing harm by witchcraft . The case against the three women collapsed " spectacularly " when the chief prosecution witness , Grace Sowerbutts , was exposed by the trial judge to be " the perjuring tool of a Catholic priest " . 
 Many historians , notably Hugh Trevor @-@ Roper , have suggested that the witch trials of the 16th and 17th centuries were a consequence of the religious struggles of the period , with both the Catholic and Protestant Churches determined to stamp out what they regarded as heresy . The trial of the Samlesbury witches is perhaps one clear example of that trend ; it has been described as " largely a piece of anti @-@ Catholic propaganda " , and even as a show @-@ trial , to demonstrate that Lancashire , considered at that time to be a wild and lawless region , was being purged not only of witches but also of " popish plotters " ( i.e. Catholics ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 King James I , who came to the English throne from Scotland in 1603 , had a keen interest in witchcraft . By the early 1590s , he was convinced that Scottish witches were plotting against him . His 1597 book , Daemonologie , instructed his followers that they must denounce and prosecute any supporters or practitioners of witchcraft . In 1604 , the year following James 's accession to the English throne , a new witchcraft law was enacted , " An Act against <unk> , Witchcraft and dealing with evil and wicked spirits " , imposing the death penalty for causing harm by the use of magic or the exhumation of corpses for magical purposes . James was , however , sceptical of the evidence presented in witch trials , even to the extent of personally exposing discrepancies in the testimonies presented against some accused witches . 
 The accused witches lived in Lancashire , an English county which , at the end of the 16th century , was regarded by the authorities as a wild and lawless region , " fabled for its theft , violence and sexual laxity , where the church was honoured without much understanding of its doctrines by the common people " . Since the death of Queen Mary and the accession to the throne of her half @-@ sister Elizabeth in 1558 , Catholic priests had been forced into hiding , but in remote areas like Lancashire they continued to celebrate mass in secret . In early 1612 , the year of the trials , each justice of the peace ( JP ) in Lancashire was ordered to compile a list of the recusants in their area – those who refused to attend the services of the Church of England , a criminal offence at that time . 
 = = = Southworth family = = = 
 The 16th @-@ century English Reformation , during which the Church of England broke away from the authority of the pope and the Catholic Church , split the Southworth family of Samlesbury Hall . Sir John Southworth , head of the family , was a leading recusant who had been arrested several times for refusing to abandon his Catholic faith . His eldest son , also called John , did convert to the Church of England , for which he was disinherited , but the rest of the family remained staunchly Catholic . 
 One of the accused witches , Jane Southworth , was the widow of the disinherited son , John . Relations between John and his father do not seem to have been amicable ; according to a statement made by John Singleton , in which he referred to Sir John as his " old Master " , Sir John refused even to pass his son 's house if he could avoid it , and believed that Jane would probably kill her husband . Jane Southworth ( née Sherburne ) and John were married in about 1598 , and the couple lived in Samlesbury Lower Hall . Jane had been widowed only a few months before her trial for witchcraft in 1612 , and had seven children . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 On 21 March 1612 , Alizon Device , who lived just outside the Lancashire village of Fence , near Pendle Hill , encountered John Law , a pedlar from Halifax . She asked him for some pins , which he refused to give to her , and a few minutes later Law suffered a stroke , for which he blamed Alizon . Along with her mother Elizabeth and her brother James , Alizon was summoned to appear before local magistrate Roger Nowell on 30 March 1612 . Based on the evidence and confessions he obtained , Nowell committed Alizon and ten others to Lancaster Gaol to be tried at the next assizes for maleficium , causing harm by witchcraft . 
 Other Lancashire magistrates learned of Nowell 's discovery of witchcraft in the county , and on 15 April 1612 JP Robert Holden began investigations in his own area of Samlesbury . As a result , eight individuals were committed to Lancaster Assizes , three of whom – Jane Southworth , Jennet Bierley , and Ellen Bierley – were accused of practising witchcraft on Grace Sowerbutts , Jennet 's granddaughter and Ellen 's niece . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The trial was held on 19 August 1612 before Sir Edward Bromley , a judge seeking promotion to a circuit nearer London , and who may therefore have been keen to impress King James , the head of the judiciary . Before the trial began , Bromley ordered the release of five of the eight defendants from Samlesbury , with a warning about their future conduct . The remainder – Jane Southworth , Jennet Bierley , and Ellen Bierley – were accused of using " diverse <unk> and wicked Arts , called <unk> , <unk> , Charmes , and <unk> , in and upon one Grace Sowerbutts " , to which they pleaded not guilty . Fourteen @-@ year @-@ old Grace was the chief prosecution witness . 
 Grace was the first to give evidence . In her statement she claimed that both her grandmother and aunt , Jennet and Ellen Bierley , were able to transform themselves into dogs and that they had " haunted and vexed her " for years . She further alleged that they had transported her to the top of a <unk> by her hair , and on another occasion had tried to persuade her to drown herself . According to Grace , her relatives had taken her to the house of Thomas <unk> and his wife , from whom they had stolen a baby to suck its blood . Grace claimed that the child died the following night , and that after its burial at Samlesbury Church Ellen and Jennet dug up the body and took it home , where they cooked and ate some of it and used the rest to make an ointment that enabled them to change themselves into other shapes . 
 Grace also alleged that her grandmother and aunt , with Jane Southworth , attended <unk> held every Thursday and Sunday night at Red Bank , on the north shore of the River Ribble . At those secret meetings they met with " foure black things , going upright , and yet not like men in the face " , with whom they ate , danced , and had sex . 
 Thomas <unk> , the father of the baby allegedly killed and eaten by the accused , was the next to give evidence . He confirmed that his child had died of unknown causes at about one year old . He added that Grace Sowerbutts was discovered lying as if dead in his father 's barn on about 15 April , and did not recover until the following day . Two other witnesses , John Singleton and William <unk> , confirmed that Sir John Southworth , Jane Southworth 's father @-@ in @-@ law , had been reluctant to pass the house where his son lived , as he believed Jane to be an " evil woman , and a Witch " . 
 = = = Examinations = = = 
 Thomas Potts , the clerk to the Lancaster Assizes , records that after hearing the evidence many of those in court were persuaded of the accused 's guilt . On being asked by the judge what answer they could make to the charges laid against them , Potts reports that they " humbly fell upon their knees with weeping <unk> " , and " desired him [ Bromley ] for Gods cause to examine Grace Sowerbutts " . Immediately " the countenance of this Grace Sowerbutts changed " ; the witnesses " began to quarrel and accuse one another " , and eventually admitted that Grace had been coached in her story by a Catholic priest they called Thompson . Bromley then committed the girl to be examined by two JPs , William Leigh and Edward <unk> . Under questioning Grace readily admitted that her story was untrue , and said she had been told what to say by Jane Southworth 's uncle , Christopher Southworth aka Thompson , a Jesuit priest who was in hiding in the Samlesbury area ; Southworth was the chaplain at Samlesbury Hall , and Jane Southworth 's uncle by marriage . Leigh and <unk> questioned the three accused women in an attempt to discover why Southworth might have fabricated evidence against them , but none could offer any reason other than that each of them " goeth to the [ Anglican ] Church " . 
 After the statements had been read out in court Bromley ordered the jury to find the defendants not guilty , stating that : 
 God hath delivered you beyond expectation , I pray God you may use this <unk> and favour well ; and take heed you fall not hereafter : And so the court doth order that you shall be delivered . 
 Potts concludes his account of the trial with the words : " Thus were these poore Innocent creatures , by the great care and <unk> of this honourable Judge , delivered from the danger of this <unk> ; this <unk> practise of the Priest laid open " . 
 = = The Wonderfull Discoverie of Witches in the Countie of Lancaster = = 
 Almost everything that is known about the trials comes from a report of the proceedings written by Thomas Potts , the clerk to the Lancaster Assizes . Potts was instructed to write his account by the trial judges , and had completed the work by 16 November 1612 . Bromley revised and corrected the manuscript before its publication in 1613 , declaring it to be " truly reported " and " fit and worthie to be published " . Although written as an apparently verbatim account , the book is not a report of what was actually said at the trial , but instead a reflection on what happened . Nevertheless , Potts " seems to give a generally trustworthy , although not comprehensive , account of an Assize witchcraft trial , provided that the reader is constantly aware of his use of written material instead of verbatim reports " . 
 In his introduction to the trial , Potts writes ; " Thus have we for a time left the <unk> Witches of the Forrest of Pendle , to the good consideration of a very sufficient jury . " Bromley had by then heard the cases against the three Pendle witches who had confessed to their guilt , but he had yet to deal with the others , who maintained their innocence . He knew that the only testimony against them would come from a nine @-@ year @-@ old girl , and that King James had cautioned judges to examine carefully the evidence presented against accused witches , warning against credulity . In his conclusion to the account of the trial , Potts says that it was interposed in the expected sequence " by special order and commandment " , presumably of the trial judges . After having convicted and sentenced to death three witches , Bromley may have been keen to avoid any suspicion of credulity by presenting his " masterful exposure " of the evidence presented by Grace Sowerbutts , before turning his attention back to the remainder of the Pendle witches . 
 = = Modern interpretation = = 
 Potts declares that " this Countie of Lancashire ... now may lawfully bee said to abound <unk> in Witches of divers kinds as Seminaries , <unk> , and Papists " , and describes the three accused women as having once been " obstinate Papists , and now came to Church " . The judges would certainly have been keen to be regarded by King James , the head of the judiciary , as having dealt resolutely with Catholic recusants as well as with witchcraft , the " two big threats to Jacobean order in Lancashire " . Samlesbury Hall , the family home of the <unk> , was suspected by the authorities of being a refuge for Catholic priests , and it was under secret government surveillance for some considerable time before the trial of 1612 . It may be that JP Robert Holden was at least partially motivated in his investigations by a desire to " smoke out its Jesuit chaplain " , Christopher Southworth . 
 The English experience of witchcraft was somewhat different from the European one , with only one really mass witchhunt , that of Matthew Hopkins in East Anglia during 1645 . That one incident accounted for more than 20 % of the number of witches it is estimated were executed in England between the early 15th and mid @-@ 18th century , fewer than 500 . The English legal system also differed significantly from the inquisitorial model used in Europe , requiring members of the public to accuse their neighbours of some crime , and for the case to be decided by a jury of their peers . English witch trials of the period " revolved around popular beliefs , according to which the crime of witchcraft was one of ... evil @-@ doing " , for which tangible evidence had to be provided . 
 Potts devotes several pages to a fairly detailed criticism of the evidence presented in Grace Sowerbutts ' statement , giving an insight into the discrepancies that existed during the early 17th century between the Protestant establishment 's view of witchcraft and the beliefs of the common people , who may have been influenced by the more continental views of Catholic priests such as Christopher Southworth . Unlike their European counterparts , the English Protestant elite believed that witches kept familiars , or companion animals , and so it was not considered credible that the Samlesbury witches had none . Grace 's story of the sabbat , too , was unfamiliar to the English at that time , although belief in such secret gatherings of witches was widespread in Europe . Most demonologists of the period , including King James , held that only God could perform miracles , and that he had not given the power to go against the laws of nature to those in league with the Devil . Hence Potts dismisses Sowerbutts ' claim that Jennet Bierley transformed herself into a black dog with the comment " I would know by what means any Priest can <unk> this point of Evidence " . He equally lightly dismisses Grace 's account of the sabbat she claimed to have attended , where she met with " foure black things ... not like men in the face " , with the comment that " The <unk> [ priest ] mistakes the face for the <unk> : For Chattox [ one of the Pendle witches ] and all her fellow witches agree , the <unk> is cloven @-@ footed : but <unk> [ Chattox 's familiar ] had a very good face , and was a proper man . " 
 It is perhaps unlikely that the accused women would have failed to draw the examining magistrate 's attention to their suspicions concerning Grace Sowerbutts ' motivations when first examined , only to do so at the very end of their trial when asked by the judge if they had anything to say in their defence . The trial of the Samlesbury witches in 1612 may have been " largely a piece of anti @-@ Catholic propaganda " , or even a " show @-@ trial " , the purpose of which was to demonstrate that Lancashire was being purged not only of witches , but also of " popish plotters " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Bromley achieved his desired promotion to the Midlands Circuit in 1616 . Potts was given the <unk> of <unk> Park by King James in 1615 , to breed and train the king 's hounds . In 1618 he was given responsibility for " collecting the forfeitures on the laws concerning sewers , for twenty @-@ one years " . Jane Southworth 's eldest son , Thomas , eventually inherited his grandfather 's estate of Samlesbury Hall . 
 = Emilie de Ravin = 
 Emilie de Ravin ( / <unk> də <unk> / ; born 27 December 1981 ) is an Australian actress . She has played Tess Harding on Roswell and Claire Littleton on the ABC drama Lost . In 2012 she guest @-@ starred as Belle on the ABC drama Once Upon a Time and became a series regular beginning with season two . 
 De Ravin 's film credits include Santa 's Slay ( 2005 ) , The Hills Have Eyes ( 2006 ) and Ball Don 't Lie ( 2008 ) . She starred as Emily , the heroin @-@ addicted ex @-@ girlfriend of Brendan Frye , in the neo @-@ noir film Brick ( 2005 ) . She had a cameo in Public Enemies ( 2009 ) and more recently starred in Remember Me ( 2010 ) . De Ravin was included on Maxim 's Hot 100 list three times : in 2005 , on No. 47 , the next year on No. 65 , and in 2008 on No. 68 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 De Ravin was born in Mount Eliza , Victoria , Australia , an outer southeastern suburb of Melbourne . Having studied ballet since the age of nine at Christa Cameron School of Ballet in Melbourne , and being home schooled by her mother , she was accepted into the Australian Ballet School at fifteen , where she performed in productions with The Australian Ballet as well as <unk> 301 . 
 She studied acting at Australia 's National Institute of Dramatic Art , and with the Prime Time Actors Studio in Los Angeles . 
 = = Career = = 
 De Ravin 's first major role was a recurring part as <unk> in the TV series Beastmaster . She went on to appear as alien / human hybrid Tess Harding in the teen television series , Roswell . She landed this role one month after moving to Los Angeles at the age of 18 . 
 In 2004 , De Ravin was cast to portray Claire Littleton on the hit ABC drama Lost . Speaking about the success of Lost , she said : " It 's sort of hard to say . You read something and have a good feeling about it , it sounds great , ties nicely together and then shooting something , editing it , the music , the actors involved , everything sort of plays a huge part . Everyone involved had a great feeling towards it , but you never really know . " She was a series regular for the first four seasons and the sixth and final season . She was not a regular in season five but was under a holding contract with ABC Network . 
 In 2005 , De Ravin was cast to portray Emily <unk> , the heroin @-@ addicted ex @-@ girlfriend of Brendan Frye ( Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt ) , in the neo @-@ noir film Brick . In an interview about the film , Ravin told that she was attracted by the script because it was original and the teens in the film are very deep and emotional for their age . 
 A year later , De Ravin had a lead role and was cast as Brenda Carter in the remake of The Hills Have Eyes . The film performed well at the box office . In 2007 , Variety reported that she would be starring in the film Ball Don 't Lie , which premiered at the 2008 Tribeca Film Festival , which arrived in cinemas early 2009 . De Ravin appeared in William Dear 's The Perfect Game , and appeared in the 2009 film Public Enemies as a bank teller named Barbara Patzke . 
 De Ravin was cast in the movie adaption of the video game Onimusha , but due to producer Samuel <unk> 's other project The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus , and star Heath Ledger 's death , <unk> was forced to push back the release date of the film . Onimusha is postponed for an unknown amount of time and there is not any confirmation if De Ravin will continue the project . De Ravin filmed Remember Me in the summer of 2009 . The film received its wide release on 12 March 2010 . She was a regular on the sixth and final season of Lost . 
 In 2012 she guest @-@ starred as Belle on the ABC fantasy drama , Once Upon a Time . After sporadic appearances in the first season , she was promoted to a series regular in the second . 
 De Ravin starred in the Finnish film Love and Other Troubles , directed by Samuli <unk> . The film tells the story of Ville ( Jussi <unk> ) and his father ( Ville Virtanen ) , who both fall in love with the same woman , played by De Ravin . 
 She was to star as Anthony LaPaglia 's character 's daughter in the new drama series Americana in 2012 , but ABC passed on the pilot . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 After three years of dating , actor Josh Janowicz proposed to De Ravin on New Year 's Day 2003 in Melbourne , which she said " was very impromptu and very sweet " . She met Janowicz in Los Angeles , and said that " our life together always comes before work . You can 't buy love or family . " While filming Lost , De Ravin flew to and from Hawaii " once or twice a week " to return to her home in Burbank , California , which she shared with Janowicz and their poodle . 
 The couple married 19 June 2003 ( not 2006 , when they had a public celebration ) in Melbourne , Australia . They separated six months after they married , and then reconciled . In June 2009 , it was reported that they were living separately and had filed for divorce . In October 2009 , she called off the divorce after a trip to Japan with her husband . On 8 July 2014 , de Ravin filed for divorce from Janowicz . 
 According to court documents , the pair wed on 19 June 2003 , despite their wedding ceremony on 26 June 2006 ; the documents further confirm that the couple separated on 1 November 2013 . On 3 October 2015 , de Ravin announced via Twitter that she was expecting her first child with her boyfriend Eric <unk> . On March 12 , 2016 , she gave birth to a baby girl named Vera Audrey de Ravin @-@ <unk> . The couple announced their engagement on July 6 , 2016 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 = New York State Route 344 = 
 New York State Route 344 ( NY 344 ) is a state highway located in Columbia County , New York , in the United States . The route is 1 @.@ 90 miles ( 3 @.@ 06 km ) in length and serves primarily as an access road to the Bash Bish Falls state parks on both sides of the New York – Massachusetts border . The western terminus of NY 344 is at NY 22 in Copake Falls . Its eastern terminus is at the Massachusetts state line , where it continues into Bash Bish Falls State Park as Falls Road , a locally maintained highway . NY 344 was assigned c . 1932 and extended to its current length by 1953 after NY 22 was rerouted to bypass Copake Falls . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 344 begins at an intersection with NY 22 in the hamlet of Copake Falls . The road heads to the southeast , turning eastward into Taconic State Park . NY 344 intersects with a few local roads at the border of the park , where it runs along the south base of Sunset Rock , an 1 @,@ 800 feet ( 550 m ) high , dual @-@ state mountain . The route continues eastward , along the base of Cedar Mountain before beginning to ascend the mountain . While climbing Cedar Mountain , NY 344 crosses into Massachusetts and becomes the unnumbered Falls Road , a local roadway providing access to Bash Bish Falls State Park . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 344 was assigned c . 1932 to a 1 @.@ 52 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 45 km ) long highway extending from Copake Falls in the west to the Massachusetts state line in the east . At the time , NY 22 served Copake Falls directly instead of bypassing it . NY 22 was rerouted to bypass Copake Falls on a new roadway to the west of the hamlet between 1947 and 1953 . NY 344 was then extended northward on NY 22 's former alignment to meet the new bypass north of Copake Falls . The southern half of NY 22 's old routing into the hamlet remained state @-@ maintained as well and is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Copake , Columbia County . 
 = Interstate 29 in Iowa = 
 In the U.S. state of Iowa , Interstate 29 ( I @-@ 29 ) is a north – south Interstate Highway which closely parallels the Missouri River . I @-@ 29 enters Iowa from Missouri near Hamburg and heads to the north @-@ northwest through the Omaha @-@ Council Bluffs and the Sioux City areas . It exits the state by crossing the Big Sioux River into South Dakota . For its entire distance through the state , it runs on the flat land between the Missouri River and the Loess Hills . 
 I @-@ 29 was built in sections over a period of 15 years . When there was a shortage of male workers , female workers stepped in to build a twenty @-@ mile ( 32 km ) section near Missouri Valley . Between Council Bluffs and Sioux City , I @-@ 29 replaced U.S. Route 75 ( US 75 ) as the major route in western Iowa . As a result of I @-@ 29 's creation , US 75 south of Sioux City was relocated into Nebraska . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Interstate 29 enters Iowa south of Hamburg . The interstate heads northwest , where it meets Iowa Highway 333 ( Iowa 333 ) at a diamond interchange . From Hamburg , I @-@ 29 continues to the northwest for seven miles ( 11 km ) where it meets Iowa 2 three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of Nebraska City , Nebraska . North of the Iowa 2 interchange , the interstate straightens out to the north ; interchanges serving Percival , Thurman , and Bartlett are spaced out every four and a half miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) . At the US 34 interchange near Glenwood , I @-@ 29 is joined by US 275 . 
 North of Glenwood , I @-@ 29 / US 275 continue north towards Council Bluffs . The two routes meet Iowa 370 , which crosses into Nebraska providing access to Offutt Air Force Base in Bellevue , Nebraska . Near Lake Manawa , US 275 splits away from I @-@ 29 at the Iowa 92 <unk> three @-@ quarters mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) north of the split , the interstate is joined from the east by Interstate 80 . The two interstates head west together through southern Council Bluffs for three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . When the two interstates split at a Y interchange , I @-@ 80 immediately crosses the Missouri River into Nebraska , and I @-@ 29 immediately turns to the north . Two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) to the north is a modified Y interchange with US 6 and the eastern end of I @-@ 480 . 
 North of Council Bluffs , I @-@ 29 is joined by I @-@ 680 near Crescent . The two interstates travel north together for nine miles ( 14 km ) before I @-@ 680 splits off to the east near Loveland . I @-@ 29 continues north for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to Missouri Valley , where it intersects US 30 . North of Missouri Valley , the interstate turns to the northwest towards <unk> and then straightens out again south of <unk> , where I @-@ 29 meets the western end of Iowa 127 . From <unk> , it travels north for 23 miles ( 37 km ) to the Iowa 175 interchange at <unk> , passing Little Sioux and <unk> . 
 North of <unk> , I @-@ 29 continues northwest for fifteen miles ( 24 km ) towards Sloan , where it meets the western end of Iowa 141 . As it approaches the Sioux City metro area , it passes the Sioux Gateway Airport at Sergeant Bluff . At the Singing Hills Boulevard interchange , northbound is joined by southbound U.S. Route 75 Business ( US 75 Bus . ) . One mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) later , US 75 Bus. ends at the cloverleaf interchange with US 20 / US 75 , which is also the eastern end of Interstate 129 . 
 For the next three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the I @-@ 129 interchange , I @-@ 29 runs closely , as close as 200 feet ( 61 m ) , to the Missouri River . The interstate follows the curve of the river and turns to the west . It meets Gordon Drive , which carries US 20 Bus . US 20 Bus. traffic is directed onto the interstate for one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) before it exits via a volleyball interchange which represents the national northern end of U.S. Route 77 . I @-@ 29 continues west along the Missouri River , and after the Big Sioux River converges into the Missouri , I @-@ 29 follows the Big Sioux . Shortly before it crosses the Big Sioux into South Dakota , Iowa 12 splits away to the north . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction of Interstate 29 began in the late 1950s in the Sioux City area . The first section to open , a three @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) stretch from the Big Sioux River to the then @-@ US 20 / US 77 bridge across the Missouri River , opened around October 1 , 1958 . In September 1961 , I @-@ 29 was extended across the Big Sioux River to South Dakota . On April 1 , 1962 , some of the northbound directional spans collapsed into the Big Sioux River at the South Dakota state line as a result of flooding and bridge scour . 
 North of Council Bluffs , a twenty @-@ mile ( 32 km ) section to Missouri Valley opened in November 1958 . By December 1967 , the two sections were connected , creating 100 miles ( 160 km ) of continuous interstate highway . Due to a shortage of male workers , at least 20 women were enlisted to help build this section of I @-@ 29 . The women were paid $ 2 @.@ 00 hourly ( $ 14 @.@ 00 hourly in 2016 dollars ) , the same wage as men would have earned . 
 Construction of I @-@ 29 in the Council Bluffs area was completed in 1970 and the route was open to Glenwood in the same year . Additional interchanges were added in the Sioux City and Council Bluffs areas between 1970 and 1971 . The last thirty miles ( 48 km ) of interstate were constructed and opened in sections over the next two years ; the last section opened on December 15 , 1972 . 
 In 1973 , US 34 was expanded to four lanes near Glenwood , which resulted in US 34 being rerouted onto I @-@ 29 for three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) . In 2003 , US 275 was rerouted onto I @-@ 29 from the same interchange near Glenwood northward to Iowa 92 at Council Bluffs . The former US 275 alignment was turned over to Mills and Pottawattamie Counties . 
 Much of I @-@ 29 was built next to existing highways , most notably US 75 . When the section of I @-@ 29 opened between Council Bluffs and Missouri Valley , US 75 was rerouted onto I @-@ 29 . When construction connecting the Sioux City and Council Bluffs segments was completed , US 75 was again rerouted onto I @-@ 29 . In the mid @-@ 1980s , US 75 , from Council Bluffs to Sioux City , was completely rerouted out of Iowa , instead extending up the former US 73 corridor in Nebraska . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Rembrandt ( horse ) = 
 Rembrandt ( 15 March 1977 – 30 October 2001 ) was a dark bay Westphalian gelding ridden for Germany by Nicole Uphoff in dressage competitions . Together , the pair won four Olympic gold medals , three gold and one silver World Equestrian Games medals , and numerous other international championships . Although known as a sensitive horse prone to spookiness , Rembrandt 's elegance and expression in the ring allowed him to become one of the top horses in the sport of dressage . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rembrandt was foaled in 1977 by Herbert de <unk> . His sire was <unk> II , a famous Westphalian stallion during the 1970s , and his dam was Adone , full sister to <unk> , a multiple Olympic medal winning dressage horse under German rider Reiner <unk> . Due to his Thoroughbred @-@ like appearance , several riders passed over a chance to purchase the gelding as a youngster . In 1981 , he was purchased by Nicole Uphoff 's father , Jürgen Uphoff , as a mount for his then @-@ 14 @-@ year @-@ old daughter . Rembrandt was too much for her , however , and he was sent to train with Klaus <unk> , a noted trainer who saw his potential and advised the <unk> to keep the horse , despite his spookiness and sensitivity . 
 = = Competitive career = = 
 In 1985 , Rembrandt and Uphoff began to compete at events for young riders , and in 1986 , the pair began working with Uwe Schulten @-@ Baumer , a well @-@ known dressage coach . In 1987 , the pair began to compete , and win , at the international level . They rose to the top of the dressage world with unheard @-@ of speed , due to Rembrandt 's elegance and expression in the ring . Their rise to fame resulted in a 1988 Olympic nomination . Uphoff switched trainers four months before the Games began , leaving Schulten @-@ Baumer to work with Harry Boldt , the German national coach . 
 Rembrandt and Uphoff were Olympic Champions twice , in 1988 in Seoul and 1992 in Barcelona . Both times they took both individual gold and a gold medal with the German team . The Barcelona games resulted in Rembrandt being titled a " living work of art " by one German sports commentator . During the last two years of his career , Rembrandt began to decline slightly , and he missed the team nomination to the 1996 Summer Olympics . Uphoff used her right as defending champion to compete as an individual , and they were again part of the German team in Atlanta , where the pair eventually placed 14th . This placement was despite being pulled from competition before the last round , due to an injury , at which point he was in 8th place . Rembrandt and Uphoff took both individual and team gold at the first World Equestrian Games in 1990 . In 1993 , he was injured by a kick from another horse during a victory lap at the German Championships , but recovered from the blow to take individual silver at the 1994 World Equestrian Games . The German team , including Uphoff , again took gold . 
 Rembrandt and Uphoff also competed at many other international @-@ level events . In 1989 , Rembrandt made his European Dressage Championships debut at Mondorf , Luxembourg , where they took both individual and team gold . It was the first time that the gold @-@ medal winning German team ( which had also won the previous 12 team golds ) had been made up of four female riders . In 1991 , at the Championships in Donaueschingen , Germany , the pair took silver in the Grand Prix Special , while again riding to gold as part of the German team . The silver medal was the first defeat in three years for the pair , and was dealt by another Schulten @-@ Baumer student , Isabell Werth on Gigolo <unk> . At the 1995 Championships , held in Mondorf , Luxembourg , Rembrandt again assisted the German team to a gold medal , while taking 5th individually . The pair also won seven times at the Stuttgart German Masters international show , the last in 1995 . This was a record number of wins until 2010 , when Werth won for an eighth time , and Uphoff remains the only rider to have won seven masters titles on a single horse ( Werth rode three different horses to her eight victories ) . 
 = = Later life and legacy = = 
 In 1996 , Rembrandt and Uphoff gave a farewell show at his official retirement at the Stuttgart Indoor Show . He spent the rest of his life at Uphoff 's farm . On October 30 , 2001 , he was euthanized after his health deteriorated quickly and he was unable to rise . 
 Rembrandt 's transitions , particularly from passage to extended trot back to passage , have been called " unequalled " . He was also known for his spookiness , however , to the point that crowds hushed themselves when he was performing . He is known as a " legendary " dressage horse , and mounted upon Rembrandt , Nicole Uphoff pioneered an era of female @-@ dominated dressage competitions . 
 In 2009 , Uphoff donated Rembrandt 's saddle to the equestrian museum at CHIO Aachen in Germany . 
 = West Worldham = 
 West Worldham is a small village in the East Hampshire district of Hampshire , England . It is 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) southeast of Alton . Hartley Mauditt and East Worldham are nearby , which along with West Worldham form the Parish of Worldham . West Worldham contains some eighteen houses with a population of about 50 ; about half the population of 1851 , when it was 98 . Of note is the Manor Farm and cottage and the late 12th century St Nicholas Church , both Grade II listed buildings . 
 = = History = = 
 Archeological findings in the fields between West and East Worldham reveal that the area has been visited and inhabited since at least the Palaeolithic era . An Iron Age hillfort , dated to around 100 BC , lay on the summit of King John 's Hill , to the east of East Worldham . The Romans built a road from Chichester to Silchester that passed below the hill over what is now Green Street and <unk> Lane . 
 The village is believed to have been part of " Werildeham " , mentioned in the Domesday Book . At this time , Worldham manor was held by Marshal Geoffrey de Venuz . However , the first mention of West Worldham as a village is in a document dated October 1277 . In the late 12th century , Richard de Annecy granted the newly built church of St Nicholas of <unk> to Hamble Priory . 
 During its history , Worldham has been spelled in many different ways , including <unk> , Worldham and <unk> in the 14th century and <unk> in the 16th century . An early occupant was Thomas <unk> , who " died possessed of West <unk> lands and tenements " . During the reign of Edward II , " John <unk> was seized in his demesne as of fee of certain tenements and lands afterwards called the manor of West Worldham and Matilda " . Godwin held Worldham during this period , and the land was assessed at 1 hide and 1 <unk> . In 1428 , the village had " not ten <unk> <unk> " . During the medieval period , the area was a noted hunting ground , and the descendents of Geoffrey de Venuz established a private deer park and hunting lodge near here . 
 The naturalist and ornithologist Gilbert White immortalised the localities of the region , including West Worldham , in his The Natural History and Antiquities of Selborne ( 1789 ) . In 1846 , Henry Moody , curator of the Winchester Museum , wrote about West Worldham , " a perpetual curacy in the gift of Winchester College , worth according to the Parliamentary returns £ 38 ; but has since received two additional endowments of £ 200 from Queen Anne 's Bounty , and £ 200 from the warden and fellows of Winchester College , who are the <unk> of the <unk> , and patrons of the living . " In the next decade , John Dutton , 2nd Baron Sherborne was lord of the manor and his son , James Dutton , 3rd Baron Sherborne , was noted to be its owner in the 1870s . In the late 1800s , William Wickham , MP , was the Guardian of West Worldham . By the early 20th century , the parish of Worldham remained under ownership of Winchester College and the Dutton Estate . 
 In May 1944 , a Junkers Ju 188 was shot down by a Mosquito nearby and its debris was scattered across the village , including the church wall . Later , the inhabitants had to be evacuated when a bomb fell into the field opposite Manor Farm , and had to be defused and removed by the Royal Engineers . In 1962 , the Dutton Estate holdings were sold to seven tenant farmers who retained the land they farmed but sold the remaining woodlands and properties . 
 = = Geography = = 
 West Worldham is located in the eastern central part of Hampshire , in the southeast of England , 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) southeast of Alton and 5 @.@ 1 miles ( 8 @.@ 2 km ) by road northwest of <unk> . In 1862 , West Worldham reportedly had an area of 447 acres . The landscape is dominated by farmland and several woods such as Hamble Pits Copse , Wild Duck Copse , Little Wood Copse , Warner 's Wood and Pheasant Wood are in the vicinity . There are also rich and dry meadows , as well as greensand . Beyond some slopes is the junction of <unk> Stream with River Wey , while the extreme western end of the Weald is situated nearby . Chloritic Marl , characterised as a narrow band at the base of the Chalk Marl , is seen in the lane leading from Alton to West Worldham , and also north @-@ west of Selbourne . Blanket Street connects the village to Hartley Mauditt just to the southwest and East Worldham , a mile to the northeast . At East Worldham this road meets the <unk> road ( <unk> 's Lane ) near The Three Horseshoes . The other road leads to the southwest beyond Little Wood Copse and joins the <unk> road ( Selbourne Road ) . The nearest railway station is Alton , 2 @.@ 1 miles ( 3 @.@ 4 km ) northwest of the village . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In 2001 West Worldham had a population of about 50 people , out of 336 people who lived in the Parish of Worldham . Most houses in the area date to the pre @-@ 20th century ; however in recent times numerous farm buildings have been converted to housing and for industrial purposes . According to the parish website , there are now " two significant industrial developments within the parish " . The local economy is based around agriculture , particularly cattle farming . Beef cattle , sheep , grain crops , and hops are the main sources of income , Farmers from West Worldham traded in Southampton and Alton throughout its history . Most inhabitants are either retired or commute to nearby towns to work . Worldham Golf Course is located just to the north of West Worldham . The Jalsa <unk> , an annual convention held at Oaklands Farm in East Worldham , attracts numerous people from surrounding areas . 
 = = Notable landmarks = = 
 Manor Farm House is a Grade II listed building and the farm and its cottages are the main feature in West Worldham . It was owned for some time by the <unk> family . Manor Farm is one of the UK 's twenty @-@ three Feather Down Farms . <unk> Farmhouse is also a Grade II listed building , and although its inscription dates to 1652 , it shows medieval characteristics . 
 Adjacent to the Manor Farm is St Nicholas Church , small church dated to the late 12th century , which forms one of eleven churches in the Northanger benefice . It fell into ruin and lost its roof before it was restored in the late Victorian period in 1888 . It is a single @-@ cell building , with 2 small lancets on the north side , and contains windows dated to the 15th and 16th century . The two doorways date to the 13th century , and the timber @-@ framed porch on the south side to the 15th century . The interior is described as " plain , with a piscina in the east wall and 2 in the nave , an octagonal font , and 3 wall monuments of the late 18th century . " The church became a listed building on 31 July 1963 . 
 = United States = 
 The United States of America ( USA ) , commonly referred to as the United States ( U.S. ) or America , is a federal republic composed of 50 states , the federal district of Washington , D.C. , five major self @-@ governing territories , and various possessions . The 48 contiguous states and federal district are in central North America between Canada and Mexico , with the state of Alaska in the northwestern part of North America and the state of Hawaii comprising an archipelago in the mid @-@ Pacific . The territories are scattered about the Pacific Ocean and the Caribbean Sea . At 3 @.@ 8 million square miles ( 9 @.@ 8 million km2 ) and with over 320 million people , the U.S. is the world 's third largest country by total area ( and fourth largest by land area ) and the third most populous . It is one of the world 's most ethnically diverse and multicultural nations , the product of large @-@ scale immigration from many other countries . The geography and climate are also extremely diverse , and the country is home to a wide variety of wildlife . 
 Paleo @-@ Indians migrated from Asia to the North American mainland at least 15 @,@ 000 years ago , with European colonization beginning in the 16th century . The United States emerged from 13 British colonies along the East Coast . Numerous disputes between Great Britain and the colonies led to the American Revolution , which began in 1775 . On July 4 , 1776 , as the colonies were fighting Great Britain in the American Revolutionary War , delegates from the 13 colonies unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence . The war ended in 1783 with recognition of the independence of the United States by the Kingdom of Great Britain , and was the first successful war of independence against a European colonial empire . The current constitution was adopted in 1788 , after the Articles of Confederation , adopted in 1781 , were felt to have provided inadequate federal powers . The first ten amendments , collectively named the Bill of Rights , were ratified in 1791 and designed to guarantee many fundamental civil liberties . 
 The United States embarked on a vigorous expansion across North America throughout the 19th century , displacing American Indian tribes , acquiring new territories , and gradually admitting new states until it spanned the continent by 1848 . During the second half of the 19th century , the American Civil War led to the end of legal slavery in the country . By the end of that century , the United States extended into the Pacific Ocean , and its economy , driven in large part by the Industrial Revolution , began to soar . The Spanish – American War and World War I confirmed the country 's status as a global military power . The United States emerged from World War II as a global superpower , the first country to develop nuclear weapons , the only country to use them in warfare , and a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council . The end of the Cold War and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 left the United States as the world 's sole superpower . 
 The United States is a highly developed country , with the world 's largest economy by nominal and real GDP . It ranks highly in several measures of socioeconomic performance , including average wage , human development , per capita GDP , and productivity per person . While the U.S. economy is considered post @-@ industrial , characterized by the dominance of services , the manufacturing sector remains the second largest in the world . Though its population is only 4 @.@ 4 % of the world total , the United States accounts for nearly a quarter of world GDP and almost a third of global military spending , making it the world 's foremost military and economic power . The United States is a prominent political and cultural force internationally , and a leader in scientific research and technological innovations . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In 1507 the German cartographer Martin <unk> produced a world map on which he named the lands of the Western Hemisphere " America " after the Italian explorer and cartographer Amerigo Vespucci ( Latin : Americus <unk> ) . The first documentary evidence of the phrase " United States of America " is from a letter dated January 2 , 1776 , written by Stephen Moylan , Esq . , George Washington 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp and Muster @-@ Master General of the Continental Army . Addressed to Lt. Col. Joseph Reed , Moylan expressed his wish to carry the " full and ample powers of the United States of America " to Spain to assist in the revolutionary war effort . 
 The first known publication of the phrase " United States of America " was in an anonymous essay in The Virginia Gazette newspaper in Williamsburg , Virginia , on April 6 , 1776 . The second draft of the Articles of Confederation , prepared by John Dickinson and completed by June 17 , 1776 , at the latest , declared " The name of this Confederation shall be the ' United States of America . ' " The final version of the Articles sent to the states for ratification in late 1777 contains the sentence " The Stile of this Confederacy shall be ' The United States of America ' " . In June 1776 , Thomas Jefferson wrote the phrase " UNITED STATES OF AMERICA " in all capitalized letters in the headline of his " original Rough draught " of the Declaration of Independence . This draft of the document did not surface until June 21 , 1776 , and it is unclear whether it was written before or after Dickinson used the term in his June 17 draft of the Articles of Confederation . In the final Fourth of July version of the Declaration , the title was changed to read , " The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America " . The preamble of the Constitution states " ... establish this Constitution for the United States of America . " 
 The short form " United States " is also standard . Other common forms are the " U.S. " , the " USA " , and " America " . Colloquial names are the " U.S. of A. " and , internationally , the " States " . " Columbia " , a name popular in poetry and songs of the late 1700s , derives its origin from Christopher Columbus ; it appears in the name " District of Columbia " . In non @-@ English languages , the name is frequently the translation of either the " United States " or " United States of America " , and colloquially as " America " . In addition , an abbreviation ( e.g. USA ) is sometimes used . 
 The phrase " United States " was originally plural , a description of a collection of independent states — e.g. , " the United States are " — including in the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution , ratified in 1865 . The singular form — e.g. , " the United States is " — became popular after the end of the American Civil War . The singular form is now standard ; the plural form is retained in the idiom " these United States " . The difference is more significant than usage ; it is a difference between a collection of states and a unit . 
 A citizen of the United States is an " American " . " United States " , " American " and " U.S. " refer to the country <unk> ( " American values " , " U.S. forces " ) . " American " rarely refers to subjects not connected with the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Indigenous and European contact = = = 
 The first inhabitants of North America migrated from Siberia by way of the Bering land bridge and arrived at least 15 @,@ 000 years ago , though increasing evidence suggests an even earlier arrival . Some , such as the pre @-@ Columbian Mississippian culture , developed advanced agriculture , grand architecture , and state @-@ level societies . After the Spanish conquistadors made the first contacts , the native population declined for various reasons , primarily diseases such as smallpox and measles . Violence was not a significant factor in the overall decline , though it impacted specific tribes and colonial settlements . In the Hawaiian Islands , the earliest indigenous inhabitants arrived around 1 AD from Polynesia . Europeans under the British explorer Captain James Cook arrived in the Hawaiian Islands in 1778 . 
 In the early days of colonization , many European settlers were subject to food shortages , disease , and attacks from Native Americans . Native Americans were also often at war with neighboring tribes and allied with Europeans in their colonial wars . At the same time , however , many natives and settlers came to depend on each other . Settlers traded for food and animal pelts , natives for guns , ammunition and other European wares . Natives taught many settlers where , when and how to cultivate corn , beans and squash . European missionaries and others felt it was important to " civilize " the Native Americans and urged them to adopt European agricultural techniques and lifestyles . 
 = = = Settlements = = = 
 After Spain sent Columbus ' on his first voyage to the New World in 1492 , other explorers followed . The Spanish set up small settlements in New Mexico and Florida . France had several small settlements along the Mississippi River . Successful English settlement on the eastern coast of North America began with the Virginia Colony in 1607 at Jamestown and the Pilgrims ' Plymouth Colony in 1620 . Early experiments in communal living failed until the introduction of private farm holdings . Many settlers were dissenting Christian groups who came seeking religious freedom . The continent 's first elected legislative assembly , Virginia 's House of Burgesses created in 1619 , and the Mayflower Compact , signed by the Pilgrims before disembarking , established precedents for the pattern of representative self @-@ government and constitutionalism that would develop throughout the American colonies . 
 Most settlers in every colony were small farmers , but other industries developed within a few decades as varied as the settlements . Cash crops included tobacco , rice and wheat . Extraction industries grew up in furs , fishing and lumber . Manufacturers produced rum and ships , and by the late colonial period Americans were producing one @-@ seventh of the world 's iron supply . Cities eventually dotted the coast to support local economies and serve as trade hubs . English colonists were supplemented by waves of Scotch @-@ Irish and other groups . As coastal land grew more expensive freed indentured servants pushed further west . 
 Slave cultivation of cash crops began with the Spanish in the 1500s , and was adopted by the English , but life expectancy was much higher in North America because of less disease and better food and treatment , leading to a rapid increase in the numbers of slaves . Colonial society was largely divided over the religious and moral implications of slavery and colonies passed acts for and against the practice . But by the turn of the 18th century , African slaves were replacing indentured servants for cash crop labor , especially in southern regions . 
 With the British colonization of Georgia in 1732 , the 13 colonies that would become the United States of America were established . All had local governments with elections open to most free men , with a growing devotion to the ancient rights of Englishmen and a sense of self @-@ government stimulating support for republicanism . With extremely high birth rates , low death rates , and steady settlement , the colonial population grew rapidly . Relatively small Native American populations were eclipsed . The Christian revivalist movement of the 1730s and 1740s known as the Great Awakening fueled interest in both religion and religious liberty . 
 In the French and Indian War , British forces seized Canada from the French , but the francophone population remained politically isolated from the southern colonies . Excluding the Native Americans , who were being conquered and displaced , those 13 colonies had a population of over 2 @.@ 1 million in 1770 , about one @-@ third that of Britain . Despite continuing new arrivals , the rate of natural increase was such that by the 1770s only a small minority of Americans had been born overseas . The colonies ' distance from Britain had allowed the development of self @-@ government , but their success motivated monarchs to periodically seek to reassert royal authority . 
 = = = Independence and expansion ( 1776 – 1865 ) = = = 
 The American Revolutionary War was the first successful colonial war of independence against a European power . Americans had developed an ideology of " republicanism " asserting that government rested on the will of the people as expressed in their local legislatures . They demanded their rights as Englishmen , " no taxation without representation " . The British insisted on administering the empire through Parliament , and the conflict escalated into war . 
 Following the passage of the Lee Resolution , on July 2 , 1776 , which was the actual vote for independence , the Second Continental Congress adopted the Declaration of Independence , on July 4 , which proclaimed , in a long preamble , that humanity is created equal in their unalienable rights and that those rights were not being protected by Great Britain , and declared , in the words of the resolution , that the Thirteen Colonies were independent states and had no allegiance to the British crown in the United States . The fourth day of July is celebrated annually as Independence Day . In 1777 , the Articles of Confederation established a weak government that operated until 1789 . 
 Britain recognized the independence of the United States following their defeat at Yorktown . In the peace treaty of 1783 , American sovereignty was recognized from the Atlantic coast west to the Mississippi River . Nationalists led the Philadelphia Convention of 1787 in writing the United States Constitution , ratified in state conventions in 1788 . The federal government was reorganized into three branches , on the principle of creating salutary checks and balances , in 1789 . George Washington , who had led the revolutionary army to victory , was the first president elected under the new constitution . The Bill of Rights , forbidding federal restriction of personal freedoms and guaranteeing a range of legal protections , was adopted in 1791 . 
 Although the federal government criminalized the international slave trade in 1808 , after 1820 , cultivation of the highly profitable cotton crop exploded in the Deep South , and along with it , the slave population . The Second Great Awakening , beginning about 1800 , converted millions to evangelical Protestantism . In the North , it energized multiple social reform movements , including abolitionism ; in the South , Methodists and Baptists proselytized among slave populations . 
 Americans ' eagerness to expand westward prompted a long series of American Indian Wars . The Louisiana Purchase of French @-@ claimed territory in 1803 almost doubled the nation 's size . The War of 1812 , declared against Britain over various grievances and fought to a draw , strengthened U.S. nationalism . A series of U.S. military incursions into Florida led Spain to cede it and other Gulf Coast territory in 1819 . Expansion was aided by steam power , when steamboats began traveling along America 's large water systems , which were connected by new canals , such as the Erie and the I & M ; then , even faster railroads began their stretch across the nation 's land . 
 From 1820 to 1850 , Jacksonian democracy began a set of reforms which included wider male suffrage ; it led to the rise of the Second Party System of Democrats and Whigs as the dominant parties from 1828 to 1854 . The Trail of Tears in the 1830s exemplified the Indian removal policy that moved Indians into the west to their own reservations . The U.S. annexed the Republic of Texas in 1845 during a period of expansionist Manifest destiny . The 1846 Oregon Treaty with Britain led to U.S. control of the present @-@ day American Northwest . Victory in the Mexican – American War resulted in the 1848 Mexican Cession of California and much of the present @-@ day American Southwest . 
 The California Gold Rush of 1848 – 49 spurred western migration and the creation of additional western states . After the American Civil War , new transcontinental railways made relocation easier for settlers , expanded internal trade and increased conflicts with Native Americans . Over a half @-@ century , the loss of the American bison ( sometimes called " buffalo " ) was an existential blow to many Plains Indians cultures . In 1869 , a new Peace Policy sought to protect Native @-@ Americans from abuses , avoid further war , and secure their eventual U.S. citizenship , although conflicts , including several of the largest Indian Wars , continued throughout the West into the 1900s . 
 = = = Civil War and Reconstruction Era = = = 
 Differences of opinion and social order between northern and southern states in early United States society , particularly regarding Black slavery , ultimately led the U.S. into the American Civil War . Initially , states entering the Union alternated between slave and free states , keeping a sectional balance in the Senate , while free states outstripped slave states in population and in the House of Representatives . But with additional western territory and more free @-@ soil states , tensions between slave and free states mounted with arguments over federalism and disposition of the territories , whether and how to expand or restrict slavery . 
 With the 1860 election of Abraham Lincoln , the first president from the largely anti @-@ slavery Republican Party , conventions in thirteen slave states ultimately declared secession and formed the Confederate States of America , while the U.S. government maintained that secession was illegal . The ensuing war was at first for Union , then after 1863 as casualties mounted and Lincoln delivered his Emancipation Proclamation , a second war aim became abolition of slavery . The war remains the deadliest military conflict in American history , resulting in the deaths of approximately 618 @,@ 000 soldiers as well as many civilians . 
 Following the Union victory in 1865 , three amendments to the U.S. Constitution brought about the prohibition of slavery , gave U.S. citizenship to the nearly four million African Americans who had been slaves , and promised them voting rights . The war and its resolution led to a substantial increase in federal power aimed at reintegrating and rebuilding the Southern states while ensuring the rights of the newly freed slaves . Following the Reconstruction Era , throughout the South Jim Crow laws soon effectively disenfranchised most blacks and some poor whites . Over the subsequent decades , in both the North and the South blacks and some whites faced systemic discrimination , including racial segregation and occasional vigilante violence , sparking national movements against these abuses . 
 = = = Industrialization = = = 
 In the North , urbanization and an unprecedented influx of immigrants from Southern and Eastern Europe supplied a surplus of labor for the country 's industrialization and transformed its culture . National infrastructure including telegraph and transcontinental railroads spurred economic growth and greater settlement and development of the American Old West . The later invention of electric light and the telephone would also impact communication and urban life . 
 The end of the Indian Wars further expanded acreage under mechanical cultivation , increasing surpluses for international markets . Mainland expansion was completed by the purchase of Alaska from Russia in 1867 . In 1893 , pro @-@ American elements in Hawaii overthrew the monarchy and formed the Republic of Hawaii , which the U.S. annexed in 1898 . Puerto Rico , Guam , and the Philippines were ceded by Spain in the same year , following the Spanish – American War . 
 Rapid economic development at the end of the 19th century produced many prominent industrialists , and the U.S. economy became the world 's largest . Dramatic changes were accompanied by social unrest and the rise of populist , socialist , and anarchist movements . This period eventually ended with the advent of the Progressive Era , which saw significant reforms in many societal areas , including women 's suffrage , alcohol prohibition , regulation of consumer goods , greater antitrust measures to ensure competition and attention to worker conditions . 
 = = = World War I , Great Depression , and World War II = = = 
 The United States remained neutral from the outbreak of World War I , in 1914 , until 1917 when it joined the war as an " associated power " , alongside the formal Allies of World War I , helping to turn the tide against the Central Powers . In 1919 , President Woodrow Wilson took a leading diplomatic role at the Paris Peace Conference and advocated strongly for the U.S. to join the League of Nations . However , the Senate refused to approve this , and did not ratify the Treaty of Versailles that established the League of Nations . 
 In 1920 , the women 's rights movement won passage of a constitutional amendment granting women 's suffrage . The 1920s and 1930s saw the rise of radio for mass communication and the invention of early television . The prosperity of the Roaring Twenties ended with the Wall Street Crash of 1929 and the onset of the Great Depression . After his election as president in 1932 , Franklin D. Roosevelt responded with the New Deal , which included the establishment of the Social Security system . The Great Migration of millions of African Americans out of the American South began before World War I and extended through the 1960s ; whereas the Dust Bowl of the mid @-@ 1930s impoverished many farming communities and spurred a new wave of western migration . 
 At first effectively neutral during World War II while Germany conquered much of continental Europe , the United States began supplying material to the Allies in March 1941 through the Lend @-@ Lease program . On December 7 , 1941 , the Empire of Japan launched a surprise attack on Pearl Harbor , prompting the United States to join the Allies against the Axis powers . During the war , the United States was referred as one of the " Four Policemen " of Allies power who met to plan the postwar world , along with Britain , the Soviet Union and China . Though the nation lost more than 400 @,@ 000 soldiers , it emerged relatively undamaged from the war with even greater economic and military influence . 
 The United States played a leading role in the Bretton Woods and Yalta conferences with the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union and other Allies , which signed agreements on new international financial institutions and Europe 's postwar reorganization . As an Allied victory was won in Europe , a 1945 international conference held in San Francisco produced the United Nations Charter , which became active after the war . The United States developed the first nuclear weapons and used them on Japan ; the Japanese surrendered on September 2 , ending World War II . 
 = = = Cold War and civil rights era = = = 
 After World War II the United States and the Soviet Union jockeyed for power during what is known as the Cold War , driven by an ideological divide between capitalism and communism and , according to the school of geopolitics , a divide between the maritime Atlantic and the continental Eurasian camps . They dominated the military affairs of Europe , with the U.S. and its NATO allies on one side and the USSR and its Warsaw Pact allies on the other . The U.S. developed a policy of containment towards the expansion of communist influence . While the U.S. and Soviet Union engaged in proxy wars and developed powerful nuclear arsenals , the two countries avoided direct military conflict . 
 The U.S. often opposed Third World movements that it viewed as Soviet @-@ sponsored . American troops fought communist Chinese and North Korean forces in the Korean War of 1950 – 53 . The Soviet Union 's 1957 launch of the first artificial satellite and its 1961 launch of the first manned spaceflight initiated a " Space Race " in which the United States became the first nation to land a man on the moon in 1969 . A proxy war in Southeast Asia eventually evolved into full American participation , as the Vietnam War . 
 At home , the U.S. experienced sustained economic expansion and a rapid growth of its population and middle class . Construction of an Interstate Highway System transformed the nation 's infrastructure over the following decades . Millions moved from farms and inner cities to large suburban housing developments . In 1959 Hawaii became the 50th and last U.S. state added to the country . A growing civil rights movement used nonviolence to confront segregation and discrimination , with Martin Luther King , Jr. becoming a prominent leader and figurehead . A combination of court decisions and legislation , culminating in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , sought to end racial discrimination . Meanwhile , a counterculture movement grew which was fueled by opposition to the Vietnam war , black nationalism , and the sexual revolution . The launch of a " War on Poverty " expanded entitlements and welfare spending . 
 The 1970s and early 1980s saw the onset of stagflation . After his election in 1980 , President Ronald Reagan responded to economic stagnation with free @-@ market oriented reforms . Following the collapse of détente , he abandoned " containment " and initiated the more aggressive " rollback " strategy towards the USSR . After a surge in female labor participation over the previous decade , by 1985 the majority of women aged 16 and over were employed . 
 The late 1980s brought a " thaw " in relations with the USSR , and its collapse in 1991 finally ended the Cold War . This brought about <unk> with the U.S. unchallenged as the world 's dominant superpower . The concept of Pax Americana , which had appeared in the post @-@ World War II period , gained wide popularity as a term for the post @-@ Cold War new world order . 
 = = = Contemporary history = = = 
 After the Cold War , the 1990s saw the longest economic expansion in modern U.S. history , ending in 2001 . Originating in U.S. defense networks , the Internet spread to international academic networks , and then to the public in the 1990s , greatly impacting the global economy , society , and culture . On September 11 , 2001 , Al @-@ Qaeda terrorists struck the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon near Washington , D.C. , killing nearly 3 @,@ 000 people . In response , the United States launched the War on Terror , which included war in Afghanistan and the 2003 – 11 Iraq War . 
 Beginning in 1994 , the U.S. entered into the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , linking 450 million people producing $ 17 trillion worth of goods and services . The goal of the agreement was to eliminate trade and investment barriers among the U.S. , Canada , and Mexico by January 1 , 2008 ; trade among the partners has soared since the agreement went into force . 
 Barack Obama , the first African American , and multiracial president , was elected in 2008 amid the Great Recession , which began in December 2007 and ended in June 2009 . 
 = = Geography , climate , and environment = = 
 The land area of the contiguous United States is 2 @,@ 959 @,@ 064 square miles ( 7 @.@ 7 Mm2 ) . Alaska , separated from the contiguous United States by Canada , is the largest state at 663 @,@ 268 square miles ( 1 @.@ 7 Mm2 ) . Hawaii , occupying an archipelago in the central Pacific , southwest of North America , is 10 @,@ 931 square miles ( 28 @,@ 311 km2 ) in area . The populated territories of Puerto Rico , American Samoa , Guam , Northern Mariana Islands , and U.S. Virgin Islands together cover 9 @,@ 185 square miles ( 23 @,@ 789 km2 ) . 
 The United States is the world 's third or fourth largest nation by total area ( land and water ) , ranking behind Russia and Canada and just above or below China . The ranking varies depending on how two territories disputed by China and India are counted and how the total size of the United States is measured : calculations range from 3 @,@ 676 @,@ 486 square miles ( 9 @.@ 5 Mm2 ) to 3 @,@ 717 @,@ 813 square miles ( 9 @.@ 6 Mm2 ) to 3 @,@ 796 @,@ 742 square miles ( 9 @.@ 8 Mm2 ) to 3 @,@ 805 @,@ 927 square miles ( 9 @.@ 9 Mm2 ) . Measured by only land area , the United States is third in size behind Russia and China , just ahead of Canada . 
 The coastal plain of the Atlantic seaboard gives way further inland to deciduous forests and the rolling hills of the Piedmont . The Appalachian Mountains divide the eastern seaboard from the Great Lakes and the grasslands of the Midwest . The Mississippi – Missouri River , the world 's fourth longest river system , runs mainly north – south through the heart of the country . The flat , fertile prairie of the Great Plains stretches to the west , interrupted by a highland region in the southeast . 
 The Rocky Mountains , at the western edge of the Great Plains , extend north to south across the country , reaching altitudes higher than 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) in Colorado . Farther west are the rocky Great Basin and deserts such as the Chihuahua and Mojave . The Sierra Nevada and Cascade mountain ranges run close to the Pacific coast , both ranges reaching altitudes higher than 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) . The lowest and highest points in the contiguous United States are in the state of California , and only about 84 miles ( 135 km ) apart . At an elevation of 20 @,@ 310 feet ( 6 @,@ 190 @.@ 5 m ) , Alaska 's Denali ( Mount McKinley ) is the highest peak in the country and North America . Active volcanoes are common throughout Alaska 's Alexander and Aleutian Islands , and Hawaii consists of volcanic islands . The supervolcano underlying Yellowstone National Park in the Rockies is the continent 's largest volcanic feature . 
 The United States , with its large size and geographic variety , includes most climate types . To the east of the 100th meridian , the climate ranges from humid continental in the north to humid subtropical in the south . The Great Plains west of the 100th meridian are semi @-@ arid . Much of the Western mountains have an alpine climate . The climate is arid in the Great Basin , desert in the Southwest , Mediterranean in coastal California , and oceanic in coastal Oregon and Washington and southern Alaska . Most of Alaska is subarctic or polar . Hawaii and the southern tip of Florida are tropical , as are the populated territories in the Caribbean and the Pacific . Extreme weather is not uncommon — the states bordering the Gulf of Mexico are prone to hurricanes , and most of the world 's tornadoes occur within the country , mainly in Tornado Alley areas in the Midwest and South . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 The U.S. ecology is megadiverse : about 17 @,@ 000 species of vascular plants occur in the contiguous United States and Alaska , and over 1 @,@ 800 species of flowering plants are found in Hawaii , few of which occur on the mainland . The United States is home to 428 mammal species , 784 bird species , 311 reptile species , and 295 amphibian species . About 91 @,@ 000 insect species have been described . The bald eagle is both the national bird and national animal of the United States , and is an enduring symbol of the country itself . 
 There are 58 national parks and hundreds of other federally managed parks , forests , and wilderness areas . Altogether , the government owns about 28 % of the country 's land area . Most of this is protected , though some is leased for oil and gas drilling , mining , logging , or cattle ranching ; about <unk> % is used for military purposes . 
 Environmental issues have been on the national agenda since 1970 . Environmental controversies include debates on oil and nuclear energy , dealing with air and water pollution , the economic costs of protecting wildlife , logging and deforestation , and international responses to global warming . Many federal and state agencies are involved . The most prominent is the Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) , created by presidential order in 1970 . The idea of wilderness has shaped the management of public lands since 1964 , with the Wilderness Act . The Endangered Species Act of 1973 is intended to protect threatened and endangered species and their habitats , which are monitored by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 The U.S. Census Bureau estimated the country 's population to be 323 425 550 as of April 25 , 2016 , and to be adding 1 person ( net gain ) every 13 seconds , or about 6 @,@ 646 people per day . The U.S. population almost quadrupled during the 20th century , from about 76 million in 1900 . The third most populous nation in the world , after China and India , the United States is the only major industrialized nation in which large population increases are projected . In the 1800s the average woman had 7 @.@ 04 children , by the 1900s this number had decreased to 3 @.@ 56 . Since the early 1970s the birth rate has been below the replacement rate of 2 @.@ 1 with 1 @.@ 86 children per woman in 2014 . Foreign born immigration has caused the US population to continue its rapid increase with the foreign born population doubling from almost 20 million in 1990 to over 40 million in 2010 , representing one third of the population increase . The foreign born population reached 45 million in 2015 . 
 The United States has a birth rate of 13 per 1 @,@ 000 , which is 5 births below the world average . Its population growth rate is positive at 0 @.@ 7 % , higher than that of many developed nations . In fiscal year 2012 , over one million immigrants ( most of whom entered through family reunification ) were granted legal residence . Mexico has been the leading source of new residents since the 1965 Immigration Act . China , India , and the Philippines have been in the top four sending countries every year since the 1990s . As of 2012 , approximately 11 @.@ 4 million residents are illegal immigrants . As of 2015 , 47 % of all immigrants are Hispanic , 26 % are Asian , 18 % are white and 8 % are black . The percentage of immigrants who are Asian is increasing while the percentage who are Hispanic is decreasing . 
 According to a survey conducted by the Williams Institute , nine million Americans , or roughly 3 @.@ 4 % of the adult population identify themselves as homosexual , bisexual , or transgender . A 2012 Gallup poll also concluded that 3 @.@ 5 % of adult Americans identified as LGBT . The highest percentage came from the District of Columbia ( 10 % ) , while the lowest state was North Dakota at 1 @.@ 7 % . In a 2013 survey , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that 96 @.@ 6 % of Americans identify as straight , while 1 @.@ 6 % identify as gay or lesbian , and 0 @.@ 7 % identify as being bisexual . 
 In 2010 , the U.S. population included an estimated 5 @.@ 2 million people with some American Indian or Alaska Native ancestry ( 2 @.@ 9 million exclusively of such ancestry ) and 1 @.@ 2 million with some native Hawaiian or Pacific island ancestry ( 0 @.@ 5 million exclusively ) . The census counted more than 19 million people of " Some Other Race " who were " unable to identify with any " of its five official race categories in 2010 , over 18 @.@ 5 million ( 97 % ) of whom are of Hispanic ethnicity . 
 The population growth of Hispanic and Latino Americans ( the terms are officially interchangeable ) is a major demographic trend . The 50 @.@ 5 million Americans of Hispanic descent are identified as sharing a distinct " ethnicity " by the Census Bureau ; 64 % of Hispanic Americans are of Mexican descent . Between 2000 and 2010 , the country 's Hispanic population increased 43 % while the non @-@ Hispanic population rose just 4 @.@ 9 % . Much of this growth is from immigration ; in 2007 , 12 @.@ 6 % of the U.S. population was foreign @-@ born , with 54 % of that figure born in Latin America . 
 About 82 % of Americans live in urban areas ( including suburbs ) ; about half of those reside in cities with populations over 50 @,@ 000 . The US has numerous clusters of cities known as <unk> , the largest being the Great Lakes Megalopolis followed by the Northeast Megalopolis and Southern California . In 2008 , 273 incorporated places had populations over 100 @,@ 000 , nine cities had more than one million residents , and four global cities had over two million ( New York City , Los Angeles , Chicago , and Houston ) . There are 52 metropolitan areas with populations greater than one million . Of the 50 fastest @-@ growing metro areas , 47 are in the West or South . The metro areas of San Bernardino , Dallas , Houston , Atlanta , and Phoenix all grew by more than a million people between 2000 and 2008 . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Source : 2010 American Community Survey , U.S. Census Bureau . Most respondents who speak a language other 
 than English at home also report speaking English " well " or " very well . " For the language groups listed above , the 
 strongest English @-@ language proficiency is among speakers of German ( 96 % report that they speak English " well " 
 or " very well " ) , followed by speakers of French ( 93 @.@ 5 % ) , Tagalog ( 92 @.@ 8 % ) , Spanish ( 74 @.@ 1 % ) , Korean ( 71 @.@ 5 % ) , 
 Chinese ( 70 @.@ 4 % ) , and Vietnamese ( 66 @.@ 9 % ) . 
 English ( American English ) is the de facto national language . Although there is no official language at the federal level , some laws — such as U.S. naturalization requirements — standardize English . In 2010 , about 230 million , or 80 % of the population aged five years and older , spoke only English at home . Spanish , spoken by 12 % of the population at home , is the second most common language and the most widely taught second language . Some Americans advocate making English the country 's official language , as it is in 28 states . 
 Both Hawaiian and English are official languages in Hawaii , by state law . Alaska recognizes twenty Native languages . While neither has an official language , New Mexico has laws providing for the use of both English and Spanish , as Louisiana does for English and French . Other states , such as California , mandate the publication of Spanish versions of certain government documents including court forms . Many jurisdictions with large numbers of non @-@ English speakers produce government materials , especially voting information , in the most commonly spoken languages in those jurisdictions . 
 Several insular territories grant official recognition to their native languages , along with English : Samoan and Chamorro are recognized by American Samoa and Guam , respectively ; Carolinian and Chamorro are recognized by the Northern Mariana Islands ; Cherokee is officially recognized by the Cherokee Nation within the Cherokee tribal jurisdiction area in eastern Oklahoma ; Spanish is an official language of Puerto Rico and is more widely spoken than English there . 
 According to the Center for Immigration Studies , Arabic and Urdu ( Pakistan 's national language ) are the fastest growing foreign languages spoken at American households . According to the survey , more than 63 @.@ 2 million US residents speak a language other than English at home . In recent years , Arabic speaking residents increased by 29 % , Urdu by 23 % and Persian by 9 % . 
 The most widely taught foreign languages at all levels in the United States ( in terms of enrollment numbers ) are : Spanish ( around 7 @.@ 2 million students ) , French ( 1 @.@ 5 million ) , and German ( 500 @,@ 000 ) . Other commonly taught languages ( with 100 @,@ 000 to 250 @,@ 000 learners ) include Latin , Japanese , American Sign Language , Italian , and Chinese . 18 % of all Americans claim to speak at least one language in addition to English . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution guarantees the free exercise of religion and forbids Congress from passing laws respecting its establishment . Christianity is by far the most common religion practiced in the U.S. , but other religions are followed , too . In a 2013 survey , 56 % of Americans said that religion played a " very important role in their lives " , a far higher figure than that of any other wealthy nation . In a 2009 Gallup poll , 42 % of Americans said that they attended church weekly or almost weekly ; the figures ranged from a low of 23 % in Vermont to a high of 63 % in Mississippi . 
 As with other Western countries , the U.S. is becoming less religious . Irreligion is growing rapidly among Americans under 30 . Polls show that overall American confidence in organized religion has been declining since the mid to late 1980s , and that younger Americans in particular are becoming increasingly irreligious . According to a 2012 study , Protestant share of U.S. population dropped to 48 % , thus ending its status as religious category of the majority for the first time . Americans with no religion have 1 @.@ 7 children compared to 2 @.@ 2 among Christians . The unaffiliated are less likely to get married with 37 % marrying compared to 52 % of Christians . 
 According to a 2014 survey , 70 @.@ 6 % of adults identified themselves as Christian , Protestant denominations accounted for 46 @.@ 5 % , while Roman Catholicism , at 20 @.@ 8 % , was the largest individual denomination . The total reporting non @-@ Christian religions in 2014 was 5 @.@ 9 % . Other religions include Judaism ( 1 @.@ 9 % ) , Islam ( 0 @.@ 9 % ) , Buddhism ( 0 @.@ 7 % ) , Hinduism ( 0 @.@ 7 % ) . The survey also reported that 22 @.@ 8 % of Americans described themselves as agnostic , atheist or simply having no religion , up from 8 @.@ 2 % in 1990 . There are also Unitarian Universalist , Baha 'i , Sikh , Jain , Shinto , Confucian , Taoist , Druid , Native American , Wiccan , humanist and deist communities . 
 Protestantism is the largest Christian religious grouping in the United States . Baptists collectively form the largest branch of Protestantism , and the Southern Baptist Convention is the largest individual Protestant denomination . About 26 % of Americans identify as Evangelical Protestants , while 15 % are Mainline and 7 % belong to a traditionally Black church . Roman Catholicism in the United States has its origin in the Spanish and French colonization of the Americas , and later grew because of Irish , Italian , Polish , German and Hispanic immigration . Rhode Island is the only state where a majority of the population is Catholic . Lutheranism in the U.S. has its origin in immigration from Northern Europe and Germany . North and South Dakota are the only states in which a plurality of the population is Lutheran . Presbyterianism was introduced in North America by Scottish and Ulster Scots immigrants . Although it has spread across the United States , it is heavily concentrated on the East Coast . Dutch Reformed congregations were founded first in New Amsterdam ( New York City ) before spreading westward . Utah is the only state where Mormonism is the religion of the majority of the population . The Mormon Corridor also extends to parts of Idaho , Nevada and Wyoming . 
 The Bible Belt is an informal term for a region in the Southern United States in which socially conservative Evangelical Protestantism is a significant part of the culture and Christian church attendance across the denominations is generally higher than the nation 's average . By contrast , religion plays the least important role in New England and in the Western United States . 
 = = = Family structure = = = 
 As of 2007 , 58 % of Americans age 18 and over were married , 6 % were widowed , 10 % were divorced , and 25 % had never been married . Women now work mostly outside the home and receive a majority of bachelor 's degrees . 
 The U.S. teenage pregnancy rate is 26 @.@ 5 per 1 @,@ 000 women . The rate has declined by 57 % since 1991 . In 2013 , the highest teenage birth rate was in Alabama , and the lowest in Wyoming . Abortion is legal throughout the U.S. , owing to Roe v. Wade , a 1973 landmark decision by the Supreme Court of the United States . While the abortion rate is falling , the abortion ratio of 241 per 1 @,@ 000 live births and abortion rate of 15 per 1 @,@ 000 women aged 15 – 44 remain higher than those of most Western nations . In 2013 , the average age at first birth was 26 and 40 @.@ 6 % of births were to unmarried women . 
 The total fertility rate ( TFR ) was estimated for 2013 at 1 @.@ 86 births per woman . Adoption in the United States is common and relatively easy from a legal point of view ( compared to other Western countries ) . In 2001 , with over 127 @,@ 000 adoptions , the U.S. accounted for nearly half of the total number of adoptions worldwide . Same @-@ sex marriage is legal nationwide and it is legal for same @-@ sex couples to adopt . Polygamy is illegal throughout the U.S. 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 The United States is the world 's oldest surviving federation . It is a constitutional republic and representative democracy , " in which majority rule is tempered by minority rights protected by law " . The government is regulated by a system of checks and balances defined by the U.S. Constitution , which serves as the country 's supreme legal document . For 2014 , the U.S. ranked 19th on the Democracy Index and 17th on the Corruption Perceptions Index . 
 In the American federalist system , citizens are usually subject to three levels of government : federal , state , and local . The local government 's duties are commonly split between county and municipal governments . In almost all cases , executive and legislative officials are elected by a plurality vote of citizens by district . There is no proportional representation at the federal level , and it is rare at lower levels . 
 The federal government is composed of three branches : 
 Legislative : The bicameral Congress , made up of the Senate and the House of Representatives , makes federal law , declares war , approves treaties , has the power of the purse , and has the power of impeachment , by which it can remove sitting members of the government . 
 Executive : The President is the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the military , can veto legislative bills before they become law ( subject to Congressional override ) , and appoints the members of the Cabinet ( subject to Senate approval ) and other officers , who administer and enforce federal laws and policies . 
 Judicial : The Supreme Court and lower federal courts , whose judges are appointed by the President with Senate approval , interpret laws and overturn those they find unconstitutional . 
 The House of Representatives has 435 voting members , each representing a congressional district for a two @-@ year term . House seats are apportioned among the states by population every tenth year . At the 2010 census , seven states had the minimum of one representative , while California , the most populous state , had 53 . 
 The Senate has 100 members with each state having two senators , elected at @-@ large to six @-@ year terms ; one third of Senate seats are up for election every other year . The President serves a four @-@ year term and may be elected to the office no more than twice . The President is not elected by direct vote , but by an indirect electoral college system in which the determining votes are apportioned to the states and the District of Columbia . The Supreme Court , led by the Chief Justice of the United States , has nine members , who serve for life . However , the court currently has one vacant seat after the death of Associate Justice Antonin Scalia . 
 The state governments are structured in roughly similar fashion ; Nebraska uniquely has a unicameral legislature . The governor ( chief executive ) of each state is directly elected . Some state judges and cabinet officers are appointed by the governors of the respective states , while others are elected by popular vote . 
 The original text of the Constitution establishes the structure and responsibilities of the federal government and its relationship with the individual states . Article One protects the right to the " great writ " of habeas corpus . The Constitution has been amended 27 times ; the first ten amendments , which make up the Bill of Rights , and the Fourteenth Amendment form the central basis of Americans ' individual rights . All laws and governmental procedures are subject to judicial review and any law ruled by the courts to be in violation of the Constitution is voided . The principle of judicial review , not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution , was established by the Supreme Court in Marbury v. Madison ( 1803 ) in a decision handed down by Chief Justice John Marshall . 
 = = = Political divisions = = = 
 The United States is a federal republic of 50 states , a federal district , five territories and eleven uninhabited island possessions . The states and territories are the principal administrative districts in the country . These are divided into subdivisions of counties and independent cities . The District of Columbia is a federal district which contains the capital of the United States , Washington DC . The states and the District of Columbia choose the President of the United States . Each state has presidential electors equal to the number of their Representatives and Senators in Congress , the District of Columbia has three . 
 Congressional Districts are reapportioned among the states following each decennial Census of Population . Each state then draws single member districts to conform with the census apportionment . The total number of Representatives is 435 , and delegate Members of Congress represent the District of Columbia and the five major US territories . 
 The United States also observes tribal sovereignty of the American Indian nations to a limited degree , as it does with the states ' sovereignty . American Indians are U.S. citizens and tribal lands are subject to the jurisdiction of the U.S Congress and the federal courts . Like the states they have a great deal of autonomy , but also like the states tribes are not allowed to make war , engage in their own foreign relations , or print and issue currency . 
 = = = Parties and elections = = = 
 The United States has operated under a two @-@ party system for most of its history . For elective offices at most levels , state @-@ administered primary elections choose the major party nominees for subsequent general elections . Since the general election of 1856 , the major parties have been the Democratic Party , founded in 1824 , and the Republican Party , founded in 1854 . Since the Civil War , only one third @-@ party presidential candidate — former president Theodore Roosevelt , running as a Progressive in 1912 — has won as much as 20 % of the popular vote . The President and Vice @-@ president are elected through the Electoral College system . 
 Within American political culture , the center @-@ right Republican Party is considered " conservative " and the center @-@ left Democratic Party is considered " liberal " . The states of the Northeast and West Coast and some of the Great Lakes states , known as " blue states " , are relatively liberal . The " red states " of the South and parts of the Great Plains and Rocky Mountains are relatively conservative . 
 The winner of the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections , Democrat Barack Obama , is the 44th , and current , U.S. president . Current leadership in the Senate includes Democratic Vice President Joseph Biden , Republican President Pro Tempore ( Pro Tem ) Orrin Hatch , Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , and Minority Leader Harry Reid . Leadership in the House includes Speaker of the House Paul Ryan , Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy , and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi . 
 In the 114th United States Congress , both the House of Representatives and the Senate are controlled by the Republican Party . The Senate currently consists of 54 Republicans , and 44 Democrats with two independents who caucus with the Democrats ; the House consists of 246 Republicans and 188 Democrats , with one vacancy . In state governorships , there are 31 Republicans , 18 Democrats and one independent . Among the DC mayor and the 5 territorial governors , there are 2 Republicans , 2 Democrats ( one is also in the PPD ) , and 2 Independents . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 The United States has an established structure of foreign relations . It is a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council , and New York City is home to the United Nations Headquarters . It is a member of the G7 , G20 , and Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development . Almost all countries have embassies in Washington , D.C. , and many have consulates around the country . Likewise , nearly all nations host American diplomatic missions . However , Iran , North Korea , Bhutan , and the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) do not have formal diplomatic relations with the United States ( although the U.S. still maintains relations with Taiwan and supplies it with military equipment ) . 
 The United States has a " Special Relationship " with the United Kingdom and strong ties with Canada , Australia , New Zealand , the Philippines , Japan , South Korea , Israel , and several European Union countries , including France , Italy , Germany , and Spain . It works closely with fellow NATO members on military and security issues and with its neighbors through the Organization of American States and free trade agreements such as the trilateral North American Free Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico . In 2008 , the United States spent a net $ 25 @.@ 4 billion on official development assistance , the most in the world . As a share of America 's large gross national income ( GNI ) , however , the U.S. contribution of 0 @.@ 18 % ranked last among 22 donor states . By contrast , private overseas giving by Americans is relatively generous . 
 The U.S. exercises full international defense authority and responsibility for three sovereign nations through Compact of Free Association with Micronesia , the Marshall Islands and Palau . These are Pacific island nations , once part of the <unk> Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands after World War II , which gained independence in subsequent years . 
 = = = Government finance = = = 
 Taxes in the United States are levied at the federal , state and local government level . These include taxes on income , payroll , property , sales , imports , estates and gifts , as well as various fees . In 2010 taxes collected by federal , state and municipal governments amounted to 24 @.@ 8 % of GDP . During FY2012 , the federal government collected approximately $ 2 @.@ 45 trillion in tax revenue , up $ 147 billion or 6 % versus FY2011 revenues of $ 2 @.@ 30 trillion . Primary receipt categories included individual income taxes ( $ <unk> or 47 % ) , Social Security / Social Insurance taxes ( $ <unk> or 35 % ) , and corporate taxes ( $ <unk> or 10 % ) . Based on CBO estimates , under 2013 tax law the top 1 % will be paying the highest average tax rates since 1979 , while other income groups will remain at historic lows . 
 U.S. taxation is generally progressive , especially the federal income taxes , and is among the most progressive in the developed world . The highest 10 % of income earners pay a majority of federal taxes , and about half of all taxes . Payroll taxes for Social Security are a flat regressive tax , with no tax charged on income above $ 118 @,@ 500 ( for 2015 and 2016 ) and no tax at all paid on unearned income from things such as stocks and capital gains . The historic reasoning for the regressive nature of the payroll tax is that entitlement programs have not been viewed as welfare transfers . However , according to the Congressional Budget Office the net effect of Social Security is that the benefit to tax ratio ranges from roughly 70 % for the top earnings quintile to about 170 % for the lowest earning quintile , making the system progressive . 
 The top 10 % paid 51 @.@ 8 % of total federal taxes in 2009 , and the top 1 % , with 13 @.@ 4 % of pre @-@ tax national income , paid 22 @.@ 3 % of federal taxes . In 2013 the Tax Policy Center projected total federal effective tax rates of 35 @.@ 5 % for the top 1 % , 27 @.@ 2 % for the top quintile , 13 @.@ 8 % for the middle quintile , and − 2 @.@ 7 % for the bottom quintile . The incidence of corporate income tax has been a matter of considerable ongoing controversy for decades . State and local taxes vary widely , but are generally less progressive than federal taxes as they rely heavily on broadly borne regressive sales and property taxes that yield less volatile revenue streams , though their consideration does not eliminate the progressive nature of overall taxation . 
 During FY 2012 , the federal government spent $ 3 @.@ 54 trillion on a budget or cash basis , down $ 60 billion or 1 @.@ 7 % vs. FY 2011 spending of $ 3 @.@ 60 trillion . Major categories of FY 2012 spending included : Medicare & Medicaid ( $ <unk> or 23 % of spending ) , Social Security ( $ <unk> or 22 % ) , Defense Department ( $ <unk> or 19 % ) , non @-@ defense discretionary ( $ <unk> or 17 % ) , other mandatory ( $ <unk> or 13 % ) and interest ( $ <unk> or 6 % ) . 
 The total national debt of the United States in the United States was $ 18 @.@ 527 trillion ( 106 % of the GDP ) in 2014 . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 The President holds the title of commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the nation 's armed forces and appoints its leaders , the Secretary of Defense and the Joint Chiefs of Staff . The United States Department of Defense administers the armed forces , including the Army , Navy , Marine Corps , and Air Force . The Coast Guard is run by the Department of Homeland Security in peacetime and by the Department of the Navy during times of war . In 2008 , the armed forces had 1 @.@ 4 million personnel on active duty . The Reserves and National Guard brought the total number of troops to 2 @.@ 3 million . The Department of Defense also employed about 700 @,@ 000 civilians , not including contractors . 
 Military service is voluntary , though conscription may occur in wartime through the Selective Service System . American forces can be rapidly deployed by the Air Force 's large fleet of transport aircraft , the Navy 's 10 active aircraft carriers , and Marine expeditionary units at sea with the Navy 's Atlantic and Pacific fleets . The military operates 865 bases and facilities abroad , and maintains deployments greater than 100 active duty personnel in 25 foreign countries . 
 The military budget of the United States in 2011 was more than $ 700 billion , 41 % of global military spending and equal to the next 14 largest national military expenditures combined . At 4 @.@ 7 % of GDP , the rate was the second @-@ highest among the top 15 military spenders , after Saudi Arabia . U.S. defense spending as a percentage of GDP ranked 23rd globally in 2012 according to the CIA . Defense 's share of U.S. spending has generally declined in recent decades , from Cold War peaks of 14 @.@ 2 % of GDP in 1953 and 69 @.@ 5 % of federal outlays in 1954 to 4 @.@ 7 % of GDP and 18 @.@ 8 % of federal outlays in 2011 . 
 The proposed base Department of Defense budget for 2012 , $ 553 billion , was a 4 @.@ 2 % increase over 2011 ; an additional $ 118 billion was proposed for the military campaigns in Iraq and Afghanistan . The last American troops serving in Iraq departed in December 2011 ; 4 @,@ 484 service members were killed during the Iraq War . Approximately 90 @,@ 000 U.S. troops were serving in Afghanistan in April 2012 ; by November 8 , 2013 2 @,@ 285 had been killed during the War in Afghanistan . 
 = = Law enforcement and crime = = 
 Law enforcement in the United States is primarily the responsibility of local police and sheriff 's departments , with state police providing broader services . The New York City Police Department ( NYPD ) is the largest in the country . Federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) and the U.S. Marshals Service have specialized duties , including protecting civil rights , national security and enforcing U.S. federal courts ' rulings and federal laws . At the federal level and in almost every state , a legal system operates on a common law . State courts conduct most criminal trials ; federal courts handle certain designated crimes as well as certain appeals from the state criminal courts . Plea bargaining in the United States is very common ; the vast majority of criminal cases in the country are settled by plea bargain rather than jury trial . 
 In 2012 there were 4 @.@ 7 murders per 100 @,@ 000 persons in the United States , a 54 % decline from the modern peak of 10 @.@ 2 in 1980 . In 2001 – 2 , the United States had above @-@ average levels of violent crime and particularly high levels of gun violence compared to other developed nations . A cross @-@ sectional analysis of the World Health Organization Mortality Database from 2003 showed that United States " homicide rates were 6 @.@ 9 times higher than rates in the other high @-@ income countries , driven by firearm homicide rates that were 19 @.@ 5 times higher . " Gun ownership rights continue to be the subject of contentious political debate . 
 From 1980 through 2008 males represented 77 % of homicide victims and 90 % of offenders . Blacks committed 52 @.@ 5 % of all homicides during that span , at a rate almost eight times that of whites ( " whites " includes most Hispanics ) , and were victimized at a rate six times that of whites . Most homicides were <unk> , with 93 % of black victims killed by blacks and 84 % of white victims killed by whites . In 2012 , Louisiana had the highest rate of murder and non @-@ negligent manslaughter in the U.S. , and New Hampshire the lowest . The FBI 's Uniform Crime Reports estimates that there were 3 @,@ 246 violent and property crimes per 100 @,@ 000 residents in 2012 , for a total of over 9 million total crimes . 
 Capital punishment is sanctioned in the United States for certain federal and military crimes , and used in 31 states . No executions took place from 1967 to 1977 , owing in part to a U.S. Supreme Court ruling striking down arbitrary imposition of the death penalty . In 1976 , that Court ruled that , under appropriate circumstances , capital punishment may constitutionally be imposed . Since the decision there have been more than 1 @,@ 300 executions , a majority of these taking place in three states : Texas , Virginia , and Oklahoma . Meanwhile , several states have either abolished or struck down death penalty laws . In 2014 , the country had the fifth highest number of executions in the world , following China , Iran , Saudi Arabia , and Iraq . 
 The United States has the highest documented incarceration rate and total prison population in the world . At the start of 2008 , more than 2 @.@ 3 million people were incarcerated , more than one in every 100 adults . At year end 2012 , the combined U.S. adult correctional systems supervised about 6 @,@ 937 @,@ 600 offenders . About 1 in every 35 adult residents in the United States was under some form of correctional supervision at <unk> 2012 , the lowest rate observed since 1997 . The prison population has quadrupled since 1980 , and state and local spending on prisons and jails has grown three times as much as that spent on public education during the same period . However , the imprisonment rate for all prisoners sentenced to more than a year in state or federal facilities is 478 per 100 @,@ 000 in 2013 and the rate for pre @-@ trial / remand prisoners is 153 per 100 @,@ 000 residents in 2012 . The country 's high rate of incarceration is largely due to changes in sentencing guidelines and drug policies . According to the Federal Bureau of Prisons , the majority of inmates held in federal prisons are convicted of drug offenses . The privatization of prisons and prison services which began in the 1980s has been a subject of debate . In 2008 , Louisiana had the highest incarceration rate , and Maine the lowest . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The United States has a capitalist mixed economy which is fueled by abundant natural resources and high productivity . According to the International Monetary Fund , the U.S. GDP of $ 16 @.@ 8 trillion constitutes 24 % of the gross world product at market exchange rates and over 19 % of the gross world product at purchasing power parity ( PPP ) . 
 The US 's nominal GDP is estimated to be $ 17 @.@ 528 trillion as of 2014 From 1983 to 2008 , U.S. real compounded annual GDP growth was 3 @.@ 3 % , compared to a 2 @.@ 3 % weighted average for the rest of the G7 . The country ranks ninth in the world in nominal GDP per capita and sixth in GDP per capita at PPP . The U.S. dollar is the world 's primary reserve currency . 
 The United States is the largest importer of goods and second largest exporter , though exports per capita are relatively low . In 2010 , the total U.S. trade deficit was $ 635 billion . Canada , China , Mexico , Japan , and Germany are its top trading partners . In 2010 , oil was the largest import commodity , while transportation equipment was the country 's largest export . Japan is the largest foreign holder of U.S. public debt . The largest holder of the U.S. debt are American entities , including federal government accounts and the Federal Reserve , who hold the majority of the debt . 
 In 2009 , the private sector was estimated to constitute 86 @.@ 4 % of the economy , with federal government activity accounting for 4 @.@ 3 % and state and local government activity ( including federal transfers ) the remaining 9 @.@ 3 % . The number of employees at all levels of government outnumber those in manufacturing by 1 @.@ 7 to 1 . While its economy has reached a postindustrial level of development and its service sector constitutes 67 @.@ 8 % of GDP , the United States remains an industrial power . The leading business field by gross business receipts is wholesale and retail trade ; by net income it is manufacturing . In the franchising business model , McDonald 's and Subway are the two most recognized brands in the world . Coca @-@ Cola is the most recognized soft drink company in the world . 
 Chemical products are the leading manufacturing field . The United States is the largest producer of oil in the world , as well as its second largest importer . It is the world 's number one producer of electrical and nuclear energy , as well as liquid natural gas , sulfur , phosphates , and salt . The National Mining Association provides data pertaining to coal and minerals that include beryllium , copper , lead , magnesium , zinc , titanium and others . 
 Agriculture accounts for just under 1 % of GDP , yet the United States is the world 's top producer of corn and soybeans . The National Agricultural Statistics Service maintains agricultural statistics for products that include peanuts , oats , rye , wheat , rice , cotton , corn , barley , hay , sunflowers , and oilseeds . In addition , the United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) provides livestock statistics regarding beef , poultry , pork , and dairy products . The country is the primary developer and grower of genetically modified food , representing half of the world 's biotech crops . 
 Consumer spending comprises 68 % of the U.S. economy in 2015 . In August 2010 , the American labor force consisted of 154 @.@ 1 million people . With 21 @.@ 2 million people , government is the leading field of employment . The largest private employment sector is health care and social assistance , with 16 @.@ 4 million people . About 12 % of workers are unionized , compared to 30 % in Western Europe . The World Bank ranks the United States first in the ease of hiring and firing workers . The United States is ranked among the top three in the Global Competitiveness Report as well . It has a smaller welfare state and redistributes less income through government action than European nations tend to . 
 The United States is the only advanced economy that does not guarantee its workers paid vacation and is one of just a few countries in the world without paid family leave as a legal right , with the others being Papua New Guinea , Suriname and Liberia . However , 74 % of full @-@ time American workers get paid sick leave , according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics , although only 24 % of part @-@ time workers get the same benefits . While federal law currently does not require sick leave , it 's a common benefit for government workers and full @-@ time employees at corporations . In 2009 , the United States had the third highest workforce productivity per person in the world , behind Luxembourg and Norway . It was fourth in productivity per hour , behind those two countries and the Netherlands . 
 The 2008 – 2012 global recession had a significant impact on the United States , with output still below potential according to the Congressional Budget Office . It brought high unemployment ( which has been decreasing but remains above pre @-@ recession levels ) , along with low consumer confidence , the continuing decline in home values and increase in foreclosures and personal bankruptcies , an escalating federal debt crisis , inflation , and rising petroleum and food prices . There remains a record proportion of long @-@ term unemployed , continued decreasing household income , and tax and federal budget increases . 
 = = = Income , poverty and wealth = = = 
 Americans have the highest average household and employee income among OECD nations , and in 2007 had the second highest median household income . According to the Census Bureau real median household income was $ 50 @,@ 502 in 2011 , down from $ 51 @,@ 144 in 2010 . The Global Food Security Index ranked the U.S. number one for food affordability and overall food security in March 2013 . Americans on average have over twice as much living space per dwelling and per person as European Union residents , and more than every EU nation . For 2013 the United Nations Development Programme ranked the United States 5th among 187 countries in its Human Development Index and 28th in its inequality @-@ adjusted HDI ( <unk> ) . 
 There has been a widening gap between productivity and median incomes since the 1970s . However , the gap between total compensation and productivity is not as wide because of increased employee benefits such as health insurance . While inflation @-@ adjusted ( " real " ) household income had been increasing almost every year from 1947 to 1999 , it has since been flat on balance and has even decreased recently . According to Congressional Research Service , during this same period , immigration to the United States increased , while the lower 90 % of tax filers incomes became stagnant , and eventually decreasing since 2000 . The rise in the share of total annual income received by the top 1 percent , which has more than doubled from 9 percent in 1976 to 20 percent in 2011 , has had a significant impact on income inequality , leaving the United States with one of the widest income distributions among OECD nations . The post @-@ recession income gains have been very uneven , with the top 1 percent capturing 95 percent of the income gains from 2009 to 2012 . The extent and relevance of income inequality is a matter of debate . 
 Wealth , like income and taxes , is highly concentrated ; the richest 10 % of the adult population possess 72 % of the country 's household wealth , while the bottom half claim only 2 % . Between June 2007 and November 2008 the global recession led to falling asset prices around the world . Assets owned by Americans lost about a quarter of their value . Since peaking in the second quarter of 2007 , household wealth was down $ 14 trillion , but has since increased $ 14 trillion over 2006 levels . At the end of 2014 , household debt amounted to $ 11 @.@ 8 trillion , down from $ 13 @.@ 8 trillion at the end of 2008 . 
 There were about 578 @,@ 424 sheltered and unsheltered homeless persons in the U.S. in January 2014 , with almost two @-@ thirds staying in an emergency shelter or transitional housing program . In 2011 16 @.@ 7 million children lived in food @-@ insecure households , about 35 % more than 2007 levels , though only 1 @.@ 1 % of U.S. children , or 845 @,@ 000 , saw reduced food intake or disrupted eating patterns at some point during the year , and most cases were not chronic . According to a 2014 report by the Census Bureau , one in five young adults lives in poverty today , up from one in seven in 1980 . 
 = = Education = = 
 American public education is operated by state and local governments , regulated by the United States Department of Education through restrictions on federal grants . In most states , children are required to attend school from the age of six or seven ( generally , kindergarten or first grade ) until they turn 18 ( generally bringing them through twelfth grade , the end of high school ) ; some states allow students to leave school at 16 or 17 . 
 About 12 % of children are enrolled in parochial or nonsectarian private schools . Just over 2 % of children are homeschooled . The U.S. spends more on education per student than any nation in the world , spending more than $ 11 @,@ 000 per elementary student in 2010 and more than $ 12 @,@ 000 per high school student . Some 80 % of U.S. college students attend public universities . 
 The United States has many competitive private and public institutions of higher education . The majority of world 's top universities listed by different ranking organizations are in the US . There are also local community colleges with generally more open admission policies , shorter academic programs , and lower tuition . Of Americans 25 and older , 84 @.@ 6 % graduated from high school , 52 @.@ 6 % attended some college , 27 @.@ 2 % earned a bachelor 's degree , and 9 @.@ 6 % earned graduate degrees . The basic literacy rate is approximately 99 % . The United Nations assigns the United States an Education Index of 0 @.@ 97 , tying it for 12th in the world . 
 As for public expenditures on higher education , the U.S. trails some other OECD nations but spends more per student than the OECD average , and more than all nations in combined public and private spending . As of 2012 , student loan debt exceeded one trillion dollars , more than Americans owe on credit cards . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The United States is home to many cultures and a wide variety of ethnic groups , traditions , and values . Aside from the Native American , Native Hawaiian , and Native Alaskan populations , nearly all Americans or their ancestors settled or immigrated within the past five centuries . Mainstream American culture is a Western culture largely derived from the traditions of European immigrants with influences from many other sources , such as traditions brought by slaves from Africa . More recent immigration from Asia and especially Latin America has added to a cultural mix that has been described as both a homogenizing melting pot , and a heterogeneous salad bowl in which immigrants and their descendants retain distinctive cultural characteristics . 
 Core American culture was established by Protestant British colonists and shaped by the frontier settlement process , with the traits derived passed down to descendants and transmitted to immigrants through assimilation . Americans have traditionally been characterized by a strong work ethic , competitiveness , and individualism , as well as a unifying belief in an " American creed " emphasizing liberty , equality , private property , democracy , rule of law , and a preference for limited government . Americans are extremely charitable by global standards . According to a 2006 British study , Americans gave 1 @.@ 67 % of GDP to charity , more than any other nation studied , more than twice the second place British figure of 0 @.@ 73 % , and around twelve times the French figure of 0 @.@ 14 % . 
 The American Dream , or the perception that Americans enjoy high social mobility , plays a key role in attracting immigrants . Whether this perception is realistic has been a topic of debate . While mainstream culture holds that the United States is a classless society , scholars identify significant differences between the country 's social classes , affecting socialization , language , and values . Americans ' self @-@ images , social viewpoints , and cultural expectations are associated with their occupations to an unusually close degree . While Americans tend greatly to value socioeconomic achievement , being ordinary or average is generally seen as a positive attribute . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 Mainstream American cuisine is similar to that in other Western countries . Wheat is the primary cereal grain with about three @-@ quarters of grain products made of wheat flour and many dishes use indigenous ingredients , such as turkey , venison , potatoes , sweet potatoes , corn , squash , and maple syrup which were consumed by Native Americans and early European settlers . These home grown foods are part of a shared national menu on one of America 's most popular holidays ; Thanksgiving , when some Americans make traditional foods to celebrate the occasion . 
 Characteristic dishes such as apple pie , fried chicken , pizza , hamburgers , and hot dogs derive from the recipes of various immigrants . French fries , Mexican dishes such as burritos and tacos , and pasta dishes freely adapted from Italian sources are widely consumed . Americans drink three times as much coffee as tea . Marketing by U.S. industries is largely responsible for making orange juice and milk ubiquitous breakfast beverages . 
 American eating habits owe a great deal to that of their British culinary roots with some variations . Although American lands could grow newer vegetables England could not , most colonists would not eat these new foods until accepted by Europeans . Over time American foods changed to a point that food critic , John L. Hess stated in 1972 : " Our founding fathers were as far superior to our present political leaders in the quality of their food as they were in the quality of their prose and intelligence " . 
 The American fast food industry , the world 's largest , pioneered the drive @-@ through format in the 1940s . Fast food consumption has sparked health concerns . During the 1980s and 1990s , Americans ' caloric intake rose 24 % ; frequent dining at fast food outlets is associated with what public health officials call the American " obesity epidemic " . Highly sweetened soft drinks are widely popular , and sugared beverages account for nine percent of American caloric intake . 
 = = = Literature , philosophy , and the arts = = = 
 In the 18th and early 19th centuries , American art and literature took most of its cues from Europe . Writers such as Nathaniel Hawthorne , Edgar Allan Poe , and Henry David Thoreau established a distinctive American literary voice by the middle of the 19th century . Mark Twain and poet Walt Whitman were major figures in the century 's second half ; Emily Dickinson , virtually unknown during her lifetime , is now recognized as an essential American poet . A work seen as capturing fundamental aspects of the national experience and character — such as Herman Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick ( 1851 ) , Twain 's The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn ( 1885 ) , F. Scott Fitzgerald 's The Great Gatsby ( 1925 ) and Harper Lee 's To Kill a Mockingbird ( 1960 ) — may be dubbed the " Great American Novel " . 
 Eleven U.S. citizens have won the Nobel Prize in Literature , most recently Toni Morrison in 1993 . William Faulkner , Ernest Hemingway and John Steinbeck are often named among the most influential writers of the 20th century . Popular literary genres such as the Western and hardboiled crime fiction developed in the United States . The Beat Generation writers opened up new literary approaches , as have postmodernist authors such as John Barth , Thomas Pynchon , and Don DeLillo . 
 The transcendentalists , led by Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson , established the first major American philosophical movement . After the Civil War , Charles Sanders Peirce and then William James and John Dewey were leaders in the development of pragmatism . In the 20th century , the work of W. V. O. Quine and Richard Rorty , and later Noam Chomsky , brought analytic philosophy to the fore of American philosophical academia . John Rawls and Robert Nozick led a revival of political philosophy . Cornel West and Judith Butler have led a continental tradition in American philosophical academia . Chicago school economists like Milton Friedman , James M. Buchanan , and Thomas Sowell have impacted various fields in social and political philosophy . 
 In the visual arts , the Hudson River School was a mid @-@ 19th @-@ century movement in the tradition of European naturalism . The realist paintings of Thomas Eakins are now widely celebrated . The 1913 Armory Show in New York City , an exhibition of European modernist art , shocked the public and transformed the U.S. art scene . Georgia O 'Keeffe , Marsden Hartley , and others experimented with new , individualistic styles . Major artistic movements such as the abstract expressionism of Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning and the pop art of Andy Warhol and Roy Lichtenstein developed largely in the United States . The tide of modernism and then postmodernism has brought fame to American architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright , Philip Johnson , and Frank Gehry . 
 One of the first major promoters of American theater was impresario P. T. Barnum , who began operating a lower Manhattan entertainment complex in 1841 . The team of Harrigan and Hart produced a series of popular musical comedies in New York starting in the late 1870s . In the 20th century , the modern musical form emerged on Broadway ; the songs of musical theater composers such as Irving Berlin , Cole Porter , and Stephen Sondheim have become pop standards . Playwright Eugene O 'Neill won the Nobel literature prize in 1936 ; other acclaimed U.S. dramatists include multiple Pulitzer Prize winners Tennessee Williams , Edward Albee , and August Wilson . 
 Though little known at the time , Charles Ives 's work of the 1910s established him as the first major U.S. composer in the classical tradition , while experimentalists such as Henry Cowell and John Cage created a distinctive American approach to classical composition . Aaron Copland and George Gershwin developed a new synthesis of popular and classical music . Choreographers Isadora Duncan and Martha Graham helped create modern dance , while George Balanchine and Jerome Robbins were leaders in 20th @-@ century ballet . Americans have long been important in the modern artistic medium of photography , with major photographers including Alfred Stieglitz , Edward Steichen , and Ansel Adams . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The rhythmic and lyrical styles of African @-@ American music have deeply influenced American music at large , distinguishing it from European traditions . Elements from folk idioms such as the blues and what is now known as old @-@ time music were adopted and transformed into popular genres with global audiences . Jazz was developed by innovators such as Louis Armstrong and Duke Ellington early in the 20th century . Country music developed in the 1920s , and rhythm and blues in the 1940s . 
 Elvis Presley and Chuck Berry were among the mid @-@ 1950s pioneers of rock and roll . In the 1960s , Bob Dylan emerged from the folk revival to become one of America 's most celebrated songwriters and James Brown led the development of funk . More recent American creations include hip hop and house music . American pop stars such as Presley , Michael Jackson , and Madonna have become global celebrities , as have contemporary musical artists such as Taylor Swift , Britney Spears , Katy Perry , and Beyoncé as well as hip hop artists Jay Z , Eminem and Kanye West . Rock bands such as Metallica , the Eagles , and Aerosmith are among the highest grossing in worldwide sales . 
 = = = Cinema = = = 
 Hollywood , a northern district of Los Angeles , California , is one of the leaders in motion picture production . The world 's first commercial motion picture exhibition was given in New York City in 1894 , using Thomas Edison 's Kinetoscope . The next year saw the first commercial screening of a projected film , also in New York , and the United States was in the forefront of sound film 's development in the following decades . Since the early 20th century , the U.S. film industry has largely been based in and around Hollywood , although in the 21st century an increasing number of films are not made there , and film companies have been subject to the forces of globalization . 
 Director D. W. Griffith , American 's top filmmaker during the silent film period , was central to the development of film grammar , and producer / entrepreneur Walt Disney was a leader in both animated film and movie merchandising . Directors such as John Ford redefined the image of the American Old West and history , and , like others such as John Huston , broadened the possibilities of cinema with location shooting , with great influence on subsequent directors . The industry enjoyed its golden years , in what is commonly referred to as the " Golden Age of Hollywood " , from the early sound period until the early 1960s , with screen actors such as John Wayne and Marilyn Monroe becoming iconic figures . In the 1970s , film directors such as Martin Scorsese , Francis Ford Coppola and Robert Altman were a vital component in what became known as " New Hollywood " or the " Hollywood Renaissance " , grittier films influenced by French and Italian realist pictures of the post @-@ war period . Since , directors such as Steven Spielberg , George Lucas and James Cameron have gained renown for their blockbuster films , often characterized by high production costs , and in return , high earnings at the box office , with Cameron 's Avatar ( 2009 ) earning more than $ 2 billion . 
 Notable films topping the American Film Institute 's AFI 100 list include Orson Welles 's Citizen Kane ( 1941 ) , which is frequently cited as the greatest film of all time , Casablanca ( 1942 ) , The Godfather ( 1972 ) , Gone with the Wind ( 1939 ) , Lawrence of Arabia ( 1962 ) , The Wizard of Oz ( 1939 ) , The Graduate ( 1967 ) , On the Waterfront ( 1954 ) , Schindler 's List ( 1993 ) , Singin ' in the Rain ( 1952 ) , It 's a Wonderful Life ( 1946 ) and Sunset Boulevard ( 1950 ) . The Academy Awards , popularly known as the Oscars , have been held annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences since 1929 , and the Golden Globe Awards have been held annually since January 1944 . 
