 = = = Oldham Athletic = = = 
 Upon his release from prison on 20 August 2007 , Hughes signed a two @-@ year contract with League One club Oldham Athletic ; the club asked supporters " not to pass moral judgement " . His reported salary of £ 1 @,@ 800 @-@ a @-@ week at Boundary Park was less than a 10th of what he earned at the peak of his career with West Bromwich Albion . Hughes made his debut for Oldham in a 4 – 1 defeat by Hartlepool United at Victoria Park on 1 September 2007 . He failed to find the net in his first seven games , and underwent an operation to correct a hernia problem . He recovered quickly from the procedure , and registered his first two goals for the Latics in a 3 – 0 win over Bournemouth at Dean Court on 25 November , before being named in the " League One Team of the Week " . He scored his first hat @-@ trick for the club against Millwall in a 3 – 2 victory at The Den on 15 December , and again made the " League One Team of the Week " . He picked up a groin injury in March 2008 , and was sidelined for the rest of the season . Hughes had scored eight goals by the end of the 2007 – 08 season , making him the club 's second highest goalscorer behind Craig Davies . 
 He opened his account for the 2008 – 09 season with a hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 0 win over Cheltenham Town on 23 August . Stating his future ambitions as playing Championship football with Oldham , he was offered a new deal at the club on 30 December 2008 . He was linked with a move to Doncaster Rovers in January 2009 , but stayed put after talks with manager John Sheridan , who insisted Hughes was " very happy " at Oldham . In March 2009 it was widely reported that Hughes had been involved in a drunken brawl with Sheridan where Hughes was reported to have had him " in a headlock " . Sheridan later downplayed the incident as " jovial " , saying " people have made things up " . Sheridan was sacked , but insisted that the two incidents were not related , as " it was results that cost me the job " . 
 On 26 March 2009 , Hughes joined Championship club Blackpool on loan until the end of the season . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat to Plymouth Argyle at Bloomfield Road on 4 April . His first goal for the club came on 18 April against Charlton Athletic at the Valley , when after coming on as an 89th @-@ minute substitute , and with Blackpool 2 – 1 down , he scored four minutes later to make the score 2 – 2 . Hughes ended the campaign as Oldham 's highest scorer with 18 goals in 40 appearances . However he was one of a number of players released by the club 's new manager Dave Penney in May 2009 , and returned to Kidderminster Harriers for training in order to keep up his fitness levels whilst searching for a new club . 
 = = = Notts County = = = 
 Hughes signed for League Two team Notts County on a two @-@ year contract on 22 July 2009 , on the same day that Sven @-@ Göran Eriksson arrived at the club as director of football . He scored a hat @-@ trick on his debut in a 5 – 0 victory over Bradford City on the opening day of the season . He then got his second hat @-@ trick against Northampton Town in a 5 – 2 home win on 12 September . He claimed his third hat @-@ trick of the campaign on 28 December during a 4 – 1 win over Burton Albion at the Pirelli Stadium . However the club endured a turbulent time , with manager Ian McParland sacked and replaced by Hans Backe , who himself resigned after <unk> Investments proved unable to fund Backe 's wages . New owner Ray Trew appointed Steve Cotterill as manager , and County entered April ten points behind league leaders Rochdale , though Hughes remained confident that they could reduce the deficit and win the league . On 17 April , Hughes scored two goals in a 4 – 1 victory over Morecambe as County won promotion to League One . He was named as League Two 's Player of the Month in April . On 1 May , Hughes added another two goals in County 's final home game of the season , making him the first Notts player to score 30 league goals since Tommy Lawton in the 1949 – 50 season . He finished as the division 's top @-@ scorer in 2009 – 10 with 30 league goals in 39 games , and was named on the PFA Team of the Year alongside teammates Kasper Schmeichel and Ben Davies . County won the league by a ten @-@ point margin . In July 2010 , Hughes signed a one @-@ year extension to his contract that would see him at Meadow Lane until the summer of 2012 . 
 On 23 September 2010 , Hughes revealed a ‘ Boing , Boing ’ T @-@ shirt in a League Cup tie with Wolverhampton Wanderers at Molineux – the slogan of Wolves ' rivals West Bromwich Albion – and was quizzed by police after angry Wolves fans retaliated to the message by attacking Notts County supporters ’ coaches . He was reported to be " angry " at being named as a substitute in a league game against Milton Keynes Dons on 11 December , though boss Paul Ince stated that " <unk> is 34 and cannot play week in week out . But he 's never come and said ' I should be starting ' . He 's been different class . " On 8 January 2011 , he was on the scoresheet as County beat Premier League side Sunderland 2 – 1 in the FA Cup . Two weeks later he was confirmed to be a target of Sheffield Wednesday . He remained with the " Magpies " , and ended the 2010 – 11 season as the club 's top @-@ scorer with 16 goals in 37 appearances . The club again went through a succession of managers – Craig Short , Paul Ince and then Martin Allen – and ended the season three points above the relegation zone . 
 On 8 September 2011 , he played against Italian club Juventus in the inaugural game of the Juventus Stadium , and scored County 's goal in a 1 – 1 draw . The next month he accepted a pay cut to sign a new 18 @-@ month contract , and was quoted as saying he never planned to leave the club as " the fans have taken me in and I love it here " . He ended the 2011 – 12 campaign on 11 goals in 44 games . In summer 2012 , the club rejected offers for Hughes from Cheltenham Town and former club Oldham Athletic . 
 At the beginning of the 2012 – 13 season , new manager Keith Curle stated that " we know he is of an age where he won 't be playing for 46 games , so he needs to be managed " . New signing Yoann <unk> became the County 's first choice striker , and Hughes announced his intention to leave the club in order to find first team football . He was reported to have joined Port Vale on loan , with a view to a permanent move , on 22 November 2012 ; though the deal had yet to be ratified by the Football League . However , the next day it was revealed that the loan move would not go through as the relevant paperwork had not been sent in on time . Three weeks later Hughes provided the club with a sick note , saying that he was unavailable until January . His contract was terminated by mutual consent on 7 January 2013 . 
 = = = Port Vale = = = 
 Hughes joined Port Vale the day after securing his exit from Notts County , as the BBC reported that " promotion @-@ chasing boss Micky Adams wants to bring him in to add impetus to a Vale attack who have occasionally misfired this term " . He signed a contract to keep him at Vale Park until the end of the 2012 – 13 season , at which point his contract would be extended by 12 months if the " Valiants " were promoted . He marked his debut against the " Gills " with the winning goal that sent Vale to the top of the table . Being partnered with the country 's leading goalscorer Tom Pope allowed Hughes space in front of goal vacated by opposition defenders attempting to double up on Pope . Hughes scored his first hat @-@ trick for the " Valiants " in a 7 – 1 home victory over Burton Albion on 5 April , with two of his goals coming from the penalty spot as he took over from Jennison Myrie @-@ Williams as the club 's penalty taker . This performance won him a place on the League Two team of the week . Vale were promoted at the end of the season , with Hughes scoring ten goals in his 18 games , ensuring his contract was extended until summer 2014 . 
 He was not a regular starter in the 2013 – 14 season , especially as Jordan Hugill began to impress from the youth development squad , and so he decided to leave the club in the January transfer window . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 On 3 January 2014 , he joined Conference Premier side Forest Green Rovers on an 18 @-@ month contract . Manager Adrian Pennock stated that " He 's come to play football , he 's not come for money and I 'm chuffed to have him on board . He has the experience we need and I believe he 'll score goals . " He made his debut six days later in a 1 – 1 draw with Hereford United at The New Lawn . On 25 January , he scored his first goals for the club , securing a brace in a 3 – 0 home win over Chester . 
 On the opening day of the 2014 – 15 season , Hughes scored Forest Green 's winning goal in a 1 – 0 away victory at Southport . He then scored his 300th career goal with his second strike of the season in a 2 – 0 win over Alfreton Town at The New Lawn on 16 August 2014 . 
 On 30 January 2015 , Hughes returned to Conference Premier club Kidderminster Harriers on a deal till the end of the season after having his contract with Forest Green Rovers mutually terminated . On his ' second debut ' for Kidderminster , he put his side ahead in a Worcestershire Senior Cup tie against Stourbridge . He also scored on his league return against Woking at Aggborough , scoring in the 39th minute in a 1 – 1 draw . He was released at the end of the season as manager Gary <unk> 's playing budget was reduced by half for the 2015 – 16 campaign . 
 After impressing in pre season , Hughes signed for Northern Premier League Premier Division side Ilkeston , and was sent off on his debut against Skelmersdale United on 15 August 2015 . 
 In September 2015 , Hughes signed for Worcester City on non @-@ contract terms , who played at Aggborough , the home of Kidderminster Harriers where he started his career . He scored 19 goals in 29 appearances in the 2015 – 16 campaign . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Describing Hughes 's attributes in January 2013 , former Notts County coach Dave Kevan said that he was a " fantastic finisher ... a clever player whose movement is good , whose intelligence is good , who uses his body well and who uses his strength well ... he plays with his brain and he 's adapted his game as he has got older ... he 's also clever enough to create opportunities for others " . He maintained a " natural goalscoring instinct " throughout his career , and has said " I always fancy myself to stick the ball in the back of the net if I get a chance " . He ended the 2013 – 14 season with eight goals in 21 appearances for Rovers . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 The son of Bill and Gail Hughes , older brother to Clint and Brett , Hughes worked with his father as a roofer in his home @-@ town of Smethwick before turning professional . In 1999 , Sharlene Gillies claimed that she and Hughes had a child together . DNA tests later proved that he was not the father , though by this time his engagement to lap dancer Donna Nisbet was called off . Hughes stated that " I don 't think Donna was particularly happy with all the limelight that comes with football " , though insisted that barracking from opposition fans only made him more determined to put in a good performance on the pitch . Hughes and Jason Roberts were questioned by police over allegations that they assaulted a man outside a pub in Brierley Hill ; the case was dropped in September 2000 . It was reported that he had converted to Islam during his time in prison , due in part to his friendship with Muslim prisoners and the fact that abuse of alcohol had helped to bring about his downfall – his father said that " this story is not true . " In 2005 Hughes was reported to be on suicide watch after learning that his wife had reportedly been seeing a younger man . 
 He married air hostess Anna <unk> in June 2000 in the Croatian town of Trogir . The couple had two children together but split up in 2008 ; the split was described as " very amicable " . His eldest , Mia , was born in November 2000 . 
 = = = Causing death by dangerous driving conviction = = = 
 On 23 November 2003 , near his home in the Warwickshire village of Meriden , West Midlands , Hughes lost control of his Mercedes <unk> AMG and went onto the wrong side of the road before colliding with a Renault <unk> . A passenger in the Renault , Douglas Graham , was killed in the incident , whilst his wife Maureen and the driver Albert Frisby were severely injured . Hughes and passenger Adrian Smith left the scene , before turning themselves in to the police 36 hours later . He was arrested on suspicion of causing death by dangerous driving . He denied the charge , though later pleaded Guilty to charges of failing to stop and failing to report an accident . 
 During his trial at Coventry Crown Court , Hughes was accused of driving too fast in wet conditions and was described as driving " like a madman " . He claimed the brakes on his car had locked , though tests showed that the brakes were in perfect working order and had technology installed to prevent the driver from losing control . When asked where he had been in the 36 hours after leaving the scene of the incident Hughes said that " I would rather not say , really " , though later admitted he had travelled 20 miles to Smethwick . Prosecutor Melbourne Inman QC told the court Hughes had fled the scene to dodge a breath test . On 9 August 2004 , Hughes was found guilty of causing death by dangerous driving , and was sentenced to six years imprisonment . Frisby said that the sentence was not long enough . Hughes lodged an appeal against the sentence , but not the conviction . In January 2005 , his appeal for his sentence to be reduced was refused . 
 He served his time in Category C prisons . During his time in HM Prison Featherstone he played in the Staffordshire County Senior League for the prison football team . He also helped to organise a charity football match which raised £ 5 @,@ 000 for a children 's hospice . He was released in August 2007 , three years into his six @-@ year sentence . 
 " After today I do not intend to discuss or make comment about the events which led to my imprisonment . I have made this decision , not out of protection for myself , but with regard to the privacy and respect for the families involved . I made dreadful mistakes and decisions that will live with me for the rest of my life . It also greatly affected my immediate family , including my wife and children , and I will never forgive myself for this . " 
 = = = Assault conviction = = = 
 On 3 December 2011 , Hughes was arrested and bailed on charges of sexual assault after an incident in Croydon . He was then charged with the offence on 30 January 2012 . In May 2012 Hughes was found guilty of common assault and fined £ 500 , but the charge of sexual assault was dropped . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 As of 4 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Kidderminster Harriers 
 Football Conference runner @-@ up : 1996 – 97 
 West Bromwich Albion 
 Football League First Division runner @-@ up : 2003 – 04 
 Notts County 
 Football League Two : 2009 – 10 
 Port Vale 
 Football League Two third @-@ place promotion : 2012 – 13 
 Individual 
 PFA Team of the Year ( First Division ) : 1998 – 99 
 West Bromwich Albion F.C. Player of the Year : 1998 – 99 
 Football League Two Player of the Month : April 2010 
 PFA Team of the Year ( League Two ) : 2009 – 10 
 = History of St. Louis = 
 The history of St. Louis , Missouri began with the settlement of the St. Louis area by Native American mound builders who lived as part of the Mississippian culture from the 9th century to the 15th century , followed by other migrating tribal groups . Starting in the late 17th century , French explorers arrived . Spain took over in 1763 and a trading company led by Pierre Laclede and Auguste Chouteau established the settlement of St. Louis in February 1764 . It attracted French settlers leaving Illinois when Britain took control east of the Mississippi . The city grew in population due to its location as a trading post on the Mississippi River , as the western fur trade was lucrative . The city played a small role in the American Revolutionary War and became part of the U.S. through the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 . 
 With its connection through the Ohio River to the east , the Mississippi to the south and north , and the Missouri to the west , St. Louis was ideally located to become the main base of interregional trade . In the 1840s , it became a destination for massive immigration by Irish and Germans . Some native @-@ born Americans reacted with fear to the newcomers , adopting nativist sentiments . Missouri was a slave state , but the city 's proximity to free states caused it to become a center for the filing of freedom suits . Many slaves gained freedom through such suits in the antebellum years . But , by the 1850s and the Dred Scott case , interpretations had changed and the US Supreme Court ruled against him . It also ruled that the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional , contributing to the tensions causing the American Civil War . During the War , St. Louis had a small skirmish on its outskirts , but was held under Union control . 
 After the war , the city expanded its railroad connections and industrial activity . It suffered a corresponding rise in pollution of the river and waterfront . During the early 1870s , the Eads Bridge was constructed over the Mississippi River , and the city established several large parks , including Forest Park . Due to local political and economic disputes , the city separated from St. Louis County in 1876 and became an independent city . Its limited geographic area has inhibited its success in the 20th and 21st centuries because of the small tax base . During the late 19th century , St. Louis became home to two Major League Baseball teams . Ragtime and blues music flourished in the city , with African Americans making major contributions also in jazz . 
 The city hosted the 1904 World 's Fair and the 1904 Summer Olympics , attracting millions of visitors . Part of the infrastructure for the fair was the basis for major city institutions in Forest Park . In the early part of the century , many African Americans migrated from the South to the city for industrial jobs , as part of the Great Migration . St. Louis did not escape the Great Depression and its high unemployment . During World War II the city hosted war industries that employed thousands of workers . 
 After the war , federal highway subsidies and postwar development encouraged outward migration as residents moved to gain newer housing ; this suburbanization significantly reduced the city 's middle @-@ class population . The city made efforts to create new attractions , such as the Gateway Arch , which construction became a focus of the civil rights movement to gain non @-@ segregated jobs in the skilled trades . The first litigation under the 1964 Civil Rights Act was against St. Louis unions . The city worked to replace substandard housing by new public housing projects such as Pruitt – Igoe . A combination of factors resulted in this being notoriously unsuccessful , and it was demolished in the late 20th century . Starting in the 1980s and continuing into the following century , construction and gentrification have increased in some areas of St. Louis , particularly downtown . City beautification and crime reduction have made progress , although St. Louis has continued to struggle with crime and perceptions of crime . The city saw modest population growth during the mid @-@ 2000s , but showed a decline in the 2010 U.S. Census . 
 = = Exploration and Louisiana before 1762 = = 
 The earliest settlements in the middle Mississippi Valley were built in the 10th century by the people of the Mississippian culture , who constructed more than two dozen platform mounds within the area of the future European @-@ American city . These were related to the center of the culture at the very large complex of Cahokia Mounds , on the east side of the Mississippi River . The Mississippian culture ended for unknown reasons in the 14th century and these sites were empty for some time . Siouan @-@ speaking groups such as the Missouria and the Osage migrated from the eastern Ohio Valley to the Missouri Valley . They lived in villages along the Missouri and Osage rivers . Both groups competed with northeastern tribes such as the Sauk and the Meskwaki , and all four groups confronted the earliest European explorers of the middle Mississippi Valley . 
 Extensive European exploration near the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers began nearly a century before the city was officially founded . Explorer Louis Joliet and Jesuit priest Jacques Marquette traveled south on the Mississippi River in June 1673 , passed the future site of St. Louis and reached the mouth of the Arkansas River before turning back . 
 Nine years later , French explorer La Salle led an expedition south from the Illinois River to the mouth of the Mississippi in the Gulf of Mexico , claiming the entire valley for France . La Salle named the Mississippi river basin La Louisiane ( Louisiana ) after King Louis XIV ; the region between and near the confluence of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers was named the Illinois Country . As part of a series of forts in the Mississippi valley , the French built settlements at Cahokia and Kaskaskia , Illinois . French trading companies also built towns during the 1720s and 1730s , including Fort de Chartres and Ste . Genevieve , Missouri , the first European town in Missouri west of the Mississippi . From 1756 to 1760 , fighting in the French and Indian War ( the North American front of the Seven Years ' War ) halted settlement building . The economy remained weak through 1762 due to the ongoing war , in which Britain defeated France the following year . 
 = = City founding and early history : 1763 – 1803 = = 
 The arrival in New Orleans of Jean @-@ Jacques Blaise d 'Abbadie as the new governor of Louisiana in June 1763 led to changes in colonial policies . D 'Abbadie quickly moved to grant trade monopolies in the middle Mississippi Valley to stimulate the economy . Among the new <unk> was Pierre Laclede , who along with his stepson Auguste Chouteau set out in August 1763 to build a fur trading post near the confluence of the Missouri and Mississippi rivers . The settlement of St. Louis was established at a site south of the confluence on the west bank of the Mississippi on February 15 , 1764 , by Chouteau and a group of about 30 men . Laclede arrived at the site by mid @-@ 1764 and provided detailed plans for the village , including a street grid and market area . 
 French settlers began to arrive from settlements on the east bank of the Mississippi in 1764 due to fears of British control , given the transfer of eastern land to Great Britain after the Treaty of Paris . The local French lieutenant governor moved to St. Louis in 1765 and began awarding land grants . As part of the peace negotiations to end the Seven Years ' War , Spain gained control of Louisiana according to the secret Treaty of Fontainebleau in 1762 . Due to travel times and the Louisiana Rebellion of 1768 , the Spanish took official control in St. Louis only in May 1770 . After the transfer , the Spanish confirmed French land grants , and Spanish soldiers provided local security . 
 The occupation of most settlers was farming , and by the 1790s nearly 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 24 km2 ) were under cultivation around St. Louis . Fur trading was the major commercial focus of many residents , as it was much more lucrative than agriculture during that period . The residents were not particularly religious , in spite of their Roman Catholic faith . The first church was constructed in mid @-@ 1770 and St. Louis acquired a resident priest in 1776 , making Catholic religious observance a more customary component of life . 
 The French settlers brought both black and Indian slaves to St. Louis ; although the majority were used as domestic servants , others worked as agricultural laborers . In 1769 , the Spanish prohibited Indian slavery in Louisiana , but the practice was entrenched among the French Creoles in St. Louis . As a compromise , Spanish governors ended the Indian slave trade but allowed the retention of current slaves and any children born to them . In 1772 , a census determined the population of the village to be 637 , including 444 whites ( 285 males and 159 females ) and 193 African slaves , with no Indian slaves reported due to their technical illegality . During the 1770s and 1780s , St. Louis grew slowly and the Spanish commanders were replaced often . 
 = = = American Revolution = = = 
 Upon the beginning of the American Revolutionary War , Spanish governor , Bernardo de Galvez , in New Orleans assisted the American rebels with weapons , food , blankets , tents and ammunition . The Spanish lieutenant governors at St. Louis also aided the colonials , particularly the forces of George Rogers Clark during the Illinois campaign . After the official entry of Spain into the American Revolutionary War in June 1779 on the side of the Americans and the French , the British began preparing an invasion to attack St. Louis and other Mississippi outposts . However , St. Louis was warned of the plans , and residents began to fortify the town . 
 On May 26 , 1780 , British and Indian forces attacked the town of St. Louis , but were forced to retreat due to the fortifications and defections of some Indian forces . In spite of their defeat , the British and their allies destroyed much of St. Louis ' agricultural lands and cattle stock , killed 23 residents , wounded 7 , and captured between 25 and 75 as prisoners ( some might have been murdered after their capture ) . A subsequent counterattack launched from St. Louis against British forts in the Midwest ended the threat of another attack on the town . 
 After the British were defeated , more French Creole families evaded Anglo @-@ American rule by moving to the Spanish @-@ controlled land on the west bank , including wealthy merchants Charles Gratiot , Sr. and Gabriel <unk> . Both the Gratiot and <unk> families intermarried with the Chouteau family to create a Creole @-@ dominated society in the 1780s and 1790s . The families also had marital ties to Spanish government officials , including the lieutenant governors <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = = Transfer to France and the United States = = = 
 During the 1790s , towns near St. Louis expanded as small farmers sold their lands to the <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . These farmers moved to towns such as Carondelet , St. Charles , and Florissant . By 1800 , only 43 % of the district 's population lived within the village ( 1 @,@ 039 of 2 @,@ 447 ) . 
 The Spanish government secretly returned the unprofitable Louisiana territory to France in October 1800 in the Treaty of San Ildefonso . The Spanish officially transferred control in October 1802 ; however , Spanish administrators remained in charge of St. Louis throughout the time of French ownership . Shortly afterward , a team of American negotiators purchased Louisiana , including St. Louis . On March 8 or 9 , 1804 , the flag of Spain was lowered at the government buildings in St. Louis and , according to local tradition , the flag of France was raised . On March 10 , 1804 , the French flag was replaced by that of the United States . 
 = = Expansion , growth , and the Civil War : 1804 – 1865 = = 
 = = = Government and religion = = = 
 Initially , the governor of the Indiana Territory governed the Louisiana District ( which included St. Louis ) , and the district 's organizational law forbade the foreign slave trade and reduced the influence of St. Louis in the region . Wealthy St. Louisans petitioned Congress to review the system , and in July 1805 , Congress reorganized the Louisiana District as the Louisiana Territory , with its territorial capital at St. Louis and its own territorial governor . From the division of the Louisiana Territory in 1812 to Missouri statehood in 1821 , St. Louis was the capital of the Missouri Territory . 
 The population of the city expanded slowly after the Louisiana Purchase , but expansion increased desire to incorporate St. Louis as a town , allowing it to create local ordinances without the approval of the territorial legislature . On November 27 , 1809 , the first Board of Trustees were elected . The Board passed slave codes , created a volunteer fire department , and created an overseer to improve street quality . To enforce town ordinances , the Board created the St. Louis Police Department , and a town jail was established in the fortifications built for the Battle of St. Louis . 
 After the end of the War of 1812 , the population of St. Louis and the Missouri Territory began expanding quickly . During this expansion land was donated for the Old St. Louis County Courthouse . The population increase stirred interest in statehood for Missouri , and in 1820 , Congress passed the Missouri Compromise , authorizing Missouri 's admission as a slave state . The state constitutional convention and first General Assembly met in St. Louis in 1820 . Shortly thereafter , St. Louis incorporated as a city , on December 9 , 1822 . The first mayor of the city was William Carr Lane , and a Board of Aldermen replaced the earlier Board of Trustees . Early city government focused on improvements to the riverfront and health conditions . In addition to a street paving program , the aldermen voted to rename the streets . 
 After the transfer of Louisiana to the United States , the Spanish had ended subsidies to the Catholic Church in St. Louis . As a result , Catholics in St. Louis had no resident priest until the arrival of Louis William Valentine Dubourg in early January 1818 . Upon his arrival , he replaced the original log chapel with a brick church , recruited priests , and established a seminary . By 1826 , a separate St. Louis diocese was created . Joseph <unk> became the first bishop in 1827 . 
 Protestants had received services from itinerant ministers in the late 1790s , but the Spanish required them to move to American territory until after the Louisiana Purchase . After the purchase , the Baptist missionary John Mason Peck built the first Protestant church in St. Louis in 1818 . Methodist ministers reached the town during the early years after the purchase , but only formed a congregation in 1821 . The Presbyterian Church in St. Louis began as a Bible reading society in 1811 , and in December 1817 members organized a church and built a chapel late the next year . A fourth Protestant group to take root was the Episcopal Church , founded in 1825 . 
 During the 1830s and 1840s , other faith groups also came to St. Louis , including the first Jewish congregation in the area , the United Hebrew Congregation , which was organized in 1837 . Followers of Mormonism arrived in 1831 , and in 1854 , they organized the first LDS church in St. Louis . Despite these events , during the pre @-@ Civil War era most of the population were culturally Catholic or uninterested in organized religion . 
 = = = Commerce , the Panic of 1819 , and growth = = = 
 Commerce after the Louisiana Purchase remained focused on the fur trade ; operations in St. Louis were led by the Chouteau family and its alliance with the Osages and by Manuel Lisa and his Missouri Fur Company . Due to its role as a major trading post , the city was the departure point for the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 1804 . 
 American and other immigrant families began arriving in St. Louis and opening new businesses , including printing and banking , starting in the 1810s . Among the printers was Joseph <unk> , who published the first newspaper west of the Mississippi , the Missouri Gazette , on July 12 , 1808 . In 1816 and 1817 , groups of merchants formed the first banks in the town , but mismanagement and the Panic of 1819 led to their closure . 
 The effect of the Panic of 1819 and subsequent depression slowed commercial activity in St. Louis until the mid @-@ 1820s . By 1824 and 1825 , however , St. Louis businesses began to recover , largely due to the introduction of the steamboat ; the first to arrive in St. Louis , the Zebulon M. Pike , docked on August 2 , 1817 . Rapids north of the city made St. Louis the northernmost navigable port for many large riverboats , and the Pike and other ships soon transformed St. Louis into a bustling inland port . 
 More goods became available in St. Louis during the economic recovery , largely as a result of the new steamboat power . Wholesalers , new banks , and other retail stores opened starting in the late 1820s and early 1830s . The fur trade continued as a major industry into the 1830s . In 1822 , Jedediah Smith joined William H. Ashley 's St. Louis fur trading company . Smith would later be known for his explorations of the West and for being the first American to travel overland to California . New fur trade companies such as the Rocky Mountain Fur Company pioneered trails west . Although beaver fur lost its popularity in the 1840s , St. Louis continued as a hub of buffalo hide and other furs . 
 Construction of the County Courthouse in the late 1820s also encouraged growth , with an addition of western lots to Ninth Street and a new City Hall adjacent to the river in 1833 . The military post far north of the city at Fort Bellefontaine moved nearer to the city to Jefferson Barracks in 1827 , and the St. Louis Arsenal was built in south St. Louis the same year . The 1830s included dramatic population growth : by 1830 , it had increased to 5 @,@ 832 from roughly 4 @,@ 500 in 1820 . By 1835 , it reached 8 @,@ 316 , doubled by 1840 to 16 @,@ 439 , doubled again by 1845 to 35 @,@ 390 , and again by 1850 to 77 @,@ 860 . 
 = = = Infrastructure and education improvements = = = 
 In large part due to the rapid population growth , cholera became a significant problem . In 1849 , a major cholera epidemic killed nearly 5 @,@ 000 people , leading to a new sewer system and the draining of a mill pond . Cemeteries were removed to the outskirts to Bellefontaine Cemetery and Calvary Cemetery to reduce groundwater contamination . In the same year , a large fire broke out on a steamboat on the levee , spread to 23 other boats , and destroyed a large portion of the center city . The St. Louis landing was significantly improved during the 1850s . Using the engineering planning of Robert E. Lee , levees were constructed on the Illinois side to direct water toward Missouri to eliminate sand bars that threatened the landing . Another infrastructure improvement was the city 's water system , which was begun in the early 1830s and was continually improved and expanded in the 1840s and 1850s . 
 Most early St. Louisans remained illiterate through the 1810s , although many wealthy merchants purchased books for private libraries . Early schools in St. Louis were all fee @-@ based and mostly conducted lessons in French . The first substantial educational effort came about under the authority of the Catholic Church , which in 1818 opened Saint Louis Academy , later renamed Saint Louis University . In 1832 , the college applied for a state charter , and in December 1832 , it became the first chartered university west of the Mississippi River . Its medical school opened in 1842 , with faculty that included Daniel Brainard ( founder of Rush Medical College ) , Moses Linton ( founder of the first medical journal west of the Mississippi River in 1843 ) , and Charles Alexander Pope ( later president of the American Medical Association ) . However , the university primarily catered to seminary students rather than the general public , and only in the 1840s did the Catholic Church offer large scale instruction at parochial schools . In 1853 , William Greenleaf Eliot founded a second university in the city — Washington University in St. Louis . During the 1850s Eliot founded Smith Academy for boys and Mary Institute for girls , which later merged and became Mary Institute and St. Louis Country Day School . 
 Public education in St. Louis , provided by St. Louis Public Schools , began in 1838 with the creation of two elementary schools , and the system quickly expanded during the 1840s . By 1854 , the system had 27 schools and served nearly 4 @,@ 000 students . In 1855 , the district opened a high school to considerable fanfare . The high school , now known as Central VPA High School , was the first public high school west of the Mississippi River . By 1860 , nearly 12 @,@ 000 students had enrolled in the district . The district also opened a normal school in 1857 , which later became Harris – Stowe State University . 
 Entertainment options increased during the pre – Civil War period ; in early 1819 , the first theatre production in St. Louis opened , including a musical accompaniment . In the late 1830s , a 35 @-@ member orchestra briefly played in St. Louis , and in 1860 , another orchestra opened that played more than 60 concerts through 1870 . 
 = = = Slavery , immigration and nativism = = = 
 Missouri was admitted as a slave state . During the 1840s , the number of slaves increased but their percentage relative to the population declined ; during the 1850s , both the number and percentage declined . Roughly 3 @,@ 200 free blacks and slaves lived in St. Louis in 1850 , working as domestic servants , artisans , crew on the riverboats and stevedores . 
 Some slaves were allowed to earn wages , and some were able to save money to purchase their freedom or that of relatives . Others were manumitted , which occurred relatively more frequently in St. Louis than in the surrounding rural areas . Still others attempted to escape via the Underground Railroad or attempted to gain their freedom through freedom suits . The first freedom suit in St. Louis was filed by Marguerite <unk> in 1805 . More than 300 suits were filed in St. Louis before the Civil War . Among the most famous was that of Dred Scott and his wife Harriet , in a case heard at the Old Courthouse . The suit was based on their having traveled and lived with their master in free states . Although the state ruled in his favor , an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court resulted in an 1857 ruling against them . The Court ruled that slaves could not be counted as citizens , overturning the basis of the Missouri Compromise and inflaming national debate about slavery . 
 During the economic expansion of the 1830s , Irish and German immigration to St. Louis increased substantially . In particular , the writings of Gottfried Duden encouraged German immigration . Many Irish were motivated by the Irish potato famine of 1845 – 1846 and the failed Irish uprising of 1848 . Other Irish settlers came because of its reputation as a Catholic city . 
 Nativist sentiment increased in St. Louis during the late 1840s , leading to mob attacks and riots in 1844 , 1849 , and 1852 . The 1844 riots derived from popular outrage and resentment toward human dissection , which was then taking place at the Saint Louis University Medical College . The discovery of human remains prompted rumors of grave robbing , and a mob of more than 3 @,@ 000 residents attacked the medical college , destroying most of its interior facilities . The worst nativist riot in St. Louis took place in 1854 . The local militia was used to end the fighting . 10 people were killed , 33 wounded , and 93 buildings were damaged . Regulations on elections prevented fighting in future elections in 1856 and 1858 . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 Before the war , the core of St. Louis leadership had shifted from the Creole and Irish families to a new group , dominated by anti @-@ slavery Germans . Among this new class of leaders was Frank P. Blair , Jr . , who led an effort to create a local militia loyal to the Union after Missouri Governor Claiborne Fox Jackson hinted about secession . This local militia allied itself with the Union army forces at Jefferson Barracks under the leadership of Nathaniel Lyon , which on May 10 , 1861 cleared a Confederate encampment outside the city in what became known as the Camp Jackson Affair . While the Confederates were being marched back into town , a group of citizens attacked the Union and militia forces , costing 28 civilian lives . 
 Throughout the entirety of the Civil War , St. Louis was under pressure as it was considered a city on the borderline . Though many people were confident in abolition , many were concerned about the economic effect of losing their free work force . In addition , St. Louis was still a developing city , and so a war could lead to utter destruction and ruin . However , with all the necessity of ammunition , St. Louis survived and transformed into a leader among cities . 
 After the Camp Jackson Affair , there were no more military threats to Union control until 1864 , although guerrilla activity continued in rural areas for the duration of the war . Union General John C. Fremont placed the city under martial law in August 1861 to suppress sedition ; after Fremont 's dismissal , Union army forces continued to suppress pro @-@ Confederate demonstrations . The war significantly damaged St. Louis commerce , especially after the Confederacy blockaded the Mississippi shutting off St. Louis 's connection to eastern markets . War also slowed growth during the 1860s , with an increase of only 43 @,@ 000 residents from 1860 to 1866 . 
 = = Fourth city status : 1866 – 1904 = = 
 During the decades after the Civil War , St. Louis grew to become the nation 's fourth largest city , after New York City , Philadelphia , and Chicago . It also experienced rapid infrastructure and transportation development and the growth of heavy industry . The period culminated with the 1904 World 's Fair and 1904 Summer Olympics , which were held concurrently in St. Louis . 
 = = = Infrastructure , parks , and education = = = 
 During the Civil War , the infrastructure of St. Louis suffered from neglect ; another cholera epidemic struck in 1866 , and typhoid fever raged . In response , St. Louis improved its water system and established a Board of Health to regulate polluting industries . St. Louis 's park system was expanded during the 1860s and 1870s , with the creation of Tower Grove Park and Forest Park . 
 = = = Railroads = = = 
 Railroad connections with the southwest and Texas were improved during the 1870s , with the formation of the Cotton Belt Railroad . In addition to connecting St. Louis with the West , the railroads began to demand connections with the east across the Mississippi . Between 1867 and 1874 , work on the Eads Bridge over the Mississippi continued despite setbacks such as caisson disease . The bridge formally opened on July 4 , 1874 . 
 To accommodate increased rail traffic , a new railroad terminal was constructed in 1875 , but it was not large enough to consolidate all train service in one location . A replacement station , called Union Station , opened on September 1 , 1894 . Although Chicago , Illinois had a greater volume of traffic at its own Union Station , more railroads met at St. Louis than any other city in the United States . Union Station 's rail platform expanded in 1930 and operated as the passenger rail terminal for St. Louis into the 1970s . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 By 1870 the public and parochial education systems expanded , to 24 @,@ 347 and 4 @,@ 362 students respectively . St. Louis educators established the first public kindergarten in the United States , under the instruction of Susan Blow in 1874 . Proposals for a free library system originated prior to the Civil War , and after the conflict the St. Louis Public School Library was established . During the 1870s and 1880s , a variety of local fee @-@ based libraries consolidated with the school library system , and in 1894 , the school system divested the library system as an independent entity , which became the St. Louis Public Library . 
 Racially segregated schools had operated secretly and illegally in St. Louis since the 1820s , but in 1864 , an integrated group of St. Louisans formed the Board of Education for Colored Schools , which established schools without public finances for more than 1 @,@ 500 black pupils in 1865 . After 1865 , the St. Louis Board of Education appropriated funding for the black schools , but facilities and conditions were quite poor . In 1875 , after considerable effort and protest from the black community , high school classes began to be offered at Sumner High School , the first high school for black students west of the Mississippi . However , inequality remained rampant in St. Louis schools . 
 Radical historians in the 1960s , steeped in the anti @-@ bureaucratic ethos of the New Left , deplored the emergence of bureaucratic school systems . They argue its purpose was to suppress the upward aspirations of the working class . However , other historians have emphasized the necessity of building non @-@ politicized standardized systems . The reforms in St. Louis , according to historian Selwyn Troen , were . " born of necessity as educators first confronted the problems of managing a rapidly expanding and increasingly complex institutions . " Troen found that the bureaucratic solution remove schools from the bitterness and spite of ward politics . Troen argues : 
 In the space of only a generation , public education had left behind a highly regimented and politicized system dedicated to training children in the basic skills of literacy and the special discipline required of urban citizens , and had replaced it with a largely apolitical , more highly organized and efficient structure specifically designed to teach students the many specialized skills demanded in a modern , industrial society . In terms of programs this entailed the introduction of vocational instruction , a doubling of the period of schooling , and a broader concern for the welfare of urban youth . 
 = = = Separation from St. Louis County = = = 
 When Missouri became a state in 1821 , St. Louis County was created from the boundaries of the former St. Louis subdistrict of the Missouri Territory ; St. Louis city existed within the county but was not coterminous with it . Starting in the 1850s , rural county voters began to exert political influence over questions of taxation in the St. Louis County court . In 1867 , the county court was given power to assess and collect property tax revenue from St. Louis city property , providing a financial boon to the county government while depriving city government of revenues . After this power transfer , St. Louisans in the city began to favor one of three options : greater representation on the county court via charter changes , city – county consolidation , or urban secession to form an independent city . 
 At a Missouri state constitutional convention in 1875 , delegates from the region agreed on a separation plan . A Board of Freeholders from St. Louis county and city reorganized boundaries and proposed a final plan of separation in mid @-@ 1876 . The new city charter also tripled the size of the city to include the new rural parks ( such as Forest Park ) and the useful riverfront from the Missouri – Mississippi confluence to the mouth of the River Des Peres . After a fraudulent election initially showed a rejection of the plan , a recount in December 1876 showed voters had approved the separation . 
 = = = Industrial and commercial growth = = = 
 In 1880 , the leading industries of St. Louis included brewing , flour milling , slaughtering , machining , and tobacco processing . Other industries including the manufacture of paint , bricks , and iron . During the 1880s , the city grew in population by 29 percent , from 350 @,@ 518 to 451 @,@ 770 , making it the country 's fourth largest city ; it also ranked fourth as measured by value of its manufactured products , and more than 6 @,@ 148 factories existed in 1890 . However , during the 1890s , manufacturing growth slowed dramatically . The Panic of 1893 and subsequent depression and the overproduction of grain made St. Louis mills considerably less productive and valuable . Flour milling was halved and most other industries suffered similar declines . 
 The introduction of the railroad in St. Louis helped spread the fortune and initialize much of this industrial success . With the completion of the Municipal Railroad System , St. Louis ' manufacturers could get their products to consumers on the East Coast much faster than before . 
 The brewing small industry took off with the arrival of Adam Lemp from Germany in 1842 . He introduced lager beer , which quickly became the city 's most popular choice . The industry expanded rapidly in the late 1850s , from 24 breweries in 1854 to 40 in 1860 . Brewing became the city 's largest industry by 1880 , and St. Louis breweries were innovators . Anheuser @-@ Busch pioneered refrigerated railroad cars for beer transport and was the first company to market pasteurized bottled beer . 
 St. Louis became home to whiskey distilleries . Several were at the heart of the Whiskey Ring during the early 1870s , a conspiracy that began among St. Louis distillers and federal tax officials to avoid paying excise taxes . With the breakup of the ring in May 1875 , more than 100 conspirators were charged with fraud , including Grant 's private secretary , Orville E. Babcock . In early 1876 , 110 conspirators were convicted of fraud . Babcock was the only defendant who was acquitted . 
 The Ralston @-@ Purina company , headed by the Danforth family , was headquartered in the city , and Anheuser @-@ Busch , the world 's largest brewery , remained a fixture of the city 's economy into the 21st century . The city was home to both International Shoe and the Brown Shoe Company . The <unk> Consolidated Lead Company , the largest lead mining concern in the country , headed by the <unk> family , was headquartered downtown . In May 1874 , the insurance companies of St. Louis founded the <unk> Salvage Corps to reduce the impact of fires in the city . 
 Among the downsides to rapid industrialization was pollution . Brick firing produced particulate air pollution and paint @-@ making created lead dust , while beer and liquor brewing produced grain swill . The worst pollution was coal dust and smoke , for which St. Louis was infamous by the 1890s . The greatest number of complaints to the St. Louis Board of Health were due to industries engaged in rendering , which produced noxious fumes . In spite of this , pollution control was hindered by a desire to promote growth . One of the few controls began in 1880 , in which regulations would be enforced strictly in some areas while little in others , thereby encouraging factories to concentrate in industrial districts . 
 In addition to industrial growth , the 1880s and 1890s were a period of significant growth in downtown commercial building . The retail district was centered at Fourth Street and Washington Avenue , while banking and business was centered to the south , at Fourth and Olive streets . During the 1890s , significant retailers and businesses moved westward ; among the new buildings constructed as a result of this movement was the Wainwright Building . Designed by Louis Sullivan in 1891 , the Wainwright was the tallest building in the city at the time of its construction and remains an example of early skyscraper design . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 In September 1880 , the St. Louis Choral Society opened as a musical orchestra and choir ; the same organization provided annual concerts through 1906 , when it was renamed the St. Louis Symphony Orchestra . Starting in the 1890s , the district known as Chestnut Valley ( an area near the present @-@ day Scottrade Center ) became the home of St. Louis ragtime . Several well @-@ known ragtime and jazz composers lived or played in St. Louis , including W.C. Handy , Tom Turpin , Scott Hayden , Arthur Marshall , Joe Jordan , and Louis Chauvin . In addition to the early Chestnut Valley players , ragtime composer Scott Joplin moved to St. Louis from Sedalia , Missouri in 1901 , where he associated with Tom Turpin and composed music in the city until moving to Chicago in 1907 . 
 The sport of baseball began to be played in the years following the Civil War ; a team known as the St. Louis Brown Stockings was founded in 1875 . The Brown Stockings were a founding member of the National League and became a hometown favorite , defeating the Chicago White Stockings ( later the Chicago Cubs ) in their opener on May 6 , 1875 . The original Brown Stockings club closed in 1878 , and an unrelated National League team with the same name was founded in 1882 . This team repeatedly changed its name , shortening to the Browns in 1883 , becoming the Perfectos in 1899 , and settling on the St. Louis Cardinals in 1900 . In 1902 , a team moved to St. Louis from Milwaukee and adopted the name St. Louis Browns , although they had no relation to the previous Browns or Brown Stockings . From 1902 until the 1950s , St. Louis was home to two Major League teams . 
 Notable residents in the field of literature included poets Sara Teasdale and T. S. Eliot , as well as playwright Tennessee Williams . 
 = = = 1904 World 's Fair = = = 
 Beginning in the 1850s , St. Louis hosted annual agricultural and mechanical fairs at Fairground Park to connect with regional manufacturers and growers . By the 1880s , the connection to agriculture had declined , and in 1883 , a new St. Louis Exposition and Music Hall was built to house industrial exhibits . In 1890 , St. Louis attempted to host the World 's Columbian Exposition , but the project was awarded to Chicago , which hosted the exposition in 1893 . In 1899 , delegates from states that had been part of the Louisiana Purchase met in St. Louis , selecting it as the site of a world 's fair celebrating the centennial of the purchase in 1904 . 
 Company directors selected the western half of Forest Park as the fair site , sparking a real estate and construction boom . Streetcar and rail service to the area was improved , and a new filtration system was implemented to improve the St. Louis water supply . The fair consisted of an " Ivory City " of twelve temporary exhibition palaces , and one permanent exhibit palace which became the St. Louis Art Museum after the fair . The fair celebrated American expansionism and world cultures with exhibits of historical French fur @-@ trading , and Eskimo and Filipino villages . Concurrently , the 1904 Summer Olympics were held in St. Louis , at what would become the campus of Washington University in St. Louis . 
 = = Decline of the inner city and urban renewal : 1905 – 1980 = = 
 = = = Civic improvements and segregation policies = = = 
 During the early 1900s and 1910s , St. Louis began a building program that created parks and playgrounds in several deteriorating residential neighborhoods . Parks Commissioner ( and former professional tennis player ) Dwight F. Davis continued the development of recreational facilities during the early 1910s by expanding tennis facilities and building a public 18 @-@ hole golf course in northwest Forest Park . The St. Louis Zoo was constructed in Forest Park in the early 1910s under the leadership of Mayor Henry Kiel . Since the 1890s , St. Louis had attempted to control its air pollution problems with little success , but damage to buildings and flora made the issue more visible during the 1920s . Problems came to a head with the 1939 St. Louis smog , which blackened the sky and lasted for three weeks . A ban on burning low @-@ quality coal solved the problem in December 1939 , and the addition of natural gas for heating assisted homeowners in making the transition to cleaner fuels by the late 1940s . 
 During the 1904 World 's Fair , ballooning was demonstrated as a viable means of transportation ; in October 1907 , the second Gordon Bennett Cup , an international balloon racing event , was held in the city . The first airplane flight occurred in late 1909 , and by the next year , an airfield had been established in nearby Kinloch , Missouri . In October 1910 , St. Louis hosted President Theodore Roosevelt , who became the first president to fly in an airplane after departing from the field . In 1925 , local entrepreneur Albert Lambert purchased Kinloch Field , expanded its facilities , and renamed it Lambert Field . In May 1927 , Charles Lindbergh departed from Lambert Field en route to New York to begin his solo non @-@ stop flight across the Atlantic Ocean . In early 1928 , the city of St. Louis purchased the airport from Lambert , making it the first municipally owned airport in the United States ; Lambert remains the area 's primary airport . 
 Although St. Louis enforced a variety of Jim Crow laws , the area generally had a lower level of racial violence and fewer lynchings than the American South . The St. Louis black community was stable and relatively concentrated along the riverfront or near the railroad yards . Although informal discrimination had existed in the St. Louis housing market since the end of the Civil War , only in 1916 did St. Louis pass a residential segregation ordinance . The ordinance quickly was invalidated by court injunctions , but private restrictive covenants in St. Louis real estate transactions limited the ability of white owners to sell to blacks and were another form of racial discrimination . In 1948 the U.S. Supreme Court overturned such real estate limitations as unconstitutional in Shelley v. Kraemer , a court case based on the sale of a St. Louis house ( the Shelley House ) to a black family . 
 Despite segregationist and racist attitudes , St. Louis acted as a haven during the 1917 East St. Louis Riot , as St. Louis police shepherded fleeing blacks across the Eads Bridge to shelter and food provided by the city government and the American Red Cross . Leonidas C. Dyer , who represented part of St. Louis in the U.S. House , led a Congressional investigation into the events and eventually sponsored an anti @-@ lynching bill in response . Due to an influx of refugees from East St. Louis and the general effects of the Great Migration of blacks from the rural South to industrial cities , the black population of St. Louis increased more rapidly than the whole during the decade of 1910 to 1920 . 
 = = = World War I and the interbellum period = = = 
 Both the St. Louis German and Irish communities urged neutrality at the 1914 outbreak of World War I , which contributed to a resurgent nativism after U.S. entry into the war in 1917 . As a result , German St. Louisans suffered some discrimination during the war , and St. Louisans repressed elements of German culture . Commerce was not dramatically affected by the war . However , leading up to and before World War I , the population started to decrease as men were needed to work at the artillery plants and factories that were closer to the Atlantic . 
 After World War I , the nationwide prohibition of alcohol in 1919 brought heavy losses to the St. Louis brewing industry . Other industries , such as light manufacturing of clothing , automobile manufacturing , and chemical production , filled much of the gap , and St. Louis 's economy was relatively diversified and healthy during the 1920s . 
 St. Louis suffered as much or more than comparable cities in the early years of the Great Depression . Manufacturing output fell by 57 percent between 1929 and 1933 , slightly more than the national average of 55 percent , and output remained low until World War II . Unemployment during the Depression was high in most urban areas , and St. Louis was no exception ( see table ) . Black workers in St. Louis , as in many cities , suffered significantly higher unemployment than their white counterparts . To aid the unemployed , the city allocated funds starting in 1930 toward relief operations . In addition to city relief aid , New Deal programs such as the Public Works Administration employed thousands of St. Louisans . Civic improvement construction jobs also reduced the number of persons on direct relief aid by the late 1930s . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 During World War II , St. Louis was the location of a large ammunition factory and the Curtiss @-@ Wright aircraft factory . Area factories also produced uniforms and footwear , K @-@ rations , and chemicals and medicines . The uranium used in the Manhattan Project was refined in St. Louis by Mallinckrodt Chemical Company starting in 1942 , and several atomic bomb scientists had ties to St. Louis , including Arthur Compton . At the start of the war , many German , Italian , and Japanese St. Louisans were interrogated or arrested , while the FBI investigated charges of sedition in the area . Residents engaged in civil defense drills and supported the war effort with scrap drives and war bond purchases . St. Louis produced several notable soldiers in the war , including Edward O 'Hare , who grew up in St. Louis and won the Medal of Honor for combat in the Pacific . St. Louis also was home to Wendell O. Pruitt , an African @-@ American pilot who shot down three enemy aircraft and destroyed multiple ground targets in June 1944 . 
 At the outbreak of war , African @-@ American workers gained greater acceptance in industry than previously , but discrimination remained a problem for many black workers . During the war , city officials passed the first municipal integration ordinance , allowing African Americans to eat at city @-@ owned ( but not private ) lunch counters . In May 1944 , when a black sailor in uniform was refused service at a privately owned lunch counter , the action prompted peaceful sit @-@ in protests at several downtown diners . No changes in Jim Crow segregation policies at lunch counters resulted , but Saint Louis University admitted its first black students starting in August 1944 . 
 More than 5 @,@ 400 St. Louisans became casualties of the war , listed as either missing or killed in action . The end of the war led to the closure of many St. Louis factories , with major layoffs beginning in May and continuing through August 1945 . By late 1945 , returning soldiers encountered a chronic housing and job shortage in the city . The GI Bill allowed many St. Louis veterans to purchase homes and pursue higher education , which encouraged sub @-@ urbanization that after the war reduced the city 's population . 
 = = = Sub @-@ urbanization and population loss = = = 
 Internal population migration westward was a feature of St. Louis since its earliest days , but it accelerated rapidly in the late 19th century . Starting in the 1890s , the St. Louis streetcar system and commuter railroad stations enabled commuters to travel from suburban towns bordering the city into the downtown . Towns such as Kirkwood , Maplewood , Webster Groves , Richmond Heights , University City , and Clayton grew rapidly between 1900 and 1930 . Extensive movement to these towns doubled the population of St. Louis County from 1910 to 1920 , while due to restrictions on immigration and outward migration the city grew only 12 percent in the same period . During the 1930s , the city 's population declined by a small amount for the first time , but St. Louis County grew by nearly 30 percent . Nearly 80 percent of new residential construction in the region occurred outside city limits during the late 1930s , and St. Louis planners were unable to combat the problem via annexation . 
 The city reached its highest recorded census population in 1950 , reaching 856 @,@ 796 , and its population peaked in the early 1950s with approximately 880 @,@ 000 residents . However , new highway construction and increased automobile ownership enabled further suburbanization and population began a long decline . Another factor in the city 's population loss was white flight , which began in earnest during the late 1950s and continued during the 1960s and 1970s . From 1950 to 1960 , the city population declined by 13 percent to 750 @,@ 026 , and from 1960 to 1970 , the city declined another 17 percent to 622 @,@ 236 . Of this decline , the white population declined primarily due to " massive outward migration , primarily to the suburbs . " Between 1960 and 1970 , a net 34 percent of white city residents moved out ; in addition , city white death rates exceeded birth rates . By the early 1970s , the white population of the city had decreased significantly , particularly among those of child @-@ bearing age . The black population of St. Louis saw a natural increase of 19 @.@ 5 percent during the 1960s , with no gain or loss through migration ; during that decade , the overall percentage of black city residents rose from 29 to 41 percent . However , the black population declined in size from 1968 to 1972 by nearly 20 @,@ 000 residents , representing significant black out @-@ migration from the city during the period . Many moved to suburban developments in St. Louis County . 
 = = = Urban renewal projects and the Arch = = = 
 Early urban renewal efforts in St. Louis coincided with efforts to plan a riverfront memorial to honor Thomas Jefferson , which would later include the famous Gateway Arch . Work began in the early 1930s on acquisition and demolition of the forty @-@ block area where the memorial would stand ; the only remnant of Laclede 's street grid that was preserved was north of the Eads Bridge ( in what is now known as Laclede 's Landing ) . The only building in the area to remain was the Old Cathedral . Demolition continued until the outbreak of World War II , when the area began to be used as a parking lot . The project stalled until a design competition for the memorial was launched . In 1948 , Finnish architect Eero Saarinen 's design for an inverted and weighted catenary curve won the competition ; however , groundbreaking did not occur until 1954 . The Arch topped out in October 1965 . A museum and visitors ' center was completed underneath the structure , opening in 1976 . In addition to attracting millions of visitors , the Arch ultimately spurred more than $ 500 million in downtown construction during the 1970s and 1980s . 
 Concurrent with plans to build the Jefferson National Expansion Memorial during the 1930s were plans to create subsidized housing in the city . Despite efforts at civic improvement starting in the 1920s and two significant housing projects built in 1939 , after World War II more than 33 @,@ 000 houses had shared or outdoor toilets , while thousands of St. Louisans lived in crowded , unsafe conditions . Starting in 1953 , St. Louis cleared the Chestnut Valley area in Midtown , selling the land to developers who constructed middle @-@ class apartment buildings . Nearby , the city cleared more than 450 acres ( 1 @.@ 8 km2 ) of a residential neighborhood known as Mill Creek Valley , displacing thousands . A residential mixed @-@ income development known as <unk> Town was created in the area in the early 1960s , although this was eventually demolished for an expansion of Saint Louis University . The majority of people displaced from Mill Creek Valley were poor and African American , and they typically moved to historically stable , middle @-@ class black neighborhoods such as The Ville . 
 In 1953 , St. Louis issued bonds that financed the completion of the St. Louis Gateway Mall project and several new high @-@ rise housing projects . The most famous and largest was Pruitt – Igoe , which opened in 1954 on the northwest edge of downtown and included 33 eleven @-@ story buildings with nearly 3 @,@ 000 units . Between 1953 and 1957 , St. Louis built more than 6 @,@ 100 units of public housing , and each opened with enthusiasm on the part of local leaders , the media , and new tenants . From the beginning problems plagued the projects ; it became quickly apparent that there was too little recreational space , too few healthcare facilities or shopping centers , and employment opportunities were scarce . Crime was rampant , particularly at Pruitt – Igoe , and that complex was demolished in 1975 . The other St. Louis housing projects remained relatively well @-@ occupied through the 1980s , in spite of lingering problems with crime . 
 Along with the housing projects , a 1955 urban renewal bond issue totaled more than $ 110 million . The bonds provided funds to purchase land to build three expressways into downtown St. Louis , which later became Interstate 64 , Interstate 70 , and Interstate 44 . In 1967 , the highway @-@ only Poplar Street Bridge opened to move traffic from all three expressways over the Mississippi River . The openings of the Arch in 1965 and the bridge in 1967 were accompanied by the opening of a new stadium for the St. Louis Cardinals . The Cardinals moved into Busch Memorial Stadium early in the 1966 season . Construction of the stadium required the demolition of Chinatown , St. Louis , ending the decades @-@ old presence of a Chinese immigrant community . 
 = = = Government consolidation attempts = = = 
 Due to the city 's population decline , beginning in the 1920s and accelerating through the 1950s , local government leaders made several attempts to consolidate services . A pre – Great Depression annexation attempt by the city failed due to opposition from county voters , and only after World War II would more efforts be made toward consolidation . The first ( and one of the few ) successful attempts at consolidation resulted in the creation of the Metropolitan Sewer District , a city – county water and sewer company formed in 1954 . The next year , however , a city – county mass transit agency was rejected by voters , followed by a failed charter revision in 1955 that would have unified the city and the county . As the County population grew , local subdivisions began multiplying and incorporating into cities and towns , producing more than 90 separate municipalities by the 1960s . Regional planning advocates succeeded in the 1965 creation of the East – West Gateway Coordinating Council , a group given the power to approve or deny applications for federal aid from cities . 
 = = Recent developments : 1981 – present = = 
 = = = Beautification and crime prevention projects = = = 
 By the late 1970s , urban decay had spread , as described by Kenneth T. Jackson , historian of suburban development : 
 [ St. Louis is ] a premier example of urban abandonment . Once the fourth largest city in America , the " Gateway to the West " is now twenty @-@ seventh , a ghost of its former self . In 1940 it contained 816 @,@ 000 inhabitants : in 1980 the census counted only 453 @,@ 000 . Many of its old neighborhoods have become dispiriting collections of burned @-@ out buildings , eviscerated homes , and vacant lots .... The air is polluted , the sidewalks are filthy , the juvenile crime is horrendous , and the remaining industries are languishing . Grimy warehouses and aging loft factories are landscaped by weed @-@ grown lots adjoining half @-@ used rail yards . Like an elderly couple no longer sure of their purpose in life after their children have moved away , these neighborhoods face an undirected future . 
 As of the election of Vincent Schoemehl as the city 's youngest mayor ever in 1981 , St. Louis 's problems were more significant than many other <unk> cities . Several major development projects incomplete and the city 's economic base crumbling . However , Schoemehl developed two projects early in his three terms in office that assisted St. Louis : Operation Brightside provided city beautification through plantings and graffiti cleanup . Schoemehl also instituted a safety program to address crime , known as Operation <unk> , which blocked access to certain through streets and provided low @-@ cost security measures to homeowners . Crime declined starting in 1984 , and despite a small resurgence in 1989 , continued to decline through the 1990s . 
 = = = School desegregation and voluntary transfers = = = 
 Although de jure segregation in St. Louis public schools ended in 1954 after Brown v. Board of Education , St. Louis area educators continued to employ tactics to ensure de facto segregation during the 1960s . 
 In the 1970s , a lawsuit challenging this segregation led to a 1983 settlement agreement in which St. Louis County school districts agreed to accept black students from the city on a voluntary basis . State funds were used to transport students to provide an integrated education . The agreement also called for white students from the county to voluntarily attend city magnet schools , in an effort to desegregate the City 's remaining schools . Despite opposition from state and local political leaders , the plan significantly desegregated St. Louis schools ; in 1980 , 82 percent of black students in the city attended all @-@ black schools , while in 1995 , only 41 percent did so . During the late 1990s , the St. Louis voluntary transfer program was the largest such program in the United States , with more than 14 @,@ 000 enrolled students . 
 Under a renewed agreement in 1999 , all but one of the St. Louis County districts agreed to continue their participation , albeit with an opt @-@ out clause that allowed districts to reduce the number of incoming transfer students starting in 2002 . In addition , districts have been permitted to reduce available seats in the program . Since 1999 , districts have reduced availability by five percent annually . A five @-@ year extension of the voluntary transfer program was approved in 2007 , and another five @-@ year extension was approved in 2012 , allowing new enrollments to take place through the 2018 – 2019 school year in participating districts . Critics of the transfer program note that most of the desegregation under the plan is via transfer of black students to the county rather than transfer of white students to the city . Another criticism has been that the program weakens city schools by removing talented students to county schools . Despite these issues , the program will continue until all transfer students reach graduation ; with the last group of transfer students allowed to enroll in 2018 – 2019 , the program will end after the 2030 – 2031 school year . 
 = = = New construction , gentrification , and rehabilitation = = = 
 From 1981 to 1993 , new construction projects were initiated in downtown St. Louis at levels unseen since the early 1960s . Among these was the tallest building in the city , One Metropolitan Square , which was designed by Hellmuth , Obata and Kassabaum and built in 1989 . New retail projects began to take shape : Amtrak abandoned Union Station as a passenger rail terminal in 1978 , but in 1985 , it reopened as a festival marketplace under the direction of Baltimore developer James Rouse . The same year , downtown developers opened St. Louis Centre , an enclosed four @-@ story shopping mall costing $ 176 million with 150 stores and 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 square feet ( 140 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail space . By the late 1990s , however , the mall had fallen out of favor due to the expansion of the St. Louis Galleria in Brentwood , Missouri . The mall 's flagship Dillard 's store closed in 2001 . The mall closed in 2006 , and beginning in 2010 , developers began to convert the mall into a parking structure and an adjoining building into apartments , hotel , and retail . 
 The city sponsored a major expansion of the St. Louis Convention Center during the 1980s , and Schoemehl focused efforts on retaining professional sports teams . To that end , the city purchased The Arena , a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ seat venue for professional ice hockey that was home of the St. Louis Blues . In the early 1990s , Schoemehl worked with business groups to develop a new ice hockey arena ( now known as the Scottrade Center ) on the site of the city 's Kiel Auditorium , with the promise that the developer would renovate the adjacent opera house . 
 Although the arena opened in 1994 ( and the original arena was demolished in 1999 ) , renovations on the opera house did not begin until 2007 . This was more than 15 years after the initial development plan . The Peabody Opera House ( named for corporate contributor Peabody Energy ) reopened on October 1 , 2011 , with performances by Jay Leno and Aretha Franklin . 
 In January 1995 , Georgia Frontiere , the owner of the National Football League team known as the Los Angeles Rams ( now St. Louis Rams ) , announced she would move that team to St. Louis . The team replaced the St. Louis Cardinals ( now Arizona Cardinals ) , an NFL franchise that had moved to St. Louis in 1960 but departed for Arizona in 1988 . The Rams played their first game in their St. Louis stadium , the Edward Jones Dome , on October 22 , 1996 . 
 Starting in the early 1980s , more rehabilitation and construction projects began , some of which remain incomplete . In 1981 , the Fox Theatre , a movie theater in Midtown that closed in 1978 , was completely restored and reopened as a performing arts venue . Among the areas to undergo gentrification was the Washington Avenue Historic District , which extends along Washington Avenue from the Edward Jones Dome west almost two dozen blocks . During the early 1990s , garment manufacturers moved out of the large office buildings on the street , and by the end of that decade residential developers began to convert the buildings into lofts . Prices per square foot increased dramatically in the area , and by 2001 , nearly 280 apartments were built . Among the Washington Avenue projects to remain in development is the Mercantile Exchange Building , which is being converted to offices , apartments , retail , and a movie theater . The gentrification also has had the effect of increasing the downtown population , with both the central business district and Washington Avenue district more than doubling their population from 2000 to 2010 . 
 Other downtown projects include the renovation of the Old Post Office , which started in 1998 and was completed in 2006 . The Old Post Office and seven adjacent buildings had been vacant since the early 1990s ; as of 2010 this complex included a variety of tenants , including a branch of the St. Louis Public Library , a branch of Webster University , the St. Louis Business Journal , and a variety of government offices . The renovation of the Old Post Office spurred development of an adjacent plaza , which is linked to a new $ 80 million residential building called Roberts Tower , the first new residential construction in downtown St. Louis since the 1970s . 
 As early as 1999 , the St. Louis Cardinals began pushing for the construction of a new Busch Stadium as part of a broader trend in Major League Baseball toward stadium building . In early 2002 , plans for a new park were settled among state and local leaders and Cardinals owners . According to an agreement in which the state and city would issue bonds for construction , the Cardinals agreed to build a multipurpose development known as St. Louis Ballpark Village on part of the site of Busch Memorial Stadium . The new stadium opened in 2006 , and groundbreaking for Ballpark Village took place in February 2013 . 
 = = = Population and crime issues = = = 
 Starting in the early 1990s , St. Louis became home to a substantial Bosnian immigrant community , which became the second @-@ largest in the United States in 1999 . The city also began to see an increase in immigrants from Mexico , Vietnam , Ethiopia , and Somalia . Many immigrants reported moving to St. Louis , particularly its south side Bevo Mill neighborhood , due to the low cost of living compared to other American cities . Despite this increase , the foreign @-@ born population of the St. Louis region was roughly one @-@ third of the national average in 2010 . 
 During the mid @-@ 2000s , the population of St. Louis began growing following a half @-@ century of decline . Census estimates from 2003 through 2008 were successfully challenged and population figures were revised upward ; however , no challenges to 2009 data were permitted . In spite of gains during the 2000s , the 2010 U.S. Census showed a decline of slightly more than 10 percent for St. Louis . 
 Given the losses of industry and jobs , St. Louis has had significant and persistent problems with both crime and perceptions of crime . In 2011 St. Louis was named by U.S. News and World Report as the most dangerous city in the United States , using Uniform Crime Reports data published by the U.S. Department of Justice . In addition , St. Louis was named as the city with the highest crime rate in the United States by CQ Press in 2010 , using data reported to the FBI in 2009 . Critics of these analyses note that division between St. Louis City and St. Louis County make crime reports for the area appear inflated , and that reporting crime differs greatly depending on the localities involved . The FBI cautioned against using this data as a form of ranking , as it presents too simplistic a view of crime . From 2006 to 2007 , the rate of city youth to be killed by guns was the second @-@ highest in the United States , according to data released by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . The rate of firearm deaths for the metropolitan statistical area was one @-@ fifth of the city rate . 
 = The Vicar of Bullhampton = 
 The Vicar of Bullhampton is an 1870 novel by Anthony Trollope . It is made up of three intertwining subplots : the courtship of a young woman by two suitors ; a feud between the titular Broad church vicar and a Low church nobleman , abetted by a Methodist minister ; and the vicar 's attempt to rehabilitate a young woman who has gone astray . 
 Trollope expected his depiction of a fallen woman to be controversial , and unusually for him wrote a preface defending it . But the anticipated controversy never materialised , and contemporary reviewers tended to ignore that subplot , focussing instead on the courtship in the novel . Reviews were generally less than positive ; many reviewers and readers who had acquired a taste for Trollope from the 1850s – 60s Barchester novels were unhappy about the darker tone of later novels such as this one . 
 Trollope 's fortunes suffered because of the mode of the novel 's publication . Owing to mismanagement by the publishers , it was not serialised in a popular magazine , as originally intended . Instead , it was issued as monthly numbers , a form of serialisation that had become unpopular with the reading public , and Trollope lost readers as a result . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The Vicar of Bullhampton is set in a small town in Wiltshire . It develops three subplots , all connected with Frank Fenwick , the eponymous vicar . 
 = = = Mary Lowther = = = 
 The first subplot involves the courtship of Mary Lowther , a childhood friend of the vicar 's wife . Harry Gilmore , a Bullhampton squire and a friend of the Fenwicks , falls deeply in love with her . Mary recognises that Gilmore is a good man , but she fears that she does not adore him as a woman should adore the man she marries . The Fenwicks and her guardian aunt all urge her to accept his proposal , telling her that the affection she does not now feel will come after marriage . In the face of this advice , she does not reject Gilmore outright , but asks for time to consider . 
 Mary finds the love she seeks in her second cousin , Captain Walter Marrable . He falls in love with her , and she joyously accepts his offer of marriage . However , misfortune strikes in the form of Colonel Marrable , the Captain 's father , who swindles his son out of the fortune left him by his late mother . The impoverished Captain fears that he will have to return to India with his regiment ; he and Mary , each unwilling to inflict poverty on the other , end their engagement by mutual consent and with mutual regret . 
 Mary , <unk> , yields to Gilmore 's <unk> , warning him that theirs must be a long engagement and that she will end it if Captain Marrable finds himself able to marry a woman without a fortune . This comes to pass : the death of the Captain 's cousin , the heir to the family 's baronetcy , makes him the likely eventual heir . The current Baronet accepts the Captain as his heir , buying out the Colonel 's interest to prevent his squandering the family fortune . The two lovers are reunited , leaving Gilmore bitter and despondent . 
 = = = Brattle family = = = 
 The second subplot involves the family of Bullhampton 's miller , Jacob Brattle . His youngest son , Sam , is a hard worker at the mill , but has fallen in with bad companions , and is often absent from home . Sam 's sister Carry is worse off yet : having yielded to a seducer , she has been disowned by her father , and is living a life of sin in an unknown location . 
 When a Bullhampton farmer is murdered in the course of a burglary , suspicion falls on Sam Brattle and his associates . Fenwick believes in Sam 's innocence , and acts as one of his bondsmen . Through Sam he discovers Carry 's whereabouts , and resolves to rescue her if he can . He finds her a temporary home , but it becomes clear to him that the only permanent solution must involve bringing her back into the Brattle family , which means winning her father 's forgiveness . 
 Carry leaves the home that Fenwick has found her and wanders distraught . Eventually , she returns to the mill , half resolved to see her old home and then drown herself in the millstream . There she is greeted lovingly by her mother and sister . Her father reluctantly allows her to remain in the family home ; eventually he too forgives her , although he can never forget the shame she has brought on the family . Carry remains with her family for the rest of her life , but although she has returned to decency , her past ensures that she will never find an honest husband . 
 Sam is never charged with the murder , although one of his former associates is hanged for it . He continues to work at the mill , and eventually marries a Bullhampton girl . 
 = = = Marquis and Methodist = = = 
 A third subplot centres on the relationship between Fenwick , Mr. Puddleham , the village 's Methodist minister , and the Marquis of Trowbridge , Bullhampton 's principal landowner . The marquis believes that Sam Brattle is guilty of the murder , and is angered by Fenwick 's support for him . He spreads rumours about Fenwick 's relations with Carry Brattle , and grants Puddleham permission to build a chapel on a piece of land neighbouring Fenwick 's residence , where he hopes that the sight of it and the sound of its bell will annoy the vicar . Fenwick tries to reconcile himself to the existence of the chapel , but it subsequently comes to light that the land does not belong to the marquis , and is instead part of the parish 's glebe . The embarrassed marquis pays to move the chapel to a new location , and through the intervention of his son , a suave Member of Parliament , he and Fenwick are reconciled . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 = = = Plight of the fallen woman = = = 
 According to Trollope , the plight of Carry Brattle was at the center of the story . " The Vicar of Bullhampton was written chiefly with the object of exciting not only pity but sympathy for fallen woman , and of raising a feeling of forgiveness for such in the minds of other women . " In the Autobiography , he argued that the punishment for fornication is far heavier for women than for men , although in most cases the latter are more to blame than the former ; and that women are given no opportunity of returning to decent lives , however repentant they might be . 
 On 5 August 1869 , shortly after The Vicar had begun to appear in the form of monthly numbers , Dion Boucicault 's Formosa ; or , The Railroad to Ruin opened at Drury Lane . The title character of Boucicault 's play was a harlot , and her representation on stage provoked an exchange in the pages of The Times . Critics argued that the depiction of a prostitute in the theatre would tarnish the innocence of unmarried girls attending the performance . Supporters , including Boucicault himself , responded that worse women were regularly portrayed in Italian operas such as La traviata and Lucrezia Borgia , which were considered eminently suitable for young women , and in the police and court news of The Times itself . 
 Trollope leapt into the fray somewhat belatedly , in the pages of Saint Paul 's in October 1869 , with an article on the Formosa controversy that can be read as a defence of and an advertisement for The Vicar . He took exception to several of the arguments in The Times : young women of the 1860s , he wrote , were not unaware of the existence of prostitution ; and attempting to keep them in ignorance would not conduce to virtue . Rather than promoting vice , an accurate depiction of the squalid and miserable life of a woman of the streets would arm young people to resist temptation . 
 The harm done by Formosa lies in this , — that the character is utterly false , false to human nature and false to London life . She is a wretch , abominable almost beyond conception , so as to be odious , if known , to the most odious . She is sharper as well as prostitute , — and is false to all with whom she comes in contact , to those whom she is supposed to love and to those who love her . Her peculiar profession is represented as causing her no personal remorse . And yet she is exhibited to us as a fine creature , a noble woman , one whom a man might be honoured by loving ; — and at last she ends with a success ! ... That which is vile and dirty , squalid and miserable , — that , of which we may say that were its horrors known such knowledge would deter more thoroughly than any ignorance , — is exhibited as a bright existence , full of danger indeed , but still open to all that is noble , and capable of final success . 
 When the book edition of The Vicar of Bullhampton appeared in April 1870 , it bore a preface ; Trollope , who ordinarily scorned prefaces and dedications , felt compelled to justify the presentation of a character like Carry Brattle . He reiterated the points he had made regarding Formosa : that while depicting a fallen woman as glamourous or noble might lead impressionable readers to vice , a true depiction of such a woman 's misery might deter readers from yielding to temptation ; and might soften the hearts of parents whose daughters have fallen , and thus afford an opportunity of returning to decency . 
 = = = Love and courtship = = = 
 A recurring theme in Trollope 's work is the difficulty of choosing between two suitors . As Henry James expressed it , 
 Trollope has described again and again the ravages of love ... His story is always primarily a love @-@ story , and a love @-@ story constructed on an inveterate system . There is a young lady who has two lovers , or a young man who has two sweethearts ; we are treated to the innumerable forms in which this predicament may present itself and the consequences , sometimes pathetic , sometimes grotesque , which spring from such false situations . 
 To illustrate this point , James cited The Vicar , with Mary Lowther 's vacillation between Gilmore and Col. Marrable . 
 Unlike the majority of Trollope 's triangles , Mary is not called upon to judge between a good suitor and a bad one , but between two good men . Gilmore is presented as a sympathetic and admirable character ; the reader learns far less about Captain Marrable 's character , and is given no reason why Mary should prefer him to his rival . To Trollope , a woman does not necessarily fall in love because of a man 's merits ; and it is very wrong for a woman to marry where she does not love , regardless of her suitor 's worthy qualities . 
 = = = " The Girl of the Period " = = = 
 In David Skilton 's view , the Carry Brattle and Mary Lowther subplots together comprise a rejoinder to Eliza Lynn Linton 's " The Girl of the Period " . In her 1868 essay , Linton accused contemporary English girls of imitating prostitutes in their dress , speech , and manner , and declared that " the Girl of the Period has done away with such moral <unk> as consideration for others , or regard for counsel and rebuke " . Trollope was well aware of Linton 's views , and made two references to them in the novel . According to Skilton , the highly unromantic portrayal of Carry Brattle 's condition was a denial of Linton 's claim that <unk> were " gorgeously attired and sumptuously appointed ... flattered , fêted , and courted " ; and the trouble that Mary Lowther brought upon herself and others came about not because of her disregard for counsel and rebuke , but because she attempted to follow the advice of her friends and elders . Near the end of the novel , Trollope writes : 
 [ The author ] has endeavoured to describe a young woman , prompted in all her doings by a conscience wide awake , guided by principle , willing , if need be , to sacrifice herself , struggling always to keep herself from doing wrong , but yet causing infinite grief to others , and nearly bringing herself to utter shipwreck , because , for a while , she allowed herself to believe that it would be right for her to marry a man whom she did not love . 
 In Skilton 's opinion , since the stories of the two women are both essential to Trollope 's refutation of Linton , neither can be given " titular pre @-@ eminence " ; thus the book had to take its name from the vicar . ( The title was changed at some point in the novel 's development ; in the early planning stages , it was tentatively named I Count Her Wrong . ) 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The Vicar of Bullhampton has been described as Trollope 's most religious novel , and Frank Fenwick as his " most explicitly religious character " . Although the author won renown for his depictions of the lives of the clergy in the <unk> novels , he wrote of their social rather than their spiritual lives . In The Vicar , however , Fenwick 's object is " to apply Christian doctrine to life in the world . " 
 A variety of religious beliefs are represented among the novel 's characters . Jacob Brattle is an unbeliever . Puddleham is a Primitive Methodist . The <unk> family , to which the marquis belongs , are Low Church Anglicans , and Fenwick is High church and <unk> . Their charity is tested by their response to Carry Brattle , and it is Fenwick who passes the test . As William Cadbury expresses it , Puddleham has been hardened by too much doctrine , Jacob Brattle by too little . 
 Fenwick 's beliefs are similar to Trollope 's own . In his early life , the novelist was a supporter of the Tractarians . However , beginning in about the mid @-@ 1860s , his sympathies tended increasingly toward the Broad church . He defended Bishop Colenso , expressed doubt about the literal truth of the Old Testament , and questioned the doctrine of eternal punishment contained in the Athanasian Creed . 
 Indeed , Fenwick resembled his creator in more than belief . To T. H. S. Escott , who was personally acquainted with Trollope , Fenwick — generous , outspoken , broad @-@ minded , and a bit pugnacious — was very much like a portrait of the author in clerical dress . Puddleham 's discomfiture " proves , to Trollope 's naively undisguised satisfaction , that Providence is on the side of the State Church " . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Once A Week = = = 
 Early in 1868 , Trollope was approached by E. S. Dallas , a fellow member of the Garrick Club . Dallas had just been appointed editor of Once A Week , a magazine published by the firm of Bradbury and Evans . Trollope agreed to provide a novel of the length of The <unk> , to be serialised beginning in May 1869 , for a fee of £ 2800 . In the course of his correspondence with Dallas , Trollope wrote , " Of course it is understood that it is intended for your periodical , Once A Week . " 
 Trollope wrote The Vicar of Bullhampton between 15 June and 1 November 1868 . The novel was begun in Washington , D.C. , where the author was on a mission to negotiate a postal treaty and international copyright arrangements with the United States . It was concluded after his return to England , in the early stages of his unsuccessful campaign for a Parliamentary seat in the borough of Beverley . 
 As the publication date neared , difficulties arose . In January 1869 , Dallas asked Trollope for permission to defer serial publication by three months . As Trollope had agreed not to allow another of his novels to run serially during the first six months of The Vicar 's career , the editor 's request would have diminished the author 's income . Trollope initially refused , but subsequently agreed to a delay of two months , with publication to begin in early July . 
 Matters did not improve . In March 1869 , Dallas made a new request of Trollope . Once A Week had bought the rights to Victor Hugo 's forthcoming novel , L 'homme qui <unk> , expecting to begin serialisation in January 1869 . However , Hugo was behind schedule , and the novel would not be available until April . The magazine did not have enough space to run Hugo 's and Trollope 's novels side by side . Would Trollope , therefore , be willing to see The Vicar serialised in The Gentleman 's Magazine instead ? 
 Trollope would not . The Gentleman 's Magazine was , in Michael Sadleir 's words , " a very inferior paper with a lower class of reader and a poor general reputation " . Moreover , personal feelings were involved : Trollope resented the fact that he , a punctual Englishman , was being asked to yield to a dilatory Frenchman . 
 My disgust at this proposition was , I think , chiefly due to Victor Hugo 's latter novels , which I regard as pretentious and untrue to nature . To this perhaps was added some feeling of indignation that I should be asked to give way to a Frenchman . The Frenchman had broken his engagement . He had failed to have his work finished by the stipulated time . From week to week and from month to month he had put off the fulfilment of his duty . And because of these laches on his part , — on the part of this sententious French Radical , — I was to be thrown over ! 
 Trollope refused . Hugo 's novel was published in The Gentleman 's Magazine , beginning in May 1869 . However , by the end of June , the sale of Once A Week to a new publisher was in progress . Rather than serialising The Vicar in the magazine , Bradbury and Evans issued it in eleven monthly shilling numbers , running from July 1869 to May 1870 . Trollope could not object to this mode of independent publication ; but it was one that had fallen out of favour with the public , and Trollope suffered a loss of reputation and readership as a result . He also suffered a pecuniary loss of £ 300 , agreeing for reasons unspecified to accept only £ 2500 for the novel . 
 = = = Other publication = = = 
 The Vicar of Bullhampton was published serially in Lippincott 's Monthly Magazine of Philadelphia in 1869 – 70 . At the same time , an American book edition was issued by J. B. Lippincott & Co . 
 Bradbury and Evans released the novel in book form in 1870 , as a single volume with thirty illustrations by Henry Woods . In the same year , English @-@ language books were published by Harper in New York and by <unk> in Leipzig ; a Russian translation , <unk> <unk> , was published in Moscow . In 1872 , a Dutch translation , De <unk> van Bullhampton , was published by <unk> of Schiedam ; in 1873 , a Russian <unk> <unk> was released in St. Petersburg . 
 More recently , editions have been published by Dover Publications in 1979 ; by Alan Sutton in 1983 ; by Oxford University Press in 1924 , re @-@ issued with an introduction by David Skilton in 1988 ; and by the Trollope Society , with an introduction by John Halperin , in 1998 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Trollope 's preface suggests that he anticipated controversy from the depiction of Carry Brattle in The Vicar of Bullhampton . This did not happen . The Times declared it " a nice , easy , safe reading book for old ladies and young ladies ... welcome in all well @-@ regulated families " . Contemporary reviewers tended to neglect the Carry Brattle subplot and focus on Mary Lowther , whose conduct was criticised by Blackwood 's Magazine , by The Times , and by Mrs. Oliphant . The Saturday Review complained that " [ a ] sort of savageness pervades the book " , and that " [ n ] obody is pleasant " , and described the novel as " third @-@ rate " and as a " not very satisfactory book " . This was in keeping with the reaction of many readers and reviewers who had grown accustomed to the wholesome tone and genteel characters of the Barchester novels , and were not happy with the darker and more pessimistic tone of Trollope 's later works . 
 Later critics varied in their opinion of the novel . Henry James , who had loudly derided several of Trollope 's novels of the mid @-@ 1860s , described it in an 1883 article as a " slow but excellent story , which is a capital example of interest produced by the quietest conceivable means " . In 1927 , Michael Sadleir wrote that it " has a sure title to enduring reputation " ; of Mary Lowther , whom earlier critics had found irritating , he wrote , " to @-@ day she seems sensible enough and , as a young woman , wholly natural . " . By 1971 , however , James Pope @-@ Hennessy labelled the novel " a lifeless , dull production " . 
 More recently still , Trollope scholars have looked upon it with increasing favour , describing it as a powerful work that has suffered undeserved neglect . Present @-@ day critics have focussed increasingly on the Carry Brattle subplot ; it has been suggested , supported in part by the similarity of passages from The Vicar , from the Autobiography , and from The Small House at Allington referring to Johnny Eames , that some aspects of her portrayal are based on the novelist 's own early adulthood in London . 
 = Singapore Stone = 
 The Singapore Stone is a fragment of a large sandstone slab which originally stood at the mouth of the Singapore River . The large slab , which is believed to date back to at least the 13th century and possibly as early as the 10th or 11th century , bore an undeciphered inscription . Recent theories suggest that the inscription is either in Old Javanese or in Sanskrit . It is likely that the person who commissioned the inscription was Sumatran . The slab was blown up in 1843 to clear and widen the passageway at the river mouth to make space for a fort and the quarters of its commander . 
 The slab may be linked to the legendary story of the 14th @-@ century strongman Badang , who is said to have thrown a massive stone to the mouth of the Singapore River . On Badang 's death , the Rajah sent two stone pillars to be raised over his grave " at the point of the straits of Singapura " . 
 The Stone , now displayed at the National Museum of Singapore , was designated by the museum as one of 11 " national treasures " in January 2006 , and by the National Heritage Board as one of the top 12 artefacts held in the collections of its museums . 
 = = Sandstone slab = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 In June 1819 , a few months after the arrival of Sir Stamford Raffles ( 1781 – 1826 ) in Singapore , a sandstone slab about 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high and 9 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) long was found by labourers clearing jungle trees at the southeast side of the mouth of the Singapore River . It stood at a promontory known as the Rocky Point , and later as Artillery Point , Fort Fullerton and the Master Attendant 's Office . ( In 1972 , a short projection from the slab 's site was constructed and a statue of an imaginary beast called the Merlion placed on it . The statue has since been relocated . ) According to papers from the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal which were collected by Sir William Edward Maxwell and republished in 1886 , one Dr. D.W. Montgomerie said that the rock was brought to light by some Bengal sailors employed by Captain Flint , R.N. , the first Master Attendant : 
 You remember the situation of it [ the sandstone slab ] on the rocky point on the south [ sic : southeast ] side of the entrance of the Singapore Creek . That point was covered with forest trees and jungle in 1819 , and the stone was brought to notice by some Bengal <unk> who were employed by Capt. Flint , R.N. ( the first Master Attendant ) ; the men on discovering the inscription were very much frightened , and could not be induced to go on with the clearing , which , if I recollect right , was completed by Chinese under the stimulus of high wages . 
 The slab was inscribed with 50 or 52 lines of script , but by the time of its discovery the meaning of the inscription was already a mystery to the island 's inhabitants . 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 John Crawfurd ( 1783 – 1868 ) , who was Resident of Singapore , described the slab in his journal on 3 February 1822 in these terms : 
 On the stony point which forms the western side of the entrance of the salt creek , on which the modern town of Singapore is building , there was discovered , two years ago , a tolerably hard block of sand @-@ stone , with an inscription upon it . This I examined early this morning . The stone , in shape , is a rude mass , and formed of the one @-@ half of a great nodule broken into two nearly equal parts by artificial means ; for the two portions now face each other , separated at the base by a distance of not more than two feet and a half , and reclining opposite to each other at an angle of about forty degrees . It is upon the inner surface of the stone that the inscription is engraved . The workmanship is far ruder than any thing of the kind that I have seen in Java or India ; and the writing , perhaps from time , in some degree , but more from the natural decomposition of the rock , so much obliterated as to be quite illegible as a composition . Here and there , however , a few letters seem distinct enough . The character is rather round than square . 
 James Prinsep ( 1799 – 1840 ) , an Anglo @-@ Indian scholar and antiquary who started the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal , published a paper in the Journal in 1837 by a Dr. William Bland of H.M.S. Wolf , which stated that he had made a facsimile of all that remained in any way perceptible on the slab . Dr. Bland described the slab thus : 
 On a tongue of land forming the termination of the right bank of the river at Singapore , now called Artillery Point , stands a stone or rock of coarse red sandstone about ten feet high , from two to five feet thick , and about nine or ten feet in length , somewhat wedge @-@ shaped , with weather @-@ worn cells . The face sloping to the south @-@ east at an angle of 76 ° has been smoothed down in the form of an irregular square , presenting a space of about thirty @-@ two square feet , having a raised edge all round . 
 On this surface an inscription has originally been cut , of about fifty lines , but the characters are so obliterated by the weather that the greater part of them are illegible . Still , there are many left which are plain enough , more particularly those at the lower right @-@ hand corner , where the raised edge of the stone has in some measure protected them . 
 The inscription was engraved in rounded letters about three @-@ quarters of an inch ( 1 @.@ 9 cm ) wide . 
 = = = Destruction = = = 
 About January 1843 , on the orders of the acting Settlement Engineer , Captain D.H. Stevenson , the slab was blown to pieces to clear and widen the passageway at the Singapore River mouth to make space for Fort Fullerton and the quarters of its commander . Some sources claim that the Superintendent of Public Works , George <unk> Coleman , was responsible for the Stone 's destruction , but he was on leave out of Singapore at the time of its blasting . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Low had petitioned to have the sandstone slab spared , but had been told that it was in the way of a projected bungalow . On the explosion taking place , he crossed the river from his office and selected fragments that had letters on them . As the fragments were very bulky , he had them chiselled into small slabs by a Chinese man . He selected some of the smaller fragments bearing the most legible parts of the inscription and sent them to the Royal Asiatic Society 's museum in Calcutta ( now known as the Indian Museum ) for analysis , where they arrived in about June 1848 . 
 According to Maxwell 's papers , when news of the destruction of the sandstone slab reached Bengal , James Prinsep asked the Governor of the Straits Settlements , Colonel William John Butterworth , to secure any legible fragments that might still exist and to send them to the Royal Asiatic Society 's museum . Butterworth replied : " The only remaining portion of the stone you mention , except what Colonel Low may have , I have found lying in the verandah of the Treasury at Singapore , where it was used as a seat by the Sepoys of the guard and persons in waiting to transact business . I lost no time in sending it to my house , but , alas ! not before the inscription was nearly erased . Such as the fragment was then however – i.e. , in 1843 – it is now ; for I have preserved the stone with much care , and shall have much pleasure in sending it for your museum , having failed to establish one , as I hoped to have done , in Singapore . " 
 A large block from the monument lay abandoned at Fort Canning until finally being broken up and used as gravel for a road . According to one W.H. Read , who arrived in Singapore in 1841 : 
 I remember a large block of the rock at the corner of Government House , where Fort Canning is now ; but during the absence of the Governor at Penang on one occasion the convicts requiring stone to replace the road , chipped up the valuable relic of antiquity , and thus all trace of our past history was lost . 
 It was destroyed when the sea @-@ wall was built around Fort Fullerton , where the Club , Post Office , and Master Attendant 's Office now are . It used to be decorated with flags and offerings when at the entrance of the Singapore river . The immediate consequence of the removal of the stone , an act of vandalism , was the silting up of the river . I have been told that an inscription in similar characters , which I always understood were " cuneiform , " still exists ( 1884 ) in the Carimon Islands . 
 Dr. D.W. Montgomerie , recalling that the Bengal sailors who had discovered the slab while clearing the jungle could not be persuaded to continue the work , commented : " What a pity it is that those who authorized the destruction of the ancient relic were not prevented by some such wholesome superstition ! " 
 In 1918 , the Raffles Museum and Library 's Committee of Management asked the Royal Asiatic Society 's museum in Calcutta to return the fragments of the sandstone slab , and the Calcutta museum agreed to send them back on extended loan . However , only one fragment , now known as the Singapore Stone , was received on indefinite loan from the trustees of the museum . Archaeologist John N. Miksic has said that " presumably the other pieces are still in Calcutta " . 
 = = Inscription and attempts at decipherment = = 
 = = = Sir Stamford Raffles = = = 
 Raffles himself tried to decipher the inscriptions on the original sandstone slab . In his 1834 work , The Malay Peninsula , Captain Peter James Begbie of the Madras Artillery , part of the Honourable East India Company , wrote : 
 The principal curiosity of Singapore is a large stone at the point of the river , the one face of which has been sloped and smoothed , and upon which several lines of engraven characters are still visible . The rock being , however , of a <unk> and porous nature , the inscription is illegible . It is said that Sir Stamford Raffles endeavoured , by the application of powerful acids , to bring out the characters with the view of <unk> them , but the result was unsuccessful . 
 In the Hikayat Abdullah , Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir ( 1796 – 1854 ) , also known as Munshi Abdullah , recorded Raffles taking missionary Rev. Claudius Henry Thomsen and himself to see what Raffles described as a " remarkable stone " in October 1822 . Raffles apparently took the view that the writing had to be Hindu " because the Hindus were the oldest of all immigrant races in the East , reaching Java and Bali and Siam , the inhabitants of which are all descended from them " . 
 = = = William Bland and James Prinsep : Pali ? = = = 
 In his note published in the Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal of 1837 , Dr. William Bland reported that he had " frequently made pilgrimages " to the Stone , " determined , if it were possible , to save a few letters , could they be satisfactorily made out , to tell us something , however , small , of the language or the people who inscribed it , and hence eke out our limited and obscure knowledge of the Malayan Peninsula . " 
 With the assistance of a " clever native writer " , Bland used " well @-@ made and soft dough " to take impressions of the characters on the slab to copy them . After an impression of each character had been made , the character itself in the stone was painted over with white lead , " as far as the eye could make it out , ... and if the two agreed , it was considered as nearly correct as possible , and although this was done to all the characters , it was more particularly attended to in the more obscure ones , for the letters marked in the facsimile with more strength could readily be copied by the eye . " Bland also discovered that when the Stone was viewed " when the sun was descending in the west , a palpable shadow was thrown into the letter , from which great assistance was derived . " 
 In Bland 's view , " speaking from a very limited knowledge of the subject " , the inscription was in " the ancient Ceylonese , or <unk> " . James Prinsep concurred , saying that although he could not venture to put together any connected sentences or even words , " some of the letters – the g , l , h , p , s , y , & c . – can readily be recognised , as well as many of the vowel marks " . He expressed the opinion that the purpose of the inscription " is most probably to record the extension of the Buddhist faith to that remarkable point of the Malay Peninsula " . 
 = = = Peter James Begbie 's speculative theory : Tamil ? = = = 
 In The Malay Peninsula ( 1834 ) , Captain Peter James Begbie made " an attempt to throw some light upon a subject so <unk> obscure " . He referred to the legend of the 14th @-@ century strongman Badang in the Malay Annals ( 1821 ) , a posthumously @-@ published English translation of the Sejarah Melayu ( 1612 ) by the British orientalist John Leyden ( 1775 – 1811 ) . According to the Malay Annals , news of Badang 's remarkable feats of strength reached the land of Kling ( the Coromandel Coast ) . The Rajah of that country sent a champion named Nadi Vijaya <unk> to try his strength with him , staking seven ships filled with treasures on the issue of the contest . After a few trials of their relative powers , Badang pointed to a huge stone lying before the Rajah 's hall and asked his opponent to lift it , and to allow their claims to be decided by the greatest strength displayed in this feat . The Kling champion assented , and , after several failures , succeeded in raising it as high as his knee , after which he immediately let it fall . Badang , took up the stone , poised it easily several times , and then threw it out into the mouth of the river , and this is the rock which is at this day visible at the point of Singhapura , or Tanjong Singhapura . The Annals go on to state that after a long time , Badang died and was buried at the point of the straits of Singhapura , and when the tidings of his death reached the land of Kling , the Rajah sent two stone pillars to be raised over his grave as a monument , and these were the pillars which were still at the point of the bay . 
 Begbie went on to speculate that the monument installed over Badang 's grave was the sandstone slab at the mouth of the Singapore River , and that the inscription contained a recital of Badang 's feats . He identified the " Rajah of Kling " as Sri Rajah <unk> who reigned from 1223 to 1236 . In Begbie 's view , the inscription was in an obsolete dialect of Tamil : 
 At the period of the transaction [ which Begbie put at about A.D. 1228 ] , the Malays were destitute of a written language , as it was not until between forty and fifty years afterwards , when the <unk> religion became the popular one , that the Arabic character was introduced . It appears to be probable that the Kling Rajah , aware of this destitution of a written character , employed a sculptor of his own nation to cut the inscription on the rock , and that , from the epitaph being in an unknown language , the original story as therein related , being necessarily handed down by oral tradition , became corrupted in every thing but its leading features . This supposition is borne out by the form of the characters , which more resembles that of the Malabar language than any other oriental tongue that I am acquainted with . I do not mean to say that the words are essentially Tamil , but merely to express an opinion that the inscription is couched in an obsolete dialect of that language . 
 = = = J.W. Laidlay : Kawi ? = = = 
 J.W. Laidlay examined fragments of the sandstone slab that had been donated to the Asiatic Society of Bengal by Colonel Butterworth and Lieutenant @-@ Colonel James Low , <unk> finely @-@ powdered animal charcoal over the surface of the stones and sweeping it gently with a feather so as to fill up all the depressions ; in this way " the very slightest of which was thus rendered remarkably distinct by the powerful contrast of colour . By this means , and by studying the characters in different lights " , Laidlay was able to make drawings of the inscriptions on three fragments . According to Laidlay , the fragment shown in the top drawing seemed to have been from the upper part of the inscription , but was omitted in Prinsep 's lithograph as effaced . He could not identify the other two fragments with any portion of the lithograph . 
 Laidlay felt that the square shape of the characters had misled Prinsep into concluding that the inscription was in Pali . In fact , the characters bore no resemblance whatsoever to Pali . Laidlay was unable to identify the characters with those of any published Sinhalese inscriptions , but found it identical with Kawi , a literary language from the islands of Java , Bali and Lombok based on Old Javanese with many Sanskrit loanwords . He noted , " With the alphabet of this language , ... I can identify all , or nearly all , of the characters ; but of course no clue to the purport of the inscription can be obtained without some knowledge of the language itself . " Relying on Begbie , he , too , " conjectured with probability that the inscription is a record of some Javanese triumph at a period anterior to the conversion of the Malays to <unk> " . 
 = = = Studies by Kern and other scholars : Old Javanese or Sanskrit ? = = = 
 The first effectual study of the sandstone fragments was by the Dutch epigrapher Johan Hendrik Caspar Kern . He succeeded in deciphering a few words , including <unk> , ya @-@ <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , but was unable to identify the language in which they were written . He gave the probable date of the inscription as around 1230 . Another Dutch Indologist , N.J. Krom , judged from a rubbing of the Stone published in 1848 that the script resembled that of the Majapahit Empire but dated from a period somewhat earlier than 1360 . 
 Other scholars have taken different views . Dr. J.G. de Casparis , a scholar of ancient Indonesian writing , gave the preliminary judgment that the style of the script might date from an earlier period such as the 10th or 11th century . He was able to decipher one or two words , which seemed to be in the Old Javanese language . On the other hand , Drs. <unk> , epigraphical expert of the Indonesian National Research Centre for Archaeology and lecturer at the University of Indonesia , was of the opinion that the engraving dates from no later than the 12th century , has a closer affinity to the Sumatran than the Javanese writing style , and that the language may not be Old Javanese but Sanskrit , which was in common use in Sumatra at that era . John Miksic has commented that while it is impossible to determine whether de Casparis 's or <unk> 's theory is more correct on the basis of epigraphy alone , it is easier to accept the conclusion that the person who commissioned the inscription was culturally Sumatran rather than Javanese , because by the 10th century the linguistic influence of Java had reached the Lampung region in the south of Sumatra , but no such influence has been discovered as far north as Singapore and there is no evidence of Javanese colonisation in Sumatra or the offshore islands at that time . Miksic notes that most conclusions regarding the slab have been on the basis of rubbings or photographs , and thus there is a " slight possibility " that detailed analysis of fragments of the sandstone slab may provide more information about the age of the inscription or the nature of its contents . However , he also says that the script probably never will be fully deciphered . 
 = = The Singapore Stone today = = 
 One of the fragments of the original sandstone slab that was saved by Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Low , which was later returned to what was then the Raffles Museum in Singapore , is today known as the Singapore Stone . It is currently displayed in the Singapore History Gallery of the National Museum of Singapore . The Stone was designated by the Museum as one of 11 " national treasures " in January 2006 , and by the National Heritage Board as one of the top 12 artefacts held in the collections of its museums . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Bland , W. ( William ) ( 1837 ) . " Inscription on the Jetty at Singapore " . Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 6 : 680 – 682 . , reprinted in vol . 1 of Rost , Reinhold ( ed . ) ( 1886 ) . Miscellaneous Papers Relating to Indo @-@ China : Reprinted for the Straits Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , from Dalrymple 's ' Oriental Repertory ' and the ' Asiatic Researches ' and ' Journal ' of the Asiatic Society of Bengal ( Trübner 's Oriental Series ) 1 . London : Kegan Paul , Trench , Trübner & Co. pp. 218 – 219 . This two @-@ volume work was reprinted by Routledge in 2000 . 
 Prinsep , James ( 1848 ) . " Inscription at Singapore " . Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal <unk> : 154 f . , reprinted in Miscellaneous Papers Relating to Indo @-@ China , above , vol . 1 at 222 – 223 . 
 Low , James ( 1848 ) . " An Account of Several Inscriptions Found in Province Wellesley , on the Peninsula of Malacca " . Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal <unk> ( ii ) : 62 – 66 . , reprinted in Miscellaneous Papers Relating to Indo @-@ China , above , vol . 1 at 223 – 226 . 
 Laidlay , J.W. ( 1848 ) . " Note on the Inscriptions from Singapore and Province Wellesley <unk> by the Hon. Col Butterworth and Col J. Low " . Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal 17 ( 2 ) . , reprinted in Miscellaneous Papers Relating to Indo @-@ China , above , vol . 1 at 227 – 232 . 
 Rouffaer , G.P. ( 1921 ) . " Was Malakka emporium voor 1400 A.D. <unk> <unk> ? En <unk> lag <unk> , Ma @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ? [ Was the Trading Post of Malacca Named <unk> before 1400 A.D. ? And where were <unk> , Ma @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ? ] " . <unk> tot de <unk> , <unk> en Volkenkunde van Nederlandsch @-@ Indie [ Contributions to the Linguistics , Geography and Anthropology of the Dutch East Indies ] 77 ( 1 ) : 58 . . 
 Cornelius @-@ <unk> , Vernon ( 30 March 2000 ) . " The Singapore Stone " . Singapore Infopedia , National Library , Singapore . Retrieved 13 July 2007 . 
 " Singapore Stone " . Singapore Paranormal Investigators . 2000 – 2005 . Retrieved 13 July 2007 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir ; annotated <unk> by A.H. Hill ( 1969 ) . The Hikayat Abdullah : The Autobiography of Abdullah bin Abdul Kadir ( 1797 – 1854 ) . Singapore : Oxford University Press . 
 Miksic , John N. ( Norman ) ( 1985 ) . Archaeological Research on the ' Forbidden Hill ' of Singapore : Excavations at Fort Canning , 1984 . Singapore : National Museum . ISBN 9971 @-@ 917 @-@ 16 @-@ 5 . 
 = Avril Lavigne = 
 Avril Ramona Lavigne ( / <unk> <unk> / ; French : [ <unk> <unk> ] ) ( born 27 September 1984 ) is a Canadian singer @-@ songwriter and actress . She was born in Belleville , Ontario , and spent most of her youth in the town of Greater Napanee . By the age of 15 , she had appeared on stage with Shania Twain ; by 16 , she had signed a two @-@ album recording contract with Arista Records worth more than $ 2 million . In 2002 , when she was 17 years old , Lavigne entered the music industry with her debut album , Let Go , becoming one of the most popular pop punk artists , a reason she earned her reputation of a " skater punk " persona and " pop punk princess " . Since her professional debut , she has sold more than 40 million albums and over 50 million singles worldwide . 
 Let Go made Lavigne the youngest female soloist to reach number 1 in the UK . As of 2013 , it has sold nearly 7 million copies in the United States and over 20 million copies worldwide . 
 Her breakthrough single , " Complicated " , peaked at number 1 in many countries around the world , as did the album Let Go . Her second studio album , Under My Skin , was released in May 2004 and was her first album to peak at number 1 on the US Billboard 200 , eventually selling more than 12 million copies worldwide . 
 The Best Damn Thing , Lavigne 's third album , was released in April 2007 , becoming her third number 1 album in the UK Albums Chart and featuring her first US Billboard Hot 100 number 1 single , " Girlfriend " . Lavigne has scored six number @-@ one singles worldwide , including " Complicated " , " Sk8er Boi " , " I 'm with You " , " My Happy Ending " , " Nobody 's Home " , and " Girlfriend " . Lavigne is one of the top @-@ selling artists releasing albums in the US , with over 11 million copies certified by the RIAA . Her fourth studio album , Goodbye Lullaby , was released in March 2011 . Goodbye Lullaby gave Lavigne her fourth top 10 album on the US Billboard 200 and the UK Albums Chart and her third number 1 album in both Japan and Australia . Three months after the release of Goodbye Lullaby , Lavigne began work on her eponymously titled fifth studio album , which was released by Epic Records on 1 November 2013 following her departure from RCA Records in 2011 . 
 Lavigne took a break from recording music , pursuing careers in feature film acting and designing clothes and perfumes . She voiced Heather , a Virginia opossum , in the animated film Over the Hedge in 2006 . That same year , she made her on @-@ screen feature film debut in Fast Food Nation . In 2008 , Lavigne introduced her clothing line , Abbey Dawn , and in 2009 she released her first perfume , Black Star , which was followed by her second perfume , Forbidden Rose , in 2010 and her third perfume , Wild Rose , in 2011 . In July 2006 , Lavigne married her boyfriend of two years , Deryck Whibley , lead singer and guitarist for Sum 41 . The marriage lasted four years . In October 2009 , Lavigne filed for divorce . Whibley and Lavigne continued to work together , with Whibley producing her fourth album , as well as Lavigne 's single " Alice " , written for Tim Burton 's film Alice in Wonderland . Lavigne married Nickelback frontman Chad Kroeger in 2013 . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Lavigne was born in Belleville , Ontario , Canada . Her mother is of English , Scottish , and German descent , and her father , Jean @-@ Claude Joseph Lavigne , is of French @-@ Canadian extraction , and Avril holds a French passport . She was named " Avril " by her father after the French word for the month of April . He and Lavigne 's mother , Judy , recognized their child 's vocal abilities when she was two years old and sang " Jesus Loves Me " on the way home from church . Lavigne has an older brother , Matthew , and a younger sister , Michelle , both of whom teased her when she sang . " My brother used to knock on the wall because I used to sing myself to sleep and he thought it was really annoying . " 
 When Lavigne was five years old , the family moved to Greater Napanee , Ontario , a town with a population of approximately 5 @,@ 000 . As a child , she was sometimes kicked out of class for misbehaving , her parents supported her singing . Her father bought her a microphone , a drum kit , a keyboard , and several guitars , and converted their basement into a studio ; following his own love for music Jean @-@ Claude led the family to church at Third Day Worship Center in Kingston , Ontario , where he often played bass . When Lavigne was 14 years old , her parents took her to karaoke sessions . Lavigne also performed at country fairs , singing songs by Garth Brooks , the Dixie Chicks , and Shania Twain . She also began writing her own songs . Her first song was called " Can 't Stop Thinking About You " , about a teenage crush , which she described as " cheesy cute " . 
 = = Music career = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2001 : Early performances and record deal = = = 
 In 1999 , Lavigne won a radio contest to perform with the Canadian singer Shania Twain at the Corel Centre in Ottawa , before an audience of 20 @,@ 000 people . Twain and Lavigne sang Twain 's song , " What Made You Say That " , and Lavigne told Twain that she was going to be " a famous singer " . During a performance with the Lennox Community Theatre , Lavigne was spotted by local folksinger Stephen <unk> . He invited her to contribute vocals on his song , " Touch the Sky " , for his 1999 album , Quinte Spirit . She later sang on " Temple of Life " and " Two Rivers " for his follow @-@ up album , My Window to You , in 2000 . 
 In December 1999 , Lavigne was discovered by her first professional manager , Cliff Fabri , while singing country covers at a Chapters bookstore in Kingston , Ontario . Fabri sent out VHS tapes of Lavigne 's home performances to several industry prospects , and Lavigne was visited by several executives . Mark Jowett , co @-@ founder of a Canadian management firm , Nettwerk , received a copy of Lavigne 's karaoke performances recorded in her parents ' basement . Jowett arranged for Lavigne to work with producer Peter Zizzo during the summer of 2000 in New York , where she wrote the song " Why " . Lavigne was noticed by Arista Records during a trip to New York . 
 In November 2000 , Ken <unk> , an A & R representative , invited Antonio " L.A. " Reid , then head of Arista Records , to Zizzo 's Manhattan studio to hear Lavigne sing . Her 15 @-@ minute audition " so impressed " Reid that he immediately signed her to Arista with a deal worth $ 1 @.@ 25 million for two albums and an extra $ 900 @,@ 000 for a publishing advance . By this time , Lavigne had found that she fit in naturally with her hometown high school 's skater clique , an image that carried through to her first album , but although she enjoyed skateboarding , school left her feeling insecure . Having signed a record deal , and with support from her parents , she left school to focus on her music career . Lavigne 's band was chosen by Nettwerk , as they wanted young performers who were up and coming from the Canadian punk rock scene who would fit with Lavigne 's personality . 
 = = = 2002 – 03 : Let Go = = = 
 Reid gave A & R Joshua Sarubin the responsibility of overseeing Lavigne 's development and the recording of her debut album . They spent several months in New York working with different co @-@ writers , trying to forge an individual sound for her . Sarubin told HitQuarters that they initially struggled ; although early collaborations with songwriter @-@ producers including <unk> <unk> , Curt Frasca and Peter Zizzo resulted in some good songs , they did not match her or her voice . It was only when Lavigne then went to Los Angeles in May 2001 and created two songs with The Matrix production team — including " Complicated " , later released as her debut single — that the record company felt she had made a major breakthrough . Lavigne worked further with The Matrix and also with singer @-@ songwriter Cliff Magness . Recording of Lavigne 's debut album , Let Go , finished in January 2002 . 
 Lavigne released Let Go in June 2002 in the US , where it reached number two on the Billboard 200 albums chart . It peaked at number one in Australia , Canada , and the UK — this made Lavigne , at 17 years old , the youngest female soloist to have a number @-@ one album on the UK Albums Chart at that time . By the end of 2002 , the album was certified four @-@ times platinum by the RIAA , making her the bestselling female artist of 2002 and Let Go the top @-@ selling debut of the year . By May 2003 , Let Go had accumulated over 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 sales in Canada , receiving a diamond certification from the Canadian Recording Industry Association . By 2009 , the album had sold over 16 million units worldwide , and the RIAA certified the album six @-@ times platinum , denoting shipments of over six million units in the US ( it has sold 6 @.@ 8 million copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan ) . 
 Lavigne 's debut single , " Complicated " , peaked at number one in Australia and number two in the US . " Complicated " was one of the bestselling Canadian singles of 2002 , and one of the decade 's biggest hits in the US , where subsequent singles " Sk8er Boi " and " I 'm with You " reached the top ten . With these three singles , Lavigne became the second artist in history to have three top @-@ ten songs from a debut album on Billboard 's Mainstream Top 40 chart . Lavigne was named Best New Artist ( for " Complicated " ) at the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards , won four Juno Awards in 2003 out of six nominations , received a World Music Award for " World 's Bestselling Canadian Singer " , and was nominated for eight Grammy Awards , including Best New Artist and Song of the Year for " Complicated " . 
 In 2002 , Lavigne made a cameo appearance in the music video for " Hundred Million " by the pop punk band Treble Charger . In March 2003 , Lavigne posed for the cover of Rolling Stone magazine , and in May she performed " Fuel " during MTV 's Icon tribute to Metallica . During her first headlining tour , the Try to Shut Me Up Tour , Lavigne covered Green Day 's " Basket Case " . 
 = = = 2004 – 05 : Under My Skin = = = 
 Lavigne 's second studio album , Under My Skin , was released in May 2004 and debuted at number one in Australia , Canada , Japan , the UK , and the US . The album was certified five @-@ times platinum in Canada and has sold 14 million copies , including 3 @.@ 2 million in the US . Lavigne wrote most of the album 's tracks with Canadian singer @-@ songwriter Chantal Kreviazuk , and Kreviazuk 's husband , Our Lady Peace front man Raine Maida , co @-@ produced the album with Butch Walker and Don Gilmore . Lavigne said that Under My Skin proved her credentials as a songwriter , saying that " each song comes from a personal experience of mine , and there are so much [ sic ] emotions in those songs " . ' Don 't Tell Me ' , the lead single off the album , reached the top five in the UK and Canada and the top ten in Australia . " My Happy Ending " , the album 's second single , was a top five hit in the UK and Australia . In the US , it was a top ten entry on the Billboard Hot 100 and became a number @-@ one pop radio hit . The third single , " Nobody 's Home " , did not manage to make the top 40 in the US and performed moderately elsewhere . 
 During early 2004 Lavigne went on the ' Live and By Surprise ' acoustic mall tour in the US and Canada to promote ' Under My Skin ' , accompanied by her guitarist Evan Taubenfeld . In late 2004 , Lavigne embarked on her first world tour , the year @-@ long <unk> Tour . Lavigne won two World Music Awards in 2004 , for ' World 's Best Pop / Rock Artist ' and ' World 's Bestselling Canadian Artist ' , and won three Juno Awards from five nominations in 2005 , including ' Artist of the Year ' . She also won in the category of ' Favorite Female Singer ' at the eighteenth annual Nickelodeon Kids ' Choice Awards . 
 Lavigne co @-@ wrote the song ' Breakaway ' , which was recorded by Kelly Clarkson for the soundtrack to the 2004 film ' The Princess Diaries 2 : Royal Engagement ' . ' Breakaway ' was released as a single in mid 2004 and subsequently included as the title track on Clarkson 's second album , ' Breakaway ' . Lavigne performed the Goo Goo Dolls song ' Iris ' with the band 's lead singer John Rzeznik at Fashion Rocks in September 2004 , and she posed for the cover of ' Maxim ' in October 2004 . She recorded the theme song for ' The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie ' ( released in November 2004 ) with producer Butch Walker . 
 = = = 2006 – 08 : The Best Damn Thing = = = 
 In February 2006 , Lavigne represented Canada at the closing ceremony of the 2006 Winter Olympics . Fox Entertainment Group approached Lavigne to write a song for the soundtrack to the 2006 fantasy @-@ adventure film Eragon ; her contribution , " Keep Holding On " , was released as a single to promote the film and its soundtrack . 
 Lavigne 's third album , The Best Damn Thing , was released in April 2007 and debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , and subsequently achieving platinum status in Canada . The album sold more than 1 @.@ 7 million copies in the US and six million worldwide . Its lead single , " Girlfriend " , became Lavigne 's first number @-@ one single on the US ' Billboard ' Hot 100 and one of the decade 's biggest singles . The single also peaked at number one in Australia , Canada , and Japan , and reached number two in the UK and France . As well as English , " Girlfriend " was recorded in Spanish , French , Italian , Portuguese , German , Japanese , and Mandarin . The International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ranked " Girlfriend " as the most @-@ downloaded track worldwide in 2007 , selling 7 @.@ 3 million copies , including the versions recorded in eight different languages . " When You 're Gone " , the album 's second single , reached the top five in Australia and the United Kingdom , the top ten in Canada , and the top forty in the US . " Hot " was the third single and charted only at number 95 in the US , although it reached the top 10 in Canada and the top 20 in Australia . 
 Lavigne won two World Music Awards in 2007 , for ' World 's Bestselling Canadian Artist ' and ' World 's Best Pop / Rock Female Artist ' . She won her first two MTV Europe Music Awards , received a Teen Choice Award for ' Best Summer Single ' , and was nominated for five Juno Awards . In December 2007 , Lavigne was ranked number eight in Forbes magazine 's list of ' Top 20 Earners Under 25 ' , with annual earnings of $ 12 million . In March 2008 , Lavigne undertook a world tour , The Best Damn World Tour , and appeared on the cover of Maxim for the second time . In mid @-@ August , Malaysia 's Islamic opposition party , the Pan @-@ Malaysian Islamic Party , attempted to ban Lavigne 's tour show in Kuala Lumpur , judging her stage moves " too sexy " . Her concert on 29 August was thought that it would promote wrong values ahead of Malaysia 's independence day on 31 August . On 21 August 2008 , MTV reported that the concert had been approved by the Malaysian government . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 : Goodbye Lullaby = = = 
 In January 2010 , Lavigne worked with Disney clothing designs inspired by Tim Burton 's feature film Alice in Wonderland . She recorded a song for its soundtrack , " Alice " , which was played over the end credits and included on the soundtrack album Almost Alice . In February , Lavigne performed at the Vancouver 2010 Winter Olympics closing ceremony . Lavigne 's song " I 'm with You " was sampled by Rihanna on the track " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " , which is featured on Rihanna 's fifth studio album , Loud ( 2010 ) . " Cheers ( Drink to That ) " was released as a single the following year , and Lavigne appeared in its music video . In December 2010 , American singer Miranda Cosgrove released " Dancing Crazy " , a song written by Lavigne , Max Martin and Shellback . It was also produced by Martin . 
 Lavigne began recording for her fourth studio album , Goodbye Lullaby , in her home studio in November 2008 , its opening track , " Black Star " , was written to help promote her first fragrance of the same name . Lavigne described the album as being about her life experiences rather than focusing on relationships , and its style as less pop rock than her previous material , reflecting her age . The release date for Goodbye Lullaby was delayed several times , which Lavigne said was because of her label . Goodbye Lullaby was released in March 2011 , and its lead single , " What the Hell " , premiered in December 2010 . Goodbye Lullaby sold 368 @,@ 000 copies in the US and received Juno Award nominations for Album of the Year and Pop Album of the Year . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Avril Lavigne = = = 
 Three months after the release of Goodbye Lullaby , Lavigne announced that work on her fifth studio album had already begun , describing it as the musical opposite of Goodbye Lullaby and " pop and more fun again " . In late 2011 , she confirmed that she had moved to Epic Records , headed by L. A. Reid . Lavigne contributed two cover songs to the 2012 Japanese animated film One Piece Film : Z : " How You Remind Me " ( originally by Nickelback ) and " Bad Reputation " ( originally by Joan Jett ) . 
 The lead single from Lavigne 's fifth studio album , " Here 's to Never Growing Up " ( produced by Martin Johnson of the band Boys Like Girls ) , was released in April 2013 and reached top 20 positions on the Billboard Hot 100 , Australia and the UK . The second single , " Rock n Roll " , was released in August 2013 and the third , " Let Me Go " ( featuring Lavigne 's husband Chad Kroeger of Nickelback ) , was released in October 2013 . The album , eponymously titled Avril Lavigne , was released in November 2013 and sold 125 @,@ 000 copies in the US ; in Canada , it was certified gold and received a Juno Award nomination for Pop Album of the Year . During mid 2014 , Lavigne opened for boy band the Backstreet Boys ' In a World Like This Tour and played at the music festival Summer Sonic in Tokyo , Japan . 
 In an April 2015 interview with Billboard , Lavigne announced plans to release a new single titled " Fly " , which was released on 26 April in association with the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games , and to release a Christmas album . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style and songwriting = = = 
 Themes in Lavigne 's music include messages of self @-@ empowerment from a female or an adolescent view . Lavigne believes her " songs are about being yourself no matter what and going after your dreams even if your dreams are crazy and even if people tell you they 're never going to come true . " On her debut album , Let Go , Lavigne preferred the less mainstream songs , such as " Losing Grip " , instead of her more radio @-@ friendly singles , such as " Complicated " , saying that " the songs I did with the Matrix ... were good for my first record , but I don 't want to be that pop anymore . " Lavigne 's second album , Under My Skin , had deeper personal themes underlying each song , saying that " I 've gone through so much , so that 's what I talk about ... Like boys , like dating or relationships " . In contrast , her third album , The Best Damn Thing , was not personal to her . " Some of the songs I wrote didn 't even mean that much to me . It 's not like some personal thing I 'm going through . " Her objective in writing the album was simply to " make it fun " . Goodbye Lullaby , Lavigne 's fourth album , was much more personal than her earlier records , with Lavigne describing the album as " more stripped down , deeper . All the songs are very emotional " . Ian McKellen defined her as " a punk chanteuse , a post @-@ grunge valkyrie , with the wounded soul of a poet and the explosive pugnacity of a Canadian " on The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson in 2007 . 
 Most critics and publications , such as The New York Times , Rolling Stone , NME , <unk> , IGN and PopMatters , have identified Lavigne as a mix of alternative rock , pop rock and pop punk , influenced by a post @-@ grunge sound . 
 While Lavigne denied being angry , her interviews were still passionate about the media 's lack of respect for her songwriting . She said " I am a writer , and I won 't accept people trying to take that away from me " , adding that she had been writing " full @-@ structured songs " since she was 14 . Despite this , Lavigne 's songwriting has been questioned throughout her career . The songwriting trio the Matrix , with whom Lavigne wrote songs for her debut album , claimed that they were the main songwriters of Lavigne 's singles " Complicated " , " Sk8er Boi " and " I 'm with You " . Lavigne denied this , asserting that she was the primary songwriter for every song on the album , saying that " [ N ] one of those songs aren 't from me " . In 2007 , Chantal Kreviazuk , who wrote with Lavigne on her second album , accused Lavigne of plagiarism and criticized her songwriting , saying that " Avril doesn 't really sit and write songs by herself or anything . " Lavigne also disclaimed this , and considered taking legal action against Kreviazuk for " clear defamation " against her character . Kreviazuk later apologized , saying that " Avril is an accomplished songwriter and it has been my privilege to work with her . " Shortly after that , Tommy Dunbar , founder of the band the <unk> , sued Lavigne , her publishing company , and Lukasz " Dr. Luke " Gottwald for allegedly stealing parts of " I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend " for her song " Girlfriend " . Gottwald defended Lavigne , stating , " me and Avril wrote the song together ... It has the same chord progressions as ten different Blink @-@ 182 songs , the standard changes you 'd find in a Sum 41 song . It 's the Sex Pistols , not the <unk> . " In January 2008 , the lawsuit was closed after a confidential settlement had been reached . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Lavigne 's earlier influences came from country music acts such as Garth Brooks , the Dixie Chicks and Shania Twain ; and alternative singer @-@ songwriters such as Alanis Morissette , Lisa Loeb , Natalie Imbruglia and Janis Joplin . By the time she left school to focus on her music career , Lavigne was musically more influenced by skate punk , pop punk and punk rock acts such as blink @-@ 182 , Sum 41 , NOFX , Pennywise , Dashboard Confessional , Green Day , the Ramones , the Distillers and Hole . She also enjoyed metal bands such as Marilyn Manson , System of a Down , Incubus and the Used ; as well as alternative bands such as Nirvana , No Doubt , Goo Goo Dolls , Radiohead , Coldplay , Oasis , Third Eye Blind and Matchbox Twenty . 
 Because of these influences , musical genres , and Lavigne 's personal style , the media often defined her as punk , something she denied being . Lavigne 's close friend and guitarist , Evan Taubenfeld , said , " It 's a very touchy subject to a lot of people , but the point is that Avril isn 't punk , but she never really pretended to claim to come from that scene . She had pop punk music and the media ended up doing the rest " . Lavigne also commented on the matter : " I have been labeled like I 'm this angry girl , [ a ] rebel ... punk , and I am so not any of them . " Although she stated to have punk influences on her music : " I like to listen a lot to punk rock music , you can notice a certain influence of punk in my music . I like an aggressive music , but pretty enough heavy pop @-@ rock , which is what I really do . " 
 = = Other work = = 
 = = = Film career = = = 
 Lavigne became interested in appearing on television and in feature films . The decision , she said , was her own . Although her years of experience in making music videos was to her advantage , Lavigne admitted her experience in singing removed any fear of performing on camera . She specifically mentioned that the video " Nobody 's Home " involved the most " acting " . Her first television appearance was in a 2002 episode of Sabrina , the Teenage Witch , performing " Sk8er Boi " with her band in a nightclub . She later made a cameo appearance in the 2004 film Going the Distance . The main characters bump into her backstage at the MuchMusic Video Awards after her performance of " Losing Grip " . 
 She moved into feature film acting cautiously , choosing deliberately small roles to begin with . In November 2005 , after going through an audition to land the role , Lavigne travelled to New Mexico to film a single scene in the 2007 film , The Flock . She played Beatrice Bell , the girlfriend of a crime suspect , appearing alongside Claire Danes and Richard Gere . Gere gave Lavigne acting tips between takes . On her role in The Flock , Lavigne said , " I did that just to see how it was and to not jump into [ mainstream acting ] too fast " . The Flock was not released in American theatres , and because it was not released in foreign markets until late 2007 , it is not considered Lavigne 's debut . The film made $ 7 million in the foreign box office . 
 Lavigne 's feature film debut was voicing an animated character in the 2006 film Over the Hedge , based on the comic strip of the same name . She voiced the character Heather , a Virginia opossum . Recording the characters ' voices was devoid of interaction with other actors . Lavigne stated , " All the actors went in individually , and [ director ] Tim and [ screenwriter Karey ] and directors were there with me every time I went in , and they made it go so smoothly ; they made me feel comfortable .... That was the interesting part , going in by yourself , with no one else to kind of feed off of . " Lavigne found the recording process to be " easy " and " natural " , but she kept hitting the microphone as she gestured while acting . " I 'd use my hands constantly and , like , hit the microphone stand and make noises , so Tim and Karey had to tell me to hold still .... It 's hard to be running or falling down the stairs and have to make those sounds come out of your mouth but keep your body still . " Lavigne believed she was hired to perform Heather because of her rock @-@ star status . " [ The director ] thought I 'd give my character ... a bit of attitude " . The film opened on 19 May 2006 , making $ 38 million over its opening weekend . It went on to gross $ 336 million worldwide . 
 In December 2005 , Lavigne signed to appear in Fast Food Nation , based on the book Fast Food Nation : The Dark Side of the All @-@ American Meal . The fictionalized adaptation , directed by Richard Linklater , traces fast @-@ food hamburgers contaminated with cow feces back to the slaughterhouses . Lavigne played Alice , a high school student intent on freeing the cows . The film opened on 17 November 2006 and remained in theatres for 11 weeks , grossing $ 2 million worldwide . 
 Both Over the Hedge and Fast Food Nation opened at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival , which Lavigne attended . Lavigne felt honoured to be able to attend and was proud of her work . When asked if she would pursue her film career , she stated that she wanted to take her time and wait for the " right parts and the right movies . " Lavigne was aware of the roles she had chosen . " I wanted to start off small and to learn [ that ] I wouldn 't just want to throw myself into a big part . " In August 2006 , Canadian Business magazine ranked her as the seventh top Canadian actor in Hollywood in their second @-@ annual ranking Celebrity Power List . The results were determined by comparing salary , Internet hits , TV mentions , and press hits . 
 = = = Fashion design = = = 
 In July 2008 , Lavigne launched the clothing line Abbey Dawn , featuring a back @-@ to @-@ school collection . It is produced by Kohl 's , which is the brand 's exclusive US retailer . Named after Lavigne 's childhood nickname , Abbey Dawn is designed by Lavigne herself . Kohl 's describes Abbey Dawn as a " juniors lifestyle brand " , which incorporates skull , zebra , and star patterns , purples and " hot pinks and blacks " . Lavigne , who wore some of the clothes and jewellery from her line at various concerts before its official launch , pointed out that she was not merely licensing her name to the collection . " I actually am the designer . What 's really important to me is that everything fits well and is well @-@ made , so I try everything on and approve it all . " The clothing line incorporates Lavigne 's musical style and lyrics , " after the release of my first album , I realized how much fashion was involved in my musical career " . 
 The designs were also featured on the Internet game Stardoll , where figures can be dressed up as Lavigne . On 14 September 2009 , Lavigne took her then latest collection for her clothing line to be a part of the New York Fashion Week , returning in 2011 . In December 2010 , the clothing line was made available to over 50 countries through the line 's official website . " It 's fun to be a chick and design clothes and things I 'd like for myself . I design things I [ can 't ] find . " 
 Lavigne released her first fragrance , Black Star , created by Procter & Gamble Prestige Products . The fragrance was announced on Lavigne 's official website on 7 March 2009 . Black Star , which features notes of pink hibiscus , black plum and dark chocolate , was released in summer 2009 in Europe , and later in the US and Canada . When asked what the name meant , Lavigne replied , " I wanted [ the bottle ] to be a star , and my colors are pink and black , and Black Star resembles being different , and standing out in the crowd , and reaching for the stars ; the whole message is just about following your dreams , and it 's okay to be unique and be who you are . " Black Star won the 2010 Best " Women 's Scent Mass " by Cosmetic Executive Women ( CEW ) . Black Star was followed by a second fragrance in July 2010 , Forbidden Rose , which took two years to develop . It features notes of red apple , <unk> , black pepper , <unk> , heliotrope , <unk> , <unk> agreement , sandalwood , and vanilla . Its message is an extension of Black Star 's " follow your dreams " , though the tagline for the new perfume is " Dare to Discover " . The commercial takes place in a gothic garden setting , where Lavigne , upon entering the garden , finds a single , purple rose . Lavigne launched a third fragrance , Wild Rose , in August 2011 and filmed the commercial for it in late 2010 . The tagline for the fragrance is " Dare to discover more " . It features notes of mandarin , pink grapefruit , plum , orange blossom , frangipani , blue orchid , musk , sandalwood and crème brûlée . 
 In January 2010 , Lavigne began working with Disney to incorporate Alice in Wonderland @-@ inspired designs into her Abbey Dawn line of clothing . Her designs were exhibited at the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in California beginning in May through September , alongside Colleen Atwood 's costumes from the 2010 film . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 Lavigne has been involved with many charities , including Make Some Noise , Amnesty International , Erase MS , <unk> , Special Olympics , Camp Will @-@ a @-@ Way , Music Clearing Minefields , US Campaign for Burma , Make @-@ A @-@ Wish Foundation and War Child . She has also appeared in ALDO ads with <unk> to raise money to educate people worldwide about HIV / AIDS . Lavigne took part in the Unite Against AIDS concert presented by ALDO in support of UNICEF on 28 November 2007 at the Bell Centre in Montréal , Québec , Canada . In November 2010 , Lavigne attended the Clinton Global Initiative . 
 Lavigne worked with Reverb , a non @-@ profit environmental organization , for her 2005 east coast tour . She covered " Knockin ' on Heaven 's Door " for War Child 's Peace Songs compilation , and she recorded a cover of the John Lennon song " Imagine " as her contribution to the compilation album Instant Karma : The Amnesty International Campaign to Save Darfur . Released on 12 June 2007 , the album was produced to benefit Amnesty International 's campaign to alleviate the crisis in Darfur . 
 On 5 December 2009 , Lavigne returned to the stage in Mexico City during the biggest charity event in Latin America , " <unk> " . She performed acoustic versions of her hits " Complicated " and " Girlfriend " with Evan Taubenfeld and band member , Jim <unk> . In 2010 , Lavigne was one of several artists who contributed their voices to a cover of K 'naan 's " Wavin ' Flag " as a benefit single to help raise money for several charity organizations related to the 2010 Haiti earthquake . 
 On 14 September 2010 , Lavigne introduced her charity , " The Avril Lavigne Foundation " , which aims to help young people with serious illnesses and disabilities and works with leading charitable organizations ; The foundation partners with the Easter Seals , Make @-@ A @-@ Wish foundation and Erase MS , the latter two being charities Lavigne has previously worked with . Her work with the Make @-@ A @-@ Wish foundation was the inspiration behind her own charity , with Lavigne stating , " I just really wanted to do more " . Lavigne said on the foundation 's website , " I have always looked for ways to give back because I think it 's a responsibility we all share " . Philanthropist Trevor Neilson 's 12 @-@ person firm , " Global Philanthropy Group " , advises Lavigne with her foundation as well as several other celebrities , including musician John Legend . 
 In September 2014 , she launched a personal fundraising campaign for Special Olympics as part of her birthday celebration . Proceeds from her " Team Rockstar " event helped sponsor athletes from around the world competing in the 2015 Special Olympics World Summer Games in Los Angeles . According to an <unk> Magazine interview with Lavigne , the athletes were the stars of the music video for " Fly " , which was shot in Canada . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 Lavigne was featured in the 2003 game The Sims : Superstar as a non @-@ playable celebrity . 
 In mid @-@ 2007 , Lavigne was featured in a two @-@ volume graphic novel , Avril Lavigne 's Make 5 Wishes . She collaborated with artist Camilla d <unk> and writer Joshua Dysart on the manga , which was about a shy girl named Hana who , upon meeting her hero , Lavigne , learned to overcome her fears . Lavigne said , " I know that many of my fans read manga , and I 'm really excited to be involved in creating stories that I know they will enjoy . " The first volume was released in April 2007 , and the second followed in July 2007 . The publication Young Adult Library Services nominated the series for " Great Graphic Novels for Teens " . 
 In September 2011 , Lavigne appeared on the Hub Network televised singing competition Majors & Minors as a guest mentor , alongside other singers including Adam Lambert and Leona Lewis . 
 = = Public image = = 
 When Lavigne first gained publicity , she was known for her tomboyish style , in particular her necktie @-@ and @-@ tank @-@ top combinations . She preferred baggy clothes , skater shoes or <unk> , wristbands , and sometimes shoelaces wrapped around her fingers . During photo shoots , instead of wearing " glittery get @-@ ups " , she preferred wearing " old , crumpled T 's " . In response to her fashion and musical influences , the media called her the " pop punk princess " and the female answer to Blink @-@ 182 . Press and fans regarded her as the " anti @-@ Britney " , in part because of her less commercial and " real " image , but also because she was noticeably headstrong . " I 'm not made up and I 'm not being told what to say and how to act , so they have to call me the anti @-@ Britney , which I 'm not . " By November 2002 , however , Lavigne stopped wearing ties , claiming she felt she was " wearing a costume " . Lavigne made a conscious effort to keep her music , and not her image , at the forefront of her career . " I 'm just saying , I don 't want to sell sex . I feel that 's sort of lame and low . I 've got so much more to say . " 
 Lavigne eventually took on a more gothic style as she began her second album , Under My Skin , trading her skating outfits for black tutus and developing an image marked by angst . During The Best Damn Thing years , Lavigne changed directions . She dyed her hair blonde with a pink streak , wore feminine outfits , including " tight jeans and heels " , and modelled for magazines such as Harper 's Bazaar . Lavigne defended her new style : " I don 't really regret anything . You know , the ties and the wife @-@ beaters and all ... It had its time and place . And now I 'm all grown up , and I 've moved on " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Tattoos = = = 
 Only a few of Lavigne 's tattoos are unique to her ; the rest are matched with those of her friends . Lavigne had a star tattooed on the inside of her left wrist that was created at the same time as friend and musical associate Ben Moody 's identical tattoo . In late 2004 , she had a small pink heart around the letter " D " applied to her right wrist , which represented her then @-@ boyfriend , Deryck Whibley . Lavigne and then @-@ husband Whibley got matching tattoos in March 2010 , in celebration of his 30th birthday . In April 2010 , Lavigne added another tattoo on her wrist , that of a lightning bolt and the number 30 . 
 Her love of tattoos , however , gained media attention in May 2010 , after Lavigne and Brody Jenner each got matching tattoos of the word " fuck " on their ribs . Lavigne appeared in the June / July cover story for <unk> magazine , where she discussed and showed off her tattoos , including an " Abbey Dawn " on her left forearm and an " XXV " and star on her right . Although she confirmed the " fuck " tattoo verbally in the article ( calling it her " favorite word " ) she had it applied after the magazine 's photo shoot . She added that she eventually wanted to get a " big @-@ ass heart with a flag through it with a name ... I 'm going to wait a few years and make sure I still want it then . I have to wait for that special someone to come back into my life . " In July 2010 , Lavigne had her boyfriend 's name , " Brody " , tattooed beneath her right breast . The couple announced that they broke up in January 2012 . 
 = = = French citizenship = = = 
 Lavigne 's father being French , she has herself been legally French from birth , as the country applies jus sanguinis . She applied for her French passport and received it in February 2011 . In January 2012 , Lavigne 's house in Bel @-@ Air , on the market since May 2011 , sold , and Lavigne moved to Paris , France , to study the French language . She rented an apartment and attended a Berlitz school . She later held her second wedding in the South of France . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 = = = = Deryck Whibley = = = = 
 Lavigne and Sum 41 lead vocalist / rhythm guitarist Deryck Whibley began dating when Lavigne was 19 years old , after being friends since she was 17 . Only a few weeks before they met , Lavigne admitted that she was not meeting boys because her bodyguards were frightening them away . In June 2005 , Whibley surprised Lavigne with a trip to Venice , Italy , including a gondola ride and a romantic picnic , and on 27 June , he proposed to her . 
 She at first wanted to have a " rock n ' roll , goth wedding " , but admitted that she had doubts about going against tradition . " I 've been dreaming about my wedding day since I was a little girl . I have to wear the white dress ... people thought that I would [ wear a ] black wedding dress , and I would have . But at the same time , I was thinking about the wedding pictures , and I wanted to be in style . I didn 't want to be thinking , 20 years later , ' Oh , why did I wear my hair like that ? ' " The couple married on 15 July 2006 in Montecito , California . 
 Seven months into their marriage , Lavigne stated that she was " the best thing that 's ever happened to him " , and suggested that she helped Whibley stay off drugs since they had begun dating . " He doesn 't do drugs . Clearly , he used to , because he talked about it , but I wouldn 't be with someone who did , and I made that very clear to him when we first started dating . I 've never done cocaine in my life , and I 'm proud of that . I am 100 percent against drugs . " The marriage lasted four years . It was announced on 17 September 2009 that Lavigne and Whibley had split up and that divorce papers would soon follow . On 9 October 2009 , Lavigne filed for divorce , releasing the statement , " I am grateful for our time together , and I am grateful and blessed for our remaining friendship . " The divorce was finalized on 16 November 2010 . 
 = = = = Chad Kroeger = = = = 
 Lavigne began dating fellow Canadian rocker Chad Kroeger , frontman of the band Nickelback , in July 2012 . The relationship blossomed after they began working together in March 2012 to write and record music for Lavigne 's fifth album . Lavigne and Kroeger became engaged in August 2012 , after one month of dating . The couple married at the Château de La <unk> , a reconstructed medieval castle on the Mediterranean in the South of France , on 1 July 2013 ( which is Canada Day ) , after a year of being together . They had their honeymoon in Portofino , Italy . On 2 September 2015 , Lavigne announced her separation from Kroeger via her official Instagram account . 
 = = = Health issues = = = 
 In December 2014 , it was reported that Lavigne had privately written to a fan on Twitter that she was suffering from undisclosed health issues , although she denied rumours that she was in rehab . In April 2015 , she revealed to People magazine that she had been diagnosed with Lyme disease . In an interview with Billboard , Lavigne said that she was recovering . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Lavigne received eight Grammy Awards nominations in two years , including Best New Artist . She has also received three American Music Awards nominations , one Brit Award nomination , and one MTV Video Music Award . She has received a total of 221 awards and 301 nominations . 
 By 2013 , Lavigne sold more than 50 million singles and 40 million copies of her albums worldwide , becoming one of the top @-@ selling artists releasing albums in the US , with over 12 @.@ 4 million copies certified by the RIAA . In 2009 , Billboard named Lavigne the number 10 pop artist in the " Best of the 2000s " chart . She was listed as the 28th overall best act of the decade based on album and single chart performance in the US 
 = = Backing band = = 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Let Go ( 2002 ) 
 Under My Skin ( 2004 ) 
 The Best Damn Thing ( 2007 ) 
 Goodbye Lullaby ( 2011 ) 
 Avril Lavigne ( 2013 ) 
 = = Concerts = = 
 = Buried Secrets ( Body of Proof ) = 
 " Buried Secrets " is the eight episode of the first season of the American medical drama Body of Proof . It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on May 10 , 2011 . The episode was directed by David Platt and written by Sunil Nayar and series creator Christopher Murphey . 
 In this episode , Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) investigates when Joe Salerno ( Derek Russo ) , a friend of Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) , is found dead , after being run over . However , Megan concludes that he was dead before the car hit him . Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) finds out that Joe was doing freelance work on a cold case involving Lizzy Adler ( Rebecca <unk> ) , a student athlete who was murdered . After getting Lizzy 's body exhumed , Megan realizes the same person killed Joe and Lizzy . Meanwhile , Megan asks her mother Joan ( Joanna Cassidy ) to help with the case . 
 The episode received positive reviews , and was watched by 10 @.@ 11 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , on the Tuesday night it aired in the United States . Critic Christine Orlando of TV Fanatic praised the scenes between Samantha and Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) calling them " sweet " , as well as praising the scenes between Megan and Joan , adding that Joan was " a real piece of work " in this episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Detective Joe Salerno ( Derek Russo ) , a very dear friend of Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) , is found dead , after being run over by Sara Gonzales ( Diane Guerrero ) . When Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) arrives on scene , she concludes that he was dead before the car hit him , having been thrown off the bridge above the road . A distraught Samantha and Megan visit Joe 's wife Helen ( Kathryn <unk> ) and their daughter Becky ( Fátima Ptacek ) . Helen says that Joe had been distant before he died , after he was under review for assaulting Chuck Foster ( John <unk> ) . Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) discovers Joe was doing freelance work on a cold case involving Lizzy Adler ( Rebecca <unk> ) , a student athlete who was murdered , with Chuck being the prime suspect . Megan , Bud , Samantha and Peter Dunlop ( Nicholas Bishop ) talk to Lizzy 's lacrosse coach , Hal Davis , who states that Joe had been visiting the team recently . Megan <unk> Lizzy 's body , without her boss , Kate Murphy 's ( Jeri Ryan ) , permission . Megan gets her judge mother , Joan ( Joanna Cassidy ) to sign the request , who tells Megan that Lizzy is buried in the same graveyard as Megan 's father David , who committed suicide when Megan was twelve . Megan and Peter later visit David 's grave . 
 Megan receives backlash from Kate for not following procedure , but clay found in both Lizzy and Joe 's pockets match . Samantha realizes that Joe found the crime scene of Lizzy 's murder ; the tennis courts at her school . Kate and Megan study her body and find a hand impression on her back , which matches one of her friends Heather Clayton ( Meg Chambers <unk> ) . Heather killed Lizzy after she broke her finger during a lacrosse game . Lizzy 's body was found elsewhere , meaning Heather had help moving the body , so Megan finds out that Lou helped Heather . Lou also admits killing Joe , as he was getting too close to the truth . After they arrest them , Megan revisits her mother Joan , asking to exhume her father ’ s body . Joan declines the request , telling Megan to leave him be . Megan and Samantha revisit Helen and Becky , revealing that Joe had an undiagnosed brain disorder , causing the emotional distance from the two , telling them that Joe helped solve the Lizzy Adler case . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Buried Secrets " was written by Sunil Nayar and series creator Christopher Murphey and directed by David Platt , most known for directing television series such as Law & Order and its spinoff Law & Order : Special Victims Unit . Platt has been nominated for three Emmy 's whilst working on Law & Order . Daniel Licht who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . Actor John <unk> – best known for his role in the film My Soul to Take – guest starred in the episode as Chuck Foster . Recurring cast member Joanna Cassidy returned in this episode , with this being Cassidy 's first appearance since season one 's sixth episode " Society Hill " , however she was mentioned in this episode 's previous episode , " All in the Family " . Radio Times listed Mary Mouser as appearing as Lacey Fleming , however she did not appear in this episode . 
 " Buried Secrets " , along with the eight episode 's from Body of Proof 's first season , were released on a two @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 20 , 2011 . The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episode 's , a preview of season 2 and a 10 @-@ minute " featurette " on the making of the show , with commentaries from the medical consultants who helped with the script , as well as a " Contaminated Evidence " blooper reel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 10 , 2011 , " Buried Secrets " was seen by 10 @.@ 11 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 9 share . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode achieved a lower number of viewers than the previous episode , " All in the Family " , as well as a lower amount than subsequent episode " Broken Home " . Body of Proof came seventh in the ratings on Tuesday night , it was outperformed by CBS 's NCIS , NCIS : Los Angeles , an episode of The Good Wife , two airings of ABC 's Dancing with the Stars and NBC 's The Voice . " Buried Secrets " was watched by 1 @.@ 77 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 This episode received positive reviews . Christine Orlando from TV Fanatic said of the episode ; " Buried Secrets " left me wondering if there was even more to Megan 's father 's death than a simple suicide . There must be a story there and I hope we get to hear more of it . It would be nice to see Megan get her answers , no matter what they may be " . Orlando called Joan " a real piece of work " saying that she could not understand why Joan would not allow Megan to exhume her father 's body . She added that Joan was " cold " saying this adding , " I suddenly understood why Megan avoids Mom like the plague " . Of the conversation between Samantha and Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) she said , " Ethan 's story about losing his guinea pig as a child was sad and sweet . In his own strange way he was trying to relate to Samantha and the death of her friend . Plus , it painted a heart @-@ breaking picture of a sad , lonely boy " . She added that the death of the episode " caused a ripple effect , touching everyone who came near it " , including Kate , who she said that she admired Megan for exhuming the body , as " she 's not allowed to flaunt the rules the way Megan is prone to do . 
 = Battle of Kings Mountain = 
 The Battle of Kings Mountain was a decisive victory in South Carolina for the Patriot militia over the Loyalist militia in the Southern campaign of the American Revolutionary War . The battle took place on October 7 , 1780 , 9 miles ( 14 km ) south of the present @-@ day town of Kings Mountain , North Carolina in rural Cherokee County , South Carolina , where the Patriot militia defeated the Loyalist militia commanded by British Major Patrick Ferguson of the 71st Foot . 
 Ferguson had arrived in North Carolina in early September 1780 to recruit troops for the Loyalist militia and protect the flank of Lord Cornwallis ' main force . Ferguson issued a challenge to the rebel militias to lay down their arms or suffer the consequences . In response , the Patriot militias led by Benjamin Cleveland , James Johnston , William Campbell , John Sevier , Joseph McDowell and Isaac Shelby rallied for an attack on Ferguson . 
 Receiving intelligence on the oncoming attack , Ferguson decided to retreat to the safety of Lord Cornwallis ' army . However , the Patriots caught up with the Loyalists at Kings Mountain near the border with South Carolina . Achieving a complete surprise , the Patriot militiamen attacked and surrounded the Loyalists , inflicting heavy casualties . After an hour of battle , Ferguson was fatally shot while trying to break the rebel line , after which his men surrendered . Some Patriots gave no quarter until the rebel officers re @-@ established control over their men ; they were said to be seeking revenge for alleged killings by Banastre Tarleton 's men of militiamen at the Battle of Waxhaws , under the slogan " Remember Tarleton 's Quarter . " Although victorious , the Patriots had to retreat quickly from the area for fear of Cornwallis ' advance . Later they executed nine Loyalist prisoners after a short trial . 
 The battle was a pivotal moment in the Southern campaign . The surprising victory over the American Loyalist militia came after a string of rebel defeats at the hands of Lord Cornwallis , and greatly raised the Patriots ' morale . With Ferguson dead and his Loyalist militia destroyed , Cornwallis was forced to abandon his plan to invade North Carolina and retreated into South Carolina . 
 = = Prelude to battle = = 
 Major Patrick Ferguson was appointed Inspector of Militia on May 22 , 1780 . His task was to march to the old Tryon County area , raise and organize Loyalist units from the Tory population of the Carolina Backcountry , and protect the left flank of Lord Cornwallis ' main body at Charlotte , North Carolina . 
 = = = Battle of Musgrove 's Mill = = = 
 On the evening of August 18 , 1780 two hundred mounted Patriot partisans under joint command of Colonels Isaac Shelby , James Williams , and Elijah Clarke prepared to raid a Loyalist camp at Musgrove ’ s Mill , which controlled the local grain supply and guarded a ford of the Enoree River . The Battle of Musgrove Mill , August 19 , 1780 occurred near a ford of the Enoree River , near the present @-@ day border between Spartanburg , Laurens and Union Counties in South Carolina . The Patriots anticipated surprising a garrison of about an equal number of Loyalists , but a local farmer informed them that the Tories had recently been reinforced by about a hundred Loyalist militia and two hundred provincial regulars on their way to join British Major Patrick Ferguson . The whole battle took perhaps an hour and within that period , sixty @-@ three Tories were killed , an unknown number wounded , and seventy were taken prisoner . The Patriots lost only about four dead and twelve wounded . 
 Some Whig leaders briefly considered attacking the Tory stronghold at Ninety Six , South Carolina ; but they hurriedly dispersed after learning that a large Patriot army had been defeated at Camden three days previous . 
 = = = Pursuit of Shelby = = = 
 Shelby ’ s forces covered sixty miles with Ferguson in hot pursuit before making their escape . In the wake of General Horatio Gates ’ blundering defeat at Camden , the victory at Musgrove Mill heartened the Patriots and served as further evidence that the South Carolina backcountry could not be held by the Tories . 
 Shelby and his Overmountain Men crossed back over the Appalachian Mountains and retreated back into the territory of the Watauga Association at Sycamore Shoals in present day Elizabethton , Tennessee , and by the next month on September 25 , 1780 , Colonels Shelby , John Sevier , and Charles McDowell and their 600 Overmountain Men had combined forces with Col. William Campbell and his 400 Virginia men at the Sycamore Shoals muster in advance of the October 7 , 1780 Battle of Kings Mountain north of present day Blacksburg , South Carolina in North Carolina . 
 On September 2 , Ferguson and the militia he had already recruited marched west in pursuit of Shelby toward the Appalachian Mountain hill country on what is now the Tennessee / North Carolina border . By September 10 , Ferguson had established a base camp at Gilbert Town , North Carolina and , according to Shelby issued a challenge to the Patriot leaders to lay down their arms or he would " lay waste to their country with fire and sword . " 
 North Carolina Patriot militia leaders Isaac Shelby and John Sevier , from the Washington District ( now present day northeast Tennessee ) , met and agreed to lead their militiamen against him . 
 = = = Muster at Sycamore Shoals = = = 
 Patriot leaders also sent word to a Virginia militia leader , William Campbell , asking him to join them at Sycamore S Campbell called on Benjamin Cleveland to bring his Wilkes County , North Carolina militia to the rendezvous . The detachments of Shelby , Sevier and Campbell were met by 160 North Carolina militiamen led by Charles McDowell and his brother Joseph . Campbell 's cousin , Arthur Campbell , brought 200 more Virginians . About 1 @,@ 100 volunteers from southwest Virginia and today 's northeast Tennessee , known as the " Overmountain Men " because they had settled into the wilderness west of the Appalachian Mountains ridgeline , mustered at the rendezvous on September 25 , 1780 , at Sycamore Shoals near the modern city of Elizabethton , Tennessee . Their movement had been made possible by easing tensions with the Cherokee , thanks to diplomacy by Benjamin Cleveland 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Indian agent Joseph Martin . The Overmountain Men crossed Roan Mountain the next day , and proceeded in a southerly direction for about thirteen days in anticipation of fighting the British Loyalist forces . By September 30 , they had reached Quaker Meadows , the Burke County , North Carolina home of the McDowell brothers , where they united with Benjamin Cleveland and 350 men . Now 1400 strong , the Patriots marched to South Mountain , North Carolina , The five colonels leading the Patriot force ( Shelby , Sevier , William Campbell , Joseph McDowell and Cleveland ) chose William Campbell as the nominal commander , but they agreed that all five would act in council to command their combined army . 
 Meanwhile , two deserters from the Patriot militia reached Patrick Ferguson and informed him of the large body of militia advancing towards him . Waiting three days for reasons that are still unclear , Ferguson ordered a retreat to Lord Cornwallis and the British main forces in Charlotte , sending a message to Cornwallis requesting reinforcements . The request did not reach Cornwallis until one day after the battle . On October 1 , Ferguson reached North Carolina 's Broad River , where he issued another pugnacious public letter , calling the local militia to join him lest they be " pissed upon by a set of mongrels " ( the Overmountain Men ) . 
 On October 4 , the Patriot militia reached Ferguson 's former camp at Gilbert Town , where thirty Georgia militiamen joined them , anxious for action . On October 6 , they reached Cowpens , South Carolina , ( site of the future Battle of Cowpens ) , where they received word that Ferguson was east of them , heading towards Charlotte and Cornwallis . They hurried to catch him . Rebel spies reported Ferguson was making camp on Kings Mountain with some 1200 men . Ferguson , rather than pushing on until he reached Charlotte and safety ( just a day 's march away ) , camped at Kings Mountain and sent Cornwallis another letter asking for reinforcements . Kings Mountain is one of many rocky forested hills in the upper Piedmont , near the border between North and South Carolina . It is shaped like a footprint with the highest point at the heel , a narrow instep , and a broad rounded toe . The Loyalists camped on a ridge west of Kings Pinnacle , the highest point on Kings Mountain . 
 Needing to hurry , the Patriot militia put 900 men on horseback and rode for Kings Mountain . They left immediately , marching through the night of the 6th and morning of the 7th , even though the rain never stopped . By sunrise of the 7th , they forded the Broad River , fifteen miles from Kings Mountain . By early afternoon they arrived and immediately surrounded the ridge and attacked . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The battle opened about 3 p.m. , when the 900 Patriots ( including John Crockett , father of Davy Crockett ) , approached the steep base of the western ridge . They formed eight detachments of 100 to 200 men each . Ferguson was unaware that the Patriots had caught up to him and his 1 @,@ 100 men . He was the only regular British soldier in his command , composed entirely of Loyalist Carolina militia ( except for the 100 or so red @-@ uniformed Loyalist soldiers from New York ) . He had not thought it necessary to fortify his camp . 
 The Patriots caught the Loyalists by surprise . Loyalist officer Alexander Chesney later wrote he didn 't know the Patriots were anywhere near them until the shooting started . As the screaming Patriots charged up the hill , Captain DePeyster turned to Ferguson and said , " These things are ominous — these are the damned yelling boys ! " Two parties , led by Colonels John Sevier and William Campbell , assaulted the mountains " heel " — the smallest in area , but its highest point . The other detachments , led by Colonels Shelby , Williams , Lacey , Cleveland , <unk> , Winston and McDowell , attacked the main Loyalist position , surrounding the " ball " base beside the " heel " crest of the mountain . 
 No one in the Patriot army held command once the fighting started . Each detachment fought independently under the previously agreed to plan to surround and destroy the Loyalists . The Patriots crept up the hill and fired from behind rocks and trees . Ferguson rallied his troops and launched a desperate bayonet @-@ charge against Campbell and Sevier . Lacking bayonets , the Patriots ran down the hill and into the woods . Campbell soon rallied his troops , returned to the hill , and resumed firing . Ferguson ordered two more bayonet charges during the battle . This became the pattern of the battle ; the Patriots would charge up the hill , then the Tories would charge down the hill with fixed bayonets , driving the Patriots off the slopes and into the woods . Once the charge was spent and the Tories returned to their positions , the Patriots would reform in the woods , return to the base of the hill , and charge up the hill again . During one of the charges , Colonel Williams was killed , and Colonel McDowell was wounded . Firing was difficult for the Loyalists , since the Patriots constantly moved using cover and concealment to their advantage . Furthermore , the downhill angle of the hill contributed to the Loyalists overshooting their marks . 
 After an hour of combat , Loyalist casualties were heavy . Ferguson rode back and forth across the hill , blowing a silver whistle he used to signal charges . Shelby , Sevier and Campbell reached the top of the hill behind the Loyalist position and attacked Ferguson 's rear . The Loyalists were driven back into their camp , where they began to surrender . Ferguson drew his sword and hacked down any small white flags that he saw popping up , but he appeared to know that the end was near . In an attempt to rally his faltering men , Ferguson shouted out " Hurrah , brave boys , the day is ours ! " [ sic ] He gathered a few officers together and tried to cut through the Patriot ring , but Sevier 's men fired a volley and Ferguson was shot and dragged by his horse behind the Patriot line . There he was confronted by an opposing officer , who demanded a surrender from the major . Ferguson shot and killed the man with his pistol , but was shot dead by multiple Patriots on the spot . When the Patriots recovered his corpse , they counted seven bullet wounds . 
 Seeing their leader fall , the Loyalists began to surrender . Some Patriots did not want to take prisoners , as they were eager to avenge the Battle of Waxhaws or ' Tarleton 's Quarter , ' in which Banastre Tarleton 's forces killed a sizable number of Abraham Buford 's Continental soldiers after the latter tried to surrender . ( At Waxhaws , Tarleton 's horse was shot , pinning him to the ground and leading his men to believe their commanding officer had been killed under a white flag of surrender . ) Also , other Patriots were seemingly unaware that the Loyalists were trying to surrender . 
 Loyalist Captain Abraham DePeyster , in command after Ferguson was killed , sent out an emissary with a white flag , asking for quarter . For several minutes , the Patriots rejected DePeyster 's white flag and continued firing , many of them shouting , " Give ' em Tarleton 's Quarter ! " and " Give them Buford 's play ! " A significant number of the surrendering Loyalists were killed . When DePeyster sent out a second white flag , a few of the rebel officers , including Campbell and Sevier , ran forward and took control by ordering their men to cease fire . They took about 800 Loyalist prisoners . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Battle of Kings Mountain lasted 65 minutes . The Loyalists suffered 290 killed , 163 wounded , and 668 taken prisoner . The Patriot militia suffered 29 killed and 58 wounded . The Patriots had to move out quickly for fear that Cornwallis would advance to meet them . Loyalist prisoners well enough to walk were herded to camps several miles from the battlefield . The dead were buried in shallow graves and wounded were left on the field to die . Ferguson 's corpse was later reported to have been desecrated and wrapped in oxhide before burial . Both victors and captives came near to starvation on the march due to a lack of supplies in the hastily organized Patriot army . 
 On October 14 , the retreating Patriot force held drumhead <unk> of various Loyalists on various charges ( treason , desertion from Patriot militias , incitement of Indian rebellion ) . Passing through the Sunshine community in what is now Rutherford County , N.C. , the retreat halted on the property of the Biggerstaff family . Aaron Biggerstaff , a Loyalist , had fought in the battle and been mortally wounded . His brother Benjamin was a Patriot and was being held as a prisoner @-@ of @-@ war on a British ship docked at Charleston , S.C. Their cousin John Moore was the Loyalist commander at the earlier Battle of Ramsour 's Mill ( modern <unk> , N.C. ) , in which many of the same troops had participated on both sides . 
 While stopped on the Biggerstaff land , the rebels convicted 36 Loyalist prisoners . Some were testified against by Patriots who had previously fought alongside them and later changed sides . Nine of the prisoners were hanged before Isaac Shelby brought an end to the proceedings . His decision to halt the executions came after an impassioned plea for mercy from one of the Biggerstaff women , although accounts vary as to whether it was Martha Biggerstaff , Aaron 's wife , or Mary Van Zant Biggerstaff , Benjamin 's wife . As the Patriot army dispersed , all but 130 Loyalist prisoners escaped , while being led single file through the woods , over the next few days before the column finally reached camp at Salem , North Carolina . 
 Kings Mountain was a pivotal moment in the history of the American Revolution . Coming after a series of disasters and humiliations in the Carolinas — the fall of Charleston and capture of the American army there , the destruction of another American army at the Battle of Camden , the Waxhaws Massacre — the surprising , decisive victory at Kings Mountain was a great boost to Patriot morale . The Tories of the Carolina back country were broken as a military force . Additionally , the destruction of Ferguson 's command and the looming threat of Patriot militia in the mountains caused Lord Cornwallis to cancel his plans to invade North Carolina ; he instead evacuated Charlotte and retreated to South Carolina . He would not return to North Carolina until early 1781 , when he was chasing Nathanael Greene after the Americans had dealt British forces another defeat at the Battle of Cowpens . 
 In The Winning of the West , Theodore Roosevelt wrote of Kings Mountain , " This brilliant victory marked the turning point of the American Revolution . " Thomas Jefferson called it , " The turn of the tide of success . " President Herbert Hoover at Kings Mountain said , 
 " This is a place of inspiring memories . Here less than a thousand men , inspired by the urge of freedom , defeated a superior force <unk> in this strategic position . This small band of Patriots turned back a dangerous invasion well designed to separate and dismember the united Colonies . It was a little army and a little battle , but it was of mighty portent . History has done scant justice to its significance , which rightly should place it beside Lexington , Bunker Hill , Trenton and Yorktown . " 
 In 1931 , the Congress of the United States created the Kings Mountain National Military Park at the site of the battle . The park headquarters is in Blacksburg , South Carolina , and hosts hundreds of thousands of people each year . 
 = Charles Edward Magoon = 
 Charles Edward Magoon ( December 5 , 1861 – January 14 , 1920 ) was an American lawyer , judge , diplomat , and administrator who is best remembered as a governor of the Panama Canal Zone , Minister to Panama , and an occupation governor of Cuba . He was also the subject of several scandals during his career . 
 As a legal advisor working for the United States Department of War , he drafted recommendations and reports that were used by Congress and the executive branch in governing the United States ' new territories following the Spanish – American War . These reports were collected as a published book in 1902 , then considered the seminal work on the subject . During his time as a governor , Magoon worked to put these recommendations into practice . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Magoon was born in Owatonna , Minnesota . His family moved with him to Nebraska when he was still a small child . In 1876 , he enrolled in the " prep " program at the University of Nebraska at Lincoln and studied there for two years before officially enrolling in 1878 . He left school in 1879 to study law independently with a prominent law firm . In 1882 , he was admitted to the bar and practiced law in Lincoln , Nebraska . Eventually , he was made a partner in the firm . He also became the judge advocate of the Nebraska National Guard and continued to use the title of " Judge " throughout the remainder of his career . 
 = = = War Department and the " Magoon Incident " = = = 
 By 1899 , Magoon was sought out to join the law office of the newly created Division of Customs and Insular Affairs , later renamed the Bureau of Insular Affairs , in the U.S. Department of War under Secretary of War Russell A. Alger . 
 Legal and political controversy had arisen regarding whether the people of the newly acquired territories were automatically granted the same rights under the United States Constitution as American citizens . Magoon prepared a report to Alger in May 1899 that would have established the official departmental policy as " the Constitution follows the flag . " 
 Under this view , the moment the treaty transferring the territories to U.S. sovereignty was signed , the residents of Puerto Rico , the Philippines , and other territories became subject to all the rights granted by the Constitution . For the new territories following the Spanish – American War , this would have been from the signing of the Treaty of Paris on December 10 , 1898 . With the resignation of Secretary Alger , this incomplete report was not released to Congress . 
 In August 1899 , Elihu Root became the new secretary of war , and the unreleased report was scrapped . Magoon drafted a new report which came to precisely the opposite conclusion from the first : the Constitution did not apply in new territories until the United States Congress specifically passed legislation to authorize it . It argued that precedent was set when Congress passed legislation to apply the Constitution to the Northwest Territory and the Louisiana Purchase . This revised report was dated February 12 , 1900 , and released to Congress as a policy document expressing the Department 's official stance on the issue . This view was largely adopted by the Supreme Court of the United States beginning in 1901 in the so @-@ called " Insular Cases . " 
 During this period , Congress was debating a Puerto Rico Tariff Act that would have been unconstitutional had the first definition been kept . This was a largely partisan issue at the time — the Republicans were in favor of this Act , but it was strongly denounced by Democrats . During the ensuing debate , the existence of the original report was discovered by the Democrats , who requested that the War Department release the earlier report to them so they could be compared " side by side " . The request was refused , but a copy of the report was leaked , allowing Minority Leader James D. Richardson to read it aloud on the Senate floor , prior to the vote . These efforts failed ; the vote remained along party lines and the measure was passed . 
 This small scandal , with Magoon at the center , was termed the " Magoon Incident " by the Chicago Tribune and resulted in harsh words against him from both parties . Fellow Republicans urged that Magoon was only a " subordinate clerk " , with no right to express any opinion except the opinion of the Department , and therefore the first report should carry no weight . Democrats similarly were against the second version of the report . It is unclear which version , if any , actually represented Magoon 's personal views rather than the views of the current secretary of war . 
 After this incident , Magoon remained with the Department of War . In 1902 , his work on the legal foundations of the new civil governments was released to the public as a book , Reports on The Law of Civil Government in Territory Subject to Military Occupation by the Military Forces of the United States , etc . It was reprinted several times and was considered the seminal text on the subject . 
 = = = Panama = = = 
 In late 1903 , Secretary Root announced that he was retiring as secretary of war . Speculation followed in the media that Magoon would retire simultaneously and join the outgoing secretary in private practice . Instead , Magoon was appointed by President Theodore Roosevelt in June 1904 to be the general counsel for the Isthmian Canal Commission , the group working toward what would eventually become the Panama Canal . In this role , he would be working under Chairman John Grimes Walker , but would not be a commissioner . According to President Roosevelt , Magoon deserved the position because he had " won his spurs " working in the War Department and was well respected . Although Magoon was working for the Canal project , his office and residence remained in Washington , DC . 
 On March 29 , 1905 , President Roosevelt unexpectedly called for the simultaneous resignations of all members of the Canal Commission and the governor of the Panama Canal Zone , George Whitefield Davis . According to Secretary of War William Howard Taft , this clean sweep was due to the " inherent clumsiness " of the Commission , especially as related to sanitary problems in the Zone , as well as the difficulty of reaching consensus between the current seven commissioners . Several days later , replacement appointments were announced : Magoon was appointed both governor and a member of the Commission , with railroad entrepreneur Theodore P. <unk> made chairman of the Commission . The new Commission had seven commissioners , as required by the act of Congress that created the body , but responsibilities were to be split such that only Magoon , <unk> , and the chief engineer had any real authority . The remaining four members of the commission were appointed only to fulfil the letter of the law . Congress had already rejected a request by the President to formally make the Commission a three @-@ member body ; restructuring the organization was an end @-@ run by the President around that restriction . In order to assume his new duties , Magoon relocated to the Canal Zone the following month . 
 = = = = Governor of Panama Canal Zone = = = = 
 Magoon 's primary responsibilities within the Canal Zone were to improve sanitation and to deal with the all @-@ too @-@ common outbreaks of yellow fever and malaria . At first , he refused to believe that the diseases were carried by mosquitos because , he reasoned , the native population would have been more affected . At this time , the nature of human acquired immunity to diseases was not well understood . The Chicago Tribune , in an article about conditions in the canal , referred to the notion that yellow fever was carried by mosquitos as " <unk> " . However , by January 1906 , Magoon had long come to understand the role of mosquitos in the transmission of diseases , as evidenced in a New York Times article wherein Magoon addressed criticisms of his administration in detail ; by then he had undertaken a vigorous and ambitious plan to eliminate the swamps that bred mosquitos . 
 While governor , he worked with translators in the War Department to publish an English edition of the complete Civil Code of Panama , which he codified as the law of the Canal Zone on May 9 , 1904 . This was the first time that the complete civil code of a Spanish @-@ speaking country not a U.S. territory had been translated into English . It was significant that he did not make changes to these laws when " importing " them into the legal system of the territory that he governed . 
 On July 2 , 1905 , President Roosevelt further consolidated power in Panama by appointing Magoon Minister to Panama , to replace John Barrett . This put Magoon in the unique position of being both a governor of a U.S. territory and a diplomat to the country of which that territory was an enclave . During the tenure of Governor Davis , there had been friction between him and Minister Barrett . This double appointment would ensure that the two roles could not work at cross @-@ purposes . Magoon would draw two salaries in the arrangement , an issue which would come up later to haunt him . With influential posts in both Panama proper and the Canal Zone , Magoon was an exceptionally powerful man on the Isthmus . 
 = = = = Friction with Congress = = = = 
 The President was coming into increasing conflict with Congress on the handling of the Zone , including the unusual consolidation of power . In addition to not officially restructuring the Commission , Congress increasingly fought or raised questions about the appointments of replacement commissioners . In November 1905 , Panama was visited by Poultney Bigelow , a lecturer and writer for the American Geographical Society , who wrote a scathing report on progress in the Canal Zone — a report that was well @-@ publicized in the States . This report criticized the efficiency of the work being performed as well as the quality of its management . Magoon countered this negative press by stressing that Bigelow had visited the Zone for less than two days , one of which was Thanksgiving Day , and that work was naturally lax on the holiday . 
 In February , Magoon was called to testify before the Senate Committee responsible for Canal administration , including responding to Bigelow 's report . He was criticized now for the earlier adoption of Panama 's penal system in the Zone . One major point of contention was that it did not allow for trial by jury for American citizens arrested there . They raised questions as to the quality of the judges in the territory and other issues . 
 There was no official outcome from these hearings , but Congress subsequently passed a Consular Reform Bill which included a provision that specifically would not allow a diplomat , such as Magoon , to hold a separate administrative position . Rather than remove Magoon from one of his positions , he was named to become vice governor @-@ general of the Philippines . Ultimately , this offer was rescinded before it could take effect , and he was instead appointed governor of Cuba . The best coverage of Magoon 's work in Panama can be found in : <unk> , Gustavo A. ; Nelly Maldonado <unk> ( 1999 ) . Charles Edward Magoon : The Panama Years . Río Piedras , Puerto Rico : Editorial Plaza Mayor . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 155 @-@ 4 . OCLC <unk> 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 In 1906 , Cuba was in the midst of a constitutional crisis as a result of a disputed election and an attempt by elected President Tomás Estrada Palma to stay in power after the conclusion of his term . This led to a revolt , and the U.S. military sent in 5 @,@ 600 men to reassert control over the country in what would be called the Second Occupation of Cuba . This was permitted under the Cuban @-@ American Treaty of Relations of 1903 , a treaty that stipulated the degree of United States intervention in Cuba . After a brief period of stabilization by Secretary Taft , Magoon was appointed governor under the Constitution of Cuba , effectively with absolute authority and backed by the U.S. military . 
 On October 13 , 1906 , Magoon officially became Cuban governor . Magoon declined to have an official inauguration ceremony , and , instead , news of the appointment was announced to the Cuban public via the newspapers . In his written appointment address to the country , Magoon indicated that he would " perform the duties provided for by the ... constitution of Cuba for the preservation of Cuban independence " . He was there , in short , to restore order and not to colonize . 
 During Magoon 's time as governor , the remaining revolutionaries were defeated , and his attention was turned inward to infrastructure . He coordinated the construction of two hundred kilometers of highway . He called for the reorganization of the Cuban military into a formal army , rather than a Mexican @-@ style " rural guard " . More controversially , he called for the removal of the sunken USS Maine , the ship whose destruction led to the Spanish – American War , because it was interfering with traffic in Havana 's harbor . In his yearly report to the secretary of war , Magoon reported that many Cubans held the popular belief that neither the United States nor the US @-@ backed Cuban government had explored the wreckage because evidence might be found to suggest that the ship was not sunk by a torpedo , as was the official report — something that would cast doubt on the justification for the United States ' war against Spain . The removal of the ship did not take place while Magoon was in office ; it was authorized by Congress in 1910 . 
 While he was well regarded in the United States , Magoon was not popular among Cubans . He reaped a vast number of lurid accusations at the hands of Cuban writers who described him as a " man of wax " , who was " gross in character , rude in manners , of a profound ambition and greedy for <unk> " . The Cuban scholar Carlos Manuel <unk> later wrote that Magoon " profoundly corrupted the Cuban nation , and on account of his venality was looked upon with contempt . " Other Cuban historians point to the fiscal wastefulness of Magoon 's tenure , which " left a bad memory and a bad example to the country " and returned Cuba to the corrupt practices of colonial times . 
 On January 29 , 1909 , the sovereign government of Cuba was restored , and José Miguel Gómez became president . No explicit evidence of Magoon 's corruption ever surfaced , but his parting gesture of issuing lucrative Cuban contracts to U.S. firms was a continued point of contention . Several months later , Magoon received an official commendation from President Taft for his excellent service in Cuba . 
 Following his service in Cuba , Magoon retired from public service and vacationed for a year in Europe before returning to the United States . Speculation at the time pointed to him taking a position as ambassador to China , a special commission on stability in Central America , or a Cabinet position . Ultimately Magoon did not take up any of those new responsibilities and formally entered retirement . He died in Washington , D.C. , in 1920 after complications from surgery for acute appendicitis . 
 = = Works = = 
 Magoon , Charles Edward ( 1902 ) . Reports on The Law of Civil Government in Territory Subject to Military Occupation by the Military Forces of the United States , etc . Washington , D.C. : U.S. Government Printing Office . OCLC <unk> . ( Also known as The Law of Civil Government under Military Occupation . ) 
 = Jocelin of Wells = 
 Jocelin of Wells , also known as <unk> <unk> or Jocelin <unk> , ( died 19 November 1242 ) was a medieval Bishop of Bath ( and Glastonbury ) . He was the brother of Hugh de Wells , who became Bishop of Lincoln . Jocelin became a canon of Wells Cathedral before 1200 , and was elected bishop in 1206 . During King John of England 's dispute with Pope Innocent III , Jocelin at first remained with the king , but after the excommunication of John in late 1209 , Jocelin went into exile . He returned to England in 1213 , and was mentioned in Magna Carta in 1215 . 
 Jocelin was one of the bishops that crowned John 's son Henry III , and throughout the rest of Jocelin 's life was involved in royal administration . He was also active in his diocese , ordering construction on the cathedral at Wells , and issuing rules for his diocesan clergy . During his time as bishop , he settled a dispute between his diocese and Glastonbury Abbey that had started during the bishopric of his predecessor . The memorial brass on his tomb in Wells Cathedral is probably one of the earliest in England . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jocelin born in Wells in Somerset , and was the son of Edward of Wells , a small landowner in the city of Wells . His brother Hugh de Wells , was archdeacon of Wells and Bishop of Lincoln . Some historians say that another relative , although the exact relationship is unknown , was Simon of Wells , who became Bishop of Chichester in 1207 , but other historians dispute this . The name Jocelin Trotman or <unk> , by which he was occasionally known by some modern historians , only dates from the Margam Annals , and is not contemporary with his life . 
 Jocelin was a royal justiciar in 1203 , as well as the custodian of the vacant diocese of Lincoln . He was a royal clerk as well as a canon of Wells , becoming a canon and a deacon by 1200 . The previous bishop of Wells died in 1205 , and on 3 February 1206 , Jocelin was elected bishop . He was consecrated on 28 May 1206 , at Reading by Bishop William of Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Eglise of London . It is unclear if the cathedral chapters of Bath and of Wells took the action on their own , or if King John was the driving force behind the election . 
 = = Advisor to King John = = 
 Jocelin was one of the main advisors of King John during the dispute with the pope over Stephen Langton 's appointment to the Archbishopric of Canterbury . Jocelin did not immediately leave England after Pope Innocent III placed an interdict on England . Jocelin encouraged John to settle with Innocent in early 1209 , worried that Innocent would expand the interdict into an excommunication , forcing John 's advisors to choose between serving the king or obeying the pope . Nothing came of the negotiations , however . Jocelin did leave England when John was excommunicated in late 1209 . Jocelin , along with Gilbert Glanvill , the Bishop of Rochester , was the subject of a mocking song on his conduct during the interdict . 
 Jocelin and Hugh were in exile together in Bordeaux in 1212 , but they both returned to England in May 1213 , along with the other English bishops . Jocelin was one of the bishops in August 1214 who refused to pay a scutage to the king . In 1215 , Jocelin sided with Stephen Langton and the barons , and Magna Charta lists Jocelin as one of the king 's councillors . 
 = = Henry III 's reign = = 
 Jocelin and Peter des Roches , the Bishop of Winchester , anointed and crowned King Henry III , the young son of John , after John 's death . Later , Jocelin was present at the battle with Eustace the Monk in 1217 , which helped to secure Henry 's rule . Jocelin supported Hubert de Burgh 's work of ejecting French forces from England and regaining control of royal castles seized by Falkes de Breauté and other barons . In 1218 , Jocelin was one of the itinerant justiciars for southwestern England . 
 In 1218 and 1219 , Jocelin also ended the dispute between his diocese and Glastonbury Abbey . Jocelin gave up any claim to control of the abbey , and the abbey gave the bishopric a number of estates . Previously , the bishops , as part of their attempt to annexe Glastonbury to their bishopric , had been known as the Bishop of Bath and Glastonbury . They also had held the office of abbot . In 1218 , as part of the settlement , a new abbot was elected at Glastonbury . The papacy had never acknowledged Jocelin 's claiming of the title of abbot . The historian J. A. Robinson felt that as part of the settlement , Jocelin began to use the title Bishop of Bath and Wells , but another historian , David Knowles , disagreed . 
 After 1223 , Jocelin was a baron of the exchequer . In 1225 he served the king as head of one of the receivers of the tax of a fifteenth . After the dismissal of Walter <unk> as treasurer , at first Jocelin , along with Richard Poore , the Bishop of Durham , took over many of the treasurers functions , but this did not last long , and after 1233 , Jocelin no longer was involved with financial affairs . He occasionally witnessed charters , however . After the fall of Peter des Roches in April 1234 , Jocelin was given control of the Wardrobe . After this , he appears less regularly in royal government , but he did witness the reconfirmation of Magna Carta in 1237 . 
 = = Diocesan affairs = = 
 With his brother Hugh , Jocelin founded St. John 's Hospital at Wells . Jocelin promulgated a set of constitutions for the diocese , ordered that his diocesan clergy reside in their benefices , and gave land and income to the cathedral school . Glastonbury Abbey complained of Jocelin that he plundered lands of the abbey . Jocelin was also involved in mediating between William de Blois , the Bishop of Worcester , and Tewkesbury Abbey over William 's rights over the abbey . Jocelin finally settled the dispute in 1232 . 
 Jocelin funded the building of Wells Cathedral , begun at the east end in the Early English Gothic style under Reginald Fitz Jocelin . The nave was completed , the west front begun . The new cathedral was consecrated on 23 October 1239 by Jocelin . Other construction work undertaken by Jocelin included the cloisters and bishop 's palace at Wells , and a manor house at Wookey . 
 = = Death = = 
 Jocelin died on 19 November 1242 at Wells and was buried in the choir of Wells Cathedral . He may have been the father of Nicholas of Wells . The memorial brass on his tomb is allegedly one of the earliest brasses in England . He employed the medieval architect Elias of Dereham as a household official . 
 = Go to the Future = 
 Go to the Future ( Japanese pronunciation : [ go : <unk> : <unk> : <unk> ] ) is the debut studio album by Japanese band Sakanaction . It was released on May 9 , 2007 through Victor Entertainment sub @-@ label BabeStar . Recorded and produced in the band 's native Hokkaido in a month , the album compiled the band 's early songs , including compositions from the band 's vocalist Ichiro Yamaguchi 's high @-@ school band Dutchman . The album mixed electronic and rock music conventions , and featured live instruments as a way to conceptually separate the album from pure dance music . 
 Though not commercially successful nationally , the album was well received in Hokkaido . The leading song of the album , " Mikazuki Sunset " , received strong airplay by radio stations such as FM North Wave and FM Hokkaido . Critics praised the album , noting Yamaguchi 's distinct vocals and the band 's varied electronic and rock sound . 
 In 2009 , the album was made available globally as a digital download , alongside the band 's second and third albums Night Fishing ( 2008 ) and Shin @-@ shiro ( 2009 ) . In 2015 , the album was reissued on CD , LP record and lossless digital formats . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 Sakanaction was first formed in August 2005 in Sapporo , Hokkaido . It was originally a two @-@ member unit , consisting of vocalist Ichiro Yamaguchi and guitarist Motoharu Iwadera . Yamaguchi first worked together with Iwadera in the band Dutchman , that formed at their high school in 1998 and performed British rock @-@ inspired music . In 2004 , the band broke up , and Yamaguchi took the name for his solo project , where he created techno and club music . Yamaguchi had the idea that it would be interesting to mix electronic music with Japanese @-@ style " folky melodies " , so formed Sakanaction with Iwadera . 
 Bassist Ami Kusakari first joined the band as a support member in December 2005 . She was originally in a separate band that often performed at the same events as Dutchman . When her band broke up , Yamaguchi took advantage of this and asked her to join . In the summer of 2006 , keyboardist Emi Okazaki and drummer Keiichi Ejima joined the band to form the group 's current five @-@ member line @-@ up . Ejima was introduced to Yamaguchi through a friend , and Okazaki was originally a co @-@ worker of Yamaguchi 's . Before the band 's debut , they mostly performed at live houses around Sapporo . In August , the band made their first festival appearance at the Rising Sun Rock Festival in Yamaguchi 's home town of Otaru . During this period , Sakanaction sent demos of their songs " Mikazuki Sunset " and later " Shiranami Top Water " to College Radio Japan Sapporo . Both songs were well received by listeners , managing to be in the top five weekly songs for the radio program , and " Shiranami Top Water " charted in the top 100 songs on FM North Wave 's Sapporo Hot 100 chart in September . 
 While a member of Dutchman , Yamaguchi had been scouted and trained by Victor Entertainment . After they had managed to go through the audition process to perform at the Rising Sun Rock Festival , Yamaguchi sent his material with Sakanaction to his contact at Victor , which led to the band 's debut through BabeStar . Originally the group featured three official members , after drummer Ejima had been added , but for the group 's major label debut they officially promoted support members Kusakari and Okazaki . The band was unveiled as being on BabeStar 's line @-@ up in February 2007 . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 The album was recorded at two locations in Sapporo , Studio Jack at the Yamaha Center in Chūō @-@ ku , and at <unk> Studio in the Sapporo Lifelong Learning Center in Nishi @-@ ku . After it was commissioned , the album took only a month to produce , as Sakanaction mostly reworked demos they had already produced to create an album . Only the song " Yoru no <unk> " was written specifically for the album . Two of the songs had been released by Yamaguchi 's first band Dutchman , " Inner World " in 2002 and " Mikazuki Sunset " in 2003 . As a soloist , Yamaguchi released a remix of the song " Shiranami Top Water " on the compilation album Music for <unk> in 2004 . Retrospectively , Yamaguchi said that Go to the Future felt like a business card for Sakanaction , due to the album being a compilation of already created songs . 
 The album was recorded and produced entirely in Hokkaido , including the album 's cover artwork and music videos . When writing the songs , Yamaguchi thought up imagery for each song , and asked the other band members to picture this while creating and performing the songs . Yamaguchi created the album 's music and melody while thinking about how they would be received by other people , but wrote the lyrics entirely introspectively . " Mikazuki Sunset " and " Shiranami Top Water " were the first songs produced by the band , and were the band 's first attempts at making club @-@ style music . Due to their success on college radio , Yamaguchi felt like this was proof that the mix of dance music with Japanese melodies was a good direction , and continued to make music in this style . Yamaguchi was inspired by the differences in house and techno music styles when writing the album . Yamaguchi was mindful about how to reach a wide audience , and considered that live instruments were important to stress how the album was rock music , as pure dance music was based on electronic and sampled instruments . One convention the band kept for the album was to record everything at <unk> , to make it easier for the band 's drummer , who had not experienced performing dance music before . 
 Yamaguchi considered folky melodies on top of techno and house music the core of Sakanaction 's sound on Go to the Future . In a retrospective interview conducted with Rockin ' On Japan in 2011 , Yamaguchi felt that his need to construct his own personal musical vision was too strong , and felt like the other members of Sakanaction had too little say in the album 's content . " <unk> " was the first song that Sakanaction worked on together as a five @-@ piece band , and was created to be a playful song mixing American and French styles . " Go to the Future " was originally an acoustic song , that grew into a triple metre song when the band developed their electronic sound . The song as the band originally envisioned it was re @-@ recorded for their 2015 compilation album <unk> Tsuki wa Atarashii Tsuki : Coupling & Remix Works . Footage on the visual media disc of the album shows Yamaguchi and Iwadera returning to the studio where they had originally performed the song in Sapporo , to recreate the song . The published version of the song " <unk> " found on the album used the ad @-@ libbed lyrics <unk> had created while composing the guitar chords of the song . 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 The album was primarily promoted by the song " Mikazuki Sunset " . The song was used on several television programs as opening or closing credit music , including MM @-@ TV on Mainichi Broadcasting System , Music @-@ 03 on Chiba Television Broadcasting and <unk> 18 on Hokkaido Television Broadcasting . Both " Mikazuki Sunset " and " Shiranami Top Water " received music videos . " Mikazuki Sunset " ' s video was directed by Yoshihiro Mori , and " Shiranami Top Water " ' s by Hokkaido artist Hiroshi Kondo . A special website was created to promote Go to the Future , which opened on April 26 . It featured the music videos of the two promotional songs on the album , as well as song commentary by Yamaguchi . 
 Live performances of " Mikazuki Sunset " and " Inner World " were broadcast on <unk> 18 on May 16 , featuring footage of the band 's performance at the Sapporo <unk> Hall on April 28 . Sakanaction performed a short tour of Japan to promote the album 's release , performing concerts in Tokyo , Osaka and Nagoya from May 11 to May 13 , and held a solo @-@ billed live at Bessie Hall in Sapporo on May 27 . The band were featured in many major magazine publications in Japan to promote the album , including Pia , CD Data , What 's In ? , <unk> ! and Rockin ' On Japan . 
 In 2015 the album was reissued , initially on vinyl record and a CD re @-@ release in March , followed by a lossless digital release . Originally the band had planned on releasing a new studio album around March 2015 , however could not do so due to bassist Kusakari 's pregnancy . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 CDJournal online reviewers gave the album their star of recommendation , praised the variety of sounds and tempos on the album , as well as the " peculiar musical world " created by Yamaguchi 's " dry " vocals layered on top of a " floating @-@ feeling " techno and " funky " sound . They further noted Sakanaction 's intense usage of surround sound during the album . Reviewer Yuji Tayama praised the album for its multi @-@ faceted nature , and focused his praise on Emi Okazaki 's keyboard work , the band 's " funky rhythms " and vocalist Ichiro Yamaguchi 's " nostalgic , youthful vocals " . He felt the album had a " dazzling " and " refined " pop sense echoed in their " clear ' vocal post @-@ rock ' sound " , and described the album as being " at times colorful like the pattern of a tropical fish , and at times gloomy like the mood of a deep sea fish " . Mayumi Tsuchida of Bounce felt the album 's strength was the harmony between the " [ rock ] band sound smeared with techno and electronica " and Yamaguchi 's sorrowful , literary lyrics . She singled out " Shiranami Top Water " as the best example of this , feeling that its " bouncy synths and elegant guitar " worked together to " paint a spiral " and soared together , to create " breathtaking beauty " . Retrospectively , Entertainment Media Kulture felt that the album showed Sakanaction still in the process of finding their sound , with many aspects feeling avant @-@ garde . 
 = = = Commercial reception = = = 
 In its debut week , Go to the Future was the number 105 most sold album in Japan , according to the Japanese music chart Oricon , selling 1 @,@ 500 copies . It continued to chart in the top 300 for an additional four weeks , selling an additional 3 @,@ 000 copies . During the release of the band 's single " Aruku Around " in January 2010 , the album re @-@ charted for a single week , bringing the total tracked number of copies sold to 5 @,@ 000 . In 2015 , the album 's reissued version debuted at number 55 , selling 1 @,@ 500 copies in its first week , and bringing the total copies of the album sold to 7 @,@ 000 . Tracking the regional sales of Japanese Tower Records stores , CDJournal noted a significant number of copies sold in Sapporo . In its first week , Go to the Future was the second most sold album , only behind Mr. Children 's B @-@ Side ; selling 200 copies at Sapporo 's Tower Records and HMV stores . CDJournal noted the album had a mid @-@ level success in two Tokyo locations , notably at the Tower Records Shibuya where it sold 100 copies in the first ten days . However , CDJournal did not note any significant sales in the other regional centers of Nagoya , Osaka and Fukuoka . 
 In May , " Mikazuki Sunset " reached number two on FM North Wave 's airplay and sales chart , the Sapporo Hot 100 , while the song " Shiranami Top Water " also received minor radio airplay during this time . Radio data compiler <unk> tracked the song as being the second most played song in Hokkaido in early May . " Mikazuki Sunset " eventually became the 66th most successful song of 2007 on the Sapporo Hot 100 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Ichiro Yamaguchi . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel details were sourced from Go to the Future 's liner notes booklet . 
 Sakanaction 
 Personnel and imagery 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Alexander of Greece = 
 Alexander ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> ; 1 August 1893 – 25 October 1920 ) was King of Greece from 11 June 1917 until his death from the effects of a monkey bite at the age of 27 . 
 The second son of King Constantine I , Alexander was born in the summer palace of Tatoi , on the outskirts of Athens . He succeeded his father in 1917 , during World War I , after the Entente Powers and the followers of Eleftherios Venizelos pushed Constantine I , and his eldest son Crown Prince George , into exile . Having no real political experience , the new king was stripped of his powers by the Venizelists and effectively imprisoned in his own palace . Venizelos , as prime minister , was the effective ruler with the support of the Entente . Though reduced to the status of a puppet king , Alexander supported Greek troops during their war against the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria . Under his reign , the territorial extent of Greece considerably increased , following the victory of the Entente and their Allies in the First World War and the early stages of the Greco @-@ Turkish War of 1919 – 22 . 
 Alexander controversially married the commoner Aspasia Manos in 1919 , provoking a major scandal that forced the couple to leave Greece for several months . Soon after returning to Greece with his wife , Alexander was bitten by a domestic Barbary macaque and died of septicemia . The sudden death of the sovereign led to questions over the monarchy 's survival and contributed to the fall of the Venizelist regime . After a general election and a referendum , Constantine I was restored . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alexander was born at Tatoi Palace on 1 August 1893 ( 20 July in the Julian calendar ) , the second son of Crown Prince Constantine of Greece and his wife Princess Sophia of Prussia . He was related to royalty throughout Europe . His father was the eldest son and heir apparent of King George I of Greece by his wife Grand Duchess Olga Constantinovna of Russia ; his mother was the daughter of Emperor Frederick III of Germany and his wife Victoria , Princess Royal of the United Kingdom . Constantine was a grandson of King Christian IX of Denmark and a cousin of both King George V of the United Kingdom and Emperor Nicholas II of Russia . Sophia was the sister of Emperor Wilhelm II of Germany , and was also a cousin of King George V through her grandmother , Queen Victoria . 
 Alexander 's early life alternated between the Royal Palace in Athens , and Tatoi Palace in the city 's suburbs . With his parents he undertook several trips abroad and regularly visited Schloss Friedrichshof , the home of his maternal grandmother , who had a particular affection for her Greek grandson . 
 Though he was very close to his younger sister , Princess Helen , Alexander was less warm towards his elder brother George , with whom he had little in common . While his elder brother was a serious and thoughtful child , Alexander was mischievous and extroverted ; he smoked cigarettes made from blotting paper , set fire to the games room in the palace , and recklessly lost control of a toy cart in which he and his younger brother Paul were rolling down a hill , tipping his toddler brother a distance of six feet into brambles . 
 = = Military career = = 
 As his father 's second son , Alexander was third in line to the throne , after his father and elder brother , George . His education was expensive and carefully planned , but while George spent part of his military training in Germany , Alexander was educated in Greece . He joined the prestigious Hellenic Military Academy , where several of his uncles had previously studied and where he made himself known more for his mechanical skills than for his intellectual capacity . He was passionate about cars and motors , and was one of the first Greeks to acquire an automobile . 
 He distinguished himself in combat during the Balkan Wars of 1912 – 13 . As a young officer , he was stationed , along with his elder brother , in the field staff of his father ; and he accompanied the latter at the head of the Army of Thessaly during the capture of Thessaloniki in 1912 . King George I was assassinated in Thessaloniki soon afterwards , and Alexander 's father ascended the throne as Constantine I. 
 = = = Courtship of Aspasia Manos = = = 
 In 1915 , at a party held in Athens by court marshal Theodore Ypsilantis , Alexander became re @-@ acquainted with one of his childhood friends , Aspasia Manos . She had just returned from education in France and Switzerland , and was reckoned as very beautiful by her acquaintances . She was the daughter of Constantine 's Master of the Horse , Colonel Petros Manos , and his wife Maria Argyropoulos . The 21 @-@ year @-@ old Alexander was smitten , and was so determined to seduce her that he followed her to the island of Spetses where she holidayed that year . Initially , Aspasia was resistant to his charm ; although considered very handsome by his contemporaries , Alexander had a reputation as a ladies ' man from numerous past liaisons . Despite this , he finally won her over , and the couple were engaged in secret . However , for King Constantine I , Queen Sophia and much of European society of the time , it was inconceivable for a royal prince to marry someone of a different social rank . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During World War I , Constantine I followed a formal policy of neutrality , yet he was openly benevolent towards Germany , which was fighting alongside Austria @-@ Hungary , Bulgaria and the Ottoman Empire against the Triple Entente of Russia , France and Britain . Constantine was the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Kaiser Wilhelm II , and had also become something of a Germanophile following his military training in Prussia . His pro @-@ German attitude provoked a split between the monarch and the prime minister , Eleftherios Venizelos , who wanted to support the Entente in the hope of expanding Greek territory to incorporate the Greek minorities in the Ottoman Empire and the Balkans . Protected by the countries of the Entente , particularly France , in 1916 Venizelos formed a parallel government to that of the king . 
 Parts of Greece were occupied by the Allied Entente forces , but Constantine I refused to modify his policy and faced increasingly open opposition from the Entente and the Venizelists . In July 1916 , an arson attack ravaged Tatoi Palace and the royal family barely escaped the flames ; Alexander was not injured but his mother narrowly saved Princess Katherine by carrying her through the woods for more than two kilometers . Among the palace personnel and firefighters who arrived to deal with the blaze , sixteen people were killed . 
 Finally on 10 June 1917 , Charles <unk> , the Entente 's High Commissioner in Greece , ordered King Constantine to give up his power . On the threat of Entente forces landing in Piraeus , the king conceded and agreed to go into self @-@ exile , though without officially abdicating his crown . The Allies , while determined to be rid of Constantine , did not wish to create a Greek republic , and sought to replace the king with another member of the royal family . Crown Prince George , who was the natural heir , was ruled out by the Allies because they thought him too pro @-@ German , like his father . Instead , they considered installing Constantine 's brother ( and Alexander 's uncle ) , Prince George , but he had tired of public life during his difficult tenure as High Commissioner of Crete between 1901 and 1905 ; above all , he sought to remain loyal to his brother , and categorically refused to take the throne . So , Constantine 's second son , Prince Alexander , was chosen to become the new monarch . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Accession = = = 
 The dismissal of Constantine was not unanimously supported by the Entente powers ; while France and Britain did nothing to stop <unk> 's actions , the Russian provisional government officially protested to Paris . Petrograd demanded that Alexander should not receive the title of king but only that of regent so as to preserve the rights of the deposed sovereign and the Crown Prince . Russia 's protests were brushed aside and Alexander ascended the Greek throne . 
 Alexander swore the oath of loyalty to the Greek constitution on the afternoon of 11 June 1917 in the ballroom of the Royal Palace . Apart from the Archbishop of Athens , <unk> I , who administered the oath , only King Constantine I , Crown Prince George and the king 's prime minister , Alexandros <unk> , attended . There were no festivities . The 23 @-@ year @-@ old Alexander had a broken voice and tears in his eyes as he made the solemn declaration . He knew that the Entente and the Venizelists would hold real power and that neither his father nor his brother had renounced their claims to the throne . Constantine had informed his son that he should consider himself a regent , rather than a true monarch . 
 In the evening , after the ceremony , the royal family decided to leave their palace in Athens for Tatoi , but city residents opposed the exile of their sovereign and crowds formed outside the palace to prevent Constantine and his family from leaving . On 12 June , the former king and his family escaped undetected from their residence by feigning departure from one gate while exiting through another . At Tatoi , Constantine again impressed upon Alexander that he held the crown in trust only . It was the last time that Alexander would be in direct contact with his family . The next day , Constantine , Sophia and all of their children except Alexander arrived at the small port of <unk> and set off into exile . 
 = = = Puppet king = = = 
 With his parents and siblings in exile , Alexander found himself isolated . The royals remained unpopular with the Venizelists , and Entente representatives advised the king 's aunts and uncles , particularly Prince Nicholas , to leave . Eventually , they all followed Constantine into exile . Royal household staff were gradually replaced by enemies of the former king , and Alexander 's allies were either imprisoned or distanced from him . Portraits of the royal family were removed from public buildings , and Alexander 's new ministers openly called him the " son of a traitor " . 
 On 26 June 1917 , the king was forced to name Eleftherios Venizelos as head of the government . Despite promises given by the Entente on Constantine 's departure , the previous prime minister , <unk> , was effectively forced to resign as Venizelos returned to Athens . Alexander immediately opposed his new prime minister 's views and , annoyed by the king 's rebuffs , Venizelos threatened to remove him and set up a regency council in the name of Alexander 's brother Prince Paul , then still a minor . The Entente powers intervened and asked Venizelos to back down , allowing Alexander to retain the crown . <unk> on day and night by the prime minister 's supporters , the monarch quickly became a prisoner in his own palace , and his orders went ignored . 
 Alexander had no experience in affairs of state . However , he was determined to make the best of a difficult situation and represent his father as best he could . Effecting an air of cool indifference to the government , he rarely made the effort to read official documents before he rubber stamped them . His functions were limited , and amounted to visiting the Macedonian front to support the morale of the Greek and Allied troops . Since Venizelos 's return to power , Athens was at war with the Central Powers , and Greek soldiers battled those of Bulgaria in the north . 
 = = = Greek expansion = = = 
 By the end of World War I , Greece had grown beyond its 1914 borders , and the treaties of Neuilly ( 1919 ) and Sèvres ( 1920 ) confirmed the Greek territorial conquests . The majority of Thrace ( previously split between Bulgaria and Turkey ) and several Aegean Islands ( such as Imbros and Tenedos ) became part of Greece , and the region of Smyrna , in Ionia , was placed under Greek mandate . Alexander 's kingdom increased in size by around a third . In Paris , Venizelos took part in the peace negotiations with the Ottoman Empire and Bulgaria . Upon his return to Greece in August 1920 , Venizelos received a laurel crown from the king for his work in support of <unk> . 
 Despite their territorial gains following the Paris Peace Conference , the Greeks still hoped to achieve the <unk> Idea and annex Constantinople and larger areas of Ottoman Asia Minor ; they invaded Anatolia beyond Smyrna and sought to take Ankara , with the aim of destroying the Turkish resistance led by Mustafa Kemal ( later known as Atatürk ) . Thus began the Greco @-@ Turkish War ( 1919 – 22 ) . Although Alexander 's reign saw success after success for the Greek armies , it was eventually Atatürk 's revolutionary forces that obtained victory in 1922 . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 On 12 June 1917 , the day after his accession , Alexander revealed his liaison with Aspasia Manos to his father and asked for his permission to marry her . Constantine was reluctant to let his son marry a non @-@ royal , and demanded that Alexander wait until the end of the war before considering the engagement , to which Alexander agreed . In the intervening months , Alexander increasingly resented his separation from his family . His regular letters to his parents were intercepted by the government and confiscated . Alexander 's only source of comfort was Aspasia , and he took the decision to marry her despite his father 's request . 
 The ruling dynasty of Greece was of German @-@ Danish origin and Constantine and Sophia were seen as far too German by the Venizelists , but even though the marriage of the king to a Greek presented an opportunity to <unk> the royal family , and counter criticisms that it was a foreign institution , both Venizelists and <unk> opposed the match . The Venizelists feared it would give Alexander a means to communicate with his exiled family through Colonel Manos and both sides of the political divide were unhappy at the king marrying a commoner . Although Venizelos was a friend of Petros Manos , the prime minister warned the king that marrying her would be unpopular in the eyes of the people . 
 When Prince Arthur , Duke of Connaught and Strathearn , visited Athens in March 1918 , to confer the Order of the Bath upon the king , Alexander feared that a marriage between him and Princess Mary of the United Kingdom would be discussed as part of an attempt to consolidate the relationship between Greece and Britain . To Alexander 's relief , Arthur asked to meet Aspasia , and declared that , if he were younger , he would have sought to marry her himself . For the foreign powers , and particularly the British ambassador , the marriage was seen as positive . The British authorities feared that Alexander would abdicate in order to marry Aspasia if the wedding was blocked , and they wanted to avoid Greece becoming a republic in case it led to instability or an increase in French influence at their expense . 
 Alexander 's parents were not so happy about the match . Sophia disapproved of her son marrying a commoner , while Constantine wanted a delay but was prepared to be his son 's best man if Alexander would be patient . Alexander visited Paris at the end of 1918 , raising hopes among his family that they would be able to contact him once he was outside Greece . When Queen Sophia attempted to telephone her son in his Parisian hotel , a minister intercepted the call and informed her that " His Majesty is sorry , but he cannot respond to the telephone " . He was not even informed that she had called . 
 = = = Public scandal = = = 
 With the help of Aspasia 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Christo <unk> , and after three unsuccessful attempts , the couple eventually married in secret before a royal chaplain , Archimandrite <unk> , on the evening of 17 November 1919 . After the ceremony , the archimandrite was sworn to silence but soon broke his promise by confessing to the Archbishop of Athens , <unk> <unk> . According to the Greek constitution , members of the royal family had to obtain permission to marry from both the sovereign and the head of the Greek Orthodox Church . By marrying Aspasia without the permission of the Archbishop , Alexander was to cause a major scandal . 
 Despite his disapproval of the union , Venizelos allowed Aspasia and her mother to move into the Royal Palace on condition that the marriage remain secret . The information leaked , however , and to escape public opprobrium Aspasia was forced to leave Greece . She fled to Rome , and then to Paris , where Alexander was allowed to join her , six months later , on condition that they did not attend official functions together . On their Parisian honeymoon , while motoring near Fontainebleau , the couple witnessed a serious car crash in which Count <unk> 's chauffeur lost control of his master 's vehicle . Alexander avoided the count 's car , which swerved and hit a tree . The king drove the injured to hospital in his own car , while Aspasia , who had trained as a nurse during World War I , rendered first aid . The count was seriously injured and died shortly afterward , after having both legs amputated . 
 The government allowed the couple to return to Greece in mid @-@ 1920 . Although their marriage was legalized , Aspasia was not recognized as queen , but was instead known as " Madame Manos " . At first , she stayed at her sister 's house in the Greek capital before transferring to Tatoi , and it was during this period that she became pregnant with Alexander 's child . 
 Alexander visited the newly acquired territories of West Thrace , and on 8 July 1920 the new name for the region 's main town — Alexandroupoli ( meaning " city of Alexander " in Greek ) — was announced in the king 's presence . The city 's previous name of Dedeagatch was considered too Turkish . On 7 September , Venizelos , counting on a surge of support in the wake of the signing of the Treaty of Sèvres and the expansion of Greek territory , announced a general election for early November . 
 = = Death = = 
 On 2 October 1920 , Alexander was injured while walking through the grounds of the Tatoi estate . A domestic Barbary macaque belonging to the steward of the palace 's grapevines attacked or was attacked by the king 's German Shepherd Dog , Fritz , and Alexander attempted to separate the two animals . As he did so , another monkey attacked Alexander and bit him deeply on the leg and torso . Eventually servants arrived and chased away the monkeys ( which were later destroyed ) , and the king 's wounds were promptly cleaned and dressed but not cauterized . He did not consider the incident serious and asked that it not be publicized . 
 That evening , his wounds became infected ; he suffered a strong fever and septicemia set in . His doctors considered amputating his leg , but none wished to take responsibility for so drastic an act . On 19 October , he became delirious and called out for his mother , but the Greek government refused to allow her to re @-@ enter the country from exile in Switzerland , despite her own protestations . Finally , the queen dowager , Olga , widow of George I of Greece and Alexander 's grandmother , was allowed to return alone to Athens to tend to the king . She was delayed by rough waters , however , and by the time she arrived , Alexander had already died of sepsis twelve hours previously at a little after 4 p.m. on 25 October 1920 . The other members of the royal family received the news by telegram that night . 
 Two days later , Alexander 's body was conveyed to Athens Cathedral where it lay in state , until his funeral on 29 October . Once again , the Greek royals were refused permission to return to Greece , and Queen Olga was the only member of the royal family who attended . Foreign powers were represented by the Prince Regent of Serbia with his sister Princess Helen wife of John Constantinovich of Russia , the Crown Prince of Sweden with his uncle Prince Eugene , Duke of <unk> , and Rear @-@ Admirals Sir George Hope of Britain and <unk> of France , as well as members of the Athens diplomatic corps . 
 After the cathedral service , Alexander 's body was interred on the grounds of the royal estate at Tatoi . The Greek royal family never regarded Alexander 's reign as fully legitimate . In the royal cemetery , while other monarchs are given the inscription " King of the Hellenes , Prince of Denmark " , Alexander 's reads " Alexander , son of the King of the Hellenes , Prince of Denmark . He ruled in the place of his father from 14 June 1917 to 25 October 1920 . " According to Alexander 's favorite sister , Queen Helen of Romania , this feeling of illegitimacy was also shared by Alexander himself ; a sentiment that helps explain his <unk> with Aspasia Manos . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Alexander 's death raised questions about the succession to the throne as well as the nature of the Greek regime . As the king had contracted an unequal marriage his descendants were not in the line of succession . The Hellenic Parliament demanded that Constantine I and Crown Prince George be excluded from the succession but sought to preserve the monarchy by selecting another member of the royal house as the new sovereign . On 29 October 1920 , the Greek minister in Berne , acting under the direction of the Greek authorities , offered the throne to Alexander 's younger brother , Prince Paul . Paul , however , refused to become king while his father and elder brother were alive , insisting that neither of them had renounced their rights to the throne and that he therefore could never legitimately wear the crown . 
 The throne remained vacant and the legislative elections of 1920 turned into an open conflict between the Venizelists , who favored republicanism , and the supporters of the ex @-@ King Constantine . On 14 November 1920 , with the war with Turkey dragging on , the monarchists won , and Dimitrios Rallis became prime minister ; Venizelos ( who lost his own parliamentary seat ) chose to leave Greece in self @-@ exile . Rallis asked Queen Olga to become regent until Constantine 's return . 
 Under the restored King Constantine I , whose return was endorsed overwhelmingly in a referendum , Greece went on to lose the Greco @-@ Turkish War with heavy military and civilian casualties . The territory gained on the Turkish mainland during Alexander 's reign was lost . Historians postulate that Alexander 's death in the midst of an election campaign helped destabilize the Venizelos regime and the resultant loss of Allied support contributed to the failure of Greece 's territorial ambitions . Winston Churchill wrote , " it is perhaps no exaggeration to remark that a quarter of a million persons died of this monkey 's bite . " 
 = = = Issue = = = 
 Alexander 's daughter by Aspasia Manos , Alexandra ( 1921 – 1993 ) , was born five months after his death . Initially , the government took the line that since Alexander had married Aspasia without the permission of his father or the church , his marriage was illegal and his posthumous daughter was illegitimate . However , in July 1922 , Parliament passed a law which allowed the King to retroactively recognize royal marriages on a non @-@ dynastic basis . That September , Constantine — at Sophia 's insistence — recognized his son 's marriage to Aspasia and granted her the style of " Princess Alexander " . Her daughter was legitimized as a princess of Greece and Denmark , and later married King Peter II of Yugoslavia in London in 1944 . They had one child : Alexander , Crown Prince of Yugoslavia . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = The Boat Race 2000 = 
 The 146th Boat Race took place on 25 March 2000 . Oxford won the race by three lengths , breaking a seven @-@ year spell of Cambridge dominance . The result was a " shock triumph " . The race also featured the joint @-@ tallest ever competitor , and the youngest ever winner in the " modern " race . In the reserve race , Isis beat Goldie by five lengths , and Oxford triumphed in the women 's race , emerging with victory in the men 's and women 's races for the year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is an annual competition between the universities of Oxford and Cambridge . First held in 1829 , the competition is a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) race along the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1999 race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . Cambridge had won the last seven races ( between 1993 and 1999 ) ; and led overall with 76 victories to Oxford 's 68 ( excluding the " dead heat to Oxford by five feet " of 1877 ) . The race was sponsored by Aberdeen Asset Management . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) had a heavier average weight of 13 stone 10 pounds ( 87 kg ) per crew member , making them almost 11 pounds ( 5 @.@ 0 kg ) heavier per man ; and were considered the underdogs before the race . The Cambridge crew ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) had a taller crew , and had the joint @-@ tallest ever competitor , the 6 feet 10 inches ( 2 @.@ 08 m ) Joshua West . The Oxford crew had an average age of 21 while Cambridge 's crew averaged 23 . The Oxford crew featured six Britons , two Americans , and a Norwegian ; whilst the Cambridge crew consisted of six Britons , an American , a New Zealander , and a South African . 
 The crews for the race were as follows : 
 = = Race description = = 
 Cambridge won the coin toss and chose to start from the southern side , the Surrey side , of the River Thames , based on the opinion that taking a lead early in the race would give them an advantage . However , the theory failed as Oxford stayed with Cambridge , and though Cambridge had a large push which gave them a slender lead after two minutes , Oxford were leading at the First Mile post , passing in 3 minutes 41 seconds , Cambridge a second behind . 
 The race was close , and " the lead switched back and forth between the two teams " . Cambridge pressed and rewon their lead , and were a quarter of a length ahead after a favourable bend . Though level at Chiswick Steps , Oxford pushed ahead , gaining a five @-@ second lead by Barnes Bridge , and eight at the finish . 
 Oxford finished with a time of 18 minutes , 4 seconds , Cambridge finished 8 seconds behind . It was Oxford 's first victory in seven years and brought the overall result to 76 – 69 in Cambridge 's favour . The victory gave the Oxford number four , Matthew Smith , the honour of being the youngest ever " modern " winner at 18 years , 8 months 11 days . 
 In the reserve race , Oxford 's Isis beat Cambridge 's Goldie by five lengths . Earlier , Oxford won the 55th women 's race by two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths , in a time of 6 minutes 18 seconds , their first victory in nine years . Oxford also won the women 's lightweight , but Cambridge won the women 's reserves , men 's lightweight , and men 's lightweight reserves . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Oxford University Boat Club President and number four Nick Robinson said the crew had kept going and won " an incredible race " , but was a " shock triumph " . 
 = Witchfinder General ( film ) = 
 Witchfinder General is a 1968 British horror film directed by Michael Reeves and starring Vincent Price , Ian Ogilvy , and Hilary Dwyer . The screenplay was by Reeves and Tom Baker based on Ronald Bassett 's novel of the same name . Made on a low budget of under £ 100 @,@ 000 , the movie was co @-@ produced by Tigon British Film Productions and American International Pictures . The story details the heavily fictionalised murderous witch @-@ hunting exploits of Matthew Hopkins , a 17th @-@ century English lawyer who claimed to have been appointed as a " Witch Finder General " by Parliament during the English Civil War to root out sorcery and witchcraft . The film was retitled The Conqueror Worm in the United States in an attempt to link it with Roger Corman 's earlier series of Edgar Allan Poe – related films starring Price — although this movie has nothing to do with any of Poe 's stories , and only briefly alludes to his poem . 
 Director Reeves featured many scenes of intense onscreen torture and violence that were considered unusually sadistic at the time . Upon its theatrical release throughout the spring and summer of 1968 , the movie 's gruesome content was met with disgust by several film critics in the UK , despite having been extensively censored by the British Board of Film Censors . In the US , the film was shown virtually intact and was a box office success , but it was almost completely ignored by reviewers . 
 Witchfinder General eventually developed into a cult film , partially attributable to Reeves 's 1969 death from a drug overdose at the age of 25 , only nine months after Witchfinder 's release . Over the years , several prominent critics have championed the film , including J. Hoberman , Danny Peary , and Derek Malcolm . In 2005 , the magazine Total Film named Witchfinder General the 15th greatest horror film of all time . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1645 , during the English Civil War , Matthew Hopkins ( Vincent Price ) , an opportunist and <unk> , takes advantage of the breakdown in social order to impose a reign of terror in East Anglia . Hopkins and his assistant , John Stearne ( Robert Russell ) , visit village after village , brutally torturing confessions out of suspected witches . They charge the local magistrates for the work they carry out . 
 Richard Marshall ( Ian Ogilvy ) is a young Roundhead . After surviving a brief skirmish and killing his first enemy soldier ( and thus saving the life of his Captain ) , he rides home to Brandeston , Suffolk , to visit his lover Sara ( Hilary Dwyer ) . Sara is the niece of the village priest , John Lowes ( Rupert Davies ) . Lowes gives his permission to Marshall to marry Sara , telling him there is trouble coming to the village and he wants Sara far away before it arrives . Marshall asks Sara why the old man is frightened . She tells him they have been threatened and become outcasts in their own village . Marshall vows to Sara , " rest easy and no @-@ one shall harm you . I put my oath to that . " At the end of his army leave , Marshall rides back to join his regiment , and chances upon Hopkins and Stearne on the path . Marshall gives the two men directions to Brandeston then rides on . 
 In Brandeston , Hopkins and Stearne immediately begin rounding up suspects . Lowes is accused at his home and tortured . He has needles stuck into his back ( in an attempt to locate the so @-@ called " Devil 's Mark " ) , and is about to be killed , when Sara stops Hopkins by offering him sexual favours in exchange for her uncle 's safety . However , soon Hopkins is called away to another village . Stearne takes advantage of Hopkins ' absence by raping Sara . When Hopkins returns and finds out what Stearne has done , Hopkins will have nothing further to do with the young woman . He instructs Stearne to begin torturing Lowes again . Shortly before departing the village , Hopkins and Stearne execute Lowes and two women . 
 Marshall returns to Brandeston and is horrified by what has happened to Sara . He vows to kill both Hopkins and Stearne . After " marrying " Sara in a ceremony of his own devising and instructing her to flee to Lavenham , he rides off by himself . In the meantime , Hopkins and Stearne have become separated after a Roundhead patrol attempts to commandeer their horses . Marshall locates Stearne , but after a brutal fight , Stearne is able to escape . He reunites with Hopkins and informs him of Marshall 's desire for revenge . 
 Hopkins and Stearne enter the village of Lavenham . Marshall , on a patrol to locate the King , learns they are there and quickly rides to the village with a group of his soldier friends . Hopkins , however , having earlier learned that Sara was in Lavenham , has set a trap to capture Marshall . Hopkins and Stearne frame Marshall and Sara as witches and take them to the castle to be interrogated . Marshall watches as needles are repeatedly jabbed into Sara 's back , but he refuses to confess to witchcraft , instead vowing again to kill Hopkins . He breaks free from his bonds and stamps on Stearne 's face , at the same time that his army comrades approach the castle dungeon . Marshall grabs an axe and repeatedly strikes Hopkins . The soldiers enter the room and are horrified to see what their friend has done . One of them puts the mutilated but still living Hopkins out of his misery by shooting him dead . Marshall 's mind snaps and he shouts , " You took him from me ! You took him from me ! " Sara , also apparently on the brink of insanity , screams uncontrollably over and over again . 
 = = Production = = 
 Tigon Productions owned the rights to Ronald Bassett 's 1966 novel , Witchfinder General , which was based very loosely on a historical figure named Matthew Hopkins , a self @-@ described " <unk> " who claimed to have been commissioned by Parliament to prosecute and execute witches . Hopkins was in fact never given an official mandate to hunt witches . Tony Tenser , the founder and chief executive of Tigon , had read Bassett 's book while it was still in galley form and purchased the rights on impulse prior to publication . Despite the novel being " tedious low @-@ brow popular history " , Tenser felt it " had some scope , had some breadth to it ; there was canvas for a film . " Tenser offered the film to Michael Reeves , who had just completed Tigon 's The Sorcerers ( 1967 ) , starring Boris Karloff . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Reeves provided a story outline which met with Tenser 's enthusiastic approval . Tenser immediately began putting together a preliminary budget , and requested that Reeves quickly complete a full film script , stressing to Reeves that the production would need to commence by September of that year to avoid shooting during cold weather . Reeves called in his childhood friend Tom Baker ( who had co @-@ written The Sorcerers with Reeves ) to assist him with the script . Reeves and Baker began drafting a screenplay with Donald Pleasence firmly in mind as the film 's star . However , once American International Pictures became involved in the production , they insisted that their contract star , Vincent Price , be given the lead , and Pleasence was dropped from the film . With the abrupt change of star , Reeves and Baker had to rethink their original concept of presenting Hopkins as " ineffective and inadequate ... a ridiculous authority figure " , which they had believed Pleasence could play to perfection . They knew the tall , imposing Price , with his long history of horror roles , would have to be more of a straightforward villain , and they made changes to their script accordingly . 
 As was required by law for British film productions of that time , the completed first draft of the screenplay was presented by Tenser to the British Board of Film Censors ( BBFC ) on 4 August to determine if any possible censorship issues could be anticipated . On the same day , a preliminary report was issued by a BBFC examiner , who , noting that Tenser was an " ape " , referred to the screenplay as " perfectly beastly " and " ghoulish " . The script was returned to Tenser a few days later , with a more detailed report from the same examiner , which described the screenplay as " a study in sadism in which every detail of cruelty and suffering is lovingly dwelt on ... a film which followed the script at all closely would run into endless censorship trouble . " After a second draft was subsequently written and sent to the BBFC only eleven days after the first draft , the reaction was nearly the same . It was returned to Tenser with an " exhaustive list " of requirements to reduce the film 's possible offensiveness . 
 Reeves and Baker completed a third and final draft that was " substantially toned down " in content from the previous attempts . This version of the screenplay , which was filmed with only a few minor revisions during the production , was missing many of the more explicit moments of violence described in the first submitted drafts : the death spasms of the pre @-@ credits hanging victim , Lowes getting stabbed fifteen times with a steel spike , and a sniper 's victim somersaulting through the air and slamming into a tree . A sequence depicting the Battle of Naseby was to be filmed , during which a soldier 's head was to be cut off on screen . Most significantly , the film 's finale was completely altered . In the original ending , Stearne falls in with a group of gypsies and attempts to rape one of their women , who successfully fights off her attacker by plunging her thumbs into his eyes , blinding him . The gypsies then stake him to death . Marshall arrives and convinces the gypsies to assist him in ambushing Hopkins . Hopkins is viciously beaten by Marshall , who forces a " confession " out of the bloodied man . Marshall partially drowns Hopkins ( whose thumbs have been tied to his feet ) , then finally hangs him . Tenser had previously expressed concerns regarding the scope of the Battle of Naseby sequence as well as the gypsy @-@ ending , noting that these would both require the employment of additional groups of extras . He asked Reeves and Baker to remove the battle sequence and simplify the ending for the final draft . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Vincent Price as Matthew Hopkins . Decidedly not Michael Reeves 's choice for the part , this was the veteran horror star 's 75th film and his 17th for American International Pictures . Some of the performances he provided for his previous AIP movies had certain elements of campy overacting , but in Witchfinder he was subtle and deadly serious . The role was a great challenge for Price , as his frequent clashes with Reeves left him unsure as to what the director wanted ( see " Filming " section below ) . Despite this , Price ultimately felt he delivered " one of the best performances I 've ever given . " 
 Ian Ogilvy as Richard Marshall . Ogilvy had been a friend of Reeves since they were teenagers , and the actor had appeared in many of the director 's amateur short films . Ogilvy had also starred in both of Reeves 's two previous feature films , Revenge of the Blood Beast and The Sorcerers , and was the natural first choice for the role of Witchfinder 's heroic lead . Describing his working relationship with Reeves , Ogilvy noted that " his mastery of the technical aspects was absolute " , but added " Mike never directed the actors . He always said he knew nothing about acting , and preferred to leave it up to us . " Ogilvy enjoyed working with Price , finding him to be " very funny , in a ' <unk> ' sort of way . " 
 Hilary Dwyer as Sara . Witchfinder was Dwyer 's debut feature film . With three years of television work behind her , she had been noticed by Tenser and put under contract with Tigon . She felt Reeves was " just wonderful ... He was really inspiring to work with . And because it was my first film I didn 't know how lucky I was . " At 21 , she found appearing in the love and rape scenes " stressful " . She would go on to make several more horror movies for AIP , most of them co @-@ starring Price , before retiring from acting in the late 1970s . 
 Rupert Davies as John Lowes . Appearing as Dwyer 's uncle , Witchfinder was only one of several horror films the British character actor found himself in during the later stage of his career . Davies was not pleased when he discovered that the filming of his torture scenes was to be augmented with actual live rats placed on his body . The actor recalled Reeves instructing him , " Don 't move , Rupert ! Don 't move ! Wait until one of them starts nibbling your jaw then you might move your head a little . " 
 Robert Russell as John Stearne . Playing Hopkins 's thuggish assistant , Russell certainly looked the part . However , as filming progressed , Reeves found the actor 's high pitched voice unsuitable for such a rough character , and after production was completed he had all of his dialogue dubbed by another actor , Jack Lynn ( who also appeared in a small role as an innkeeper ) . 
 Patrick Wymark as Oliver Cromwell . Wymark received prominent billing for a " one @-@ day bit part " . 
 Other cast : Nicky Henson as Trooper Swallow , Wilfrid Brambell as Master Loach , Tony Selby as Salter , Bernard Kay as Fisherman , Godfrey James as Webb , Michael <unk> as Captain Gordon , John <unk> as Harcourt , Bill Maxwell as Gifford , " Morris Jar " ( pseudonym for Paul Ferris ) as Paul , Maggie Kimberly as Elizabeth , Peter Haigh as Lavenham Magistrate , Hira <unk> as Hanged Woman , Anne <unk> as Old Woman , Peter Thomas as Farrier , Edward Palmer as Shepherd , David Webb as <unk> , Lee Peters as Sergeant , David Lyell as Footsoldier , Alf Joint as Sentry , Martin Terry as Hoxne Innkeeper , Jack Lynn as Brandeston Innkeeper , Beaufoy Milton as Priest , Dennis Thorne as Villager , Michael Segal as Villager , Toby Lennon as Old Man , Margaret Nolan as Girl at Inn , Sally Douglas as Girl at Inn , Donna Reading as Girl at Inn , Derek Ware as Boy at Hoxne Inn . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production began on 18 September 1967 with a budget of £ 83 @,@ 000 . £ 32 @,@ 000 was provided by AIP , with £ 12 @,@ 000 for Price 's expenditures and fees , and £ 20 @,@ 000 for production costs . Philip Waddilove , a former BBC radio and record producer , contributed £ 5 @,@ 000 in return for associate producer billing . Although the film would be the biggest budgeted title in Tigon 's history , for AIP their part of the budget represented a relatively small expenditure of money . Not much in terms of real quality was expected by AIP heads Samuel Z. Arkoff and James H. Nicholson , and the movie was intended to be nothing more than a tax write @-@ off . 
 The interiors were filmed in two specially converted aircraft hangars near Bury St. Edmunds in Suffolk , which were leased for £ 1 @,@ 500 ; this cost @-@ measure resulted in much of the dialogue having to be re @-@ recorded later , because the tin roofs of the hangars caused an echo . The exterior shots range from the Dunwich Coast ( for the scene with the fisherman ) to Langley Park outside London ( for the scene where Stearne escapes capture ) . The tracking shot of the ambush after the opening credits was filmed at Black Park in southeast Buckinghamshire , a location frequently used by Hammer Film Productions . Lavenham Square ( in Lavenham , Suffolk ) , site of the witch @-@ burning scene , was the real Lavenham Market Square ; the crew lowered TV antennas and telephone wires and Waddilove hired a cherry picker from a local utility company for £ 10 , because the unit couldn 't afford a camera crane . The countryside vistas seen in the chase scenes on horseback were shot on the Stanford Battle Area near Thetford , Norfolk — the producer , through connections with the government , was able to lease parts of the area . The church used in the film is St John The Evangelist in <unk> in Norfolk . The moat drowning and hanging scenes were filmed at <unk> Hall , in Long Melford . The climax of the film was shot at Orford Castle , on the coast of East Anglia , which is an English Heritage property . Filming wrapped as scheduled on 13 November 1967 . 
 The production went relatively smoothly except for the unrelentingly antagonistic relationship that developed between Reeves and Price . Reeves kept it no secret from everyone associated with the production that the American actor was not his choice for the role , and the director 's comments had reached the actor back in the US . Reeves refused the courtesy of meeting Price at London Heathrow Airport when he arrived in England , a " deliberate snub calculated to offend both Price and AIP . " " Take me to your goddamn young genius , " Price reportedly said to co @-@ producer Philip Waddilove , who greeted the actor at the airport instead of Reeves . When Price went on location and met Reeves for the first time , the young director told the actor , " I didn 't want you , and I still don 't want you , but I 'm stuck with you ! " 
 According to Kim Newman in his book , Nightmare Movies , when Reeves made a suggestion on the set , Price objected and told the director : " I 've made 87 [ sic ] films . What have you done ? " And Reeves responded : " I 've made three good ones . " " Reeves hated me , " Price later recalled . " He didn 't want me at all for the part . I didn 't like him , either . It was one of the first times in my life that I 've been in a picture where the director and I just clashed . " Price felt that all the actors on the set had a difficult time with the director , explaining : " Michael Reeves could not communicate with actors . He would stop me and say , ' Don 't move your head like that . ' And I would say , ' Like what ? What do you mean ? ' He 'd say , ' There — you 're doing it again . Don 't do that ' . " Price reportedly became so upset with Reeves that he refused to watch the film 's dailies . 
 In one scene , Reeves needed Price to shoot his flintlock between the ears of the horse he was riding . When Price realised that Reeves had ordered that an actual blank charge was to be used so the weapon 's puff of smoke would be visible , he immediately shouted , " What ? You want the gun to go bang between the ears of this fucking nag ? How do you think he 's going to react ? " However , Reeves insisted and , when the gun went off , the horse reared and sent Price tumbling onto the ground . Price was not hurt but he was extremely angered by the incident . 
 On the final day of shooting , Price showed up on the set visibly intoxicated . Reeves seethed to Waddilove , " He 's drunk – how dare he be drunk on my set ! I 'll kill the bastard . " Waddilove soon discovered that Reeves planned to inflict painful revenge on the actor . During preparations for Price 's violent death scene , the director was overheard instructing Ogilvy to " really lay into Vincent " with the stage axe . Although when the scene was filmed Ogilvy indeed responded with blows that were not faked , Waddilove had earlier found some foam padding and fitted Price 's costume with it , protecting the actor from any injury . 
 Despite the tension between the two men during the production , when Price saw the movie the following year , he admitted that he finally understood what Reeves had been after and wrote the young director a ten @-@ page letter praising the film . Reeves wrote Price back , " I knew you would think so . " Years after Reeves 's death , Price said , " ... I realized what he wanted was a low @-@ key , very laid @-@ back , menacing performance . He did get it , but I was fighting him almost every step of the way . Had I known what he wanted , I would have cooperated . " 
 In addition to his difficult relationship with Price , Reeves had to deal with a few production problems during the shooting . On the first day , Price was thrown from his horse and sent back to his hotel to recover . The actor returned to work the following day . Towards the end of filming , a strike was called when the British technicians union learned the production company was not hiring a large enough crew as required by union rules . After an extra man was hired , the crew resumed working . On two occasions , Reeves was short of actors . Waddilove replaced an absent actor as a Roundhead officer during Wymark 's one @-@ day scene . Waddilove 's wife , Susi , played one of the women in the animal enclosure during the witch @-@ burning sequence . 
 The film 's violent climax was edited together in its present shape due to a continuity problem . In the screenplay , the soldier played by Nicky Henson was supposed to shoot both Price and Ogilvy to death . However , the actor only had one flintlock pistol , which had been clearly established in previous scenes , and was therefore only able to shoot one person . When the error was discovered , Reeves immediately told the actor : " All right , just shoot Vincent and I 'll get Ian to scream and shout and go mad and freeze frame on Hilary Dwyer screaming . " 
 Several " alternate " nude scenes were filmed during the production . Set in a pub and involving local " wenches " , the sequences were reportedly solely intended for the movie 's German release version . Reeves refused to take part in the filming of these sequences and they were completed by the crew after the " regular " versions of the scenes had been shot , with Tigon 's Tenser acting as director . According to Waddilove , Louis M. " Deke " Heywood appeared at the location only to ensure those additional scenes were filmed . The credits read , " Additional scenes by Louis M Heywood . " According to Ogilvy , this was an in @-@ joke because for Reeves , " additional scenes " meant " some prick of a producer putting his oar in and messing up what the director had done . " None of these scenes were made available in the theatrical versions released in the US or UK , although they were included in the videotape version released in the mid @-@ 1980s by HBO Home Video . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 For its time , Witchfinder General was considered an unusually sadistic film experience . British film censor John Trevelyan was reportedly a distant cousin of Michael Reeves and accepted the director 's good intentions when Reeves explained why he felt it was necessary to include such intense violence in the movie . Trevelyan nonetheless argued , " The film gave the impression that it was exploiting violence , and in particular , sadism for commercial reasons . " Consequently , the film was cut extensively by the British Board of Film Censors for its UK release . Nearly two complete minutes of what was described as " excesses of sadistic brutality " were removed . Reeves agreed to make some of the initial minor cuts himself , but when additional and more extensive demands were made he adamantly refused to take part in any further editing . 
 Trevelyan claimed that Reeves later wrote him a letter admitting that the cuts were not as harmful as he had expected . No copy of the letter has ever surfaced , and based on several other comments the director subsequently made about how the edits " ruined the film " , Reeves 's biographer Benjamin Halligan believes Trevelyan may have somehow " <unk> " the existence of this letter , confusing it with an earlier missive from the director in which he made a plea for the BBFC 's leniency . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Even the truncated version was met with considerable controversy by UK film critics . Dilys Powell in The Sunday Times complained " ... 17th century hanging , burning , raping , screaming , and Vincent Price as England 's prize torture @-@ overseer . <unk> nauseating . " The Guardian felt the film was filled with " gratuitous sadism . " Margaret <unk> of The Sunday Telegraph dismissed it as a " sadistic extravaganza . " Nonetheless , several critics felt the film was worth accolades . John Russell Taylor in the London Times Saturday Review said the film " ... is quite happily and deliberately a horror film : that is to say , it has no particular pretensions to being anything else ... There is much in it which would win Michael Reeves an important reputation if he were dealing with some more pretentious , but fundamentally no more serious subject ... Mr. Reeves is no longer merely promising . He already has real achievements behind him : not merely good horror films , but good films , period . " Films and Filming noted , " Witchfinder General has no explicit ' message ' , but it does say something about the springs of despair and it says it forcefully . It is a very frightening film ... Matthew Hopkins is the best of Price 's recent performances . Witchfinder General is emphatically not a horror film ; it is , however , a very horrifying one ... " Monthly Film Bulletin observed , " Not since Peeping Tom has a film aroused such an outcry about nastiness and gratuitous violence as this one ... the tone of the film is oddly muted , with torture and death in plenty , but viewed matter @-@ of @-@ factly and without stress ... Throughout the whole film there is a vivid sense of a time out of joint , which comes as much from the stray groups of soldiers who skirmish against unseen attackers in the woods or hang wearily about by the wayside waiting for battle to commence , as from the bloody crimes committed in the name of religion by Matthew Hopkins . " 
 Playwright Alan Bennett was particularly repulsed by Witchfinder . In his regular column in The Listener , published eight days after the film 's release , Bennett explained how he felt horror films should always be " punctuated by belly laughs " and attacked Reeves 's completely humourless movie as " the most persistently sadistic and morally rotten film I have seen . It was a degrading experience by which I mean it made me feel dirty . " Although Reeves was infuriated , his response indicated that he believed Bennett 's reaction was proof that his decision to include such extreme violence was the correct approach to the material . In his letter published in The Listener , Reeves noted : " Surely the most immoral thing in any form of entertainment is the conditioning of the audience to accept and enjoy violence ... Violence is horrible , degrading and sordid . Insofar as one is going to show it on the screen at all , it should be presented as such – and the more people it shocks into sickened recognition of these facts the better . I wish I could have witnessed Mr. Bennett frantically attempting to wash away the ' dirty ' feeling my film gave him . It would have been proof of the fact that Witchfinder General works as intended . " 
 AIP heads Arkoff and Nicholson had originally contributed their portion of the budget as a tax write @-@ off , but when they were screened the completed film they were astonished by its quality . Nicholson told Louis Heyward , " It is one of the best we have gotten from England . Everybody thinks this is about the best production in the Poe series for the past few years . " Arkoff noted that " Michael Reeves brought out some elements in Vincent that hadn 't been seen in a long time . Vincent was more savage in the picture . Michael really brought out the balls in him . I was surprised how terrifying Vincent was in that ... I hadn 't expected it . " 
 In the US , the film was not subject to any censorship at all , and was released virtually intact to AIP 's usual mix of drive @-@ ins and grindhouses . However , in an attempt to link the film with Roger Corman 's earlier Edgar Allan Poe series of films , it was retitled The Conqueror Worm . Brief prologue and epilogue narrations ( by Price ) taken from Poe 's poem were added to justify the new title . As Danny Peary noted in his Cult Movies book , the film went nearly unnoticed by critics during its US release : " The few <unk> trade reviewers who saw it treated it as just another entry in AIP 's Edgar Allan Poe series ... and gave it such dismal notices that future bookings were scarce . " Hollywood Citizen News was appalled by the film : " A disgrace to the producers and <unk> , and a sad commentary on the art of filmmaking ... a film with such bestial brutality and orgiastic sadism , one wonders how it ever passed customs to be released in this country . " The trade journal Box Office noted that : " Fans of the horror film will be glad to know that Vincent Price is back to add another portrait to his gallery of arch @-@ fiends ... bathed in the most stomach @-@ churning gore imaginable ... " Variety opined that " Dwyer gives evidence of acting talent , but she and all principals are hampered by Michael Reeves 's mediocre script and ordinary direction . " Despite the lack of critical support , the movie was a modest success stateside , earning $ 1 @.@ 5 million for AIP according to Cinefantastique magazine . In his biography of Reeves , Benjamin Halligan claims the film made $ 10 million in the US . 
 The film 's retitling by AIP caused a minor fracas in Hong Kong . A group of British sailors had seen the movie at the base cinema under its original title and one week later unwittingly saw the movie again in a local cinema , playing under the American release title . They immediately demanded their money back and , when the manager refused , they tipped over litter bins , threw popcorn at the screen , and " almost tore the theatre apart . " The manager changed his mind and paid the sailors back for the price of the tickets , and sent a bill to AIP for the damages . 
 Very soon after its initial release in the spring of 1968 , several critics began championing the film in the UK and US . David Pirie , who wrote extensively and enthusiastically about the film in his 1973 book A Heritage of Horror , reviewed the film in 1971 for Time Out , commenting : " ... one of the most personal and mature statements in the history of British cinema ... The performances are generally excellent , and no film before or since has used the British countryside in quite the same way . " Danny Peary noted , " The Conqueror Worm is a stunning film in many ways , but probably Reeves 's greatest achievement is that he was able to maintain an extraordinary momentum throughout , until the film ends as it began , with a woman ( this time Sara ) screaming . " In 2000 , Derek Malcolm included Witchfinder General as part of his series The Century of Films , a list of what he considered to be the one hundred most " artistically or culturally important " movies of the 20th Century . Malcolm asserted that the film " is one of the most compulsively watchable ever made in Britain " and " transcends its genre with the sheer panache of its making . " In 2005 , J. Hoberman of the Village Voice stated that the film " ... has long been a cult item – in part because its talented 25 @-@ year @-@ old director , Michael Reeves , died of a drug overdose before [ sic ] the film 's release , but mainly because it is an extraordinarily bleak story of political evil ... Reeves shot on location and the movie has a robust autumnal quality perfectly matched by Price 's overripe performance ... it remains contemporary , and even frightening , in its evocation of cynical Puritanism and mass deception . " 
 In his 2007 book , Madness Unchained : A Reading of Virgil 's ' Aeneid ' , Lee <unk> described Witchfinder General as a modern retelling of the main themes of Virgil 's epic Aeneid , and its central image of the unrelenting nature of fury and madness and its power to corrupt essentially good heroes . <unk> has written that in the film Reeves " has captured exactly the point of Virgil 's great epic of madness and its horrifying conclusion . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 Writer Mark Thomas McGee noted that Witchfinder General " did fantastic business and kicked off a second wave of Edgar Allan Poe movies " produced by American International Pictures , including Gordon Hessler 's The Oblong Box starring Price ( originally scheduled to be directed by Reeves but handed over to Hessler after Reeves bowed out a week prior to production ) and Murders in the Rue Morgue ( 1971 ) . Hessler 's Cry of the Banshee ( 1970 ) , which featured Witchfinder co @-@ stars Price and Hilary Dwyer , was also vaguely associated with Poe in advertisements ( " Edgar Allan Poe Probes New Depths of Terror ! " ) ; it was dismissed by Allmovie as " a rehashing of Witchfinder General . " This new Poe " series " was short @-@ lived and effectively over by 1971 . 
 According to AIP 's Louis Heyward , Witchfinder General " was very successful in Germany — it was the most successful of the violence pictures — it started a vogue . " " Copycat " films financed , or partially financed , by German production companies included Mark of the Devil ( 1970 ) , with Herbert Lom and Udo Kier , The Bloody Judge ( 1970 ) , directed by Jesus Franco and starring Christopher Lee , and Hexen <unk> und zu Tode <unk> ( 1973 ) , released in the U.S. years later on video as Mark of the Devil Part II . 
 Tigon 's own The Blood on Satan 's Claw ( 1970 ) was produced " as a successor , in spirit if not in story " to Witchfinder General , and borrowed Reeves 's usage of " the usually tranquil English countryside as a place of terror . " Mark Gatiss has referred to the film as a prime example of a short @-@ lived subgenre he called " folk horror " , grouping it with Satan 's Claw and The Wicker Man . 
 Some critics maintain that Ken Russell 's The Devils ( 1971 ) was influenced by the commercial success of Reeves 's film , with one writer calling Russell 's movie " the apex of the ' historical ' witch @-@ persecution films started by Witchfinder General . " However , Russell has noted that he hated Reeves 's film , describing it as " one of the worst movies I have ever seen and certainly the most nauseous . " 
 The film has had a minor influence on heavy metal music . In 1980 , the movie inspired a band to call themselves Witchfinder General . The group broke up in 1983 . Another metal band , Cathedral , released a 1996 EP titled Hopkins ( The Witchfinder General ) , featuring a song of the same name . That song also appeared on their album , The Carnival Bizarre and the music video was included as an extra on the UK DVD release of Reeves 's film . And Electric Wizard have a song from their 2000 album <unk> called " I , The Witchfinder " , although its lyrics indicate it may also have been inspired by Mark of the Devil . American death doom band Acid Witch recorded a song inspired by the film , titled " <unk> Finder " , which was featured on their second LP , 2010 's Stoned . 
 The film was the inspiration for a BBC Radio 4 play Vincent Price and The Horror of The English Blood Beast by Matthew Broughton , first broadcast in March 2010 . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 While some reviewers have praised the film for its ostensible " historical accuracy " , others have strongly questioned its adherence to historical fact . Dr. Malcolm Gaskill , Fellow and former Director of Studies in history at Churchill College , Cambridge , and author of <unk> : A 17th @-@ Century English Tragedy , critiqued the film for the Channel 4 History website , calling it " a travesty of historical truth " while acknowledging that " there is much to be said in favour of Witchfinder General – but as a film , not as history . " Based purely on its level of historical accuracy , Gaskill gave the film " 3 stars " on a scale of 0 – 10 . 
 Gaskill had several complaints regarding the film 's " distortions and flights of fancy " . While Hopkins and his assistant John Stearne really did torture , try and hang John Lowes , the vicar of Brandeston , Gaskill notes that other than those basic facts the film 's narrative is " almost completely fictitious . " In the movie , the fictional character of Richard Marshall pursues Hopkins relentlessly to death , but in reality the " gentry , magistrates and clergy , who undermined his work in print and at law " were in pursuit of Hopkins throughout his ( brief ) murderous career , as he was never legally sanctioned to perform his witch @-@ hunting duties . And Hopkins wasn 't axed to death , he " withered away from consumption at his Essex home in 1647 " . Vincent Price was 56 when he played Hopkins , but " the real Hopkins was in his 20s " . According to Gaskill , one of the film 's " most striking errors is its total omission of court cases : witches are simply tortured , then hanged from the nearest tree . " 
 = = Home video versions = = 
 Censorship and musical rights issues kept a complete , pristine version of Witchfinder General from being released on videotape , laserdisc or DVD for many years . Although uncensored theatrical prints have been available for archival showings in the US for several years , video releases of the title were repeatedly compromised . 
 The " Export Version " , which contained both the previously cut violence and alternate shots of topless nudity filmed for overseas release , was passed uncut by the BBFC in 1995 , and released on VHS by Redemption . In 2001 , a DVD was released in the UK by Metrodome consisting of two versions , the complete " Director 's Cut " containing the two minutes of previously censored violence , and the aforementioned " Export Version " , also with the violence intact but including shots of nudity added to certain sequences . In both versions , the two minutes of violence have been taken from what has been described as " a grainy VHS source . " Some critics complained that watching the film in this manner was an often " jarring " or " distracting " viewing experience . In addition , the soundtrack of the newly inserted nude shots had " brief snippets of audio repeating itself because of the timing involved in inserting the previously cut footage " . 
 In the US , while censorship of the film has never been a factor , the film nonetheless experienced numerous delays in appearing on home video in its originally intended form . When Orion Pictures acquired the rights to many of AIP 's titles in the 1980s , they were unable to also purchase rights to the musical soundtracks of some of the films , and added synthesizer scores by composer Kendall Schmidt in lieu of the original music . Witchfinder General was one of these " problem " titles . For years , Paul Ferris 's acclaimed full orchestral score was not available in the US on home video releases , although it was included on theatrical and syndicated television prints . The HBO videotape release from the late 1980s utilised the Orion version , which also included the nude inserts . Tim Lucas noted that the spoken soundtrack to these newly added " spicy " shots " doesn 't match it correctly . " 
 In 2005 , writer Steve <unk> reported that a " definitive version " of the film had been restored and would be released in the US on DVD by MGM @-@ UA in August of that year , as part of their Midnite Movies series . After Sony purchased the rights to the MGM film library , James Owsley ( Director of Restorations at MGM ) advised Philip Waddilove ( one of Witchfinder General 's producers ) that the date of the DVD release was postponed until October 2006 . In an interview conducted in August 2005 , Waddilove revealed that he had learned Sony had " little interest " in the film and no official announcement of any pending DVD release had ever been made . Waddilove noted that " the principal at Sony doesn 't greenlight DVDs of anything older than ten years ! ! " However , the film was indeed released under the Midnite Movies banner on 11 September 2007 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment . The release includes the complete , uncut version of the film with the Ferris score intact . Price 's opening and closing narration tacked on to the AIP Conqueror Worm version , as well as the alternate nude sequences , were not available on this release , but they were included in the UK Blu @-@ ray release from Odeon Entertainment issued in June 2011 . The Blu @-@ ray utilised the same high @-@ definition transfer as the 2007 MGM DVD and was completely uncut . In 2013 , Scream Factory included the film as part of the company 's multi @-@ title Vincent Price Blu @-@ ray box set released in Fall of 2013 . 
 = Falkland Islands = 
 The Falkland Islands ( / <unk> / ; Spanish : Islas Malvinas [ <unk> ] ) are an archipelago in the South Atlantic Ocean on the Patagonian Shelf . The principal islands are about 300 miles ( 483 kilometres ) east of South America 's southern Patagonian coast , at a latitude of about 52 ° S. The archipelago , with an area of 4 @,@ 700 square miles ( 12 @,@ 000 square kilometres ) , comprises East Falkland , West Falkland and 776 smaller islands . As a British overseas territory , the Falklands have internal self @-@ governance , and the United Kingdom takes responsibility for their defence and foreign affairs . The islands ' capital is Stanley on East Falkland . 
 Controversy exists over the Falklands ' discovery and subsequent colonisation by Europeans . At various times , the islands have had French , British , Spanish , and Argentine settlements . Britain reasserted its rule in 1833 , although Argentina maintains its claim to the islands . In April 1982 , Argentine forces temporarily occupied the islands . British administration was restored two months later at the end of the Falklands War . Most <unk> favour that the archipelago remain a UK overseas territory , but its sovereignty status is part of an ongoing dispute between Argentina and the United Kingdom . 
 The population ( 2 @,@ 932 inhabitants in 2012 ) primarily consists of native @-@ born Falkland Islanders , the majority of British descent . Other ethnicities include French , Gibraltarian and Scandinavian . Immigration from the United Kingdom , the South Atlantic island of Saint Helena , and Chile has reversed a population decline . The predominant ( and official ) language is English . Under the British Nationality ( Falkland Islands ) Act 1983 , Falkland Islanders are British citizens . 
