 The islands lie on the boundary of the subantarctic oceanic and tundra climate zones , and both major islands have mountain ranges reaching 2 @,@ 300 feet ( 700 m ) . They are home to large bird populations , although many no longer breed on the main islands because of competition from introduced species . Major economic activities include fishing , tourism and sheep farming , with an emphasis on high @-@ quality wool exports . Oil exploration , licensed by the Falkland Islands Government , remains controversial as a result of maritime disputes with Argentina . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Falkland Islands take their name from the Falkland Sound , a strait separating the archipelago 's two main islands . The name " Falkland " was applied to the channel by John Strong , captain of an English expedition which landed on the islands in 1690 . Strong named the strait in honour of Anthony Cary , 5th Viscount of Falkland , the Treasurer of the Navy who sponsored their journey . The Viscount 's title originates from the town of Falkland , Scotland , whose name comes from " folkland " ( land held by folk @-@ right ) . The name was not applied to the islands until 1765 , when British captain John Byron of the Royal Navy , claimed them for King George III as " Falkland 's Islands " . The term " Falklands " is a standard abbreviation used to refer to the islands . 
 The Spanish name for the archipelago , Islas Malvinas , derives from the French Îles <unk> — the name given to the islands by French explorer Louis @-@ Antoine de Bougainville in 1764 . Bougainville , who founded the islands ' first settlement , named the area after the port of Saint @-@ Malo ( the point of departure for his ships and colonists ) . The port , located in the Brittany region of western France , was in turn named after St. Malo ( or <unk> ) , the Christian evangelist who founded the city . 
 At the twentieth session of the United Nations General Assembly , the Fourth Committee determined that , in all languages other than Spanish , all UN documentation would designate the territory as Falkland Islands ( Malvinas ) . In Spanish , the territory was designated as Islas Malvinas ( Falkland Islands ) . The nomenclature used by the United Nations for statistical processing purposes is Falkland Islands ( Malvinas ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Although <unk> from Patagonia may have visited the Falkland Islands in prehistoric times , the islands were uninhabited at the time of their discovery by Europeans . Claims of discovery date back to the 16th century , but no consensus exists on whether these early explorers discovered the Falklands or other islands in the South Atlantic . The first recorded landing on the islands is attributed to English captain John Strong , who , en route to Peru 's and Chile 's littoral in 1690 , discovered the Falkland Sound and noted the islands ' water and game . 
 The Falklands remained uninhabited until the 1764 establishment of Port Louis on East Falkland by French captain Louis Antoine de Bougainville , and the 1766 foundation of Port Egmont on Saunders Island by British captain John MacBride . Whether or not the settlements were aware of each other 's existence is debated by historians . In 1766 , France surrendered its claim on the Falklands to Spain , which renamed the French colony Puerto Soledad the following year . Problems began when Spain discovered and captured Port Egmont in 1770 . War was narrowly avoided by its restitution to Britain in 1771 . 
 Both the British and Spanish settlements coexisted in the archipelago until 1774 , when Britain 's new economic and strategic considerations led it to voluntarily withdraw from the islands , leaving a plaque claiming the Falklands for King George III . Spain 's Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata became the only governmental presence in the territory . West Falkland was left abandoned , and Puerto Soledad became mostly a prison camp . Amid the British invasions of the Río de la Plata during the Napoleonic Wars in Europe , the islands ' governor evacuated the archipelago in 1806 ; Spain 's remaining colonial garrison followed suit in 1811 , except for gauchos and fishermen who remained voluntarily . 
 Thereafter , the archipelago was visited only by fishing ships ; its political status was undisputed until 1820 , when Colonel David Jewett , an American privateer working for the United Provinces of the River Plate , informed anchored ships about Buenos Aires ' 1816 claim to Spain 's territories in the South Atlantic . Since the islands had no permanent inhabitants , in 1823 Buenos Aires granted German @-@ born merchant Luis Vernet permission to conduct fishing activities and exploit feral cattle in the archipelago . Vernet settled at the ruins of Puerto Soledad in 1826 , and accumulated resources on the islands until the venture was secure enough to bring settlers and form a permanent colony . Buenos Aires named Vernet military and civil commander of the islands in 1829 , and he attempted to regulate sealing to stop the activities of foreign whalers and sealers . Vernet 's venture lasted until a dispute over fishing and hunting rights led to a raid by the American warship USS Lexington in 1831 , when United States Navy commander Silas Duncan declared the dissolution of the island 's government . 
 Buenos Aires attempted to retain influence over the settlement by installing a garrison , but a mutiny in 1832 was followed the next year by the arrival of British forces who reasserted Britain 's rule . The Argentine Confederation ( headed by Buenos Aires Governor Juan Manuel de Rosas ) protested Britain 's actions , and Argentine governments have continued since then to register official protests against Britain . The British troops departed after completing their mission , leaving the area without formal government . Vernet 's deputy , the Scotsman Matthew Brisbane , returned to the islands that year to restore the business , but his efforts ended after , amid unrest at Port Louis , gaucho Antonio Rivero led a group of dissatisfied individuals to murder Brisbane and the settlement 's senior leaders ; survivors hid in a cave on a nearby island until the British returned and restored order . In 1840 , the Falklands became a Crown colony , and Scottish settlers subsequently established an official pastoral community . Four years later , nearly everyone relocated to Port Jackson , considered a better location for government , and merchant Samuel Lafone began a venture to encourage British colonisation . 
 Stanley , as Port Jackson was soon renamed , officially became the seat of government in 1845 . Early in its history , Stanley had a negative reputation due to cargo @-@ shipping losses ; only in emergencies would ships rounding Cape Horn stop at the port . Nevertheless , the Falklands ' geographic location proved ideal for ship repairs and the " Wrecking Trade " , the business of selling and buying shipwrecks and their cargoes . Aside from this trade , commercial interest in the archipelago was minimal due to the low @-@ value hides of the feral cattle roaming the pastures . Economic growth began only after the Falkland Islands Company , which bought out Lafone 's failing enterprise in 1851 , successfully introduced Cheviot sheep for wool farming , spurring other farms to follow suit . The high cost of importing materials , combined with the shortage of labour and consequent high wages , meant the ship repair trade became uncompetitive . After 1870 , it declined as the replacement of sail ships by steamships was accelerated by the low cost of coal in South America ; by 1914 , with the opening of the Panama Canal , the trade effectively ended . In 1881 , the Falkland Islands became financially independent of Britain . For more than a century , the Falkland Islands Company dominated the trade and employment of the archipelago ; in addition , it owned most housing in Stanley , which greatly benefited from the wool trade with the UK . 
 In the first half of the 20th century , the Falklands served an important role in Britain 's territorial claims to subantarctic islands and a section of Antarctica . The Falklands governed these territories as the Falkland Islands Dependencies starting in 1908 , and retained them until their dissolution in 1985 . The Falklands also played a minor role in the two world wars as a military base aiding control of the South Atlantic . In the First World War Battle of the Falkland Islands in December 1914 , a Royal Navy fleet defeated an Imperial German squadron . In the Second World War , following the December 1939 Battle of the River Plate , the battle @-@ damaged HMS Exeter steamed to the Falklands for repairs . In 1942 , a battalion en route to India was redeployed to the Falklands as a garrison amid fears of a Japanese seizure of the archipelago . After the war ended , the Falklands economy was affected by declining wool prices and the political uncertainty resulting from the revived sovereignty dispute between the United Kingdom and Argentina . 
 <unk> tensions between the UK and Argentina increased during the second half of the century , when Argentine President Juan Perón asserted sovereignty over the archipelago . The sovereignty dispute intensified during the 1960s , shortly after the United Nations passed a resolution on decolonisation which Argentina interpreted as favourable to its position . In 1965 , the UN General Assembly passed Resolution 2065 , calling for both states to conduct bilateral negotiations to reach a peaceful settlement of the dispute . From 1966 until 1968 , the UK confidentially discussed with Argentina the transfer of the Falklands , assuming its judgement would be accepted by the islanders . An agreement on trade ties between the archipelago and the mainland was reached in 1971 and , consequently , Argentina built a temporary airfield at Stanley in 1972 . Nonetheless , <unk> dissent , as expressed by their strong lobby in the UK Parliament , and tensions between the UK and Argentina effectively limited sovereignty negotiations until 1977 . 
 Concerned at the expense of maintaining the Falkland Islands in an era of budget cuts , the UK again considered transferring sovereignty to Argentina in the early Thatcher government . Substantive sovereignty talks again ended by 1981 , and the dispute escalated with passing time . In April 1982 , the disagreement became an armed conflict when Argentina invaded the Falklands and other British territories in the South Atlantic , briefly occupying them until a UK expeditionary force retook the territories in June . After the war , the United Kingdom expanded its military presence , building RAF Mount Pleasant and increasing the size of its garrison . The war also left some 117 minefields containing nearly 20 @,@ 000 mines of various types , including anti @-@ vehicle and anti @-@ personnel mines . Due to the large number of <unk> casualties , initial attempts to clear the mines ceased in 1983 . 
 Based on Lord Shackleton 's recommendations , the Falklands diversified from a sheep @-@ based monoculture into an economy of tourism and , with the establishment of the Falklands Exclusive Economic Zone , fisheries . The road network was also made more extensive , and the construction of RAF Mount Pleasant allowed access to long haul flights . Oil exploration has also begun , with indications of possible commercially exploitable deposits in the Falklands basin . <unk> clearance work restarted in 2009 , in accordance with the UK 's obligations under the Ottawa Treaty , and Sapper Hill Corral was cleared of mines in 2012 , allowing access to an important historical landmark for the first time in 30 years . Argentina and the UK re @-@ established diplomatic relations in 1990 ; relations have since deteriorated as neither has agreed on the terms of future sovereignty discussions . Disputes between the governments have led " some analysts [ to ] predict a growing conflict of interest between Argentina and Great Britain ... because of the recent expansion of the fishing industry in the waters surrounding the Falklands " . 
 = = Government = = 
 The Falkland Islands are a self @-@ governing British Overseas Territory . Under the 2009 Constitution , the islands have full internal self @-@ government ; the UK is responsible for foreign affairs , retaining the power " to protect UK interests and to ensure the overall good governance of the territory " . The Monarch of the United Kingdom is the head of state , and executive authority is exercised on the monarch 's behalf by the Governor , who in turn appoints the islands ' Chief Executive on the advice of members of the Legislative Assembly . Both the Governor and Chief Executive serve as the head of government . Governor Colin Roberts was appointed in April 2014 ; Chief Executive Keith Padgett was appointed in March 2012 . The UK minister responsible for the Falkland Islands since 2012 , Hugo Swire , administers British foreign policy regarding the islands . 
 The Governor acts on the advice of the islands ' Executive Council , composed of the Chief Executive , the Director of Finance and three elected members of the Legislative Assembly ( with the Governor as chairman ) . The Legislative Assembly , a unicameral legislature , consists of the Chief Executive , the Director of Finance and eight members ( five from Stanley and three from Camp ) elected to four @-@ year terms by universal suffrage . All politicians in the Falkland Islands are independent ; no political parties exist on the islands . Since the 2013 general election , members of the Legislative Assembly have received a salary and are expected to work full @-@ time and give up all previously held jobs or business interests . 
 Due to its link to the UK , the Falklands are part of the overseas countries and territories of the European Union . The islands ' judicial system , overseen by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office , is largely based on English law , and the constitution binds the territory to the principles of the European Convention on Human Rights . Residents have the right of appeal to the European Court of Human Rights and the Privy Council . Law enforcement is the responsibility of the Royal Falkland Islands Police ( <unk> ) , and military defence of the islands is provided by the United Kingdom . A British military garrison is stationed on the islands , and the Falkland Islands government funds an additional company @-@ sized light infantry Falkland Islands Defence Force . The territorial waters of the Falklands extend to 200 nautical miles ( 370 km ) from its coastal baselines , based on the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea ; this border overlaps with the maritime boundary of Argentina . 
 = = = Sovereignty dispute = = = 
 The United Kingdom and Argentina both claim the Falkland Islands . The UK 's position is that the <unk> have not indicated a desire for change , and that there are no pending issues to resolve concerning the islands . The UK bases its position on its continuous administration of the islands since 1833 ( except for 1982 ) and the islanders ' " right to self @-@ determination as set out in the UN Charter " . Argentine policy maintains that Falkland Islanders do not have a right to self @-@ determination , claiming that in 1833 the UK expelled Argentine authorities ( and settlers ) from the Falklands with a threat of " greater force " and , afterwards , barred Argentines from resettling the islands . Argentina posits that it acquired the Falklands from Spain when it achieved independence in 1816 , and that the UK illegally occupied them in 1833 . 
 In 2009 , British prime minister Gordon Brown had a meeting with Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner , and said that there would be no further talks over the sovereignty of the Falklands . In March 2013 , the Falkland Islands held a referendum on its political status , with 99 @.@ 8 percent of voters favoured remaining under British rule . Argentina does not recognise the Falkland Islands as a partner in negotiations ; consequently , it dismissed the Falkland Islands ' sovereignty referendum . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Falkland Islands have a land area of 4 @,@ 700 square miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km2 ) and a coastline estimated at 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) . Two main islands , West Falkland and East Falkland , and about 776 smaller islands constitute the archipelago . The islands are predominantly mountainous and hilly , with the major exception the depressed plains of <unk> ( a peninsula forming the southern part of East Falkland ) . The Falklands are continental crust fragments resulting from the break @-@ up of Gondwana and the opening of the South Atlantic that began 130 million years ago . The islands are located in the South Atlantic Ocean , on the Patagonian Shelf , about 300 miles ( 480 km ) east of Patagonia in southern Argentina . 
 The Falklands are situated approximately at latitude 51 ° 40 ′ – 53 ° 00 ′ S and longitude 57 ° 40 ′ – 62 ° 00 ′ W. The archipelago 's two main islands are separated by the Falkland Sound , and its deep coastal indentations form natural harbours . East Falkland houses Stanley ( the capital and largest settlement ) , the UK military base at RAF Mount Pleasant , and the archipelago 's highest point : Mount Usborne , at 2 @,@ 313 feet ( 705 m ) . Outside of these significant settlements is the area colloquially known as " Camp " , which is derived from the Spanish term for countryside ( Campo ) . 
 The climate of the islands is cold , windy and humid maritime . Variability of daily weather is typical throughout the archipelago . Rainfall is common over half of the year , averaging 610 millimetres ( 24 in ) in Stanley , and sporadic light snowfall occurs nearly all year . The temperature is generally between 21 @.@ 1 and − 11 @.@ 1 ° C ( 70 @.@ 0 and 12 @.@ 0 ° F ) in Stanley , but can vary to 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) early in the year and − 1 ° C ( 30 ° F ) in July . Strong westerly winds and cloudy skies are common . Although numerous storms are recorded each month , conditions are normally calm . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 The Falkland Islands are a biogeographical part of the mild Antarctic zone , with strong connections to the flora and fauna of Patagonia in mainland South America . Land birds make up most of the Falklands ' avifauna ; 63 species breed on the islands , including 16 endemic species . There is also abundant arthropod diversity on the islands . The Falklands ' flora consists of 163 native vascular species . The islands ' only native terrestrial mammal , the <unk> , was hunted to extinction by European settlers . 
 The islands are frequented by marine mammals , such as the southern elephant seal and the South American fur seal , and various types of cetaceans ; offshore islands house the rare striated caracara . The Falklands are also home to five different penguin species and a few of the largest albatross colonies on the planet . Endemic fish around the islands are primarily from the genus <unk> . The Falklands are treeless and have a wind @-@ resistant vegetation predominantly composed of a variety of dwarf shrubs . 
 Virtually the entire land area of the islands is used as pasture for sheep . Introduced species include reindeer , hares , rabbits , Patagonian foxes , brown rats and cats . The detrimental impact several of these species have caused to native flora and fauna has led authorities to attempt to contain , remove or exterminate invasive species such as foxes , rabbits and rats . Endemic land animals have been the most affected by introduced species . The extent of human impact on the Falklands is unclear , since there is little long @-@ term data on habitat change . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The economy of the Falkland Islands is ranked the 222nd largest out of 229 in the world by GDP ( PPP ) , but ranks 10th worldwide by GDP ( PPP ) per capita . The unemployment rate was 4 @.@ 1 percent in 2010 , and inflation was last calculated at 1 @.@ 2 percent rate in 2003 . Based on 2010 data , the islands have a high Human Development Index of 0 @.@ 874 and a moderate Gini coefficient for income inequality of 34 @.@ 17 . The local currency is the Falkland Islands pound , which is pegged to the British pound sterling . 
 Economic development was advanced by ship resupplying and sheep farming for high @-@ quality wool . The main sheep breeds in the Falkland Islands are Polwarth and Corriedale . During the 1980s , although synthetic fibres and ranch underinvestment hurt the sheep @-@ farming sector , the government established a major revenue stream with the establishment of an exclusive economic zone and the sale of fishing licenses to " anybody wishing to fish within this zone " . Since the end of the Falklands War in 1982 , the islands ' economic activity has increasingly focused on oil field exploration and tourism . 
 The port city of Stanley has regained the islands ' economic focus , with an increase in population as workers migrate from Camp . Fear of dependence on fishing licences and threats from overfishing , illegal fishing and fish market price fluctuations have increased interest on oil drilling as an alternative source of revenue ; exploration efforts have yet to find " exploitable reserves " . Development projects in education and sports have been funded by the Falklands government , without aid from the United Kingdom . 
 The primary sector of the economy accounts for most of the Falkland Islands ' gross domestic product , with the fishing industry alone contributing between 50 % and 60 % of annual GDP ; agriculture also contributes significantly to GDP and employs about a tenth of the population . A little over a quarter of the workforce serves the Falkland Islands government , making it the archipelago 's largest employer . Tourism , part of the service economy , has been spurred by increased interest in Antarctic exploration and the creation of direct air links with the United Kingdom and South America . Tourists , mostly cruise ship passengers , are attracted by the archipelago 's wildlife and environment , as well as activities such as fishing and wreck diving ; the majority are based in accommodation found in Stanley . The islands ' major exports include wool , hides , venison , fish and squid ; its main imports include fuel , building materials and clothing . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 The Falkland Islands are a homogeneous society , with the majority of inhabitants descended from Scottish and Welsh immigrants who settled the territory in 1833 . The 2006 census listed some Falklands residents as descendants of French , Gibraltarians and Scandinavians . That census indicated that one @-@ third of residents were born on the archipelago , with foreign @-@ born residents assimilated into local culture . The legal term for the right of residence is " belonging to the islands " . The British Nationality Act of 1983 gave British citizenship to Falkland Islanders . 
 A significant population decline affected the archipelago in the twentieth century , with many young islanders moving overseas in search of education , a modern lifestyle , and better job opportunities , particularly to the British city of Southampton , which came to be nicknamed " Stanley north " . In recent years , the island 's population decline has steadied , thanks to immigrants from the United Kingdom , Saint Helena , and Chile . In the 2012 census , a majority of residents listed their nationality as Falkland Islander ( 59 percent ) , followed by British ( 29 percent ) , Saint <unk> ( 9 @.@ 8 percent ) , and Chilean ( 5 @.@ 4 percent ) . A small number of Argentines also live on the islands . 
 The Falkland Islands have a low population density . According to the 2012 census , the average daily population of the Falklands was 2 @,@ 932 , excluding military personnel serving in the archipelago and their dependents . A 2012 report counted 1 @,@ 300 uniformed personnel and 50 British Ministry of Defence civil servants present in the Falklands . Stanley ( with 2 @,@ 121 residents ) is the most @-@ populous location on the archipelago , followed by Mount Pleasant ( 369 residents , primarily air @-@ base contractors ) and Camp ( 351 residents ) . The islands ' age distribution is skewed towards working age ( 20 – 60 ) . Males outnumber females ( 53 to 47 percent ) , and this discrepancy is most prominent in the 20 – 60 age group . In the 2006 census most islanders identified themselves as Christian ( 67 @.@ 2 percent ) , followed by those who refused to answer or had no religious affiliation ( 31 @.@ 5 percent ) . The remaining 1 @.@ 3 percent ( 39 people ) were adherents of other faiths . 
 Education in the Falkland Islands , which follows England 's system , is free and compulsory for residents aged between 5 and 16 years . Primary education is available at Stanley , RAF Mount Pleasant ( for children of service personnel ) and a number of rural settlements . Secondary education is only available in Stanley , which offers boarding facilities and 12 subjects to General Certificate of Secondary Education ( GCSE ) level . Students aged 16 or older may study at colleges in England for their GCE Advanced Level or vocational qualifications . The Falkland Islands government pays for older students to attend institutions of higher education , usually in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Falklands culture is " based on the British culture brought with the settlers from the British Isles " , although it has been influenced by the cultures of Hispanic South America . Some terms and place names used by the islands ' former Gaucho inhabitants are still applied in local speech . The Falklands ' predominant and official language is English , with the foremost dialect being British English ; nonetheless , inhabitants also speak Spanish and other languages . According to naturalist Will Wagstaff , " the Falkland Islands are a very social place , and stopping for a chat is a way of life " . 
 The islands have two weekly newspapers : <unk> Express and The Penguin News , and television and radio broadcasts generally feature programming from the United Kingdom . Wagstaff describes local cuisine as " very British in character with much use made of the homegrown vegetables , local lamb , mutton , beef , and fish " . Common between meals are " home made cakes and biscuits with tea or coffee " . Social activities are , according to Wagstaff , " typical of that of a small British town with a variety of clubs and organisations covering many aspects of community life " . 
 = Pat Morton = 
 Philip Henry ( Pat ) Morton ( 28 October 1910 – 18 January 1999 ) was an Australian businessman and politician . Born in Lismore in Northern New South Wales to a prominent political family and educated at Lismore High School , Morton left school at fourteen to be employed in a legal firm , before branching out into various businesses . Moving to Sydney , Morton first entered politics in 1944 as an Alderman on Mosman Municipal Council , rising to be Mayor in 1946 . Morton then entered the New South Wales Legislative Assembly on 3 May 1947 , representing the Electoral district of Mosman for the Liberal Party of Australia . 
 Morton soon rose through the party ranks , becoming touted as a possible leader . When the Liberals lost their third election under party leader Vernon Treatt , Morton contested the leadership in July 1954 . Although Morton was defeated , Treatt did not stay long , resigning in August . Morton then stood , but was deadlocked against party whip , Robert Askin , and Askin then asked Murray Robson to take the leadership . Robson proved ineffective and was deposed in September 1955 in a party spill and Morton was elected to succeed him as Leader of the New South Wales Opposition . 
 Morton contested as Leader the 1956 and 1959 elections , gaining seats each time but failing to defeat the long @-@ standing Labor Government . A few months after the 1959 election , Morton was deposed as Leader by now @-@ Deputy Leader Askin in July 1959 . He remained on the backbenches until Askin led the Liberal Party to its first electoral victory in May 1965 , whereupon Morton was appointed as the Minister for Local Government and Minister for Highways . He served in the cabinet , becoming prominent and controversial in his role in the reorganisation of the City of Sydney as Local Government Minister and state planning regulations , until he retired from parliament in June 1972 . He died in Mosman aged 88 in 1999 . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Pat Morton was born on 28 October 1910 in Lismore , New South Wales , the son of Arthur Richmond Morton and Maria Morton . Although born on the north coast of New South Wales , Morton 's family were prominent members of the Shoalhaven District on the New South Wales south coast . Morton 's grandfather , Henry Gordon Morton , born in Edinburgh , Scotland in 1828 , arrived in Australia in 1852 and was a surveyor for the Berry Estate and the first Mayor of <unk> , the private town founded by Alexander Berry . 
 Henry Morton and his wife Jane <unk> had eight sons : Mark <unk> Morton , who served as Mayor and Alderman on Nowra Municipal Council and the NSW Parliament from 1901 to 1938 for Shoalhaven , Allowrie and <unk> ; Henry Douglas Morton , who served the NSW Parliament from 1910 to 1920 for Hastings and Macleay and as Speaker of the Legislative Assembly in 1913 ; Philip Henry Morton , who served as member for Shoalhaven from 1889 to 1898 and later as an Alderman on the Sydney City Council from 1904 to 1908 ; and Pat 's father , Alexander Richmond Morton , who , after serving as an Alderman on Nowra Municipal Council , moved with his wife to Lismore and served as an Alderman on Lismore Municipal Council . 
 Morton was educated at Lismore High School , which he left at the age of 14 to be employed in a law firm , but had a varied career in many different businesses . On 31 March 1937 , He married Nance Maude on 31 March 1937 and had two daughters , Patricia and Margaret . Morton moved to Mosman , New South Wales , where he was elected to the Mosman Municipal Council in December 1944 as an Alderman , rising to become Mayor in 1946 . He would remain on council until September 1951 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 As an Alderman , Morton joined the new Liberal Party of Australia , becoming a member of the Balmoral local branch and a federal councillor . Morton soon joined the NSW Branch under party Leader Vernon Treatt and stood for the New South Wales Legislative Assembly seat of Mosman at the state election on 3 May 1947 . At the election he succeeded in defeating the conservative Independent member , The Reverend Donald Macdonald , with 55 @.@ 56 % of the vote . 
 Treatt led the Coalition again at the 17 June 1950 election , which resulted in a hung parliament , with the Coalition gaining 12 seats and a swing of 6 @.@ 7 % for a total of 46 seats . With the Labor Party also holding 46 seats , the balance of power lay with the two re @-@ elected Independent Labor members , James Geraghty and John Seiffert , who had been expelled from the party for disloyalty during the previous parliament . Under a legalistic interpretation of the ALP rules , Seiffert was readmitted to the party and , together with the support of Geraghty , Premier James McGirr and Labor were able to stay in power . Morton was re @-@ elected with 77 @.@ 28 % . Morton also finished his term on Mosman Municipal Council in 1951 . 
 At the 14 February 1953 election , Morton retained his seat with 75 @.@ 59 % , The Liberals , however , suffered a total loss of ten seats and a swing against them of 7 @.@ 2 % . Reversing the gains made at the previous election , confidence in Treatt 's leadership decayed . The Liberal Party soon descended into factional in @-@ fighting , culminating in the resignation of Deputy Leader Walter Howarth on 22 July 1954 , who publicly announced it on 4 July citing that he felt that Treatt doubted his loyalty . He was replaced by Party Whip Robert Askin . The resignation split the party and sparked a leadership challenge from Morton , who criticised Treatt 's " lack of aggression " towards the Labor Government . At the party meeting on 6 July , Treatt narrowly defeated Morton with 12 votes to 10 . 
 With party support eroded , Treatt did not remain long as leader afterwards . On Friday 6 August 1954 , Treatt announced that he would resign as leader on 10 August . At the following party meeting , after a deadlocked vote between Askin and Morton , Askin persuaded Murray Robson to accept the Leadership of the Liberal Party as a compromise candidate . Like other senior members of the party , after having no conservative government since Alexander Mair in 1941 , Robson had no experience in government , he had little interest in policy except for Cold War anti @-@ communism , ignored majority views of his party and fellow parliamentary colleagues and further alienated party members by trying to forge a closer alliance with Michael Bruxner 's Country Party . Over a year after Robson had assumed the leadership , at a party meeting on 20 September 1955 , senior party member Ken McCaw moved that the leadership be declared vacant , citing that Robson 's leadership lacked the qualities necessary for winning the next election . The motion was carried 15 votes to 5 . Robson then moved a motion to prevent Morton , who was the only person nominated for leader , from taking the leadership . This was defeated 16 votes to 6 and Morton was elected <unk> as leader , with Robert Askin remaining as Deputy Leader . 
 = = = Leadership = = = 
 As Leader of the New South Wales Liberal Party and Leader of the Opposition , Morton had to direct the campaign for the upcoming election in early 1956 . At the official campaign launch on 15 February , Morton began by accusing the Cahill government of losing its way and wasting public funds , while promising to invest in public works , education and health . At the election on 3 March 1956 , the Liberals gained five seats ( Coogee , Drummoyne , Georges River , Parramatta and Sutherland ) and the Country Party under Michael Bruxner regained the seat of Armidale , reducing the government 's majority from twenty to six . Morton retained Mosman with 78 @.@ 74 % . Although the Coalition had failed to win government , an official report from the Liberal Party State Council blamed the defeat on the seat redistribution , the abolition of postal voting and the strong right @-@ wing Labor support for Premier Cahill . 
 Morton again led the opposition to the ballot at the 21 March 1959 election , which resulted in an overall gain of three seats but the loss of Sutherland and Parramatta to Labor . After counting was finalised the Cahill Government was left with an overall majority of four seats . Many attributed the loss to the Opposition 's failure to back up its promises with actual figures , which led Premier Cahill to nickname Morton " Promising Pat " . Morton retained Mosman again with a significant 90 @.@ 16 % of the vote . 
 During his time as leader , Morton had refused to give up his various business interests , including as a manager of a motor accessories distributor from 1956 until 1965 and a director of Coventry Tool and Gauge Company in 1958 , among others . This led many to accuse him of not focusing on his political responsibilities , including a Sydney Morning Herald article that said called Morton a " part @-@ time " leader and stated that : " One of the points that told against Morton was his refusal to renounce or curtail his considerable business interests . In fact he increased them during the life of the last Parliament . " Morton 's leadership was further undermined when in April 1959 , Liberal backbench MP for Manly , Douglas Darby , challenged Morton for the leadership . Although Morton won the vote 22 votes to 6 , the result was interpreted as only occurring because there was no other alternative to Morton . For his last few months as Leader , confidence in his leadership did not recover . 
 On 14 July 1959 , three Liberal MLAs ( Geoffrey Cox , Ivan Black and Douglas Cross ) called on Morton to resign , stating that the party needed a full @-@ time leader and that Morton no longer commanded the majority support of his colleagues . Morton refused and instead called an emergency meeting on 17 July to confirm his leadership . Soon after , the two main opponents to Morton , the Member for <unk> , Eric Willis , and Deputy Leader Robin Askin , declared that they would only take the Leadership if they were given an absolute majority of 28 votes . At the party meeting , Morton was removed as Leader by two votes . Willis then surprised many by deciding not to put his name forward for nomination , leaving Askin as the only contender . Askin was subsequently elected unanimously as leader , with Willis eventually becoming Deputy Leader . Unlike his predecessor , Robson , Morton accepted his loss well , declaring that there would be " no recriminations " and pledged loyalty to Askin . 
 On his deposition , a Sydney Morning Herald editorial summed up his leadership thus : " True , the margin [ of the last election ] was slender . And , true , Morton campaigned vigorously . But his punches seemed to be rather wild . He would have done better by directing his blows to a few vital points instead of trying to hit at anything in sight . In addition to losing the last election , when Labour seemed at its most vulnerable after 18 years of office , Mr Morton further disappointed his colleagues – indeed , antagonised some of them – by expanding his private business interests when he was being urged to concentrate wholly on the job of Leader of the Opposition . However , the sad truth is that the genial Mr Morton has never measured up as a sagacious , inspiring leader . " 
 At the 3 March 1962 election , Askin led the Coalition to another defeat to the Labor Party , now under Bob Heffron , who had become Premier following Cahill 's death in October 1959 . Morton retained his seat again with 80 @.@ 76 % . Heffron was Premier until his retirement on 30 April 1964 . He was succeeded by Jack Renshaw , whose tenure was perceived to be the last days of a party which , after almost a quarter of a century in government , was tired . At the May 1965 election , Askin led the Coalition to its first ever state electoral victory , gaining eight seats and a swing of 5 @.@ 6 % to achieve a majority of two . Askin became the first Liberal Premier . Morton was re @-@ elected with 82 @.@ 30 % . 
 = = = Minister of the Crown = = = 
 Askin then named Morton as the Minister for Local Government and Minister for Highways , being sworn in by the Governor of New South Wales , Sir Eric Woodward at Government House , Sydney on 13 May 1965 . As Minister , Morton was involved in the first dismissal of Warringah Shire Council in April 1967 which was triggered by the <unk> of two councillors for bribery . The Councillors involved , Dennis Thomas and George Knight , were prosecuted under the Secret Commissions Prohibition Act 1919 ( NSW ) for receiving bribes from a development company to influence planning and development decisions , and both received gaol sentences . From 1967 to 1968 he appointed several public servants as Administrators to serve until a new council could be elected . 
 As a Minister of the Crown , Morton oversaw the rapid escalation of building development in inner @-@ city Sydney and the central business district , which followed in the wake of his controversial 1967 abolition of Sydney City Council and a redistribution of municipal electoral boundaries that was aimed at reducing the power of the rival Australian Labor Party . On its abolition , Morton commented that it was " essential for Sydney 's progress " and replaced the City Council with a Commission , headed by his predecessor , Vernon Treatt . At the 24 February 1968 election , Askin increased his majority by six seats . Morton retained his seat with 73 @.@ 55 % . 
 Morton soon gained a reputation as a strong advocate for allowing free enterprise and business to take precedence over planning controls and government regulation . His time as Minister was marked by increasing strains on state infrastructure and his pro @-@ development stance was largely attributed as an attempt to alleviate these problems . Despite this , Morton and his State Planning Authority were continuously criticised for not being totally accountable to the public , particularly as the pro @-@ business Sydney Commissioners worked side @-@ by @-@ side with the Planning authority to increase developments in the Sydney CBD to their highest levels ever , embodied by the construction of the MLC Centre , the demolition of the Theatre Royal , Sydney and the Australia Hotel . Among the most controversial schemes planned by his government were also a massive freeway system that was planned to be driven through the hearts of historic inner @-@ city suburbs including Glebe and Newtown and an equally ambitious scheme of ' slum clearance ' that would have brought about the <unk> destruction of the historic areas of Woolloomooloo and The Rocks . This eventually culminated in the 1970s Green ban movement led by Unions Leader Jack <unk> , to protect the architectural heritage of Sydney . 
 At the 13 February 1971 election , Askin 's majority was reduced by four seats to the Labor Party under Pat Hills . Morton retained his seat , despite a significant reduction in his majority to 62 @.@ 68 % . Morton stayed in office for another year when , on 16 June 1972 he retired from politics . At the time of his departure it had been rumoured that he had been threatening to dismiss Blacktown City Council if they did not stop blocking a $ 200 million development in Mount Druitt . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 On 18 July 1972 , Queen Elizabeth II granted him retention of the title " The Honourable " for life , for having served as a Minister of the Crown and on the Executive Council of New South Wales . Morton 's mid @-@ term retirement caused a by @-@ election in his seat of Mosman . At the 29 July 1972 by @-@ election he was succeeded by Liberal candidate David <unk> with 51 % of the primary vote . On his retirement , Morton was appointed as a Trustee of the Zoological Parks Board of New South Wales , becoming chairman in 1976 . He died on 18 January 1999 at his Mosman home , survived by his eldest daughter , Patricia . His youngest daughter Margaret having died of melanoma in 1987 . His funeral was held at St Luke 's Anglican Church , Mosman , on 22 January 1999 . 
 = Tropical Storm Cristobal ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Cristobal was a relatively weak tropical cyclone that meandered in the western Atlantic Ocean prior to being absorbed into a frontal zone . The third named storm of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season , Cristobal developed on August 5 near the coast of South Carolina from the same trough that spawned Tropical Storm Bertha . The storm tracked slowly southeastward in the early portion of its duration , and initially remained disorganized . Cristobal attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , and lost the characteristics of a tropical cyclone on August 8 . The remnants brought moderate precipitation to Bermuda , and in combination with a high pressure system the storm caused three drownings on Long Island from rip currents . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A trough extended from the northern Gulf of Mexico to the western Atlantic Ocean in early August . The trough remained nearly stationary , spawning Tropical Storm Bertha in the Gulf of Mexico and a tropical disturbance off the coast of South Carolina . The weak low pressure area off South Carolina drifted southward , with its associated deep convection increasing in organization on August 4 . By 1800 UTC on August 5 , the system had acquired sufficient organization to be classified as Tropical Depression Three , while located about 175 miles ( 280 km / h ) east @-@ southeast of Charleston , South Carolina . 
 Upon becoming a tropical depression , the cyclone maintained outer rainbands and fair outflow . It tracked southeastward around the northeastern periphery of an anticyclone over Florida . By August 6 , the convection had diminished as outflow became restricted due to northeasterly wind shear ; with a relatively dry environment , most of the convection was confined to the southern semicircle of the depression . Despite the circulation becoming elongated in the southwesterly flow of a southward moving cold front , a Hurricane Hunters flight late on August 6 reported that the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Cristobal about 315 miles ( 505 km ) east of Jacksonville , Florida . 
 Tropical Storm Cristobal initially continued tracking southeastward , with its circulation reforming closer to the thunderstorms during each increase in convection . On August 7 the storm turned eastward , due to the influence of a large approaching mid to upper @-@ level frontal zone . As the convection organized further , Cristobal intensified somewhat and attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . On August 8 , increased dry air weakened the convection and caused Cristobal to accelerate east @-@ northeastward . The low @-@ level circulation interacted with the approaching frontal zone , and by 0000 UTC on August 9 Tropical Storm Cristobal was absorbed by the cold front about 350 miles ( 560 km ) southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The remnants continued northeastward , passing near Newfoundland on August 10 before weakening near Greenland on August 14 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a tropical cyclone , Cristobal had minimal effect to any land masses . Its remnants brought unsettled conditions to Bermuda , including a 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) wind gust at the Bermuda International Airport . The combination of moisture from Cristobal and a cold front produced 2 @.@ 78 inches ( 71 mm ) in a 24 ‑ hour period . The interaction between the remnants of Cristobal and a high pressure system over the Mid @-@ Atlantic States produced rip currents and 4 foot ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) waves along the south shore of Long Island , New York ; three people drowned from the rip currents . Two ships recorded tropical storm force winds in association with the storm ; the vessel with the sign <unk> reported sustained winds of 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) from the west @-@ southwest on August 7 . 
 = Too Much Too Soon ( album ) = 
 Too Much Too Soon is the second studio album by American hard rock band the New York Dolls , released on May 10 , 1974 , by Mercury Records . The group was dissatisfied with the sound of their 1973 self @-@ titled debut album , so frontman David Johansen enlisted veteran producer Shadow Morton for Too Much Too Soon . Morton had become disenchanted by the music industry , but was motivated by the band 's energy and agreed to work with them as a challenge . They recorded the album at A & R Studios in New York City . 
 Although the New York Dolls shared an affinity for Morton , they produced little original material with him . To complete Too Much Too Soon , they covered older songs and re @-@ recorded their past demos . Johansen impersonated different characters on some of the novelty covers , while Morton incorporated many studio sound effects and female backing vocals in his production . For the album , lead guitarist Johnny Thunders wrote and recorded " Chatterbox " , his first lead vocal track . 
 Too Much Too Soon was released to poor sales and only charted at number 167 on the Billboard 200 . After a problem @-@ ridden national tour , the New York Dolls were dropped by Mercury and disbanded in 1975 . The album received positive reviews from most critics , who felt Morton 's production highlighted the group 's raw sound and made it a better record than their first . Like their debut album , Too Much Too Soon became one of the most popular cult records in rock music and has since been viewed by music journalists as a predecessor to punk rock . 
 = = Background = = 
 After being signed by Mercury Records , the New York Dolls released their self @-@ titled debut album in 1973 to poor sales . Although it was praised by critics , the band members were not satisfied with producer Todd Rundgren 's sound for the album and had disagreements with him before recording Too Much Too Soon . Songwriting and production partners Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller were originally enlisted to produce their second album , while the band 's guitarist Johnny Thunders wanted to produce it himself . However , Leiber and Stoller withdrew shortly before recording was to begin . The group held a single session with Mercury A & R executive Paul Nelson at Media Sound Recording Studios , where they recorded 14 songs , most of which were cover songs . 
 At the recommendation of Leiber and Stoller , frontman David Johansen asked veteran producer Shadow Morton to work on Too Much Too Soon . Morton was best known for his work with the Shangri @-@ Las , of whom the New York Dolls were fans , and had also been Johansen 's original choice to produce their debut album . Morton had become disenchanted with the music industry and wanted to challenge himself by producing the band 's second album : " The Dolls had energy , sort of a disciplined weirdness . I took them into the room as a challenge . I was bored with the music and the business . The Dolls can certainly snap you out of boredom . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 With Morton , the New York Dolls recorded Too Much Too Soon in 1974 at A & R Studios in New York City . The album was later mastered at Sterling Sound and Masterdisk . During the sessions , Morton had Johansen record his vocals several times and incorporated sound effects such as gongs , gunshots , and feminine choruses . In a report on the album 's progress for Melody Maker , journalist Lenny Kaye wrote that they were taking more time than they had on their first record , " bringing in occasional strings and horns , following Shadow 's advice not ' to settle ' . " Morton and the band shared an affinity for each other , as he found the group 's energy in the studio refreshing , while Johansen was fond of Morton and the " looser " feel he provided for their music : " That man is completely unpretentious . He doesn 't think he ever did a marvellous thing in his life . " 
 The New York Dolls and Morton produced little original material together and had to record cover songs and re @-@ recorded some of the band 's earlier demos to complete Too Much Too Soon ; " Babylon " , " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " , " It 's Too Late " , and " Human Being " had been recorded by the band in March 1973 as demos for Mercury before the label signed them . They had also recorded demos of two songs written by guitarist Sylvain Sylvain , " Teenage News " and " Too Much Too Soon " , before working with Morton , but neither were considered for the album . Sylvain said he confronted Morton about this decision , recalling he had been in a rush : " He was too quick with me and said that he 'd been told only to listen to David Johansen and Johnny Thunders . He didn 't want to tell me who had told him that but obviously it was the managers . I just walked out , it was all driving me nuts . " 
 According to journalist Tony Fletcher , Morton would have been more productive on Too Much Too Soon had it not been for his alcoholism and the lifestyles of the band members — bassist Arthur Kane was also an alcoholic , while Thunders and drummer Jerry Nolan had heroin addictions . Robert Christgau believed the New York Dolls relied more on cover songs for the album because , " like so many cocky songwriters , David Johansen overloaded his debut with originals and then found that record promotion wasn 't a life activity that inspired new ones . " English writer Clinton Heylin said their inability to sell enough records before may have discouraged them from writing original songs . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Billboard magazine , Too Much Too Soon was another hard rock record by the New York Dolls but with a more " sophisticated " production . Music journalist Nina Antonia wrote that because of the group 's " untamable wildness " , the record still sounded eccentric despite attempts by Morton to " polish " their sound , such as by subduing their otherwise unrefined guitar playing . The album featured covers of the Cadets ' 1956 hit " Stranded in the Jungle " , Archie Bell 's 1969 hit " There 's Gonna Be a Showdown " , and Sonny Boy Williamson 's " Don 't Start Me Talkin ' " . On the novelty cover songs , Johansen impersonated characters such as the high @-@ stepper in " ( There 's Gonna Be A ) Showdown " and Charlie Chan in " Bad Detective " , which has lyrics describing a nonsensical narrative set in China . On " Stranded in the Jungle " , he alternated between a comical reject and a lecherous man at lover 's lane . Journalist Ellen Willis remarked that , like the band 's 1973 song " Personality Crisis " , " Stranded in the Jungle " suggested a theme of " clashing cultures and the dilemma of preserving one 's uniqueness while reaching out to others " . 
 For " Babylon " , Johansen wrote the lyrics as a tribute to the New York Dolls ' following from outside New York City : " [ The song ] is about people who live in Babylon , Long Island , New York , who go into the city every night dressed to kill . These people have to get home before sun @-@ up , you know , like vampires that can 't get caught by the sun . " By contrast , Spin magazine 's Eric Weisbard and Craig Marks interpreted " Babylon " as a reference to the Biblical city of the same name because of how the song portrayed " the symbol of decadence as a sanctuary " . The song 's subject leaves Babylon for Manhattan , where she is then hired to work in a massage parlour . 
 " It 's Too Late " was a commentary on nostalgic fashions and made reference to actress Diana Dors in a lyric rebuking drug use . According to Antonia , the song criticized indifferent , decadent people who cannot , as Johansen sang , " <unk> New York français " . On " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " , he scolded those who abuse love , wanting to " kick it on the floor " and " beat it like a scatter rug " . " Puss ' n ' Boots " was titled after an illustrated , <unk> magazine sold in adult book stores . Johansen said the song was about shoe fetishism , " or as Arthur [ Kane ] observed , it 's about ' the woofers in relationship with the <unk> ' . " Its lyrics depicted adversities faced by the protagonist , " Little <unk> Target " , as he tried to change his name in pursuit of his shoe fetish before the music ended with a gunshot , a sound effect inspired by the Olympics ' 1958 song " Western Movies " . Willis interpreted a feminist subtext in the song , citing the lyrics " sometimes you gotta get away someway / and now you 're walkin ' just like you 're ten feet tall ... I hope you don 't get shot for tryin ' . " 
 " Chatterbox " was written and sung by Thunders , whom Willis felt " uses his voice as a wailing instrument " similarly to rock singer Robert Plant . The song was Thunders 's first time singing lead and featured vocals Weisbard and Marks said were delivered in a quavering but proud New York accent . His lyrics described the narrator 's growing frustration over a crossed @-@ wire phone connection with a female subject . On " Human Being " , an ode to self @-@ respect and personal liberty , Thunders introduced his guitar playing with a roughly performed variation on Bill Doggett 's 1956 song " Honky Tonk " . Johansen addressed critics of the band in the song , telling them if they found him objectionable they should instead find themselves " a saint " , " a boy who 's gonna be what I ain 't " , and a " plastic doll with a fresh coast of paint who 's gonna sit through the madness and always act so quaint " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Too Much Too Soon was titled after the biography of the same name on actress Diana Barrymore . According to music journalist Jon Savage , the title was " more than applicable to the Dolls themselves " because of alcoholism and other issues among the band members , including Thunders 's heroin use and Nolan 's contraction of hepatitis . A dedication to Barrymore was printed in the album 's gatefold LP . For its front cover , the group eschewed the drag image that their first album had presented and they had developed a reputation for in favor of a fake concert shot . During the shoot , Thunders held a doll in his arm as if to strike it against his guitar to add shock value . 
 Released on May 10 , 1974 , Too Much Too Soon was another commercial failure for the New York Dolls , as it only charted at number 167 on the Billboard 200 . It performed well below Mercury 's expectations and sold less than 100 @,@ 000 copies . Two double A @-@ sided , 7 " singles were released to promote the album — " Stranded in the Jungle " / " Who Are the Mystery Girls ? " in July and " ( There 's Gonna Be A ) Showdown " / " Puss ' n ' Boots " in September 1974 — but neither charted . According to Antonia , the selected singles demonstrated how " the Dolls were in need of a hit single and their current producer wanted to see them attain it " by accommodating radio audiences with toned @-@ down studio versions of songs the band had performed more rowdily in concert . Joe Gross wrote in The New Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) that the band 's attempt to garner more airplay by enlisting Morton did not work because , " with a slicker sound , background choruses , and cleaner riffs , the Dolls just sounded <unk> " . 
 When Too Much Too Soon was released in Europe in July , the New York Dolls performed at the Buxton Festival in Derbyshire and the Rock Prom Festival at Olympia in London . They also embarked on their second tour of the United States , which lasted only a few months . It was marred by cancelled shows and conflicts between the band members stemming from their escalating addictions to alcohol and other drugs . Because of their alcoholism , they failed to set up a recording session for a scheduled third album after the tour had ended , and by 1975 , they were dropped by Mercury and disbanded . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Too Much Too Soon received positive reviews from critics . In a review of the album for Rolling Stone , Dave Marsh hailed the New York Dolls as the leading hard rock band in the US and noted what he felt was Nolan 's competent drumming , Johansen 's ability to add depth to his characters , and Thunders 's innovative guitar playing . Marsh especially praised his playing on " Chatterbox " , calling it " a classic " , and believed even the most brazen songs sounded successful because Morton 's production highlighted the group 's more unrefined musical qualities . Writing for Creem magazine , Christgau said the polished sound reproduction preserved the band 's raw qualities , especially in the case of Johansen 's vocals and Nolan 's drumming , and remarked that Rundgren " should be ashamed — Shadow Morton has gotten more out of the Dolls than they can give us live on any but their best nights . " Robert Hilburn from the Los Angeles Times felt Too Much Too Soon was a better @-@ produced album that proved the band to be " the real thing " , calling it the best record of derisive punk rock since Exile on Main St. ( 1972 ) by the Rolling Stones . In The New Yorker , Ellen Willis wrote that she learned to appreciate Too Much Too Soon more than New York Dolls after seeing the band perform songs from the former album in concert , particularly " Human Being " and " Puss ' n ' Boots " , while Ron Ross from Phonograph Record magazine said the group 's " easy going ironic sensibility " was expressed " far more amusingly and accessibly " here than on their debut album . 
 Some reviewers were critical of Too Much Too Soon for what they felt was a poorly recorded and overproduced sound . In a negative review for NME , Nick Kent said it sounded cluttered and " shot through with unfulfilled potential " , while Circus magazine panned the record as " cut after cut of annoying screeching " . It was nonetheless voted the tenth best album of 1974 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published in The Village Voice . Willis , one of the critics polled , listed it as her fifth favorite record of the year . Christgau , the poll 's creator and supervisor , named it third best , and in a decade @-@ end list for The Village Voice , he named it the fourth best album of the 1970s . Los Angeles Times critic Richard Cromelin included it in his list of favorite records from the decade and wrote that Morton 's production made it slightly better than New York Dolls . 
 Along with New York Dolls , Too Much Too Soon became one of the most popular cult albums in rock music . According to AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine , the group predated punk rock with their " gleeful sleaziness and reckless sound " on the record , which he said was embellished by Morton 's production details and exemplified by " musically visceral and dangerous " songs such as " Human Being " . In 1986 , Sounds magazine ranked it sixtieth on its list of the 100 best albums of all time . After it was reissued by Mercury in 1987 , Don McLeese of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that Morton 's production highlighted the New York Dolls ' sense of humor and was rendered vividly by the CD remaster . However , he felt Too Much Too Soon was marred by inconsistent material and rated it lower than their first record . In a review of the reissue , Don Waller of the Los Angeles Times said the underappreciated album was just as much an " instant classic " as New York Dolls . 
 In 2005 , Too Much Too Soon was remastered and reissued by Hip @-@ O Select and Mercury , after which Christgau wrote in Blender that both it and New York Dolls make up " a priceless proto @-@ punk legacy " . He wrote that although Johansen 's best original songs are on the first record , Too Much Too Soon has consistent hooks , clever lyrics , and exceptional cover songs , including " two R & B novelties whose theatrical potential was barely noticed until the Dolls penetrated their holy essence " . That year , rock journalist Toby Creswell named " Babylon " as one of the greatest songs of all time in his book 1001 Songs . In the Encyclopedia of Popular Music ( 2006 ) , Colin Larkin felt the band 's issues with alcohol and other drugs affected their performance on the record , which he deemed " a charismatic collection of punk / glam @-@ rock anthems , typically delivered with ' wasted ' cool " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = New York Dolls = = = 
 David Johansen – vocals , gong 
 Arthur " Killer " Kane – bass 
 Jerry Nolan – drums , percussion 
 Sylvain Sylvain – guitar , piano , vocals 
 Johnny Thunders – guitar , vocals 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 Album Graphics – graphic supervision 
 Dennis <unk> – engineering 
 Bob Gruen – photography 
 Gilbert Kong – mastering 
 Hans G. Lehmann – photography 
 Pieter <unk> – photography 
 Shadow Morton – production 
 Paul Nelson – A & R 
 Dixon Van Winkle – engineering 
 = = Release history = = 
 Information is adapted from Nina Antonia 's Too Much Too Soon : The New York Dolls ( 2006 ) . 
 = Japanese cruiser Iwate = 
 Iwate ( <unk> ) was the second and last Izumo @-@ class armored cruiser built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s . As Japan lacked the industrial capacity to build such warships herself , the ship was built in Britain . She participated in most of the naval battles of the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 . The ship was moderately damaged during the Battle of Port Arthur , the Battle off Ulsan , and the Battle of Tsushima . Iwate played a minor role in World War I and began the first of her many training cruises for naval cadets in 1916 , a task that would last until the end of 1939 . The ship continued to conduct training in home waters throughout the Pacific War . Iwate was sunk by American carrier aircraft during the attack on Kure in July 1945 . Her wreck was refloated and scrapped in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Background and description = = 
 The 1896 Naval Expansion Plan was made after the First Sino @-@ Japanese War and included four armored cruisers in addition to four more battleships , all of which had to be ordered from British shipyards as Japan lacked the capability to build them itself . Further consideration of the Russian building program caused the IJN to believe that the battleships ordered under the original plan would not be sufficient to counter the Imperial Russian Navy . Budgetary limitations prevented ordering more battleships and the IJN decided to expand the number of more affordable armored cruisers to be ordered from four to six ships . The revised plan is commonly known as the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " . Unlike most of their contemporaries which were designed for commerce raiding or to defend colonies and trade routes , Iwate and her half @-@ sisters were intended as fleet scouts and to be employed in the battleline . 
 The ship was 132 @.@ 28 meters ( 434 ft 0 in ) long overall and 121 @.@ 92 meters ( 400 ft 0 in ) between perpendiculars . She had a beam of 20 @.@ 94 meters ( 68 ft 8 in ) and had an average draft of 7 @.@ 21 meters ( 23 ft 8 in ) . Iwate displaced 9 @,@ 423 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 274 long tons ) at normal load and 10 @,@ 235 metric tons ( 10 @,@ 073 long tons ) at deep load . The ship had a metacentric height of 0 @.@ 73 meters ( 2 ft 5 in ) . Her crew consisted of 672 officers and enlisted men . 
 Iwate had two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving a single propeller shaft . Steam for the engines was provided by 24 Belleville boilers and the engines were rated at a total of 14 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 800 kW ) . The ship had a designed speed of 20 @.@ 75 knots ( 38 @.@ 43 km / h ; 23 @.@ 88 mph ) and reached 22 @.@ 3 knots ( 41 @.@ 3 km / h ; 25 @.@ 7 mph ) during her sea trials from 15 @,@ 739 ihp ( 11 @,@ 737 kW ) . She carried up to 1 @,@ 527 long tons ( 1 @,@ 551 t ) of coal and could steam for 7 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ; 8 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament for all of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers was four eight @-@ inch guns in twin @-@ gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of 14 Elswick Ordnance Company " Pattern Z " quick @-@ firing ( QF ) , 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . Only four of these guns were not mounted in armored casemates on the main and upper decks and their mounts on the upper deck were protected by gun shields . Iwate was also equipped with a dozen QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 @-@ cwt guns and eight QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Yamauchi guns as close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats . The ship was equipped with four submerged 457 mm ( 18 @.@ 0 in ) torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . 
 All of the " Six @-@ Six Fleet " armored cruisers used the same armor scheme with some minor differences . The waterline belt of Krupp cemented armor ran the full length of the ship and its thickness varied from 178 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) amidships to 89 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) at the bow and stern . It had a height of 2 @.@ 13 meters ( 7 ft 0 in ) , of which 1 @.@ 33 meters ( 4 ft 4 in ) was normally underwater . The upper strake of belt armor was 127 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick and extended from the upper edge of the waterline belt to the main deck . It extended 53 @.@ 31 meters ( 174 ft 11 in ) from the forward to the rear barbette . The Izumo class had oblique 127 mm armored bulkheads that closed off the ends of the central armored citadel . 
 The barbettes , gun turrets and the front of the casemates were all 6 inches thick while the sides and rear of the casemates were protected by 51 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor . The deck was 63 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) thick and the armor protecting the conning tower was 356 millimeters ( 14 @.@ 0 in ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and career = = 
 The contract for Iwate , named after the eponymous prefecture , was signed on 19 July 1898 with Armstrong Whitworth . The ship was laid down at their shipyard in Elswick on 11 November 1898 and launched on 29 March 1900 . She was completed on 18 March 1901 and departed for Japan the following day under the command of Captain Yamada <unk> , who had been appointed to supervise her construction and bring her back to Japan . Iwate arrived in Yokosuka on 17 May and Yamada was relieved by Captain <unk> <unk> on 6 July . 
 = = = Russo @-@ Japanese War = = = 
 At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Iwate was the flagship of Rear Admiral Misu Sotarō , commander of the 2nd Division of the 2nd Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 , when Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the Combined Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected the surprise night attack by his destroyers to be much more successful than it was , anticipating that the Russians would be badly disorganized and weakened , but they had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the protected cruiser Boyarin , which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russians . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defenses with his main armament and engage the ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as the Japanese eight- and six @-@ inch guns inflicted little damage on the Russian ships , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although many ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered some 150 , while the Japanese suffered roughly 90 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . Iwate had , in fact , been considerably damaged in the engagement . 
 In early March , Kamimura was tasked to take the reinforced 2nd Division north and make a diversion off Vladivostok . While scouting for Russian ships in the area , the Japanese cruisers bombarded the harbor and defenses of Vladivostok on 6 March to little effect . Upon their return to Japan a few days later , the 2nd Division was ordered to escort the transports ferrying the Imperial Guards Division to Korea and then to join the ships blockading Port Arthur . Kamimura was ordered north in mid @-@ April to cover the Sea of Japan and defend the Korea Strait against any attempt by the Vladivostok Independent Cruiser Squadron , under the command of Rear Admiral Karl Jessen , to break through and unite with the Pacific Squadron . The two units narrowly missed each other on the 24th in heavy fog and the Japanese proceeded to Vladivostok where they laid several minefields before arriving back at Wonsan on the 30th . 
 The division failed to intercept the Russian squadron as it attacked several transports south of Okinoshima Island on 15 June due to heavy rain and fog . The Russians sortied again on 30 June and Kamimura finally was able to intercept them the next day near Okinoshima . The light was failing when they were spotted and the Russians were able to disengage in the darkness . Jessen 's ships sortied again on 17 July headed for the eastern coast of Japan to act as a diversion and pull Japanese forces out of the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea . The Russian ships passed through Tsugaru Strait two days later and began capturing ships bound for Japan . The arrival of the Russians off Tokyo Bay on the 24th caused the Naval General Staff to order Kamimura to sail for Cape Toi Misaki , Kyūshū , fearing that Jessen would circumnavigate Japan to reach Port Arthur . Two days later he was ordered north to the Kii Channel and then to Tokyo Bay on the 28th . The General Staff finally ordered him back to Tsushima Island on the 30th ; later that day he received word that Jessen 's ships had passed through the Tsugaru Strait early that morning and reached Vladivostok on 1 August . 
 = = = = Battle off Ulsan = = = = 
 On 10 August , the ships at Port Arthur attempted a breakout to Vladivostok , but were turned back in the Battle of the Yellow Sea . Jessen was ordered to rendezvous with them , but the order was delayed . His three armored cruisers , Rossia , Gromoboi , and Rurik , had to raise steam , so he did not sortie until the evening of 13 August . By dawn he had reached Tsushima , but turned back when he failed to see any ships from the Port Arthur squadron . 36 miles ( 58 km ) north of the island he encountered Kamimura 's squadron , which consisted of four modern armored cruisers , Izumo , Tokiwa , Azuma , and Iwate . The two squadrons had passed during the night without spotting one another and each had reversed course around first light . This put the Japanese ships astride the Russian route to Vladivostok . 
 Jessen ordered his ships to turn to the northeast when he spotted the Japanese at 05 : 00 and they followed suit , albeit on a slightly converging course . Both sides opened fire around 05 : 23 at a range of 8 @,@ 500 meters ( 9 @,@ 300 yd ) . The Japanese ships concentrated their fire on Rurik , the rear ship of the Russian formation . She was hit fairly quickly and began to fall astern of the other two ships . Jessen turned southeast in an attempt to open the range , but this blinded the Russian gunners with the rising sun and prevented any of their broadside guns from bearing on the Japanese . About 06 : 00 , Jessen turned 180 ° to starboard in an attempt to reach the Korean coast and to allow Rurik to rejoin the squadron . Kamimura followed suit around 06 : 10 , but turned to port , which opened the range between the squadrons . Azuma then developed engine problems and the Japanese squadron slowed to conform with her best speed . Firing recommenced at 06 : 24 and Rurik was hit three times in the stern , flooding her steering compartment ; she had to be steered with her engines . Her speed continued to decrease , further exposing her to Japanese fire , and her steering jammed to port around 06 : 40 . 
 Jessen made another 180 ° turn in an attempt to interpose his two ships between the Japanese and Rurik , but the latter ship suddenly turn to starboard and increased speed and passed between Jessen 's ships and the Japanese . Kamimura turned 180 ° as well so that both squadrons were heading southeast on parallel courses , but Jessen quickly made another 180 ° turn so that they headed on opposing courses . At this time an eight @-@ inch shell struck the roof of Iwate 's starboard forward upper six @-@ inch casemate and ignited the ready @-@ use ammunition . The fire killed 40 and wounded 24 more and knocked out the six @-@ inch gun in that casemate , as well as those below and aft of it . In addition , the 12 @-@ pounder above it was rendered inoperable . The Russians reversed course for the third time around 07 : 45 in another attempt to support Rurik although Rossia was on fire herself ; her fires were extinguished about twenty minutes later . Kamimura circled Rurik to the south at 08 : 00 and allowed the other two Russian ships to get to his north and gave them an uncontested route to Vladivostok . Despite this , Jessen turned back once more at 08 : 15 and ordered Rurik to make her own way back to Vladivostok before turning north at his maximum speed , about 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 About this time Kamimura 's two elderly protected cruisers , Naniwa and Takachiho , were approaching from the south . Their arrival allowed Kamimura to pursue Jessen with all of his armored cruisers while the two new arrivals dealt with Rurik . They fought a running battle with the Russians for the next hour and a half ; scoring enough hits on them to force their speed down to 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The Japanese closed to a minimum of about 5 @,@ 000 meters ( 5 @,@ 500 yd ) , but Kamimura then opened the range up to 6 @,@ 500 meters ( 7 @,@ 100 yd ) . 
 About 10 : 00 , Kamimura 's gunnery officer erroneously informed him that Izumo had expended three @-@ quarters of her ammunition and he turned back after a five @-@ minute rapid @-@ fire barrage . He did not wish to leave the Tsushima Strait unguarded and thought that he could use his remaining ammunition on Rurik . By this time she had been sunk by Naniwa and Takachiho . They had radioed Kamimura that she was sunk , but he did not receive the message . Shortly after the Japanese turned back , Gromoboi and Rossia were forced to heave @-@ to to make repairs . Iwate was the most seriously damaged Japanese ship and suffered a total of 40 killed and 37 wounded . 
 In mid @-@ September , Tokiwa and Iwate were transferred to the 1st Division . In early December the cruiser was sent home to refit . In mid @-@ February , she was guarding the Tsugaru Strait and remained there through mid @-@ April . 
 = = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = = 
 As the Russian 2nd and 3rd Pacific Squadrons approached Japan on 27 May , having sailed from the Baltic Sea , they were spotted by patrolling Japanese ships early that morning , but visibility was limited and radio reception poor . The preliminary reports were enough to cause Tōgō to order his ships to put to sea and the 2nd Division spotted the Russian ships under the command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky at around 11 : 30 . Kamimura closed to about a range of 8 @,@ 000 meters ( 8 @,@ 700 yd ) before sheering off under fire to join Tōgō 's battleships . Iwate , now the flagship of Rear Admiral Shimamura Hayao , was last in the 2nd Division when Tōgō opened fire on the 2nd Pacific Squadron at 14 : 10 and , like most of the ships in the division , engaged the battleship Oslyabya which was forced to fall out of formation at 14 : 50 and sank 20 minutes later . The cruiser also fired upon the battleship Imperator Nikolai I before 14 : 50 . The protected cruiser Zhemchug attempted to make a torpedo attack at about 15 : 06 , but was driven off by fire from Iwate and the armored cruisers Kasuga and Nisshin . The battleship Knyaz Suvorov suddenly appeared out of the mist at 15 : 35 at a range of about 2 @,@ 000 meters ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) . All of Kamimura 's ships engaged her for five minutes or so with Azuma and the armored cruiser Yakumo also firing torpedoes at the Russian ship without effect . 
 After 17 : 30 Kamimura led his division in a fruitless pursuit of some of the Russian cruisers , leaving Tōgō 's battleships to their own devices . He abandoned his chase around 18 : 03 and turned northwards to rejoin Tōgō . His ships spotted the rear of the Russian battleline around 18 : 30 and opened fire when the range closed to 8000 – 9000 meters . Nothing is known of any effect on the Russians and they ceased fire by 19 : 30 and rejoined Tōgō at 20 : 08 as night was falling . The surviving Russian ships were spotted the next morning and the Japanese ships opened fire around 10 : 30 , staying beyond the range at which the Russian ships could effectively reply . Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov therefore decided to surrender his ships as he could neither return fire nor close the range . 
 In the meantime , the coast defense ship Admiral Ushakov had fallen well behind Nebogatov 's ships and was spotted by the protected cruiser Chiyoda early in the morning , but the Japanese were more intent on locating the main body of the Russian fleet than attacking a single isolated ship . Admiral Ushakov was then spotted at 14 : 10 , well after Nebogatov 's surrender , by Shimamura who received permission to pursue her with Iwate and Yakumo . They caught up with the Russian ship at 17 : 00 and demanded her surrender . Admiral Ushakov attempted to close the range to bring the Japanese cruisers within range of her guns , but they were fast enough to keep the range open and the Russian ship never hit either one . After about half an hour , Admiral Ushakov was listing heavily enough that her guns could not elevate enough to bear and her commander ordered his crew to abandon ship and the scuttling charges detonated . The ship sank in three minutes and 12 officers and 327 crewmen were rescued by the Japanese . Between them , Yakumo and Iwate fired 89 eight- and 278 six @-@ inch shells during the engagement . Iwate was struck 17 times , over the course of the entire battle , including hits that burst in the water alongside . She was , however , only lightly damaged by two hits that caused two compartments on the lower deck to flood . These hits were made by two 12 @-@ inch , three 8 @-@ inch , two 6 @-@ inch , one 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) , five 75 mm ( 3 in ) , and four unidentified shells . 
 As the IJN was preparing to invade Sakhalin Island in early July , Kamimura 's 2nd Division , now reduced to Iwate , Izumo , and Tokiwa , was tasked to defend the Korea Strait before it escorted troops that made an amphibious landing in northeastern Korea . In mid @-@ August , the division covered the landing at Chongjin , closer to the Russian border . After the war , she was briefly commanded by Captain Yamashita Gentaro from 2 February to 22 November 1906 before he was relieved by Captain Arima <unk> . 
 = = = Subsequent service = = = 
 The ship participated in the early stages of the Battle of Tsingtao before returning to Sasebo on 2 October 1914 . The following month she was assigned to the First South Seas Squadron , based at Fiji and later at the Marquesas Islands . On 1 September 1915 , Iwate was assigned to the Training Squadron where she conducted long @-@ distance oceanic navigation and officer training for cadets in the Imperial Japanese Navy Academy . She began the first of her 16 training cruises on 20 April 1916 , together with Azuma , and visited Australia and Southeast Asia before returning home on 22 August . The ship was relieved of her assignment the next month , but rejoined the Training Squadron a year later in preparation for her next training cruise . Iwate departed on 2 March 1918 , bound for Central America , Hawaii and the South Sea Islands , and returned on 6 July . 
 Two years later , the ship began her next training cruise on 21 August 1920 , visiting South America and the South Sea Islands , before returning on 4 April 1921 . On 1 September , she was re @-@ designated as a 1st @-@ class coast @-@ defense ship . On 26 June 1922 , Iwate , accompanied by Izumo and Yakumo , began a circumnavigation of the world that took them to Hawaii , Los Angeles , California , through the Panama Canal to Rio de Janeiro , where the cadets viewed the Independence Centenary International Exposition commemorating Brazilian independence . The ships then visited Buenos Aires , Argentina and Durban , South Africa before heading home via the Indian Ocean , where they arrived on 8 February 1923 . 
 In 1924 , four of Iwate 's 12 @-@ pounder guns were removed , as were all of her QF 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder guns , and a single 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) gun was added . Refitted again in 1931 , her torpedo tubes were removed as were all of her main deck 6 @-@ inch guns and their casemates plated over ; she now carried only two 12 @-@ pounders , although she now had three 8 cm / 40 3rd Year Type AA guns . In addition her boilers were replaced by six Yarrow boilers with an output of only 7 @,@ 000 ihp ( 5 @,@ 200 kW ) which reduced her top speed to 16 knots ( 30 km / h ; 18 mph ) . She now carried 1 @,@ 435 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 412 long tons ) of coal and 329 metric tons ( 324 long tons ) of fuel oil . Her crew now numbered 726 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship continued to make training cruises , usually at two @-@ year intervals , for the rest of the decade that took her to the East Coast of North America and the Mediterranean Sea among other places . One of her cadets on the 1925 – 26 cruise was Prince Hironobu Fushimi . In December 1928 , the ship escorted Emperor Hirohito during an Imperial fleet review in Yokohama harbor . From 1932 the training voyages became annual events , with the exception of 1935 , until they ceased at the end of 1939 . 
 Iwate was assigned to the 12th Squadron of the 3rd Support Fleet from 1 February 1940 . Despite her antiquated age , she was briefly re @-@ classified as a 1st @-@ class cruiser on 1 July 1942 before she was reclassified as a training ship in 1943 . On 19 March 1945 , Iwate was attacked by American carrier aircraft , killing one crewman , although they failed to inflict any significant damage . Shortly afterwards , her 8 @-@ inch guns were replaced by four 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) Type 89 dual @-@ purpose guns in two twin mounts and four of her remaining 6 @-@ inch guns were removed . Her light anti @-@ aircraft armament was significantly reinforced by the addition of nine license @-@ built Hotchkiss 25 @-@ millimeter Type 96 light AA guns in one triple , two twin , and two single @-@ gun mounts and two 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter Hotchkiss machine guns in single mounts . 
 The ship was bombed during the American aerial attack on Kure on 24 July 1945 . While not hit by any bombs , the three near misses sprang the ship 's seams and the resulting flooding caused her to sink in shallow water at coordinates 34 ° 14 ′ N 132 ° 30 ′ E the following day . She was removed from the navy list on 30 November and her hulk was raised and scrapped in 1946 – 47 by the Harima Dock Company . 
 = Smederevo Fortress = 
 The Smederevo Fortress ( Serbian : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) is a medieval fortified city in Smederevo , Serbia , which was temporary capital of Serbia in the Middle Ages . It was built between 1427 and 1430 on the order of Despot Đurađ Branković , the ruler of the Serbian Despotate . It was further fortified by the Ottoman Empire , that had taken the city , in the end of the century . 
 The fortress withstood several sieges by Ottomans and Serbs , which it survived relatively unscathed . It was not until World War II that it was heavily damaged , by explosions and bombing . As of 2009 it is in the midst of extensive restoration and conservation work , despite which the fortress remains " one of the rare preserved courts of medieval Serbian rulers . " 
 Smederevo Fortress was declared a national Monument of Culture of Exceptional Importance in 1979 . In 2010 , the fortress was placed on the tentative list for possible nomination as a World Heritage Site ( UNESCO ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 Smederevo Fortress , 45 kilometers southeast of Belgrade , covers 11 @.@ 3 hectares in the center of the modern @-@ day city of Smederevo . It is strategically located on the right bank of the Danube river on the triangular plain formed by the confluence of the Danube and Jezava rivers , only 72 meters above sea level . This location allowed the Serbian capital to remain near the Christian Kingdom of Hungary , while also satisfying Sultan Murad II of the Ottoman Empire by eliminating the uncontrolled passage of the Hungarians into the Morava valley . 
 The fortress ' position connecting the Balkans and Central Europe has made it an important religious and commercial center for centuries , now aided by being on the Pan @-@ European X corridor . The Danube also connects it to many other historic sites , most notably Belgrade and its suburb of Vinča , Novi Sad , Golubac fortress , <unk> Vir and Viminacium . 
 = = History = = 
 Amidst the turbulence of the Ottoman conquest of the Balkans in the early 15th century , the region 's Christian rulers lost several battles , such as the Battle of Kosovo and the siege of Veliko Tarnovo . Despot Stefan Lazarević had to maintain the Serbian Despotate in a delicate balance between the Ottomans and Hungarians . Around 1403 , he accepted the Hungarian vassalage from King Sigismund and established the new capital in Belgrade , which was ceded to him as an award . After Stefan 's death in 1426 , Đurađ Branković , Stefan 's nephew and successor , had to return Belgrade to the Hungarians . To compensate for this loss , Đurađ decided to build a new capital , and the choice fell to Smederevo . 
 Smederevo , which had no prior settlement , was chosen for several reasons . In 1428 , during the Ottoman Empire 's war with Venice , the Hungarians and Ottomans agreed to recognize Branković as an independent ruler of Serbia , thereby turning it into a buffer state . A contract also established Ottoman overlordship of Serbia , in conjunction with remaining a Hungarian vassal . Between the longer status with Hungary and religious differences with the Ottomans ( Hungary and Serbia were Christian , as compared to the Muslim Turks ) , it was preferred that the capital be closer to Hungary than the Ottoman Empire . Smederevo 's location on the Danube , between Belgrade and Golubac , provided easy access to other points along the river . It also allowed the control of Danube traffic , including blocking Hungarian entry into the Morava valley , which satisfied the Turks . 
 In the fall of 1428 , construction of the capital began . In 1430 , the first part of the fortress , including a palace and enough other buildings to form an inner city , was completed . Work on a fortified suburb and additional fortifications continued until 1439 . 
 On April 20 , 1434 , Đurađ Branković 's youngest daughter Katarina and Ulrich II of Celje were wed in the new fortress . This marriage stressed the friendly relations the Despot had with the Ottoman Porte , although Ulrich 's kinship with the Queen of Hungary implied an increased Serbo @-@ Hungarian alliance . As a result , Vizier Mehmet <unk> @-@ pasha arrived in Smederevo in mid @-@ 1434 with a message from Edirne . It stated that Serbia 's safety from the Ottoman Empire could only be guaranteed through the marriage of Branković 's older daughter to Sultan Murad II . After much deliberation , the council convoked at the palace conceded , and arrangements were made for Mara to be engaged to the Sultan . That autumn , Murad sent several of his " most famous viziers " to retrieve his fiancée . 
 On August 14 , 1435 , a formal contract of " brotherhood and friendship " between Serbia and the Republic of Venice was signed in Smederevo 's audience hall . This contract resulted in Đurađ and his sons being counted as Venetian citizens . In early June 1439 , the peace with the Ottomans , which had been gained through Mara 's marriage to the Sultan , was broken . Led by Murad II , 130 @,@ 000 Turkish soldiers occupied the hills around Smederevo . Branković rushed to Hungary for help , leaving his son Grgur in command . Help was not forthcoming , but Smederevo withstood the attack , even when Murad brought in cannons . 
 Nearly three months later , on August 18 , 1439 , hunger forced the Serbs to surrender . Princes Grgur and Stefan were sent to Anatolia and blinded , despite the pleas of their sister , now Sultana Mara . Five years later , however , Smederevo , Grgur , and Stefan returned to Branković through the Peace of Szeged . 
 Around the beginning of 1449 , Branković imprisoned Hungarian regent John Hunyadi in the dungeons of the fortress until he was ransomed by his countrymen . In 1453 , Sultan Mehmed II and Isak @-@ bey <unk> led another attack on Smederevo as part of a devastating raid on Serbia . The Turks took 50 @,@ 000 men , women and children during that raid , but Smederevo was well @-@ led by Thomas Kantakouzenos . Despite having only 6 @,@ 000 men , compared to the Ottomans ' 20 @,@ 000 , the city withstood . Mehmed the Conqueror besieged Smederevo for the second time and the fortress was besieged by the Ottomans for the third time in 1456 , being defended by Serbian forces . In 1459 , Smederevo was captured by the Ottomans , leading to the end of the medieval Serbian state . 
 During World War II , German forces used the fortress for ammunition storage . On June 5 , 1941 , the ammunition exploded , blasting through the entirety of Smederevo and reaching settlements as far as 10 kilometers away . Much of the southern wall of the fortress was destroyed , the nearby railway station , packed with people , was blown away , and most of the buildings in the city were turned into debris . Around 2 @,@ 500 people died in the explosion , and every other inhabitant was injured or wounded ( approximately 5 @,@ 500 ) . Bombing by the Allies in 1944 caused further damage . 
 = = = Current and future use = = = 
 The fortress is currently used as a city park , and occasionally hosts festivals , concerts , fairs , and other cultural events . A stage has been built in the inner city . To the southeast , the previously open space along the Jezava now has a harbor and a marina . There are also discussions underway to determine compatible future , modernized uses , and to develop projects to restore and rehabilitate the fortress . 
 = = Cultural and historical significance = = 
 Smederevo Fortress has been described as " one of the most striking and monumental pieces of architecture surviving from medieval Serbia " , and " the witness of Serbian creative force . " It is an accurate display of traditional medieval defensive architecture and has remained well preserved , suffering no major deterioration until World War II . The fortress and surrounding area have accumulated evidence of the civilizations that developed throughout history , mainly between the 15th and 20th centuries , providing a direct testimony for the progress of the medieval Serbian state and corresponding Orthodox Church . 
 The fortress was built by Đurađ Branković as the new capital of Serbia . During construction , Branković 's wife Jerina was seen speaking with the foreign overseers — her brother George Palaiologos Kantakouzenos and his men — which resulted in her being commonly associated with the project . Among the workers , this association , coupled with required long @-@ term labor and high taxes , gained her the nickname Prokleta Jerina ( Damned Jerina ) . 
 The amount of effort exerted also produced a variety of exaggerations and stories , such as the epic poem " <unk> Novak i knez <unk> " ( " Elder Novak and Count <unk> " ) , which stated that many people fled to the woods and became <unk> in order to escape taxes and further work . While there were in fact <unk> in the area , it is unclear whether they were actually related to the fortress ' construction . 
 Once the first part was completed , Smederevo Fortress quickly became an important connection between the Balkans and central Europe . Shortly after it was built , the city reached its peak importance as a religious , commercial , and trade center , at which point it was populated mainly by Serbs and colonies of merchants , primarily from Dubrovnik . Around the same time , the relics of Saint Luke the Evangelist , who became the patron saint of Smederevo , were brought and stored in the church in the fortress . 
 In relation to the structure itself , the inner city is notable for the audience hall , which is an important representation of Serbian medieval architecture . High in the stone wall on the Danube side , four sets of double @-@ arched windows are carved in a combination of Gothic and Romanesque styles . This is where a merchant contract between the Republic of Venice and the Serbian Despotate was signed . 
 There is also a tower in the inner city with a large brick inscription naming Đurađ Branković and stating the date of construction . It reads " V <unk> <unk> <unk> despot <unk> , gospodin <unk> i <unk> <unk> ; <unk> <unk> <unk> se <unk> grad v <unk> 6938 " ( " In Christ the Lord faithful despot <unk> , Lord of Serbs and the Littoral of Zeta . By His order this city was built in the year of 6938 [ 1430 ] " . ) Above it is an immured cross , which gives the tower its names " <unk> kula " ( " <unk> tower " ) and tower " <unk> " . This type of inscription is rare , and found only on former Byzantine territory . It is the sole example in the former Yugoslavia . 
 In the fortified suburb are the minimal remains of two more significant structures . One was a sacral complex , <unk> <unk> ( Annunciation Church ) , where the Saint 's relics were stored . Though its construction began in the 15th century , it was built over several historical phases . The second structure was a Turkish bath from the 17th century . 
 For years , Smederevo Fortress stood as the last defense against Ottoman assaults . During their attack in 1439 , it also became the first site in Serbia to see cannon fire . When it fell in 1459 , it became the center of a Turkish sanjak . Later , Smederevo was a province of the Habsburg Monarchy , and between 1805 and 1807 it was once again the center of the renewed Serbian state . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Smederevo Fortress is a monumental complex built in the Byzantine tradition and modeled after Constantinople fortress . Although its foundations were not intended to be submerged , it is classed as a water fortress because it is completely surrounded by water . After the fortress ' completion , there was a decline in its military importance and few structural changes were made . As a result , the original architectural style has been preserved to this day . 
 The fortress is encircled by 1 @.@ 5 kilometers of crenelated walls over 2 meters thick , and 25 towers which are each approximately 25 meters tall . Two sides were bordered by the Danube and Jezava rivers , though the Jezava has now been redirected away from the wall . The third side had two moats added to the defensive system , one for the inner city and one for the suburb . The area south of the outer walls was left open . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 There were four main phases in the construction of the fortress . The work on the first part , a fortified manor for Despot Đurađ Branković built at the confluence of the rivers , began in the autumn of 1428 . 
 Under the eye of George Palaiologos Kantakouzenos , older brother of <unk> Jerina Branković , lumber , lime , and enormous stones from the former Roman cities of Mons Aureus ( the modern village of <unk> , west of Smederevo ) , <unk> ( at the mouth of the Great Morava ) , and Viminacium were collected . In the spring of 1429 , Greek and Ragusan workers began the brickwork . In 1430 , the elegant manor was completed . It included a palace stretching along the length of the moat wall ; a throne hall against the Danube wall ; a keep , <unk> kula ( <unk> tower ) , in the corner formed by the walls ; a treasury in a high chamber ; and other auxiliary buildings , creating an inner city . 
 The throne hall , where Branković received his visitors , was built with four double @-@ arched windows , fashioned in a mixed Gothic / Romanesque style . <unk> kula was intended to be the final line of defense . It was constructed with walls over 4 meters thick , and housed the nobility during Turkish attacks . Hidden doors were built into the Jezava wall , allowing for passage towards Hungary . 
 The next nine years were spent expanding the fortifications to include a larger fortified suburb , thereby finishing the main fortress . In the suburb , a sacral complex was built in phases from the 15th century onwards , and a Turkish bath was added by the Ottomans in the 17th century . There was a ship gate in the suburb 's Danube wall , where sailors could enter the fortress . It is unclear whether any long @-@ term residential buildings were built . 
 Between 1460 and 1480 , while held by the Ottoman Empire , a larger defensive system was built , including escarpments , low walls , and more towers . During the first half of the 18th century , fortified trenches were added . 
 = = = Current condition = = = 
 The state of deterioration of the fortress ranges widely , from <unk> kula which is still well preserved , to sections of the walls which have seen no repair work and have collapsed in some places . 
 The first , and most severe , damage happened during World War II . On June 5 , 1941 , ammunition stored in the fortress exploded , destroying not only a large part of the southern wall , but also decimating most of Smederevo . Further damage was caused by the Allies ' bombing in 1944 . 
 A dam in the Iron Gate , completed in 1972 , raised the water level of the lower Danube basin and caused significant flooding . Between 1970 and 1980 , a system was built to protect the fortress and surrounding city from future high water , however there was once again major flooding in 2006 , a result of heavy rainfall and melting snow . 
 The fortress has been the focus of restoration and conservation efforts , followed by archaeological and architectural research , since at least 1970 . The majority of work so far was done between 1970 and 1995 . While some parts were at least partially repaired , others only received conservation work and are still in bad condition . 
 In the inner city , the foundation is the only part of the palace which remains standing , and the audience hall has only an outline where the base was . What remains has been partially restored and is now stable , though issues of vegetation growth and permanent maintenance remain . The surrounding towers also still need work , as many have collapsed . The town 's restoration was followed in 1994 – 1995 with an archaeological investigation . 
 The fortified suburb is still in very bad condition . Parts of the wall are missing and several towers are leaning or partially collapsed . The corner tower behind the Turkish inscription tower , and the stretch of wall along the Danube have seen conservation efforts , and the southern wall , which has been restored several times as part of a levee , is stable , but the conservation work is of poor quality . Much of the time has instead been spent on archaeological excavations and research , especially of the remains of the sacral complex and Turkish bath . 
 The escarpment along the Danube , which had partially collapsed several times , has seen restoration work , and is now in good condition . On the other sides , much of the escarpment is gone or underground , and the overall condition is unknown . 
 The ambiance and setting are also threatened , though they remain the best along the Danube . The other two sides are surrounded by modern development , such as a marina on the eastern side , a railway to the south , and a variety of other urban structures . 
 The planned final result of the work is for full rehabilitation of both Smederevo Fortress and its immediate surroundings , including relocating the railroad , though estimations of cost vary widely . Between 2003 and 2004 , the cost for just the conservation work was estimated to be € 10 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 , while the total rehabilitation cost , including conservation , restoration , and research , reached as high as € 22 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . In 2005 , the combined cost for basic conservation and research dropped to € 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Ongoing risk factors = = = 
 Despite conservation efforts , the fortress is still at risk of damage , for reasons , both natural and man @-@ made . The higher groundwater level resulting from the dam in the Iron Gate threatens its stability , and has increased the number of floods , especially before the coast was consolidated . Air pollution and vegetation growth are increasing the rate of decay . Urban encroachment , especially by the railroad , continues to threaten the character of the area surrounding the fortress . Unrestricted visits by tourists , combined with inadequate protection , maintenance , and support , both administrative and financial , also contribute to the slow deterioration of the fortress . 
 = Courbet @-@ class battleship = 
 The Courbet class battleships were the first dreadnoughts built for the French Navy before World War I. The class comprised four ships : Courbet , France , Jean Bart , and Paris . All four ships were deployed to the Mediterranean Sea for the entirety of World War I , spending most of their time escorting French troop convoys from North Africa and covering the Otranto Barrage . An Anglo @-@ French fleet led by Courbet succeeded in sinking the Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta in the Battle of Antivari . Jean Bart was torpedoed in the bow by U @-@ 12 on 21 December 1914 , but she was able to steam to Malta for repairs . 
 France sank after striking a rock in Quiberon Bay in 1922 . Between the wars the surviving ships were modernised several times , but they were not rebuilt thoroughly enough to prevent them from becoming obsolete in comparison to modern German or Italian battleships . They were relegated to training duties during the 1930s . Courbet and Paris escaped to Portsmouth where they became depot and accommodation ships after the French armistice in 1940 . Jean Bart was demilitarised , renamed Océan , and became a school hulk in Toulon . She was captured there on 27 November 1942 , although she was not scuttled . She was used for experiments with large shaped charge warheads by the Germans until she was sunk by the Allies in 1944 , later broken up in place in 1945 . Courbet was scuttled on 9 June 1944 as a breakwater for the Mulberry harbour used during the Battle of Normandy . 
 = = Design = = 
 Concerned about underwater hits , the class 's French designers decided to extend the waterline armour belt well below the waterline as compared to their contemporaries . The main armour was also thinner than that of its British or German counterparts , but covered more area . Their secondary armament was of a smaller size than the 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns used by the Germans or the British 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , but the French placed a premium on rate of fire rather than size , in order stop torpedo boats before they got within torpedo range . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Courbets were longer than their predecessors , at 166 m ( 544 ft 7 in ) overall . The ships had a beam of 27 m ( 88 ft 7 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 @.@ 04 m ( 29 ft 8 in ) at the bow . The ships were significantly heavier than the previous Danton class ; the Courbet @-@ class ships displaced 23 @,@ 475 tonnes ( 23 @,@ 104 long tons ) at standard load and 25 @,@ 579 tonnes ( 25 @,@ 175 long tons ) at full load , over 5 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 900 long tons ) more than the earlier ships . 
 These ships proved to be rather wet in service , as they were bow @-@ heavy because of the superimposed turrets forward . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The Courbet @-@ class ships had four Parsons direct @-@ drive steam turbines which were rated at 28 @,@ 000 shp ( 21 @,@ 000 kW ) . Each ship had twenty @-@ four Belleville water @-@ tube or Niclausse boilers , eight small and sixteen large . The large boilers were in the two forward boiler rooms and the small boilers were in the rear boiler room ; each boiler room housed eight boilers . These boilers were coal @-@ burning with auxiliary oil sprayers . They had a top speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , although all four were faster during trials . The ships carried up to 2 @,@ 700 long tons ( 2 @,@ 743 t ) of coal and 906 long tons ( 921 t ) of oil . They could steam for 4 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km ; 4 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The French rejected their standard hexagonal configuration for the main armament of the Courbet class . Twelve 305 mm Mle 1910 45 @-@ calibre guns were mounted in six twin gun turrets , with two turrets superimposed fore and aft , and one on each flank of the ship . The guns had a maximum elevation of only 12 ° . They fired 432 @-@ kilogram ( 952 lb ) armour @-@ piercing projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 783 m / s ( 2 @,@ 570 ft / s ) at a rate of 1 @.@ 5 – 2 rounds per minute . At maximum elevation , this provided a maximum range of only 13 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 yd ) . The guns were provided with 100 shells each . 
 The ships ' secondary armament consisted of twenty @-@ two 138 mm Mle 1910 guns , mounted in casemates . The guns fired 39 @.@ 5 @-@ kilogram ( 87 lb ) semi @-@ armour @-@ piercing shells at a muzzle velocity of 840 m / s ( 2 @,@ 800 ft / s ) . The guns could be elevated to 15 ° , which provided a maximum range of less than 16 @,@ 000 metres ( 17 @,@ 000 yd ) . They had a rate of fire of 5 – 6 rounds per minute and each gun provided with 275 rounds . The rearmost guns were very low and were often washed out in any kind of sea . The ships also carried four 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Modèle 1902 Hotchkiss guns , two on each beam . The Courbet class ships were also armed with four 450 mm ( 18 in ) submerged Modèle 1909 torpedo tubes for which they carried twelve torpedoes . 
 Fire control arrangements were very primitive and the Courbets were only provided with one 2 @.@ 74 m ( 9 ft 0 in ) rangefinder on each side of the conning tower . Each turret had 1 @.@ 37 m ( 4 ft 6 in ) rangefinder under an armoured hood at the rear of the turret . 
 = = = Armour = = = 
 The Courbet @-@ class ships had a waterline armoured belt , 4 @.@ 75 m ( 15 @.@ 6 ft ) deep , that was 270 mm ( 11 in ) thick between the fore and aft turrets and tapered to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) towards the bow and stern . It extended 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 ft 10 in ) below the normal waterline . Above the main belt was another belt , 180 mm thick , that covered the sides , and the secondary armament , up to the forecastle deck , 4 @.@ 5 m ( 15 ft ) deep , between the fore and aft turrets . The vertical armour was backed by 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) of wood . Four of the ship 's decks were armoured , between 30 and 48 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 and 1 @.@ 9 in ) each , although they were built up from two or more layers of plates . The sides of the lowest armoured deck curved to meet the bottom of the lower edge of the waterline belt armour and increased to a thickness of 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) . The conning tower had armour 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The main gun turrets had 290 mm ( 11 @.@ 4 in ) of armour on their faces , 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) on their sides and roofs 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . Their barbettes had 280 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 in ) of armour . There was no anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead although there was a longitudinal bulkhead abreast the machinery spaces that was used either as a coal bunker or left as a void . 
 = = Construction = = 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early service = = = 
 The Courbet @-@ class ships were completed less than a year before the start of World War I and nothing is known of their activities during this time except that France , escorted by Jean Bart , carried the President of the French Republic , Raymond Poincaré , on a state visit to Saint Petersburg , Russia in July 1914 . They were returning from Russia when World War I began , but made it to France without encountering German ships . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 France and the British agreed that the French fleet would concentrate in the Mediterranean to contain the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet and the Courbet class ships sailed there after the war began . Courbet became the flagship of Admiral Augustin Boué de Lapeyrère , commander of the French Mediterranean Fleet . Lapeyrère decided immediately on a sweep into the Adriatic to surprise the Austrian vessels enforcing a blockade of Montenegro . The Anglo @-@ French force , which included Jean Bart , succeeded in cutting off and sinking the Austro @-@ Hungarian protected cruiser Zenta off Bar on 16 August 1914 , although her accompanying destroyer managed to escape . They spent most of the rest of 1914 providing gunfire support for the Montenegrin Army until U @-@ 12 hit Jean Bart on 21 December with one torpedo in the wine store just in front of the forward magazine off Sazan Island . She was able to steam to Malta on her own for repairs that required three and a half months , but this forced the battleships to fall back to either Malta or Bizerte . After the French occupied the neutral Greek island of Corfu in 1916 they moved forward to Corfu and Argostoli , but their activities were very limited as many of their crews were used to man anti @-@ submarine ships . 
 = = = Post @-@ war modernisation = = = 
 A post @-@ war assessment listed their weaknesses as : 
 No director control for the guns 
 The elevation of the main guns was insufficient 
 Protection against torpedoes was weak 
 The horizontal protection against plunging fire was weak 
 The anti @-@ aircraft defense was negligible 
 They were coal @-@ fired 
 The organisation of the crew , the lighting and the method of transmitting orders were old @-@ fashioned . 
 The survivors were refitted several times during the interwar period to remedy these issues , although no comprehensive modernisation was ever planned . These included installation of director control mounted in new tripod foremasts , replacement of the rangefinders by larger units , the addition of more rangefinders , the alteration of the main gun turrets to allow elevation up to 23 ° , partial replacement of the coal @-@ fired boilers by oil @-@ fired units , the replacement of the direct @-@ drive turbines by geared turbines , the removal of the bow armour to reduce the weight forward , and the addition of more modern anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war careers = = = 
 In April 1919 , while helping to defend Sevastopol from the advancing Bolsheviks , the crews of France and Jean Bart mutinied , but collapsed when Vice @-@ Admiral Jean @-@ Françoise @-@ Charles Amet agreed to meet their main demand to take the ships home . 26 crewmen on France and three on Jean Bart were sentenced to prison terms upon her return , although they were commuted in 1922 as part of a bargain between Prime Minister Raymond Poincaré and the parties of the Left . 
 In 1922 , France was wrecked after striking an uncharted rock in Quiberon Bay at low tide and foundered with three deaths among her crew . Jean Bart received the first stage of her modernisation between 12 October 1923 and 29 January 1925 . She underwent the second stage between 7 August 1929 and 28 September 1931 . Her condition was poor , even after the earlier refits so she was demilitarised and became a training ship in Toulon in 1936 . She was renamed Océan in 1937 to release her name for the new Richelieu @-@ class battleship Jean Bart. 
 Courbet became flagship of Vice @-@ Amiral Charlier between 6 June 1919 and 20 October 1920 . The following year she became a gunnery training ship at Toulon , but she suffered a serious boiler fire in June 1923 that caused her to be repaired and given the first of her upgrades between July and April 1924 at La Seyne @-@ sur @-@ Mer . She had another boiler fire in August 1924 and remained under repair for the rest of the year , but resumed her duties as a gunnery training ship upon her return from the dockyard . She was refitted again between January 1927 and January 1931 . She was transferred from the gunnery school to the navigation school in 1937 , before her final prewar refit between April 1937 to September 1938 . By 1939 she reverted to her role as a gunnery training ship , but she was ordered to Brest and Quiberon with her sister Paris upon the outbreak of World War II . 
 Paris was sent to Pula on 12 December 1918 to supervise the surrendered Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet where she remained until 25 March 1919 . She provided cover for Greek troops during the Occupation of İzmir ( Smyrna ) from May 1919 before returning to Toulon on 30 June . She received the first of her upgrades at Brest between October 1922 and November 1923 . She supported an amphibious landing at Al Hoceima by Spanish troops during the summer of 1925 after the <unk> attacked French Morocco during the Rif War . She destroyed coast defense batteries there despite taking light damage from six hits and remained there until October as the flagship of the French forces . She received the second of her upgrades from 16 August 1927 to 15 January 1929 at Toulon . She resumed her role as flagship of the 2nd Division of the 1st Squadron of the Mediterranean Squadron until 1 October 1931 when she became a training ship . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Courbet and Paris formed a Fifth Squadron at the beginning of the war . They were transferred to the Atlantic to continue their training duties without interference . Both ships were ordered restored to operational status on 21 May 1940 by Amiral Mord and their light anti @-@ aircraft outfits were augmented at Cherbourg . Courbet was ordered to provide gunfire support to the defenders of Cherbourg against the advancing 7th Panzer Division and covered the evacuation of the town by the Allies while Paris supported the defenders of Le Havre . Lack of spotting aircraft meant that neither ship was particularly effective in that role . 
 Paris was damaged by a German bomb on 11 June and sailed for Cherbourg for emergency repairs that night . She was later transferred to Brest on 14 June and evacuated 2800 men when she sailed for Plymouth on 18 June at a speed of 7 knots ( 13 km / h ; 8 @.@ 1 mph ) . She was seized there on 3 July by the Royal Navy as part of Operation Catapult , Winston Churchill 's plan to prevent the French Navy from falling into German hands . She was used as a depot ship for the rest of the war and temporarily as a barracks ship by the Polish Navy . She was returned to French control in July 1945 and towed to Brest on 21 August . She continued to serve as a depot ship until she was stricken for breaking up on 21 December 1955 before being scrapped the following year . 
 Courbet sailed for Portsmouth on 20 June . She was also seized there on 3 July and was turned over to the Free French a week later who used her as a depot and an anti @-@ aircraft ship in Portsmouth until 31 March 1941 when she was disarmed . She remained in use as a depot ship and target until she was scuttled as a breakwater on 9 July 1944 for the Mulberry harbour used during the Battle of Normandy . She was scrapped in place after the war . 
 Jean Bart was demilitarised and became a school hulk in Toulon in 1936 . She remained there during World War II and was captured there on 27 November 1942 , although she was not scuttled . She was used for experiments with large shaped charge warheads by the Germans until she was sunk by the Allies in 1944 before being broken up in place beginning on 14 December 1945 . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Design A @-@ 150 battleship = 
 Design A @-@ 150 , also known as the Super Yamato class , was an Imperial Japanese plan for a class of battleships . Begun in 1938 – 39 , the design was mostly complete by 1941 . However , so that a demand for other types of warships could be met , all work on Design A @-@ 150 was halted and no keels were laid . Authors William H. Garzke and Robert O. Dulin have argued that Design A @-@ 150 would have been the " most powerful battleships in history " because of the massive size of their main battery of six 510 mm ( 20 in ) guns as well as numerous smaller caliber weapons . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Initial plans for the A @-@ 150 battleships called for eight or nine 510 mm ( 20 @.@ 1 in ) guns in quadruple or triple turrets . The successful construction of a 480 mm ( 18 @.@ 9 in ) gun in 1920 – 1921 made the Japanese confident that a 510 mm ( 20 @.@ 1 in ) could be built . In addition , a top speed of 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) was desired so that the class would be faster than the United States ' 27 kn ( 31 mph ; 50 km / h ) North Carolina @-@ class battleships . However , these grand specifications were curtailed when tests culminated in a ship that had a displacement of some 90 @,@ 000 tons ; it was felt that ships of this size would be " too large and too expensive " . 
 = = = Specifications = = = 
 Initial design studies were undertaken after the completion of plans for the Yamato class ( 1938 – 39 ) ; they focused on a ship with a displacement nearer to that of the Yamatos . As the Japanese expected that the Americans would be able to obtain the true characteristics of that class ( namely the principal armament of 460 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) ) , the use of 510 mm guns was vital to keep with Japan 's policy of individual ships ' superiority over their American counterparts ; the A @-@ 150s were meant to counter the United States ' reply to the Yamatos . 
 Plans were " essentially completed " sometime in 1941 ; however , similar to the fate of documents relating to the Yamato class , most papers and all plans relating to the class were destroyed at the end of the war , meaning that the full specifications of the ships are not known . It is known the ships would have had greater firepower than the Yamato class : a main battery of six 510 mm ( 20 @.@ 1 inch ) guns in three twin turrets and a secondary armament of " many " 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) / 65 caliber guns . The displacement was to be similar to the Yamato class , which was around 60 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 tonnes . The side armor belt was probably going to be 460 mm ( 18 in ) . This was so large that steel mills in Japan were incapable of manufacturing it ; instead , " double strakes of armor plates " were going to be used , which would have been much less effective than just one single plate . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Although details of the smaller armament planned for the ships are not given in sources , a main battery of six 510 mm ( 20 @.@ 1 in ) / 45 caliber guns in dual turrets was definitely planned . These would have been the largest ever fitted to a capital ship , dwarfing the 460 mm ( 18 @.@ 1 in ) guns mounted on the Yamato class . By 1941 , one — possibly two — of the 510 mm guns were being constructed at the Kure Naval Arsenal and detailed designs of the turrets that would hold the guns were drawn up . The turrets would have weighed 2 @,@ 780 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 740 long tons ) and trained at 2 ° per second through a range of 120 ° to port or starboard . The guns themselves could have fired at a maximum rate of 1 to 1 @.@ 5 rounds per minute and be elevated from -5 ° to 45 ° , with the elevation rate being 10 ° per second . They would have weighed 227 t ( 223 long tons ) and would have been 23 @.@ 56 m ( 928 in ) long . The bore length was to have been around 22 @.@ 84 m ( 899 in ) . The armor @-@ piercing ammunition would have weighed between 1900 and 2000 kg ( <unk> – <unk> lbs ) , while the high explosive rounds would have been 1 @,@ 858 kg ( 4 @,@ 096 lb ) . 
 A secondary battery of " many " 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) / 65 caliber guns was being considered , although this was not final . This design was the best anti @-@ aircraft gun produced by Japan during the Second World War . Overall , the weapons compared very well with other contemporary weapons . The key advantages that made it so successful — the " high muzzle velocity and a fast rate of fire " — resulted in a short 350 – 400 @-@ round service life . In anti @-@ aircraft defense , their ceiling at 90 ° was 13 @,@ 000 m ( 43 @,@ 000 ft ) , although the effective range was 11 @,@ 000 m ( 36 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were able to fire 15 – 21 rounds per minute . 
 In Battleships : Axis and Neutral Battleships in World War II , authors William H. Garzke and Robert O. Dulin argued that Design A @-@ 150 would have been the " most powerful battleships in history " because of the titanic main armament and the use of a dual purpose secondary battery . 
 = = Construction = = 
 With war on the horizon in early 1941 , all design work was diverted from battleships — even though the A @-@ 150s ' design was virtually complete — so that a demand for " aircraft carriers , cruisers , and smaller ships " could be met . Even though no work was being done on them , two ships of Design A @-@ 150 , provisionally designated as Warships Number 798 and 799 , were projected in a 1942 building program . 798 was to be built in the same dock as Shinano , while 799 was to be built in Kure in the same dock as Yamato after the fourth ship in the class , Warship Number 111 , was launched . Both of the ships ' keels were supposed to be laid in late 1941 or early 1942 , launched in 1944 / 45 , and finished in 1946 / 47 . However , the war 's turn against the Japanese after the Battle of Midway meant that the need for ships other than battleships never abated . 
 = The Black Adder = 
 The Black Adder is the first series of the BBC sitcom Blackadder , written by Richard Curtis and Rowan Atkinson , directed by Martin <unk> and produced by John Lloyd . The series was originally aired on BBC One from 15 June 1983 to 20 July 1983 , and was a joint production with the Australian Seven Network . Set in 1485 at the end of the British Middle Ages , the series is written as a secret history which contends that King Richard III won the Battle of Bosworth Field , only to be unintentionally assassinated by his nephew Edmund , and is succeeded by Richard IV , one of the Princes in the Tower . 
 The series follows the exploits of Richard IV 's <unk> second son Edmund ( who calls himself " The Black Adder " ) in his various attempts to increase his standing with his father and in the final episode his quest to overthrow him . Conceived while Atkinson and Curtis were working on Not the Nine O 'Clock News , the series covers a number of medieval issues in Britain in a humorous and often anachronistic manner - witchcraft , Royal succession , European relations , the Crusades and the conflict between the Crown and the Church . The filming of the series was highly ambitious , with a large cast and much location shooting . The series also features Shakespearean dialogue , often adapted for comic effect . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Set in the Middle Ages , the series is written as an alternate history . It opens on 21 August 1485 , the eve of the Battle of Bosworth Field , which in the series is won not by Henry Tudor ( as in reality ) but by Richard III . Richard III , played by Peter Cook , is presented as a good king who doted on his nephews , contrary to the Shakespearean view of him as a hunchbacked , infanticidal monster . 
 After his victory in the battle , Richard III is unintentionally killed by Lord Edmund Plantagenet ; Richard attempts to take Edmund 's horse , which he thinks is his own . Not recognizing the king , Edmund thinks Richard is stealing it and cuts his head off . The late King 's nephew , Richard , Duke of York ( played by Brian Blessed ) who is Lord Edmund Plantagenet 's father , is then crowned as Richard IV . Lord Edmund himself did not take part in the battle after arriving late , but later claims to have killed 450 peasants and several nobles , one of whom had actually been killed by his brother in the battle . 
 King Richard IV of England and XII of Scotland and his Queen Gertrude of Flanders have two sons : Harry , Prince of Wales and his younger brother Prince Edmund . Of the two , Harry is by far his father 's favourite , the King barely acknowledging his second son 's existence . It is a running gag throughout the series that Edmund 's father cannot even remember his name . However , despite his mostly dismissive attitude toward his second son , the series ' finale makes it clear that the King loves Edmund as much as Harry : on Edmund 's deathbed , the King does his best to console him and has the entire court drink a toast in his honour . In the third episode , when Edmund becomes the Archbishop of Canterbury and helps his father to secure some land before the church , the King acknowledges Edmund as his son , embraces him and even mentions to the Queen that he has " turned out well " . 
 Using this premise , the series follows the fictitious reign of Richard IV ( 1485 – 98 ) through the experiences of Prince Edmund , who styles himself as " The Black Adder " , and his two sidekicks : the imbecilic Lord Percy Percy , the Duke of Northumberland ( Tim McInnerny ) ; and Baldrick ( Tony Robinson ) , a more intelligent servant of no status . 
 By the end of the series , events converge with accepted history , when King Richard IV and his entire family are poisoned , allowing Henry Tudor to take the throne as King Henry VII . He then rewrites history , presenting Richard III as a monster , and eliminating Richard IV 's reign from the history books . In reality , Richard , Duke of York , one of the Princes in the Tower , was only twelve years old ( and perhaps two years dead ) when the Battle of Bosworth Field took place in 1485 , and thus too young to have had two adult sons . One notable anachronism is Edmund ´ s title , Duke of Edinburgh , as Scotland was an independent kingdom ruled by a different royal house from its inception in the ninth century until 1603 ( with the exception of some periods during the turmoil of the Scottish Wars of Independence ) though given that this is an alternate history , it is possible that Henry Tudor falsified the history of Scotland as well . 
 = = = Episodes = = = 
 The episodes in this series , written by Rowan Atkinson and Richard Curtis , were originally shown on BBC One on Wednesday evenings , 21 : 25 – 22 : 00 . Each episode ran for roughly 33 minutes . The series began on 15 June 1983 . 
 Each of the episodes was based on a medieval theme — the Wars of the Roses , the Crusades and Royal succession , the conflict between the Crown and the Church , arranged marriages between monarchies , and the Plague and witchcraft . The final episode follows a planned coup d 'état . 
 The series was broadcast shortly after the BBC Television Shakespeare productions of Shakespeare 's four plays about the Wars of the Roses , the three @-@ part Henry VI plays , followed by Richard III , which was first shown on 23 January 1983 . Some of the same actors were used to enhance the parody of Shakespearean history . Ron Cook , who played Richard III in the Shakespeare productions , is cast as the villainous " Sean the Irish Bastard " . Peter Benson , who played Shakespeare 's Henry VI , played Henry VII in the first episode . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 In this series , the character of the Black Adder is somewhat different from later incarnations , being largely unintelligent , naive , and snivelling . The character does evolve through the series , however , and he begins showing signs of what his descendants will be like by the final episode , where he begins insulting everyone around him and making his own plans . This evolution follows naturally from the character 's situation . " The Black Adder " is the title that Edmund adopts during the first episode ( after first considering " The Black Vegetable " ) . Presumably one of his descendants adopted it as a surname before Blackadder II , in which the title character becomes " Edmund Blackadder " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Rowan Atkinson and Richard Curtis developed the idea for the sitcom while working on Not the Nine O 'Clock News . Eager to avoid comparisons to the critically acclaimed Fawlty Towers , they proposed the idea of a historical sitcom . An unaired pilot episode was made in 1982 , and a six @-@ episode series was commissioned . 
 In the unaired pilot episode , covering the basic plot of " Born to be King " , Rowan Atkinson speaks , dresses and generally looks and acts like the later Blackadder descendants of the second series onwards , but no reason is given as to why he was instead changed to a snivelling wretch for the first series . Richard Curtis has stated he cannot remember the exact reason , but has suggested it was because they wanted to have a more complicated character ( implying that the change was driven by the writing ) instead of a swaggering lead from the pilot . 
 Curtis admitted in a 2004 documentary that just before recording began , producer John Lloyd came up to him with Atkinson and asked what Edmund 's character was . Curtis then realised that , despite writing some funny lines , he had no idea how Rowan Atkinson was supposed to play his part . On the 25th anniversary documentary Blackadder Rides Again , Atkinson added that as the cameras were about to roll for the first time , he suddenly realised he wasn 't even sure what voice to use for the character . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The budget for the series was considerable , with much location shooting particularly at Alnwick Castle in Northumberland and the surrounding countryside in February 1983 . <unk> Priory , an authentic reconstruction of a medieval monastery church , was used for the episode " The Archbishop " . The series also used large casts of extras , as well as horses and expensive medieval @-@ style costumes . Filming at the castle was hindered by bad weather - snow is visible in many of the outdoor location shots . 
 Atkinson had to suffer during the making of the programme , having to trim his hair in an unflattering medieval style and wearing a selection of " <unk> codpieces " . Atkinson has said about the making of the first series : 
 The first series was odd , it was very extravagant . It cost a million pounds for the six programmes ... [ which ] was a lot of money to spend ... It looked great , but it wasn 't as consistently funny as we would have liked . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Robinson stated in a 2003 radio documentary that he was originally flattered to be offered a part and it was only later he found that every other small @-@ part actor had also been offered the role and turned it down . The series also featured a number of guest roles , often featuring noted actors such as Peter Cook and Peter Benson in " The <unk> " ; Miriam Margolyes and Jim Broadbent in " The Queen of Spain 's Beard " ; Frank Finlay in " <unk> Pursuivant " ; and Rik Mayall and Patrick Allen ( who also narrated the series ) in " The Black Seal " . 
 = = = Title sequence and music = = = 
 The title sequence consisted of several stock shots of Edmund riding his horse on location , interspersed with different shots of him doing various silly things ( and , usually , a shot of King Richard IV to go with Brian Blessed 's credit ) . The closing titles were a similar sequence of Edmund riding , and eventually falling off , his horse and then chasing after it . All the credits of the first series included " with additional dialogue by William Shakespeare " and " made in glorious television " . 
 The series used the first incarnation of the Blackadder theme by Howard Goodall ( with the exception of the unaired pilot , which featured a different arrangement ) . For the opening theme , a trumpet solo accompanied by an orchestra was used . For the end titles , the theme gained mock @-@ heroic lyrics sung by a baritone ( Simon Carrington , a member of the King 's Singers ) . In the final episode , the theme was sung by a treble , in a more reflective style . The series ' incidental music was unusually performed by pipe organ and percussion . 
 = = Awards and criticism = = 
 The series won an International Emmy award in the popular arts category in 1983 . The four series of Blackadder were voted into second place in the BBC 's Britain 's Best Sitcom in 2004 with 282 @,@ 106 votes , although the series ' advocate , John Sergeant , was not complimentary of the first series , suggesting it was " grandiose , confused and expensive " . 
 Members of the cast and crew , looking back for the documentary Blackadder Rides Again , are also not particularly complimentary of the first series . John Lloyd recalls that a colleague commented at the time that the series " looks a million dollars , but cost a million pounds " , although admits that they were proud of the result at the time . Due to the high cost of the first series , the Controller of BBC1 at the time the second series was commissioned , Michael Grade , was reluctant to authorise a second series without major improvements and cost @-@ cutting , leaving a gap of three years before Blackadder II was broadcast , on the condition that it remained largely studio @-@ bound . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The complete series of The Black Adder is available as a Region 2 DVD from BBC Worldwide , as well as in a complete box set with the other series . An earlier VHS release of the series was also produced in September 1996 . The series is also available in Region 1 DVD in a box set of the complete series . " The Complete Collected Series 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and Specials " , a 15 @-@ disc complete set of audiobooks published by BBC Audiobooks Ltd , was released in 2009 . A selection of one @-@ off episodes , documentaries and other appearances by " Blackadder " are featured , with some of this extra material being released on audio for the first time . 
 = = = VHS releases = = = 
 On about 5 February 1990 , BBC Enterprises Ltd released all 6 episodes of The Black Adder on two single videos and on 7 September 1992 all 6 episodes of Blackadder II were re @-@ released on ' Complete ' double VHS releases . All 6 episodes were re @-@ released on a single video release on 2 October 1995 . 
 = HMS Phoenix ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Phoenix was a Parthian @-@ class submarine of the Royal Navy , launched in 1929 . She was the eighteenth warship of the Royal Navy to use the name Phoenix . She served on the China Station from her commissioning until the start of the Second World War . Phoenix was then relocated to the Mediterranean Sea and was sunk by the Italian torpedo boat Albatros on 16 July 1940 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Parthian class was designed as an improvement of the earlier Odin class ; the new class was larger , built with a raked stem , and given a shield to cover the 4 @-@ inch gun . The class had a design flaw in that the riveted external fuel tanks leaked , leaving an oil trail on the surface . Phoenix was fitted with a four @-@ cycle blast @-@ injection eight @-@ cylinder diesel engine , which provided 4 @,@ 640 horsepower ( 3 @,@ 460 kW ) ; submerged propulsion was provided by a 1 @,@ 635 horsepower ( 1 @,@ 219 kW ) electric motor . Phoenix was 289 feet ( 88 @.@ 1 m ) long with a breadth of 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) and displaced 2 @,@ 040 long tons ( 2 @,@ 070 t ) of water while submerged . 
 All submarines of the Parthian @-@ class were outfitted with eight 21 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , one QF 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) Mk XII deck gun , and two machine guns . The class was the first to be outfitted with the Mark VIII torpedo . Phoenix had six tubes in the bow and two tubes at the stern . Submarines of the Parthian class were designed for a complement of 53 officers and men . Phoenix had a crew of 56 . 
 = = History = = 
 Phoenix was laid down at Cammell Laird shipyard in 1928 . The ship was the 18th in a series of British warships named after the mythical phoenix , and had the motto <unk> ( Latin for " I will rise again " ) Phoenix was originally deployed on the China Station as part of the 4th submarine flotilla . Ships of the China Station were tasked with trade protection and were used as a symbol of British power . In later September 1935 , Phoenix , HMS Pandora , HMS Osiris , HMS Oswald , and the depot ship HMS Medway were ordered to travel to the Mediterranean . While in the Mediterranean , the ships participated in naval exercises including the crash dive manoeuvre . Eight months later , the small group was ordered back to Hong Kong . In April 1940 , the flotilla , along with Medway , was ordered to the Mediterranean Sea to support naval operations there and the 1st submarine flotilla was established . 
 = = = Service in the Second World War = = = 
 Phoenix was stationed in Alexandria and patrolled the Aegean Sea and waters around the Dodecanese from 14 June to July 1940 . In July 1940 , Phoenix , under the command of Lt Cdr Gilbert Hugh Nowell , and Rorqual were given the task of screening a convoy of British ships bringing supplies from Malta to Alexandria . Phoenix made a contact report on 8 July after sighting the Italian battle fleet . Admiral Andrew Cunningham ordered his ships to cut off the Italian fleet from their base at Taranto , which led to the Battle of Calabria . Phoenix fired torpedoes at two Italian battleships , Giulio Cesare and Conte di Cavour , but missed both targets . While off the coast of Augusta , Sicily , Phoenix fired torpedoes at the Italian torpedo boat Albatros , but missed her . Albatros counter @-@ attacked and sank Phoenix with depth charges . All hands were lost . 
 = Hilde Levi = 
 Hilde Levi ( 9 May 1909 – 26 July 2003 ) was a German @-@ Danish physicist . She was a pioneer of the use of radioactive isotopes in biology and medicine , notably the techniques of radiocarbon dating and autoradiography . In later life she became a scientific historian , and published a biography of George de Hevesy . 
 Born into a non @-@ religious Jewish family in Frankfurt , Germany , Levi entered the University of Munich in 1929 . She carried out her doctoral studies at the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry at Berlin @-@ Dahlem , writing her thesis on the spectra of alkali metal halides under the supervision of Peter Pringsheim and Fritz Haber . By the time she received it in 1934 , the Nazi Party had been elected to office in Germany , and Jews were no longer allowed to be hired for academic positions . She went to Denmark where she found a position at the Niels Bohr Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen . Working with James Franck and George de Hevesy , she published a number of papers on the use of radioactive substances in biology . 
 When the Nazis began rounding up Danish Jews in September 1943 , Levi fled to Sweden , where she worked for the biologist John <unk> at the Wenner @-@ Gren Institute for Experimental Biology in Stockholm . After the war ended , she returned to Denmark to work at the Zoophysiological Laboratory in Copenhagen . She spent the 1947 – 48 academic year in the United States learning about the recently discovered techniques of radiocarbon dating and autoradiography , which she introduced to Europe . She retired from the Zoophysiological Laboratory in 1979 , but became involved with the Niels Bohr Archive , where she collected papers of de Hevesy , eventually publishing his biography . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hilde Levi was born in Frankfurt , Germany , on 9 May 1909 , the daughter of Adolf Levi , the sales director of a metal company , and his wife Clara ( née Reis ) , the daughter of a printer . Hilde had an older brother called Edwin . She was a gifted musician who learned to play the piano at a young age . During the summers , she would listen to performances at her cousins ' summer house in Bavaria by musicians including Elisabeth Schumann and Richard Strauss . 
 Although Jewish , Levi 's family did not practise their religion , and were not part of the Jewish community , but when she was enrolled at the Victoria School ( now the Bettina School ) in Frankfurt , her religion was listed as Jewish . Religious instruction was compulsory , so she had to attend classes with a local rabbi . She soon rebelled against this , and told her parents that she did not wish to attend the classes . She came to reject formal religion . 
 While at high school , Levi decided that she would become a scientist . Her final year was devoted to a physics project on spectra and photography , which became her <unk> <unk> . She was the only girl in her class to major in physics that year . After her graduation in April 1928 , her father sent her to England for six months to learn English and good manners . She entered the University of Munich in 1929 , where she listened to lectures by Arnold Sommerfeld . For her doctorate , her father managed to get her accepted into the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry at Berlin @-@ Dahlem , where she wrote her thesis on the spectra of alkali metal halides , under the supervision of Peter Pringsheim and Fritz Haber . 
 = = Nazi period = = 
 By the time Levi received her doctorate in 1934 , the Nazi Party had been elected to office in Germany . Her supervisors had gone into exile , and Jews were no longer allowed to be hired for academic positions . The Danish branch of the International Federation of University Women helped Levi find a position at the Niels Bohr Institute of Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark . Niels Bohr asked James Franck , another refugee from Germany , if he knew Levi , and would be willing to have Levi as his assistant . Franck replied that he did not know her personally , but he knew her thesis , and rated it highly . 
 She became engaged to the physicist Hans Bethe in 1934 . The two had known each other since 1925 . However , his mother , although herself Jewish , was opposed to her son marrying a Jewish girl , and he broke off the engagement a few days before the wedding was to take place . Bethe 's action shocked Franck and Bohr . Although an eminent physicist , Bethe would not be invited to visit the Niels Bohr Institute until after the Second World War . Levi never married , but became friends with many of the physicists who did visit the Institute , including Otto Frisch , George Placzek , Rudolf Peierls , Leon Rosenfeld , Edward Teller and Victor Weisskopf . 
 Levi worked as Franck 's assistant , publishing two papers with him on the fluorescence of chlorophyll , until he left Denmark for the United States in 1935 . She then became assistant to the Hungarian physical chemist George de Hevesy . The recent discovery of induced radioactivity and the consequent creation of short @-@ lived radioactive isotopes opened up a number of new uses for radioactive substances in biology which she explored with de Hevesy , publishing a number of papers with him . The University of Berlin cancelled Levi 's doctorate in 1938 . In April 1940 , the Germans occupied Denmark . When the Nazis began rounding up Danish Jews in September 1943 , Levi was one of the thousands of Jews who fled to Sweden . For the rest of the war she worked for the biologist John <unk> at the Wenner @-@ Gren Institute for Experimental Biology in Stockholm . 
 = = Later life = = 
 When the war ended , de Hevesy elected to stay in Sweden , and Bohr decided to drop biological research at the Institute and return to concentrating on physics . Levi accepted a position at the Zoophysiological Laboratory in Copenhagen , under August Krogh , who , like Bohr , had won a Nobel Prize . She spent the 1947 – 48 academic year in the United States as a Fellow of the American Association of University Women . While there , she learned from Willard Libby at the University of Chicago about his recently discovered technique of radiocarbon dating . She developed the new technique of autoradiography while working for the United States Atomic Energy Commission at the University of Rochester in Rochester , New York . 
 On returning to Denmark , she worked with the National Museum of Denmark in Copenhagen to develop radiocarbon dating equipment . This was put to the test in 1951 , dating the Grauballe Man . <unk> was then used by the <unk> Institute to investigate the effects of the radiocontrast agent <unk> . Levi was a consultant at the Danish National Board of Health from 1952 to 1970 . 
 Levi retired from the Zoophysiological Laboratory in 1979 , but became involved with the Niels Bohr Archive , where she collected papers from de Hevesy . The result of this work was a biography of Hevesy , which was published in 1985 . That year she organised the Niels Bohr Centennial Exhibition at the Copenhagen Town Hall . In 2001 she was honoured by Humboldt University of Berlin , along with other students who had been dismissed in 1933 . She died in Copenhagen on 26 July 2003 . 
 = Washington State Route 532 = 
 State Route 532 ( SR 532 ) is a short Washington state highway in Island and Snohomish counties , located in the United States . The 10 @.@ 09 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 24 km ) long roadway begins at Sunrise Boulevard in Camano and travels east through Stanwood to end at Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . The road first appeared on a map in 1911 and in 1945 was designated Secondary State Highway 1Y ( SSH 1Y ) , which became SR 532 in 1964 . As of 2009 , the Washington State Department of Transportation is improving the whole corridor from Camano to I @-@ 5 with repaving projects , new traffic cameras , new lanes and replacing the Mark Clark Bridge between Camano and Stanwood with the Gateway Bridge . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 532 ( SR 532 ) begins at an intersection with Sunrise Boulevard on Camano Island , which in turn is the census @-@ designated place of Camano . From Sunrise Boulevard , the highway travels east through rural areas and a wetland to cross Davis Slough from Island County to Snohomish County . After entering Snohomish County , the roadway crosses the Stillaguamish River on the Gateway Bridge and enters Stanwood . Between Sunrise Boulevard and the Stillaguamish River bridge , a daily average of 20 @,@ 000 motorists used these sections of SR 532 in 2007 , higher than the 3 @,@ 500 that used the same stretch of road in 1970 . The route intersects city streets , crosses a railroad track owned by the BNSF Railway that serves Amtrak 's Cascades route between Vancouver , British Columbia , and Seattle . The tracks serve the Stanwood station , which was completed on November 12 and opened November 21 , just north of SR 532 . After crossing the tracks , the roadway intersects the Pioneer Highway , which was SR 530 from 1964 until 1991 . The highway eventually leaves Stanwood and continues eastward past suburban housing areas and Sunday Lake to a diamond interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 532 first appeared on a map in 1911 , which showed a road extending from Camano past East Stanwood ( present @-@ day Stanwood ) . The state began maintaining the highway in 1945 , when Secondary State Highway 1Y ( SSH 1Y ) was established , running along the current route of SR 532 . The Mark Clark Bridge , which is located on SR 532 between Camano Island and Stanwood , was constructed in 1949 and dedicated on July 23 , 1950 , to World War II general Mark Wayne Clark , who served out of Fort Lewis . During the 1964 highway renumbering , SSH 1Y became SR 532 ; since the 1964 renumbering , no major renumberings or route changes have been made . The Washington State Department of Transportation ( WSDOT ) arranged a minor project in 2007 and is currently working on a corridor improvement , a project designed to improve the highway from Camano to Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) . During floods in January 2009 , residents in Stanwood constructed a barrier to prevent water damage to the highway . WSDOT is improving the whole corridor in a project divided into four miniature projects , all of which are expected to be complete by 2011 . The improvements include installing left @-@ turn lanes and replacing the Mark Clark Bridge with a wider , four @-@ lane bridge . In 2001 , when the project plans were underway , it was suggested that the roadway become five lanes wide and that a ferry from Everett to Camano Island be added ; WSDOT began seeking contractors in August 2008 and hired four by September . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Second Ostend Raid = 
 The Second Ostend Raid ( officially known as Operation VS ) was the later of two failed attempts made during the spring of 1918 by the United Kingdom 's Royal Navy to block the channels leading to the Belgian port of Ostend as a part of its conflict with the German Empire during World War I. Due to the significant strategic advantages conferred by the Belgian ports , the Imperial German Navy had used Ostend as a base for their U @-@ boat activities during the Battle of the Atlantic since 1915 . 
 A successful blockade of these bases would force German submarines to operate out of more distant ports , such as Wilhelmshaven , on the German coast . This would expose them for longer to Allied countermeasures and reduce the time they could spend raiding . The ports of Ostend and Zeebrugge ( partially blocked in the Zeebrugge Raid three weeks previously ) provided sea access via canals for the major inland port of Bruges . Bruges was used as a base for small warships and submarines . As it was 6 mi ( 5 @.@ 2 nmi ; 9 @.@ 7 km ) inland , it was immune to most naval artillery fire and coastal raids , providing a safe harbour for training and repair . 
 The First Ostend Raid on 23 April 1918 was largely a failure , the blockships grounded too far from the channels to obstruct them . The second attempt also failed , due to heavy German resistance and British navigational difficulties in poor weather . In anticipation of a raid , the Germans had removed the navigation buoys and without them the British had difficulty finding the narrow channel into the harbour in poor weather . When they did discover the entrance , German resistance proved too strong for the operation to be completed as originally planned : the obsolete cruiser HMS Vindictive was sunk , but only partially blocked the channel . 
 Despite its failure , the raid was presented in Britain as a courageous and daring gamble that came very close to success . Three Victoria Crosses and numerous other gallantry medals were awarded to sailors who participated in the operation . British forces had moderate casualties in the raid , compared to minimal German losses . 
 = = Bruges = = 
 After the German Army captured much of Belgium following the Battle of the Frontiers in 1914 , the Allied forces were left holding a thin strip of coastline to the west of the Yser . The remainder of the Belgian coast came under the occupation of German Marine Divisions , including the important strategic ports of Antwerp and Bruges . While Antwerp was a deep water port vulnerable to British attack from the sea , Bruges , sitting 6 mi ( 5 @.@ 2 nmi ; 9 @.@ 7 km ) inland , was comparatively safe from naval bombardment or coastal raids . A network of canals connected Bruges with the coast at Ostend and Zeebrugge , through which small warships such as destroyers , light cruisers and submarines could travel and find a safe harbour from which to launch raids into the English Channel and along the coasts of southeast England . U @-@ boats could also depart from Bruges at night , cutting a day off the journey to the Western Approaches , more easily avoiding the North Sea Mine Barrage and allowing U @-@ boat captains to gain familiarity with the net and mine defences of the English Channel , through which they had to pass to reach the main battlegrounds of the Atlantic . 
 In 1915 – 1916 , the German navy had developed Bruges from a small Flanders port into a major naval centre with large concrete bunkers to shelter U @-@ boats , extensive barracks and training facilities for U @-@ boat crews , and similar facilities for other classes of raiding warship . Bruges was therefore a vital asset in the German navy 's increasingly desperate struggle to prevent Britain from receiving food and matériel from the rest of the world . The significance of Bruges was not lost on British naval planners and two previous attempts to close the exit at Ostend , the smaller and narrower of the Bruges canals , had ended in failure . On 7 September 1915 , four Lord Clive @-@ class monitors of the Dover Patrol had bombarded the dockyard , while German coastal artillery returned fire . Only 14 rounds were fired by the British with the result that only part of the dockyard was set on fire . In a bombardment on 22 September 1917 , the lock gates were hit causing the basin to drain at low water . 
 Two years passed before the next attempt on the Ostend locks . The First Ostend Raid was conducted in tandem with the similar Zeebrugge Raid led by Acting Vice @-@ Admiral Roger Keyes on 23 April 1918 ; a large scale operation to block the wider canal at Zeebrugge . Both attacks largely failed , but while at Zeebrugge the operation came so close to success that it took several months for the British authorities to realise that it had been unsuccessful , at Ostend the attack had ended catastrophically . Both blockships intended to close off the canal had grounded over half a mile from their intended location and been scuttled by their crews under heavy artillery and long @-@ range small arms fire , which caused severe casualties . Thus while Zeebrugge seemed to be blocked entirely , Ostend was open wide , nullifying any success that might have been achieved at the other port . 
 = = Planning = = 
 As British forces on the southeast coast of Britain regrouped , remanned and repaired following heavy losses at Zeebrugge , Keyes planned a return to Ostend with the intention of blocking the canal and consequently severing Bruges from the sea , closing the harbour and trapping the 18 U @-@ boats and 25 destroyers present for months to come . Volunteers from among the force that had failed in April aided the planning with advice based on their experience on the previous operation . Among these volunteers were Lieutenant @-@ Commander Henry Hardy of HMS Sirius , Commander Alfred Godsal , former captain of HMS Brilliant , and Brilliant 's first lieutenant Victor Crutchley . These officers approached Commodore Hubert Lynes and Admiral Roger Keyes with a refined plan for a second attempt to block the port . Other officers came forward to participate and Keyes and Lynes devised an operational plan to attack the canal mouth at Ostend once again . 
 Two obsolete cruisers — the aged HMS Sappho and the battered veteran of Zeebrugge , HMS Vindictive — were fitted out for the operation by having their non @-@ essential equipment stripped out , their essential equipment reinforced and picked crews selected from volunteers . The ships ' forward ballast tanks were filled with concrete to both protect their bows during the attack , and act as a more lasting obstacle once sunk . Vindictive was commanded by Godsal ; her six officers and 48 crew were all volunteer veterans of the previous failed attempt by Brilliant . The two sacrificial cruisers were , as with the previous attack , accompanied by four heavy monitors under Keyes ' command , eight destroyers under Lynes in HMS Faulknor and five motor launches . Like the blockships , the launches were all crewed by volunteers ; mostly veterans of previous operations against the Belgian ports . 
 The plan was similar to the failed operation of three weeks previously . Weather dependent , under cover of a smoke screen , aerial bombardment and offshore artillery , the blockships would steam directly into the channel , turn sideways and scuttle themselves . Their advance would be covered by artillery fire against German shore positions from the heavy monitors at distance and at closer range by gunfire from the destroyers . This cover was vital because Ostend was protected by a very strong 11 in ( 280 mm ) gun position known as the Tirpitz battery , named for the admiral . Once the operation had been concluded , the motor launches would draw along the seaward side of the blockships , remove the surviving crews and take them to the monitors for passage back to Britain . This operation was to thoroughly block the channel , and — coupled with the blockage at Zeebrugge ( which the British authorities believed to be fully closed ) — was to prevent use of Bruges by German raiding craft for months to come . 
 = = Attack on Ostend = = 
 All preparations for the operation were completed by the first week of May and on 9 May the weather was nearly perfect for the attack . The British armada had collected at Dunkirk in Allied @-@ held France and departed port shortly after dark . Two minutes after midnight , the force suffered a setback when Sappho suffered a minor boiler explosion and had to return to Dunkirk , unable to complete the journey . Although this accident halved the ability of the force to block Ostend , Lynes decided to continue the operation , and at 01 : 30 , the force closed on the port , making the final preparations for the assault . Torpedoes fired from motor launches demolished machine gun posts on the ends of the piers marking the canal , beginning the attack . Ten heavy bombers of the newly formed Royal Air Force then dropped incendiary bombs on German positions , but did not cause significant damage . In spite of the fog , air operations continued as planned under the overall direction of Brigadier @-@ General Charles Lambe . At the same time as the aerial bombardment began , the long range artillery of the Royal Marine Artillery opened fire on Ostend from Allied positions around the Belgian town of Ypres . 
 In preparation for the attack , Godsal and Lynes had carefully consulted available charts of Ostend following the previous operation 's failure caused by German repositioning of navigation buoys . This careful study was , however , rendered worthless by a sudden fog which obliterated all sight of the shore . Steaming back and forth across the harbour entrance in the fog as the monitors and German shore batteries engaged in a long range artillery duel over the lost cruiser , Godsal looked for the piers marking the entrance to the canal . As he searched , two German torpedo boats sailed from Ostend to intercept the cruiser , but in the heavy fog they collided and , disabled , limped back to shore . During this period , Godsal 's motor launches lost track of the cruiser in the murk , and it was not until the third pass that Vindictive found the entrance , accompanied by only one of the launches . Heading straight into the mouth of the canal , guided by a flare dropped by the launch , Vindictive became an instant target of the German batteries and was badly damaged , the shellfire exacerbating the damage suffered in the earlier Zeebrugge Raid and seriously damaging Vindictive 's port propeller . 
 Alfred Godsal intended to swing Vindictive broadside on into the channel mouth , but as he ordered the turn , the right screw broke down completely , preventing the cruiser from fully turning . Before this was realised on the cruiser 's bridge , a shell fired from a gun battery on shore struck Commander Godsal directly , killing him instantly and shattering the bridge structure . Most of the bridge crew were killed or wounded by the blast , including First Lieutenant Victor Crutchley , who staggered to the wheel and attempted to force the ship to make the full turn into the channel . The damaged propeller made this maneuver impossible and the drifting cruiser floated out of the channel and became stuck on a sandbank outside , only partially obscuring the entranceway . 
 = = = Evacuation of HMS Vindictive = = = 
 Realising that further manoeuvring would be pointless , Crutchley ordered the charges to be blown and the ship evacuated . As Engineer @-@ Lieutenant William Bury prepared to detonate the scuttling charges , Crutchley took a survey of the ship and ordered all survivors to take to the boats on the seaward side of the wreck . As men scrambled down the ship 's flank away from the shells and machine @-@ gun bullets spitting from the harbour entrance , Crutchley made a final survey with an electric torch looking for wounded men among the dead on the decks . Satisfied that none alive remained aboard , he too leapt onto the deck of a motor launch bobbing below . The rescue mission itself , however , was not going as planned . Of the five motor launches attached to the expedition , only one had remained with the cruiser in the fog ; ML254 commanded by Lieutenant Geoffrey Drummond . The launch — like the cruiser — was riddled with bullets ; her commander was wounded and her executive officer dead . Despite her sheltered position behind the cruiser , fire from shore continued to enfilade the launch and a number of those aboard , including Lieutenant Bury , suffered broken ankles as they jumped onto the heaving deck . 
 ML254 then began slowly to leave the harbour mouth , carrying 38 survivors of Vindictive 's 55 crewmen huddled on deck , where they remained exposed to machine gun fire from the shore . As Drummond turned his boat seawards and proceeded back to the offshore squadron that was still engaged in an artillery duel with the German defenders , one of the missing launches , ML276 passed her , having caught up with the lost cruiser at this late stage . Drummond called to ML276 's commander — Lieutenant Rowley Bourke — that he believed there were still men in the water and Bourke immediately entered the harbour to search for them . Drummond 's launch proceeded to the rendezvous with the destroyer HMS Warwick , overweighted and sinking , so severe was the damage she had suffered . 
 Hearing cries , Bourke entered the harbour but could not identify the lost men . Despite heavy machine gun and artillery fire , Bourke returned to the scene of the wreck four times before they discovered two sailors and Vindictive 's badly wounded navigation officer Sir John Alleyne clinging to an upturned boat . Hauling the men aboard , Bourke turned for the safety of the open sea , but as he did , two 6 in ( 150 mm ) shells struck the launch , smashing the lifeboat and destroying the compressed air tanks . This stalled the engines and caused a wave of highly corrosive acid to wash over the deck , causing severe damage to the launch 's hull and almost suffocating the unconscious Alleyne . Under heavy fire , the boat staggered out of the harbour and was taken under tow by another late @-@ arriving motor launch . After the operation , Bourke 's launch was discovered to have 55 bullet and shrapnel holes . 
 Offshore , as Warwick 's officers , Keyes ' staff and the survivors of Vindictive gathered on the destroyer 's deck to discuss the operation , an enormous explosion rocked the ship causing her to list severely . Warwick had struck one of the defensive mines off Ostend and was now in danger of sinking herself . The destroyer HMS Velox was lashed alongside and survivors from Warwick , Vindictive and ML254 transferred across to the sound ship . This ragged ensemble did not reach Dover until early the following morning , with Warwick still afloat . British casualties were reported in the immediate aftermath as being eight dead , ten missing and 29 wounded . German losses were three killed and eight wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite German claims that the blockage did not impede their operations , the operation to close the Ostend canal seemed to have been at least partially successful . The channel was largely blocked and so Bruges was ostensibly closed off from the open sea , even if the position of the blockship meant that smaller ships could get through . In fact , the entire operation had been rendered moot before it even began , due to events at the wider canal in Zeebrugge . British assessments of that operation had proven optimistic and the channel there had not been properly closed . Small coastal submarines of the UC class had been able to pass through the channel as early as the morning after the Zeebrugge Raid and German naval engineers were able to dredge channels around the blockages at both ports over the coming weeks . 
 At Ostend , Vindictive did prevent larger warships passing through the channel , although smaller craft could still come and go at will . The larger warships in Bruges were trapped there for the remaining months of the war ; the town was captured by the Allies in October 1918 . The blockages at Ostend and Zeebrugge took several years to clear completely , not being totally removed until 1921 . On a strategic scale the effects of the raids at Ostend and Zeebrugge on the battle of the Atlantic were negligible . Despite this , in Britain the Ostend Raid was feted as a success . Three Victoria Crosses and a host of lesser awards were given to the men involved . The Admiralty presented it as a fine example of daring and careful planning from the Royal Navy , providing a valuable morale boost at one of the most critical moments of the war . 
 = Ian Thorpe = 
 Ian James Thorpe , OAM ( born 13 October 1982 ) is an Australian swimmer who specialises in freestyle , but also competes in backstroke and the individual medley . He has won five Olympic gold medals , the most won by any Australian , and with three gold and two silver medals , was the most successful athlete at the 2000 Summer Olympics . At the 2001 World Aquatics Championships , he became the first person to win six gold medals in one World Championship . In total , Thorpe has won eleven World Championship golds , the third @-@ highest number of any swimmer . Thorpe was the first person to have been named Swimming World Swimmer of the Year four times , and was the Australian Swimmer of the Year from 1999 to 2003 . His athletic achievements made him one of Australia 's most popular athletes , and he was recognised as the Young Australian of the Year in 2000 . 
 At the age of 14 , he became the youngest male ever to represent Australia , and his victory in the 400 metre freestyle at the 1998 Perth World Championships made him the youngest ever individual male World Champion . After that victory , Thorpe dominated the 400 m freestyle , winning the event at every Olympic , World , Commonwealth and Pan Pacific Swimming Championships until his break after the 2004 Olympics . Aside from 13 individual long @-@ course world records , Thorpe anchored the Australian relay teams , numbering the victories in the 4 × 100 m and the 4 × 200 m freestyle relays in Sydney , among his five relay world records . His wins in the 200 m and 400 m and his bronze in the 100 m freestyle in Athens have made him the only male to have won medals in the 100 – 200 – 400 combination . During this , he picked up the nickname " <unk> " because of his speed in swimming . 
 After the Athens Olympics , Thorpe took a year away from swimming , scheduling a return for the 2006 Commonwealth Games . However , he was forced to withdraw due to illness . Subsequent training camps were interrupted , and he announced his retirement in November 2006 , citing waning motivation . From early 2011 , there was speculation about Thorpe 's return to swimming , fuelled by people claiming to have seen him training . The speculations were substantiated when Thorpe spoke at a February 2011 press conference of his return to swimming after four years away , with the aim of competing in the 2012 London Olympic Games . Thorpe competed at Australia 's Olympic Trials in 2012 , but failed to make the team . It was subsequently announced that he was targeting qualification for the 2013 World Championships in Barcelona and later the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow but was forced to abandon his plans due to a shoulder injury . In 2014 , he was presented with a Doctor of Letters from Macquarie University in recognition of his extraordinary contribution for the sport , philanthropy and Indigenous rights . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in Sydney , Thorpe grew up in the suburb of <unk> and hailed from a sporting family . His father Ken was a promising cricketer at junior level , representing Bankstown District Cricket Club in Sydney 's district competition . A talented batsman , he once topped the season 's batting averages ahead of former Australian captain Bob Simpson . However , paternal pressure detracted from Ken 's enjoyment of cricket , and he retired at the age of 26 . Thorpe 's mother Margaret played A @-@ grade netball , but he did not inherit his parents ' ball skills . His elder sister Christina was advised to take up swimming to strengthen a broken wrist , so by chance , the five @-@ year @-@ old Thorpe followed her into the pool . Due to his unhappy experiences , Ken Thorpe regarded enjoyment as the most critical aspect of his children 's participation in sport . A large baby , Thorpe weighed 4 @.@ 1 kg ( 9 @.@ 0 lb ) and measured 59 cm ( 1 ft 11 in ) in length at birth . 
 As a young child , Thorpe was sidelined by an allergy to chlorine . As a result , he did not swim in his first race until a school carnival at the age of seven . The allergy forced Thorpe to swim with his head out of the water ; despite this ungainly technique , he won the race , primarily because of his significant size advantage . Thorpe gradually overcame the ailment and progressed to the captaincy of New South Wales for the Australian Primary Schools Championships in 1994 . He subsequently won nine individual gold medals at the New South Wales Short Course Age Championships in September of the same year . In 1995 , Thorpe started his secondary education at East Hills Boys Technology High School and switched coaches to swim alongside his sister under the tutelage of Doug Frost . It was a busy year for the family ; Christina was selected for the Australian team to compete at the 1995 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Atlanta . Now six feet tall , Ian competed at his first Australian Age Championships , winning bronze medals in the 200 m and 400 m freestyle . He won all ten events at the New South Wales Age Championships . 
 = = = National debut = = = 
 Thorpe competed at the 1996 Australian Age Championships in Brisbane , winning five gold , two silver and two bronze medals . His times in the 400 m freestyle and 200 m backstroke qualified him for the Australian Championships , which doubled as selection trials for the 1996 Atlanta Olympics . Frost knew that Thorpe had no realistic chance of making the top two in any event , which would have meant Olympic selection at only 13 years and six months . He sent Thorpe to Sydney merely to gain competition experience at senior national level . As expected , Thorpe missed selection ; he finished 23rd in the 400 m freestyle and 36th in the 200 m backstroke . At the end of the year , Thorpe qualified for the Australian Short Course Championships . It was another chance to gain national selection , as the event served as the selection trials for the 1997 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) . Thorpe qualified in second place in the heats of the 400 m individual medley and reached his first national final . However , he swam more slowly in the final and missed selection . 
 At the New South Wales Championships in January 1997 , Thorpe 's time of 3 min 59 @.@ 43 s in the 400 m was eight seconds faster than his previous personal best ; it made him the first 14 @-@ year @-@ old to cover the distance in less than four minutes on Australian soil . Ranked fourth for the event countrywide , Thorpe went into the Australian Championships in Adelaide as a serious contender for selection in the national team for the 1997 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Fukuoka , Japan . With a top @-@ three finish and a specific qualifying time required for selection , Thorpe focused on the 400 m freestyle after injuries to world record holder Kieren Perkins and Daniel Kowalski ; both had won Olympic medals in the event . Thorpe went on to win bronze behind 16 @-@ year @-@ old Queenslander Grant Hackett , setting a new personal best of 3 min 53 @.@ 44 s . The time was a world record for his age group and the race was the first of many battles with Hackett . 
 Aged 14 years and 5 months , Thorpe became the 463rd and youngest ever male to be selected for the Australian team , surpassing John Konrads ' record by one month . Frost said that Thorpe 's selection catalysed his eventual focus on freestyle . Thorpe continued his good form at the Australian Age Championships . He contested all twelve events , winning ten individual gold and two bronze medals . He set six Australian records in the process . 
 = = Early international career = = 
 = = = International debut = = = 
 In June 1997 , two months before the Pan Pacific Championships , Thorpe required an appendix operation , which caused him to miss two weeks of training . Upon reaching Japan , Thorpe placed fourth in his heat of the 200 m freestyle with a new personal best time of 1 min 51 @.@ 46 s . Thorpe 's time was not enough to qualify for the final , but earned him selection in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay team . Along with teammates Michael Klim , Ian van der Wal and Hackett , Thorpe claimed silver , making him the youngest ever Pan Pacific medalist . In his first individual final at international level , Thorpe was fifth at the 300 m mark , but fought back to claim silver in the 400 m freestyle behind Hackett in a time of 3 min 49 @.@ 64 s . His finishing burst was to become a trademark , and his time would have been enough to win silver at the Atlanta Olympics . In October 1997 , a few days before his fifteenth birthday , Thorpe competed in qualifying trials in Brisbane for the 1998 World Aquatics Championships in Perth . Thorpe gained selection for the world championships by finishing fourth and second in the 200 m and 400 m freestyle respectively . He set new personal bests in both events . 
 = = = 1998 World Aquatics Championships = = = 
 Thorpe 's first international appearance in his home country , at the 1998 World Championships in Perth , began with the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay . Swimming the third leg after Klim and Hackett , Thorpe broke away from 200 m butterfly Olympic champion Tom Malchow to set a split time of 1 min 47 @.@ 67 s , just 0 @.@ 26 seconds slower than Klim 's winning time in the 200 m final . By the end of Thorpe 's leg , the Australians were two seconds ahead of the world record pace , and three seconds ahead of the Americans , having extended the lead by two body lengths . Although anchorman Kowalski finished outside the world record , it was the first time that Australia had won the event at the global level since 1956 . Thorpe was ranked fourth in the world before the 400 m final , which Hackett led from the outset . Hackett established a comfortable 2 @.@ 29 s lead over Thorpe by the 300 m mark , and although Thorpe reduced the margin to 1 @.@ 53 s at the 350 m mark , Hackett led until Thorpe passed him on the final stroke . Thorpe 's time was the fourth fastest in history and made him the youngest ever male individual world champion , aged 15 years and 3 months . 
 As a result of the media attention generated by his win on home soil , Thorpe received multiple offers for television commercials and was often surrounded by autograph hunters . He became a high @-@ profile supporter of the Children 's Cancer Institute , after his sister Christina 's future brother @-@ in @-@ law Michael Williams became gravely ill with cancer . 
 = = = 1998 Commonwealth Games = = = 
 Thorpe 's next competition was in March at the Australian Championships in Melbourne , which were selection trials for the 1998 Commonwealth Games in Malaysia . Thorpe 's improvement continued when he defeated Klim in the 200 m freestyle in 1 min 47 @.@ 24 s , faster than Klim 's winning time at the World Championship two months earlier . Thorpe 's time was a Commonwealth record and with it , he secured his first national title . He then claimed the 400 m freestyle title from Hackett and clocked 50 @.@ 36 s in the 100 m freestyle . His time earned silver in his first 100 m race at the national level , gaining him Commonwealth selection in three individual events . 
 Thorpe 's rise continued when the Australians arrived in Kuala Lumpur during September for the Commonwealth Games . Thorpe 's first event was the 200 m freestyle , where he led throughout to record a time just one hundredth of a second outside Giorgio Lamberti 's world record . He then combined with Klim , Kowalski and Matt Dunn in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay to break the world record of the Unified Team set in 1992 by 0 @.@ 09 s . Thorpe 's run ended when a personal best of 50 @.@ 21 s in the 100 m freestyle was only sufficient for fourth place , but he returned to victory with the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay team . He claimed a fourth gold in the 400 m freestyle , setting another personal best , just 0 @.@ 55 s slower than Kieren Perkins ' 1994 mark . 
 Thorpe left school at the end of the year after completing Year 10 . His decision caused concerns that concentrating on swimming alone could lead to burn out . Thorpe disagreed , pointing to his informal search for knowledge , stating that " Swimming is a small part of my life " . His impact in the swimming community was acknowledged when he became the youngest male swimmer to be named as the Swimming World Swimmer of the Year . 
 = = World record breaking phase = = 
 1999 began with heavy media expectations that Thorpe would inevitably break both 200 m and 400 m world records , given his continuing physical growth . The first opportunity came in late March at the 1999 Australian Championships in Brisbane , which doubled as a selection event for the 1999 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships . Thorpe again won the 400 m , but Perkins ' record eluded him , this time by just 0 @.@ 05 s . Hackett turned the tables in the 200 m event , passing Thorpe in the final 50 m to win Thorpe 's title . Although both were outside Lamberti 's mark , Hackett went on to break it the following night in a relay event . Thorpe finished the Championships by continuing his improvement in the 100 m freestyle , posting a time of 49 @.@ 98 s , his first under the 50 s barrier . The Australian team then travelled to Hong Kong for the 1999 World Short Course Championships , where Thorpe broke Lamberti 's mark in the 200 m freestyle , the longest standing world record at the time . However , Hackett defeated him in the 400 m . This was the start of a three @-@ year phase where Thorpe was to set his 13 individual long course world records . He led the men 's relay team to unprecedented success in relay events , scoring historic victories over the Americans . Thorpe was to peak in 2001 when he became the first person to win six gold medals at one world championships , setting three world records and helping Australia top the medal tally at a global meet for the first time since 1956 . In this period , he was named Swimming World Swimmer of the Year three times . 
 = = = 1999 Pan Pacific Championships = = = 
 The 1999 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships were held in August at Sydney Olympic Park , and were viewed as a rehearsal for the 2000 Summer Olympics to be held in the same venue . With Thorpe expected to deliver world records at his first international meet in Sydney , the event was shown live on Australian television for the first time . The opening night saw him pitted against Hackett and South Africa 's <unk> <unk> in the 400 m freestyle final . The trio reached the 200 m mark in a group , on world record pace , before Thorpe broke away , recording a split time 1 @.@ 86 s ahead of world @-@ record pace at 300 m . He extended his lead to four body lengths by the 350 m mark and finished in a time of 3 min 41 @.@ 83 s , cutting almost two seconds from the world record , and covering the second half in almost the same time as the first . Talbot reacted to the performance by dubbing Thorpe as " the greatest swimmer we 've [ Australia ] ever had " , whilst four @-@ time American Olympic gold medalist Rowdy Gaines , commentating for NBC , said " ... he went into a balls @-@ out sprint at 250 – and I have never seen anything like that ... I have been around swimming a long time and it 's the most amazing swim I 've ever seen , hands down . " A formula used by the International Swimming Statisticians Association to compare world records in different events gave his performance the highest score of all current world records . Thorpe promptly donated the A $ 25 @,@ 000 <unk> for breaking the first world record in the pool to charity . Later the same night , Thorpe anchored the Australians to a historic victory in the 4 × 100 m freestyle final , the first time the United States had lost the event . Thorpe set an Australian record relay split of 48 @.@ 55 s . Even taking into account a 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 7 s for a flying relay start , his split time was almost 1 s faster than his individual best of 49 @.@ 98 s . It was to be the first of many occasions in which he would anchor the Australian relay teams to victory over the Americans , with splits consistently faster than his equivalent individual times . The following night , in the semi @-@ finals of the 200 m freestyle , Thorpe broke Hackett 's world record by 0 @.@ 33 s , clocking 1 min 46 @.@ 34 s . The next day in the final , he again broke the record , lowering it to 1 min 46 @.@ 0 s . He finished his competition by leading off the 4 × 200 m freestyle team with Klim , Hackett and Bill Kirby to victory . Their time lowered their own world record by more than three seconds , completing Thorpe 's fourth world record in four nights . 
 Immediately after the Pan Pacific Championships , Thorpe 's management announced his signing to Adidas for an undisclosed six @-@ figure sum , stating that he would race in their new bodysuit . This presented a dilemma , as the national team was sponsored and wore outfits designed by Speedo , leading to months of protracted discussions and uncertainty . To compound his commercial difficulties , Thorpe had an uncertain end to the sporting year when , in October , he broke a bone in his ankle whilst jogging . However his performance throughout the year was recognised when he was again named as the World Swimmer of the Year by Swimming World , and by Swimming Australia as its Swimmer of the Year . In a wider arena , he was named Young Australian of the Year , ABC Sports Star of the Year , and Male Athlete of the Year at the Australian Sports Awards . 
 = = = 2000 Olympic build @-@ up = = = 
 Thorpe started 2000 looking to add a third individual event to his Olympic schedule . He explored his options by contesting the 1500 m freestyle at the New South Wales Championships in January , which he won . Thorpe embarked on a European FINA World Cup tour in order to hone his <unk> , but this was overshadowed by comments made by German head coach Manfred <unk> accusing him of using steroids . Thorpe 's difficulties heightened at the subsequent German leg of the tour in Berlin , when a standoff over a drug @-@ test arose when officials wanted to take an unsealed sample due to lack of containers . After the standoff was resolved , Thorpe proceeded to cut more than 1 @.@ 5 s from his world short course record in the 200 m freestyle . Given the context of the race , Thorpe rated it as his best @-@ ever performance , ahead of his victories at Olympic and World level . On returning from Europe , Thorpe faced further uncertainty until he was granted permission to wear his Adidas suit instead of the Australian uniforms provided by Speedo . 
 With the past uncertainties resolved , Thorpe proceeded to the Olympic selection trials at Sydney Olympic Park in May 2000 . He again broke his 400 m world record on the first night of racing , lowering it to 3 min 41 @.@ 33 s to earn his first Olympic selection . The following day , he lowered his 200 m world record to 1 min 45 @.@ 69 s in the semi @-@ finals , before lowering it again to 1 min 45 @.@ 51 s in the final . His attempt to secure a third individual berth failed after he finished fourth in the final of the 100 m and withdrew from the 1500 m . 
 Thorpe 's success led to allegations of drug doping in 2000 , which arose again in 2007 . Specifically he was accused of using banned performance @-@ enhancing steroids . Prior to the 2000 Olympics , the head coach and captain of Germany 's swimming team accused Thorpe of cheating , that his physical attributes were symptomatic of steroid use and that his ability to exceed prior records believed to be drug @-@ fuelled made his feats worthy of suspicion . In 2007 , the French sports newspaper L 'Équipe claimed that Thorpe " showed ' abnormal levels ' of two banned substances in a doping test " . Thorpe denied the charges and the Australian Sports Anti @-@ Doping Authority ( <unk> ) confirmed that they had investigated Thorpe in the past , for abnormal levels of testosterone and <unk> hormone ( LH ) , but had dismissed the result . FINA dropped its investigation and closed the case . Thorpe has never been found to have been doping , and has steadfastly denied the allegations while also being prominent in the campaign against drug use . He has called for the introduction of blood testing , promised to surrender a frozen sample for retrospective testing and repeatedly criticised FINA for drug @-@ testing procedures that he regards as inadequate . 
 = = = 2000 Summer Olympics = = = 
 Entering the Olympics , the Australian public expected Thorpe to deliver multiple world records and gold medals as a formality ; Sydney 's Daily Telegraph posted a front @-@ page spread headlined Invincible . Thorpe cruised through the heats of the 400 m on the first morning of competition , posting a new Olympic record and shortening bookmakers ' odds to 50 – 1 . By the time the final was held that night , the pressure had intensified — the host nation had yet to win its first gold medal . Thorpe led throughout , and although Italy 's Massimiliano Rosolino was within a body length at the 300 m mark , Thorpe 's finishing kick extended the final margin to three body lengths . This set a new world record of 3 min 40 @.@ 59 s . Secret tests carried out by the Italian National Olympic Committee prior to the Olympics later showed that Rosolino had abnormal levels of human growth hormone . Rosolino aside , Thorpe had left bronze medallist Klete Keller fifteen metres in arrears . 
 Thorpe lined up later in the night alongside Klim , Chris <unk> and Ashley Callus to anchor the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay , an event which the Americans had never lost at Olympic level . The third leg ended with Australia only an arm 's length ahead of the United States . Thorpe timed his dive much better than Gary Hall , Jr . , and surfaced a body length ahead . Hall 's sprinting ability allowed him to open a lead by the final turn , but Thorpe 's finishing kick overhauled him in the final metres , sparking wild celebrations amongst the partisan crowd . It evoked an uncharacteristic celebration from Thorpe , who immediately jumped out of the pool , screaming and hugging his ecstatic teammates . He even went as far as playing air guitar to mock Hall 's pre @-@ race claim that the Americans would " smash " the Australians " like guitars " . 
 When Thorpe broke the 200 m freestyle Olympic record in the heats the following morning , his main rival Pieter van den Hoogenband of the Netherlands ( with World # 2 ranked and teammate Michael Kim bypassing the 200 metres ) conceded defeat . However , van den Hoogenband showed his hand in the semi @-@ finals by cutting more than a second off his personal best , to set a new world record of 1 min 45 @.@ 35 s . Thorpe qualified second with a personal best of his own , 0 @.@ 02 s slower , and was under immense pressure to win the final the following day after his double gold on the first night . Van den Hoogenband started quickly and Thorpe chased him , reaching the 100 m mark just 0 @.@ 04 s behind . Both swimmers turned at 150 m in identical times . As a result of starting harder than usual , Thorpe faded as van den Hoogenband drew away to claim gold and equal his world record , stunning the home crowd . Thorpe touched in 1 min 45 @.@ 83 s , the first time that he had swum slower in the final than in the qualifying rounds . Thorpe though would never again lose to Van Den Hoogenband in a long course 200 metres race again . Thorpe returned to victory when he led off the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay the following night , setting up a 10 m lead over American Scott Goldblatt in the first leg . Although Thorpe was unable to reclaim the individual world record , he , Klim , Kirby and Todd Pearson lowered their world record to 7 min 07 @.@ 05 s , over five seconds ahead of the Americans — the largest winning margin in an Olympic relay for half a century . Thorpe rounded off his Olympics by swimming in the heats of the 4 × 100 m medley relay , and collected a silver medal when the finals quartet finished behind the Americans . Thorpe 's performances as Australia 's leading medalist for the Games were recognised when the Australian Olympic Committee granted him the honour of carrying the flag at the closing ceremony . With three gold and two silver medals , Thorpe was the most successful athlete at the 2000 Olympic Games . At year 's end , he was again named by Swimming Australia as the Swimmer of the Year , but van den Hoogenband usurped him as the leading male swimmer chosen by Swimming World Magazine . 
 = = = 2001 World Aquatics Championships = = = 
 With the 2001 Australian Championships held in Hobart in March , Thorpe added the 800 m freestyle to his repertoire , after FINA had added the event for the 2001 World Aquatics Championships . Thorpe began his campaign by successfully defending his 400 m title with a time just 0 @.@ 17 s outside his world record . The following night in the 800 m event , he drew away from Hackett in the last 100 m to break Kieren Perkins ' 1994 world record by over four seconds . He earned his third title by cutting 0 @.@ 66 s from van den Hoogenband 's 200 m world record to set a new mark of 1 min 44 @.@ 69 s . This performance made him the third male after John Konrads and Tim Shaw to hold world records over three distances simultaneously . His subsequent victory in the 100 m freestyle in a new personal best of 49 @.@ 05 s made him the first since Konrads in 1959 to hold all Australian freestyle titles from 100 m to 800 m . This indicated that he could swim faster at the subsequent World Championships in Fukuoka , where he was looking to regain the ascendancy from van den Hoogenband . 
 Thorpe arrived in Fukuoka having been chosen by broadcaster TV Asahi as the marketing drawcard of the event . With the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay being held after the 400 m freestyle on the first night , Thorpe appeared to be conserving energy when he reached the 200 m mark two seconds outside his world record . Although he was 0 @.@ 93 s behind at the final turn , a final 50 m burst in 24 @.@ 36 s saw him cut a further 0 @.@ 42 s from his world record . The relay saw him dive in fractionally ahead of American Jason Lezak after Klim , Callus and Pearson had completed the first three legs . Thorpe fell behind in the early half of the leg before kicking away in the closing stages , to seal gold with his fastest @-@ ever relay split of 47 @.@ 87 s . In the 800 m final , he shadowed Hackett for the first 750 m , staying within a body length . He then broke clear to win by a body length , lowering his world record by over two seconds . The 200 m freestyle rematch with van den Hoogenband provided Thorpe with a chance to rectify his strategy from the Olympics ; this time he allowed the Dutchman to lead through the first 100 m . Thorpe pulled even at the 150 m mark and then broke away towards the finishing wall two body lengths clear . He lowered his world record to 1 min 44 @.@ 06 s in the process , prompting van den Hoogenband to raise his arm aloft . Thorpe 's winning streak was interrupted in the 100 m freestyle when his personal best of 48 @.@ 81 s placed him fourth , but he returned to form in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay . Anchoring the team of Klim , Hackett and Kirby , the Australians lowered their world record time by more than two seconds , leaving the Italians more than six seconds in arrears . Having overtaken Klim as Australia 's leading 100 m freestyle swimmer , Thorpe was entrusted with anchoring the 4 × 100 m medley relay team on 28 July . After Matt Welsh , Regan Harrison and Geoff <unk> had finished their legs , Thorpe 's change left him half a body length behind the new 100 m world champion Anthony Ervin of the United States . The Americans were expected to win , and with his typically slow start , Thorpe turned a body length behind with 50 m remaining . With an American victory seeming inevitable , Thorpe managed to accelerate and deprive Ervin of the lead in the last 5 m . This made Thorpe the only swimmer to have won six gold medals at a World Championships , and the first since Shaw in 1974 to win the 200 – 400 – 800 treble . His performances formed the basis for Australia 's gold medal win over the United States 13 – 9 . It was also the first time since the 1956 Summer Olympics that Australia had topped the medal tally at a global meet . Thorpe 's achievements led to predictions that he could match Mark Spitz 's seven gold medals at the 1972 Summer Olympics , which he played down . 
 = = = 2002 Commonwealth Games and Pan Pacific Championships = = = 
 Thorpe began competition in 2002 at the Australian Championships in Brisbane in March , which were used to select the team for the 2002 Commonwealth Games in Manchester and the 2002 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships . After his record six gold medals in Fukuoka , the meet was surrounded by further expectations of world records and speculation that he would match Spitz 's seven gold medals . His winning time in the 400 m was the second fastest in history , but such was the expectation on him that his failure to break a world record was the talking point . He claimed the 100 m and 200 m events in times outside his best , making it the first time that he had failed to break a world record at a major meet since 1999 . He also experimented by adding the 100 m backstroke to his repertoire , placing second . This earned him a Commonwealth spot in a seventh event , leading to further media speculation that he could match Spitz . 
 By this time , Thorpe 's relationship with Frost was beginning to unravel . Thorpe had always insisted that his swimming was about enjoyment and improving himself in setting faster times , rather than victory or defeat . This contrasted with Frost , who had a more aggressive and combative mindset , often making bold public statements . Thorpe ignored Frost 's advice and bulked up his upper body by a further 5 kg to 105 kg , making him the heaviest elite swimmer in history . His reasoning that the strength gains would outweigh any loss in flexibility raised concerns over his physiological strategy . On the first night in Manchester , Thorpe again lowered his 400 m mark by 0 @.@ 09 s to 3 min 40 @.@ 08 s , before anchoring the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay team to another gold . Prior to the 200 m final , Thorpe was seen arguing with Frost in the warm @-@ up area . Thorpe won , but was unusually angry at having failed to lower his previous best , publicly stating that he " wasn 't with it " and that he had " one of the worst warm @-@ ups ever " . Thorpe did manage to lower his personal best in the 100 m freestyle to 48 @.@ 73 s en route to his fourth gold , and anchored the 4 × 200 m freestyle and 4 × 100 m medley relays to comfortable victories . When he collected a silver in his first international race in the 100 m backstroke with another personal best behind world champion Matt Welsh , he was forced to rebuff media comparisons to Spitz . He emphasised personal performance , stating " I think it 's a limiting attitude to be competing against other people when you can be challenging yourself " . Despite Thorpe 's assertion that he could not match Spitz , Frost predicted that Thorpe could win nine golds at one Olympics . In spite of the media disappointment , Thorpe 's six gold medals equalled the record set by Susie O 'Neill , completing all in Games or World record time . As a result , he was awarded the honour of carrying the flag at the closing ceremony . 
 The Pan Pacific Championships followed in Yokohama less than a month later , with media speculation about Thorpe and Frost overshadowing the racing . Thorpe began his campaign with a victory over Hackett in the 400 m freestyle in a time five seconds outside his world record . Afterwards , he revealed that both he and Hackett had deliberately conserved energy for the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay later in the night . Australia subsequently won the relay , with Thorpe again overtaking Jason Lezak in the last 50 m . He subsequently won the 200 m freestyle , and anchored the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay to victory to take his tally to four golds . After qualifying second in the 100 m freestyle , Thorpe came from fourth at the 50 m mark win his fifth gold in a time of 48 @.@ 84 s . Thorpe 's run ended in the 4 × 100 m medley relay final , when despite setting the second fastest ever relay split of 47 @.@ 20 s , Australia were defeated . 
 = = Tracey Menzies era = = 
 After the 2002 Pan Pacific Championships , Thorpe announced that he was splitting with Frost to train with one of his assistants , Tracey Menzies , who had no prior international experience . Admitting that tension existed between him and Frost , Thorpe asserted that the split was amicable . He cited waning motivation for the split , stating " I decided I either had to make the change or it was to walk away from the sport " . The retired Talbot expressed concerns that Thorpe was making a decision whilst he was physically and emotionally drained , while other coaches felt that the new relationship would end up with Thorpe , rather than Menzies , making the decisions . Despite a turbulent year , he was again named by Swimming World as its World Swimmer of the Year . 
 Along with the switch of coaches , Thorpe indicated that he would put more focus on improving his sprinting ability . He thus dropped the 800 m freestyle despite being the reigning world champion and record holder . During this period , his times in the 400 m and 200 m freestyle deteriorated , and both he and Menzies were criticised . The criticism continued to mount during their partnership , particularly during the build @-@ up to the 2004 Olympics . Following his victory in the 200 and 400 events in Athens , Thorpe said that his results justified his decision , despite posting substantially faster times as a young swimmer under Frost . 
 = = = 2003 World Aquatics Championships = = = 
 The first major test of Thorpe 's partnership with Menzies came at the Australian Championships held in Sydney in March . Thorpe did not threaten any of his world records , completing the 400 m and 200 m freestyle more than two and one seconds respectively off his best . Despite defeating Hackett in both races to retain his titles , he later admitted that he was " pretty disappointed " with his performances . When he tied with Ashley Callus in a time of 49 @.@ 05 s , he was criticised by The Sydney Morning Herald which stated " The measure of Thorpe 's sprinting ability is that he could only match the efforts of a virus @-@ riddled Callus " . Thorpe found some relief by setting a new Commonwealth record of 2 min 00 @.@ 11 s in his first long course 200 m individual medley outing , the fifth fastest time in the past year . Thorpe attracted further criticism when he withdrew from the inaugural Duel in the Pool with a medical complaint , despite travelling overseas for commercial and charity work . 
 Thorpe arrived for the 2003 World Championships in Barcelona for his first major international competition since Menzies ' appointment under heavy media scrutiny following his non @-@ improvement at the Australian Championships . On the first night of competition Thorpe defeated Hackett in the 400 m freestyle in a time 2 @.@ 5 s outside his world record , making him the first to win three world titles in the same event . After his relatively slow 400 m , he was again under pressure in the 200 m freestyle after van den Hoogenband led at the 100 m mark ahead of world record pace . Thorpe managed to respond and retain his world title , and gained some relief after his sprint training yielded his first medal in the 100 m freestyle at a global competition ; he finished third in 48 @.@ 77 s . In all three freestyle events however , he had swum slower than his times under Frost . He ended his individual campaign on a promising note with his experiment with the 200 m individual medley , setting a new personal best of 1 min 59 @.@ 66 s to claim silver . Thorpe again anchored the 4 × 200 m freestyle team to retain the world title along with Hackett , Nicholas Sprenger and Craig Stevens , with a reduced margin over the Americans , who finished less than two seconds in arrears . Michael Klim 's injuries left the relay teams weakened , with Thorpe anchoring the 4 × 100 m freestyle team to fourth , At the end of a difficult year in the water , his standing had fallen in the eyes of Swimming World , who rated him fourth in the world . He was again named as Australian Swimmer of the Year , jointly with Hackett . 
 = = = 2004 Summer Olympics = = = 
 After his feats at the 2003 World Championships , Speedo had generated significant media publicity by offering Michael Phelps US $ 1 million if he could match Spitz 's seven golds . Thorpe was adamant that this was impossible , and scrapped his seventh event , the 200 m individual medley from his Olympic program . In late March 2004 at the Australian Championships in Sydney , Thorpe overbalanced whilst on the blocks in the heats of the 400 m freestyle and fell into the water , resulting in his disqualification and ending the defence of his Olympic 400 m title . This resulted in a large debate among the swimming and public community as to whether Thorpe should be given an exception to Australia 's policy of selecting the first and second place getters , with Prime Minister of Australia John Howard describing the situation as a " tragedy " . Despite the intense media spotlight , Thorpe managed to win the 100 m and 200 m freestyle events to ensure his selection for Athens . Craig Stevens , who had claimed the second qualifying position in the 400 m event , subsequently faced immense public pressure to relinquish his position to Thorpe , and later did so in a television interview for which he was paid . This generated ethical debate as to whether Stevens ' decision had been bought , and criticism against Thorpe . 
 The pressure in the lead @-@ up was further compounded by the media attention surrounding Phelps , who had decided that the 200 m freestyle would be one of the events in his quest for eight gold medals . This prompted many media outlets to label the race between Thorpe , van den Hoogenband , Phelps and Hackett as The Race of the Century . With the press spotlight growing , Thorpe tried to avoid media attention , resulting in a few terse media events . Thorpe 's increasing focus on the 100 m event , coupled with the media pressure , resulted in speculation that he was vulnerable to Hackett in the 400 m event . Thorpe made a slow start in the final , reaching the 100 m mark one second outside world record pace . In a topsy @-@ turvy performance at irregular pace , there were multiple changes of lead before Thorpe established a body @-@ length lead by 350 m . He was closed down by Hackett , holding on by only 0 @.@ 26 s in a time three seconds outside his own world record . Thorpe appeared to shed tears in an uncharacteristic sign of emotion , admitting that the controversy surrounding the event had taken a toll on him , but denying that any liquid had left his eyes . 
 With Klim recently returning from a two @-@ year injury layoff , and Callus ill , Thorpe could only anchor Australia to sixth in the 4 × 100 m freestyle relay . The 200 m began with van den Hoogenband again attacking immediately , reaching the 100 m mark more than a second under the world record split , with Thorpe half a body length behind . Thorpe gradually reduced the lead before passing van den Hoogenband in the last 50 m to win The Race of the Century by half a body length , in a new Olympic record of 1 min 44 @.@ 71 s . Having achieved what had eluded him four years earlier , Thorpe reacted emotionally , immediately tearing off his cap , punching the air and screaming . The next day saw six years of Australian victory in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay ended when Hackett , Klim and Sprenger had put Thorpe into the final leg 1 @.@ 48 s behind Keller . Thorpe gradually reduced the margin but was unable to pass Keller in the last lap , the United States touching 0 @.@ 13 s earlier . Thorpe found himself on the other side of a close result when he qualified last for the 100 m freestyle by 0 @.@ 01 s . He capitalised in the final by coming from sixth at the 50 m mark to win bronze medal in a personal best of 48 @.@ 56 s , making him the only person to medal in the 100 – 200 – 400 combination in Olympic history . After the Athens Olympics , Thorpe took a break from competitive swimming , skipping the 2005 World Aquatics Championships . 
 = = = 2006 : Attempted return and retirement = = = 
 Thorpe returned to competition at the New South Wales Championships in December 2005 . He raced in the 200 m and stated his intention to retire after the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing . Thorpe announced that due to a desire to concentrate on the 100 m freestyle , he had dropped his pet event , the 400 m . He was unmoved by national coach Alan Thompson , who implored him to continue swimming the event . In February , Thorpe qualified for the 2006 Commonwealth Games by winning the 100 m and 200 m freestyle in times of 49 @.@ 24 s and 1 min 46 @.@ 42 s respectively . He expressed disappointment with his performances ; he speculated that he may have misjudged his new training schedule and anticipated further improvement . 
 Soon after , Thorpe announced his withdrawal from the Commonwealth Games due to a bout of bronchitis , which had stopped him from training . Thorpe 's illness was later diagnosed as a strain of glandular fever , and after a further delay caused by a broken hand , he moved to the United States in July to work with Dave Salo . Further disruption followed when the Australian switched coaches , citing excessive and ongoing media attention . Thorpe 's stay was constantly surrounded by rumours that he was suffering from ill discipline ; this fuelled speculation that his international career was on the decline . 
 Upon his return to Australia , Thorpe withdrew from the selection trials for the 2007 World Championships and announced his retirement on 21 November 2006 . Thorpe said that he had been contemplating retirement for some time , but was afraid of the future because swimming had given him a " safety blanket " . Thorpe stated that he retired despite reaching higher levels of fitness , noting " As I got fit , physically fit , my mind also got fit " . He said a clear mind allowed him to reach his decision . He was close to tears when thanking the Australian public , but declared that his retirement was a " joyous " occasion of celebration . 
 = = = 2011 : Attempted qualification for 2012 Olympics = = = 
 On 1 February 2011 , Ian Thorpe announced that he would try to qualify for the 2012 Olympics in London . Thorpe 's major focus was the 100 m and 200 m freestyle at 2012 's trials , stating he could offer the most value to the Australian team in the relays . He would not swim the 400 m , claiming he would not have enough time to build up endurance for that event . This led many to see a renewed rivalry with Michael Phelps . 
 Thorpe swam the 100 m butterfly and 100 m medley in Singapore ( 4 – 5 November ) and Beijing ( 8 – 9 November ) before also taking on the 100 m freestyle in the Tokyo ( 12 – 13 November ) round of the 2011 FINA Swimming World Cup . 
 = = = 2012 : Australian Olympic Trials = = = 
 Thorpe 's comeback attempt in the 200 m freestyle came to an abrupt end on day 2 of Australia 's Olympic Trials in Adelaide , on 16 March 2012 . No longer allowed to wear the full @-@ body racing suit ( covering from neck to ankles and wrists ) with which he set all of his world records – but are now banned by FINA rule changes – he competed wearing just the " jammer " ( hip to thigh ) racing shorts . He swam very well in the morning heats , cruising to 1 : 49 @.@ 18 , a time which placed him equal fifth fastest . However , in the semi @-@ finals that evening he faded over the last 100 meters , finishing in 12th place at 1 : 49 @.@ 91 . Speaking to reporters immediately afterwards , Thorpe said , " The last 100 was a struggle , I 'm not sure why . This was slower than what I swam this morning , probably the inexperience of racing in the last 18 months held me up . The fairytale has turned into a nightmare . " In the 100 m freestyle on day 3 ( 17 March ) , Thorpe won his heat ( the 9th of 12 ) but failed to break 50 seconds and did not advance to the semi @-@ finals with the top 16 sprinters . Thus , his bid to qualify for the London Olympics officially ended . 
 Thorpe spoke to reporters after his 100 m race , saying : " When I started this I wanted to get back into the pool . I wanted to start racing again , I wanted to be competitive again and I wanted to go to the Olympics . I still want to do all of those things . I 've missed out on what was a huge goal for me to accomplish in this short period of time , but still the desire I had previous to this , it 's still there . " Essentially saying that his ( relatively ) slow times in the 100 and 200 meters were the result of too short a period to train and prepare , Thorpe announced he will continue training , setting as his ( new ) goal qualifying for the World Championships in 2013 . 
 During the 2012 Olympic Games , Thorpe worked as a pundit for BBC Television . 
 = = Athletic attributes = = 
 Thorpe 's success has been attributed to his work ethic , mental strength , powerful kick , ability to accelerate and a physiology suited to swimming . This led former Australian head coach Don Talbot to label him as " the greatest swimmer the world has seen " . Although Swimming World labelled Thorpe 's technique as " extraordinary " and " superior " , Talbot disagreed , stating his belief that Thorpe relied on his kick too heavily at the expense of his arms . He also cited Thorpe 's ability to manage his workload and his day @-@ to @-@ day recovery between races during a meet as a deficiency . Thorpe was known for using his trademark six @-@ beat kick to power away from his rivals in the closing stages of races , the effectiveness of which was attributed to his unusually large size 17 feet . 
 Following his retirement , head coach of the US men 's swimming team Bob Bowman — who also mentors Michael Phelps — called Thorpe " the greatest middle @-@ distance swimmer of all time and ... the greatest relay swimmer I have seen " . Bowman further cited Thorpe 's ability to raise the profile and popularity of swimming , noting that Phelps ' public image was modelled on that of the Australian . Australian Olympic Committee President John Coates stated that " In 50 years from now Australians will still marvel at the feats of Ian Thorpe " . Dawn Fraser , the first of only two swimmers to win the same Olympic event three times , said that Thorpe was the " greatest [ freestyle ] swimmer in the world " , and lamented that he would not be attempting a hat @-@ trick of 400 m titles . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Aside from his swimming achievements , Thorpe has received numerous honours and accolades during his life . 
 2014 : Conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters by the Macquarie University in recognition of his extraordinary contribution for the sport , philanthropy and Indigenous rights . 
 2013 : Conferred an honorary Doctor of Letters by the University of Western Sydney for his support for health and education services for Indigenous youth . 
 2012 : Awarded Human Rights Medal for his charity work with Indigenous children . 
 2007 : Ian Thorpe Aquatic and Fitness Centre in Ultimo , Sydney named in his honour . 
 2001 : Awarded Medal of the Order of Australia ( OAM ) for service to sport as a gold medallist at the Sydney 2000 Olympic Games . 
 2000 : Young Australian of the Year 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 In a July 2014 televised interview with British talk show host Michael Parkinson Thorpe came out as gay , after years of denying his homosexuality publicly . He stated " I 'm comfortable saying I 'm a gay man . And I don 't want people to feel the same way I did . You can grow up , you can be comfortable and you can be gay . " He added " I am telling the world that I am gay … and I hope this makes it easier for others now , and even if you 've held it in for years , it feels easier to get it out . " 
 = = = Sponsorship = = = 
 Thorpe is known for his interests in fashion , and serves as an ambassador for Armani , and has his own line of designer jewellery and underwear . During his career , Thorpe was one of the most prominent and popular sportspeople in Australia . Despite competing in a sport in which the vast majority of international athletes ' earnings are below the poverty line , marketing surveys consistently ranked Thorpe as the most sought @-@ after Australian athlete for sponsorship deals , surpassing footballers who compete on a weekly basis in much larger stadia . Aside from his swimsuit sponsor Adidas , Thorpe was sponsored by Australian corporate giants such as Qantas , Telstra , and the Seven Network . 
 Thorpe 's interests in fashion and culture led him to make frequent visits to New York City — which he describes as a second home — often for engagements with Armani and particularly because of the city 's status as a global fashion capital . He was present at the World Trade Center on the morning of 11 September 2001 , having stopped there on his jog , before returning to his hotel after forgetting his camera . It was during this trip that he appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , which was notable because of the relative lack of interest in competitive swimming in America . Thorpe later became a spokesperson for the unsuccessful New York bid for the 2012 Summer Olympics , even promising to continue his career until the games if New York won the hosting rights . Thorpe 's interests have also seen him involved in television . In 2002 , he played the lead role in the reality television show Undercover Angels , which imitated the Charlie 's Angels series . In the program , Thorpe directed three young women who performed good deeds for people in need . Although it averaged more than a million viewers per episode , it was widely panned by critics . Thorpe has also appeared as an extra in the American sitcom Friends . 
 Thorpe is widely popular in Asia , particularly Japan . In 2000 , TV Asahi identified him as the swimmer likely to be the most successful at the 2001 World Championships in Fukuoka , so they selected him as the event 's marketing figurehead . In the lead @-@ up , Thorpe visited Japan to promote Asahi in a series of television events , and upon returning for the competition , he was mobbed at the airport by youthful crowds 25 m deep ; hundreds camped outside the Australian team 's hotel . He was also praised by older sections of Japanese society as a role model for youth , due to what they interpreted as his humility and work ethic . It was estimated that more than 80 % of the Japanese public watched his races on television . In 2002 , in the wake of a tourism slump after 11 September terrorist attacks , Thorpe agreed to be an ambassador for the Australian Tourism Commission in Japan . The high @-@ profile campaign included a meeting with the Japanese Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi . The marketing drive resulted in an upturn in Japanese tourism to Australia , which was credited to Thorpe . In 2005 , Yakult released a ' <unk> ' energy drink — which featured a picture of the swimmer on the bottle — in Japan . This was part of an equity deal with the So Natural food group , in which Thorpe was given a 5 % stake in the company — at the time worth A $ 1 @.@ 1 m — in return for the use of his name and image on their products . The 15 @-@ year deal covers East and Southeast Asia and Thorpe 's share in the venture could increase to 50 % depending on its success . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 More recently , Thorpe has also emerged as a philanthropist , starting the charity Ian Thorpe 's Fountain for Youth in 2000 . The organisation raises funds for research into childhood illnesses and sponsors a school in Beijing for orphaned children with disabilities . In addition , it works with The Fred Hollows Foundation to improve health standards and living conditions in Australian aboriginal communities . Citing a wish to " ... work directly with our Aboriginal partners and not compete for the meagre funding available from public and corporate donations " the organisation was liquidated in 2014 . 
 = = = Depression = = = 
 In 2014 , it was confirmed that Thorpe had been admitted to a rehabilitation clinic after neighbours found him dazed near his parents ' <unk> home . Thorpe was taken to Bankstown Hospital by police before being admitted to a rehabilitation clinic . In his 2012 autobiography This is Me , Thorpe stated he had considered suicide and had drunk ' huge quantities ' of alcohol to deal with ' crippling depression ' . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Thorpe , Ian ; Wainwright , Robert , 1961- ( 2012 ) . This is Me . Simon and Schuster Australia . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 = Theobald of Bec = 
 Theobald of Bec ( c . 1090 – 18 April 1161 ) , sometimes known as <unk> , was archbishop of Canterbury from 1139 to 1161 . He was a Norman ; his exact birth date is unknown . Some time in the late 11th or early 12th century Theobald became a monk at the Abbey of Bec , rising to the position of abbot in 1137 . King Stephen of England chose him to be Archbishop of Canterbury in 1138 . Canterbury 's claim to primacy over the Welsh ecclesiastics was resolved during Theobald 's term of office when Pope Eugene III decided in 1148 in Canterbury 's favour . Theobald faced challenges to his authority from a subordinate bishop , Henry of Blois , Bishop of Winchester and King Stephen 's younger brother , and his relationship with King Stephen was turbulent . On one occasion Stephen forbade him from attending a papal council , but Theobald defied the king , which resulted in the confiscation of his property and temporary exile . Theobald 's relations with his cathedral clergy and the monastic houses in his archdiocese were also difficult . 
 Serving during the disorders of Stephen 's reign , Theobald succeeded in forcing peace on the king by refusing to consecrate Stephen 's son and heir , Eustace . After Eustace 's death in 1153 , Stephen recognised his rival Henry of Anjou as his heir , and later Theobald was named regent of the kingdom after Stephen 's death . After a long illness , Theobald died in 1161 , following which unsuccessful efforts were made to have him canonised as a saint . 
 Theobald was the patron of his successor Thomas Becket , and a number of other future bishops and archbishops served as his clerks . During his time as archbishop Theobald augmented the rights of his see , or bishopric . Historians of his time and later were divided on his character and he is often overlooked in the historical record , mainly because of the fame of his successor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Theobald 's family was from the area around <unk> near Le Bec @-@ Hellouin , in the Risle River valley . The modern historian Frank Barlow speculates that Theobald may have been a distant relative of his successor as archbishop , Thomas Becket , as Becket 's family came from the same part of Normandy . The exact date of Theobald 's birth is unknown ; the only clue to his age is that when he died in 1161 contemporaries considered him an old man , suggesting a birth date of perhaps around 1090 to one modern historian . His father was supposedly a knight , but no contemporary reference gives his name . His brother Walter also became a priest , and later a bishop . 
 Theobald entered the Abbey of Bec in Normandy as a Benedictine monk in the late 11th or early 12th century , while William was the third abbot . But as William was abbot from 1096 to 1124 , that leaves a wide range of possible entry dates . Theobald was the 266th monk admitted under William , out of 346 . The historian Avrom Saltman suggests that , if admissions were spaced regularly throughout William 's abbacy , Theobald would have become a monk in about 1117 , but qualifies his estimate with the statement that 1117 " seems to be rather late " . 
 = = = Life at Bec = = = 
 In 1127 Theobald was made prior of Bec , after Boso succeeded William as abbot . Theobald became abbot in 1137 , following Boso 's death in June 1136 . The monks of Bec unanimously elected him to be their new abbot without first consulting the Archbishop of Rouen , Hugh de Boves , who consequently threatened to void the result . <unk> , the Bishop of Evreux , and brother of Thurstan , the Archbishop of York , intervened with Hugh and persuaded him to ratify the election . Another problem then arose when Hugh demanded a written profession of obedience from Theobald , which Theobald refused to provide ; no previous abbot had made such a profession . Theobald resisted for 14 months before a compromise was reached through the intercession of Peter the Venerable , Abbot of Cluny , allowing Theobald to give a verbal profession to Hugh . 
 No documents survive from Theobald 's tenure as abbot , nor is there any information on the administration of the monastery during his period of office , except that 47 monks were admitted to Bec while he was abbot . Theobald travelled to England on business for his abbey at least once during his abbacy , to supervise the monastery 's lands in England , a trip that took place shortly before his selection as the new Archbishop of Canterbury in 1138 . 
 = = = Appointment to Canterbury = = = 
 In 1138 King Stephen chose Theobald to fill the vacant archbishopric of Canterbury over Stephen 's own brother Henry , the Bishop of Winchester , who had helped Stephen gain the throne of England . Stephen feared that Henry would be too powerful as archbishop , and would attempt to control the king . The election took place on 24 December ; Stephen was present with the papal legate , Alberic of Ostia , and a small group of barons and bishops , but Henry was absent overseeing the ordination of deacons . Most historians consider that Stephen arranged the election 's timing to ensure Henry 's absence . Henry believed that Theobald had been elected not only because of Stephen 's concerns but also because Waleran of Meulan , the lay patron of Bec , was attempting to put his own man in one of the most powerful positions in England . Waleran and his twin brother Robert , Earl of Leicester , were Henry 's chief rivals for Stephen 's favour , and Henry disliked both of them intensely . Although Theobald was pious and well @-@ educated , he had only become abbot the year before , and his election was probably influenced by the reputation of his monastery , which had already produced two archbishops of Canterbury , Lanfranc and Anselm . Theobald had no important family connections to advance his career , and few clerical allies . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Theobald was consecrated on 8 January 1139 by the legate , Alberic of Ostia . He went to Rome for his pallium and took part in the Second Lateran Council . As archbishop his behaviour was less political in comparison to that of his main rival , Henry of Blois . Henry was appointed a papal legate on 1 March 1139 , which meant that Henry could now call church councils in England and had power equal to or exceeding that of Theobald . Theobald swore fealty to Stephen upon his election to Canterbury , recognising Stephen as the king of England . 
 Soon after his election Theobald selected his brother Walter to be archdeacon of Canterbury , and in 1148 promoted him to be Bishop of Rochester . Theobald attended the council held by Stephen in June 1139 that deprived Roger of Salisbury , Bishop of Salisbury , and his nephews Nigel , Bishop of Ely , and Alexander , Bishop of Lincoln , of their castles . According to most historians , Theobald took little part in the controversy that followed the council , which eventually ended with Roger 's death in 1139 and Nigel and Alexander 's restoration to favour . Recently however , that view has been challenged by two historians who argue that Theobald took a more active role in the council . They base their view on a Vita , or Life of the 12th @-@ century mystic Christina of Markyate , which narrates the events and gives a more central role to Theobald , instead of Henry of Blois , in challenging Stephen 's arrest of the three bishops . 
 = = = Civil war = = = 
 Theobald 's actions in the next few years are intertwined with the history of Stephen 's ascension to the throne . Following King Henry I 's death in 1135 the succession was disputed between the king 's nephews — Stephen and his elder brother , Theobald II , Count of Champagne — and Henry 's surviving legitimate child Matilda , usually known as the Empress Matilda because of her first marriage to the German Emperor , Henry V. King Henry 's only legitimate son , William , had died in 1120 . After Matilda was widowed in 1125 , she returned to her father , who married her to Geoffrey , Count of Anjou . All the magnates of England and Normandy were required to declare fealty to Matilda as Henry 's heir , but when Henry I died , Stephen rushed to England and had himself crowned before either Theobald II or Matilda could react . The Norman barons accepted Stephen as Duke of Normandy , and Theobald II contented himself with his possessions in France . But Matilda was not resigned to the loss , and secured the support of the Scottish king , David , her maternal uncle , and in 1138 the support of her half @-@ brother , Robert , Earl of Gloucester , an illegitimate son of Henry I. 
 After the Battle of Lincoln in 1141 , with Stephen in captivity in Bristol , Theobald did not immediately join the Empress . He claimed that he needed to talk to Stephen before switching his oath of fealty . After consulting in person with Stephen , he secured permission to accept the current conditions , and then joined Henry of Blois , who had switched sides , at Winchester in April for a legatine council held to depose Stephen and crown Matilda as queen . Attendance at the council was sparse however , and the Empress could not be crowned because she did not hold London . After the unsuccessful attempt to crown Matilda , those gathered at Winchester had to flee before Stephen 's forces ; one of Matilda 's chief supporters , her half @-@ brother Robert of Gloucester , was captured . During their flight Theobald and his fellow bishops were robbed of their horses and ecclesiastical vestments . Theobald then took a leading part in the negotiations that led to the exchange of Robert for Stephen , which happened in November 1141 . Henry of Blois , having switched sides again , then held another legatine council in Westminster , which reaffirmed Stephen as king . Theobald ceremonially crowned Stephen at Canterbury during the Christmas court held there . 
 Matilda remained in England until 1148 . The disorders were at their peak between 1142 and 1148 , but her cause could never secure enough support to enable her to be crowned . Nor could Stephen decisively defeat Matilda 's forces , which meant that England remained divided in allegiance between the two rivals . But while Matilda was in England , her husband Geoffrey was conquering Normandy , which he finally overran in 1144 . 
 = = = Difficulties with Henry of Blois = = = 
 Theobald 's dealings with Henry of Blois , the Bishop of Winchester , his suffragan bishop , were strained because of Henry 's position as papal legate . Henry supported the appointment of William FitzHerbert as Archbishop of York in 1141 , which Theobald opposed . Although Theobald spoke out against the manner of election , he took little active part in the subsequent electoral disputes , which resulted eventually in the deposition of FitzHerbert and his replacement at York by Henry Murdac . But in September 1143 , Henry 's legatine powers lapsed when Pope Innocent II , who had made the legatine appointment , died . Celestine II was elected on 26 September 1143 , but he was an opponent of Stephen , and thus was not favourably inclined towards Stephen 's brother Henry either . To secure appointment as legate , Theobald travelled to Rome in December 1143 , arriving shortly before Celestine 's death on 8 March 1144 . Theobald was probably accompanied by Nigel , Bishop of Ely , and Roger de Clinton , Bishop of Coventry . Before his death , Celestine forbade Theobald " to allow any change to be made in the position of the English crown , since the transfer of it had been justly denounced , and the matter was still under dispute " . This became the papal policy , and was a significant change from the recognition of Stephen as king by Pope Innocent II soon after Stephen 's coronation in 1135 . It essentially forbade Theobald from crowning any successor to Stephen , especially while Stephen was still alive . 
 After Celestine 's death Theobald returned to England , stopping at St Denis Abbey in Paris to help Suger , the abbot , consecrate the newly rebuilt abbey church and its altars . Theobald was the only bishop present at the ceremony whose diocese was not in France . Meanwhile , Henry of Blois had arrived in Rome and begun negotiations with the new pope , Lucius II , over the elevation of the bishopric of Winchester to an archbishopric . It appears that Lucius appointed a legate , Cardinal <unk> , the Bishop of Tusculum , to travel to England and oversee the project , but Lucius died before anything was accomplished . 
 = = = Disputes with Stephen = = = 
 Theobald was back in Paris in May 1147 to meet with the new pope , Eugene III ; among the issues probably discussed was Theobald 's dispute with Bernard of St David 's . Relations at this time between Theobald and Stephen seem to have been good , but when Eugene summoned the English bishops to the Council of Rheims in April 1148 the king forbade all of them from attending except for three he nominated : Chichester , Hereford and Norwich . Despite having been specifically refused permission Theobald sneaked away in a fishing boat , presumably accompanied by Gilbert Foliot , who attended the council with him . Theobald had a number of reasons for defying the king : chiefly his obedience to the pope 's order commanding his attendance , but also to keep the papacy from favouring the newly elected Archbishop of York , Henry Murdac , in the disputes between York and Canterbury . Murdac was known to be close to his fellow Cistercian Eugene . 
 Bethune , the Bishop of Hereford , died during the council , and Eugene nominated Foliot as his successor at Theobald 's urging . One of the council 's last acts was to suspend the non @-@ attending bishops from their offices . The only English bishop specifically named was Henry of Blois , but the others who did not attend were presumably also suspended although not named . Henry of Blois was singled out for special handling , as the papacy ordered that he could not be reinstated by Theobald ; Eugene reserved to himself the power to restore Henry . Theobald appears to have reinstated most of the bishops quickly , as Foliot wrote later in 1148 that only the bishops of Winchester , Durham , Worcester , Bath and Exeter were still suspended . Theobald forgave the bishops of Exeter , Worcester and Bath on 11 November 1148 , according to the later chronicler Gervase of Canterbury . Gervase also lists Hilary of Chichester as one of those forgiven by Theobald on that date , but as Hilary attended the council it is likely that this is an error . Durham may have been omitted because he was a suffragan bishop of the Archbishop of York , and his reinstatement was in his archbishop 's hands . 
 The king was angry with Theobald for attending the council , even though the archbishop intervened with Eugene , who was displeased with the king for forbidding the bishops ' attendance . Theobald persuaded Eugene against excommunicating Stephen , asking the pope to allow the king to make amends for his behaviour . But Stephen was unimpressed with Theobald 's intercession ; he confiscated Theobald 's property and banished the archbishop . In September 1148 , the pope put England under interdict , which was ignored except in Canterbury . At first Theobald was in exile at St Omer , where he consecrated Gilbert Foliot as Bishop of Hereford . He then returned to England and set himself up in Framlingham , which was held by Hugh Bigod , an adherent of the Empress . From there he conducted the ecclesiastical business of England , but Theobald 's presence in the country posed a threat to Stephen 's authority , and Stephen quickly settled the differences between the two . 
 Henry of Blois had lost his legateship before Celestine became pope , but it was not until about 1150 that Theobald was appointed legate by Eugene III , perhaps owing to the exhortations of Bernard of Clairvaux . Theobald held the legatine powers in England until his death in 1161 . In 1151 Theobald held a legatine council in London . The council was attended by the king and Eustace , the king 's eldest son , as well as other members of the nobility . The council decreed eight canons , or ecclesiastical statutes , including ones condemning the pillaging of church properties and the imposition of financial levies on the clergy . Another canon of the council stated that bishops should no longer pursue violators of church property in the royal courts , but should use ecclesiastical courts instead . The other canons dealt with procedural matters arising from excommunications for abusing church property . 
 The next year , the archbishop refused to crown Eustace and was again exiled by Stephen , who was attempting to secure the succession for his son by imitating the Capetian dynasty of France , which usually saw the king 's heir crowned during his father 's lifetime . Although Theobald claimed papal authority for refusal , based on the prohibition by Celestine , it was more probable that he and the bishops had no desire to prolong the civil war . Stephen demanded in April 1152 that Theobald crown Eustace , but the archbishop once again refused , and went into exile in Flanders . Theobald claimed that Stephen had gained the throne through perjury , implying that if the archbishop crowned Eustace , Theobald would be perpetuating this crime . The king and the archbishop reached a truce in August . 
 In January 1153 Henry of Anjou , Matilda 's son , invaded England in pursuit of his claim to the throne , and with the death of Eustace in August 1153 , Stephen gave up . Theobald was instrumental in the negotiations between Henry and Stephen that resulted in the Treaty of Wallingford , securing Henry 's succession to the throne . Theobald was also present when Henry of Anjou met with Stephen 's second son William , probably after Eustace 's death , to settle William 's lands and status after Henry succeeded Stephen . Pope Eugene III forced Stephen to reverse the sentence of banishment , and Theobald returned to his see . Later it was mainly Theobald and Henry of Blois who negotiated the treaty ending the civil war , as neither Stephen nor Henry of Anjou was interested in a compromise . Henry of Blois and Theobald , who had previously found working together difficult , managed to secure an end to the disorders in England . 
 = = = Under Henry II = = = 
 Theobald was present at Stephen 's deathbed in October 1154 , and Stephen named him as regent until Henry could take up the crown . During the six weeks before Henry arrived , the archbishop had little difficulty in keeping the peace . After Henry 's arrival , Theobald crowned Henry and his wife Eleanor of Aquitaine on 19 December 1154 at Westminster Abbey . 
 For most of the remainder of Theobald 's life he was occupied with ecclesiastical affairs in his diocese , as well as attending the royal court when Henry was in England . In January 1155 Theobald helped to secure the Chancellorship for his protégé , Thomas Becket , an action that Barlow speculates happened because Theobald hoped to secure more influence with the king through Becket . If this was his hope , Barlow notes that it did not materialise . Although the king and the archbishop occasionally clashed when their interests conflicted , both appear to have wished to minimise the disputes and were willing to compromise to secure good relations . As an example , when Pope Adrian IV died in September 1159 , two rival claimants for the papal throne emerged . King Henry , following the custom of his grandfather Henry I , forbade the bishops from recognising either claimant . Eventually , after Henry weighed the political factors , he recognised Pope Alexander III , and it was only then that Theobald also recognised Alexander as pope . 
 However , not everything was always harmonious between the king and the archbishop . In 1156 , Theobald supported the efforts of Osbert de Bayeux , who was accused of poisoning William the Archbishop of York , to secure a trial for his alleged crimes in an ecclesiastical court rather than in the royal court . The crime had taken place during Stephen 's reign , but Stephen 's death had prevented Osbert from being tried in 1154 . The delay allowed the shifting of the trial to the church courts , which Henry opposed . Although Theobald 's position displeased the king no open rupture ensued . Theobald himself admitted to the papacy in 1154 that English custom was to try clergy for crimes in the secular courts . 
 Theobald called a church council at London in June 1160 , which dealt partly with the issues of the papal schism ; his health was poor and he had to be taken to the council in a litter . A further cause of distress to Theobald was what he saw as the ingratitude of Becket , who did not visit the ailing archbishop . 
 = = = Relations with his cathedral clergy = = = 
 Theobald 's cathedral chapter was composed of monks , and he was considered the abbot of the monastery of Christ Church Cathedral . Because of his episcopal duties , the regular running of the cathedral was the responsibility of the prior . At the time of Theobald 's election there were about 140 monks in the chapter , and they seem to have expected that Theobald , being a monk himself , would take their side in disputes and continue to support their needs . Theobald began well , sending a party of monks from the cathedral to St Martin 's Priory at Dover , which had been settled with canons instead of monks . Theobald replaced the canons with the monks . Theobald also refounded a collegiate church at South Malling near Lewes to provide benefices for his cathedral chapter . 
 Theobald worked with his first prior , Jeremiah , to eliminate clerical marriage in the diocese . But Jeremiah had been elected during the vacancy before Theobald 's election , and the monks had not secured papal permission for the election of a new prior , so eventually Theobald decided to remove Jeremiah and install his own choice as prior . Jeremiah appealed to the papacy , but Theobald deposed him while the appeal was ongoing , and appointed Walter <unk> as prior . Innocent II , however , appointed Henry of Blois to hear the case , and Henry sided with Jeremiah and ordered Jeremiah 's reinstatement . Theobald then refused to perform any services in the cathedral until Jeremiah was removed by the chapter . The lack of services would have deprived the monks of income , and Theobald 's threat had the desired effect , as Jeremiah resigned his office and left Christ Church for St Augustine 's Abbey , Canterbury . <unk> was reinstalled as prior and remained in that position until he became Bishop of Coventry in October 1149 . 
 At Easter , 1151 , Theobald took over the management of the chapter 's estates , as the new prior , Walter Parvus , was not up to the task . At first , there were no disputes , but soon the monks felt that Theobald was cheating them and imposing too rigorous a definition of poverty , and asked that the stewardship of the estates be restored to Parvus . Theobald refused and the monks attempted to appeal to the papacy . Their envoys , however , were caught by agents of the archbishop and the appeal went nowhere . Theobald then deposed Parvus and appointed a new prior . Theobald 's relations with the monks after this point seem to have been without incident . 
 = = = Relations with other monastic houses = = = 
 Theobald also had a dispute with St Augustine 's Abbey over the right of the archbishop to receive annual payments , and whether those payments were for sacraments performed by the archbishop , which would have been uncanonical , or were for other reasons . The dispute was eventually settled by a compromise in which St Augustine 's continued to make the payments but they were specifically stated not to be for sacraments . Another dispute with St Augustine 's concerned the right of the archbishops to have a say in the election of new abbots and whether or not the abbots would make a profession of obedience to the archbishops . This was eventually settled by a papal mandate of 1144 instructing the abbots to profess obedience . 
 The conflict re @-@ surfaced in 1149 , when some of the monks of St Augustine 's , led by their prior and sacrist , refused to obey the interdict placed on England by Theobald and Pope Eugene III . Theobald had the two officials excommunicated and publicly flogged . When the previous abbot of St Augustine 's died in 1151 , the prior , Silvester , paid the king for the right to administer the abbey and to hold a free election for a new abbot . The monks then proceeded to elect Silvester as the new abbot , but Theobald refused to confirm the election , accusing Silvester of buying the office . Eventually , however , Pope Eugene III ordered Theobald to allow Silvester to take up the office , which Theobald did in August 1152 . Theobald and St Augustine 's also came into conflict over the abbey 's claims of exemption from the archbishops ' oversight , because it owed obedience directly to the pope . Papal documents held at Rome backed the abbey , but there were no English royal charters that gave the abbey its liberty from the archbishops . Theobald attempted to end the confusion by legal actions both at Rome and in England , but the record was mixed . The documents at Rome clearly favoured the abbey , but at a royal council held at Northampton in 1157 , Henry II ruled in favour of Theobald . As part of the settlement Silvester , as abbot , was required to make a formal profession of obedience to Theobald , something he had been attempting to avoid since his election . The struggle with Silvester was just one event in the long history of the dispute between Canterbury and St Augustine 's . 
 As well as St Augustine 's , the abbots of a number of other monasteries in the diocese of Canterbury are known to have professed obedience to Theobald , as the documents recording the events survive . Not only abbots and priors from within Canterbury , but some from other dioceses swore to obey Theobald , although normally such oaths would have gone to their diocesan bishop instead . Most of these exceptions occurred because the monastic house claimed exemption from the oversight of their diocesan bishop , and had a tradition of making those oaths to Canterbury instead . Besides these events , Theobald also intervened in the elections of some abbots , although not always successfully . He attempted to secure the right of Gilbert Foliot to remain Abbot of Gloucester after Foliot 's election as Bishop of Hereford , but a new abbot was elected by the monks of Gloucester . Theobald was more successful in securing the election of William , who had previously been a monk at Christ Church , to be Abbot of Evesham over the objections of some of the monks of Evesham . 
 Theobald also became embroiled in the dispute between Hilary , the Bishop of Chichester , and Walter de Lucy , the abbot of Battle Abbey , over Hilary 's claims to jurisdiction over the abbey and the abbey 's counter @-@ claims that it was exempt from episcopal supervision . The abbey had never received a papal exemption , but relied instead on its royal foundation by King William I of England and its status as an <unk> , or proprietary church of the king . Under King Stephen , the abbey 's claims prevailed , but after Stephen 's death Hilary excommunicated the abbot , who appealed to the papacy . Theobald supported the bishop , who eventually secured a trial before King Henry II . It was a minor setback for Theobald when the case was eventually decided in Battle 's favour , mainly on the basis of charters that were thought at the time to be genuine , but modern historians have come to believe were forged . 
 = = = Relations with other bishops = = = 
 Theobald was instrumental in securing the subordination of the Welsh bishoprics to Canterbury . His first act in this area was the consecration of Meurig as Bishop of Bangor in 1140 , during which Meurig made a profession of obedience like those made by other bishops subject to Canterbury . Bernard , Bishop of St David 's , contested Theobald 's right to consecrate Meurig and instead asserted that St David 's should be considered an archbishopric , and that Bernard should receive a pallium . This went against the last half @-@ century of precedent that Canterbury had jurisdiction over the four Welsh sees , a precedent that dated back to Anselm 's days when Anselm had consecrated Urban as Bishop of Llandaff in 1107 . 
 Also in 1140 , Theobald consecrated Uhtred as Bishop of Llandaff , with Uhtred also swearing to obey Theobald . Likewise , when Theobald consecrated Gilbert as Bishop of St Asaph in 1142 , a similar profession of obedience was made . Along with these consecrations , Theobald 's legal efforts enabled him to withstand the attempts of Bernard to turn St David 's into an archbishopric , and when Bernard was succeeded by David <unk> in 1148 , Theobald secured the new bishop 's profession of obedience to Canterbury , thus ending the efforts to remove Wales from Canterbury 's jurisdiction . Also in 1148 , Pope Eugene decided in favour of Canterbury and against the claims of St David 's , securing Canterbury 's jurisdiction over Wales . 
 Theobald even maintained the theoretical claim of Canterbury to jurisdiction over Irish sees by consecrating Patrick as Bishop of Limerick in 1140 . That , however , was the last assertion of the claim , as in 1152 the papal legate Giovanni <unk> reorganised the Irish dioceses and settled the issue by appointing the Archbishop of Armagh the primate of Ireland . 
 Relations with bishops in England remained good , with little activity in the long @-@ running Canterbury – York dispute over the primacy of Britain . Theobald obtained a vague confirmation of his see 's primacy from Celestine II in 1143 – 1144 , but at the Council of Reims in 1148 Eugene clarified that this primacy did not affect the claims of York to be independent of Canterbury . Because of the unsettled election disputes during the 1140s over the see of York , when it was contested between William of York and Henry Murdac , Theobald faced little challenge from either William or Murdac as to the traditional dispute between Canterbury and York . When William of York died in 1154 , Theobald secured York for his protégé , Roger de Pont L 'Evêque . Further peace between the two sees was ensured when Theobald consecrated Roger without requiring a profession of obedience , which had previously been a major bone of contention between the two . 
 = = = Patronage and household = = = 
 Theobald 's household included many young men of ability , including his successor Thomas Becket . Theobald was instrumental in the early spread of Roman law to England , inviting the Bologna @-@ schooled jurist Vacarius to join his administration and advise on legal matters . Whether Vacarius actually started a school in Theobald 's household is unclear , but in the 1140s he taught briefly at Oxford . Theobald was instrumental in fostering the teaching of canon law in England ; the conflict that later arose between Henry II and Thomas Becket had its roots in disputes that were exposed during Theobald 's time in office . While still in Normandy , Theobald had made an intense study of ecclesiastical or canon law , which he continued after being elected archbishop . 
 Although Theobald was a monk , his episcopal household was not monastic in character . As he settled into the role of archbishop , he seems to have left most of his monastic habits behind , although he continued to have a monk as a companion . His nephews and brother benefited from his nepotism , with his nephews becoming part of his household early in his <unk> . The four nephews — Guillaume , Gilbert , Roger and <unk> — were witnesses to a charter of Theobald 's dated to about 1150 or 1153 . After Theobald 's death , Guillaume was a clerk in Bartholomew , the Bishop of Exeter 's household in around 1172 . 
 Another charter of Theobald 's from about 1152 shows the usual household staff that surrounded him . It was witnessed by the archbishop 's <unk> , three of Theobald 's nephews and the clerk who presumably was in charge of them , a chancellor , two chaplains who were monks , a butler , dispenser , chamberlain , steward , cook , usher , porter and marshal . Theobald also at about the same time granted a mill to his baker named William and some lands to his cook William and the cook 's heirs . 
 Theobald was the patron of three eminent men : Becket , Vacarius , and John of Salisbury . John of Salisbury was secretary to Theobald for many years , and after Theobald 's death became Bishop of Chartres . It was during John 's time as secretary that he wrote his two most famous works , the <unk> and the <unk> . Others who studied for a time in Theobald 's household were Roger de Pont L 'Evêque , later Archbishop of York , John <unk> , later Archbishop of Lyons , John de <unk> , later Bishop of Worcester , Bartholomew Iscanus , later Bishop of Exeter , William of <unk> , later Bishop of Worcester , and William de Vere , later Bishop of Hereford . In all , his household produced three archbishops and six bishops . The household itself , although not formally a school , acted as one , with many going on to careers in the church . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Theobald died on 18 April 1161 , after a long illness , at his palace in Canterbury . He was buried in Canterbury Cathedral , in the Holy Trinity Chapel , near the tomb of Archbishop Lanfranc . His coffin was opened in 1190 during repairs to the cathedral and his body was found to be uncorrupted , but efforts to secure his canonisation as a saint on the basis of that evidence were unsuccessful . He was reburied in the nave near the altar to St Mary , with his old marble tomb replaced above his new resting place . In 1787 his lead coffin was found in Canterbury . 
 Although Theobald was troubled by the opposition of his suffragan Henry of Blois , he regained control of the English Church , secured the rights of his see , and helped maintain the unity of the realm . Contemporaries were somewhat divided on his effectiveness and personality . Gervase of Canterbury felt that he was too impetuous , probably because of Theobald 's treatment of his priors at Christ Church . Henry of Huntingdon , who knew him , felt that he was a worthy archbishop . Theobald 's legacy perhaps suffered because he was overshadowed by his successor , Becket . Modern historians have been kinder than his contemporaries ; Frank Barlow says of Theobald that he was " an upright man , but quick tempered , and sometimes spoke far too rashly " . 
 = The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher = 
 The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher is a children 's book , written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter . It was published by Frederick Warne & Co. in July 1906 . Jeremy 's origin lies in a letter she wrote to a child in 1893 . She revised it in 1906 , and moved its setting from the River Tay to the English Lake District . The tale reflects her love for the Lake District and her admiration for children 's illustrator Randolph Caldecott . 
 Jeremy Fisher is a frog who lives in a " slippy @-@ sloppy " house at the edge of a pond . One rainy day he collects worms for fishing , and sets off across the pond on his lily @-@ pad boat . He plans to invite his friends for dinner if he catches more than five minnows . He encounters all sorts of setbacks to his goal , and escapes a large trout who tries to swallow him . He swims for shore , decides he will not go fishing again , and hops home . 
 Potter 's tale pays homage to the leisurely summers her father and his companions passed sport fishing at rented country estates in Scotland . Following the tale 's publication , a child fan wrote Potter suggesting Jeremy find a wife . Potter responded with a series of miniature letters on the theme as if from Jeremy and his pals . After Potter 's death in 1943 , licences were issued to various firms to produce the Potter characters . Jeremy and his friends were released as porcelain figurines , plush toys , and other merchandise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jeremy Fisher is a frog who lives in a damp little house amongst the buttercups at the edge of a pond . His larder and back passage are " slippy @-@ sloppy " with water , but he likes getting his feet wet ; no one ever scolds and he never catches cold . One day , Jeremy finds it raining and decides to go fishing . Should he catch more than five minnows , he will invite his friends to dinner . He puts on a Macintosh and shiny Galoshes , takes his rod and basket , and sets off with " enormous hops " to the place where he keeps his lily @-@ pad boat . He poles to a place he knows is good for minnows . 
 Once there , he sits cross @-@ legged on his lily @-@ pad and arranges his tackle . He has " the dearest little red float " . His rod is a stalk of grass and his line a horsehair . An hour passes without a nibble . He takes a break and lunches on a butterfly sandwich . A water beetle tweaks his toe causing him to withdraw his legs , and rats rustling about in the rushes force him to seek a safer location . He drops his line into the water and immediately has a bite . It is not a minnow but little Jack Sharp , a stickleback . The fish escapes but not before Jeremy pricks his fingers on Jack 's spines . A shoal of little fishes come to the surface to laugh at Jeremy . 
 Jeremy sucks his sore fingers , but a trout rises from the water and seizes him with a snap ( Mr. Jeremy screams , " OW @-@ OW @-@ OW ! ! ! " ) . The trout dives to the bottom , but finds the Macintosh tasteless and spits Jeremy out , swallowing only his <unk> . Jeremy bounces " up to the surface of the water , like a cork and the bubbles out of a soda water bottle " , and swims to the pond 's edge . He scrambles up the bank and hops home through the meadow , having lost his fishing equipment but quite sure he will never go fishing again . 
 In the last few pages , Jeremy has put sticking plaster on his fingers and welcomes his friends , Sir Isaac Newton , a newt , and Alderman Ptolemy Tortoise , a tortoise who eats salad . Isaac wears a black and gold waistcoat and Ptolemy brings a salad in a string bag . Jeremy has prepared roasted grasshopper with ladybird sauce . The narrator describes the dish as a " frog treat " , but thinks " it must have been nasty ! " 
 = = Background = = 
 In addition to the pet frogs of Potter 's youth , influences on Jeremy include Potter 's sport fishing father Rupert William Potter and illustrator Randolph Caldecott . Margaret Lane , author of The Magic Years of Beatrix Potter , notes , " Mr. Potter was fond of taking his friends fishing and Beatrix ... from an early age had been familiar with [ the ] hazards and excitements of angling and dry @-@ fly fishing ... as a girl [ she ] had often enough had to endure her father and his friends relating their fishing adventures , and the picture of Mr Jeremy Fisher retailing his mishap to Sir Isaac Newton is so rich in observation , both of amphibians and elderly gentlemen , that one is ever afterwards prone to confuse them in memory " . Mr. Potter not only fished for sport but collected the works of Randolph Caldecott . In Jeremy Fisher , Potter tried to copy Caldecott but felt she had failed . " I did try to copy Caldecott , " she stated , " but ... I did not achieve much resemblance . " Biographer Linda Lear writes Potter declared , " I have the greatest admiration for his work – a jealous appreciation ; for I think that others , whose names are commonly bracketed with his , are not on the same plane at all as artist @-@ illustrators " . 
 Potter biographer Linda Lear and author of Beatrix Potter : A Life in Nature writes : 
 [ Potter ] wanted to do a frog story for some time , because it was amusing and offered the opportunity for the naturalist illustrations she delighted in ... The story of a fisherman down on his luck reminded Beatrix of the ' fish stories ' her father 's friends had told in Scotland , as well as her brother 's travails with rod and reel . She also recreated the gentlemen 's club atmosphere absorbed from her father 's reports of evenings spent at the Reform and the Athenaeum ... The text and illustrations for this story are some of the most balanced and compatible of all her writing . Nature is described and illustrated truthfully : beautifully tranquil as well as unpredictably aggressive .... Its carefully coloured botanical backgrounds of water plants , a frog with anatomically correct turned @-@ out feet , a trout that any self @-@ respecting fisherman would enjoy snagging , and a rather frighteningly rendered water @-@ beetle who tweaks Jeremy 's dainty toes , all made it a delight to look at as well as to read . 
 = = Production = = 
 The origin of The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher lies in a story letter Potter wrote to a child in September 1893 while summering on the River Tay . The following year , she created nine sketches called " A Frog he would a @-@ fishing go " and sold them to publisher Ernest <unk> . They were released with verses by Clifton Bingham in 1896 . 
 Energized by the success of The Tale of Peter Rabbit in 1902 , Potter considered expanding the frog tale and bought back her drawings and the publisher 's printer 's blocks . She wrote her editor Norman Warne , " I should like to do Mr. Jeremy Fisher ... I think I can make something of him " . The tale was set aside while Potter and Warne developed other projects , but in 1905 he approved the frog tale . As Potter biographer Daphne <unk> writes of Potter 's illustrations for Jeremy : " When she finally did the illustrations for the book , she changed the original background from the River Tay in Scotland to <unk> Water in the Lakes . The illustrations are indeed lovely , showing Potter 's skill both as a naturalist and a <unk> " . 
 In August 1905 , Norman Warne died , and his brother Harold became Potter 's editor . She wrote to him indicating Norman had approved the frog project : " We had thought of doing ... " Mr. Jeremy Fisher " to carry on the series of little [ books ] . I know some people don 't like frogs ! but I think I had convinced Norman that I could make it a really pretty book with a good many flowers & water plants for backgrounds " . Warne decided to put Jeremy Fisher into print . 
 In July 1906 , 20 @,@ 000 copies of The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher were released in paper boards at a shilling and in decorated cloth at one shilling six pence in a small format . Another 5 @,@ 000 copies were published in September 1906 and another 5 @,@ 000 in September 1907 . The book was dedicated to Stephanie Hyde Parker , the daughter of Potter 's cousin Ethel , Lady Hyde Parker : " For Stephanie from Cousin B " . Jeremy sold as profitably as other Potter productions . 
 = = Themes and style = = 
 M. Daphne Kutzer , Professor of English at State University of New York at Plattsburgh and author of Beatrix Potter : Writing in Code , observes that the social positions of Jeremy and his friends are established through the clothing they wear . Although Potter sharply critiqued the upper class elsewhere , Kutzer observes that in Jeremy Fisher her tone is more moderate . She suggests that Potter 's relocation to Sawrey and Hill Top Farm may have produced in her a willingness " to accept the silliness of the aspiring middle class as well as the eccentricities of the upper classes " . 
 Ruth K. MacDonald , Professor of English at New Mexico State University and author of Beatrix Potter points out that although Potter regarded the lives of her father and his friends as comical and even beneath notice , yet she clearly respected and valued their outdoor pursuits from the bemused treatment she accorded them in Jeremy Fisher . She valued nature untouched by humans even more , MacDonald notes , as evidenced by the careful observation in the illustrations . Jeremy Fisher was written without the many revisions typical of Potter 's other productions , and the pictures appear effortless in their execution . MacDonald writes , " Her ability to show human society without also implying its damaging effects on flora and fauna further underscores the book 's felicitous composition and success " . 
 Literary scholar Humphrey Carpenter writes in Secret Gardens : The Golden Age of Children 's Literature the basis for Potter 's writing style can be found in the Authorized King James Version of the Bible . Jeremy Fisher reflects the characteristic cadence and " employs a psalm @-@ like caesura in the middle of [ a ] sentence " . 
 Carpenter sees in Potter 's work thematic shifts from the early work onward . In the first stage of her work , he sees in stories such as The Tale of Peter Rabbit a type of Jack @-@ the @-@ Giant @-@ Killer theme , in which a small creature confronts a large creature that he believes culminates in The Tale of Jeremy Fisher . Potter places Jeremy Fisher in a dangerous world , according to Carpenter . The fishing experience is frightening : the bank @-@ side creatures worry him , the stickleback threatens him directly , and the trout tries to swallow him . But Potter makes the point that all creatures are prey , ending the story with Jeremy Fisher himself eating a grasshopper smothered in lady @-@ bird sauce . 
 = = Miniature letters = = 
 About 1907 Potter created miniature letters delivered to child fans in either a miniature mail bag or a miniature mail box . " Some of the letters were very funny , " Potter wrote , " The defect was that inquiries and answers were all mixed up . " 
 Four Jeremy letters were written at about 1910 to Drew Fayle who thought Jeremy should marry . In one letter , Sir Isaac promises Master Fayle a piece of wedding cake should Jeremy marry and , in another letter , Ptolemy writes that Jeremy 's parties " would be much more agreeable if there were a lady to preside at the table . " Jeremy writes in the third letter : " When I bought my <unk> waistcoat & my maroon tail @-@ coat I had hopes ... but I am alone ... if there were a ' Mrs. Jeremy Fisher ' she might object to snails . It is some satisfaction to be able to have as much water & mud in the house as a person likes . " 
 Mrs. Tiggy @-@ winkle , a hedgehog washerwoman in another Potter tale , writes Master Fayle in the fourth letter : 
 Dear Master Drew , 
 If you please Sir I am a widow ; & I think it very wrong that there is not any Mrs. Fisher , but I would not marry Mr. Jeremy not for worlds , the way he does live in that house all slippy @-@ sloppy ; not any lady would stand it , & not a bit of good <unk> his <unk> . 
 <unk> obedient washerwoman , 
 Tiggy Winkle . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 The characters from Jeremy Fisher have appeared as porcelain figurines , plush toys , and other merchandise . In 1950 , Beswick Pottery issued a porcelain figurine of Jeremy and figurines of Isaac and Ptolemy in the 1970s . Other figurines of Jeremy have been produced over the years as well as a Jeremy mug . Jeremy was one of the first eight plush toys released by Eden Toys , Inc. of New York in 1973 . The following year , he was released as a 37 inches ( 94 cm ) " Giant " intended for store displays , and during the Beanie Baby era as a beanbag . Isaac Newton was on store shelves for two years . 
 Jeremy Fisher was one of the first ten character music boxes released by Schmid & Co. in 1977 . Ptolemy and Isaac boxes were released in the 1980s . Ceramic Christmas ornaments of Jeremy have been released by Schmid . Other merchandise includes a variety of Crummles enamelled boxes , an ANRI wood carving and ANRI <unk> figurines and ornaments , and Huntley & Palmer biscuit tins . 
 = = Reprints and translations = = 
 As of 2010 , all 23 of Potter 's small format books remain in print , and are available as complete sets in presentation boxes , and as a 400 @-@ page omnibus edition . The English language editions of the tales still bore the Frederick Warne imprint in 2010 though the company was bought by Penguin Books in 1983 . Penguin remade the printing plates in 1985 , and all 23 volumes were released in 1987 as The Original and Authorized Edition . 
 Although sold to Penguin Books in 1984 as a subsidiary company , Frederick Warne continues to publish Potter 's books . A 2002 Publishers Weekly article , written for the centennial of the publication of The Tale of Peter Rabbit , reported that Potter was considered one of the top most popular classic writers , that anniversary editions of her work were published in 1993 and 2002 , and the artwork has been " re @-@ scanned to make the illustrations look fresher and brighter " . 
 The Tale of Mr. Jeremy Fisher was published in French in 1940 as Jérémie <unk> @-@ à @-@ la @-@ Ligne , and in Dutch as <unk> de <unk> in 1946 . The tale was republished in Dutch in 1970 as Het Verhaal van <unk> <unk> and was published in the Initial Teaching Alphabet in 1965 . In 1984 , the tale was again translated into French by M.A. James as L ’ histoire de Monsieur Jérémie <unk> @-@ a @-@ la @-@ Ligne . In 1986 MacDonald wrote that Potter 's books had become a " traditional part of childhood in most only English @-@ speaking countries and in many of the countries into whose languages Potter 's books have been translated " . 
 = Storm petrel = 
 Storm petrels are seabirds in the family Hydrobatidae , part of the order Procellariiformes . These smallest of seabirds feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface , typically while hovering . Their flight is fluttering and sometimes bat @-@ like . 
 Storm petrels have a cosmopolitan distribution , being found in all oceans . They are strictly pelagic , coming to land only when breeding . In the case of most species , little is known of their behaviour and distribution at sea , where they can be hard to find and harder to identify . They are colonial nesters , displaying strong philopatry to their natal colonies and nesting sites . Most species nest in crevices or burrows and all but one species attend the breeding colonies nocturnally . Pairs form long @-@ term monogamous bonds and share incubation and chick @-@ feeding duties . Like many species of seabird , nesting is highly protracted with incubation taking up to 50 days and fledging another 70 days after that . 
 Several species of storm petrel are threatened by human activities . One species , the Guadalupe storm petrel , is thought to have gone extinct ; the New Zealand storm petrel was presumed extinct until rediscovered in 2003 . The principal threats to storm petrels are introduced species , particularly mammals , in their breeding colonies ; many storm petrels habitually nest on isolated mammal @-@ free islands and are unable to cope with predators like rats and feral cats . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Two subfamilies are traditionally recognized . The Oceanitinae are mostly found in southern waters ( though the Wilson 's storm petrel regularly migrates into the northern hemisphere ) ; there are seven species in five genera . The Hydrobatinae are the two genera Hydrobates and Oceanodroma . They are largely restricted to the northern hemisphere , although a few can visit or breed a short distance beyond the equator . 
 Cytochrome b DNA sequence analysis suggests that the family is paraphyletic and may be more accurately treated as distinct families . The same study found that the storm petrels are basal within Procellariiformes . The first split was the subfamily Oceanitinae , with the Hydrobatinae splitting from the rest of the order at a later date . Few fossil species have been found , with the earliest being from the Upper Miocene . 
 = = Morphology and flight = = 
 Storm petrels are the smallest of all the seabirds , ranging in size from 13 – 26 cm in length . There are two body shapes in the family ; the Oceanitinae have short wings , square tails , elongated skulls , and long legs ; the Hydrobatinae have longer wings , forked or wedge @-@ shaped tails and shorter legs . The legs of all storm petrels are proportionally longer than those of other Procellariiformes , but they are very weak and unable to support the bird 's weight for more than a few steps . 
 The plumage of the Oceanitinae is dark with white underparts ( with the exception of the Wilson 's storm petrel ) All but two of the Hydrobatinae are mostly dark in colour with varying amounts of white on the rump . Two species have different plumage entirely , the Hornby 's storm petrel which has white undersides and facial markings , and the fork @-@ tailed storm petrel which has pale grey plumage . This is a notoriously difficult group to identify at sea . Onley and Scofield ( 2007 ) state that much published information is incorrect , and that photographs in the major seabird books and websites are frequently incorrectly ascribed as to species . They also consider that several national bird lists include species which have been incorrectly identified or have been accepted on inadequate evidence . 
 Storm petrels use a variety of techniques to aid flight . Most species will occasionally feed by surface pattering , holding and moving their feet on the water 's surface while holding steady above the water . They remain stationary by hovering with rapid fluttering or by using the wind to anchor themselves in place . This method of feeding flight is most commonly used by Oceanitinae storm petrels . The white @-@ faced storm petrel possesses a unique variation on pattering , holding its wings motionless and at an angle into the wind it pushes itself off the water 's surface in a succession of bounding jumps . Storm petrels also use dynamic soaring and slope soaring to travel over the ocean surface . Dynamic soaring is used mostly by the Hydrobatinae , gliding across wave fronts gaining energy from the vertical wind gradient . Slope soaring is more straightforward and favoured by the Oceanitinae , the storm petrel turns to the wind , gaining height , from where it can then glide back down to the sea . 
 = = Diet = = 
 The diet of many storm petrels species is poorly known owing to difficulties in researching ; overall the family is thought to concentrate on crustaceans . Small fish , oil droplets and molluscs are also taken by many species . Some species are known to be rather more specialised ; the grey @-@ backed storm petrel is known to concentrate on the larvae of goose barnacles . 
 Almost all species forage in the pelagic zone , except for the Elliot 's storm petrels which are coastal feeders in the Galapagos Islands . Although storm petrels are capable of swimming well and often form rafts on the water 's surface they do not feed on the water . Instead feeding usually takes place on the wing , with birds hovering above or " walking " on the surface ( see morphology ) and snatching small morsels . Rarely prey is obtained by making shallow dives under the surface . 
 Like many seabirds storm petrels will associate with other species of seabird and marine mammal species in order to help obtain food . It is theorised that they benefit from the actions of diving predators such as seals and penguins which push prey up towards the surface while hunting , allowing the surface feeding storm petrels to reach them . 
 = = Distribution and movements = = 
 Storm petrels are found in all the world 's oceans and in most of its seas . They are absent as breeders from the western Indian Ocean and as regular migrants or residents from the far north of the Arctic Ocean as well as the eastern extents of the Mediterranean , the Black Sea and areas of brackish water . The Oceanitinae are typically found in the southern hemisphere and the Hydrobatinae in the northern hemisphere . 
 Several species of storm petrel undertake migrations after the breeding season . The most widely travelled migrant is the Wilson 's storm petrel which after breeding in Antarctica and the subantarctic islands regularly crosses the equator to the waters of the north Pacific and Atlantic . Other species undertake migrations of differing lengths ; long ones , such as the Swinhoe 's storm petrel , which breeds in the west Pacific and migrates to the west Indian Ocean ; or shorter ones , such as the black storm petrel which nests in southern California and migrates down the coast of Central America as far south as Colombia . Some species , like the Tristram 's storm petrel or the grey @-@ backed storm petrel are thought to be essentially sedentary and do not undertake any migrations away from their breeding islands . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 Storm petrels nest colonially , for the most part on islands , although a few species breed on the mainland , particularly Antarctica . Nesting sites are attended nocturnally in order to avoid predators ; the wedge @-@ rumped storm petrels nesting in the Galapagos Islands are the exception to this rule and attend their nesting sites during the day . Storm petrels display high levels of philopatry , returning to their natal colonies to breed . In one instance a band @-@ rumped storm petrel was caught as an adult 2 m from its natal burrow . Storm petrels nest either in burrows dug into soil or sand , or in small crevices in rocks and scree . Competition for nesting sites is intense in colonies where storm petrels compete with other burrowing petrels , with shearwaters having been recorded killing storm petrels in order to occupy their burrows . Colonies can be extremely large and dense ; 840 @,@ 000 pairs of white @-@ faced storm petrel nest on South East Island in the Chatham Islands in burrow densities of between 1 @.@ 18 – 0 @.@ 47 burrows / m2 ; densities as high as 8 pairs / m2 for band @-@ rumped storm petrels in the Galapagos and colonies 3 @.@ 6 million strong for Leach 's storm petrel have been recorded . 
 Storm petrels are monogamous and form long @-@ term pair bonds that last a number of years . Studies of paternity using DNA fingerprinting have shown that , unlike many other monogamous birds , infidelity ( extra @-@ pair mating ) is very rare . As with the other Procellariiformes , a single egg is laid by a pair in a breeding season ; if the egg fails , then usually no attempt is made to re @-@ lay ( although it happens rarely ) . Both sexes incubate in shifts of up to six days . The egg hatches after 40 or 50 days ; the young is brooded continuously for another 7 days or so before being left alone in the nest during the day and fed by regurgitation at night . Meals fed to the chick weigh around 10 – 20 % of the parent 's body weight , and consist of both prey items and stomach oil . Stomach oil is an energy rich ( its calorific value is around 9600 calories per gram ) oil created by partly digested prey in a part of the foregut known as the proventriculus . By partly converting prey items into stomach oil storm petrels can maximise the amount of energy chicks receive during feed , an advantage for small seabirds that can only make a single visit to the chick during a 24 @-@ hour period ( at night ) . The average age at which chicks fledge depends on the species , taking between 50 or 70 days . The time taken to hatch and raise the young is long for the bird 's size but is typical of seabirds , which in general are K @-@ selected , living much longer , delay breeding for longer , and invest more effort into fewer young . Storm petrels have been recorded living as long as 30 years . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Several species of storm petrel are threatened by human activities . Two , the Guadalupe storm petrel , and the New Zealand storm petrel , are listed as critically endangered . The Guadalupe storm petrel has not been observed since 1906 and most authorities consider it extinct . The New Zealand storm petrel was also considered extinct for many years but was sighted again in 2003 , though the population is likely to be very small . One species ( the ashy storm petrel ) is listed as endangered by the IUCN due to a 42 % decline over twenty years , and two other species are also listed as near threatened or worse . In addition four species are so poorly known that they are listed as data deficient . For the ringed storm petrel , even the sites of their breeding colonies remain a mystery . 
 Storm petrels face the same threats as other seabirds ; in particular they are threatened by introduced species . The Guadalupe storm petrel was driven to extinction by feral cats , and introduced predators have also been responsible for declines in other species . Habitat degradation which limits nesting opportunities caused by introduced goats and pigs is also a problem , especially if it increases competition from more aggressive burrowing petrels . 
 = = Cultural representation of the storm petrel = = 
 The name " petrel " is a diminutive form of " Peter " , a reference to Saint Peter ; it was given to these birds because they sometimes appear to walk across the water 's surface . The more specific " storm petrel " or " stormy petrel " is a reference to their habit of hiding in the lee of ships during storms . Early sailors named these birds " Mother Carey 's chickens " because they were thought to warn of oncoming storms ; this name is based on a corrupted form of Mater Cara , a name for the Blessed Virgin Mary . 
 Breton folklore holds that storm petrels are the spirits of sea @-@ captains who mistreated their crew , doomed to spend eternity flying over the sea , and they are also held to be the souls of drowned sailors . A sailing superstition holds that the appearance of a storm petrel foretells bad weather . Sinister names from Britain and France include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and oiseau du diable . 
 The association of the storm petrel with turbulent weather has led to its use as a metaphor for revolutionary views , the epithet " stormy petrel " being applied by various authors to characters as disparate as a Roman tribune , a Presbyterian minister in the early Carolinas , an Afghan governor , or an Arkansas politician . 
 The " stormy petrel " appears as the standard English translation of the name of the lead character in Song of the Stormy Petrel , a 1901 poem by the Russian revolutionary writer Maxim Gorky in which he turned to the imagery of Subantarctic avifauna to describe Russian society 's attitudes to the coming revolution . This poem was called " the battle anthem of the revolution " , and earned Gorky himself the title of " The Storm Petrel of the Revolution " . While this English translation of the bird 's name may not be a very <unk> accurate translation of the Russian burevestnik ( <unk> ) , it is poetically appropriate , as burevestnik literally means " the announcer of the storm " . To honour Gorky and his work , the name Burevestnik was bestowed on a variety of institutions , locations , and products in the USSR . 
 The motif of the stormy petrel has a long association with revolutionary anarchism . Various groups adopted the bird 's name , either as a group identifier , as in the Spanish Civil War , or for their publications . " Stormy Petrel " was the title of a German anarchist paper of the late 19th century ; it was also the name of a Russian exile anarchist communist group operating in Switzerland in the early 20th century . The Stormy Petrel ( Burevestnik ) was the title of the magazine of the Anarchist Communist Federation in Russia around the time of the 1905 revolution , and is still an imprint of the London group of the Anarchist Federation of Britain and Ireland . Writing in 1936 , Emma Goldman referred to Buenaventura Durruti as " this stormy petrel of the anarchist and revolutionary movement " . 
 The stormy petrel is also the mascot of Oglethorpe University , a small liberal arts college in Atlanta , Georgia . 
 = = Species = = 
 = Dicen Que Soy = 
 Dicen Que Soy ( They Say That I Am ) is the third studio album by Puerto Rican @-@ American recording artist La India released on September 20 , 1994 by RMM Records . The album was produced by American musician Sergio George , who chose the songs for India to record with an emphasis on feminism to suit with her voice . The production mixes salsa music with other rhythms such as funk and <unk> . Five singles were released from the record with " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " and " Ese Hombre " topping the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 Dicen Que Soy was well received by music critics for the arrangement and selection of songs for the album . The success of the record led to India receiving a Billboard Latin Music Award and a Lo Nuestro nomination . In the United States , it peaked at number four and one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums and Tropical Albums charts respectively , and has sold over 140 @,@ 000 copies as of 2000 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following the release of her debut studio album , Breaking Night ( 1989 ) , La India went on to produce When the Night is Over ( 1991 ) , a collaboration between her then @-@ husband Little Louie Vega and Marc Anthony . Both albums were recorded at the time when freestyle music 's popularity was beginning to wane , and neither was a commercial success . India and Vega left Atlantic Records , as India wanted to pursue her singing career performing in Spanish . Three years later , American musician Eddie Palmieri , who had heard her singing on the radio , wrote and produced India 's first Spanish @-@ language record titled <unk> la India , via Eddie Palmieri ( 1992 ) . Although it was a commercial success , her high @-@ pitched vocals were criticized . 
 Subsequently , India was signed to Ralph Mercado 's record label RMM . Her first recording under the label was a cover of Basilio 's song " Vivir lo Nuestro " , a duet with Anthony for the RMM compilation album <unk> Perfecta ( 1993 ) . It was released as a single where it peaked at number ten on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart . The record was produced by American musician Sergio George who picked the song for the duo as he felt it was the right track for them to perform , despite the pair not being close friends at the time . George said he took the recording as a " personal challenge " because he believed India 's voice was " extraordinary " . 
 = = Recording and musical characteristics = = 
 For Dicen Que Soy , George picked songs that had been previously recorded by female Latin singers such as Rocío Jurado and Lupita D <unk> , with a focus on feminist lyrics . George , India , and Shirley Marte also wrote love songs ( " <unk> Amar " and " No Me <unk> " ) for the album and added India 's cover of George Benson 's song " I Just Want to Hang Around You " as a counterbalance , in case the feminist songs did not prove popular . When describing the production , India said that " This is me , my flavor in a tropical way , and showing what I can do with my voice . " The theme of the title track 's lyrics revolves the singer being criticized by gossips without caring about their opinions . Puerto Rican singer Tito Nieves is featured on the song " No Me <unk> " and " Vivir lo Nuestro " was included as a bonus track for the album . Musically , the production mixes romantic and hard salsa music along with funk and <unk> . The record took four months to complete . 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " was the first single to be released from the album . It peaked at number 11 on the Hot Latin Songs chart and number one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . The second single , " Ese Hombre " , reached number 12 on the Hot Latin Songs chart and became her second number @-@ one song on the Tropical Songs chart . " Que Ganas de No Verte Más " peaked at number 24 on the Hot Latin Songs and number two on the Tropical Songs charts . " Dicen Que Soy " and " O Ella o Yo " reached number five and seven respectively on the Tropical Songs chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Even without a formal review , an editor for the website Allmusic gave Dicen Que Soy four stars out of five . An editor for Latina magazine wrote a positive review for the album calling her cover of " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " " sensational " and " Vivir lo Nuestro " an " explosive live recording " . India 's recordings of " Ese Hombre " and " Dicen Que Soy " have been noted to be " anthems for female salsa lovers " . 
 At the 6th Lo Nuestro Awards ceremony in 1995 , Dicen Que Soy received a nomination for " Tropical Album of the Year " , but lost to Siente el Amor ... by Olga Tañón . In the same year , the album won the award for " Tropical / Salsa Album of the Year by a Female Artist " at the second annual Billboard Latin Music Awards . In the United States , it peaked at number four on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and number one on the Tropical Albums chart . According to Nielsen SoundScan , Dicen Que Soy has sold over 144 @,@ 000 copies as of <unk> 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Sergio George . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic and the Dicen Que Soy CD liner notes . 
 = = Note = = 
 A. ^ According to the Recording Industry Association of America , sales for many salsa albums went unreported because venues selling the discs did not report to monitoring services . 
 = Andy Hansen = 
 Andrew Viggo Hansen , Jr . ( November 12 , 1924 – February 2 , 2002 ) , nicknamed " Swede " , was a right @-@ handed pitcher in Major League Baseball . In a nine @-@ season career , he played for the New York Giants and the Philadelphia Phillies . Hansen was officially listed as standing 6 feet 3 inches ( 191 cm ) and weighing 185 pounds ( 84 kg ) . He was nicknamed Swede despite being of Danish ancestry , according to The Sporting News ' Baseball Register . 
 A two @-@ sport star in high school , Hansen rose quickly through the Giants ' minor league system and made his major league debut at age 19 . He played for the Giants until 1946 , when he voluntarily retired due to a family illness and then served in the United States Army . He returned to baseball in 1947 and earned a career @-@ best five wins in 1948 . After a contract holdout in 1949 , Hansen 's bullpen workload increased in 1950 , leading to an elbow injury and the Giants sending him to the Phillies in the Rule 5 draft . 
 As a Phillie , Hansen assumed the closer 's role at times from 1950 National League Most Valuable Player Jim Konstanty , and worked nearly exclusively from the bullpen after being an occasional starting pitcher with New York . After tying his career high with five victories in 1952 , Hansen went winless in 1953 and had a short tenure with the minor @-@ league Hollywood Stars before retiring and beginning a 31 @-@ year career with the United States Postal Service . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hansen was born November 12 , 1924 , in Lake Worth , Florida . As a young player , he was a second baseman and third baseman before moving to pitcher . He attended Lake Worth High School , where he played offensive end on the football team and pitched for the baseball team . In 1942 , Hansen was a member of Lake Worth 's " Trojans " football team that went undefeated , and the school 's baseball team went to the state tournament in the 1943 season with Hansen as a member of the pitching staff . After graduating that year , Hansen spurned football scholarship offers from " a number of schools , including Georgia Tech " to sign an amateur free agent contract worth $ 75 ( $ 1 @,@ 030 today ) per month with the National League 's New York Giants . 
 = = Early career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 The Giants assigned Hansen to their Appalachian League affiliate , the Bristol Twins , where , at age 18 , he posted a " sensational [ win – loss ] record " of 12 – 3 in 16 games started . He allowed 39 runs in 115 innings pitched while walking 15 batters . Hansen began the 1944 season pitching for the Jersey City Giants , New York 's top @-@ level farm team . Managed by Hall of Fame catcher Gabby Hartnett , Hansen posted an 8 – 4 record , compiling a 1 @.@ 89 earned run average ( ERA ) in 11 starts and 4 relief appearances . He allowed 90 hits and 28 walks in 100 innings pitched ( 1 @.@ 18 WHIP ) . 
 = = = 1944 : Major league debut = = = 
 Hansen was called up to the major league club to make his debut on June 30 , 1944 , in place of Cliff Melton . He started the second game of a doubleheader against the Pittsburgh Pirates , pitching 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings , striking out two and allowing six earned runs . However , the Giants scored five runs in the sixth inning against Pirates starter Fritz <unk> , so Hansen did not receive a decision ; the Giants lost the contest , 9 – 8 . His first career loss came the next week on July 5 , a 4 – 1 defeat against the St. Louis Cardinals . Hansen pitched six innings and allowed four runs , but Cardinals starter Red Munger , 10 – 2 on the season to that point , pitched a complete game and allowed only one run . He lost again on July 9 , this time to the Chicago Cubs in the first game of a doubleheader . Hansen pitched only 2 2 ⁄ 3 innings , allowing five runs , before being relieved by Rube Fischer . 
 Hansen earned his first win a week later , an 8 – 3 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies on July 16 . The victory came in relief of Frank Seward , who started the game but pitched only one inning . He pitched four innings , allowing only one run ; Ace Adams followed with four scoreless innings and earned the save . His fourth decision , a second career victory , did not come until July 31 , when he defeated future teammate Jim Konstanty in a 9 – 7 victory over the Cincinnati Reds . Hansen appeared again in a relief role , but pitched eight innings of one @-@ run ball after starter Bill Voiselle allowed six runs in the game 's first inning . At the plate , Hansen got his first major @-@ league hit and scored his second career run while striking out once . 
 Philadelphia provided Hansen with his third career win as well ; it came on August 4 when he pitched against Ken Raffensberger . Hansen entered in the eighth inning and pitched three scoreless frames in relief of Voiselle as the game went to extra innings . The Giants won , 4 – 3 , on a 10th @-@ inning run with no one out . Sporting a 3 – 2 record , Hansen earned his first career save against the Phillies on August 6 , pitching two scoreless innings in relief of Harry Feldman and striking out two . It was his only save of the season . He lost his third decision of the year on August 19 , allowing five runs and walking six batters in the Giants ' 12th consecutive loss out of a season @-@ long 13 @-@ game streak . For his rookie season , Hansen finished with a 3 – 3 record and a 6 @.@ 49 ERA in 52 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched ; he appeared in 23 games ( 4 starts ) and struck out 15 batters while walking 32 at age 19 . 
 = = = 1945 – 1946 : New York , Jersey City , and the Army = = = 
 In the 1945 season , Hansen spent most of his playing time with the major league Giants , appearing in 23 games for them that year . Described by Baseball @-@ Reference.com as New York 's fifth starter , he was the Giants ' youngest pitcher , and second @-@ youngest player ( Whitey Lockman ) , in 1945 . 
 Hansen started New York 's third game of the season , pitching against the Boston Braves ; he struck out three and allowed one run through seven innings , earning the victory . He defeated Raffensberger and the Phillies again on April 24 , pitching his first career complete game in a 5 – 2 Giants win . After that game , manager Mel Ott said that he was encouraged by the performance because pitching was a concern of the Giants entering the season . Hansen 's first loss of the season came against the Brooklyn Dodgers , a 4 – 3 defeat . After dueling to a stalemate in a tie game with Boston — he and Braves starter Al <unk> each allowed one run through seven innings in the second half of a rain @-@ shortened doubleheader — Hansen earned his third victory on May 13 against the Cardinals ; it was the last game of New York 's season @-@ long eight @-@ game winning streak . Hansen earned a no decision in a May 17 start against the Cubs , but a 5 – 2 loss to the Pirates on May 21 dropped his record to 3 – 2 ; he allowed four earned runs in four innings . His first save of the season came on May 24 , when he pitched two innings following Adams , the regular closer , who earned the win ; his final decision in May was a victory over Cincinnati , a 5 – 1 win which was the last in a four @-@ game win streak . He started the first game of a doubleheader on May 30 , pitching 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings and allowing six runs ; the Giants managed an 8 – 6 win , however , as Slim Emmerich relieved him and pitched 6 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings . 
 In early June , Hansen pitched in both games of a doubleheader against the Cardinals ; he started the first game ( allowing two runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning ) and relieved Feldman in the second ( pitching 5 1 ⁄ 3 innings and giving up three runs ) . He earned his second save of the season pitching 1 2 ⁄ 3 perfect innings against Brooklyn in relief of Van Mungo on June 7 , but followed that with his third loss against Boston , where he allowed three runs in six innings . The third loss was Hansen 's final major league decision of the season . He pitched in four more games in June , starting on June 15 and allowing four earned runs in five innings , and pitching in relief on June 17 , 22 , and 24 . He picked up a save in his final June game , pitching the final third of an inning in relief of Voiselle and Feldman in a 7 – 6 victory over Philadelphia . On June 26 , Hansen reported to Camp Blanding in his home state of Florida for a pre @-@ induction examination for the United States Army ; his service commitment had previously been deferred due to a breathing handicap from an earlier broken nose . 
 In July , Hansen appeared for the first time on Independence Day , pitching 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in relief of Emmerich and allowing three runs . His final start of 1945 came against the Reds on July 7 ; he allowed four runs through 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings as the Giants won , 11 – 7 . Hansen allowed two runs in four innings facing the Cubs on July 15 , and gave up three runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 against the Pirates on July 20 . His final outing of the season was also his shortest ; he allowed a run to Boston without putting out a single batter in the second game of a doubleheader . 
 At the beginning of August , Hansen injured his shoulder and was optioned to Jersey City in favor of Sal Maglie , where he appeared in five games ( 1 – 3 , 7 @.@ 31 ERA ) . After serving seven months in the military , Hansen asked the team to voluntarily retire him in early 1946 due to his father 's severe illness . He did not appear in a game at any level during the 1946 season , but stated that he did not plan to give up baseball as a career . 
 = = After the military = = 
 = = = 1947 : One win for New York = = = 
 Hansen returned to the Giants in April 1947 , pitching a scoreless ninth inning in his first appearance against the Phillies . In his second game back , he allowed four runs to the Braves , working three innings in relief of Monty Kennedy ; the Giants lost the game , 14 – 5 . Hansen did not appear for the Giants in May , but returned to action on June 1 for his first start of the season . After allowing four runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning , Hansen was relieved by Junior Thompson , who earned the victory as the Giants defeated the Reds , 13 – 9 ; the outing raised Hansen 's ERA to a season @-@ high 16 @.@ 62 . He did not appear again for New York until June 21 , when he pitched 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning against the Cardinals , allowing no runs . As the summer months continued , Hansen was used more heavily ; he made six appearances in July , all in Giants losses . On July 2 , he pitched the final inning of an 11 – 3 loss to Brooklyn , allowing no hits . Hansen allowed runs in each of his next two outings , both against St. Louis : he pitched two innings on July 10 , and threw five innings on July 12 in the second game of a doubleheader . In a 10 – 5 loss to the Cardinals on July 22 , Hansen made his third consecutive appearance against the Redbirds , allowing no earned runs in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings . On July 28 , he turned in a hitless , scoreless performance against Cincinnati , working one inning in a 5 – 0 shutout , and received his first decision — a loss — against the Reds on the final day of that month in an 8 – 7 contest . 
 In August , Hansen appeared in nine games , his most in a single month during the 1947 season ; he began on August 3 by allowing two runs to the Pirates in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning . He made his second start of the season against the Braves on August 10 ; although he pitched 7 1 ⁄ 3 innings and allowed just three runs , he did not factor in the decision . Closer Ken Trinkle , who relieved Hansen , took the loss after a three @-@ run home run by Tommy Holmes in the ninth inning as the Giants lost , 7 – 5 . After a one @-@ inning appearance against the Phillies on August 13 , Hansen made his third start of the year on August 17 and notched his second loss of the season , this time to Boston . He allowed one run through seven innings , but the Braves defeated New York , 3 – 1 . The defeat was Hansen 's first of four consecutive appearances in the second games of doubleheaders , the third of which was another start and his third loss of the year . He allowed the game 's only runs in a 3 2 ⁄ 3 inning performance ; the Giants lost , 4 – 0 . After two more multi @-@ inning relief appearances against Chicago on August 24 and 25 , Hansen pitched seven innings in a start against Brooklyn in what would be his last appearance in the month . He allowed one run in seven innings , walking six batters . In the seventh inning , his middle finger was bruised by a line drive hit up the middle by Dixie Walker . Hansen walked Arky Vaughan , the first batter in the eighth inning , before leaving the game , and Cookie Lavagetto singled with the bases loaded to drive in the winning runs for the Dodgers ; the Giants fell , 3 – 1 . 
 Hansen returned to the mound on September 4 , starting his sixth game of the season . Although he pitched eight innings and allowed two runs , Hansen earned his fourth loss of the season , as the Giants lost to Brooklyn , 2 – 0 . His next outing , which came in relief against the Dodgers , was scoreless , but he allowed four runs in three innings to the Pirates the following day . After two more scoreless relief appearances , Hansen started against the Phillies on September 20 . He pitched a complete game , allowing three runs ( two earned ) on four hits ; the 5 – 3 victory was his only win of the 1947 season , defeating Philadelphia starter Ken Heintzelman . Hansen appeared twice more in the 1947 season : he pitched 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings in a start against the Dodgers on September 24 , allowing four runs ; and he lost his final start of the season against the Phillies four days later , pitching four innings and allowing three runs . For the season , Hansen posted a 1 – 5 record , a 4 @.@ 37 ERA , and 18 strikeouts in 27 games as a 22 @-@ year @-@ old , the Giants ' second @-@ youngest pitcher ( Mario <unk> ) . 
 = = = 1948 : One hundred innings , five victories = = = 
 Hansen opened his 1948 campaign with five consecutive scoreless appearances . His first game was on April 22 , when he pitched 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning against the Dodgers , walking one batter and allowing a single hit . His second game was also against Brooklyn ; he allowed two hits and a walk in 2 ⁄ 3 of an inning in his final April appearance . After a 21 @-@ day layoff , Hansen returned to play on May 21 , pitching a scoreless inning against the Chicago Cubs . Two more scoreless innings prompted Ott to start Hansen against the Dodgers in the second game of a May 31 doubleheader , and Hansen pitched a complete game to earn his first win of the season , allowing only one unearned run in the 10 – 1 victory . 
 Hansen 's June appearances consisted of three starts and five relief outings . In two of his three starts , he lasted two innings or less , allowing three runs in two frames to Cincinnati on June 4 , and four runs in 2 ⁄ 3 of an inning against St. Louis 14 days later . The latter game was his second loss of the season — the first having been earned on July 11 in his other start of the month , wherein he pitched six innings , allowed three runs , and walked five batters . Hansen 's appearances from the bullpen were more successful ; in 13 1 ⁄ 3 innings , he allowed three runs , all in a single outing on June 24 against the Cubs . His longest appearance of the month was a seven @-@ inning relief outing against the Cardinals on June 13 ; starter Dave Koslo took the loss in the game for allowing three runs in the game 's first inning , and Hansen completed the remainder of the game without allowing a run . In July , Hansen began with a start on July 2 , and ended with a win on July 31 . His only start in July came against Brooklyn , when he pitched 7 2 ⁄ 3 innings and allowed four runs . He made two appearances in high @-@ scoring games during the month without recording any outs : he faced two batters against Brooklyn on July 4 , walking one and allowing a hit ; and repeated the outing on July 10 , this time allowing two hits and giving up two runs . Between those two outings , he appeared in both games of a July 5 doubleheader against the Braves , pitching two perfect innings in each game . His July victory came against the Cubs , when he struck out two batters and walked none in 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings on the month 's final day . 
 In August , Hansen did not earn any decisions , but he did notch his only save of the season in his second August contest . He pitched 1 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings against Boston to secure a 6 – 5 win for Koslo . Three days later , he allowed two earned runs in a three @-@ inning appearance against Philadelphia ; they would be the only earned runs he allowed in the entire month of August , lowering his ERA from 3 @.@ 40 to 3 @.@ 10 . He finished the month with four consecutive scoreless appearances , striking out two batters and walking one between August 15 and August 31 . On September 3 , Hansen was pressed into service as a starter for the first time in two months of play , and he delivered a quality start for New York , allowing three runs in eight innings pitched — his third victory and first complete game of the season . He was rewarded with another start on September 7 , and pitched his second consecutive complete game to earn a fourth win , this time scattering ten hits in nine innings against the Phillies , striking out three batters and allowing only a home run to Bert Haas . Starting again on September 11 , Hansen allowed two runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings before being relieved by Koslo ; neither pitcher earned the win in the shortened game , as Trinkle pitched the sixth and final inning of the doubleheader 's second game to notch the victory . Hansen earned his fifth win out of the bullpen when the Giants came from behind to defeat Cincinnati , 12 – 7 , on September 18 , and completed his season record with a loss in a start against Chicago on September 22 ; he allowed six runs ( five earned ) on nine hits while walking three hitters and striking out two . For the season , Hansen accumulated a 5 – 3 record , a 2 @.@ 97 ERA ( his best career season to date ) , and 27 strikeouts , having faced a career @-@ high 419 batters in 100 innings pitched . 
 = = = 1949 : Four consecutive mid @-@ season losses = = = 
 After his career @-@ best five wins in the prior season , Hansen held out for a better contract in February 1949 , along with another Giants pitcher , Clint Hartung ; and Walker Cooper , the Giants ' captain . He signed on February 6 , and opened the 1949 season pitching in New York 's second contest , allowing 1 run while pitching 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings of a 6 – 2 loss to Brooklyn . Hansen took his first loss of the season in his next contest ; after the Phillies and Giants played to a tie in nine innings , New York scored two runs in the top of the 11th , but Hansen , who entered to relieve , allowed three to score while recording only two outs , handing the Giants a 12 – 11 extra @-@ inning defeat . In the next game against the Dodgers , however , he recorded his first victory of the year behind a pinch @-@ hit inside @-@ the @-@ park grand slam from Pete Milne , pitching a scoreless seventh inning and striking out two . Hansen had one other appearance in April , allowing a single run in three innings against Brooklyn the following day in a 15 – 2 loss . In the next month , he also made four appearances , the first of which came on May 24 ; he pitched two scoreless innings against the Cubs . After allowing his only run of the month to the Phillies on May 27 , Hansen pitched in both games of a doubleheader on May 30 , throwing 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in the first contest and earning his only save of the season in the second by striking out two batters in 2 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings . 
 On June 1 , Hansen started his first game of the season , pitching 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings and allowing four runs ; he was replaced by Red Webb , who pitched the remaining 7 1 ⁄ 3 and won the game , 11 – 5 . Hansen earned his second defeat of the season on June 12 , when he allowed a single game @-@ winning run to the Pirates in 5 2 ⁄ 3 innings of work ; he walked three batters and struck out five in the contest . He appeared in back @-@ to @-@ back games on June 17 and 18 : a 6 – 4 loss to Pittsburgh the first day , and a 5 – 4 win for New York on the second . This game would be his last appearance in a Giants win until the season 's final month . His next two outings — against the Cardinals on June 22 and the Cubs on June 24 — were perfect ; he allowed no baserunners until June 25 , when he gave up a single hit to Chicago in a 4 – 1 defeat . His final appearance of June came in the first game of a June 30 with the Boston Braves , in which he pitched two innings and allowed one hit . In July , Hansen struggled mightily , appearing in four games ; each contest was a loss for the Giants , and each decision was tallied against him . On July 2 , he allowed 5 runs in 4 2 ⁄ 3 innings against Brooklyn , walking one batter and allowing two home runs . His five runs allowed accounted for the Dodgers ' margin of victory in the 13 – 8 Giants defeat . He pitched four innings in relief of Sheldon Jones on July 10 , suffering the loss when he walked three batters and allowed three runs to score . Hansen 's one run allowed on July 16 proved once again to be his undoing as the Pirates defeated the Giants , 7 – 6 , and dropped his record to 1 – 5 ; nevertheless , he earned the start against Pittsburgh on July 26 and took his sixth loss , allowing 4 runs on 4 walks in 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings to finish July at 1 – 6 on the season . 
 In August , all of Hansen 's appearances came in Giants losses , the first of which was on August 7 — he pitched the two final innings against the Cardinals , allowing one hit but no runs . After a scoreless inning on August 12 , Hansen appeared in back @-@ to @-@ back games against Boston on August 17 and 18 , walking one and striking out one in the former game and allowing two runs in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in the latter . He allowed a run to Philadelphia on August 19 , then pitched in consecutive games on August 27 and 28 , the second and first games of doubleheaders , respectively . The Giants lost to St. Louis , 11 – 2 , on August 27 ; Hansen allowed one unearned run in that game . The next day , he pitched two perfect innings against the Cincinnati Reds , striking out one , but New York was defeated , 10 – 3 . In his first September game , Hansen earned his final decision of the season when he defeated Pittsburgh , 9 – 5 , pitching one scoreless inning in relief of Hank Behrman . He pitched the next game as well — the following day against Brooklyn — but the Giants were shut out , 8 – 0 . He made a scoreless appearance against Philadelphia on September 6 , and allowed 4 runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings on September 8 , raising his ERA from 4 @.@ 18 to 4 @.@ 64 . Hansen made his final appearance on September 11 with a perfect 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning , striking out the only batter he faced ; his final game of the season was logged on September 18 , but he faced no batters and did not physically appear in the game . His final record for the year was two wins against six losses ; he amassed 26 strikeouts and 28 bases on balls , allowing an average of 4 @.@ 61 runs per nine innings . 
 = = = 1950 : Midseason injury = = = 
 In April 1950 , Hansen appeared in two games . His first appearance of the season came against the rival Dodgers ; he pitched two scoreless innings , giving up three hits and walking two batters . A week later , he pitched the fourth inning of another contest against Brooklyn , this time allowing no baserunners . His first game the next month came against the Pirates on May 6 , where he earned his first save of the season in a 9 – 8 victory . All of his other appearances in May , however , came in New York losses . On May 14 , Hansen started the second game of a doubleheader against Philadelphia , pitching 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings and allowing five runs on eight hits and two walks . The following week , he appeared in both games of a <unk> against the Pirates , pitching a combination perfect inning between the two contests : 2 ⁄ 3 in the first and 1 ⁄ 3 in the second . Beginning on May 25 , Hansen pitched in four consecutive games to close out his month , allowing 1 run in 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings in the first contest and throwing a scoreless frame in the second . On May 27 , he struck out one batter and allowed a single hit in 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings , and earned his first loss of the year in an extra @-@ inning defeat by the Phillies the following day ; he entered the game in the seventh inning and allowed 3 runs over 4 1 ⁄ 3 frames to total a 5 – 2 final score . 
 In June , Hansen began a heavy workload from the Giants ' bullpen ; the converted starter , who had never appeared in more than nine games in a single month in his major league career , was pressed into service 11 times in the third month of the season . On the month 's first day , Hansen pitched in both games of a doubleheader against Cincinnati , throwing a perfect 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in the first half , and three scoreless in the second contest . The following day , he blew a save against the Reds in the sixth inning , allowing two hits and recording no outs . Against the Pirates on June 5 , he recorded his second save of the season in a 5 – 4 , ten @-@ inning win , and followed it with another on June 8 in Chicago . On June 10 , Hansen allowed 2 runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings against the Cardinals , and the next week gave up four runs to the Cubs by facing 12 batters . Two scoreless outings on June 19 and 21 were followed by an appearance in Game 1 of a June 25 doubleheader ; he gave up one run on three hits and one walk . His final June appearance came against the Braves , a scoreless inning in which he walked two batters . 
 The workload continued into July , when Hansen appeared in the first game of a July 2 doubleheader . He entered in the first inning in relief of starter Koslo , who allowed two runs without recording an out ; none of the Giants ' pitchers in the 11 – 5 defeat escaped unscathed , as all allowed at least two runs , topped by Hansen 's five . His next two appearances came on July 4 , as he pitched both games of a doubleheader against the Dodgers ; he tossed two innings in each contest , striking out two in the first game and walking one in the nightcap . On July 5 , he gave up five runs in the seventh inning against Philadelphia , recording two outs and allowing five hits . In his next two outings against Boston and Pittsburgh , he allowed no runs , but the game against the Pirates would be his last scoreless outing with New York . Pitching against the Reds on July 16 , Hansen allowed 3 runs in 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings ; this was followed by four runs given up against the Cardinals on July 19 . His final contest of the season came on July 25 , when he pitched four innings against Cincinnati , allowing two runs before injuring his pitching elbow . Speaking with manager Leo Durocher , he claimed to feel a painless pop in his elbow as he threw a pitch ; two hours later , the elbow had swollen " as big as a football " and visibly bruised , ending his season . Hansen ended the season with an 0 – 1 record , a 5 @.@ 53 ERA , and 19 strikeouts ; thereafter , he was selected by the Phillies in the Rule 5 draft . 
