 = = Philadelphia = = 
 = = = 1951 : Return to the majors = = = 
 After acquiring Hansen , the Phillies assigned him to the Triple @-@ A Baltimore Orioles . He was called up to the major league club in July after posting a 1 – 1 record with a 5 @.@ 45 ERA and 14 strikeouts , working exclusively from Baltimore 's bullpen . Hansen 's first appearance with Philadelphia came on July 6 ; he pitched two innings in relief of Russ Meyer , who allowed three runs without recording an out . Three straight appearances in doubleheader openers followed Hansen 's Phillies debut : he faced two Cardinals batters without a putout on July 15 ; pitched two scoreless innings against Cincinnati two days later ; and could have earned his first victory of the season on July 22 had Konstanty — the closer and 1950 's National League Most Valuable Player — not collected his fifth blown save of the year . Hansen pitched in three more games that month , recording his first decision of the season on July 's final day : he defeated the Reds , 7 – 5 , pitching one inning and allowing two runs . 
 Hansen appeared in five games for the Phillies in August . All were multi @-@ inning appearances as a relief pitcher , and only one was not scoreless — he allowed four runs to the Braves in 2 1 ⁄ 3 innings on August 15 . He opened September with a victory , however — a 5 – 3 win over Boston — to raise his record to 2 – 0 ; it was his first of eleven appearances in the season 's final month . Including the September 2 victory , Hansen finished three of his first four games for Philadelphia in the month , allowing no runs in any of those four appearances . The Pirates notched Hansen 's first September runs allowed on the month 's 12th day ; although none of the runs were earned , Hansen still collected his only defeat of the 1951 season . 
 In his next appearance , Hansen struck out a season @-@ high four Cardinals in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched on September 16 ; it was his only appearance in 1951 wherein he struck out multiple batters . Following a scoreless two @-@ inning appearance against the Cubs on September 18 , Hansen pitched the eighth inning against the Dodgers on September 23 , allowing his first earned runs in over a month . After relieving starter Ken Johnson in the first inning of September 26 's contest — pitching two innings and allowing one run — Hansen earned his final decision of the season on September 28 , pitching three scoreless frames against Brooklyn to earn his third win . His 1951 season ended with a single scoreless inning the following day , also against the Dodgers ; this lowered his season ERA to 2 @.@ 54 , the best mark among Phillies pitchers that year , and a career low for Hansen . On the season , he struck out 11 batters while walking 7 , allowing 34 hits in 39 innings of work . 
 = = = 1952 : Four @-@ save July = = = 
 Hansen 's 1952 season did not open auspiciously ; he appeared in the Phillies ' second game of the season , entering in the ninth inning and allowing a sacrifice fly to the Giants ' Alvin Dark with the bases loaded . Although it was no blemish on Hansen 's ERA — the runner having been allowed by starter Howie Fox — he still earned a blown save in his first appearance of the year . His second appearance two days later was worse : Hansen entered the game in the eighth inning with a 7 – 6 lead , but allowed two runs in the top of the ninth , and a third earned was added to his tally after closer Konstanty , who relieved Hansen , allowed a sacrifice fly immediately thereafter . The Braves , Philadelphia 's opponents in that contest , won the game , 9 – 7 , and Hansen was saddled with his second blown save in as many appearances and his first loss of the season . His next three appearances were scoreless , but on May 16 , he entered in the eighth inning of a game against the Reds with the Phillies leading , 2 – 1 , and runners on first and second bases . He allowed a single to Bobby Adams , scoring Roy McMillan and blowing his third save , but the Phillies would win , 3 – 2 , after Heintzelman pitched 2 1 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings and the Phillies used small ball tactics ( a walk to Eddie <unk> , Heintzelman reaching on a fielder 's choice , and a bunt single by Richie Ashburn ) to load the bases in the bottom of the tenth inning , winning on a single by Granny Hamner . After two scoreless appearances against St. Louis and New York , Hansen allowed one run in a three @-@ inning appearance against his former club on May 24 . Hansen pitched in both extra @-@ inning games of a doubleheader on May 27 , pitching the twelfth and final inning against Boston in a 4 – 2 loss in the first contest , and earning his first victory in the tenth inning of the second after Del Ennis ' triple and Willie Jones ' sacrifice fly scored the winning run in the bottom half of the frame . Three more relief appearances closed out the month , two of them scoreless ; his only run allowed was against the Pirates on the final day of May . 
 Hansen 's June was also inauspicious , as all six of his appearances came in Phillies losses . He had two scoreless one @-@ inning stints against the Reds and the Cubs on June 5 and 10 , respectively , before a three @-@ inning appearance against the Pirates in the first game of a June 15 doubleheader . In the contest , he struck out one and walked one in a scoreless outing to lower his ERA to 2 @.@ 75 , and followed with a scoreless inning on June 19 to push it down to 2 @.@ 61 , his lowest to that point of the season . He allowed his only earned runs of the month on June 22 , when Hansen walked the bases loaded in the top of the ninth inning against Cincinnati ; Konstanty entered , allowing a double to former teammate Andy Seminick that scored two . In his final June game , he allowed three runs , but none were earned due to a throwing error by third baseman Willie " Puddin ' Head " Jones . At the end of June and beginning of July , closer Konstanty blew two saves , one of which resulted in a 4 – 3 loss to Brooklyn , so Hansen assumed some of the closing duties for the season 's fourth month . He collected his first save of the season on the second of July , pitching two scoreless innings against the Dodgers in relief of Russ Meyer . After allowing two runs to the Cardinals on July 10 , Hansen bounced back with consecutive saves — on July 13 against Chicago ; and again on July 16 versus the Pirates , in which Hansen relieved Roberts after the latter allowed a two @-@ run ninth @-@ inning home run . On July 22 , he earned his fourth save of the month in a two @-@ inning performance against Pittsburgh , and closed the month with two consecutive victories , defeating the Cubs on July 27 , and the Reds two days after . 
 In August , Hansen pitched 4 1 ⁄ 3 innings in the team 's first contest , allowing two runs to the Cardinals on four hits and losing his third game of the season . He appeared in three consecutive doubleheaders ( August 9 , 11 , and 13 ) and followed by pitching 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning in a 15 – 0 loss at Brooklyn on August 16 . Hansen rested until August 22 , when he relieved Curt Simmons against the Cincinnati Reds ; he pitched 3 2 ⁄ 3 innings , allowing two runs on three hits , walking two , and absorbing a fourth loss . Beginning on August 24 , he finished three games against the Cubs on consecutive game @-@ days : pitching a perfect inning on August 24 ; earning a win with two scoreless innings on August 25 ; and taking the loss on August 26 in the 13th inning of the series ' final contest . He bounced back to close the month with a fifth win , though , defeating Boston , 8 – 6 , behind a 5 1 ⁄ 3 @-@ inning relief performance . In his first September game , Hansen took the loss by allowing a single run to the Giants on the month 's third day ; he finished the month by pitching in two consecutive losses , with his final appearance coming on September 12 . For the season , he finished with a 5 – 6 record , a 3 @.@ 26 ERA , and 18 strikeouts in a team @-@ leading 43 games pitched — a year in which his performance was described as " excellent relieving " . 
 = = = 1953 : Last major league year = = = 
 Hansen 's first game of the 1953 season resulted in his first loss ; in a 14 – 12 contest against the Pirates , he allowed four runs — one earned — in the fifth frame , the only inning he pitched . His next appearance resulted in his first save of the year , coming against Pittsburgh on April 25 , and he pitched in his final April game three days later against St. Louis . Hansen 's first appearance in May came against the newly relocated Milwaukee Braves , late of Boston , when he allowed a walk and two hits , one a home run , in a single inning . He threw a scoreless frame against Brooklyn on May 10 , and a perfect 1 ⁄ 3 on May 12 to earn his second save . He allowed two runs against Milwaukee on May 18 , but both were unearned , lowering his ERA to a season @-@ low 2 @.@ 25 ; three runs in his next appearance , however , raised his average to its highest point since the year 's first game . His last game in May was against Pittsburgh : 2 ⁄ 3 of an inning with one unearned run allowed . 
 Hansen opened June with a doubleheader , pitching in both games and allowing no runs ; he gave up a hit in the first game and walked a batter in the second , striking out one batter in each contest . He pitched the ninth inning in both games , earning his third save of the year in the nightcap . He gave up two runs to the Braves in his next appearance , allowing a home run and an RBI single in three innings . On June 9 , he again allowed two runs , this time to the Cubs ; the two home runs given up resulted in his first blown save of the season . After a perfect inning against Cincinnati on June 12 , he made his first scoreless appearance against Milwaukee in the season ; he allowed two hits in 1 ⁄ 3 of an inning but neither runner scored . On June 17 , he faced the Braves again , this time pitching three scoreless innings and allowing two singles and a double . Waiting ten days until his next appearance , Hansen took the mound for two scoreless innings against St. Louis , and earned a hold on June 30 against Brooklyn after Konstanty blew a save . In his first July game , he pitched 3 1 ⁄ 3 innings , allowing two runs on three hits and walking three batters . Two days later , he pitched five scoreless innings within both halves of a doubleheader against his former team , the Giants ; he walked one batter in each game and struck out three hitters in the second . After an 11 @-@ day hiatus , he returned to the hill in an 11 – 0 loss to the Reds , allowing an unearned run on three hits in relief of Konstanty . One @-@ and @-@ two @-@ thirds scoreless innings against the Cubs on July 21 was his final scoreless outing of the month , followed by a single run allowed to the Braves on July 27 and two runs given up to the Reds three days later . 
 On August 3 , Hansen entered in the second inning of a contest against the Reds after Konstanty and Thornton Kipper allowed 7 runs in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings against the Reds ; he pitched 4 1 ⁄ 3 frames and allowed 1 run . On August 17 , he made his first start in three years , absorbing the loss as the Phillies were shut out , 6 – 0 . His final two August games came on back @-@ to @-@ back days : the second half of a doubleheader on August 30 ( 1 walk and 1 strikeout in 2 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings ) ; and the first half of a <unk> on August 31 ( one run allowed on one walk and two hits in a single inning ) . He made one September appearance , allowing two runs without recording an out ; for the year , he finished with an 0 – 2 record and three saves with a 4 @.@ 03 ERA . After the conclusion of the season , Hansen was traded with Jack <unk> and $ 70 @,@ 000 ( $ 619 @,@ 000 today ) to Pittsburgh in exchange for Murry Dickson . 
 = = After the majors = = 
 In 1954 , Hansen was assigned to the Pirates @-@ affiliated Hollywood Stars , an Open @-@ classification minor league team based in Los Angeles . He appeared in three games , accumulating a 1 @.@ 35 ERA on the mound and one hit in three at @-@ bats at the plate . In one of those contests , he and Red Munger combined to hold the rival Los Angeles Angels to a 1 – 0 shutout . After being voted outstanding player of the week for his short tenure , Hansen voluntarily retired himself a second time after Pittsburgh Pirates president Branch Rickey refused to pay him $ 750 ( $ 6 @,@ 610 today ) that he was owed . The Pirates sent him a contract to play for the Triple @-@ A New Orleans Pelicans , along with a paycheck , but he did not report , opting to remain retired . 
 Hansen was first married to Bertha Mae ( née Perkins ) , also a native of Lake Worth , Florida . They had two children , one a daughter named Gale Andra , before his wife contracted cancer and died . He had dated his second wife , Joy , when he was playing for the Giants in his early career , and they were described as " recently wedded " when interviewed by author Wes Singletary for his 2006 book . Hansen worked seasonally for the United States Postal Service during his baseball career , and became a permanent employee for 31 years until retiring . In 1988 , he was inducted into the Palm Beach County Sports Commission 's Hall of Fame . He died on February 2 , 2002 , in his hometown . 
 = 2015 Malaysian Grand Prix = 
 The 2015 Malaysian Grand Prix , formally titled the 2015 Formula 1 Petronas Malaysia Grand Prix , was a Formula One motor race that was held on 29 March 2015 at the Sepang International Circuit in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia . It was the seventeenth running of the Malaysian Grand Prix as a World Championship event , and thirty @-@ fifth overall . 
 Lewis Hamilton came into the race leading the Drivers ' championship by seven points over team @-@ mate Nico Rosberg , followed closely by Sebastian Vettel , a further three points adrift . Mercedes entered with a twenty @-@ eight point lead over Ferrari in the Constructors ' championship campaign . 
 Hamilton secured pole position in a rain @-@ soaked qualifying session , the 40th pole position in his career . Vettel won the race , having started from second place on the grid . It was the 40th victory of his career , and the first victory for Ferrari since the 2013 Spanish Grand Prix . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Going into the weekend , Lewis Hamilton was leading the Drivers ' Championship , having won the first race ahead of his teammate Nico Rosberg and Sebastian Vettel . He therefore had 25 points and held a seven @-@ point advantage over Rosberg , with Vettel another three points behind . In the constructors ' standings , Mercedes was on top , haven taken the maximum available 43 points from their 1 @-@ 2 finish in Melbourne . Ferrari were second on 15 points , followed by Sauber with 14 . 
 Mercedes arrived at the second race of the season with maximum points from Australia , having finished first and second with third placed Sebastian Vettel half a minute down . Following their dominant performance , many commentators voiced fears that the sport might become even more one @-@ sided and boring over the course of the 2015 season than it had been the previous year . Red Bull 's team principal Christian Horner called for the FIA to step in and apply rule changes that would level the competition , stating : " The FIA , within the rules , have an equalisation mechanism and that needs to be looked at . " Red Bull subsequently threatened to leave the sport , should no measures be taken . While many commentators pointed out that Red Bull had enjoyed their own share of dominance in the prior years , Formula One supremo Bernie Ecclestone voiced understanding for the team , saying : " There is a rule that I think [ former president ] Max [ Mosley ] put in when he was there that in the event ... that a particular team or engine supplier did something magic - which Mercedes have done - the FIA can level up things . They [ Mercedes ] have done a first class job which everybody acknowledges . We need to change things a little bit now and try to level things up a little bit . " Mercedes ' executive director Toto Wolff reacted to the calls by urging his rivals to " get your fucking head down and work to sort it out " . McLaren driver Jenson Button also raised doubt over the practicality of rule changes , saying " There 's nothing really to ban because it doesn 't look like Mercedes are doing anything other teams aren 't doing . " 
 Following criticism voiced by Red Bull , the future of engine supplier Renault was also a matter of debate . While Renault contemplated exiting the sport , another scenario that received media attention was a possible buy @-@ out of the Toro Rosso team . The discussion about the future of the sport was additionally fuelled by the news that the German Grand Prix would be dropped from the 2015 calendar , due to a lack of financing . The exclusion of one of motorsport 's most traditional events caused many to raise the question whether the same fate might await other traditional venues such as Monza . 
 Fernando Alonso returned from his pre @-@ season injury to take back his seat at McLaren , which had been filled by Kevin Magnussen at the previous race in Australia . Also returning was Williams driver Valtteri Bottas , who missed the previous race due to a back injury sustained during qualifying . 
 Manor Marussia , who were able to field their cars for the first time in Malaysia , were under criticism after they failed to run their cars at the Australian Grand Prix , with Ecclestone saying they would need to pay for their travel expenses , which are usually covered by the commercial rights holder . 
 As in the previous two years , Pirelli announced they would be supplying teams with the orange @-@ banded hard compound tyre as the prime selection and the white @-@ banded medium compound as the option selection for the event . The event also made use of Pirelli 's two wet weather tyres , the green @-@ banded intermediate and blue @-@ banded full wet tyres . 
 = = = Free practice = = = 
 Per the regulations for the 2015 season , three practice sessions were held , two 90 @-@ minute sessions on Friday and another one @-@ hour session before qualifying on Saturday . Nico Rosberg set the fastest time in the first practice session on Friday morning , while championship leader Lewis Hamilton was sidelined due to engine problems . He recovered to take fastest time in the second session of the day , while Ferrari proved that they would be closer to their rivals in Sepang , coming within 0 @.@ 4 seconds in both free practice sessions . 
 Fernando Alonso made his debut in the new McLaren , finishing 14th and 16th in the two Friday sessions respectively , outpacing teammate Jenson Button both times . Also debuting during free practice were Manor @-@ Marussia , with both cars struggling to meet the time limit of 107 % . Raffaele Marciello filled in for Sauber @-@ regular Felipe Nasr during the first session . 
 During the third practice session on Saturday morning , both Mercedes drivers were once again fastest , with Rosberg setting the fastest time , while Ferrari was about half a second behind . 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Qualifying consisted of three parts , 18 , 15 and 12 minutes in length respectively , with five drivers eliminated from competing after each of the first two sessions . The first part of qualifying ( Q1 ) got under way in the dry and sunny conditions ; this was not the conditions that would favour McLaren as they were still off the pace of the midfield although they made progress . Jenson Button along with his returning team @-@ mate Fernando Alonso were separated by only a tenth of a second , but were 17th and 18th on the grid . Joining them were the Manor @-@ Marussia cars of Roberto Merhi and Will Stevens ; Merhi recorded a time that was almost five seconds slower than Alonso , and Stevens failed to take to the circuit , while Felipe Nasr also failed to make it out of Q1 , as he struggled for balance in his Sauber . 
 Clouds built up at the west of the circuit before Q2 and there was a traffic jam in the pit lane . A scramble for position started to be evident and only one driver – Nico Rosberg – managed a clean lap without traffic , as the rest of the field dealt with the thunderstorm that was warned to arrive during Q2 and started tripping up on each other . The biggest casualty of the session was Ferrari 's Kimi Räikkönen who got held up by Marcus Ericsson . Räikkönen recorded a lap of 1 : 42 @.@ 173 , which was not fast enough to get into Q3 as rain started soon after . Joining Räikkönen were Pastor Maldonado , the Force Indias of Nico Hülkenberg and Sergio Pérez and the Toro Rosso of Carlos Sainz , Jr . , as they could not improve on their original lap times due to the conditions . 
 After a delay of half an hour , the cars returned to the circuit , with the majority of the remaining ten drivers on intermediate tyres , while Romain Grosjean , Felipe Massa and Valtteri Bottas initially surveyed the circuit on wets before switching to the intermediates . Ultimately , Hamilton took pole by 0 @.@ 074 seconds ahead of Vettel , with Rosberg third . They were followed by the Red Bull cars of Daniel Ricciardo and Daniil Kvyat , while Toro Rosso 's young driver Max Verstappen took sixth place . The rest of the top ten was completed by Massa , Grosjean , Bottas and Ericsson . After qualifying , Romain Grosjean was found to have left the pit lane in a different position to the one he left the garage , and so he received a two place grid penalty dropping him to tenth on the grid . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Temperatures on race day were very hot , with the track temperature at 61 ° C ( 142 ° F ) . Rain was possible , though less than in previous years , also due to the earlier starting time . Williams were hoping for a dry race , since qualifying showed they were still off the pace in wet conditions . Will Stevens , who missed qualifying due to a fuel system problem , was ultimately unable to participate in the race . Approximately 44 @,@ 611 people attended the race . 
 At the start , Lewis Hamilton got away well , while Nico Rosberg challenged Sebastian Vettel for second place , but the Ferrari was able to come out on top . Both Pastor Maldonado and Kimi Räikkönen suffered punctures on lap one after contact with Valtteri Bottas and Felipe Nasr respectively and had to come in for a new set of tyres . Vettel was able to stay with the Mercedes of Hamilton over the first few laps . On lap four , Marcus Ericsson braked too late and spun in turn one , retiring from the race and bringing out the safety car . All but seven cars went into the pits to change tyres , including both Mercedes drivers , while Sebastian Vettel stayed out . When racing resumed on lap seven , Vettel led Nico Hülkenberg , Romain Grosjean , Carlos Sainz , Jr. and Sergio Pérez , with Hamilton the first of the cars who made pit stops right behind . 
 Both Mercedes cars now made their way through the field , with Hamilton overtaking Hülkenberg for second position on the end of lap ten , now ten seconds down on race leader Vettel . Rosberg reached third position on lap 14 , while Hamilton was unable to make significant gains on Vettel in front . The cars that had not used the safety car phase for their stops began to change tyres on lap 16 , while Maldonado was handed a ten @-@ second penalty for exceeding the safety car time . Meanwhile , the Red Bull cars showed signs of brake problems with brake dust exiting the wheels at the major braking points on both cars . Vettel came in for his first stop on lap 18 , handing the lead back to Hamilton . Vettel rejoined in third place and began to close rapidly on second @-@ placed Rosberg . Vettel made good use of his fresher tyres , overtaking Rosberg on lap 22 and setting out to do the same on Hamilton , when the latter went into the pits for his second pit stop on lap 24 . Meanwhile , Fernando Alonso retired due to engine problems on lap 21 while running in ninth place . With deteriorating front wing damage , Daniel Ricciardo let his teammate Daniil Kvyat through into eleventh place on the beginning of lap 26 , only for Kvyat to be sent in a spin by Hülkenberg , who ran wide and hit the Red Bull in turn two . Kvyat was able to continue , though down in 13th place . The other Force India of Pérez sent Romain Grosjean 's Lotus into a spin five laps later . Both Force India drivers were handed a ten @-@ second penalty for their actions . 
 Vettel made a pit stop for a second and final time on lap 38 , handing the lead back to Hamilton , who came in for his final stop a lap later , emerging about twelve seconds behind Vettel in third place . His teammate Rosberg made a pit stop on lap 41 , elevating Hamilton to second , who now started to close on Vettel . Jenson Button retired from the race on lap 40 due to a turbo failure , while Maldonado 's bad day turned worse when he had to park his car suffering brake failures . Hamilton was unable to overcome the gap between himself and Vettel , leaving Vettel to take his first victory since the 2013 Brazilian Grand Prix and his first with Ferrari . Bottas was able to overtake his teammate Felipe Massa on the final lap , after both Williams drivers had an uneventful race to finish fifth and sixth respectively . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Sebastian Vettel and Ferrari reacted emotionally to the victory , with Vettel unable to hold back tears on the podium . Speaking about the experience as a Ferrari driver , he told Eddie Jordan during the podium interview : 
 I remember when the gate opened in Maranello it was like a dream coming true . I remember the last time I was there was as a young kid watching Michael [ Schumacher ] over the fence driving around in the Ferrari and now I 'm driving that very red car . It 's incredible . The day today , the race , really spot on , the whole team was there , great strategy , great pace , we beat them fair and square [ ... ] . 
 Second placed Lewis Hamilton conceded that Ferrari and Vettel " did a fantastic job this weekend " and that he had not expected them to be as quick as they were . 
 The Ferrari team shared Vettel 's enthusiasm , as they could be seen singing along to the Italian national anthem during the podium ceremony , led by team principal Maurizio Arrivabene . He later admitted he cried after receiving a congratulatory text message from Michael Schumacher 's manager on behalf of his family . Comparisons between Vettel and Schumacher were omnipresent in the following days , with commentators pointing out that it took Vettel merely two races for his first win with the Scuderia , while Schumacher achieved a victory only in his seventh race . During the post @-@ race press conference , Vettel expressed hope to emulate Schumacher 's success at Ferrari and win the world championship . 
 The result was viewed as a welcome rebuttal of the fears of monotony voiced after the Australian Grand Prix . German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung declared Vettel 's win was " the best the flagging sport could have hoped for " . The Daily Mail commented : " Now a sport that has developed an impressive aptitude for navel @-@ gazing , [ ... ] can rest from its self @-@ loathing criticism , at least for a while . " 
 Controversy arose when Force India 's Bob Fernley accused Manor Marussia of intentionally only running one car during qualifying and the race and urged the FIA to investigate the matter . Manor rejected these claims , with sporting director Graeme Lowdon saying " I can guarantee you if that car could have moved , it would have raced " . 
 Finishing seventh , Max Verstappen became the youngest driver to score World Championship points . Verstappen was quoted saying that it had been a " good day " , while his father , former Formula One driver Jos Verstappen , commented : " I 'm very pleased for what he has done today . I 'm happy that he finished the race and the way he raced , he deserved it . I 'm very proud . " 
 As a result of the race , Vettel moved within three points of Hamilton in the Drivers ' Championship , on 43 to 40 points . Rosberg followed in third with 33 points , 13 ahead of Felipe Massa . In the Constructors ' Championship , Mercedes retained their lead at now 76 points , 24 clear of Ferrari , with Williams following in third on 30 points . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 Notes 
 ^ 1 — Romain Grosjean received a two place grid penalty for failing to " leave the pitlane in the order of his arrival . " 
 ^ 2 — Roberto Merhi and Will Stevens were granted permission to start by race stewards . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 = = = Championship standings after the race = = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Manuel the Armenian = 
 Manuel the Armenian was a prominent Byzantine general of Armenian origin , active from circa 810 until his death . After reaching the highest military ranks , a palace conspiracy forced him to seek refuge in the Abbasid court in 829 . He returned to Byzantine service the next year , receiving the position of Domestic of the Schools from Emperor Theophilos , who had married his niece Theodora . Manuel remained in the post throughout Theophilos 's reign , and reportedly saved the emperor 's life in the Battle of Anzen in 838 . According to one report , he died on 27 July 838 of wounds received during the battle , but other sources record his survival past this date , ascribing him a major role in the regency that governed the empire after Theophilos 's death , and report that he died some time around 860 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Manuel was of Armenian origin , and the brother of Marinos , the father of the future Byzantine empress Theodora . Manuel first appears in the reign of Michael I <unk> ( ruled 811 – 813 ) , when he held the post of protostrator ( head of the imperial stables ) . At the time , he must still have been young , probably in his twenties . Although he urged Michael to confront Leo the Armenian , following Michael 's deposition by Leo ( r . 813 – 820 ) , Manuel was promoted to the rank of patrikios and entrusted with the post of strategos of the Armeniac or the Anatolic Theme . The latter post was the most senior of the Byzantine Empire 's thematic governors , and Leo himself had held the office prior to his accession . According to historians John B. Bury and Warren Treadgold , in early 819 and for about a year , Leo seems to have appointed Manuel to the exceptional post of monostrategos ( " single @-@ general " ) of the five land themes of Asia Minor , but this unusual concentration of command authority was apparently directed towards the more effective suppression of iconophile resistance against Leo 's reinstatement of Iconoclasm rather than for military purposes . This appointment is , however , most likely a misreading of the primary source , according to the editors of the Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit . According to the history of Michael the Syrian , at about the same time Manuel was responsible for the negotiations with the Khurramite refugees and their leader , Nasr , who became baptized as Theophobos in Byzantine service ; however , Michael 's chronology of this episode is confused and of doubtful accuracy . 
 Manuel 's career under Leo 's successor , Michael II the Amorian ( r . 820 – 829 ) , is unclear , as he is not mentioned in the sources during this period . Certainly at the time of the outbreak of the great rebellion of Thomas the Slav , the strategos of the Armeniacs was Olbianos , while the Anatolics joined the rebellion . Manuel himself , however , evidently remained loyal to Michael , and it was probably the latter who raised him to the rank of magistros . The editors of the Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit suggest that Manuel may have been recalled by Michael to Constantinople , especially if the marriage of Michael 's son and heir Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) and Manuel 's niece Theodora took place around 821 , as suggested by E.W. Brooks , and not around 830 , as suggested by Treadgold . 
 = = = Escape to the Caliphate = = = 
 In 829 , either some time before ( according to Theophanes Continuatus , followed by E.W. Brooks and the Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit and others ) or shortly after ( according to Symeon Logothetes , accepted by Treadgold , the Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium and others ) the death of Michael and the accession of Theophilos , Manuel defected to the Abbasids as a result of machinations at court : the logothetes tou dromou ( foreign minister ) Myron had accused him to the new emperor of plotting to seize the throne . Using the carriages of the imperial post , he crossed Asia Minor in haste and offered his services to Caliph al @-@ Ma 'mun ( r . 813 – 833 ) , on condition that he would not be forced to convert to Islam . According to the 13th @-@ century historian Vardan Areveltsi , so great was Ma 'mun 's joy at this defection that he gave Manuel a daily salary of 1 @,@ 306 silver dirhams , and continually presented him with gifts . 
 Theophilos , in turn , was hesitant to believe the accusations , and was eventually convinced by the protovestiarios ( chamberlain ) Leo <unk> and the <unk> John the Grammarian of his general 's innocence . He therefore resolved to get Manuel to return , and sent John the Grammarian to Baghdad on a diplomatic mission in the winter of 829 / 830 , ostensibly in order to announce his accession . John was indeed able to see Manuel in private and offered him the Emperor 's pardon , which Manuel seemed to accept , although for the time being , Manuel remained publicly loyal to his Abbasid allegiance . 
 In the summer of 830 , Manuel participated in an Abbasid expedition against the Khurramite rebels of Babak Khorramdin in Adharbayjan , alongside a contingent of Byzantine captives . The campaign was nominally led by Ma 'mun 's own son , al- ' Abbas , but it is likely , according to Treadgold , that the more experienced Manuel was the actual commander , as Arabic and Syriac sources record that he commanded an " army of Arabs and Persians " . After winning a few modest successes , the army turned back south . Manuel , who by then had apparently won the confidence of his Arab minders , suggested that he and ' Abbas take a part of the army and raid over the Pass of Hadath into Byzantine Cappadocia . Once across the mountains , he and the other Byzantine captives neutralized ' Abbas and his escort , took their arms and escaped . ' Abbas and his companions were left behind unmolested , and allowed to return to Abbasid territory . 
 = = = Domestic of the Schools = = = 
 Theophilos welcomed Manuel with open arms , and named him Domestic of the Schools , commander of the elite tagma of the Scholae and de facto commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the entire army . Manuel would remain Theophilos 's leading general for the remainder of his reign . Furthermore , as the uncle of Theophilos 's wife , the Empress Theodora , his position at court was now unassailable , as shown by the fact that the Emperor later served as godfather for Manuel 's children . The Syriac sources even report that Theophilos made Manuel governor of the " inner regions " of the Empire . 
 In 831 , Manuel accompanied Theophilos in an expedition against a raid by the Cilician Arabs . The Byzantines caught up with the Arabs near the fort of Charsianon , and inflicted a heavy defeat upon them , killing 1 @,@ 600 and taking some seven thousand prisoner . Manuel is also recorded as accompanying Theophilos on his great expedition in 837 against the Arab cities of northern Mesopotamia , which led to the sack of <unk> and Arsamosata . This campaign , however , and the atrocities committed by the Byzantines ' former Khurramite troops after the fall of <unk> , provoked a large @-@ scale retaliatory campaign by Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( r . 833 – 842 ) . Manuel again accompanied the Emperor as his senior general , along with Nasr / Theophobos as commander of a large corps composed of former Khurramite refugees . Manuel participated in the disastrous Battle of Anzen on 22 July 838 , where Theophilos confronted the army of general al @-@ Afshin . During that battle , the imperial army broke and fled , and Theophilos with his retinue were surrounded by the Arabs on a hill with some 2 @,@ 000 Khurramites . When some of the latter reportedly began planning to surrender the Emperor to the Arabs , Manuel seized the Emperor 's horse by the bridle and forcibly led him away . With a few other officers , he managed to break through the Arab lines , and brought Theophilos to safety in the nearby village of Chiliokomon . During the battle , he received heavy wounds , and according to the chronicle of Symeon Logothetes , he died of them five days later , on 27 July 838 . He was buried in his palace in Constantinople , which lay near the Cistern of Aspar and which became a monastery named after him , now traditionally identified with the <unk> Mosque . 
 = = = Possible life after 838 = = = 
 The chronicles of Genesios and Theophanes Continuatus ( and following them Skylitzes and Zonaras ) , however , report that he survived his wounds , allegedly being miraculously cured after renouncing iconoclasm at the behest of some monks . The same sources report that after Theophilos 's death , he was appointed a member of the regency council for the infant new emperor Michael III ( r . 842 – 867 ) along with Theoktistos and Bardas , and to have refused the position of Emperor when the populace acclaimed him thus at the Hippodrome . The same writers report that he played an important role in the restoration of the icons , and that he became a <unk> before falling out with Theoktistos , being accused of lèse @-@ majesté , and retiring from public life to his estates . According to the same sources , in the late 850s , he saved the Emperor 's life in another battle at Anzen and died shortly after . Traditional scholarship has largely accepted this account , but some modern historians have expressed doubts as to its veracity . The Belgian Byzantinist Henri Grégoire was the first to highlight its incompatibility with the narrative of Symeon Logothetes , speculating that it was a later invention , possibly carried out by the monks of the Monastery of Manuel , who venerated him as a saint and tried to mitigate his iconoclast past . Warren Treadgold , who considers Symeon Logothetes more reliable , also dismissed the reports of Manuel 's post @-@ 838 survival as invented . 
 Other modern scholars continue to support the possibility of his continued life after 838 , especially given the existence of a seal , dated to the mid @-@ 9th century , which names " Manuel patrikios , imperial protospatharios , magistros , and <unk> of the Emperor " , which seems to confirm both his survival into at least the early years of Michael III 's reign , and his reported role as a member of the regency . Even so , the stories about his activities , and in particular his role in the restoration of the icons and the alleged second battle at Anzen ( which is clearly inspired by the events of 838 ) , are regarded as almost certainly fictitious . However , it may be that the story of his death after Theoktistos 's downfall is reliable , which would probably place it sometime between 855 and 863 . 
 = My Happiness ( Powderfinger song ) = 
 " My Happiness " is the album of Australian rock band by Powderfinger . It was released on 21 August 2000 by Universal Music Australia . It won the 2001 ARIA Music Award for Single of the Year . Odyssey Number Five . The single is Powderfinger 's most successful ; it peaked at number four on the Australian ARIA Singles Chart , and charted in the United States on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart — the first Powderfinger song to do so . 
 Powderfinger frontman Bernard Fanning wrote the lyrics for " My Happiness " as a reflection on the time the band spent touring to promote their work , and the loneliness that came as a result . It was inspired by his love of gospel and soul music . The rest of the band are co @-@ credited with Fanning for composing the track . Despite its melancholy mood , " My Happiness " is considered by many to be a love song , a suggestion Fanning regards as mystifying . 
 " My Happiness " was released as a single with " My Kind of Scene " as a B @-@ side . It was instantly successful , charting highly in Australia and New Zealand . It won an ARIA Award and an APRA Award and topped the Triple J Hottest 100 in 2000 as well as coming 27th in the 2009 Hottest 100 of all Time . " My Happiness " was highly praised by critics , with even negative reviews of Odyssey Number Five noting it as a highlight , especially for its catchy chorus . " My Kind of Scene " was equally popular . One of the highlights of Powderfinger 's United States tour with Coldplay was a performance of " My Happiness " on Late Show with David Letterman ; they were only the fourth Australian act to appear on the show . 
 = = Production and content = = 
 If you can 't cop a bit of emotional stuff then you should go and get the lamp shade extracted from your arse . If you don 't think there is enough rock in your life then let me know and I will personally come around to your house and chuck stones at you . 
 — Bernard <unk> response to " My Happiness " being described by fans as " like Lauryn Hill , bland and boring Top 40 bullshit " . 
 The lyrics for " My Happiness " were written by Bernard Fanning , Powderfinger 's lead singer and songwriter . The rest of the band are co @-@ credited with Fanning for composing the track . The song describes feelings of love and separation ; Sain 's Pennie Dennison said it described " the pining feeling you experience when you spend time away from the one you love " . Fanning called it " a sad story of touring and the absence loneliness that comes with it " . The extensive time spent touring took its toll on the band , and it was on the back of this that Fanning wrote " My Happiness " . Thus , he expressed confusion at its being considered a romantic song . 
 " My Happiness " was attacked by some fans as being " like Lauryn Hill , bland and boring Top 40 bullshit " ; guitarist Ian Haug rebutted by pointing out that the song was an example of the new emotional level on which Powderfinger made music , while Fanning was more aggressive in his defence of the song . In response to being dubbed " Mr Miserable " by The Sun @-@ Herald 's Peter Holmes for the lyrics of " My Happiness " and " These Days " , Fanning pointed out that the songs could be construed either as melancholy , or as part of " the most hopeful record ... in a long time " . 
 Much of Fanning 's writing is inspired by non @-@ rock music , and " My Happiness " is no exception . Gospel and soul music that is " unashamedly about love and how good it makes you feel " was common during the Odyssey Number Five recording sessions . Powderfinger worked hard in those sessions to ensure a more polished work than Internationalist ; guitarist Darren Middleton concluded that " My Happiness " , " The Metre " , and " Up & Down & Back Again " were more " complete " because of the band 's efforts . The lighter elements of " My Happiness " in comparison to some of the band 's earlier work saw Fanning reveal his passion for several other musicians , such as James Taylor — something that " five years ago ... would have been an embarrassing thing to say " . 
 = = Touring and promotion = = 
 " My Happiness " was put on heavy rotation by Los Angeles radio station KROQ @-@ FM two months prior to its United States release , and Powderfinger signed a contract with United States label Republic as a result of the song 's early success . Beat journalist Jayson Argall joked the song had received " a bit " of airplay . Although " My Happiness " was subsequently dropped from KROQ @-@ FM 's roster , other radio stations continued to give the song high priority . 
 " My Happiness " peaked at number 23 on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks , making it the first Powderfinger song to appear on a Billboard chart . According to Susan Groves of <unk> , part of the song 's success came about because very few people knew of Powderfinger , but were drawn towards " My Happiness " because it was " melodic , [ and ] pretty " — a change from what she described as " middle of the road rock " popular in the United States . Meanwhile , Australians were " starting to get sick of My Happiness " — Cameron Adams argued in The Hobart Mercury that this was one of the reasons Powderfinger decided to focus on the offshore market . 
 Powderfinger performed " My Happiness " live on talk show Late Show with David Letterman while touring North America with British rock group Coldplay , . They were the fourth Australian act ( after The Living End , Silverchair , and Nick Cave ) to play on the show . The band also did free promotional shows leading up to the release of the single . In Europe , " My Happiness " received approximately four weeks of airplay on German music video program Viva II , and the band sold out for three nights in a row in London , partly due to the success of the single . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " My Happiness " starts at a train station ( Roma Street railway station in Brisbane ) with a boy and girl stepping off a train . As the pair leave the train , the boy turns and tries to reach for something , but the girl pulls him back . It is shown that he was reaching for a sentient slinky . The slinky leaves the train , and passes Middleton busking in the train station . The slinky ventures to find the boy , facing a range of challenges along the way ; these include avoiding fruit falling on it and riding a skateboard . In the middle of the music clip , the slinky is shown making its way through a music room in which Powderfinger are performing " My Happiness " . It rests on the bar and the band finishes playing , while the background music continues . As Powderfinger leaves , the slinky is picked up by Haug . He gets into a car and places the slinky on the car 's dashboard , but it falls out the window as the car turns a tight corner . It lands outside the gate of a house and is picked up and brought inside to the boy . 
 The video was created by Fifty Fifty Films , who created numerous other Powderfinger music videos . It was directed by Chris Applebaum and produced by Keeley Gould of A Band Apart , with editing by Jeff Selis . Cameron Adams of The Courier Mail reported that following the music video 's release , slinky sales increased dramatically . 
 = = Release and commercial success = = 
 " My Happiness " was released as a single in Australia on 21 August 2000 . When asked how they chose the release date , Fanning jokingly said " the release date is timed to coincide with the Olympics , when all the visitors are here ... they can go into HMV and pick it up . " At the time of the single 's release , the band 's previous album , Internationalist , was still in the top 50 on the ARIA Albums Chart , 95 weeks after entering . The single featured B @-@ side " My Kind of Scene " , which had already received strong airplay due to its appearance on the Mission : Impossible II soundtrack . " My Happiness " appeared on a Triple M compilation entitled Triple M 's New Stuff , and on a Kerrang ! compilation , Kerrang ! 2 The Album . 
 " My Happiness " entered the ARIA singles chart at number four — making it Powderfinger 's highest @-@ charting single in Australia — and spent 24 weeks on the chart . It reached number two on the Queensland singles chart , and peaked at number seven on the New Zealand singles chart , on which it spent 23 weeks . " My Happiness " was Powderfinger 's first single to chart in the USA , reaching number 23 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . 
 The song won the " Single of the Year " award at the ARIA Awards of 2001 , and the 2001 " Song of the Year " APRA Award . Furthermore , " My Happiness " topped the Triple J Hottest 100 chart in 2000 , and appeared on that year 's CD release . Rolling Stone Australia named " My Happiness " " Song of the Year " in a reader poll . " My Happiness " was the eighth most @-@ played song on Australian radio in 2001 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " My Happiness " was a critical success . Cameron Adams of The Herald Sun wrote that " My Happiness " did not disappoint in the trend of excellent first singles from Powderfinger , citing " Pick You Up " and " The Day You Come " as examples . He praised the song 's structure , stating that " the verses almost crash into the chorus " . Adams also expressed surprise that " My Kind of Scene " was only released as a B @-@ side . The Newcastle Herald 's Chad Watson described a mixture of acoustic and electric guitar and " a restrained yet warmly infectious chorus " . Despite praising it as a " Big Rock <unk> " , Richard Jinman of The Sydney Morning Herald complained that " My Happiness " was not as " hummable " as past singles " Passenger " or " These Days " . Devon Powers of PopMatters described it , and " Waiting for the Sun " , as sounding bored . The Evening Mail agreed ; it argued the " rock @-@ lite " song , while sounding lush , failed to " make you really sit up and take notice " . 
 In his highly negative review of Odyssey Number Five , Allmusic 's Dean Carlson labelled it one of the best songs , for the riff Powderfinger executed " better than most bands of their stature " . Adams also enjoyed the song 's " wobbly guitar " , and Sain 's Christie <unk> approved of the " acoustic <unk> " , but The Advertiser 's Michael Duffy said the song was " a familiar piece of yearning guitar indie that is polished but pedestrian " ; he reserved his praise for " My Kind of Scene " , which he described as akin to the best of Internationalist . Darren Bunting wrote in the Hull Daily Mail that " My Happiness " was the best song on Odyssey Number Five , praising " soaring vocals , heartfelt lyrics and chiming guitar " . Entertainment Weekly 's Marc Weingarten said that on " My Happiness " , " Fanning 's heavy heart is tattered by scratching and clawing guitars " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " My Happiness " – 4 : 36 
 " My Kind of Scene " – 4 : 37 
 " Nature Boy " – 3 : 12 
 " Odyssey # 1 " ( Demo ) – 4 : 09 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Powderfinger 
 Bernard Fanning – Vocals , tambourine 
 Darren Middleton – Guitars and backing vocals 
 Ian Haug – Guitars 
 John Collins – Bass guitars 
 Jon Coghill – Drums and percussion 
 Production 
 Nick DiDia – Producer , engineer and mixer 
 Matt Voigt – Assistant engineer 
 Anton Hagop – Assistant engineer 
 Stewart Whitmore – Digital editing 
 Stephen Marcussen – Mastering 
 Anton Hagop – Assistant producer 
 Kevin Wilkins – Art direction and photography 
 = Flag of convenience = 
 Flag of convenience is a business practice whereby a merchant ship is registered in a country other than that of the ship 's owners , and the ship flies that country 's civil ensign . Owners of a ship may register the ship under a flag of convenience to reduce operating costs or avoid the regulations of the owner 's country . The closely related term open registry , which describes a ship register that will register foreign @-@ owned ships , also exists . 
 The term " flag of convenience " has been in use since the 1950s , and it refers to the civil ensign a ship flies in order to indicate its country of registration or flag state . A ship operates under the laws of its flag state , and these laws are used if the ship is involved in a case under admiralty law . 
 The modern practice of flagging ships in foreign countries began in the 1920s in the United States , when shipowners frustrated by increased regulations and rising labor costs began to register their ships to Panama . The use of open registries steadily increased , and in 1968 , Liberia grew to surpass the United Kingdom as the world 's largest shipping register . As of 2009 , more than half of the world ’ s merchant ships were registered with open registries , and the Panama , Liberia , and Marshall Islands flags accounted for almost 40 % of the entire world fleet , in terms of deadweight tonnage . 
 Flag @-@ of @-@ convenience registries are criticized , mostly by trade union organizations based in developed countries , especially those of Europe . On the other hand , maritime industry practitioners and seafarers from other countries contest that this is a natural product of globalisation . Seafarers from developed countries must make themselves competitive if they wish to take advantage and practice in a global environment . As of 2009 , thirteen flag states have been found by international shipping organizations to have substandard regulations . A basis for many criticisms is that the flag @-@ of @-@ convenience system allows shipowners to be legally anonymous and difficult to prosecute in civil and criminal actions . Some ships with flags of convenience have been found engaging in crime , offer substandard working conditions , and negatively impact the environment , primarily through illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing . As of 2009 , ships of thirteen flags of convenience are targeted for special enforcement by countries that they visit . Supporters of the practice , however , point to economic and regulatory advantages , and increased freedom in choosing employees from an international labor pool . 
 = = Background = = 
 International law requires that every merchant ship be registered in a country . The country in which a ship is registered is its flag state , and the flag state gives the ship the right to fly its civil ensign . A ship 's flag state exercises regulatory control over the vessel and is required to inspect it regularly , certify the ship 's equipment and crew , and issue safety and pollution prevention documents . A ship operates under the laws of its flag state , and these laws are used if the ship is involved in an admiralty case . The organization which actually registers the ship is known as its registry . Registries may be governmental or private agencies . 
 The reasons for choosing an open register are varied and include tax avoidance , the ability to avoid national labor and environmental regulations , and the ability to hire crews from lower @-@ wage countries . National or closed registries typically require a ship be owned and constructed by national interests , and at least partially crewed by its citizens . Conversely , open registries frequently offer on @-@ line registration with few questions asked . The use of flags of convenience lowers registration and maintenance costs , which in turn reduces overall transportation costs . The accumulated advantages can be significant , for example in 1999 , 28 of the American company <unk> 's fleet of 63 ships were foreign @-@ flagged , saving the company up to 3 @.@ 5 million dollars per ship every year . 
 The environmental disaster caused by the 1978 sinking of the MV Amoco Cadiz , which flew the Liberian flag , spurred the creation of a new type of maritime enforcement . Resulting from strong political and public outcry over the Amoco Cadiz sinking , fourteen European nations signed the 1982 Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control or Paris MOU . Under port state control , ships in international trade became subject to inspection by the states they visit . In addition to shipboard living and working conditions , these inspections cover items concerning the safety of life at sea and the prevention of pollution by ships . In cases when a port state inspection uncovers problems with a ship , the port state may take actions including detaining the ship . In 2008 , member states of the Paris MOU conducted 14 @,@ 322 inspections with deficiencies , which resulted in vessels being detained 1 @,@ 220 times that year . Member states of the Tokyo Memorandum of Understanding conducted 13 @,@ 298 ship inspections in 2009 , recording 86 @,@ 820 deficiencies which resulted in 1 @,@ 336 detentions . 
 The principle that there be a genuine link between a ship 's owners and its flag state dates back to 1958 , when Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Geneva Convention on the High Seas also required that " the state must effectively exercise its jurisdiction and control in administrative , technical and social matters over ships flying its flag . " The principle was repeated in Article 91 of the 1982 treaty called the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and often referred to as UNCLOS . In 1986 , the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development attempted to solidify the genuine link concept in the United Nations Convention for Registration of Ships . The Convention for Registration of Ships would require that a flag state be linked to its ships either by having an economic stake in the ownership of its ships or by providing mariners to crew the ships . To come into force , the 1986 treaty requires 40 signatories whose combined tonnage exceeds 25 % of the world total . As of 2006 , only 14 countries have signed the treaty . 
 = = History = = 
 Merchant ships have used false flags as a tactic to evade enemy warships since antiquity , and examples can be found from as early as the Roman era through to the Middle Ages . Following the American Revolutionary War , merchantmen flying the flag of the fledgling United States quickly found it offered little protection against attack by Barbary pirates - many responded either by seeking to transfer their registry back to Great Britain . The use of false flags was frequently used by the British during the Napoleonic Wars and the United States during the War of 1812 . During the mid @-@ 19th century , slave ships flew various flags to avoid being searched by British anti @-@ slavery fleets . However , the modern practice of registering ships in foreign countries to gain economic advantage originated in the United States in the era of World War I , and the term " flag of convenience " came into use in the 1950s . 
 Between 1915 and 1922 , several laws were passed in the United States to strengthen the United States Merchant Marine and provide safeguards for its mariners . During this period , U.S.-flagged ships became subject to regular inspections undertaken by the American Bureau of Shipping . This was also the time of Robert LaFollette 's Seamen 's Act of 1915 , which has been described as the " Magna Carta of sailors ' rights . " The Seamen 's Act regulated mariners ' working hours , their payment , and established baseline requirements for shipboard food . It also reduced penalties for disobedience and abolished the practice of imprisoning sailors for the offense of desertion . Another aspect of the Seamen 's Act was enforcement of safety standards , with requirements on lifeboats , the number of qualified able seamen on board , and that officers and seamen be able to speak the same language . 
 These laws put U.S.-flagged vessels at an economic disadvantage against countries lacking such safeguards . By moving their ships to the Panamanian flag , owners could avoid providing these protections . Belen Quezada , the first foreign ship flagged in the Panamanian registry , was employed in running illegal alcohol between Canada and the United States during Prohibition . In addition to sidestepping the Seamen 's Act , Panamanian @-@ flagged ships in this early period paid sailors on the Japanese wage scale , which was much lower than that of western merchant powers . 
 The Liberian open registry was the brainchild of Edward Stettinius , who had been Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Secretary of State during World War II . Stettinius created a corporate structure that included The Liberia Corporation , a joint @-@ venture with the government of Liberia . The corporation was structured so that one @-@ fourth of its revenue would go to the Liberian government , another 10 % went to fund social programs in Liberia , and the remainder returned to Stettinius ' corporation . The Liberian registry was created at a time when Panama 's registry was becoming less attractive for several reasons including its unpopularity with the U.S. labor movement and European shipping concerns , political unrest in Panama , and increases in its fees and regulations . 
 On 11 March 1949 , Greek shipping magnate Stavros Niarchos registered the first ship under the Liberian flag , World Peace . When Stettinius died in 1949 , ownership of the registry passed to the International Bank of Washington , led by General George Olmsted . Within 18 years , Liberia grew to surpass the United Kingdom as the world 's largest register . 
 Due to Liberia 's 1989 and 1999 civil wars , its registry eventually fell second to Panama 's flag of convenience , but maritime funds continued to supply 70 % of its total government revenue . After the civil war of 1990 , Liberia joined with the Republic of the Marshall Islands to develop a new maritime and corporate program . The resulting company , International Registries , was formed as a parent company , and in 1993 was bought out by its management . After taking over the Liberian government , <unk> @-@ Liberian warlord Charles Taylor signed a new registry contract with the Liberian International Ship and Corporate Registry , commonly known as <unk> . <unk> was one of the few legal sources of income for Taylor 's regime . Taylor is now on trial at the International Criminal Court in The Hague on 11 counts of war crimes , crimes against humanity , and other serious violations of international humanitarian law . 
 As of 2009 , the open registries of Panama , Liberia , and Marshall Islands accounted for almost 40 % of the entire world fleet , in terms of deadweight tonnage . That same year , the top ten flags of convenience registered 55 % of the world 's deadweight tonnage , including 61 % of bulk carriers and 56 % of oil tankers . 
 = = Extent of use = = 
 The International Transport Workers ' Federation ( ITF ) maintains a list of 32 registries it considers to be FOC registries . In developing the list , the ITF considers " ability and willingness of the flag state to enforce international minimum social standards on its vessels , " the " degree of ratification and enforcement of ILO Conventions and Recommendations , " and " safety and environmental record . " As of 2010 the list includes Antigua and Barbuda , the Bahamas , Barbados , Belize , Bermuda , Bolivia , Burma , Cambodia , the Cayman Island , Comoros , Cyprus , Equatorial Guinea , Georgia , Gibraltar , Honduras , Jamaica , Lebanon , Liberia , Malta , the Marshall Islands , Mauritius , Mongolia , Netherlands Antilles , North Korea , Panama , Sao Tome and Príncipe , St Vincent , Sri Lanka , Tonga , Vanuatu , and the French and German International Ship Registers . 
 As of 2009 , Panama , Liberia and the Marshall Islands are the world ’ s three largest registries in terms of deadweight tonnage ( DWT ) . These three organizations registered 11 @,@ 636 ships of 1 @,@ 000 DWT and above , for a total of 468 @,@ 405 @,@ 000 DWT : more than 39 % of the world 's <unk> carrying capacity . Panama dominates the scene with over 8 @,@ 065 ships accounting for almost 23 % of the world 's DWT . Of the three , the Marshall Islands ( with 1 @,@ 265 registered ships ) had the greatest rate of DWT increase in 2009 , increasing its tonnage by almost 15 % . 
 The Bahamian flag ranks sixth worldwide , behind the Hong Kong and Greek registries , but is similar in size to the Marshallese flag of convenience , with about 200 more ships but a carrying capacity about 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 DWT lower . Malta , at the ninth position worldwide , had about 100 more ships than the Bahamas , with a capacity of 50 @,@ 666 @,@ 000 DWT , representing 4 % of the world fleet with 12 % growth that year . 
 At the eleventh position , Cyprus registered 1 @,@ 016 ships in 2009 , 2 @.@ 6 % of world tonnage . The remaining top 11 flags of convenience are Antigua and Barbuda ( # 20 ) , Bermuda ( # 22 ) , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ( # 26 ) , and the French International Ship Register ( FIS ) at number # 27 . Bermuda and the FIS have fewer than 200 ships apiece , but they are large : the average Bermudan ship is 67 @,@ 310 DWT and the average FIS ship is at 42 @,@ 524 DWT . ( By way of reference , the average capacity of ships in the U.S. and U.K. registers is 1 @,@ 851 DWT and 9 @,@ 517 DWT respectively . ) The registries of Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines both have over 1 @,@ 000 ships with average capacity of 10 @,@ 423 DWT and 7 @,@ 334 DWT respectively . 
 The 21 other flags of convenience listed by the ITF each account for less than 1 % of the world 's DWT . As of 2008 , more than half of the world ’ s merchant ships ( measured by tonnage ) are registered under flags of convenience . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 There are a number of common threads found in criticisms of the flag of convenience system . One is that these flag states have insufficient regulations and that those regulations they do have are poorly enforced . Another is that , in many cases , the flag state cannot identify a shipowner , much less hold the owner civilly or criminally responsible for a ship 's actions . As a result of this lack of flag state control , flags of convenience are criticized on grounds of providing an environment for conducting criminal activities , supporting terrorism , providing poor working conditions for seafarers , and having an adverse effect on the environment . 
 David Cockroft , general secretary of the ITF says : 
 Arms smuggling , the ability to conceal large sums of money , trafficking in goods and people and other illegal activities can also thrive in the unregulated havens which the flag of convenience system provides . 
 = = = Concealed ownership = = = 
 A ship 's beneficial owner is legally and financially responsible for the ship and its activities . For any of a number of reasons , some justifiable and some suspicious , shipowners who wish to conceal their ownership may use a number of strategies to achieve that goal . 
 Actual owners may establish shell corporations to be the legal owners of their ships , making it difficult , if not impossible , to track who is the beneficial owner of the ship . The 2004 Report of the UN Secretary General ’ s Consultative Group on Flag State Implementation reported that " It is very easy , and comparatively inexpensive , to establish a complex web of corporate entities to provide very effective cover to the identities of beneficial owners who do not want to be known . " According to a 2003 report by the Organisation for Economic Co @-@ operation and Development report entitled " Ownership and Control of Ships " , these corporate structures are often multi @-@ layered , spread across numerous jurisdictions , and make the beneficial owner " almost impenetrable " to law enforcement officials and taxation . The report concludes that " regardless of the reasons why the cloak of anonymity is made available , if it is provided it will also assist those who may wish to remain hidden because they engage in illegal or criminal activities , including terrorists . " 
 The OECD report concludes that the use of bearer shares is " perhaps the single most important ( and perhaps the most widely used ) mechanism " to protect the anonymity of a ship 's beneficial owner . Physically possessing a bearer share accords ownership of the corporation . There is no requirement for reporting the transfer of bearer shares , and not every jurisdiction requires that their serial numbers even be recorded . 
 Two similar techniques to provide anonymity for a ship 's beneficial owner are " nominee shareholders " and " nominee directors . " In some jurisdictions that require shareholder identities to be reported , a loophole may exist where the beneficial owner may appoint a nominee to be the shareholder , and that nominee cannot legally be compelled to reveal the identity of the beneficial owner . All corporations are required to have at least one director , however many jurisdictions allow this to be a nominee director . A nominee director 's name would appear on all corporate paperwork in place of the beneficial owners , and like nominee shareholders , few jurisdictions can compel a nominee director to divulge the identity of beneficial owners . To further complicate matters , some jurisdictions allow a corporation to fulfill the duties of a nominee director . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 Flag of convenience ships have long been linked to crime on the high seas . For example , in 1982 , Honduras shut down its open registry operations because it had enabled " illegal traffic of all kinds and had given Honduras a bad name . " 
 Ships registered by the Cambodia Shipping Corporation ( CSC ) were found smuggling drugs and cigarettes in Europe , breaking the Iraq oil embargo , and engaging in human trafficking and prostitution in Europe and Asia . In response to these activities , in 2000 , <unk> Yahya of the Cambodian Ministry of Public Works and Transport told industry publication Fairplay " We don 't know or care who owns the ships or whether they 're doing ' white ' or ' black ' business ... it is not our concern . " Less than two years later , French forces seized the Cambodian @-@ flagged , Greek @-@ owned MV Winner for cocaine smuggling . Shortly after the seizure , Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen closed the registry to foreign ships , and Cambodia canceled its contract with CSC shortly thereafter . 
 The North Korean flag of convenience has also garnered significant scrutiny . In 2003 , the North Korean freighter Pong @-@ su reflagged to Tuvalu in the middle of a voyage shortly before being seized by Australian authorities for smuggling heroin into that country . That year thirteen nations began monitoring vessels under the North Korean flag for " illicit cargos , like drugs , missiles or nuclear weapon fuel . " 
 = = = Terrorism = = = 
 In 2002 in the United States , Democratic senator John Breaux of Louisiana proposed a bill to prevent U.S. shipowners from using foreign flags , ostensibly as a counter @-@ terrorism measure . 
 = = = Working conditions = = = 
 In the accompanying material of the ILO 's Maritime Labour Convention of 2006 , the International Labour Organization estimated that at that time there were approximately 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 working seafarers across the world . This document goes on to say that when working aboard ships flagged to states that do not " exercise effective jurisdiction and control " over their ships that " seafarers often have to work under unacceptable conditions , to the detriment of their well @-@ being , health and safety and the safety of the ships on which they work . " 
 The International Transport Workers ' Federation goes further , stating that flags of convenience " provide a means of avoiding labor regulation in the country of ownership , and become a vehicle for paying low wages and forcing long hours of work and unsafe working conditions . Since FOC ships have no real nationality , they are beyond the reach of any single national seafarers ' trade union . " They also say that these ships have low safety standards and no construction requirements , that they " do not enforce safety standards , minimum social standards or trade union rights for seafarers " , that they frequently fail to pay their crews , have poor safety records , and engage in practices such as abandoning crewmen in distant ports . 
 = = = Environmental effects = = = 
 While flag of convenience ships have been involved with some of the highest @-@ profile oil spills in history ( such as the Maltese @-@ flagged MV Erika , the Bahamian @-@ flagged MV Prestige , the Marshallese @-@ flagged Deepwater Horizon , and the Liberian @-@ flagged SS Torrey Canyon , MV Amoco Cadiz and MV Sea Empress ) the most common environmental criticism they face regards illegal fishing . These critics of the flag of convenience system argue that many of the FOC flag states lack the resources or the will to properly monitor and control those vessels . The Environmental Justice Foundation ( <unk> ) contends that illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing ( IUU ) vessels use flags of convenience to avoid fisheries regulations and controls . Flags of convenience help reduce the operating costs associated with illegal fishing methods , and help illegal operators avoid prosecution and hide beneficial ownership . As a result , flags of convenience perpetuate IUU fishing which has extensive environmental , social and economic impacts , particularly in developing countries . The <unk> is campaigning to end the granting of flags of convenience to fishing vessels as an effective measure to combat IUU fishing . 
 According to Franz Fischler , European Union Fisheries Commissioner , 
 The practice of flags of convenience , where owners register vessels in countries other than their own in order to avoid binding regulations or controls , is a serious menace to today ’ s maritime world . 
 = = Ratification of maritime conventions = = 
 International regulations for the maritime industry are promulgated by agencies of the United Nations , particularly the International Maritime Organization and International Labour Organization . Flag states adopt these regulations for their ships by ratifying individual treaties . One common criticism against flag of convenience countries is that they allow shipowners to avoid these regulations by not ratifying important treaties or by failing to enforce them . 
 The International Chamber of Shipping ( ICS ) issues an annual report entitled the Shipping Industry Flag State Performance Table identifying the six " core " conventions representing a minimum level of maritime regulation , from the viewpoint of shipowners , as SOLAS , MARPOL , LL 66 , <unk> , MLC , and CLC / FUND92 . Of these , all 34 flag of convenience countries listed by ITF have ratified the <unk> Convention , concerning standards of training , certification and <unk> for seafarers , and 25 of them have now ratified all six . However , nine listed countries have not ratified all the remaining five conventions . To put this in context , 64 flag states have not ratified all six conventions , including China and United States of America . 
 The Safety of Life at Sea ( SOLAS ) and Load Line ( LL 66 ) conventions focus on shipboard safety issues . Originally developed in response to the sinking of RMS Titanic , SOLAS sets regulations on lifeboats , emergency equipment and safety procedures , including continuous radio watches . It has been updated to include regulations on ship construction , fire protection systems , life @-@ saving appliances , radio communications , safety of navigation , management for the safe operation of ships , and other safety and security concerns . As of 2015 , the Bolivian , Lebanese , and Sri Lankan flags of convenience have not ratified the SOLAS treaty . LL 66 sets standards for minimum buoyancy , hull stress , and ship 's fittings , as well as establishing navigational zones where extra precautions must be taken . As of 2015 , the Bolivian , Georgian and Sri Lankan governments have not ratified LL 66 . 
 The International Labour Organization Maritime Labour Convention , 2006 provides comprehensive rights and protection at work for seafarers , including requirements for minimum age , qualifications , hours of work and rest , medical care , complaint procedures , wage payments , and onboard living arrangements . The MLC replaced a number of earlier ILO Conventions including <unk> . As of 2015 , the Bolivian , Cambodian , North Korean , Georgian , Honduran , Lebanese , Mongolian , and Sri Lankan governments have not yet ratified the MLC . 
 MARPOL and CLC / FUND92 relate to pollution . The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships , 1973 ( MARPOL ) , as modified by the Protocol of 1978 , including <unk> I – VI " regulates pollution by ships , including oil and air pollution , shipboard sewage and garbage . As of 2015 , the Bahamian , Cambodian , North Korean , Georgian , Honduran , Lebanese and Sri Lankan governments have not fully ratified MARPOL . The Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage ( CLC ) and International Fund for Compensation for Oil Pollution Damage ( FUND92 ) together provide mechanisms to ensure compensation for victims of oil spills . As of 2015 , the Bolivian , North Korean , Honduran , Lebanese and Mongolian governments have not ratified the CLC and FUND92 conventions . 
 = = Port state targeting = = 
 In 1978 , a number of European countries agreed in The Hague to audit labour conditions on board vessels vis @-@ a @-@ vis the rules of the International Labour Organization . To this end , in 1982 the " Paris Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control " ( Paris MOU ) was established , setting port state control standards for what is now twenty @-@ six European countries and Canada . 
 Several other regional Memoranda Of Understanding have been established based on the Paris model , including the " Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control in the Asia @-@ Pacific Region " , typically referred to as the " Tokyo MOU " , and organizations for the Black Sea , the Caribbean , the Indian Ocean , the Mediterranean , and Latin America . The Tokyo and Paris organizations generate , based on deficiencies and detentions , black- , white- , and grey @-@ lists of flag states . The US Coast Guard , which handles port state control inspections in the US , maintains a similar target list for underperforming flag states . As of 2014 , fourteen of the thirty @-@ four flags of convenience listed by the ITF are targeted for special enforcement by the countries of the Paris and Tokyo <unk> or U.S. Coast Guard : Antigua and Barbuda , Belize , Bolivia , Cambodia , the Cayman Islands , Comoros , Cyprus , Honduras , North Korea , Malta , Moldova , Mongolia , Panama , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and Vanuatu . 
 = = Wages = = 
 The United Nations Conference on Trade and Development , in its 2009 Report on Maritime Trade , states that shipowners often register their ships under a foreign flag in order to employ " seafarers from developing countries with lower wages . " The Philippines and the People 's Republic of China supply a large percentage of maritime labor in general , and major flags of convenience in particular . In 2009 , the flag @-@ states employing the highest number of expatriate @-@ Filipino seafarers were Panama , the Bahamas , Liberia and the Marshall Islands . That year , more than 150 @,@ 000 Filipino sailors were employed by these four flags of convenience . In a 2006 study by the United States Maritime Administration ( <unk> ) , sailors from the People 's Republic of China comprised over 40 % of the crews on surveyed ships flying the Panamanian flag , and around 10 % of those flying the Liberian flag . The <unk> report referred to both China and the Philippines as " low cost " crewing sources . 
 The seafaring industry is often divided into two employment groups : licensed mariners including deck officers and marine engineers , and mariners that are not required to have licenses , such as able seamen and cooks , but are required to be certified . The latter group is collectively known as unlicensed mariners or ratings . Differences in wages can be seen in both groups , between " high cost " crewing sources such as the United States , and " low cost " sources such as China and The Philippines . However , salaries on flag of convenience ships are still far higher than median salaries of non @-@ seafarers in these countries . 
 For unlicensed mariners , 2009 statistics from the American Bureau of Labor Statistics give median earnings for able and ordinary seamen as US $ 35 @,@ 810 , varying from $ 21 @,@ 640 ( at the 10th percentile ) to $ 55 @,@ 360 ( at the 90th percentile ) . This can be compared with 2006 statistics from the International Labour Organization , giving average yearly earnings for Filipino and Chinese able seamen around $ 2 @,@ 000 to $ 3 @,@ 000 per year ( <unk> per month and <unk> per year ) . Among licensed mariners , American chief engineers earned a median $ 63 @,@ 630 , varying from $ 35 @,@ 030 to $ 109 @,@ 310 while their Filipino counterparts averaged $ 5 @,@ 500 per year ( <unk> per month ) . 
 = = = News stories = = = 
 = = = Fishing references = = = 
 = = = Port state control organizations = = = 
 = The Bartered Bride = 
 The Bartered Bride ( Czech : <unk> <unk> , The Sold Bride ) is a comic opera in three acts by the Czech composer Bedřich Smetana , to a libretto by Karel Sabina . The work is generally regarded as a major contribution towards the development of Czech music . It was composed during the period 1863 – 66 , and first performed at the Provisional Theatre , Prague , on 30 May 1866 in a two @-@ act format with spoken dialogue . 
 Set in a country village and with realistic characters , it tells the story of how , after a late surprise revelation , true love prevails over the combined efforts of ambitious parents and a scheming marriage broker . 
 The opera was not immediately successful , and was revised and extended in the following four years . In its final version , premiered in 1870 , it rapidly gained popularity and eventually became a worldwide success . 
 Czech national opera until this time had been represented only by minor , rarely performed works . This opera , Smetana 's second , was part of his quest to create a truly Czech operatic genre . Smetana 's musical treatment made considerable use of traditional Bohemian dance forms such as the polka and furiant , and although he largely avoided the direct quotation of folksong he <unk> created music considered by Czechs to be quintessentially Czech in spirit . 
 The overture , often played as a concert piece independently from the opera , was , unusually , composed before almost any of the other music had been written . 
 After a performance at the Vienna Music and Theatre Exhibition of 1892 , the opera achieved international recognition . It was performed in Chicago in 1893 , London in 1895 and reached New York in 1909 , subsequently becoming the first , and for many years the only , Czech opera in the general repertory . 
 Many of these early international performances were in German , under the title Die <unk> Braut , and the German @-@ language version continues to be played and recorded . A German film of the opera was made in 1932 by Max Ophüls . 
 = = Context = = 
 Until the middle 1850s Bedřich Smetana was known in Prague principally as a teacher , pianist and composer of salon pieces . His failure to achieve wider recognition in the Bohemian capital led him to depart in 1856 for Sweden , where he spent the next five years . During this period he extended his compositional range to large @-@ scale orchestral works in the descriptive style championed by Franz Liszt and Richard Wagner . Liszt was Smetana 's long @-@ time mentor ; he had accepted a dedication of the latter 's Opus 1 : Six Characteristic Pieces for Piano in 1848 , and had encouraged the younger composer 's career since then . In September 1857 Smetana visited Liszt in Weimar , where he met Peter Cornelius , a follower of Liszt 's who was working on a comic opera , Der Barbier von Bagdad . Their discussions centred on the need to create a modern style of comic opera , as a counterbalance to Wagner 's new form of music drama . A comment was made by the Viennese conductor Johann von <unk> to the effect that Czechs were incapable of making music of their own , a remark which Smetana took to heart : " I swore there and then that no other than I should beget a native Czech music . " 
 Smetana did not act immediately on this aspiration . The announcement that a Provisional Theatre was to be opened in Prague , as a home for Czech opera and drama pending the building of a permanent National Theatre , influenced his decision to return permanently to his homeland in 1861 . He was then spurred to creative action by the announcement of a prize competition , sponsored by the Czech patriot Jan von Harrach , to provide suitable operas for the Provisional Theatre . By 1863 he had written The Brandenburgers in Bohemia to a libretto by the Czech nationalist poet Karel Sabina , whom Smetana had met briefly in 1848 . The Brandenburgers , which was awarded the opera prize , was a serious historical drama , but even before its completion Smetana was noting down themes for use in a future comic opera . By this time he had heard the music of Cornelius 's Der Barbier , and was ready to try his own hand at the comic genre . 
 = = Composition history = = 
 = = = Libretto = = = 
 For his libretto , Smetana again approached Sabina , who by 5 July 1863 had produced an untitled one @-@ act sketch in German . Over the following months Sabina was encouraged to develop this into a full @-@ length text , and to provide a Czech translation . According to Smetana 's biographer Brian Large , this process was prolonged and untidy ; the manuscript shows amendments and additions in Smetana 's own hand , and some pages apparently written by Smetana 's wife Bettina ( who may have been receiving dictation ) . By the end of 1863 a two @-@ act version , with around 20 musical numbers separated by spoken dialogue , had been assembled . Smetana 's diary indicates that he , rather than Sabina , chose the work 's title because " the poet did not know what to call it . " The translation " Sold Bride " is strictly accurate , but the more euphonious " Bartered Bride " has been adopted throughout the English @-@ speaking world . Sabina evidently did not fully appreciate Smetana 's intention to write a full @-@ length opera , later commenting : " If I had suspected what Smetana would make of my operetta , I should have taken more pains and written him a better and more solid libretto . " 
 The Czech music specialist John Tyrrell has observed that , despite the casual way in which The Bartered Bride 's libretto was put together , it has an intrinsic " <unk> " , being one of the few in the Czech language written in <unk> ( a stressed syllable followed by an unstressed one ) , matching the natural first @-@ syllable emphasis in the Czech language . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 By October 1862 , well before the arrival of any libretto or plot sketch , Smetana had noted down 16 bars which later became the theme of The Bartered Bride 's opening chorus . In May 1863 he sketched eight bars which he eventually used in the love duet " Faithful love can 't be marred " , and later that summer , while still awaiting Sabina 's revised libretto , he wrote the theme of the comic number " We 'll make a pretty little thing " . He also produced a piano version of the entire overture , which was performed in a public concert on 18 November . In this , he departed from his normal practice of leaving the overture until last . 
 The opera continued to be composed in a piecemeal fashion , as Sabina 's libretto gradually took shape . Progress was slow , and was interrupted by other work . Smetana had become Chorus Master of the Hlahol Choral Society in 1862 , and spent much time rehearsing and performing with the Society . He was deeply involved in the 1864 Shakespeare Festival in Prague , conducting Berlioz 's Romeo et Juliette and composing a festival march . That same year he became music correspondent of the Czech language newspaper <unk> listy . Smetana 's diary for December 1864 records that he was continuing to work on The Bartered Bride ; the piano score was completed by October 1865 . It was then put aside so that the composer could concentrate on his third opera Dalibor . Smetana evidently did not begin the orchestral scoring of The Bartered Bride until , following the successful performance of The Brandenburgers in January 1866 , the management of the Provisional Theatre decided to stage the new opera during the following summer . The scoring was completed rapidly , between 20 February and 16 March . 
 = = Roles = = 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Act 1 = = = 
 A crowd of villagers is celebrating at the church fair ( " Let 's rejoice and be merry " ) . Among them are Mařenka and Jeník . Mařenka is unhappy because her parents want her to marry someone she has never met . They will try to force her into this , she says . Her desires are for Jeník even though , as she explains in her aria " If I should ever learn " , she knows nothing of his background . The couple then declare their feelings for each other in a passionate love duet ( " Faithful love can 't be marred " ) . 
 As the pair leave separately , Mařenka 's parents , <unk> and Krušina , enter with the marriage broker Kecal . After some discussion , Kecal announces that he has found a groom for Mařenka – Vašek , younger son of <unk> Mícha , a wealthy landowner ; the older son , he explains , is a worthless good @-@ for @-@ nothing . Kecal extols the virtues of Vašek ( " He 's a nice boy , well brought up " ) , as Mařenka re @-@ enters . In the subsequent quartet she responds by saying that she already has a chosen lover . Send him packing , orders Kecal . The four argue , but little is resolved . Kecal decides he must convince Jeník to give up Mařenka , as the villagers return , singing and dancing a festive polka . 
 = = = Act 2 = = = 
 The men of the village join in a rousing drinking song ( " To beer ! " ) , while Jeník and Kecal argue the merits , respectively , of love and money over beer . The women enter , and the whole group joins in dancing a furiant . Away from the jollity the nervous Vašek muses over his forthcoming marriage in a stuttering song ( " My @-@ my @-@ my mother said to me " ) . Mařenka appears , and guesses immediately who he is , but does not reveal her own identity . Pretending to be someone else , she paints a picture of " Mařenka " as a treacherous deceiver . Vašek is easily fooled , and when Mařenka , in her false guise , pretends to woo him ( " I know of a maiden fair " ) , he falls for her charms and swears to give Mařenka up . 
 Meanwhile , Kecal is attempting to buy Jeník off , and after some verbal fencing makes a straight cash offer : a hundred florins if Jeník will renounce Mařenka . Not enough , is the reply . When Kecal increases the offer to 300 florins , Jeník pretends to accept , but imposes a condition – no one but Mícha 's son will be allowed to wed Mařenka . Kecal agrees , and rushes off to prepare the contract . Alone , Jeník ponders the deal he has apparently made to barter his beloved ( " When you discover whom you 've bought " ) , wondering how anyone could believe that he would really do this , and finally expressing his love for Mařenka . 
 Kecal summons the villagers to witness the contract he has made ( " Come inside and listen to me " ) . He reads the terms : Mařenka is to marry no one but Mícha 's son . Krušina and the crowd marvel at Jeník 's apparent self @-@ denial , but the mood changes when they learn that he has been paid off . The Act ends with <unk> being denounced by Krušina and the rest of the assembly as a rascal . 
 = = = Act 3 = = = 
 Vašek expresses his confusions in a short , sad song ( " I can 't get it out of my head " ) , but is interrupted by the arrival of a travelling circus . The Ringmaster introduces the star attractions : Esmeralda , the Spanish dancer , a " real Indian " sword swallower , and a dancing bear . A rapid folk @-@ dance , the <unk> , follows . Vašek is entranced by Esmeralda , but his timid advances are interrupted when the " Indian " rushes in , announcing that the " bear " has collapsed in a drunken stupor . A replacement is required . Vašek is soon persuaded to take the job , egged on by Esmeralda 's flattering words ( " We 'll make a pretty thing out of you " ) . 
 The circus folk leave . <unk> 's parents – Mícha and <unk> – arrive , with Kecal . Vašek tells them that he no longer wants to marry Mařenka , having learned her true nature from a beautiful , strange girl . They are horrified ( " He does not want her – what has happened ? " ) . Vašek runs off , and moments later Mařenka arrives with her parents . She has just learned of Jeník 's deal with Kecal , and a lively ensemble ( " No , no , I don 't believe it " ) ensues . Matters are further complicated when Vašek returns , recognises Mařenka as his " strange girl " , and says that he will happily marry her . In the sextet which follows ( " Make your mind up , Mařenka " ) , Mařenka is urged to think things over . They all depart , leaving her alone . 
 In her aria ( " Oh what grief " ) , Mařenka sings of her betrayal . When Jeník appears , she rebuffs him angrily , and declares that she will marry Vašek . Kecal arrives , and is amused by Jeník 's attempts to pacify Mařenka , who orders her former lover to go . The villagers then enter , with both sets of parents , wanting to know Mařenka 's decision ( " What have you decided , Mařenka ? " ) . As she confirms that she will marry Vašek , Jeník returns , and to great consternation addresses Mícha as " father " . In a surprise identity revelation it emerges that Jeník is Mícha 's elder son , by a former marriage – the " worthless good @-@ for @-@ nothing " earlier dismissed by Kecal – who had in fact been driven away by his jealous stepmother , <unk> . As Mícha 's son he is , by the terms of the contract , entitled to marry Mařenka ; when this becomes clear , Mařenka understands his actions and embraces him . Offstage shouting interrupts the proceedings ; it seems that a bear has escaped from the circus and is heading for the village . This creature appears , but is soon revealed to be Vašek in the bear 's costume ( " Don 't be afraid ! " ) . His antics convince his parents that he is unready for marriage , and he is marched away . Mícha then blesses the marriage between Mařenka and Jeník , and all ends in a celebratory chorus . 
 = = Reception and performance history = = 
 = = = Premiere = = = 
 The premiere of The Bartered Bride took place at the Provisional Theatre on 30 May 1866 . Smetana conducted ; the stage designs were by Josef <unk> and Josef <unk> <unk> produced the opera . The role of Mařenka was sung by the theatre 's principal soprano , Eleonora von Ehrenberg – who had refused to appear in The Brandenburgers because she thought her proffered role was beneath her . The parts of Krušina , Jeník and Kecal were all taken by leading members of the Brandenburgers cast . A celebrated actor , <unk> <unk> , was engaged to play the Ringmaster , a role which involves little singing skill . 
 The choice of date proved unfortunate for several reasons . It clashed with a public holiday , and many people had left the city for the country . It was an intensely hot day , which further reduced the number of people prepared to suffer the discomfort of a stuffy theatre . Worse , the threat of an imminent war between Prussia and Austria caused unrest and anxiety in Prague , which dampened public enthusiasm for light romantic comedy . Thus on its opening night the opera , in its two @-@ act version with spoken dialogue , was poorly attended and indifferently received . Receipts failed to cover costs , and the theatre director was forced to pay Smetana 's fee from his own pocket . 
 Smetana 's friend Josef Srb @-@ <unk> , who was unable to attend the performance himself , canvassed opinion from members of the audience as they emerged . " One praised it , another shook his head , and one well @-@ known musician ... said to me : ' That 's no comic opera ; it won 't do . The opening chorus is fine but I don 't care for the rest . ' " Josef Krejčí , a member of the panel that had judged Harrach 's opera competition , called the work a failure " that would never hold its own . " Press comment was less critical ; nevertheless , after one more performance the opera was withdrawn . Shortly afterwards the Provisional Theatre temporarily closed its doors , as the threat of war drew closer to Prague . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Smetana began revising The Bartered Bride as soon as its first performances were complete . For its first revival , in October 1866 , the only significant musical alteration was the addition of a gypsy dance near the start of Act II . For this , Smetana used the music of a dance from The Brandenburgers of Bohemia . When The Bartered Bride returned to the Provisional Theatre in January 1869 , this dance was removed , and replaced with a polka . A new scene , with a drinking song for the chorus , was added to Act I , and Mařenka 's Act II aria " Oh what grief ! " was extended . 
 So far , changes to the original had been of a minor nature , but when the opera reappeared in June 1869 it had been entirely restructured . Although the musical numbers were still linked by dialogue , the first act had been divided in two , to create a three @-@ act opera . Various numbers , including the drinking song and the new polka , were repositioned , and the polka was now followed by a furiant . A " March of the Comedians " was added , to introduce the strolling players in what was now Act III . A short duet for Esmeralda and the Principal Comedian was dropped . In September 1870 The Bartered Bride reached its final form , when all the dialogue was replaced by recitative . Smetana 's own opinion of the finished work , given much later , was largely dismissive : he described it as " a toy ... composing it was mere child 's play " . It was written , he said " to spite those who accused me of being Wagnerian and incapable of doing anything in a lighter vein . " 
 = = = Later performances = = = 
 In February 1869 Smetana had the text translated into French , and sent the libretto and score to the Paris Opera with a business proposal for dividing the profits . The management of the Paris Opera did not respond . The opera was first performed outside its native land on 11 January 1871 , when Eduard Nápravník , conductor of the Russian Imperial Opera , gave a performance at the Mariinsky Theatre in St Petersburg . The work attracted mediocre notices from the critics , one of whom compared the work unfavourably to the Offenbach genre . Smetana was hurt by this remark , which he felt downgraded his opera to operetta status , and was convinced that press hostility had been generated by a former adversary , the Russian composer Mily Balakirev . The pair had clashed some years earlier , over the Provisional Theatre 's stagings of Glinka 's A Life for the Tsar and Ruslan and Lyudmila . Smetana believed that Balakirev had used the Russian premiere of The Bartered Bride as a means of exacting revenge . 
 The Bartered Bride was not performed abroad again until after Smetana 's death in 1884 . It was staged by the Prague National Theatre company in Vienna , as part of the Vienna Music and Theatre Exhibition of 1892 , where its favourable reception was the beginning of its worldwide popularity among opera audiences . Since the Czech language was not widely spoken , international performances tended to be in German . The United States premiere took place at the Haymarket Theatre , Chicago , on 20 August 1893 . The opera was introduced to the Hamburg State Opera in 1894 by Gustav Mahler , then serving as its director ; a year later a German company brought a production to the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane in London . In 1897 , after his appointment as director of the Vienna State Opera , Mahler brought The Bartered Bride into the Vienna repertory , and conducted regular performances of the work between 1899 and 1907 . Mahler 's enthusiasm for the work was such that he had incorporated a quote from the overture into the final movement of his First Symphony ( 1888 ) . When he became Director of the Metropolitan Opera in New York in 1907 he added the opera to its repertory . The New York premiere , again in German , took place on 19 February 1909 , and was warmly received . The New York Times commented on the excellence of the staging and musical characterisations , and paid particular tribute to " Mr. Mahler " , whose master hand was in evidence throughout . Mahler chose to play the overture between Acts I and II , so that latecomers might hear it . 
 = = = Modern revivals = = = 
 The opera was performed more than one hundred times during Smetana 's lifetime ( the first Czech opera to reach this landmark ) , subsequently becoming a permanent feature of the National Theatre 's repertory . On 9 May 1945 a special performance in memory of the victims of World War II was given at the theatre , four days after the last significant fighting in Europe . 
 In the years since its American premiere The Bartered Bride has entered the repertory of all major opera companies , and is regularly revived worldwide . After several unsuccessful attempts to stage it in France , it was premiered at the Opéra @-@ Comique in Paris in 1928 , sung in French as La Fiancée <unk> . In 2008 the opera was added to the repertoire of the Paris Opera , in a new production staged at the Palais Garnier . 
 In the English @-@ speaking world , recent productions of The Bartered Bride in London have included the Royal Opera House ( ROH ) presentation in 1998 , staged at Sadler 's Wells during the restoration of the ROH 's headquarters at Covent Garden . This production in English was directed by Francesca Zambello and conducted by Bernard Haitink ; it was criticised both for its stark settings and for ruining the Act II entrance of Vašek . It was nevertheless twice revived by the ROH – in 2001 and 2006 , under Charles Mackerras . 
 A New York Metropolitan staging was in 1996 under James Levine , a revival of John Dexter 's 1978 production with stage designs by Josef Svoboda . In 2005 The Bartered Bride returned to New York , at the Juilliard School theatre , in a new production by Eve Shapiro , conducted by Mark Stringer . In its May 2009 production at the Cutler Majestic Theatre , Opera Boston transplanted the action to 1934 , in the small Iowan town of <unk> , once the home of a large Czech settlement . 
 = = Music = = 
 Although much of the music of The Bartered Bride is folk @-@ like , the only significant use of authentic folk material is in the Act II furiant , with a few other occasional glimpses of basic Czech folk melodies . The " <unk> " of the music is further illustrated by the closeness to Czech dance rhythms of many individual numbers . Smetana 's diary indicates that he was trying to give the music " a popular character , because the plot [ ... ] is taken from village life and demands a national treatment . " According to his biographer John Clapham , Smetana " certainly felt the pulse of the peasantry and knew how to express this in music , yet inevitably he added something of himself . " Historian Harold Schonberg argues that " the <unk> of the Bohemian musical language were not in the Western musical consciousness until Smetana appeared . " Smetana 's musical language is , on the whole , one of happiness , expressing joy , dancing and festivals . 
 The mood of the entire opera is set by the overture , a concert piece in its own right , which Tyrrell describes as " a tour de force of the genre , wonderfully spirited & wonderfully crafted . " Tyrrell draws attention to several of its striking features – its extended string fugato , climactic tutti and prominent syncopations . The overture does not contain many of the opera 's later themes : biographer Brian Large compares it to Mozart 's overtures to The Marriage of Figaro and The Magic Flute , in establishing a general mood . It is followed immediately by an extended orchestral prelude , for which Smetana adapted part of his 1849 piano work Wedding Scenes , adding special effects such as bagpipe imitations . 
 Schonberg has suggested that Bohemian composers express melancholy in a delicate , elegiac manner " without the crushing world @-@ weariness and pessimism of the Russians . " Thus , Mařenka 's unhappiness is illustrated in the opening chorus by a brief switch to the minor key ; likewise , the inherent pathos of Vašek 's character is demonstrated by the dark minor key music of his Act III solo . Smetana also uses the technique of musical reminiscence , where particular themes are used as reminders of other parts of the action ; the lilting clarinet theme of " faithful love " is an example , though it and other instances fall short of being full @-@ blown Wagnerian leading themes or <unk> . 
 Large has commented that despite the colour and vigour of the music , there is little by way of characterisation , except in the cases of Kecal and , to a lesser extent , the loving pair and the unfortunate Vašek . The two sets of parents and the various circus folk are all conventional and " penny @-@ plain " figures . In contrast , Kecal 's character – that of a self @-@ important , pig @-@ headed , loquacious bungler – is instantly established by his rapid @-@ patter music . Large suggests that the character may have been modelled on that of the boastful Baron in Cimarosa 's opera Il <unk> <unk> . Mařenka 's temperament is shown in vocal flourishes which include coloratura passages and sustained high notes , while Jeník 's good nature is reflected in the warmth of his music , generally in the G minor key . For Vašek 's dual image , comic and pathetic , Smetana uses the major key to depict comedy , the minor for sorrow . Large suggests that Vašek 's musical stammer , portrayed especially in his opening Act II song , was taken from Mozart 's character Don Curzio in The Marriage of Figaro . 
 = = Film and other adaptations = = 
 A silent film of The Bartered Bride was made in 1913 by the Czech film production studio <unk> . It was produced by Max Urban and starred his wife Andula <unk> . A German @-@ language version of the opera , Die <unk> Braut , was filmed in 1932 by Max Ophüls , the celebrated German director then at the beginning of his film @-@ making career . The screenplay was drawn from Sabina 's libretto by Curt Alexander , and Smetana 's music was adapted by the German composer of film music , Theo <unk> . The film starred the leading Czech opera singer <unk> <unk> in the role of Mařenka ( " Marie " in the film ) , and the German baritone Willi <unk> @-@ <unk> as Jeník ( " Hans " ) . 
 Ophuls constructed an entire Czech village in the studio to provide an authentic background . Following the film 's US release in 1934 , The New York Times commented that it " carr [ ied ] most of the comedy of the original " but was " rather weak on the musical side " , despite the presence of stars such as <unk> . Opera @-@ lovers , the review suggested , should not expect too much , but the work nevertheless gave an attractive portrait of Bohemian village life in the mid @-@ 19th century . The reviewer found most of the acting first @-@ rate , but commented that " the photography and sound reproduction are none too clear at times . " Other film adaptations of the opera were made in 1922 directed by Oldrich <unk> ( Atropos ) , in 1933 , directed by Jaroslav Kvapil , Svatopluk <unk> and Emil <unk> ( <unk> ) , and in 1976 , directed by Václav <unk> ( Barrandov ) . 
 = = List of musical numbers = = 
 The list relates to the final ( 1870 ) version of the opera . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 See The Bartered Bride discography . 
 = Ron Paul = 
 Ronald Ernest " Ron " Paul ( born August 20 , 1935 ) is an American author , physician , and former politician . He served as the U.S. Representative for Texas ' 14th and 22nd congressional districts . He represented the 22nd congressional district from 1976 to 1977 and from 1979 to 1985 , and then represented the 14th congressional district , which included Galveston , from 1997 to 2013 . On three occasions , he sought the presidency of the United States : as the Libertarian Party nominee in 1988 and as a candidate in the Republican primaries of 2008 and 2012 . Paul is a critic of the federal government 's fiscal policies , especially the existence of the Federal Reserve and the tax policy , as well as the military – industrial complex , and the War on Drugs . Paul has also been a vocal critic of mass surveillance policies such as the USA PATRIOT Act and the NSA surveillance programs . Paul was the first chairman of the conservative PAC Citizens for a Sound Economy and has been characterized as the " intellectual godfather " of the Tea Party movement . 
 A native of the Pittsburgh suburb of Green Tree , Pennsylvania , Paul is a graduate of Gettysburg College and the Duke University School of Medicine , where he earned his medical degree . He served as a flight surgeon in the U.S. Air Force from 1963 to 1968 . He worked as an obstetrician @-@ gynecologist from the 1960s to the 1980s . He became the first Representative in history to serve concurrently with a son or daughter in the Senate when his son , Rand Paul , was elected to the U.S. Senate from Kentucky in 2010 . 
 Paul is a Senior Fellow of the Mises Institute , and has been an active writer , publishing on the topics of political and economic theory , as well as publicizing the ideas of economists of the Austrian School such as Murray Rothbard and Ludwig von Mises during his political campaigns . Paul has written many books on Austrian economics and classical liberal philosophy , beginning with The Case for Gold ( 1982 ) and including A Foreign Policy of Freedom ( 2007 ) , Pillars of Prosperity ( 2008 ) , The Revolution : A Manifesto ( 2008 ) , End the Fed ( 2009 ) and Liberty Defined ( 2011 ) . 
 On July 12 , 2011 , Paul announced that he would forgo seeking another term in Congress in order to focus on his presidential bid . On May 14 , 2012 , Paul announced that he would not be competing in any other presidential primaries but that he would still compete for delegates in states where the primary elections have already been held . At the 2012 Republican National Convention , Paul received 190 delegate votes . In January 2013 , Paul retired from Congress but still remains active on college campuses , giving speeches promoting his libertarian vision . 
 = = Early life , education , and medical career = = 
 Ronald Ernest Paul was born on August 20 , 1935 , in Pittsburgh , the son of Howard Caspar Paul ( 1904 – 1997 ) , who ran a small dairy company , and Margaret Paul ( née Dumont ; 1908 – 2001 ) . His paternal grandfather emigrated from Germany , and his paternal grandmother , a devout Christian , was a first @-@ generation German American . 
 As a junior at suburban <unk> High School , he was the 200 meter dash state champion . Paul went to Gettysburg College , where he was also a member of the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity . He graduated with a B.S. degree in Biology in 1957 . 
 Paul earned a Doctor of Medicine degree from Duke University 's School of Medicine in 1961 , and completed his medical internship at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit and his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at Magee @-@ <unk> Hospital in Pittsburgh . Paul served as a flight surgeon in the United States Air Force from 1963 to 1965 and then in the United States Air National Guard from 1965 to 1968 . Paul and his wife then relocated to Texas , where he began a private practice in obstetrics and gynecology . 
 = = Early congressional career ( 1976 – 1985 ) = = 
 While a medical resident in the 1960s , Paul was influenced by Friedrich Hayek 's The Road to Serfdom , which caused him to read other publications by Ludwig von Mises and Ayn Rand . He came to know economists Hans Sennholz and Murray Rothbard well , and credits to them his interest in the study of economics . 
 When President Richard Nixon " closed the gold window " by ending American participation in the Bretton Woods System , thus ending the U.S. dollar 's loose association with gold on August 15 , 1971 , Paul decided to enter politics and became a Republican candidate for the United States Congress . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 In 1974 , incumbent Robert R. Casey defeated him for the 22nd district . President Gerald Ford later appointed Casey to direct the Federal Maritime Commission , and Paul won an April 1976 special election to the vacant office after a runoff . Paul lost the next regular election to Democrat Robert Gammage by fewer than 300 votes ( 0 @.@ 2 % ) , but defeated Gammage in a 1978 rematch , and was reelected in 1980 and 1982 . Gammage underestimated Paul 's popularity among local mothers : " I had real difficulty down in Brazoria County , where he practiced , because he 'd delivered half the babies in the county . There were only two obstetricians in the county , and the other one was his partner . " 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Paul served in Congress three different periods : first from 1976 to 1977 , after he won a special election , then from 1979 to 1985 , and finally from 1997 to 2013 . 
 In his early years , Paul served on the House Banking Committee , where he blamed the Federal Reserve for inflation and spoke against the banking mismanagement that resulted in the savings and loan crisis . Paul argued for a return to the gold standard maintained by the US from 1873 – 1933 , and with Senator Jesse Helms convinced the Congress to study the issue . He spoke against the reinstatement of registration for the military draft in 1980 , in opposition to President Jimmy Carter and the majority of his fellow Republican members of Congress . 
 During his first term , Paul founded the Foundation for Rational Economics and Education ( FREE ) , a non @-@ profit think tank dedicated to promoting principles of limited government and free @-@ market economics . In 1984 , Paul became the first chairman of the Citizens for a Sound Economy ( CSE ) , a conservative political group founded by Charles and David Koch " to fight for less government , lower taxes , and less regulation . " CSE started a Tea Party protest against high taxes in 2002 . In 2004 , Citizens for a Sound Economy split into two new organizations , with Citizens for a Sound Economy being renamed as FreedomWorks , and Citizens for a Sound Economy Foundation becoming Americans for Prosperity . The two organizations would become key players in the Tea Party movement from 2009 onward . 
 Paul proposed term @-@ limit legislation multiple times , while himself serving four terms in the House of Representatives . In 1984 , he decided to retire from the House in order to run for the U.S. Senate , complaining in his House farewell address that " Special interests have replaced the concern that the Founders had for general welfare .... It 's difficult for one who loves true liberty and utterly detests the power of the state to come to Washington for a period of time and not leave a true cynic . " Paul lost the Republican primary to Phil Gramm , who had switched parties the previous year from Democrat to Republican . Another candidate of the senatorial primary was Henry Grover , a conservative former state legislator who had lost the 1972 gubernatorial general election to the Democrat Dolph Briscoe , Jr . 
 On Paul 's departure from the House , his seat was assumed by former state representative Tom DeLay , who would later become House Majority Leader . 
 = = Libertarian Party and ventures = = 
 = = = 1985 – 1997 = = = 
 Following the loss of the 1984 senate race , Paul returned to his obstetrics practice and took part in a number of other business ventures . Along with his former congressional chief of staff , Lew Rockwell , Paul founded a for @-@ profit enterprise , Ron Paul & Associates , Inc . ( RP & A ) in 1984 , with Paul serving as president , Rockwell as vice president , Paul 's wife Carol as secretary , and daughter Lori Pyeatt as treasurer . The company published a variety of political and investment @-@ oriented newsletters , including Ron Paul Freedom Report and Ron Paul Survival Report , and by 1993 was generating revenues in excess of $ 900 @,@ 000 . 
 Paul also co @-@ owned a mail @-@ order coin dealership , Ron Paul Coins , for twelve years with Burt Blumert , who continued to operate the dealership after Paul resumed office in 1996 . Paul spoke multiple times at the American Numismatic Association 's 1988 convention . He worked with his Foundation for Rational Economics and Education on such projects as establishing the National Endowment for Liberty , producing the At Issue public policy series that was broadcast on the Discovery Channel and CNBC , and continuing publication of newsletters . 
 = = = 1988 presidential campaign = = = 
 Paul resigned from the Republican Party in 1987 and launched a bid for the presidency running on the Libertarian Party ticket . His candidacy was seen as problematic because of the party 's long support for freedom of choice on abortions . Native American activist Russell Means emphasized that he was pro @-@ choice on the abortion issue . In a forum held prior to the nomination , Means dismissed the greater funds raised by Paul 's campaign , commenting that Means was receiving " 10 times more press " than the former Congressman and was therefore " 100 times more effective " . 
 In the 1988 presidential election , Paul was on the ballot in 46 states , scoring third in the popular vote with 432 @,@ 179 votes ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) . Paul was kept off the ballot in Missouri , due to what the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch termed a " technicality , " and received votes there only when written in , just as he did in North Carolina . 
 According to Paul , his presidential campaign was about more than obtaining office ; he sought to promote his libertarian ideas , often to school and university groups regardless of vote eligibility . He said , " We 're just as interested in the future generation as this election . These kids will vote eventually , and maybe , just maybe , they 'll go home and talk to their parents . " 
 Paul considered campaigning for President during 1992 , but instead chose to endorse Pat Buchanan that year , and served as an adviser to Buchanan 's Republican presidential primary campaign against incumbent President George H. W. Bush . 
 = = Later congressional career ( 1997 – 2013 ) = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 1996 campaign 
 During 1996 , Paul was re @-@ elected to Congress after a difficult campaign . The Republican National Committee endorsed incumbent Greg Laughlin in the primary ; Paul won with assistance from baseball pitcher , constituent , and friend Nolan Ryan , tax activist and publisher Steve Forbes and conservative commentator Pat Buchanan ( the latter two of whom had had presidential campaigns that year ) . Paul narrowly defeated Democratic attorney Charles " Lefty " Morris in the fall election , despite Morris ' criticism over controversial statements in several newsletters that Paul published . 
 1998 – 2013 
 In 1998 and 2000 , Paul defeated Loy <unk> , a Democratic Bay City , Texas , rice farmer and former Matagorda County judge . In the 2008 Republican primary , he defeated Friendswood city councilman Chris Peden , with over 70 percent of the vote and ran unopposed in the general election . In the 2010 Republican primary , Paul defeated three opponents with 80 percent of the vote . 
 On July 12 , 2011 , Paul announced that he would not seek re @-@ election to the House in order to pursue the 2012 presidential election . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 Legislation 
 Of the 620 bills that Paul had sponsored through December 2011 , over a period of more than 22 years in Congress , only one had been signed into law – a lifetime success rate of less than 0 @.@ 3 % . The sole measure authored by Paul that was ultimately enacted allowed for a federal customhouse to be sold to a local historic preservation society ( H.R. 2121 in 2009 ) . 
 By amending other legislation , he has helped prohibit funding for national identification numbers , funding for federal teacher certification , International Criminal Court jurisdiction over the U.S. military , American participation with any U.N. global tax , and surveillance of peaceful First Amendment activities by citizens . 
 Affiliations 
 Paul was honorary chairman of , and is a member of the Republican Liberty Caucus , a political action committee that describes its goal as electing " liberty @-@ minded , limited @-@ government individuals " . He is an initiating member of the Congressional Rural Caucus , which deals with agricultural and rural issues , and the 140 @-@ member Congressional Wildlife Refuge Caucus . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Paul served on the following committee and subcommittees . 
 Committee on Financial Services 
 Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology ( Chairman ) 
 Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade 
 Committee on Foreign Affairs 
 Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations 
 With the election of the 112th Congress , and a resulting GOP majority in the House , Paul became the chairman of the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology starting in January 2011 . 
 Paul 's congressional career ended on January 3 , 2013 with the swearing in of the 113th Congress . 
 = = 2008 presidential campaign = = 
 = = = 2008 Republican primary campaign = = = 
 Paul formally declared his candidacy for the 2008 Republican nomination on March 12 , 2007 , on C @-@ SPAN . Few major politicians endorsed him , and his campaign was largely ignored by traditional media . However , he attracted an intensely loyal grassroots following , in large part energized by " iconoclastic white men " interacting through internet social media . In May 2007 , shortly after the first televised primary debates , the blogs search engine site <unk> listed Paul 's name as the term most frequently searched for ; and Paul 's campaign claimed that Paul had more YouTube channel subscribers than Barack Obama or any other candidate for president . For a candidate who had had relatively low national name recognition prior to entering the race , Paul did surprisingly well in fundraising , taking in more money than any other Republican candidate in the fourth quarter of 2007 , as the primary season headed into the Iowa caucuses . 
 Despite benefiting from large numbers of campaign contributions from individual donors , and the efforts of tech @-@ savvy supporters determined to keep his name a frequent topic of discussion on the internet , over the course of the campaign Paul was unable to translate the enthusiasm of his core supporters into large enough numbers of actual primary votes to unseat his rivals . 
 Paul came in 5th place in both the January 4 Iowa caucuses ( 10 % of votes cast ) and the January 8 New Hampshire primary ( 8 % ) . With the exception of the Nevada caucuses January 19 , where he came in 2nd ( 14 % ) behind Romney ( 51 % ) , he did little better through the rest of January : Michigan 4th ( 6 % ) , South Carolina 5th ( 4 % ) , Florida 5th ( 3 % ) . On <unk> , February 5 , he placed 4th in almost every state , generally taking in a mere 3 – 6 % of the votes although he did better in the northern states of North Dakota ( 21 % , 3rd place ) and Montana ( 25 % , 2nd place ) . 
 By March , front @-@ runner John McCain had secured enough pledged delegates to guarantee that he would win the nomination , and Romney and Huckabee had both formally withdrawn from the race . Paul , who had won no state primaries , knew that it was now mathematically impossible for him to win the nomination , as he had captured only 20 – 40 pledged delegates compared to more than 1 @,@ 191 for McCain , yet he refused to concede the race and said that it was unlikely that he would ultimately endorse McCain . Over the next few weeks , Paul 's supporters clashed with establishment Republicans at several county and state party conventions over state party rules , the party platforms , and selection of delegates for the national convention . In one of the more dramatic moments , Nevada 's state party leaders , outmaneuvered by Paul supporters at the state nominating convention , resorted to the highly unusual measure of prematurely and abruptly shutting down the convention before selecting national delegates , with a plan to reconvene at a later date . 
 On June 12 , 2008 , Paul finally withdrew his bid for the Republican nomination . He later said that one of the reasons he did not run in the general election as a third @-@ party candidate , after losing the primaries , was that , as a concession to gain ballot access in certain states , he had signed legally binding agreements to not run a third @-@ party campaign if he lost the primary . Some of the $ 4 million remaining campaign contributions was invested into the new political action and advocacy group called Ron Paul 's Campaign for Liberty . 
 = = = Refusal to endorse the Republican nominee = = = 
 At a September 10 , 2008 , press conference , Paul announced his general support of four third @-@ party candidates : Cynthia McKinney ( Green Party ) ; Bob Barr ( Libertarian Party ) ; Chuck Baldwin ( Constitution Party ) ; and Ralph Nader ( independent ) . He said that each of them had pledged to adhere to a policy of balancing budgets , bringing the troops home , defending privacy and personal liberties , and investigating the Federal Reserve . Paul also said that under no circumstances would he be endorsing either of the two main parties ' candidates ( McCain – Republican Party , or Obama – Democratic Party ) because there were no real differences between them , and because neither of them , if elected , would seek to make the fundamental changes in governance that were necessary . He urged instead that , rather than contribute to the “ charade ” that the two @-@ party election system had become , the voters support the third @-@ party candidates as a protest vote , to force change in the election process . Later that same day , Paul gave a televised interview with Nader saying much the same again . 
 Two weeks later , " shocked and disappointed " that Bob Barr ( the Libertarian nominee ) had pulled out of attending the press conference at the last minute and had admonished Paul for remaining neutral and failing to say which specific candidate Paul would vote for in the general election , Paul released a statement saying that he had decided to endorse Chuck Baldwin , the Constitution Party candidate , for president . 
 Paul withdrew from active campaigning in the last weeks of the primary election period . He received 42 @,@ 426 votes , or 0 @.@ 03 % of the total cast , in the general election . 
 = = 2012 presidential campaign = = 
 = = = 2012 Republican primary campaign = = = 
 Paul won several early straw polls for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination and in late April 2011 , he formed an official exploratory committee . He participated in the first Republican presidential debate on May 5 , 2011 and on May 13 , 2011 , Paul formally announced his candidacy in an interview on ABC 's Good Morning America . He placed second in the 2011 Ames Straw Poll , missing first by 0 @.@ 9 % . 
 In December 2011 , with Paul 's increased support , the controversy over racist and homophobic statements in several Ron Paul newsletters in the 1980s and early 1990s once again gained media attention . During this time Paul supporters asserted that he was continually ignored by the media despite his significant support , citing examples of where television news shows would fail to mention Paul in discussions of the Republican presidential hopefuls even when he was polling second . 
 Ron Paul ’ s presidential campaign paid former Iowa state senator Kent Sorenson $ 73 @,@ 000 to switch his support from Rep. Michele Bachmann to Paul . In court papers filed in August 2014 , Sorenson said that he had been paid by both presidential campaigns for his endorsement and plead guilty to criminal charges stemming from the incident . 
 Paul came in third in the Iowa Republican Caucus held on January 3 , 2012 . Out of a turnout of 121 @,@ 503 votes , Paul took 26 @,@ 036 ( 21 % ) of the certified votes . Rick Santorum and Mitt Romney finished in a virtual tie for first place with 25 % each , although Ron Paul had ultimately won Iowa at the Republican National Convention gathering 22 delegates to Mitt Romney 's 5 . In the New Hampshire Primary held on January 10 , 2012 , Paul received 23 % of the votes and came in second after Romney 's 39 % . 
 Paul 's results then declined , despite the withdrawal of candidates Michele Bachmann , Jon Huntsman and Rick Perry . He had fourth @-@ place finishes in the next two primaries , on January 21 in South Carolina ( with 13 % of the vote ) and on January 31 in Florida ( where he received 7 % of the vote . ) 
 On February 4 , Paul finished third in Nevada with 18 @.@ 8 % of the vote . Three non @-@ binding primaries were held on February 7 ; Paul took 3rd place in Colorado and Missouri with 13 % and 12 % of the vote respectively . He fared better in Minnesota with 27 % , finishing second to Rick Santorum . 
 On May 14 , Paul 's campaign announced that due to lack of funds ( though despite financial backing from financiers Peter Thiel and Mark <unk> ) he would no longer actively campaign for votes in the 11 remaining primary states , including Texas and California , that had not yet voted . He would , however , continue to seek to win delegates for the national party convention in the states that had already voted . 
 In June , a group of 132 supporters of Paul , demanding the freedom as delegates to the upcoming Republican party national convention to cast votes for Paul , filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court against the Republican National Committee and 55 state and territorial Republican party organizations for allegedly coercing delegates to choose Mitt Romney as the party ’ s presidential nominee . The suit alleged that there had been “ a systematic campaign of election fraud at state conventions , ” employing rigging of voting machines , ballot stuffing , and falsification of ballot totals . The suit further pointed to incidents at state conventions , including acts of violence and changes in procedural rules , allegedly intended to deny participation of Paul supporters in the party decision @-@ making and to prevent votes from being cast for Paul . An attorney representing the complainants said that Paul campaign advisor Doug Wead had voiced support for the legal action . Paul himself told CNN that although the lawsuit was not a part of his campaign ’ s strategy and that he had not been advising his supporters to sue , he was not going to tell his supporters not to sue , if they had a legitimate argument . “ If they ’ re not following the rules , you have a right to stand up for the rules . I think for the most part these winning caucuses that we 've been involved in we have followed the rules . And the other side has at times not followed the rules . ” 
 = = = Republican National convention = = = 
 Paul declined to speak at the Republican National Convention as a matter of principle , saying that the convention planners had demanded that his remarks be vetted by the Romney campaign and that he make an unqualified endorsement of Romney . Paul had felt that " It wouldn ’ t be my speech .... That would undo everything I ’ ve done in the last 30 years . I don ’ t fully endorse him for president . ” Many of Paul 's supporters and delegates walked out of the convention in protest over rules adopted by the convention that reduced their delegate count and that would make it harder for non @-@ establishment candidates to win the party 's nomination in future elections . Supporters and media commentators had noted that the delegations from states where Paul had had the most support were given the worst seats in the convention hall , while delegations from regions with no electoral votes , such as the Northern Mariana Islands , American Samoa , and Puerto Rico , were given prime seats at the front . 
 = = = Refusal to endorse the Republican nominee = = = 
 As in 2008 , in 2012 Paul ultimately refused to endorse the ticket selected by the Republican Party . He said that there was no essential difference between Romney and his Democratic opponent , President Obama , on the most critical policies : " I 've been in this business a long time and believe me there is essentially no difference from one administration to another no matter what the platforms .... The foreign policy stays the same , the monetary policy stays the same , there ’ s no proposal for any real cuts and both parties support it . " 
 Paul received 26 @,@ 204 write @-@ in votes or 0 @.@ 02 % of the total cast in the election . 
 = = Political party identification = = 
 Throughout his entire tenure in Congress , Paul has represented his district as a member of the Republican Party . However , he has frequently taken positions in direct opposition to the other members and the leadership of the party , and he has sometimes publicly questioned whether he really belonged in the party . 
 Paul voted for Dwight Eisenhower for president in 1956 when he was 21 years old . He had been a lifelong supporter of the Republican Party by the time he entered politics in the mid @-@ 1970s . He was one of the first elected officials in the nation to support Ronald Reagan 's presidential campaign , and he actively campaigned for Reagan in 1976 and 1980 . After Reagan 's election in 1980 , Paul quickly became disillusioned with the Reagan administration 's policies . He later recalled being the only Republican to vote against Reagan budget proposals in 1981 , aghast that " in 1977 , Jimmy Carter proposed a budget with a $ 38 billion deficit , and every Republican in the House voted against it . In 1981 , Reagan proposed a budget with a $ 45 billion deficit – which turned out to be $ 113 billion – and Republicans were cheering his great victory . They were living in a storybook land . " He expressed his disgust with the political culture of both major parties in a speech delivered in 1984 upon resigning from the House of Representatives to prepare for a ( failed ) run for the Senate , and he eventually apologized to his Libertarian friends for having supported Reagan . 
 By 1987 , Paul was ready to sever all ties to the Republican Party , as he explained in a blistering resignation letter : " Since [ 1981 ] Ronald Reagan and the Republican Party have given us skyrocketing deficits , and astoundingly a doubled national debt . How is it that the party of balanced budgets , with control of the White House and Senate , accumulated red ink greater than all previous administrations put together ? … There is no credibility left for the Republican Party as a force to reduce the size of government . That is the message of the Reagan years . " A month later he announced he would seek the 1988 Libertarian Party nomination for president . 
 During the 1988 campaign , Paul called Reagan " a dramatic failure " and complained that " Reagan 's record is disgraceful . He starts wars , breaks the law , supplies terrorists with guns made at taxpayers ' expense and lies about it to the American people . " Paul predicted that " the Republicans are on their way out as a major party , " and he said that , although registered as a Republican , he had always been a Libertarian at heart . 
 Paul returned to his private medical practice and managing several business ventures after losing the 1988 election ; but by 1996 , he was ready to return to politics , this time running on the Republican Party ticket again . He said that he had never read the entire Libertarian platform when he ran for president as a Libertarian in 1988 , and that " I worked for the Libertarians on my terms , not theirs . " He added that in terms of a political label he preferred to call himself " a constitutionalist . In Congress I took an oath to uphold the Constitution , not the ( Republican ) platform . " 
 When he lost the Republican Party presidential primary election in 2008 , Paul criticized the two major political parties , saying that there was no real difference between the parties and that neither of them truly intended to challenge the status quo . He refused to endorse the Republican Party 's nominee for president , John McCain , and lent his support to third @-@ party candidates instead . 
 In 2012 presidential campaign , during which he acknowledged it was unlikely that he would win the Republican Party nomination , Paul again asserted that he was participating in the Republican Party on his own terms , trying to persuade the rest of the party to move toward his positions rather than joining in with theirs . He expressed doubt that he would support any of his rivals should they win the nomination , warning that , “ If the policies of the Republican Party are the same as the Democrat Party and they don 't want to change anything on foreign policy , they don 't want to cut anything , they don 't want to audit the Fed and find out about monetary policy , they don 't want to have actual change in government , that is a problem for me . " On that same theme he said in another interview , " I would be reluctant to jump on board and tell all of the supporters that have given me trust and money that all of a sudden , I 'd say , [ all ] we 've done is for naught . So , let 's support anybody at all … even if they disagree with everything that we do . " 
 In July 2015 , The Washington Times reported that Paul had changed his party affiliation to Libertarian . 
 = = Political positions = = 
 Paul has been described as conservative and libertarian . According to University of Georgia political scientist Keith Poole , Paul had the most conservative voting record of any member of Congress from 1937 to 2002 , and is the most conservative of the candidates that had sought the 2012 Republican nomination for president , on a scale primarily measuring positions on the role of government in managing the economy – not positions on social issues or foreign policy matters . Other analyses , in which key votes on domestic social issues and foreign policy factor more heavily , have judged Paul much more moderate . The National Journal , for instance , rated Paul only the 145th most conservative member of the House of Representatives ( out of 435 ) based on votes cast in 2010 . 
 The foundation of Paul 's political philosophy is the conviction that " the proper role for government in America is to provide national defense , a court system for civil disputes , a criminal justice system for acts of force and fraud , and little else . " He has been nicknamed " Dr. No , " reflecting both his medical degree and his insistence that he will " never vote for legislation unless the proposed measure is expressly authorized by the Constitution . " 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Paul 's foreign policy of <unk> made him the only 2008 Republican presidential candidate to have voted against the Iraq War Resolution in 2002 . He advocates withdrawal from the United Nations , and from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , for reasons of maintaining strong national sovereignty . 
 He voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists in response to the September 11 attacks , but suggested war alternatives such as authorizing the president to grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal targeting specific terrorists . An opponent of the Iraq War and potential war with Iran , he has also criticized neoconservatism and U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East , arguing that both inadvertently cause terrorist reprisals against Americans , such as the 9 / 11 attacks . Paul has stated that " Israel is our close friend " and that it is not the place of the United States to " dictate how Israel runs her affairs " . 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 Paul endorses constitutional rights , such as the right to keep and bear arms , and habeas corpus for political detainees . He opposes the Patriot Act , federal use of torture , presidential autonomy , a national identification card , warrantless domestic surveillance , and the draft . Paul also believes that the notion of the separation of church and state is currently misused by the court system : " In case after case , the Supreme Court has used the infamous ' separation of church and state ' metaphor to uphold court decisions that allow the federal government to intrude upon and deprive citizens of their religious liberty . " 
 Sometime within the same month but much after the event of authorities executing a lock @-@ down in sequence to the April 2013 Boston Marathon bombing , Paul commented on the tactics used by governing forces into a harsh criticism that he has written as a " military @-@ style occupation of an American city " . 
 = = = Economic = = = 
 Paul is a proponent of Austrian School economics ; he has authored six books on the subject , and displays pictures of Austrian School economists Friedrich Hayek , Murray Rothbard , and Ludwig von Mises ( as well as of President Grover Cleveland ) on his office wall . He regularly votes against almost all proposals for new government spending , initiatives , or taxes ; he cast two thirds of all the lone negative votes in the House during a 1995 – 1997 period . 
 He has pledged never to raise taxes and states he has never voted to approve a budget deficit . Paul believes that the country could abolish the individual income tax by scaling back federal spending to its fiscal year 2000 levels ; financing government operations would be primarily by excise taxes and non @-@ protectionist tariffs . He endorses eliminating most federal government agencies , terming them unnecessary bureaucracies . 
 On April 15 , 2011 , Paul was one of four Republican members of Congress to vote against Rep. Paul Ryan 's budget proposal , known as " The Path to Prosperity . " 
 Paul has consistently warned of hyperinflation as far back as 1981 . While Paul believes the longterm decrease of the U.S. dollar 's purchasing power by inflation is attributable to its lack of any commodity backing , he does not endorse a " return " to a gold standard – as the U.S. government has established during the past – but instead prefers to eliminate legal tender laws and to remove the sales tax on gold and silver , so that the market may freely decide what type of monetary standard ( s ) there shall be . Since 1999 , he has introduced bills into each Congress seeking to eliminate the Federal Reserve System in a single year . 
 He endorses free trade , rejecting membership in the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) and the World Trade Organization as " managed trade " . 
 = = = Environmental = = = 
 As a free @-@ market environmentalist , he asserts private property rights in relation to environmental protection and pollution prevention . He called global warming a hoax in a 2009 Fox Business interview , saying , " You know , the greatest hoax I think that has been around in many , many years if not hundreds of years has been this hoax on the environment and global warming . " He acknowledges there is clear evidence of rising temperatures in some parts of the globe , but says that temperatures are cooling in other parts . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Paul has stated that " The government shouldn 't be in the medical business . " He pushes to eliminate federal involvement with and management of health care , which he argues would allow prices to decrease due to the fundamental dynamics of a free market . He also opposes federal government influenza inoculation programs . 
 = = = Immigration = = = 
 Paul endorses increased border security and opposes welfare for illegal aliens , birthright citizenship and amnesty ; he voted for the Secure Fence Act of 2006 . 
 = = = Ballots and voting = = = 
 He is an outspoken proponent of increased ballot access for third @-@ party candidates . He has sought to repeal the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 , also known as the Motor Voter law . 
 = = = Secession = = = 
 Paul has stated that secession from the United States " is a deeply American principle " and that " If the possibility of secession is completely off the table there is nothing to stop the federal government from continuing to encroach on our liberties and no recourse for those who are sick and tired of it . " Paul wrote the remarks in a post on his Congressional website in one of his final public statements as a member of Congress , noting that many petitions had been submitted to the White House calling for secession in the wake of the November 2012 election . 
 = = = Social issues = = = 
 He terms himself " strongly pro @-@ life " , " an unshakable foe of abortion " , and believes regulation or ban on medical decisions about maternal or fetal health is " best handled at the state level " . His abortion @-@ related legislation , such as the Sanctity of Life Act , is intended to negate Roe v. Wade and to get " the federal government completely out of the business of regulating state matters . " Paul says his years as an obstetrician led him to believe life begins at conception . 
 Paul opposes the federal War on Drugs , and believes the states should decide whether to regulate or deregulate drugs such as medical marijuana . 
 Citing the Ninth and Tenth Amendments , Paul advocates states ' rights to decide how to regulate social matters not cited directly by the Constitution . He opposes federal regulation of the death penalty ( although he opposes capital punishment ) , of education , and of marriage , and endorsed revising the military 's " don 't ask , don 't tell " policy to concern mainly disruptive sexual behavior ( whether heterosexual or homosexual ) . 
 Paul was critical of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , arguing that it sanctioned federal interference in the labor market and did not improve race relations . He once remarked : " The Civil Rights Act of 1964 not only violated the Constitution and reduced individual liberty ; it also failed to achieve its stated goals of promoting racial harmony and a color @-@ blind society " . Paul opposes affirmative action . 
 = = Newsletters controversy = = 
 Beginning in 1978 , for more than two decades Paul and his associates published a number of political and investment @-@ oriented newsletters bearing his name ( Dr. Ron Paul 's Freedom Report , The Ron Paul Survival Report , the Ron Paul Investment Letter , and the Ron Paul Political Report ) . By 1993 , a business through which Paul was publishing the newsletters was earning in excess of $ 900 @,@ 000 per year . 
 A number of the newsletters , particularly in the period between 1988 and 1994 when Paul was no longer in Congress , contained material that later proved controversial . Topics included on conspiracy theories , anti @-@ government militia movements , and race wars . During Paul 's 1996 congressional election campaign , and his 2008 and 2012 presidential primary campaigns , critics charged that some of the passages reflected racist , anti @-@ Semitic , and homophobic bigotry . In a 1996 interview , Paul did not deny writing the newsletters and defended some of their contents , but specified that he opposes racism . In March 2001 , Paul said he did not write the commentaries , but stopped short of denying authorship in 1996 because his campaign advisers had thought it would be too confusing and that he had to live with the material published under his name . In 2011 Paul 's spokesperson Jesse Benton said Paul had " taken moral responsibility because they appeared under his name and slipped through under his watch " . 
 = = Post @-@ congressional career = = 
 In April 2013 , Paul founded the Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity , a foreign policy think tank that seeks to promote his non @-@ interventionist views . The institute is part of his larger foundation Foundation for Rational Economics and Education . 
 In the same month , he began to offer the Ron Paul Curriculum , a homeschool online curriculum developed by Gary North and taught from a " free market and Christian " perspective ; it is free from grades kindergarten – 5 and available to paid members from 6 – 12 . 
 In June 2013 , Paul criticized the NSA surveillance program and praised Edward Snowden for having performed a " great service to the American people by exposing the truth about what our government is doing in secret " . 
 = = = Ron Paul Channel = = = 
 In 2013 , Paul established the " Ron Paul Channel " , an Internet broadcast . Its slogan is " Turn Off Your TV . Turn On the Truth . " Speaking about the channel , Paul said , " I was at a debate one time a couple years ago , where I didn 't think I got a fair shake . In a two @-@ hour debate , I had 89 seconds . I thought , maybe there 's something wrong with the media . Maybe they 're not covering us fairly . I 'm just using it as a pun , but there ’ s a bit of truth to this . We don 't get a fair shake . The people who believe in liberty and limited government don 't expect it from the ordinary media . " Speaking about his youth appeal , he noted , " They don ’ t sit and watch TV and turn the programs on at seven o 'clock to watch us like that – so I thought the technology was there . The country is ripe for the continuation of this revolution . " 
 In May 2015 , Ron Paul ended all relationships with the Voices of Liberty and the Ron Paul Channel to start a new internet broadcast called the Ron Paul Liberty Report . According to Paul himself , it will not cost a thing , unlike the previous Ron Paul Channel . In the announcement of the ended relationship , Paul said , " But the message I have always tried to deliver over the years has always been the same , and that is spreading the message of liberty . Right now I am very much engaged in doing that through the internet . But , I believe we can do better . Right now , the program has changed to the Ron Paul Liberty Report , and that is what we do , we report on liberty in context of what is going on in daily activity and what is going on in the news . " Paul went on to say that it will be more locally controlled , unlike the previous Ron Paul Channel . Paul continued to say it will be produced out of Texas , instead of California . 
 = = = Spokesman for Stansberry Research = = = 
 In April 2015 , Paul began appearing in infomercials warning about an upcoming financial meltdown as a result of the imminent crash of the world ’ s currencies . He urges listeners to read America 2020 : The Survival Blueprint , a book written by Porter Stansberry . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Paul has been married to Carol ( Carolyn ) Wells since 1957 . They met in 1952 when Wells asked Paul to be her escort to her 16th birthday party . They have five children , who were baptized Episcopalian : Ronald , Lori , Randal , Robert , and Joy . Paul 's son Randal is the junior United States senator from the state of Kentucky . Raised a Lutheran , Paul later became a Baptist . Since 1995 , Carol Paul has published the Ron Paul Family Cookbook , a collection of recipes she and her friends contributed , and which was sold in part to support Ron Paul 's political campaigns . His life and career is the subject of the 2012 film Ron Paul Uprising . 
 Paul and his wife currently reside in Lake Jackson , Texas . 
 = = Publications relating to Ron Paul = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ron Paul 's <unk> : The Man and the Movement He Inspired , by Brian Doherty , 2012 
 = = = Films = = = 
 Ron Paul Uprising , a 2012 film by Wiliam Lewis 
 Brüno , a 2009 film by Sacha Baron Cohen in which Ron Paul has a cameo appearance 
 = = Other contributions = = 
 Belloc , Hilaire ; Chesterton , Cecil ( 2007 ) [ 1911 ] . The Party System . Paul , Ron ( foreword ) . Norfolk , Virginia : IHS Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 11 @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Fortman , Erik ; <unk> , Randy ( 2004 ) . Webs of Power . Paul , Ron ( interview ) . Austin , Texas : Van Cleave Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 2 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Haugen , David M. ; Musser , Susan , eds . ( 2007 ) . Human Embryo Experimentation . Paul , Ron ( Chapter 9 : No form of stem cell research should be federally funded ) . Detroit , Michigan : <unk> Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Haugen , David M. , ed . ( 2007 ) . National Security . Paul , Ron ( Chapter 1 – 7 : The federal debt is a threat to national security ) . Detroit , Michigan : <unk> Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Jaeger , James ; Baehr , Theodore ; Griffin , G. Edward ; Paul , Ron ; Vieira , Edwin ( 2007 ) . Fiat Empire : Why the Federal Reserve <unk> the U.S. Constitution ( DVD ) . Beverly Hills , California : Cornerstone @-@ <unk> Entertainment . OCLC <unk> . 
 Minns , Michael Louis ( 2001 ) . How to Survive the IRS . Paul , Ron ( foreword ) . Fort Lee , NJ : Barricade Books . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 170 @-@ 3 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Paul , Ron ; Hayashi , Terry ; Pardo , Victoriano & Fisher , Edwin ( August 1 , 1969 ) . " Evaluation of Renal Biopsy in Pregnancy <unk> " . Obstetrics and Gynecology ( American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists ) 34 ( 2 ) : 235 – 241 . PMID <unk> . 
 Paul , Ron ( 1999 ) . " Being Pro @-@ Life is Necessary to Defend Liberty " . International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy ( MCB University Press , Ltd ) 19 ( 3 – 4 ) : 11 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1108 / <unk> . ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> . OCLC <unk> . 
 Paul , Ron ; Bartlett , Roscoe et al . ( 2001 ) . The United Nations & the New World Order ( Videotape ) . Brunswick , OH : American Portrait Films , Inc . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 132 @-@ 9 . OCLC <unk> . 
 Pearl , Sandy ; Beutel , Bill ; Alis , Bob ; <unk> , Dave ; Paul , Ron ; <unk> , Ed ( 1980 ) . Born Again ( Videotape ) . Athens , GA : University of Georgia Instructional Resources Center . OCLC <unk> . 
 Skousen , Mark ; Weber , Chris ; <unk> , Michael , eds . ( 1987 ) . The Closing Door . Paul , Ron ( introduction ) . Bethel , Connecticut : Institute for the Preservation of Wealth ( <unk> / <unk> / <unk> 2d ed . 1988 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 03 @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Vieira , Jr . , Edwin ( 1983 ) . Pieces of Eight . Paul , Ron ( foreword ) . Fort Lee , NJ : Sound Dollar Committee . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . OCLC <unk> . 
 von NotHaus , Bernard , ed . ( September 1 , 2003 ) . The Liberty Dollar Solution to the Federal Reserve . Paul , Ron ( Chapter 21 : Abolish the Fed ) . Evansville , Indiana : American Financial Press . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 @-@ 9 . 
 = Deinonychus = 
 Deinonychus ( / <unk> / dy @-@ NON @-@ i @-@ <unk> ; Greek : δεινός , ' terrible ' and <unk> , genitive <unk> ' claw ' ) is a genus of carnivorous dromaeosaurid coelurosaurian dinosaurs , with one described species , Deinonychus antirrhopus . This species , which could grow up to 3 @.@ 4 metres ( 11 ft ) long , lived during the early Cretaceous Period , about 115 – 108 million years ago ( from the mid @-@ Aptian to early Albian stages ) . Fossils have been recovered from the U.S. states of Montana , Utah , Wyoming , and Oklahoma , in rocks of the Cloverly Formation , Cedar Mountain Formation and Antlers Formation , though teeth that may belong to Deinonychus have been found much farther east in Maryland . 
 Paleontologist John Ostrom 's study of Deinonychus in the late 1960s revolutionized the way scientists thought about dinosaurs , leading to the " dinosaur renaissance " and igniting the debate on whether dinosaurs were warm @-@ blooded or cold blooded . Before this , the popular conception of dinosaurs had been one of plodding , reptilian giants . Ostrom noted the small body , sleek , horizontal posture , ratite @-@ like spine , and especially the enlarged raptorial claws on the feet , which suggested an active , agile predator . 
 " Terrible claw " refers to the unusually large , sickle @-@ shaped talon on the second toe of each hind foot . The fossil YPM 5205 preserves a large , strongly curved ungual . In life , archosaurs have a horny sheath over this bone , which extends the length . Ostrom looked at crocodile and bird claws and reconstructed the claw for YPM 5205 as over 120 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long . The species name antirrhopus means " counter balance " , which refers to Ostrom 's idea about the function of the tail . As in other dromaeosaurids , the tail vertebrae have a series of ossified tendons and super @-@ elongated bone processes . These features seemed to make the tail into a stiff counterbalance , but a fossil of the very closely related Velociraptor mongoliensis ( IGM 100 / 986 ) has an articulated tail skeleton that is curved laterally in a long S @-@ shape . This suggests that , in life , the tail could bend to the sides with a high degree of flexibility . In both the Cloverly and Antlers formations , Deinonychus remains have been found closely associated with those of the ornithopod Tenontosaurus . Teeth discovered associated with Tenontosaurus specimens imply they were hunted , or at least scavenged upon , by Deinonychus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Based on the few fully mature specimens , Deinonychus could reach 3 @.@ 4 metres ( 11 @.@ 2 ft ) in length , with a skull length of 410 mm ( 16 @.@ 1 in ) , a hip height of 0 @.@ 87 metres ( 2 @.@ 9 ft ) and a weight of 73 kg ( 161 lb ) , though there is a higher estimate of 100 kg ( 220 lb ) . The skull was equipped with powerful jaws lined with around seventy curved , blade @-@ like teeth . Studies of the skull have progressed a great deal over the decades . Ostrom reconstructed the partial , imperfectly preserved skulls that he had as triangular , broad , and fairly similar to Allosaurus . Additional Deinonychus skull material and closely related species found with good three @-@ dimensional preservation show that the palate was more vaulted than Ostrom thought , making the snout far narrower , while the jugals flared broadly , giving greater stereoscopic vision . The skull of Deinonychus was different from that of Velociraptor , however , in that it had a more robust skull roof , like that of Dromaeosaurus , and did not have the depressed nasals of Velociraptor . Both the skull and the lower jaw had fenestrae ( skull openings ) which reduced the weight of the skull . In Deinonychus , the antorbital fenestra , a skull opening between the eye and nostril , was particularly large . 
 Deinonychus possessed large " hands " ( manus ) with three claws on each forelimb . The first digit was shortest and the second was longest . Each hind foot bore a sickle @-@ shaped claw on the second digit , which was probably used during predation . 
 No skin impressions have ever been found in association with fossils of Deinonychus . Nonetheless , the evidence suggests that the Dromaeosauridae , including Deinonychus , had feathers . The genus Microraptor is both older geologically and more primitive phylogenetically than Deinonychus , and within the same family . Multiple fossils of Microraptor preserve pennaceous , vaned feathers like those of modern birds on the arms , legs , and tail , along with covert and contour feathers . Velociraptor is geologically younger than Deinonychus , but even more closely related ( within the subfamily <unk> , see Classification , below ) . A specimen of Velociraptor has been found with quill knobs on the ulna . Quill knobs are where the follicular ligaments attached , and are a direct indicator of feathers of modern aspect . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Deinonychus antirrhopus is one of the best @-@ known dromaeosaurid species , and is a close relative of the smaller Velociraptor , which is found in younger , Late Cretaceous – age rock formations in Central Asia . The clade they form is called Velociraptorinae . The subfamily name Velociraptorinae was first coined by Rinchen Barsbold in 1983 and originally contained the single genus Velociraptor . Later Phil Currie included most of the dromaeosaurids . Two Late Cretaceous genera , Tsaagan from Mongolia and the North American Saurornitholestes , may also be close relatives , but the latter is poorly known and hard to classify . Velociraptor and its allies are regarded as using their claws more than their skulls as killing tools , as opposed to <unk> like Dromaeosaurus , which have stockier skulls . Phylogenetically , the dromaeosaurids represent one of the non @-@ avialan dinosaur groups most closely related to birds . The cladogram below follows a 2015 analysis by paleontologists Robert DePalma , David Burnham , Larry Martin , Peter Larson , and Robert Bakker , using updated data from the Theropod Working Group . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Fossilized remains of Deinonychus have been recovered from the Cloverly Formation of Montana and Wyoming and in the roughly contemporary Antlers Formation of Oklahoma , in North America . The Cloverly formation has been dated to the late Aptian through early Albian stages of the early Cretaceous , about 115 to 108 Ma . Additionally , teeth found in the Arundel Clay <unk> ( mid @-@ Aptian ) , of the Potomac Formation on the Atlantic Coastal Plain of Maryland may be assigned to the genus . 
 The first remains were uncovered in 1931 in southern Montana near the town of Billings . The team leader , paleontologist Barnum Brown , was primarily concerned with excavating and preparing the remains of the ornithopod dinosaur Tenontosaurus , but in his field report from the dig site to the American Museum of Natural History , he reported the discovery of a small carnivorous dinosaur close to a Tenontosaurus skeleton , " but encased in lime difficult to prepare . " He informally called the animal " <unk> agilis " and made preparations for describing it and having the skeleton , specimen AMNH <unk> , put on display , but never finished this work . Brown brought back from the Cloverly Formation the skeleton of a smaller theropod with seemingly oversized teeth that he informally named " <unk> " . John Ostrom , reviewing this material decades later , realized that the teeth came from Deinonychus , but the skeleton came from a completely different animal . He named this skeleton Microvenator . 
 A little more than thirty years later , in August 1964 , paleontologist John Ostrom led an expedition from Yale University 's Peabody Museum which discovered more skeletal material near Bridger . Expeditions during the following two summers uncovered more than 1 @,@ 000 bones , among which were at least three individuals . Since the association between the various recovered bones was weak , making the exact number of individual animals represented impossible to determine properly , the type specimen ( YPM 5205 ) of Deinonychus was restricted to the complete left foot and partial right foot that definitely belonged to the same individual . The remaining specimens were catalogued in fifty separate entries at Yale 's Peabody Museum of Natural History although they could have been from as few as three individuals . 
 Later study by Ostrom and Grant E. Meyer analyzed their own material as well as Brown 's " <unk> " in detail and found them to be the same species . Ostrom first published his findings in February 1969 , giving all the referred remains the new name of Deinonychus antirrhopus . The specific name " antirrhopus " , from Greek <unk> , means " counterbalancing " and refers to the likely purpose of a stiffened tail . In July 1969 , Ostrom published a very extensive monograph on Deinonychus . 
 Though a myriad of bones was available by 1969 , many important ones were missing or hard to interpret . There were few postorbital skull elements , no femurs , no sacrum , no furcula or sternum , missing vertebrae , and ( Ostrom thought ) only a tiny fragment of a coracoid . Ostrom 's skeletal reconstruction of Deinonychus included a very unusual pelvic bone – a pubis that was trapezoidal and flat , unlike that of other theropods , but which was the same length as the ischium and which was found right next to it . 
 = = = Further findings = = = 
 In 1974 , Ostrom published another monograph on the shoulder of Deinonychus in which he realized that the pubis that he had described was actually a coracoid – a shoulder element . In that same year , another specimen of Deinonychus , MCZ 4371 , was discovered and excavated in Montana by Steven <unk> during a Harvard University expedition headed by Farish Jenkins . This discovery added several new elements : well preserved femurs , pubes , a sacrum , and better ilia , as well as elements of the pes and metatarsus . Ostrom described this specimen and revised his skeletal restoration of Deinonychus . This time it showed the very long pubis , and Ostrom began to suspect that they may have even been a little <unk> like those of birds . 
 A skeleton of Deinonychus , including bones from the original ( and most complete ) AMNH <unk> specimen , can be seen on display at the American Museum of Natural History , with another specimen ( MCZ 4371 ) on display at the Museum of Comparative Zoology at Harvard University . The American Museum and Harvard specimens are from a different locality than the Yale specimens . Even these two skeletal mounts are lacking elements , including the sterna , sternal ribs , furcula , and gastralia . 
 Even after all Ostrom 's work , several small blocks of lime @-@ encased material remained unprepared in storage at the American Museum . These consisted mostly of isolated bones and bone fragments , including the original matrix , or surrounding rock in which the specimens were initially buried . An examination of these unprepared blocks by Gerald Grellet @-@ Tinner and Peter Makovicky in 2000 revealed an interesting , overlooked feature . Several long , thin bones identified on the blocks as ossified tendons ( structures that helped stiffen the tail of Deinonychus ) turned out to actually represent gastralia ( abdominal ribs ) . More significantly , a large number of previously unnoticed fossilized eggshells were discovered in the rock matrix that had surrounded the original Deinonychus specimen . 
 In a subsequent , more detailed report , on the eggshells , Grellet @-@ Tinner and Makovicky concluded that the egg almost certainly belonged to Deinonychus , representing the first dromaeosaurid egg to be identified . Moreover , the external surface of one eggshell was found in close contact with the gastralia suggesting that Deinonychus might have brooded its eggs . This implies that Deinonychus used body heat transfer as a mechanism for egg incubation , and indicates an endothermy similar to modern birds . Further study by Gregory Erickson and colleagues finds that this individual was 13 or 14 years old at death and its growth had plateaued . Unlike other theropods in their study of specimens found associated with eggs or nests , it had finished growing at the time of its death . 
 = = = Implications = = = 
 Ostrom 's description of Deinonychus in 1969 has been described as the most important single discovery of dinosaur paleontology in the mid @-@ 20th century . The discovery of this clearly active , agile predator did much to change the scientific ( and popular ) conception of dinosaurs and opened the door to speculation that dinosaurs may have been warm @-@ blooded . This development has been termed the dinosaur renaissance . Several years later , Ostrom noted similarities between the forefeet of Deinonychus and that of birds , an observation which led him to revive the hypothesis that birds are descended from dinosaurs . Forty years later , this idea is almost universally accepted . 
 Because of its extremely bird @-@ like anatomy and close relationship to other dromaeosaurids , paleontologists hypothesize that Deinonychus was probably covered in feathers . Clear fossil evidence of modern avian @-@ style feathers exists for several related dromaeosaurids , including Velociraptor and Microraptor , though no direct evidence is yet known for Deinonychus itself . When conducting studies of such areas as the range of motion in the forelimbs , paleontologists like Phil Senter have taken the likely presence of wing feathers ( as present in all known dromaeosaurs with skin impressions ) into consideration . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 = = = Predatory behavior = = = 
 Deinonychus teeth found in association with fossils of the ornithopod dinosaur Tenontosaurus are quite common in the Cloverly Formation . Two quarries have been discovered that preserve fairly complete Deinonychus fossils near Tenontosaurus fossils . The first , the Yale quarry in the Cloverly of Montana , includes numerous teeth , four adult Deinonychus and one juvenile Deinonychus . The association of this number of Deinonychus skeletons in a single quarry suggests that Deinonychus may have fed on that animal , and perhaps hunted it . Ostrom and Maxwell have even used this information to speculate that Deinonychus might have lived and hunted in packs . The second such quarry is from the Antlers Formation of Oklahoma . The site contains six partial skeletons of Tenontosaurus of various sizes , along with one partial skeleton and many teeth of Deinonychus . One tenontosaur humerus even bears what might be Deinonychus tooth marks . Brinkman et al . ( 1998 ) point out that Deinonychus had an adult mass of 70 – 100 kilograms , whereas adult <unk> were 1 – 4 metric tons . A solitary Deinonychus could not kill an adult tenontosaur , suggesting that pack hunting is possible . 
 A 2007 study by Roach and Brinkman has called into question the cooperative pack hunting behavior of Deinonychus , based on what is known of modern carnivore hunting and the taphonomy of tenontosaur sites . Modern archosaurs ( birds and crocodiles ) and Komodo dragons display little cooperative hunting ; instead , they are usually either solitary hunters , or are drawn to previously killed carcasses , where much conflict occurs between individuals of the same species . For example , in situations where groups of Komodo dragons are eating together , the largest individuals eat first and will attack smaller Komodos that attempt to feed ; if the smaller animal is killed , it is cannibalized . When this information is applied to the tenontosaur sites , it appears that what is found is consistent with Deinonychus having a <unk> or crocodile @-@ like feeding strategy . Deinonychus skeletal remains found at these sites are from subadults , with missing parts consistent with having been eaten by other Deinonychus . On the other hand , a paper by Li et al. describes track sites with similar foot spacing and parallel trackways , implying gregarious packing behavior instead of uncoordinated feeding behavior . 
 In 2011 , Denver Fowler and colleagues suggested a new method by which Deinonychus and other dromaeosaurs may have captured and restrained prey . This model , known as the " raptor prey restraint " ( RPR ) model of predation , proposes that Deinonychus killed its prey in a manner very similar to extant accipitrid birds of prey : by leaping onto its quarry , pinning it under its body weight , and gripping it tightly with the large , sickle @-@ shaped claws . Like accipitrids , the dromaeosaur would then begin to feed on the animal while still alive , until it eventually died from blood loss and organ failure . This proposal is based primarily on comparisons between the morphology and proportions of the feet and legs of dromaeosaurs to several groups of extant birds of prey with known predatory behaviors . Fowler found that the feet and legs of dromaeosaurs most closely resemble those of eagles and hawks , especially in terms of having an enlarged second claw and a similar range of grasping motion . However , the short metatarsus and foot strength would have been more similar to that of owls . The RPR method of predation would be consistent with other aspects of Deinonychus 's anatomy , such as their unusual jaw and arm morphology . The arms were likely covered in long feathers , and may have been used as flapping stabilizers for balance while atop a struggling prey animal , along with the stiff counterbalancing tail . Its jaws , thought to have had a comparatively weak bite force , might be used for saw motion bites , like the modern Komodo dragon which also has a weak bite force , to finish off its prey if its kicks weren 't powerful enough . 
 = = = = Bite force = = = = 
 Bite force estimates for Deinonychus were first produced in 2005 , based on reconstructed jaw musculature . This study concluded that Deinonychus likely had a maximum bite force only 15 % that of the modern American alligator . A 2010 study by Paul Gignac and colleagues attempted to estimate the bite force based directly on newly discovered Deinonychus tooth puncture marks in the bones of a Tenontosaurus . These puncture marks came from a large individual , and provided the first evidence that large Deinonychus could bite through bone . Using the tooth marks , Gignac 's team were able to determine that the bite force of Deinonychus was significantly higher than earlier studies had estimated by biomechanical studies alone . They found the bite force of Deinonychus to be between 4 @,@ 100 and 8 @,@ 200 newtons , greater than living carnivorous mammals including the hyena , and equivalent to a similarly sized alligator . 
 Gignac and colleagues also noted , however , that bone puncture marks from Deinonychus are relatively rare , and unlike larger theropods with many known puncture marks like Tyrannosaurus , Deinonychus probably did not frequently bite through or eat bone . Instead , they probably used their high bite force in defense or prey capture , rather than feeding . 
 = = = = Limb function = = = = 
 Despite being the most distinctive feature of Deinonychus , the shape and curvature of the sickle claw varies between specimens . The type specimen described by Ostrom in 1969 has a strongly curved sickle claw , while a newer specimen described in 1976 had a claw with much weaker curvature , more similar in profile with the ' normal ' claws on the remaining toes . Ostrom suggested that this difference in the size and shape of the sickle claws could be due to individual , sexual , or age @-@ related variation , but admitted he could not be sure . 
 There is anatomical and trackway evidence that this talon was held up off the ground while the dinosaur walked on the third and fourth toes . 
 Ostrom suggested that Deinonychus could kick with the sickle claw to cut and slash at its prey . Some researchers even suggested that the talon was used to disembowel large ceratopsian dinosaurs . Other studies have suggested that the sickle claws were not used to slash but rather to deliver small stabs to the victim . In 2005 , Manning and colleagues ran tests on a robotic replica that precisely matched the anatomy of Deinonychus and Velociraptor , and used hydraulic rams to make the robot strike a pig carcass . In these tests , the talons made only shallow punctures and could not cut or slash . The authors suggested that the talons would have been more effective in climbing than in dealing killing blows . 
 Ostrom compared Deinonychus to the ostrich and cassowary . He noted that the bird species can inflict serious injury with the large claw on the second toe . The cassowary has claws up to 125 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 9 in ) long . Ostrom cited Gilliard ( 1958 ) in saying that they can sever an arm or disembowel a man . <unk> ( 1999 and 2003 ) studied 241 documented cassowary attacks and found that one human and two dogs had been killed , but no evidence that cassowaries can disembowel or dismember other animals . <unk> use their claws to defend themselves , to attack threatening animals , and in agonistic displays such as the Bowed Threat Display . The <unk> also has an enlarged second toe claw , and uses it to tear apart small prey items for swallowing . In 2011 , a study suggested that the sickle claw would likely have been used to pin down prey while biting it , rather than as a slashing weapon . 
 Biomechanical studies by Ken Carpenter in 2002 confirmed that the most likely function of the forelimbs in predation was grasping , as their great lengths would have permitted longer reach than for most other theropods . The rather large and elongated coracoid , indicating powerful muscles in the forelimbs , further strengthened this interpretation . Carpenter 's biomechanical studies using bone casts also showed that Deinonychus could not fold its arms against its body like a bird ( " avian folding " ) , contrary to what was inferred from the earlier 1985 descriptions by Jacques Gauthier and Gregory S. Paul in 1988 . 
 Studies by Phil Senter in 2006 indicated that Deinonychus forelimbs could be used not only for grasping , but also for clutching objects towards the chest . If Deinonychus had feathered fingers and wings , the feathers would have limited the range of motion of the forelimbs to some degree . For example , when Deinonychus extended its arm forward , the ' palm ' of the hand automatically rotated to an upward @-@ facing position . This would have caused one wing to block the other if both forelimbs were extended at the same time , leading Senter to conclude that clutching objects to the chest would have only been accomplished with one arm at a time . The function of the fingers would also have been limited by feathers ; for example , only the third digit of the hand could have been employed in activities such as probing crevices for small prey items , and only in a position perpendicular to the main wing . Alan <unk> , in a 2001 study of Deinonychus forelimb mechanics , found that even if large wing feathers were present , the grasping ability of the hand would not have been significantly hindered ; rather , grasping would have been accomplished perpendicular to the wing , and objects likely would have been held by both hands simultaneously in a " bear hug " fashion , findings which have been supported by the later forelimb studies by Carpenter and Senter . In a 2001 study conducted by Bruce Rothschild and other paleontologists , 43 hand bones and 52 foot bones referred to Deinonychus were examined for signs of stress fracture ; none were found . The second phalanx of the second toe in the specimen YPM 5205 has a healed fracture . 
 Parsons and Parsons have shown that juvenile and sub @-@ adult specimens of Deinonychus display some morphological differences with the adults . For instance , the arms of the younger specimens were proportionally longer than those of the adults , a possible indication of difference in behavior between young and adults . Another example of this could be the function of the pedal claws . Parsons and Parsons have suggested that the claw curvature ( which Ostrom [ 1976 ] had already shown was different between specimens ) maybe was greater for juvenile Deinonychus , as this could help it climb in trees , and that the claws became straighter as the animal became older and started to live solely on the ground . This was based on the hypothesis that some small dromaeosaurids used their pedal claws for climbing . In a 2015 paper , they reported after further analysis of immature fossils that the open and mobile nature of the shoulder joint might have meant that young Deinonychus were capable of some form of flight . 
 = = = Speed = = = 
 Dromaeosaurids , especially Deinonychus , are often depicted as unusually fast @-@ running animals in the popular media , and Ostrom himself speculated that Deinonychus was fleet @-@ footed in his original description . However , when first described , a complete leg of Deinonychus had not been found , and Ostrom 's speculation about the length of the femur ( upper leg bone ) later proved to have been an overestimate . In a later study , Ostrom noted that the ratio of the femur to the tibia ( lower leg bone ) is not as important in determining speed as the relative length of the foot and lower leg . In modern fleet @-@ footed birds , like the ostrich , the foot @-@ tibia ratio is .95 . In unusually fast @-@ running dinosaurs , like Struthiomimus , the ratio is <unk> , but in Deinonychus the ratio is .48 . Ostrom stated that the " only reasonable conclusion " is that Deinonychus was not particularly fast compared to other dinosaurs , and certainly not as fast as modern flightless birds . 
 The low foot to lower leg ratio in Deinonychus is due partly to an unusually short metatarsus ( upper foot bones ) . The ratio is actually larger in smaller individuals than in larger ones . Ostrom suggested that the short metatarsus may be related to the function of the sickle claw , and used the fact that it appears to get shorter as individuals aged as support for this . He interpreted all these features – the short second toe with enlarged claw , short metatarsus , etc . – as support for the use of the hind leg as an offensive weapon , where the sickle claw would strike downwards and backwards , and the leg pulled back and down at the same time , slashing and tearing at the prey . Ostrom suggested that the short metatarsus reduced overall stress on the leg bones during such an attack , and interpreted the unusual arrangement of muscle attachments in the Deinonychus leg as support for his idea that a different set of muscles was used in the predatory stroke than in walking or running . Therefore , Ostrom concluded that the legs of Deinonychus represented a balance between running adaptations needed for an agile predator , and stress @-@ reducing features to compensate for its unique foot weapon . 
 In his 1981 study of Canadian dinosaur footprints , Richard Kool produced rough walking speed estimates based on several trackways made by different species in the <unk> Formation of British Columbia . Kool estimated one of these trackways , representing the <unk> <unk> gracilis ( which may have been made by Deinonychus ) , to have a walking speed of 10 @.@ 1 kilometers per hour ( 6 miles per hour ) . 
 = = = Eggs = = = 
 The identification , in 2000 , of a probable Deinonychus egg associated with one of the original specimens allowed comparison with other theropod dinosaurs in terms of egg structure , nesting , and reproduction . In their 2006 examination of the specimen , Grellet @-@ Tinner and Makovicky examined the possibility that the dromaeosaurid had been feeding on the egg , or that the egg fragments had been associated with the Deinonychus skeleton by coincidence . They dismissed the idea that the egg had been a meal for the theropod , noting that the fragments were sandwiched between the belly ribs and forelimb bones , making it impossible that they represented contents of the animal 's stomach . In addition , the manner in which the egg had been crushed and fragmented indicated that it had been intact at the time of burial , and was broken by the fossilization process . The idea that the egg was randomly associated with the dinosaur was also found to be unlikely ; the bones surrounding the egg had not been scattered or disarticulated , but remained fairly intact relative to their positions in life , indicating that the area around and including the egg was not disturbed during preservation . The fact that these bones were belly ribs ( gastralia ) , which are very rarely found articulated , supported this interpretation . All the evidence , according to Grellet @-@ Tinner and Makovicky , indicates that the egg was intact beneath the body of the Deinonychus when it was buried . It is possible that this represents brooding or nesting behavior in Deinonychus similar to that seen in the related troodontids and oviraptorids , or that the egg was in fact inside the oviduct when the animal died . 
 Examination of the Deinonychus egg 's microstructure confirms that it belonged to a theropod , since it shares characteristics with other known theropod eggs and shows dissimilarities with ornithischian and sauropod eggs . Compared to other maniraptoran theropods , the egg of Deinonychus is more similar to those of oviraptorids than to those of troodontids , despite studies that show the latter are more closely related to dromaeosaurids like Deinonychus . While the egg was too badly crushed to accurately determine its size , Grellet @-@ Tinner and Makovicky estimated a diameter of about 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 7 in ) based on the width of the pelvic canal through which the egg had to have passed . This size is similar to the 7 @.@ 2 cm diameter of the largest Citipati ( an oviraptorid ) eggs ; Citipati and Deinonychus also shared the same overall body size , supporting this estimate . Additionally , the thicknesses of Citipati and Deinonychus eggshells are almost identical , and since shell thickness correlates with egg volume , this further supports the idea that the eggs of these two animals were about the same size . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 Geological evidence suggests that Deinonychus inhabited a floodplain or <unk> habitat . The paleoenvironment of both the upper Cloverly Formation and the Antlers Formation , in which remains of Deinonychus have been found , consisted of tropical or sub @-@ tropical forests , deltas and lagoons , not unlike today 's Louisiana . Other animals Deinonychus shared its world with include herbivorous dinosaurs such as the armored Sauropelta and the ornithopods Zephyrosaurus and Tenontosaurus . In Oklahoma , the ecosystem of Deinonychus also included the large theropod Acrocanthosaurus , the huge sauropod Sauroposeidon , the crocodilians <unk> and <unk> , and the gar Lepisosteus . If the teeth found in Maryland are those of Deinonychus , then its neighbors would include Astrodon and a nodosaur ( called <unk> ) only known from teeth . The middle portion of the Cloverly Formation ranges in age from 115 ± 10 Ma near the base to 108 @.@ 5 ± 0 @.@ 2 Ma near the top . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Deinonychus were featured prominently in the 1990 and 1995 novels Jurassic Park and The Lost World by Michael Crichton and the film adaptations , directed by Steven Spielberg . However , Crichton and Spielberg chose to use the name Velociraptor for these dinosaurs , rather than Deinonychus . Crichton had met with John Ostrom several times during the writing process to discuss details of the possible range of behaviors and life appearance of Deinonychus . Crichton at one point apologetically told Ostrom that he had decided to use the name Velociraptor in place of Deinonychus for his book , because he felt the former name was " more dramatic " . Despite this , according to Ostrom , Crichton stated that the Velociraptor of the novel was based on Deinonychus in almost every detail , and that only the name had been changed . The Jurassic Park filmmakers followed suit , designing the film 's models based almost entirely on Deinonychus instead of actual Velociraptor , and they reportedly requested all of Ostrom 's published papers on Deinonychus during production . As a result , they portrayed the film 's dinosaurs with the size , proportions , and snout shape of Deinonychus . 
 = Russian battleship Pobeda = 
 Pobeda , ( Russian : <unk> , translit . Victory ) , was the last of the three Peresvet @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the Imperial Russian Navy at the end of the nineteenth century . The ship was assigned to the Pacific Squadron upon completion and based at Port Arthur from 1903 . During the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , she participated in the battles of Port Arthur and the Yellow Sea . Having escaped serious damage in these engagements , Pobeda was sunk by gunfire during the Siege of Port Arthur , and then salvaged by the Japanese and placed into service under the name Suwo ( <unk> ) . 
 Rearmed and re @-@ boilered by the Japanese , Suwo was reclassified by the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) as a coastal defense ship in 1908 and served as a training ship for several years . She was the flagship of the Japanese squadron that participated in the Battle of Tsingtao at the beginning of World War I and continued in that role until she became a gunnery training ship in 1917 . The ship was disarmed in 1922 to comply with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty and probably scrapped around that time . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of the Peresvet class was inspired by the British second @-@ class battleships ( typically faster , but with thinner armor and smaller guns than first @-@ class battleships ) of the Centurion class . The British ships were intended to defeat commerce @-@ raiding armored cruisers like the Russian ships Rossia and Rurik , and the Peresvet class was designed to support the armored cruisers . This role placed a premium on high speed and long range at the expense of heavy armament and armor . 
 Pobeda was 434 feet 5 inches ( 132 @.@ 4 m ) long overall , had a beam of 71 feet 6 inches ( 21 @.@ 79 m ) and a draft of 26 feet 3 inches ( 8 @.@ 0 m ) . Designed to displace 12 @,@ 674 long tons ( 12 @,@ 877 t ) , she was almost 600 long tons ( 610 t ) overweight and displaced 13 @,@ 320 long tons ( 13 @,@ 530 t ) . Her crew consisted of 27 officers and 744 enlisted men . The ship was powered by three vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines using steam generated by 30 Belleville boilers . The engines were rated at 14 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 800 kW ) , using forced draught , and designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Pobeda , however , reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) from 15 @,@ 578 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 617 kW ) during her sea trials in October 1901 . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 060 long tons ( 2 @,@ 090 t ) of coal , which allowed her to steam for 6 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 500 km ; 7 @,@ 100 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of eleven Canet 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , mounted in casemates on the sides of the hull and in the bow , underneath the forecastle . Several smaller guns were carried for defense against torpedo boats . These included twenty 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) QF guns , twenty 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns and eight 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) guns . She was also armed with five 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes , three above water and two submerged . The ship carried 45 mines to be used to protect her anchorage . Pobeda 's waterline armor belt consisted of Krupp cemented armor and was 4 – 9 inches ( 102 – 229 mm ) thick . The armor of her gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 9 in ( 229 mm ) and her deck ranged from 2 to 3 inches ( 51 to 76 mm ) in thickness . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Pobeda ( Victory ) was ordered on 26 April 1898 from the Baltic Works and construction began on 30 May 1898 at the company 's Saint Petersburg shipyard , well before the formal keel @-@ laying ceremony on 21 February 1899 . The ship was launched on 10 May 1900 and towed to Kronstadt on 31 August 1901 for fitting out . She made her machinery trials in October , well before she was completed the next year . She sailed to Reval ( modern Tallinn ) on 1 August to participate in the naval review held there a few days later to commemorate the visit of the German Kaiser , Wilhelm II , to Russia . Pobeda entered service upon completing her artillery trials on October 1902 , although she was not officially accepted until 10 March 1903 , at a cost of 10 @,@ 050 @,@ 000 rubles . She had already sailed from Libau on 13 November 1902 and arrived at Port Arthur on 13 June 1903 for assignment to the Pacific Squadron . 
 = = = Battle of Port Arthur = = = 
 After the Japanese victory in the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 95 , tensions had arisen between Russia and Japan over their ambitions to control both Manchuria and Korea . A further issue was the Russian failure to withdraw its troops from Manchuria in October 1903 , as it had promised . Japan had begun negotiations to ease the situation in 1901 , but the Russian government was slow and uncertain in its replies because it had not yet decided exactly how to resolve the problems . Japan interpreted these as deliberate prevarications designed to buy time to complete the Russian armament programs . The final straws were news of Russian timber concessions in northern Korea and the Russian refusal to acknowledge Japanese interests in Manchuria while continuing to place conditions on Japanese activities in Korea . These led the Japanese government to decide in December 1903 that war was now inevitable . The Pacific Squadron began mooring in the outer harbor at night as tensions with Japan increased , so as to react more quickly to any Japanese attempt to land troops in Korea . 
 On the night of 8 / 9 February 1904 , the IJN launched a surprise attack on the Russian fleet at Port Arthur . Pobeda was not hit in the initial torpedo @-@ boat attack , and sortied the following morning when the Combined Fleet , commanded by Vice Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō , attacked . Tōgō had expected the surprise night attack by his ships to be much more successful than it was , anticipating that the Russians would be badly disorganized and weakened , but they had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the protected cruiser Boyarin , which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russian defenses . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defenses with his main armament and engage the ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a poor decision as the Japanese 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted little damage on the Russian ships , which concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Pobeda was hit once or twice amidships near the waterline , losing two men killed and four wounded , but the shell ( s ) failed to penetrate the ship 's armor and little damage was done . 
 On 22 March , Pobeda joined several other battleships firing indirectly at Japanese ships bombarding Port Arthur 's harbor and hit the Japanese battleship Fuji once , killing seven men . She participated in the action of 13 April , when Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Pacific Squadron , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the five Japanese battleships , he turned back for Port Arthur , and Petropavlovsk struck a mine laid by the Japanese the previous night . The ship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , and Makarov was one of the 677 killed . When Pobeda was returning to port after Petropavlovsk sank , she struck a mine herself , but was able to steam to the harbor under her own power despite an 11 ° list . Her repairs were completed on 9 June although some of her guns were removed during this time to reinforce the defenses of the port . Pobeda lost a total of three 6 @-@ inch , two 75 @-@ millimeter , one 47 @-@ millimeter and four 37 @-@ millimeter guns . She sailed with the rest of the Russian squadron on 23 June in an abortive attempt to reach Vladivostok . The new fleet commander , Vice Admiral Wilgelm Vitgeft , ordered the squadron to return to Port Arthur when it encountered the Japanese fleet shortly before sunset as he did not wish to engage the numerically superior Japanese in a night battle . Pobeda bombarded Japanese positions besieging the port on 28 July . 
 = = = Battle of the Yellow Sea = = = 
 The Japanese bombardment of 9 August , coupled with a direct order from Tsar Nicholas II , forced Vitgeft to make another attempt to reach Vladivostok . The squadron sortied in an attempt to escape to Vladivostok the next morning . At 12 : 25 , it was spotted by Japanese cruisers and intercepted by the Combined Fleet in what became the Battle of the Yellow Sea . Pobeda was third in line during the battle , and was not seriously damaged during the early long @-@ range stage of the action . Around 18 : 00 , two 12 @-@ inch shells from the battleship Asahi penetrated the conning tower of the Russian flagship Tsesarevich , killing Vitgeft and the helmsman , severely wounding the captain , and causing the ship to come to a dead stop after executing a sharp turn . Thinking that this was a maneuver planned by Vitgeft , the Russian battleline started to execute the same turn , causing all of the ships directly behind Tsesarevich , including Pobeda , to maneuver wildly to avoid hitting the stationary flagship . 
 As the Japanese ships continued to pound the Tsesarevich , the battleship Retvizan boldly charged Tōgō 's battleline in an attempt to divert the Japanese shellfire , followed shortly afterward by Peresvet , the flagship of the squadron 's second @-@ in @-@ command , Rear Admiral Prince Pavel Ukhtomsky . The Japanese battleline immediately shifted fire to the oncoming ships , badly damaging both and forcing them to turn away . Ukhtomsky signaled the other Russian ships to follow him back to Port Arthur , but the signal was hard to discern because the flags had to be hung from the bridge railings because Peresvet 's topmasts had been shot away and were only gradually recognized . Although Pobeda was struck by eleven large @-@ caliber hits that killed 4 men and wounded 29 , including one below the waterline , they failed to penetrate her armor and she reached Port Arthur without any difficulties . The hits did , however , knock out one 10 @-@ inch gun and three 75 @-@ millimeter guns . 
 = = = Siege of Port Arthur = = = 
 Returning to Port Arthur on 11 August , the Russian squadron found the city still under siege by the Japanese Third Army led by Baron Nogi Maresuke . The new commander , Rear Admiral Robert N. Viren , decided to use the men and guns of the Pacific Squadron to reinforce the defenses of Port Arthur and even more guns were stripped from the squadron 's ships . This proved to make little difference and Pobeda was struck by several 5 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 150 mm ) and 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch shells on 28 September that did no significant damage . The Japanese bombardment with medium guns continued for the next month and a half and the ship was repeatedly struck , without much effect . Japanese troops were able to seize 203 Hill which overlooked the harbor on 5 December . This allowed the Imperial Japanese Army 's 28 @-@ centimeter ( 11 in ) siege guns to fire directly at the Russian ships ; they hit Pobeda approximately 30 times and sank her in shallow water on 7 December 1904 . Russian attempts to destroy the ship before they surrendered were frustrated because her vital parts were already underwater . 
 = = Japanese career = = 
 Pobeda was refloated by Japanese engineers on 17 October 1905 and was classified as a 1st @-@ class battleship by the IJN . She was renamed as Suwo on 25 October , after the eponymous ancient province . She steamed under her own power to Sasebo Naval Arsenal , where she arrived on 16 December and began temporary repairs . Her reconstruction at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal began in May 1906 and lasted until 10 October 1908 . 
 To improve her stability , Suwo 's forward fighting top was removed . The 6 @-@ inch bow gun was also removed and all of her light guns were replaced by 20 QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns . Two above @-@ water 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes replaced her original torpedo armament and her crew now numbered 791 officers and enlisted men . 
 Suwo was re @-@ designated as a 1st class coastal defense ship on 28 August 1912 and became a training ship for cadets and engineers . Initially assigned to the 1st Standing Squadron when World War I began , she shortly afterwards became the flagship of the 2nd Squadron , commanded by Vice Admiral Kato Sadakichi . The squadron was tasked to blockade the German @-@ owned port of Tsingtao , China , and to cooperate with the Imperial Japanese Army in capturing the city . Tango and the other ships of the squadron , reinforced by the British pre @-@ dreadnought HMS Triumph , bombarded German fortifications throughout the siege until the Germans surrendered on 7 November . Suwo served as flagship of the Second Squadron of the Second Fleet in 1915 – 16 before becoming a gunnery training ship at Yokosuka for the rest of the war . In April 1922 , in compliance with the Washington Naval Treaty , Suwo was disarmed at the Kure Naval Arsenal . While her armor was being removed , the ship capsized on 13 July . She was probably scrapped in 1922 – 23 , but at least one source suggests she was refloated and hulked , serving until being broken up at Kure in 1946 . 
 = M @-@ 35 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 35 is a state trunkline highway in the Upper Peninsula ( UP ) of the US state of Michigan . Running for 128 miles ( 206 km ) in a general north – south direction , it connects the cities of Menominee , Escanaba and Negaunee . The southern section of M @-@ 35 in Menominee and Delta counties carries two additional designations . M @-@ 35 forms a segment of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour , and it is the UP Hidden Coast Recreational Heritage Trail , which is a part of what is now called the Pure Michigan Byways Program . Along the southern section , the highway is the closest trunkline to the Green Bay , a section of Lake Michigan , and is also the shortest route between Menominee and Escanaba . The northern section of the highway turns inland through wooded terrain , connecting rural portions of Delta and Marquette counties . 
 M @-@ 35 is an original state trunkline that was first designated by July 1 , 1919 , originally intended to run from Menominee in the south to near Big Bay in the north , before turning toward L 'Anse to end at Ontonagon . However , the section through the Huron Mountains in northern Marquette and Baraga counties was never built . Automobile pioneer Henry Ford helped halt this construction to gain favor with and membership in the exclusive Huron Mountain Club . Some discontinuous sections were later ceded to local control . The northern segment of the route between Ontonagon and Baraga was retained as a discontinuous segment of the highway ; this northern segment was redesignated as another state trunkline . The northern end was rerouted out of the City of Negaunee into Negaunee Township to avoid mining activity near Palmer . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 35 is primarily a two @-@ lane roadway , with the exception of the nearly 8 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) section between Escanaba and Gladstone . This section is a four @-@ lane divided highway that runs concurrently with US Highway 2 / US Highway 41 ( US 2 / US 41 ) . M @-@ 35 is also listed on the National Highway System along the US 2 / US 41 concurrency . The southern terminus is in the City of Menominee . From there , M @-@ 35 runs northeasterly to the Escanaba area before turning northwesterly to its northern terminus outside of the City of Negaunee in Negaunee Township . 
 = = = Menominee to Gladstone = = = 
 The southern terminus of M @-@ 35 is north of downtown Menominee , at the corner of 10th Street ( US 41 ) and North Shore Drive . It is a Y @-@ shaped intersection near John <unk> Park . This park sits on 50 acres ( 20 ha ) of land , and it was donated to the City of Menominee by German – American brewer John <unk> in 1907 . M @-@ 35 leads northeast from the intersection before turning north to head out of town . The highway runs northeasterly following the shoreline of the Green Bay , toward Escanaba . M @-@ 35 between Menominee and Gladstone forms part of the Lake Michigan Circle Tour . 
 On August 26 , 2007 , the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) announced that this section of M @-@ 35 was also designated the UP Hidden Coast Recreational Heritage Trail running for 64 miles ( 103 km ) between Menominee and Gladstone . As a part of the Pure Michigan Byway , M @-@ 35 passes the mouths of the Cedar and Bark rivers . Wells State Park is located on M @-@ 35 in Cedar River and Fuller Park is at the mouth of the Bark River . MDOT 's press release states : 
 The Heritage Route passes through both Delta and Menominee counties on the western shoreline of Lake Michigan in the central Upper Peninsula , and features parks , waterways , forests , trails , attractions , boat launches , harbors and campgrounds . Suggested stops range from cultural centers and modern entertainment , to historical sites and natural attractions . 
 M @-@ 35 is the shortest state trunkline highway between Menominee and Escanaba . Under American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) guidelines , US Highways are to follow the most direct path between two locations , but US 41 runs inland and M @-@ 35 goes more directly up the Lake Michigan shoreline . According to the 2007 MDOT State Highway Map , the US 41 route runs for 65 miles ( 105 km ) versus 55 miles ( 89 km ) for M @-@ 35 . The original map for the US Highway System shows US 41 continuing north from Powers on a direct line to Marquette . This routing would be more direct than the current US 41 routing , but has not been built . 
 At the Menominee – Delta county line , M @-@ 35 passes from the Central to the Eastern Time Zone . After passing the south side of Escanaba , M @-@ 35 runs into town on Lake Shore Drive , passing to the south and east of the Delta County Airport before turning onto Lincoln Road . Just west of downtown , US 2 / US 41 join M @-@ 35 at the intersection of Ludington Street and Lincoln Road . Ludington and Lincoln form the east – west and north – south axes respectively of the Escanaba street numbering grid . From these two streets , the east – west avenues and north – south streets are numbered in a grid in the City of Escanaba . US 2 / US 41 enter Escanaba from the west along Ludington Street , turning north along Lincoln Road , joining M @-@ 35 . Here , M @-@ 35 joins the National Highway System , which is a road system important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 From Escanaba , M @-@ 35 runs concurrently with US 2 and US 41 to Gladstone , where M @-@ 35 logs its highest average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) counts . The 2012 AADT figures show that 14 @,@ 744 vehicles use the highway per day on a segment in north Escanaba . Between the two cities , US 2 / US 41 / M @-@ 35 crosses the Escanaba River near the mouth just south of the paper mill . North of the Escanaba , the highway follows the shoreline of Little Bay de Noc to Gladstone . M @-@ 35 separates from US 2 / US 41 at an intersection with 4th Avenue North in Gladstone . This also marks the end of the National Highway System , Lake Michigan Circle Tour and Pure Michigan Byway designations on M @-@ 35 . 
 = = = Gladstone to Negaunee = = = 
 M @-@ 35 turns northwesterly in Gladstone through northern Delta County and southern Marquette County and crosses the Days River in Brampton . From Perkins north , M @-@ 35 runs parallel to the Lake Superior & Ishpeming rail line between the iron mines of Marquette County and Escanaba . The station of Maple Ridge was located in the community of Rock along this line . M @-@ 35 crosses into Marquette County in the unincorporated location of McFarland and crosses the rail line before reaching the Little Lake in the community of the same name . The highway runs east – west through Little Lake to Gwinn . 
 Built as a company town by the Cleveland @-@ Cliffs Iron Company , Gwinn is listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the " Gwinn Model Town Historic District , Forsyth Township , Marquette County , Michigan " . M @-@ 35 follows Stephenson Avenue through the neighborhood of New Swanzy westward to the community of Gwinn . Inside Gwinn , the highway follows Pine Street northwest , passing through the downtown and into residential areas along Pine and Iron streets . 
 M @-@ 35 runs northwest of Gwinn to Palmer along the outskirts of Cleveland @-@ Cliffs ' Empire Mine , where large piles of waste rock from the mining operations tower over the roadway . According to MDOT , the segment through Palmer logged the highway 's lowest AADT , only 487 vehicles per day , in 2012 . North of Palmer , M @-@ 35 runs past Goose Lake to end in Negaunee Township . The northern terminus is 3 @.@ 6 miles ( 5 @.@ 8 km ) east of Negaunee , just east of the former Marquette County Airport and the studios of WLUC @-@ TV on US 41 / M @-@ 28 . 
 = = History = = 
 The first path along part of the modern M @-@ 35 roadway was the Sault and Green Bay Trail , an old Native American trail , between Menominee and Escanaba . This trail continued eastward from Escanaba to Sault Ste . Marie and southerly to Green Bay , Wisconsin . It was a narrow path of approximately 12 – 18 inches ( 30 – 50 cm ) in width , wide enough to permit single @-@ file traffic . 
 When designated by July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 35 was to run from M @-@ 12 / M @-@ 15 ( modern US 2 / US 41 ) at Gladstone in the south to Palmer before terminating in Negaunee at M @-@ 15 ( modern US 41 ) . Most maps showed M @-@ 35 continuing north to L 'Anse . At the time of M @-@ 35 's creation , another designation , M @-@ 91 , was assigned to a highway from Menominee northward to Cedar River . By 1930 , M @-@ 35 was extended southerly along US 2 / US 41 from Gladstone to Escanaba . From there , M @-@ 35 continued as a new highway along the Green Bay shoreline to Cedar River and supplanted M @-@ 91 . 
 = = = Huron Mountains = = = 
 In 1919 , the State Department of Highways , forerunner to today 's MDOT , designated a scenic shoreline trunkline to run north from Negaunee to Skanee and L 'Anse by way of Big Bay . The highway would continue from the L 'Anse and Baraga area to eventually end at Ontonagon at an intersection with M @-@ 64 . Local Upper Peninsula historian Fred Rydholm summarized the routing planned in 1925 as extending " ... in a northwesterly direction , across the Dead River , over the Panorama Hills , then west past the Elm Creek swamp , along the south side of Burnt Mountain , across the Cedar Creek , the Cliff Stream and out past Cliff Lake to Skanee and L 'Anse " . This highway was designated as an extension of M @-@ 35 , which ended in downtown Negaunee . Work was completed on a significant portion of the route in Marquette County by 1926 . M @-@ 35 was routed east along M @-@ 15 toward Marquette before turning north @-@ northwesterly toward Big Bay . This section of roadway follows the modern County Road 510 ( CR 510 ) in Marquette County . Similar work was completed in Baraga County connecting L 'Anse and Skanee by 1932 . 
 Construction on the two ends left the center portion through the Huron Mountains unfinished and shown on state maps as a dashed line marked " impassable " . The section not included in CR 510 , with guard rails and cement culverts has been called " Blind 35 " since . 
 = = = The Steel Bridge = = = 
 One of the first tasks for the State Highway Department was bridging the Dead River in Negaunee Township , three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of US 41 . The state solved the problem by buying a bridge in Pennsylvania , where bridges of this design were more common . MDOT describes the bridge as : 
 ... a rare Pennsylvania through truss highway bridge , particularly because of the length [ 271 feet or 83 meters ] of this single span . It was purchased by the State Highway Department in 1919 , moved from an unspecified Allegheny River site , probably considerably upstream from Pittsburgh , and then erected on this site in 1921 . 
 The bridge is still in place over the Dead River and previously carried CR 510 as the successor to M @-@ 35 in northern Marquette County . Known locally as " The Steel Bridge " , it survived a May 15 , 2003 flood caused by the breaching of the Silver Lake Dam . The Marquette County Road Commission had announced plans in 2006 to bypass the Steel Bridge with a modern replacement , leaving the existing bridge as a footpath or bike path . Construction on the bypass road and replacement bridge was begun in October 2007 . The concrete work for the replacement span was started in late 2009 , with an original projected completion date of November 1 , 2010 . The new crossing is 100 feet ( 30 m ) above river level compared to the 10 feet ( 3 m ) for the 1921 span . The total budget for bridge construction is $ 4 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ NaN in 2015 ) with an additional $ 1 @.@ 7 million ( equivalent to $ NaN in 2015 ) for the approach work , with an 80 percent federal , 15 percent state and 5 percent county funding split . The new bridge opened to traffic in September 2010 , diverting traffic from the Steel Bridge . Completion of the new span came after about a decade of planning . 
 = = = Henry Ford = = = 
 Records of the Huron Mountain Club , an exclusive private organization with large land holdings in northern Michigan , show that Henry Ford visited the Upper Peninsula many times , including at least once with Harvey Firestone and Thomas Edison on Ford 's yacht , Sialia . Many of these trips involved research to keep his operations supplied . His UP land provided wood for the manufacture of Ford automobiles such as the Model T , which required 250 board feet ( 0 @.@ 59 m3 ) of lumber per car . Ford , who was considering becoming the " owner – producer – handler " of the resources he needed , invested in sawmills in Alberta and Kingsford . He also bought the entire town of <unk> , along the shores of the Keweenaw Bay . The town belonged to Dan Hebard , who also sold Ford a sawmill , tugboats , a 14 @-@ room bungalow , and land near the Huron Mountain Club . Hebard retired to spend his summers at a cabin on the Pine River on land belonging to the Club . 
 Ford built a hydroelectric dam along the Menominee River to supply power to the Kingsford mill , bought the Imperial Mine , and opened the Blueberry Mine near Ishpeming to supply iron ore . The Ford Railroad was constructed between L 'Anse and the Cliff River for his logging operations on 300 @,@ 000 acres ( 100 @,@ 000 ha ) of timberland purchased in 1922 . He often visited the Upper Peninsula on business , but as early as 1917 , the year he ran for a seat in the U.S. Senate , he sought entry into the Huron Mountain Club . Since the club limited its membership , Ford worked to improve his chances . His admission would ultimately come when M @-@ 35 construction was halted in the Huron Mountains . 
 Hunters , campers , hikers , fishermen and some landowners opposed highway construction near the Huron Mountains . Rydholm said , " ... there seemed to be no groundswell of sentiment in favor of it , but it looked as the though the die was cast and nothing could be done to stop it " . The Huron Mountain Club members opposed the highway because it would open vast reaches of the back country and might harm the wilderness . Highway construction would also open the possibility of a resort hotel . William C. Weber , a real estate developer from Detroit , owned property along Mountain Lake , in northern Marquette County . A Michigan attorney general 's opinion provided a way for blocking the road if two @-@ thirds of the property over which the road would pass was owned by people opposed to the project . The proposed highway was to cross two 40 @-@ acre ( 16 ha ) parcels of Huron Mountain Club property , but that was not enough to halt construction . 
 In 1926 , Hebard was elected the new president at the Huron Mountain Club and changed its rules for admission . Before the changes , all existing members voted on new admissions , and four " no " votes meant rejection . After Hebard 's changes , only club directors could vote , and only one " no " was needed to block election . In 1927 , the road grading for M @-@ 35 had reached the Salmon Trout River . That same year , Ford bought more land near Mountain Lake . This property encompassed more than the requisite two @-@ thirds necessary to stop construction of the road . In 1928 , the road was moved to connect with the Big Bay Road ( CR 550 ) , leaving the stub of " Blind 35 " behind . According to club records , " by 1929 , M @-@ 35 was dead in its tracks and Henry Ford was a member " . To commemorate his membership , Ford built a white pine log cabin on club property that cost between $ 80 @,@ 000 and $ 100 @,@ 000 in 1929 ( equivalent to $ 5 @.@ 2 million to $ 6 @.@ 5 million in 2015 ) . 
 = = = After Ford = = = 
 In 1939 , M @-@ 35 from Negaunee to Big Bay to L 'Anse was officially canceled as a state trunkline highway . Constructed portions were turned over to local control , becoming Skanee Road in Baraga County and CR 510 in Marquette County . This left a discontinuous routing for 13 years . The southern segment of M @-@ 35 ran from Menominee to Negaunee , and the northern segment ran from Baraga to Ontonagon along the modern M @-@ 38 . The two segments were rejoined in 1953 , closing the gap left by the cancelled Huron Mountain route . M @-@ 35 signs were added to existing highway signs westward from the end of the southern segment at Negaunee along US 41 / M @-@ 28 and US 41 to Baraga , to connect with the northern segment westward to Ontonagon . 
 In 1964 , several abandoned underground mine shafts collapsed underneath the roadway , forcing a rerouting of M @-@ 35 out of the City of Negaunee . Before the rerouting , M @-@ 35 was routed from Palmer north to Negaunee using a portion of County Road near Lucy Hill . It also followed Silver Street connecting with part of BUS M @-@ 28 , a business loop of M @-@ 28 , through downtown Negaunee to US 41 north of town . This former segment is still shown on some maps ( such as Google Maps ) as " Old M @-@ 35 " . Since this rerouting , M @-@ 35 runs from Palmer past Goose Lake to end in Negaunee Township . The only <unk> , or natural track , luge run in North America crosses the former routing of M @-@ 35 in Negaunee . This luge run crosses over the abandoned street at the end of County Road at Lucy Hill . 
 The last major changes to M @-@ 35 came in 1968 when the section from Baraga to Ontonagon was given the M @-@ 38 designation . The M @-@ 35 concurrencies were removed along US 41 / M @-@ 28 and US 41 in Marquette and Baraga counties . This change shortened the highway designation and moved the northern terminus to the present location in Negaunee Township . Since then , sections of the roadway were realigned in Richmond Township south of Palmer to straighten some of the many curves between Palmer and Gwinn on June 2 , 1989 . MDOT has started construction of a new 20 @-@ space commuter parking lot at the southern terminus of M @-@ 553 at M @-@ 35 on August 11 , 2008 with an expected completion date of August 30 , 2008 . This is part of an effort to offer expanded ride @-@ sharing opportunities in Marquette County . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Miri , Malaysia = 
 Miri / <unk> / ( Jawi : <unk> ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> Lǐ ) is a coastal city in northeastern Sarawak , Malaysia , located near the border of Brunei , on the island of Borneo . The city covers an area of 997 @.@ 43 square kilometres ( 385 @.@ 11 sq mi ) , located 798 kilometres ( 496 mi ) northeast of Kuching and 329 kilometres ( 204 mi ) southwest of Kota Kinabalu . Miri is the second largest city in Sarawak , with a population of 234 @,@ 541 . The city is also the capital of Miri District of the Miri Division . 
 Before Miri was founded , Marudi was the administrative centre of the northern region of Sarawak . Miri was founded in 1910 when the first oil well was drilled by Royal Dutch Shell . The discovery of an oil field in Miri has led to rapid development of Miri town . Miri became the administrative centre of the northern region of Sarawak by 1929 . During World War II , the Miri oil fields were destroyed by the Brooke government to sabotage Japanese operations in Southeast Asia but to no avail ; Miri town was the first landing point of Japanese troops in Borneo . The subsequent Japanese occupation led Miri to become a target of Allied air raids which caused the destruction of oil refinery facilities in Miri . The petroleum industry continued to be a major player in the city 's economy after the war . Oil exploration has moved offshore since the 1950s , but subsequently new inland oil fields were found in 1989 and 2011 . In 1974 , the formation of Malaysian oil and gas company Petronas led to co @-@ operation between Petronas and Shell on oil exploration in the Miri region . In 2005 , Miri became the 10th city in Malaysia to be granted official city status , the first non @-@ state capital city to be bestowed such status . 
 Miri is the main tourist gateway to Gunung Mulu National Park , <unk> <unk> National Park , Lambir Hills National Park , Niah National Park and Miri @-@ Sibuti Coral Reef National Park . The Gunung Mulu National Park with its Sarawak Chamber is one of the favourite ecotourism destinations . Miri is also the birthplace of the Malaysian petroleum industry . Other major industries in the city include timber , oil palm and tourism . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Miri town is named after a minority ethnic group called " <unk> <unk> " or simply " Mirek " , or " Miriek " . This ethnic group is the earliest settlers in the region of Miri Division . Europeans who later came here for oil exploration mistakenly pronounced " Miriek " as " Miri " and hence the name continue to be used today . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 The first foragers visited the West Mouth of Niah Cave ( located 110 km southwest of Miri city ) 50 @,@ 000 years ago when Borneo was connected to the mainland of Southeast Asia . The landscape of Niah Cave was drier and more open than it is now . Prehistoric Niah Cave was surrounded by a mosaic of closed forests with bush , parkland , swamps , and rivers . The foragers were able to survive in the rainforests through hunting , fishing , mollusc collection , and plant gathering . The earliest evidence of human population in the area dates back to 40 @,@ 000 BC in Niah Cave at Paleolithic period . This is evidenced by the discovery of a Homo sapiens skull nicknamed " Deep Skull " in a deep trench uncovered by Tom Harrisson in 1958 , which is the oldest modern human skull in Southeast Asia . The skull probably belongs to a 16- to 17 @-@ year @-@ old adolescent girl . <unk> Manis <unk> ( Asian giant pangolin ) bone dated back to 30 @,@ 000 BC was also found in the proximity of the " Deep Skull " , as well as with the Mesolithic and Neolithic burial sites inside the Niah Caves . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Brooke administration = = = 
 Charles Brooke succeeded James Brooke as the new Rajah of Sarawak in 1868 . By 1883 , Sultan of Brunei ( Sultan Abdul Momin ) ceded the Baram region ( including Miri ) to Charles Brooke . The fourth division of Sarawak was immediately created with the installation of Claude Champion de Crespigny as the first Resident of the Division . The Miri area was still a fishing village at that time . It was a small settlement surrounded by mangrove and Nipah palm jungles consisted of 20 scattered houses , a few wooden shops operated by Chinese traders and a lone Arab trader . A fort was built in <unk> ( present day Marudi , 43 km to the east of Miri ) in 1883 . <unk> became the administrative centre of the division . Mr Claude 's administration was helped by two junior officers , 30 rangers , and a few native police . Charles Hose succeeded Mr Claude as the new Resident in 1891 and the fort in Marudi was renamed as " Fort Hose " . To restore peace among various ethnic tribes fighting in the Baram region , Charles Hose decided to organise a peace conference at his fort in April 1899 . This peace conference also led to the birth of first Baram Regatta , a long boat race competition among the natives which continued to be held until today . 
 The local population in Miri has indeed started to extract oil from hand @-@ dug wells for centuries . Song <unk> <unk> , a documentation of the Song dynasty of China , mentions the imports of Borneo camphor and petroleum in the 11th century . In 1882 , Mr Claude reported to the Brooke government on 18 hand @-@ dug oil wells in the Miri area . He also recommended that area near Miri River should be thoroughly explored . However , his recommendations were ignored . But when Charles Hose took over the Resident office in 1891 , he was interested in Mr Claude 's idea and began to collaborate with him . Mr Claude began to map oil seeps around the Miri area , however a consultant geologist from England discouraged the oil exploration in Miri due to poor logistical conditions . After his retirement from administrative positions in Sarawak , Charles Hose went back to England . He later went to London to discuss the idea of oil exploration in Miri with the Anglo @-@ Saxon Petroleum Company ( later became a part of Royal Dutch Shell Company in 1907 ) . Mr. H.N. Benjamin , a branch manager from the petroleum company , was interested in this idea . Finally in 1909 , Rajah Charles Brooke came to London to sign the first Sarawak Oil Mining Lease . Royal Dutch Shell dispatched a senior geologist named Josef Theodor Erb together with Charles Hose back to Miri . Mr Erb started to map Miri oil fields from August 1909 to July 1910 . He also identified a location known as " Miri Hill " ( now known as " Canada Hill " , 150 m above sea level ) is suitable to act as an anticline for oil drilling . 
 Finally , on 10 August 1910 , the first oil drilling operation was started . A 30 @-@ metre @-@ high rig ( nicknamed the " Grand Old Lady " ) made up of wooden derricks and cable tool drilling was used in the operation by Royal Dutch Shell . On 22 December 1910 , oil was struck after 130 metres of drilling at the well . Royal Dutch Shell also founded a subsidiary company named Sarawak Oil Field Ltd , which now operated as Sarawak Shell Berhad . Since then , another 624 land wells have been drilled around Miri until 1972 which are collectively known as the " Miri field " . The Miri field is the only onshore field in Sarawak , because oil production has shifted offshore since the late 1950s . The first oil well on Canada Hill ( Miri Well No. 1 ) produced a total of 0 @.@ 65 million oil barrels for the next 60 years until its closure on 31 October 1972 . The first oil refinery and submarine pipeline was built in Miri in 1914 . The oil refinery has since been relocated to Lutong ( 11 km to the north of Miri ) in 1916 . 
 Resident Office moved from Marudi to Miri in 1912 . Miri grew as fast as the rate of oil production by the Shell company . In 1920 , roads were built in Miri . Bicycles and motorcycles were also bought into the town . By 1921 , there were 40 shop houses in Miri , with one English school and one Chinese school . Motor cars were later introduced to the town . In 1924 , Pujut Road was built to link Miri with Lutong . By 1925 , rotary drilling was introduced . Oil production continued to increase until it reached a peak of 15 @,@ 211 barrels per day in 1929 . Water supply were improved , jungles were cleared , and more roads were built . Miri became the administrative centre of the entire Baram region in 1929 . 
 = = = Japanese occupation = = = 
 The Brooke government had been actively lobbying for the British government to accept Sarawak as one of its protectorates in an event of a war . By 1888 , the British finally agreed to grant the protection to Sarawak . The British dispatched several troops to Sarawak to strengthen its defences in the 1930s . By 1938 , under the leadership of Rajah Charles Vyner Brooke , airstrips were constructed in Miri , Kuching , Oya , and Mukah in preparation for an imminent war . However , by 1941 , British Royal Navy and Royal Air Force had withdrawn from Sarawak and returned to Singapore . Therefore , the British government advocated a " scorched earth policy " for the Brooke government in the event of a Japanese attack . A Denial Scheme was formulated to destroy oil installations in Miri and Lutong . This was because the coastline measuring 30 miles from Lutong to Miri was impossible to defend from Japanese landings due to shortage of manpower . By May 1941 , 1 Infantry Company from 2 / 15 Punjab Regiment , 6 @-@ inch Hong Kong @-@ Singapore Royal Artillery Battery , and 1 Platoon of Royal Engineers were stationed at Miri to oversee the destruction of the Miri oil fields . In August 1941 , an operation was carried out to reduce Miri oil output by 70 % . 
 Soon after the news of Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , Japanese planes were seen making reconnaissance flights over Miri . The Brooke government decided on a complete destruction of oilfields and airfields in Miri . Shell company officials received orders to carry out the Denial Scheme on 8 December 1941 . In the evening on the same day , the task was completed . All producing oil wells were sealed up with vital equipment and machinery dismantled and shipped off to Singapore . Skilled workers and important company papers also went along with the equipment and sent to Singapore . The Punjab Regiment and several officials were sent to guard Kuching . On 16 December 1941 , 9 days after the Pearl Harbor bombing , Japanese troops consisting of 10 @,@ 000 men landed on Tanjung Lobang Beach , Miri without much resistance . However , on 19 December 1941 , a Dutch flying boat from Tarakan Island attacked the Japanese destroyer <unk> ( under the command of Hiroshi <unk> ) off Miri . The ship was sunk along with the entire crew of 228 . Another flying boat X @-@ 33 also damaged a Japanese transport ship . After the fall of Singapore on 15 January 1942 , skilled workers that went into hiding with their equipment were sent back to Miri by the Japanese . They were immediately put to work for Japanese oil supply service company named Nen Ryo Hai Kyu . Much of the Japanese oil drilling and refinery equipment was portable . A total of 0 @.@ 75 million barrels were produced during the Japanese occupation from 1941 to 1945 . 
 During the occupation , Miri and Lutong became a periodic subject of Allied air raids and bombings . Food , clothes , and medicine were scarce . Workers of the Japanese oil supply service were used to reconstruct and maintain Lutong Bridge and Lutong airstrip from Allied bombing damage . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 Petronas , a Malaysian national oil and gas company , was formed in 1974 . As a result , a concession system was changed into production sharing contract system ( PSC ) between Shell and Petronas . All the foreign oil companies including Shell required to obtain licenses from Petronas . The first two <unk> were signed on 30 November 1976 . Foreign oil companies are required to keep not more than 41 % of the oil produced until their original costs are recovered . After a return of their investments , the oil companies will keep 30 % of the revenue after all operating costs and oil royalties are deducted . Petronas also formed a company named Petronas <unk> Sdn Bhd which was directly involved in the exploration , development , and production of oil and gas in the country . Petronas also initiated the Baram Delta Gas Gathering ( <unk> ) project which involves the collection and compression of gas from five fields , namely Betty , <unk> , Baram , <unk> , and West Lutong , located 10 km to 45 km offshore from Miri . This is to ensure the minimisation of gas loss during oil production . Petronas and Shell are also involved in educational outreach activities such as awarding scholarships to deserving students . Both companies are also involved in Malaysian first rig @-@ to @-@ reef project , in an effort to preserve bio @-@ marine life in the sea offshore Miri . In this project , an abandoned offshore platform was made to become part of the Siwa reef . Both companies also started to establish Piasau Nature Reserve in 2014 . 
 Miri Municipal Council has adopted the seahorse as the town 's official symbol . It was proposed by the former Sarawak chief minister Abdul Taib Mahmud and introduced as part of the " I love Miri campaign " in 1994 . The seahorse is chosen because of its beautiful and distinctive figure with gentle and graceful motion . These characteristics describe multiple ethnic and cultural identities of Miri which live in peace and harmony with good values of life . It also denotes the location of Miri town near to the sea and coral reefs and the city status as a resort paradise . 
 Miri was elevated to city status on 20 May 2005 and became Malaysia 's tenth city . Miri is also the first town in Malaysia which is not a state capital to be granted city status . Miri City Day is celebrated each year on 20 May since it was declared by the past Chief Minister , Abdul Taib Mahmud . A time capsule containing news article of the day and a souvenir book was buried at Petroleum Science Museum at Canada Hill , Miri . The time capsule will be opened 100 years later on 20 May 2105 . An effort has also been made to develop Miri as liveable resort city . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Miri City currently elects one member of parliament from the Miri parliamentary seat ( <unk> ) into the Parliament of Malaysia . The city also elects 3 state assemblymen into the Sarawak State Legislative Assembly , namely Piasau , Pujut , and <unk> . 
 = = = Local authority and city definition = = = 
 Miri was formerly administered by the Miri Municipal Council for 24 years . It was upgraded to Miri City Council ( MCC ) on 20 May 2005 , with Lawrence Lai Yew Son as its current mayor , headquartered at Raja Road , Miri . Area under the jurisdiction of MCC is 977 @.@ 43 km2 . Miri lies within the boundary of the Miri District , which consists of Miri City , Sibuti sub @-@ district , and Niah sub @-@ district , with a total population of 290 @,@ 274 and total area of 4 @,@ 707 km2 . Miri Resident Office and Miri District Office are located at Kingsway Road , Miri City . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Miri is situated on the alluvial plain of the Baram River on the western shore of northern Sarawak on the island of Borneo . Locally the Baram River is called the Miri River . Because of the prevailing southerly off @-@ shore current , beach drift has built up the Peninsula Road as a barrier beach between the Miri River and the shore causing a " Yazoo effect " where the river runs parallel to the coast before breaking through into the South China Sea . The city is predominately located on the inland ( east ) side of the Miri River with only a few scattered residential neighbourhoods , a Golf Club and a small airstrip on the Peninsula Road . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Miri has a tropical rainforest climate . There are two monsoon seasons : the southwest monsoon , which is the dry season from April to September , and the northeast monsoon , which is the wet season from October to March . The annual rainfall is around 250 to 380 cm ( 100 to 150 inches ) . The air temperature is between 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) to 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) the whole year round . But in rare occasions , temperature can reach down to 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) to 16 ° C ( 61 ° F ) especially in the months of November , December and January . Lowest ever recorded is in December 2010 when the temperature dropped down to 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) . 
 = = Demography = = 
 People from Miri are called " <unk> " . 
 The growth of Miri population is shown below : 
 = = = Ethnicity = = = 
 According to the 2010 Malaysian census , Miri City has a total population of 234 @,@ 541 . Indigenous people form the largest ethnic group in the city ( 143 @,@ 736 , 61 @.@ 3 % ) which consists of Iban ( 61 @,@ 273 ) , Malay ( 46 @,@ 723 ) , Melanau ( 8 @,@ 313 ) , Bidayuh ( 3 @,@ 308 ) , and other indigenous tribes ( 24 @,@ 119 ) . This is followed by Chinese ( 75 @,@ 329 , 32 @.@ 1 % ) , Indians ( 980 , 0 @.@ 43 % ) , and non @-@ Malaysians ( 13 @,@ 362 , 5 @.@ 7 % ) . The Malay people here consists mainly of Mirek , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> people . Miri has 19 out of 27 Sarawak ethnic groups , including Kedayan , Lun Bawang , Kayan , Kenyah , and Kelabit people . Chinese in Miri mainly consist of the Foochow majority with significant populations of Hakka and Cantonese including a small number of Teochews and Hainanese . A majority of non @-@ Malaysians in Miri are Suluk and Bajau people from the southern Philippines , working at Baram Delta as fishermen . There are also illegal Suluk and Bajau people entering Miri using Pulau <unk> ( near Baram Delta ) as a transit point . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 English , Mandarin and Malay languages are widely spoken here . Respective ethnic groups also speak their own languages . Indigenous groups speak languages such as Bruneian / Kedayan , Miriek , Iban , Bidayuh , Kayan , Kenyah , and Kelabit languages . Meanwhile , the Chinese would speak Mandarin , Hakka Chinese , Cantonese , Teochew dialect , Hainanese , and Fuzhou dialect . However , younger generations in Miri tend to use mainstream languages ( English and Malay ) rather than it 's indigenous languages ( such as Iban and Kelabit ) , and an effort has been made to promote the usage of the indigenous languages among the younger generation . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 There are several religions in Miri including Christianity , Islam , Buddhism , Taoism , Hinduism , Sikhism and Bahá 'í Faith . Among the Christian churches , there are the Borneo Evangelical Church , Anglicanism , Methodism , Roman Catholics , and The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints . Respective religious groups are free to hold processions in Miri city . Among notable religious places in Miri are : Tua Pek Kong Temple , Lian Hua San Ching Tien Temple ( <unk> , Taoist temple ) , St Joseph Cathedral ( Roman Catholic ) , <unk> En Methodist Church , St Columba church ( Anglican ) , Al @-@ Taqwa Mosque , Al @-@ Jamek Mosque , Sikh Temple , and Kamini Durga <unk> Amman Temple ( Hinduism ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 There are a few industrial areas in Miri , some examples include Kuala Baram Industrial Estate ( Mixed , Light , and Medium Industries ) , Piasau Industrial Estate ( Mixed Light Industries ) , <unk> Industrial Area , Eastwood Industrial Estate and Bekenu Light Industrial Area ( food processing ) . 
 Miri mainly relies on its oil and gas industry , which contributes significantly to the Gross Domestic Product ( GDP ) of Sarawak . Sarawak Shell Berhad ( upstream business ) and Petronas <unk> Sdn Bhd have their offices based in Miri . Other multinational oil and gas companies also set up their offices here , including Nippon Oil , Schlumberger , Baker Hughes , Halliburton , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and Petra Resources Sdn Bhd . In 1989 , <unk> Paya Oilfield was discovered in Sarawak inland areas . In 2010 , Petronas discovered two oil fields offshore between Bintulu and Miri . In 2011 , new underground reserves of oil and gas deposits were discovered by Nippon Oil in an inland region near Miri , Sarawak . 
 In the 1970 to 1980s , timber exporting industry became one of the major income generators for Miri . Multinational conglomerates based in Miri such as Shin Yang and Samling had their early beginnings in timber industry . Besides , shipbuilding companies such as <unk> Shipyard , Shin Yang Shipping & Shipyard , Berjaya Dockyard , and Sarawak <unk> have their major shipyards set up in Miri - Kuala Baram industrial area along the Baram river . 
 First large @-@ scale oil palm plantation in Sarawak began in 1968 , in which the newly formed Sarawak Oil Palm Berhad ( SOPB ) planted a total of 5 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare ( 50 km2 ) oil palm plantations near Miri by employing Indonesian workers at these plantations . Since the 1980s , SOPB has a total of 30 @,@ 000 @-@ hectare ( 300 km2 ) of oil palm in Miri and Bintulu Divisions , generating a total revenue of RM 85 million in 2005 . SOPB is now majority @-@ owned by Shin Yang Group and Sarawak Land Custody and Development Authority ( <unk> ) with its headquarters based in Miri . By 2014 , oil palm plantations between Miri @-@ Bintulu zone constituted 60 % of total oil palm estates in Sarawak . 
 Miri Port Authority ( MPA ) was established on 1 February 1981 and commenced operation on 1 March 1983 . It is located near the mouth of Baram River . The port is able to take in ships measuring up to 1 @,@ 500 GRT ( Gross Register Tonnage ) , with general cargo area of 50 @,@ 895 m2 and total developed area of 34 hectares ( 0 @.@ 34 km2 ) . It is mainly used in handling petroleum , timber products , coal , and building materials . A total of 23 @.@ 94 million metric tonnes of goods was handled by MPA from 2011 to 2013 , which earned a total revenue of RM 48 @.@ 58 million in port dues . 
 Miri is a popular shopping destination for visitors coming from the neighbouring country of Brunei because of a discrepancy in currency exchange rate ( 100 Brunei dollar to 250 Malaysian ringgit ) , cheaper items , and a variety of resorts here in Miri for recreational activities . Bintang Plaza and Boulevard Shopping Mall are the two major shopping destinations for Brunei people . As of 2014 , Miri visitor movement along Kuala Baram @-@ Kuala <unk> checkpoint ( Sungai <unk> , along the Sarawak @-@ Brunei border ) reached a total of 2 @.@ 9 million people in one year . Miri is also an eco @-@ tourism gateway to four national parks and a marine national park . 
 The education sector is another income generator for Miri . Curtin University Sarawak brought in RM 480 million foreign exchange annually from 3 @,@ 000 foreign students studying at the university . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Land = = = 
 All the roads in Miri are maintained by Miri City Council ( MCC ) . Miri is accessible by road from Bandar Seri <unk> ( Brunei ) through the Sungai Tujuh checkpoint which is located 35 km north of Miri . Miri is connected to all major cities and towns in Sarawak including Kota Kinabalu in Sabah through the Pan Borneo Highway . Miri is also connected to Bintulu town through a coastal road and Marudi through a 42 km road . ASEAN Bridge is located along the Miri @-@ Baram Highway and crosses the Baram River , providing direct access to neighbouring country of Brunei , and the towns of Limbang and Lawas in Sarawak . 
 = = = = Public transportation = = = = 
 Miri city has 2 bus stations , namely the local ( located at Melayu Road next to Tamu <unk> and Visitor 's Information Centre ) and long @-@ distance bus stations ( located near Pujut Corner ) . The local bus station serves the Miri city area , <unk> area , Miri Airport , and Brunei . Buses to Niah National Park , Lambir Hills National Park , Bintulu , Sibu , Kuching , and Pontianak , Indonesia depart from the long @-@ distance bus station . Local taxi services are also provided in the city with the main taxi stand at China Road in the city centre . Taxis here do not use meters . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Miri Airport ( IATA : <unk> , ICAO : <unk> ) is an important gateway to the northern region of Sarawak . It is located 11 km south of Miri city . It serves as a hub for domestic , international , and rural air services . Miri Airport is the third busiest airport in Malaysia , in terms of aircraft movements and the fifth busiest in terms of passengers handled . It provides services to 2 @.@ 2 million passengers in 2013 . The airport has direct international flights to Singapore . It also receives flights from domestic destinations such as Kuala Lumpur , Johor Bahru , Kota Kinabalu , Labuan , Kuching and other major towns in Sarawak . Miri Airport also caters flights to the Sarawak interior such as Bario , Ba 'kelalan , Marudi , Lawas , Limbang , and Mukah through MASwings using DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otter aircraft . Currently , there are three airlines serving Miri airport , namely Malaysia Airlines , Air Asia , and MASwings . 
 = = = Water = = = 
 Kuala Baram Express Boat Jetty is located 45 minutes away from Miri city centre . There are daily departures to Marudi , Long Lama area , and Gunung Mulu National Park by using express boats . 
 = = Other utilities = = 
 = = = Courts of law and legal enforcement = = = 
 The current court complex is located at <unk> Road , Miri . It contains the High Court , Sessions Court , and the Magistrate Court . Miri city also has Syariah Subordinate Court which is located at Wisma Pelita Tunku , Miri with area of jurisdiction of Miri District and Marudi District . There is one district police headquarters at Pujut Road , Miri . Miri central police station is located at Raja Road while other police stations are located at <unk> Road , Miri Airport , Kampung <unk> Road , Bekenu , and Niah . There is also a central prison in Miri . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 Miri Hospital started operation on 6 May 1995 , located 2 @.@ 5 km away from Miri city centre and with an area of 87 @.@ 11 hectares . The hospital has 339 beds , and it provides specialist services such as surgery , ophthalmology , obstetrics and gynaecology ( <unk> ) , and radiology . It is also the secondary referral hospital in the northern region of Sarawak . There are also 2 polyclinics in Miri namely Miri polyclinic and <unk> polyclinic . Miri City Medical Centre is a private hospital that started its operation in 2002 and has 30 beds . It is located at Hokkien Road , Miri . Columbia Asia Medical Centre was formerly known as <unk> Medical Centre . It was acquired in 1998 , located 4 km downtown Miri . It serves the communities from Miri , Limbang , Marudi , and Brunei . Shell employees make up the largest customer base for this private hospital . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 All the primary and secondary schools in Miri ( under National Education System ) are managed by the Miri District Education Office located at <unk> Road , Miri . Among the Chinese primary schools are SJK ( C ) Chung Hua Miri , SJK ( C ) Chung Hua Pujut , and SJK ( C ) Chung Hua Lutong . SK Agama Miri is an Islamic primary school . There are several national primary schools such as : SK <unk> , SK <unk> , and SK St Columba , along with several other national secondary schools in Miri namely SMK Chung Hua Miri , SMK Agama Miri , SMK St. Columba , Kolej Tun Datu Tuanku Haji Bujang , and Sekolah Menengah <unk> Miri . Miri has 2 out of 14 Chinese independent schools in Sarawak . These are Pei Min Middle School ( <unk> ) and <unk> Road Middle School ( <unk> ) . Tenby International School is the first international school in Miri . Other private schools in Miri such as Sekolah Rendah Sri Mawar and Sekolah Rendah Sri Mulia are providers of primary education . 
 Curtin University Sarawak is the first foreign university to establish its campus in Sarawak since 1999 . It offers business , accounting , and engineering courses . Institut Pendidikan Guru Malaysia Kampus Miri Sarawak ( Teachers training Institute Malaysia Miri Campus ) offers training for teachers placements in primary and secondary schools . I @-@ Systems College offers a nursing programme . Fajar International College ( FIC ) offers a Diploma in Occupational Safety & Health ( <unk> ) , accounting , and business studies courses . IBS College was established in 1998 , currently offering finance , business , accounting , and security courses . <unk> Institute of Management offers Diploma programme for Hotel and Tourism Management . 
 <unk> Education and Training Academy ( <unk> ) offers training courses on oil and gas industries . Institut <unk> <unk> Miri ( Miri Industry Training Institute ) was formed in 2004 , currently offering courses such as electrician , product design , and telecommunication . <unk> Institute of Technology Sarawak ( <unk> ) was established in 1996 , offering technical training in the fields of agriculture and mechanics . Institut <unk> <unk> Negara ( National Youth skills Institute ) and Pusat Pembangunan <unk> Sarawak ( Sarawak Skills Development Centre ) also offer technical training for students . Kolej <unk> Miri ( Miri Community College ) offers short module courses upon request from the public . Open University Malaysia ( OUM ) also opens a learning centre here . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 Miri City Council Library was established in 1958 . Currently , it has branches in Piasau , Lutong , and Taman Tunku . Pustaka Miri is a regional library established by the state @-@ run Sarawak State Library . It is located at Miri City Fan . 
 = = Culture and leisure = = 
 = = = Attractions and recreational spots = = = 
 = = = = Cultural = = = = 
 Miri May Fest has been held in Miri since 1989 . It is a month @-@ long celebration of entertainment programmes , trade fairs , cultural , arts , sports , and social activities organised by various governmental agencies . Miri City Day will also be held during the Miri May Fest . Gong Xi Fa Cai Bazaar is held annually a few weeks before the Chinese New Year eve . There will be stalls opening daily selling food and drinks , clothes , decorative items , potted plants , paintings , and handicrafts . Various entertainment programmes such as lion and dragon dances will be held every evening . Miri International Dance for Humanity is held annually since 2004 by Miri Chapter of Malaysian Red Crescent Society to promote racial and cultural harmony . This event will showcase up to 40 to 50 multicultural dance troupes which attract an audience of around 3 @,@ 500 . No dancing competition will be held during this event . Donation cards will be distributed to raise funds for the Red Crescent Society . 916 Malaysia Day Countdown cum Street Party has been held annually since 2010 . It consists of a variety of outdoor sports events , street parties , and entertainment programmes which runs beyond midnight to commemorate the formation of Malaysia on 16 September 1963 . Miri International Deep Sea Fishing Tournament is held annually at Luconia Shoals at South China Sea . Participants will depart from the Marina Bay , Miri and head up to the ocean for 3 days . The participant who catches the biggest fish in that category wins . Miri city Christmas Parade is held annually since 2007 . Churches in Miri would start the parade at Miri City Fan and cover the main streets in the city centre . 
 = = = = Historical = = = = 
 In 2005 , a petroleum museum was opened in Miri to preserve the city 's roots as an oil and gas city . The petroleum museum is built at the site of " Grand Old Lady " , the first oil well in Malaysia which was opened in 1910 . Visitors are able to interact with advanced devices displayed in the museum . Niah Archeology Museum is located near the archaeological site of Niah cave . It exhibits the prehistorical artefacts found in the area . Baram Regional Museum was opened in 1997 , housed inside Fort Hose at Marudi . The fort was burnt down in 1994 , but it was rebuilt later according to its original design and was converted into a museum . It displays historical and cultural artefacts belonging to various ethnic groups living in the area . The Miri Tua Pek Kong Temple was built in 1913 to give thanks to a monk who was believed to chase away evil spirits . The evil spirits were believed to have caused an unknown epidemic in Miri . It is the only building which survives World War II . 
 = = = = Leisure and conservation areas = = = = 
 Miri is surrounded by five national parks namely : Gunung Mulu National Park , Niah National Park , Lambir Hills National Park , <unk> <unk> National Park and Miri @-@ Sibuti Coral Reef National Park . Tanjung Lobang Beach is the oldest recreational park in Miri . It is a popular spot for watching sunsets . There are two wooden piers extending out into the ocean which offer a view of the coastline and the seahorse lighthouse at Marina Bay . Taman <unk> ( which serves seafood meals ) , Miri Marriott Hotel and Parkcity Everly Hotel are located at Tanjung Lobang Beach . Marina Bay also has berthing facilities for yachts . Hawaii Beach is located 15 minutes away from Miri city . Picnic and barbecue facilities are provided here . Lutong Beach is suitable for paragliding and paramotor sports . <unk> Esplanade Beach is located 11 km south of the city . It is a popular spot for barbecues and picnics . Further down the <unk> Esplanade Beach is <unk> Beach , which is located at Bekenu , about 1 hour drive from Miri city . 
 Miri <unk> Park was opened to the public in 1993 . It has a man @-@ made lake , a jogging track , and a traffic garden . Traffic games will held every year at Miri <unk> Park . Taman Awam Miri ( Miri Public Park ) is located 3 km away from Miri city centre . It has a children 's playground , botanical garden , and a jogging trail . Miri City Fan is an urban park complex that has a variety of theme gardens , botanical garden , a swimming pool , a library , and an amphitheatre where concerts are frequently held . Taman Bunga ( Flower Garden ) is located at Asrama Road . Every plant here has a label which list the name and characteristics of the plant . 
 = = = = Other attractions = = = = 
 Miri Crocodile Farm is located near the Baram Delta . It houses 1 @,@ 000 estuarine crocodiles including Malayan gharial crocodiles . Man @-@ made sanctuary pools are also constructed for the crocodiles . Other animals can also be found here such as cassowary , sun bears , python , monkeys and porcupines . Visitors are allowed to feed the animals with bananas available from the canteen . 
 = = = = Shopping = = = = 
 The shopping malls in Miri are Bintang Megamall , Boulevard Shopping Complex , The Imperial Mall , E @-@ Mart , Merdeka Mall , Miri Plaza ( <unk> Hypermarket ) , <unk> Mall , <unk> Mall , Soon Hup Shopping Complex , Wisma Pelita Tunku , and Permaisuri Imperial City Mall . 
 <unk> Weekend Market is located at <unk> Commercial Centre . It opens in late evening every Friday , Saturday and Sunday . There are over 170 stalls in the market which sell vegetables , fruits , sea products , drinks , <unk> , grilled fish , BBQ chicken wings and other products such as local handicrafts , clothes as well as used magazines at reasonable prices . Miri Handicraft Centre is located at Brooke Road , Miri . It features handicrafts and souvenirs of Sarawak such as colourful bags , beadwork , woodcarvings , and textiles made by local indigenous groups , Chinese , and Malay artisans . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 There are three music festivals in Miri , namely Borneo Jazz Festival , Asia Music Festival ( AMF ) and Miri Country Music Fest ( <unk> ) . Borneo Jazz Festival was started in 2006 . It is a 2 @-@ night festival of 4 performances in each night by local and international jazz musicians at Parkcity Everly hotel , Miri . Asia Music Festival is also a 2 @-@ day event featuring artists and musicians from Asian countries such as India , Taiwan , Philippines , and Indonesia . It was first held in 2013 at Eastwood Valley Golf and Country Club , about 5 km from the city centre . It attracts about 4 @,@ 000 music lovers attending the event . Miri Country Music Fest ( <unk> ) is a one @-@ day event introduced in 2014 , held at Parkcity Everly Hotel , Miri . Among the activities that can be found here are music and dance workshop , and night concert featuring country music bands from all over the world . Stalls selling food items , games , and souvenir items are also available . 
 = = Cuisine = = 
 Miri Central Market ( also known as Miri Open Air Market ) is located at the Miri Old Town centre . It offers a wide choices of local food whose recipes which have been passed on for generations . Popular local delicacies such as Miri curry rice , chicken porridge , open air <unk> mee , and Char <unk> <unk> can be found here . Exotic dishes of pig 's stomach cooked with pineapple and pig 's blood with chives can also be found at the central market . There are also a variety of restaurants in Miri that offer seafood , Western food , Chinese , Japanese , and Muslim food . Authentic cuisine from Kelabit Highlands especially from Bario can also be found here . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Zee Avi , international singer and ukulele player . 
 Shaun Maloney , Scottish national football player . 
 Abdul Taib Mahmud , fourth chief minister of Sarawak . 
 Joseph <unk> Tie , Sarawak FA football player . 
 George Chan Hong Nam , Sarawak 's former deputy chief minister . 
 Wee Han Wen , first chairman of the Miri City Council . 
 Natasha <unk> , Malaysian racing driver . 
 Watson <unk> , Ex @-@ national sprinter 
 = = International relations = = 
 Several countries have set up their consulates in Miri , including Netherlands and the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Sister cities = = = 
 Miri currently has two sister cities : 
 <unk> County , China 
 Hualien County , Taiwan 
 = M @-@ 40 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 40 is a north – south state trunkline highway in the Lower Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . The highway runs from US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) near the Indiana state line in Porter Township north through Paw Paw and Allegan to end in the outskirts of Holland . The current northern end is near Interstate 196 ( I @-@ 196 ) at an intersection with US 31 / Business Loop I @-@ 196 ( BL 196 ) . In between , M @-@ 40 runs through mixed agricultural and forest lands and along lakes and rivers through Southwest Michigan . 
 The trunkline was designated by July 1 , 1919 along with the rest of the original state highway system along a route that is different that of today . South of Paw Paw , the original M @-@ 40 reached Niles and even the Indiana state line for a time . The northern end was extended in stages to Holland . The southern end was shifted in the 1970s , resulting in the current routing . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 40 starts at an intersection with US 12 in rural Cass County . Running north through farm fields , the highway rounds Bar Lake and into the community of Jones . The area around Jones has a few more lakes in a wooded setting . As the trunkline continues north , it passes back into farm lands . The road curves around to the northwest as it passes between Bogart Lake and Streeters Mill Pond near Dutch Settlement Road . M @-@ 40 follows Centre Street into Marcellus . When the highway meets the western end of M @-@ 216 in town , M @-@ 40 turns west along Main Street and runs out of town . The roadway returns to a northerly course , and later it curves northwesterly again near Cedar Lake near the Van Buren County line . 
 Continuing north , the trunkline passes through mixed agricultural and wood lands into the community of Lawton . M @-@ 40 follows Main Street through town and exits on a northwestern track towards the village of Paw Paw . M @-@ 40 crosses over I @-@ 94 and turns north into town running along Maple Lake . The highway crosses the narrow isthmus between the larger Maple Lake and the smaller Ackley Lake , passing through some small residential subdivisions as it leaves Paw Paw . Small farms dot the landscape as M @-@ 40 crosses M @-@ 43 in a rural area of the county on the way to <unk> . It is in this small city that the road crosses the Kal @-@ Haven Trail State Park , a linear park that follows the former Kalamazoo and South Haven Railroad line . The rail line was converted into a rail trail and allows users to bike , hike or snowmobile between Kalamazoo and South Haven . 
 M @-@ 40 crosses into Allegan County near Base Line Lake . The highway follows Jenner Street along some curves near the banks of the Kalamazoo River as the trunkline enters the south side of Allegan . M @-@ 40 meets M @-@ 89 , and the two highways run concurrently into downtown together on Cedar Street . At the intersection with Cutler Street , M @-@ 40 / M @-@ 89 meets the western end of M @-@ 222 and M @-@ 40 / M @-@ 89 turns west onto Cutler Street . The street name changes to Western Avenue as M @-@ 40 / M @-@ 89 curves north and northwest , crossing the Kalamazoo River and leaving town . North of Lake Allegan , M @-@ 89 separates and runs west toward Fennville , and M @-@ 40 extends to Hamilton , crossing the Rabbit River . The highway runs through more farms and approaches the outskirts of Holland . The trunkline crosses over I @-@ 196 and follows Lincoln Road through an industrial area on the southeast side of town . At 48th Street , the highway turns west until meeting Lincoln Avenue . There , M @-@ 40 turns north for several blocks before ending at the intersection with BL I @-@ 196 / US 31 . 
 = = History = = 
 When M @-@ 40 was created around by July 1 , 1919 , it originally ran from Niles to Dowagiac and Decatur roughly along the current path of M @-@ 51 . Then it traveled to the northeast where it entered Paw Paw and continued north to Allegan . By 1921 , M @-@ 40 is shown on maps extending south of Niles to the Indiana state line , but not extending to Allegan . The segment from Niles south was used for the routing of US 31 in 1926 . A section of the highway was realigned in the same time period near Paw Paw . After the change , M @-@ 40 followed the contemporary US 12 instead of Paw Paw Road . A rerouting of M @-@ 89 in 1927 shifted it to run from Allegan southeast to Plainwell instead of east to Martin ; M @-@ 40 replaced M @-@ 89 on the Allegan – Martin roadway . In 1929 , the routing from Allegan to Martin was removed and renumbered M @-@ 118 , and M @-@ 40 was extended to the north out of Allegan along M @-@ 89 and its modern routing to a new terminus in Holland ending at US 31 . The last segment of unpaved highway was paved in late 1945 or early 1946 . This segment was near <unk> in central Allegan County . 
 In late 1960 or early 1961 , when the I @-@ 94 freeway was completed in Van Buren County , M @-@ 40 moved to the new freeway for four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , between present day exits 56 and 60 , and the former route along old US 12 was returned to local control . In 1971 , all of M @-@ 40 south of I @-@ 94 was reassigned the designation M @-@ 51 while M @-@ 40 was shifted to the east to take over the routing of the contemporary M @-@ 119 between Paw Paw and its intersection with US 12 in Porter Township near Mottville ; the M @-@ 40 designation on the section of I @-@ 94 was dropped . In 1994 , the northern terminus was scaled back from the US 31 business loop to its present terminus at US 31 on the southeast side of Holland . 
 Local officials in Allegan have proposed creation of a truck route around the town . Concerned about the traffic and noise , residents have formed the Citizens for a Safer Community . They cite reports that show that the accident rates in town are higher than the statewide average . The group and local officials are proposing using 24th Street , 118th Avenue and Babylon Road for truck traffic . MDOT would require permits to erect the signs needed for the truck route . The department has indicated that the bypass would not be a state highway . MDOT will not take ownership of the roads needed for the truck route , but overall the department is supportive of the city 's efforts to make the downtown area more pedestrian friendly . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Brill Tramway = 
 The Brill Tramway , also known as the Quainton Tramway , Wotton Tramway , Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad and Metropolitan Railway Brill Branch , was a 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) rail line in the Aylesbury Vale , Buckinghamshire , England . It was privately built in 1871 by the 3rd Duke of Buckingham as a horse tram line to help transport goods between his lands around Wotton House and the national rail network . Lobbying from the nearby village of Brill led to its extension to Brill and conversion to passenger use in early 1872 . Two locomotives were bought but the line had been built for horses and thus trains travelled at an average speed of 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . 
 In 1883 , the Duke of Buckingham planned to upgrade the route to main line standards and extend the line to Oxford , creating the shortest route between Aylesbury and Oxford . Despite the backing of the wealthy Ferdinand de Rothschild , investors were deterred by costly tunnelling . In 1888 a cheaper scheme was proposed in which the line would be built to a lower standard and avoid tunnelling . In anticipation , the line was named the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad . 
 Although the existing line had been upgraded in 1894 , the extension to Oxford was never built . Instead , operation of the Brill Tramway was taken over by London 's Metropolitan Railway and Brill became one of its two north @-@ western termini . The line was rebuilt in 1910 , and more advanced locomotives were introduced , allowing trains to run faster . The population of the area remained low , and the primary income source remained the carriage of goods to and from farms . Between 1899 and 1910 other lines were built in the area , providing more direct services to London and the north of England . The Brill Tramway went into financial decline . 
 In 1933 the Metropolitan Railway became the Metropolitan line of London Transport . The Brill Tramway became part of the London Underground , despite Quainton Road being 40 miles ( 64 km ) from London and not underground . London Transport aimed to concentrate on electrification and improvement of passenger services in London and saw little possibility that routes in Buckinghamshire could become viable passenger routes . In 1935 the Brill Tramway closed . The infrastructure was dismantled and sold . Little trace remains other than the former junction station at Quainton Road , now the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brill is a small village at the top of the 600 @-@ foot ( 180 m ) high Brill Hill in the Aylesbury Vale in northern Buckinghamshire , 12 miles ( 19 km ) northeast of Oxford , and 45 miles ( 72 km ) north @-@ west of London . It was the only population centre in Bernwood Forest , a forest owned by English monarchs as a hunting ground . Traditionally believed to have been the home of King Lud , Brill Palace was a seat of the Mercian kings , the home of Edward the Confessor , and an occasional residence of the monarchs of England until at least the reign of Henry III ( 1216 – 1272 ) . Although a centre for manufacture of pottery and bricks , Brill was a long way from major roads or rivers , and separated by hills from Oxford . It remained small and isolated . In the 1861 census it had a population of 1 @,@ 300 . 
 = = = Wotton House and the Dukes of Buckingham = = = 
 Richard Plantagenet Campbell Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , the only son of Richard Plantagenet Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , 2nd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos , was born on 10 September 1823 . By the mid @-@ 19th century the family was in financial difficulty . The family 's estates and their London home at Buckingham House ( <unk> Pall Mall ) were sold and the family seat of Stowe House seized by bailiffs as security and its contents sold . Over 40 @,@ 000 acres ( 16 @,@ 200 ha ) of the family 's 55 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 22 @,@ 300 ha ) estates were sold to meet debts . 
 The only property in the control of the Grenville family was the small ancestral home of Wotton House and its associated lands around Wotton Underwood near Brill . The Grenvilles looked for ways to maximise profits from their remaining farmland around Wotton , and to seek opportunities in heavy industry and engineering . Richard Plantagenet Campbell Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville ( titled Marquess of Chandos following the death of his grandfather Richard Temple @-@ Nugent @-@ Brydges @-@ Chandos @-@ Grenville , 1st Duke of Buckingham and Chandos in 1839 ) was appointed chairman of the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) on 27 May 1857 . After the death of his father on 29 July 1861 he became 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos , and resigned from chairmanship of the LNWR , returning to Wotton House to manage the family 's estates . His efforts to pay debts incurred by his father earned praise from Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli , and in 1875 he was appointed Governor of Madras , serving until 1880 . 
 = = = Early railways in the Aylesbury Vale = = = 
 On 15 June 1839 entrepreneur and former Member of Parliament for Buckingham , Sir Harry Verney , 2nd Baronet , opened the Aylesbury Railway . Built under the direction of Robert Stephenson , it connected the London and Birmingham Railway 's Cheddington railway station on the West Coast Main Line to Aylesbury High Street railway station in eastern Aylesbury , the first station in the Aylesbury Vale . On 1 October 1863 the Wycombe Railway opened a branch from Princes Risborough railway station to Aylesbury railway station on the western side of Aylesbury , leaving Aylesbury as the terminus of two small and unconnected branch lines . 
