 Meanwhile , north of Aylesbury the Buckinghamshire Railway was being built by Sir Harry Verney . The scheme consisted of a line running southwest to northeast from Oxford to Bletchley and a second southeast from Brackley via Buckingham to join the Oxford – Bletchley line halfway along its length . The first section opened on 1 May 1850 , and the whole on 20 May 1851 . The Buckinghamshire Railway intended to extend the line south to the station at Aylesbury but the extension was not built . 
 On 6 August 1860 the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway , with the 3rd Duke ( then still Marquess of Chandos ) as chairman and Sir Harry Verney as deputy chairman , was incorporated by Act of Parliament to connect the Buckinghamshire Railway ( now operated by the LNWR ) to Aylesbury . The 2nd Duke ensured the new route ran via Quainton , near his estates around Wotton , instead of a more direct route via <unk> . Beset by financial difficulties , the line took over eight years to build , eventually opening on 23 September 1868 . The new line was connected to the Wycombe Railway 's Aylesbury station , and joined the Buckinghamshire Railway where the Oxford – Bletchley line and the line to Buckingham met . A junction station was built . With no nearby town after which to name the new station , it was named Verney Junction railway station after Sir Harry . Aylesbury now had railway lines to the east , north and southwest , but no line southeast towards London and the Channel ports . 
 = = Construction and early operations = = 
 With a railway near the border of Wotton House estate , the 3rd Duke decided to build a small @-@ scale agricultural railway to connect the estate to the railway . His intended route ran on his own land other than a small stretch west of the Aylesbury and Buckingham line . This land was owned by the Winwood Charity Trust , an operator of almshouses in Quainton of which the Duke was a trustee . The Duke agreed to pay an annual rent of £ 12 ( about £ 1 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) , in return for permission to run trains . With the consent of the Winwood Charity the route did not require Parliamentary approval , and construction could begin immediately . 
 The Duke envisaged a tramway west from Quainton Road railway station across his Wotton estate . The line was intended for transport of construction materials and agricultural produce and not for passengers . It would not have a junction with the Aylesbury and Buckingham railway but would have its own station at Quainton Road at a right angle to the A & B 's line . A turntable at the end of the tramway would link to a spur from the A & B 's line . The line was to run roughly southwest from Quainton Road to Wotton near Wotton Underwood . Just west of the station at Wotton the line split . One section would run west to Wood Siding near Brill . A short stub called Church Siding would run northwest into Wotton Underwood itself , terminating near the parish church , and a 1 mile 57 chains ( 2 @.@ 8 km ) siding would run north to a coal siding near Kingswood . The branch to Kingswood was routed to pass a pond , to allow the horses working the line to drink . 
 Ralph Augustus Jones was appointed Manager of the project , and construction began on 8 September 1870 . Twenty labourers from the Wotton estate who would otherwise have been unemployed following harvest were employed six days a week to build the line , each paid 11 s per week . They carried out all the construction except laying the track , which was by the specialists , Lawford & Houghton . The line was built using the cheapest materials and winding around hills to avoid expensive earthworks . Ballast was a mix of burnt clay and ash . The stations were crude earth banks 6 inches ( 150 mm ) high , held in place by wooden planks . As the Duke intended that the line be worked only by horse @-@ drawn carriages , the line was built with longitudinal sleepers to reduce the risk of horses tripping . A 13 @-@ foot ( 4 m ) diameter turntable was installed at Quainton Road to link the tramway to the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 On 1 April 1871 the section between Quainton Road and Wotton was formally opened by the Duke of Buckingham in a ceremony in which coal from the first goods wagon to arrive at Wotton was distributed to the poor . At its opening the line was unnamed , although it was referred to as " The Quainton Tramway " in internal correspondence . The extension from Wotton to Wood Siding was complete by 17 June 1871 ; the opening date of the northern branch to Kingswood is not recorded , but it was not fully open in February 1873 . The London and North Western Railway began a dedicated service from Quainton Road , with three vans a week of milk collected from the Wotton estate shipped to the London terminus at Broad Street . The only passengers were estate employees and people accompanying livestock . 
 The Duke and Jones intended to run no more than one train on each section of the line so the line was not built with passing loops or signalling . When more than one horse @-@ drawn train or locomotive was in operation , the Tramway operated a token system using colour @-@ coded staffs to ensure only one train could be on a section . Drivers between Quainton Road and Wotton carried a blue staff , those on west of Wotton and the Kingswood siding a red staff . 
 On 26 August 1871 an excursion ran from Wood Siding to London hauled by the Great Western Railway ( GWR ) . It carried around 150 people , for a total of 1051 ⁄ 2 passenger fares ( with each child counted as half an adult ) , and was drawn by horses between Wood Siding and Quainton Road and by locomotive from Quainton Road to Aylesbury where the carriages were attached to the 7 @.@ 30 am GWR service via Princes Risborough to London , arriving at 10 @.@ 00 am . The experiment was not a success . Sharp overhanging branches posed a danger to passengers and had to be cut back in the week before the excursion . The day was wet and ticket sales were lower than expected . The return from London to Quainton Road was delayed in Slough , and the excursion arrived back at Wood Siding at 2 @.@ 00 am . 
 The surveyors designing the line had worked on the assumption that the wagons would have a load on each wheel of 2 1 ⁄ 2 long tons ( 2 @.@ 54 t ; 2 @.@ 80 short tons ) and had designed the line accordingly . As it turned out , the four @-@ wheeled wagons used had an average weight of 3 1 ⁄ 2 long tons ( 3 @.@ 56 t ; 3 @.@ 92 short tons ) and each carried 6 – 7 long tons ( 6 @.@ 10 – 7 @.@ 11 t ; 6 @.@ 72 – 7 @.@ 84 short tons ) of goods , meaning this limit was regularly exceeded . The coal wagons used on the line weighed 5 long tons ( 5 @.@ 08 t ; 5 @.@ 60 short tons ) each and carried 10 long tons ( 10 @.@ 16 t ; 11 @.@ 20 short tons ) of coal , meaning a load on each wheel of 3 3 ⁄ 4 long tons ( 3 @.@ 81 t ; 4 @.@ 20 short tons ) . 
 As well as damaging the track the loads strained the horses , and soon the line began to suffer with derailments , particularly in wet weather . On 20 October 1871 Jones wrote to the Duke that " The traffic is now becoming so heavy that I would , most respectfully , venture to ask your Grace to consider the subject as to whether an Engine would not be the least expensive and most efficient power to work it . " 
 = = = Extension to Brill and conversion to steam = = = 
 In late 1871 residents of Brill petitioned the Duke to extend the route to Brill and open a passenger service . The Duke agreed ; it is likely he had already planned passenger services to Brill , as correspondence from early 1871 mentions passenger facilities at " the Brill terminus " . In January 1872 a scheduled passenger timetable was published and the line was named the " Wotton Tramway " . ( Although officially named the " Wotton Tramway " , it was commonly known as the " Brill Tramway " from the time of its conversion to passenger use . ) The new terminus of Brill railway station , at the foot of Brill Hill approximately 3 ⁄ 4 mile ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) north of the town , opened in March 1872 . Although it was now a passenger railway , goods traffic continued to be the primary purpose of the line . The line was heavily used to ship bricks from the brickworks around Brill , and cattle and milk from farms on the Wotton estate . By 1875 the line was carrying around 40 @,@ 000 imperial gallons ( 180 @,@ 000 l ; 48 @,@ 000 US gal ) of milk each year . The inbound delivery of linseed cake to the dairy farms and of coal to the area 's buildings were also important . The line began to carry manure from London to the area 's farms , carrying 3 @,@ 200 long tons ( 3 @,@ 300 t ; 3 @,@ 600 short tons ) in 1872 . The tramway also opened a cartage business to handle the onward shipment of goods and parcels unloaded at Brill and Wotton stations . 
 With horses unable to cope , Jones and the Duke decided to convert at least part of the railway for locomotives . The lightly laid track with longitudinal sleepers limited them to 9 long tons ( 9 @.@ 14 t ; 10 @.@ 08 short tons ) , and it was thus necessary to use the lightest locomotives possible . Two traction engines converted for railway use were bought from Aveling and Porter for £ 398 ( about £ 32 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) each . They were chosen for weight and reliability , and had a top speed on the level of 8 miles per hour ( 13 km / h ) . They took 95 – 98 minutes between Brill and Quainton Road , an average of 4 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 4 km / h ) . With an unusual configuration in which a flywheel drove chains which in turn drove the wheels , the locomotives were noisy and were nicknamed " Old <unk> " by locals . 
 The first of the new locomotives , given serial number 807 by Aveling and Porter and numbered 1 by the Tramway , was delivered to Wotton station on 27 January 1872 . On the day of its delivery , the now @-@ redundant horses had been sent away . Nobody at Wotton could operate the locomotive so a horse had to be hired from Aylesbury until the driver arrived . After the delivery of the second locomotive on 7 September 1872 , all passenger services were drawn by locomotive except on Thursdays , when locomotives were replaced by horses to allow for maintenance . The line carried 104 passengers in January 1872 , rising to 224 in April , and 456 in August 1872 . 
 With steam came the need for water . Plans to dig a well near Wotton came to nothing , and the Duke 's expedient of drawing water from a pond near Quainton Road did not impress the pond 's owner . By March 1872 Jones recorded that " The party to whom the pond near the Quainton Station belongs is making complaints about our having water and I expect he will be using force to prevent our getting any " . A wooden water tower was built at Brill station , and a large water tower known as the Black Tank was built in the fork of the main line and Church Siding . 
 While the engines proved adequate , they were slow . On 6 February 1872 , Jones timed one as taking 41 minutes to travel roughly 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Quainton Road to Wotton hauling 42 tons ( 43 t ) . They were also low @-@ powered , and when pulling a heavy load their front wheels would lift off the track . The Duke 's cost @-@ cutting led to poor maintenance of track and equipment , and the service was often interrupted by derailments and accidents . 
 In 1876 the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway raised its prices for coal haulage . All coal hauled on the Tramway needed to pass along the A & BR from Verney Junction or Aylesbury and Jones had to raise prices to cover the surcharge or keep prices stable despite the loss of profits . Road @-@ hauled coal from Bicester was already undercutting the Tramway and the unreliable engines had given the Tramway a poor reputation . Jones kept prices fixed and absorb the increased costs , wrecking the Tramway 's already declining business . 
 In 1873 the 3rd Duke attempted to have the Wotton Tramway recognised as a railway , and William Yolland inspected the line in April 1873 . The Railway Regulation Act 1844 defined minimum standards of travel , one of which was that the trains travel at an average of 12 miles per hour ( 19 km / h ) , which the Aveling and Porter locomotives could not manage . None of the stopping places had adequate station buildings , and the line had no signals . Yolland permitted the line to continue as a tramway , but refused to recognise it as a railway . 
 = = Improvement and diversification = = 
 By the mid @-@ 1870s the slow locomotives and their unreliability and inability to handle heavy loads were major problems . In 1874 Ferdinand de Rothschild bought a 2 @,@ 700 @-@ acre ( 1 @,@ 100 ha ) site near Waddesdon station from John Spencer @-@ Churchill , 7th Duke of Marlborough , for his planned Waddesdon Manor . Jones and the Duke recognised that construction would increase the haulage of heavy goods and that the engines would not cope . 
 Engineer William Gordon Bagnall had established the locomotive firm of W. G. Bagnall in 1875 . Bagnall wrote to the Duke offering to hire his first locomotive for trials . On 18 December 1876 the locomotive , Buckingham , was delivered . It entered service on 1 January 1877 , mainly on the steep section of the line between Wotton and Brill . Although Jones was unhappy with some aspects of Buckingham , he recognised the improvement and ordered a locomotive from Bagnall for £ 640 ( about £ 54 @,@ 300 in 2016 ) . Wotton was delivered on 28 December 1877 and Buckingham was returned to Bagnall in February 1878 . 
 Buckingham and Wotton were more reliable than the Aveling and Porter engines . With modern locomotives on the Brill – Quainton Road route ( the Kingswood branch generally remained worked by horses , and occasionally by the Aveling and Porter engines ) , traffic rose . The figure for milk traffic rose from 40 @,@ 000 gallons carried in 1875 to 58 @,@ 000 gallons ( 260 @,@ 000 l ; 70 @,@ 000 US gal ) in 1879 , and in 1877 the Tramway carried 20 @,@ 994 tons ( 21 @,@ 331 t ) of goods . In early 1877 it appeared on Bradshaw maps and from May 1882 Bradshaw listed the timetable . 
 Despite frequent derailments , low speed meant Wotton Tramway had a good safety record . The locomotives occasionally ran over stray sheep , and on 12 September 1888 sparks from one of the Aveling and Porter engines blew back into one of the train 's cattle trucks , igniting the straw bedding and badly burning two cows . The line had one serious accident , in which Ellen Maria Nickalls , a servant at Wotton House , was struck by a locomotive near Church Siding and killed . The coroner returned a verdict of accidental death , absolving driver James Challis . 
 = = = Passenger services = = = 
 Jones increased scheduled passenger journeys from two to three each day in each direction . With locomotives generally occupied with goods , many passenger services were drawn by horse . While the increased passenger journeys boosted revenues , the Tramway no longer owned enough horses and had to hire them . By 1881 the passenger service was losing £ 11 ( about £ 1 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) a month , although reduced use of locomotives lowered maintenance costs . Although reliability had improved , services were still slow . Horse @-@ drawn passenger services took 60 – 70 minutes to travel 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) between Quainton Road and Brill . The locomotive @-@ hauled mixed trains , with frequent stops to load and unload , were timetabled at 11 ⁄ 2 to 23 ⁄ 4 hours to make the same journey , slower than walking . 
 Jones hoped to increase passenger revenue by promoting Brill as a spa . The chalybeate springs of Dorton Spa outside Brill were known for supposed healing powers , and a resort had been built around the Spa in the 1830s , featuring a modern pump house and eight baths , set in 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) of parkland . Despite the redevelopment and the building of modern hotels in Brill , Dorton Spa was unfashionable and by the late 19th century was little used . Jones and the Spa 's owners hoped Queen Victoria would visit during her 1890 stay at Waddesdon Manor and thus boost Brill as a spa town . Although such a visit was arranged , Victoria changed her mind and visited the spa at Cheltenham instead . The spa traffic never materialised . 
 = = = Waddesdon Manor = = = 
 In 1876 Ferdinand de Rothschild began work on Waddesdon Manor , a short distance south of the Tramway 's station at Waddesdon ( later renamed Waddesdon Road ) . The top of Lodge Hill , a landmark , was levelled to provide a site and sloping drives were cut into the hill to provide access to the construction site . Transport of materials was by horse , but the contractors had to get enormous stone blocks up the hill . Rothschild 's contractors built a line , known as the Winchendon Branch , which turned off the Tramway between Waddesdon and Westcott stations and ran south to the foot of Lodge Hill . From there a cable tram ran on narrow gauge rails up the hill to a gully close to the building site . Materials were hauled along the cable tramway in tubs by a steam @-@ powered winch . The Winchendon Branch was hastily and cheaply built ; after one of the Tramway 's locomotives derailed there on 5 July 1876 Jones refused to allow his engines on it , and from then on materials were hauled along the branch by horses . 
 The building of Waddesdon Manor generated huge business for the Tramway . Large numbers of bricks from Poore 's Brickworks at Brill were shipped . By July 1877 the entire output of the brickworks was going to supply the Waddesdon Manor works , with 25 @,@ 000 bricks a week being used . Additional bricks were also shipped via Quainton Road , along with 7 @,@ 000 tons ( 7 @,@ 100 t ) of Bath Stone from Corsham . The manor also required power and in 1883 a gasworks was built to the west . A siding from Westcott station ran south to the gasworks , to carry coal . Waddesdon Manor chose not to use the Tramway for supplying coal to the gasworks and the siding was abandoned in 1886 . 
 Waddesdon Manor was complete in 1889 , 13 years after construction began . The Winchendon Branch closed and the track was removed . The gasworks remained operational , although supplied by road , until its closure during the coal shortage of 1916 . It was demolished shortly afterwards . The track of the disused siding remained until at least 1916 . 
 = = = Brill Brick and Tile Works = = = 
 Although Poore 's Brickworks was well established , Jones believed there was potential profit in the Duke of Buckingham 's capitalising on his access to a railway line by becoming directly involved in <unk> . Trials with Brill clay in 1883 proved positive , and in April 1885 Jones sought estimates for machinery and labour necessary to produce 10 million bricks a year . It was decided that 5 million bricks per year was a realistic figure , with bricks to be manufactured in kilns between Brill and Wood Siding stations and shipped down the Tramway to the national network . Progress was slow and obstructed by the local authority . 
 Few records survive of the Brill Brick and Tile Works , as it came to be called , but it was operational by 1895 . Jones ( 1974 ) says the siding to the brickworks opened with the extension to Brill , implying that Brill Brick and Tile Works existed in early 1872 . This is almost certainly incorrect ; no mention of the sidings is made in the Duke of Buckingham 's correspondence before 1887 and no reference to the Brill Brick and Tile Works exists in any source earlier than 1895 . The bricks used to build Waddesdon Manor had to be shipped by road from Poore 's to Brill or along the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway from further afield before being sent down the Tramway to the site , implying there was no works capable of making high numbers of bricks along the Tramway . 
 Brill Brick and Tile Works could not compete with the larger and better @-@ connected brickworks at Calvert and declined . The brickworks finally closed in the early 20th century . The building was taken over by the W. E. Fenemore workshop , making hay loaders , before being converted into a timber yard in the 1920s . 
 = = = Relations with the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway = = = 
 Although the introduction of the Bagnall locomotives and the traffic generated by the works at Waddesdon Manor had boosted the route 's fortunes , it remained in serious financial difficulty . The only connection with the national railway network was by way of the turntable at Quainton Road . The 3rd Duke of Buckingham chaired the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway but its management regarded the Tramway as a nuisance . In the 1870s it charged disproportionately high fees for through traffic between the Tramway and the main line with the intention of forcing the Tramway out of business . Relations deteriorated between Jones and J. G. Rowe , Secretary and Traffic Manager of the A & B. The A & B 's trains at Quainton Road would miss connections with the Tramway , causing milk shipped to Quainton to become <unk> , to the extent that Jones began unloading milk at Waddesdon and shipping it to Aylesbury by road . Although Jones asked the Duke to intervene relations remained poor ; in 1888 Rowe blocked the telegraph along the Tramway , and in one meeting Jones and Rowe threatened violence . 
 Jones sought legal advice and was told that the Duke would probably win a legal action against the A & BR . The A & BR was in such a precarious financial position that any successful legal action against them would likely have forced the line through Quainton Road to close , severing the Tramway 's connection with the national network altogether . Meanwhile , local dairy farmers began to switch to beef and butter , causing a drop in milk transport . From its peak of 20 @,@ 994 tons carried in 1877 , goods traffic fell in each of the next four years , dropping to 9 @,@ 139 tons ( 9 @,@ 286 t ) in 1881 . 
 Many of the passengers using the Tramway continued their journey by way of the A & BR line ; in 1885 , 5 @,@ 192 passengers changed trains between the A & BR and the Tramway at Quainton Road . Jones suggested that the A & BR subsidise the Tramway 's service to the sum of £ 25 ( about £ 2 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) per month to allow passenger services to continue , but the A & BR agreed to pay only £ 5 ( about £ 500 in 2016 ) per month . By the mid @-@ 1880s the Tramway was finding it difficult to cover the operating expenses of either goods or passenger operations . 
 = = Oxford extension schemes = = 
 = = = Oxford , Aylesbury and Metropolitan Junction Railway Company = = = 
 Euston railway station opened in 1837 , the first railway station connecting London with the industrial heartlands of the West Midlands and Lancashire . Railways were banned by a Parliamentary commission from operating in London itself and the station was built on the northern boundary . Other termini north of London followed at Paddington ( 1838 ) , Bishopsgate ( 1840 ) , Fenchurch Street ( 1841 ) , King 's Cross ( 1852 ) and St Pancras ( 1868 ) . All were outside the built @-@ up area , making them inconvenient . 
 Charles Pearson ( 1793 – 1862 ) had proposed an underground railway connecting the City of London with the main line rail termini in around 1840 . In 1854 he commissioned the first traffic survey , determining that each day 200 @,@ 000 walked into the City , 44 @,@ 000 travelled by omnibus , and 26 @,@ 000 in private carriages . A Parliamentary Commission backed Pearson 's proposal over other schemes . Despite concerns about vibration causing subsidence of buildings , the problems of compensating the many thousands whose homes were destroyed during digging of the tunnel , and fears that the tunnelling might break into Hell , construction began in 1860 . On 9 January 1863 the line opened as the Metropolitan Railway ( MR ) , the world 's first underground passenger railway . 
 The MR grew steadily , extending its own services and acquiring other local railways north and west of London . In 1872 Edward Watkin ( 1819 – 1901 ) was appointed Chairman . A director of many railway companies , he wanted to unify a string of companies to create a single line from Manchester via London to an intended Channel Tunnel and on to France . In 1873 Watkin negotiated to take control of the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and the section of the former Buckinghamshire Railway north from Verney Junction to Buckingham . He planned to extend the MR north from London to Aylesbury and extend the Tramway southwest to Oxford , creating a route from London to Oxford . Rail services between Oxford and London were poor , and although still roundabout , the scheme would have formed the shortest route from London to Oxford , Aylesbury , Buckingham and Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon . The Duke of Buckingham was enthusiastic and authorisation was sought from Parliament . Parliament did not share the enthusiasm and in 1875 the Buckinghamshire and Northamptonshire Union Railway Bill was rejected . Watkin did receive consent in 1881 to extend the MR to Aylesbury . 
 With extension to Aylesbury approved , the Duke of Buckingham in March 1883 announced his own scheme to extend the Brill Tramway to Oxford . The turntable at Quainton Road would be replaced with a junction to the south of the existing turntable to allow through running of trains . The stretch from Quainton Road to Brill would be straightened and improved to main line standards , and Waddesdon Road and Wood Siding stations would close . From Brill , the line would pass in a 1 @,@ 650 @-@ yard ( 1 @,@ 510 m ) tunnel through Muswell Hill to the south of Brill , and on via <unk> before crossing from Buckinghamshire into Oxfordshire at Stanton St. John . From Stanton St. John the line would stop on the outskirts of Oxford at Headington , terminating at a station to be built in the back garden of 12 High Street , St Clement 's , near Magdalen Bridge . The proposal included a separate set of rails to be provided where the old and new routes ran together , to allow the existing Wotton Tramway to continue to operate independently if it saw fit , but given the Duke 's involvement in the new scheme it is unlikely he intended to use this option . 
 At 23 miles ( 37 km ) the line would have been by far the shortest route between Oxford and Aylesbury , compared with 28 miles ( 45 km ) via the GWR ( which had absorbed the Wycombe Railway ) , and 34 miles ( 55 km ) via the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and the LNWR . The Act authorising the scheme received Royal Assent on 20 August 1883 , and the new Oxford , Aylesbury and Metropolitan Junction Railway Company was created , including the Duke of Buckingham , Ferdinand de Rothschild and Harry Verney among its directors . The scheme caught the attention of the expansionist Metropolitan Railway , who paid for the survey . Despite powerful backers , the expensive Muswell Hill tunnel deterred investors . Ferdinand de Rothschild promised to lend money in return for guarantees that the rebuilt line would include a passenger station at Westcott , and that the Duke would press the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway to open a station at the nearest point to Waddesdon Manor . Waddesdon Manor railway station opened on 1 January 1897 . 
 = = = Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad = = = 
 Despite cash from Rothschild , the company could not raise sufficient investment to begin construction of the Oxford extension , and had only been given a five @-@ year window by Parliament in which to build it . On 7 August 1888 , less than two weeks before the authorisation was to expire , the directors of the Oxford , Aylesbury and Metropolitan Junction Railway Company received Royal Assent for a revised and cheaper version . To be called the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad ( O & AT ) , the new scheme envisaged the extension 's being built to the same light specifications as the existing tramway . To avoid expensive earthworks and tunnelling , the line would parallel a road out of Brill , despite the considerable gradients involved . The entire route would be single track , other than passing places , and the Oxford terminus was to be in George Street , nearer the edge of the city . Jones was sceptical and felt that it unlikely to recoup its construction costs . 
 On 26 March 1889 the 3rd Duke of Buckingham and Chandos died , aged 65 . A special train brought his body from London to Quainton Road , and from Quainton he was taken to Stowe for the service , and on to the family vault at Wotton . Five carriages provided by the London and North Western Railway carried mourners to Church Siding , near Wotton Underwood 's church . Another carried a company of the Royal Buckinghamshire Yeomanry , associated with the Grenville family and the upkeep of which had helped bankrupt the second duke . ( This second train was delayed on the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway , arriving late to the burial . ) 
 The Dukedom was inherited only in the male line . As the 3rd Duke had three daughters but no son , the title became extinct . The 1st Duke was also Earl Temple of Stowe , a title which descended through heirs of his relatives should the male line become extinct . Consequently , on the 3rd Duke 's death this title , with most of the Wotton estate , passed to his nephew William Temple @-@ Gore @-@ Langton who became the 4th Earl Temple . 
 By this time construction of the MR extension from London to Aylesbury was underway , and on 1 July 1891 the MR absorbed the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway . Sir Harry Verney died on 12 February 1894 , and on 31 March 1894 the MR took over services on the A & BR from the GWR . On 1 July 1894 the MR extension to Aylesbury was completed , giving the MR a unified route from London to Verney Junction . The MR embarked on upgrading and rebuilding stations along the line . 
 Construction of the route from Brill to Oxford had not begun . Further Acts of Parliament were granted in 1892 and 1894 varying the route slightly and allowing electrification , but no building was carried out other than surveying . On 1 April 1894 , the proposed extension to Oxford still intended , the O & AT exercised a clause of the 1888 Act and took over the Wotton Tramway . Jones was retained as general Manager and work began on upgrading the line for the extension . 
 = = = = Rebuilding and re @-@ equipping by the O & AT = = = = 
 The track from Quainton Road to Brill was relaid with improved rails on standard transverse sleepers . The former longitudinal sleepers were used as fence posts and guard rails . The stations , little more than earth banks , were replaced with wooden platforms . Waddesdon , Westcott , Wotton and Brill were fitted with buildings housing a booking office , waiting rooms and toilets , while Wood Siding station had a small waiting room " with shelf and drawer " . Church Siding was not included and was removed from the timetable . 
 The Kingswood branch was not included in the rebuilding , and retained its original 1871 track . Two Manning Wardle locomotives , Huddersfield and Earl Temple , came into use on the line at around this time . Huddersfield had been built in 1876 and originally named Prestwich ; Earl Temple was identical to Huddersfield other than having a covered cab . The Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad could not afford the price when Earl Temple was delivered and the Earl bought it with his own money and rented it to the O & AT . In 1895 two new passenger carriages , each accommodating 40 passengers , were bought from the Bristol Wagon and Carriage Company . In 1896 Huddersfield was withdrawn , and in 1899 replaced with a new Manning Wardle locomotive named Wotton No. 2 , at which time Earl Temple was renamed Brill No. 1 . 
 The rebuilding reduced journeys between Quainton Road and Brill to between 35 and 43 minutes . From 1895 the Tramway ran four passenger services in each direction on weekdays . The population of the area remained low , and in 1901 Brill had a population of only 1206 . Passenger traffic remained insignificant and in 1898 passenger receipts were only £ 24 per month ( about £ 2 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) . 
 Meanwhile , the MR were rebuilding and <unk> Quainton Road station , freeing space for a direct link between the former Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway and the O & AT to be built . A curve between the lines opened on 1 January 1897 , allowing through running between the two lines . 
 With through running between the lines in place , in June 1899 the MR inspected the O & AT 's carriages and locomotives , and had serious concerns . The original passenger carriage began as a horse tram and was shabby internally , and unsafe as part of a longer train . The passenger carriage from the 1870s was in a poor condition . The 1895 Bristol passenger carriages were unfit owing to their light construction . Eight of the O & AT 's nine goods wagons did not comply with Railway Clearing House standards and could not be used on other lines . On 4 October 1899 the MR loaned the O & AT an eight @-@ wheeled 70 seat passenger carriage . As this had been built for the MR 's standard height platforms rather than the O & AT 's low platforms , 80 – 100 ft ( 24 – 30 m ) of each platform on the Tramway was raised to standard height to accommodate the MR carriage . 
 = = Metropolitan Railway takeover = = 
 The Metropolitan and the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company were cooperating closely by 1899 . Although the line had been upgraded in preparation for the Oxford extension and had been authorised as a railway in 1894 , construction on the extension had yet to begin . On 27 November John Bell , Watkin 's successor as Chairman of the MR , leased the line from the O & AT for £ 600 ( about £ 61 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) a year with an option to buy the line . From 1 December 1899 , the MR took over all operations . Jones stayed as Manager . The O & AT 's decrepit passenger coach , a relic of Wotton Tramway days , was removed from its wheels and used as a <unk> 's hut at Brill station . An elderly Brown , Marshalls and Co passenger coach replaced it , and a section of each platform was raised to accommodate the higher doors of this coach using earth and old railway sleepers . 
 On 28 March 1902 the 4th Earl Temple died aged 55 , succeeded by Algernon William Stephen Temple @-@ Gore @-@ Langton , 5th Earl Temple of Stowe . The Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company , which by now did nothing except collect £ 600 annual rent from the MR , pay the Winwood Charity Trust rent for their land near Quainton Road crossed by the rails , and pay Earl Temple an annual dividend of £ 400 , remained independent under the control of the 4th Earl 's trustees . 
 = = = Rebuilding and re @-@ equipping by the Metropolitan Railway = = = 
 The MR sold all but one of the dilapidated goods wagons to the Llanelly and Mynydd Mawr Railway , replacing them with five eight @-@ wheeled carriages built in 1865 – 66 . The MR considered the Manning Wardle locomotives unreliable and from early 1903 they were replaced by a pair of Metropolitan Railway D Class engines , although they were not sold until 1911 . The heavy D Class locomotives damaged the track , and in 1910 the track between Quainton Road and Brill was relaid to MR standards , using track removed from the inner London MR route but considered adequate for a rural branch line . Following this upgrading , the speed limit was increased to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) . 
 The Kingswood branch was again not upgraded , and still retained its 1871 track . It was abandoned at the end of 1915 , and the track removed in 1920 . In 1911 Brill Brick and Tile Works closed , and the siding to the brickworks was removed , with the exception of the rails on the level crossing which in 1984 were still in place , albeit <unk> over . On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , Brill became a centre for training cadets , who were housed in Wotton House and ferried in trains of five passenger coaches . 
 The Metropolitan Railway was unhappy with the performance and safety of the D Class locomotives and sold them between 1916 and 1922 . With much of their route close to London now electrified the MR had surplus steam locomotives , and two Metropolitan Railway A Class locomotives , numbers 23 ( built 1866 ) and 41 ( built 1869 ) , were transferred to the route . Built by Beyer , Peacock and Company from 1864 , the A Class had been the first locomotives owned by the Metropolitan ( in 1863 , the first year of operation , the MR had used engines loaned from the GWR ) . Although the most advanced locomotives regularly to work the route , the A Class predated all other rolling stock on the Tramway . The two locomotives operated for a week at a time . Occasionally , the MR substituted other similar locomotives . 
 Four services per day operated , taking around 40 minutes from one end to the other in 1900 , falling to 32 minutes by 1931 after the upgrading of the route and the introduction of the A Class locomotives . 
 On 1 February 1903 Jones retired and control was taken over directly by the Metropolitan Railway . Jones died on 14 April 1909 , surviving to see the railway network in the Aylesbury Vale reach its greatest extent . 
 = = New railways through the Aylesbury Vale , 1899 – 1910 = = 
 = = = Great Central Railway = = = 
 In 1893 another of Edward Watkin 's railways , the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway , had been authorised to build a new 90 miles ( 140 km ) line , from its existing station at Annesley in Nottinghamshire , south to Quainton Road . Watkin had intended to run services from Manchester and Sheffield via Quainton Road and along the Metropolitan Railway to the MR 's station at Baker Street . Following Watkin 's retirement in 1894 , the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway obtained permission for a separate station near Baker Street at Marylebone , and the line was renamed the Great Central Railway ( GCR ) . The new line joined the existing MR just north of Quainton Road on the Verney Junction branch , and opened to passengers on 15 March 1899 . Many of the bricks used in the building of the Great Central Railway were supplied by the Brill Brick and Tile Works and shipped along the Tramway , providing a significant revenue boost to the O & AT . 
 = = = Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway = = = 
 Following Watkin 's retirement relations between the Great Central Railway and the Metropolitan Railway deteriorated badly . The GCR route to London ran over MR lines from Quainton Road to London , and to reduce reliance on the shaky goodwill of the MR , GCR General Manager William Pollitt decided to create a link with the Great Western Railway to create a second route into London . In 1899 the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway began construction of a new line , commonly known as the Alternative Route , to link the GWR 's existing station at Princes Risborough to the new Great Central line . The line ran from Princes Risborough north to meet the Great Central at Grendon Underwood , about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Quainton Road . The new line was to cross the Tramway on a bridge immediately east of Wotton station , although no intersection was built between the lines . Although the lines did not connect , a temporary siding was built from the Tramway onto the embankment of the new line , and used for the transport of construction materials and the removal of spoil from the works during the building of the new line . Although formally an independent company , in practice the line was operated as a part of the Great Central Railway . 
 The new line was planned as a through route and was not intended to have any stations of its own , but in 1904 it was decided to build two stations on it . A new station , also named Wotton , was built immediately to the south of the existing Wotton station . On 2 April 1906 the new route opened to passengers . The two Wotton stations were very close together , and the same stationmaster was responsible for both . 
 = = = Chiltern Main Line Bicester cut @-@ off = = = 
 In 1910 the new Bicester cut @-@ off line of the GWR Chiltern Main Line opened , allowing trains from London to Birmingham to bypass a long curve through Oxford . The new line was routed directly through Wood Siding , although no interchange station was built . The GWR ran in a cutting beneath the existing station ; Wood Siding station and its siding were rebuilt at the GWR 's expense between 1908 – 1910 to stand on a wide bridge above the GWR 's line . The new line included the station named Brill and Ludgershall , which in reality was considerably further from Brill than the existing Brill station . 
 With the opening of the new routes , the Tramway for the first time suffered serious competition . Although further from Brill than the Tramway 's station , the GWR 's station provided a fast and direct route to the GWR 's London terminus at Paddington . The Great Central Railway 's station at Wotton , and the other Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway station at Akeman Street , provided fast and direct routes to both Paddington and to the Great Central 's new London terminus at Marylebone , without the need to change trains at Quainton Road . In addition , following the end of the First World War motorised road transport grew rapidly , drawing passenger and goods traffic away from the railways . The Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company repeatedly tried to persuade the Metropolitan Railway to buy the line outright , but the MR declined . In July 1923 the O & AT tried to sell the line to the GWR and to the Electric and Railway Finance Corporation , but was rebuffed by both . 
 = = London Transport = = 
 On 1 July 1933 , the Metropolitan Railway , along with London 's other underground railways , aside from the short Waterloo & City Railway , was taken into public ownership as part of the newly formed London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) . Thus , despite Brill and Verney Junction being 50 miles ( 80 km ) and over two hours travel from the City of London , the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad and the former Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway became parts of the London Underground network . The locomotives and carriages were repainted with London Transport 's Johnston Sans emblem . 
 By this time , the route from Quainton Road to Brill was in severe decline . Competition from the newer lines and from improving road haulage had drawn away much of the tramway 's custom , and the trains would often run without a single passenger . The A Class locomotives were now 70 years old , and the track itself was poorly maintained . Trains , once again , were regularly derailing on the line . 
 Frank Pick , Managing Director of the Underground Group from 1928 and the Chief Executive of the LPTB , aimed to move the network away from freight services , and to concentrate on the electrification and improvement of the core routes in London . He saw the lines beyond Aylesbury via Quainton Road to Brill and Verney Junction as having little future as financially viable passenger routes , concluding that at least £ 2 @,@ 000 ( about £ 130 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) per year would be saved by closing the Brill branch . 
 On 1 June 1935 , the London Passenger Transport Board gave the required six months notice to the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company that it intended to terminate operations on the tramway . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 To fulfil their obligations , London Transport formally inspected the line on 23 July 1935 . The inspection was carried out with great speed , the special train taking just 15 minutes to travel the length of the line from Brill to Quainton Road . The inspection confirmed that the closure process was to proceed . 
 The last scheduled passenger service left Quainton Road in the afternoon of 30 November 1935 . Hundreds of people gathered , and a number of members of the Oxford University Railway Society travelled from Oxford in an effort to buy the last ticket . Accompanied by firecrackers and fog signals , the train ran the length of the line to Brill , where the passengers posed for a photograph . 
 Late that evening , a two @-@ coach staff train pulled out of Brill , accompanied by a band playing Auld Lang Syne and a white flag . The train stopped at each station along the route , picking up the staff , documents and valuables from each . At 11 @.@ 45 pm the train arrived at Quainton Road , greeted by hundreds of locals and railway enthusiasts . At the stroke of midnight , the rails connecting the tramway to the Metropolitan Railway main line were ceremonially severed . 
 Following the withdrawal of London Transport services the Metropolitan Railway 's lease was voided and at midnight on 1 December 1935 the railway and stations reverted to the control of the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad Company . The O & AT Board by now had only three members : the 5th Earl Temple , the Earl 's agent Robert White , and the former Brill hay @-@ loader manufacturer W. E. Fenemore . 
 Although at the time of the closure there was some speculation that the O & AT would continue to operate the tramway as a mineral railway , with no funds and no rolling stock of its own , the O & AT was unable to operate the line . On 2 April 1936 , the entire infrastructure of the stations was sold piecemeal at auction . Excluding the houses at Westcott and Brill , which were sold separately , the auction raised £ 72 7s ( about £ 4 @,@ 430 in 2016 ) in total . The Ward Scrap Metal Company paid £ 7 @,@ 000 ( about £ 429 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) for the rails , with the exception of those at Quainton Road which were retained as a siding . 
 With the stations at Wood Siding and Brill closed , and the GWR 's Brill and Ludgershall railway station inconveniently sited , the GWR opened a new station on the Chiltern Main Line near to Brill at Dorton Halt on 21 June 1937 . 
 On 5 January 1937 , the board of the Oxford & Aylesbury Tramroad met for the last time . On 5 February 1937 a winding up petition was presented to the High Court , and on 24 March 1937 Mr W. E. Fisher was appointed liquidator . On 11 November 1940 Fisher was formally discharged , and the O & AT officially ceased to exist . 
 = = After closure = = 
 After closure , the line was largely forgotten . Because it had been built on private land without an Act of Parliament , few records of it prior to the Oxford extension schemes exist in official archives . At least some of the rails remained in place in 1940 , as records exist of their removal during the building of RAF Westcott . Other than the station buildings at Westcott and Quainton Road almost nothing survives of the tramway , although much of the route can still be traced by a double line of hedges . The former trackbed between Quainton Road and Waddesdon Road is now a public footpath known as the Tramway Walk . 
 After the death of the 3rd Duke of Buckingham the family archives , including the records of the Brill Tramway , were sold to the Huntington Library in California . In 1968 the London Underground Railway Society launched a fundraising appeal to microfilm the relevant material , and in January 1971 the microfilms were opened to researchers at the University of London Library ( now Senate House Library ) . 
 In the 1973 documentary Metro @-@ land , John Betjeman spoke of a 1929 visit to Quainton Road , and of watching a train depart for Brill : " The steam ready to take two or three passengers through oil @-@ lit halts and over level crossings , a rather bumpy journey " . 
 Wotton station on the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway , which in 1923 had been taken over by the London and North Eastern Railway , remained open ( albeit little used and served by only two trains per day in each direction ) until 7 December 1953 , when the station was abandoned . The bridge that had formerly carried the GW & <unk> over the tramway at Wotton was demolished in 1970 , and the former GW & <unk> station was converted to a private house . 
 Both Dorton Halt and Brill and <unk> stations were closed on 7 January 1963 and trains no longer stop , although the line through them remains in use by trains between Princes Risborough and Bicester North . Quainton Road station was bought in 1969 by members of the London Railway Preservation Society to use as a permanent base , and now houses the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . The station is still connected to the railway network and used by freight trains and occasional special passenger services , but no longer has a scheduled passenger service . There are no longer any open railway stations in the areas formerly served by the tramway . Plans have been proposed by the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre to rebuild and reopen a stretch of the tramway as a heritage railway . 
 = = Satellite Mapping = = 
 Quainton Road railway station ( 51 ° 51 ′ 50 @.@ 53 ″ N 0 ° 55 ′ 52 @.@ 02 ″ W ) 
 Waddesdon ( Road ) ( 51 ° 51 ′ 7 @.@ 15 ″ N 0 ° 56 ′ 48 @.@ 72 ″ W ) 
 Westcott ( 51 ° 50 ′ 42 @.@ 16 ″ N 0 ° 57 ′ 21 @.@ 31 ″ W ) 
 Wotton Underwood ( 51 ° 50 ′ 5 @.@ 95 ″ N 1 ° 0 ′ 4 @.@ 18 ″ W ) 
 Church Siding Halt ( 51 ° 50 ′ 18 @.@ 02 ″ N 1 ° 0 ′ 7 @.@ 52 ″ W ) 
 Wood Siding ( 51 ° 49 ′ 58 @.@ 42 ″ N 1 ° 1 ′ 30 @.@ 98 ″ W ) 
 Woodham ( 51 ° 51 ′ 38 @.@ 86 ″ N 0 ° 59 ′ 30 @.@ 79 ″ W ) 
 Brill ( 51 ° 49 ′ 57 @.@ 23 ″ N 1 ° 2 ′ 53 @.@ 54 ″ W ) 
 = Hurricane Ava ( 1973 ) = 
 Hurricane Ava was one of the strongest tropical cyclones ever recorded in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . It was the first named storm of the 1973 Pacific hurricane season . Forming in early June , Hurricane Ava eventually reached Category 5 intensity on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , the first Pacific hurricane to do so in June and the earliest ever in a season . Its central pressure made it the most intense known Pacific hurricane at the time . Despite its intensity , Hurricane Ava stayed at sea without significant impact . 
 Ava was given the most advanced measurement and reconnaissance available at the time . Recon flights were conducted and meteorological equipment was tested . The hurricane was also photographed from space by satellites and Skylab astronauts . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On June 2 , 1973 , a tropical depression formed about 250 miles ( 400 km ) south of Salina Cruz , Oaxaca . It started out nearly stationary , and became a tropical storm late on the same day it formed , the first named storm of the 1973 Pacific hurricane season . Ava then slowly moved westwards away from Mexico and became a hurricane on June 3 . Ava became a major hurricane on the afternoon of June 5 . The next day , a United States Air Force recon flight measured a wind speed of 150 mph ( 250 km / h ) and a central pressure of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) . These measurements made Hurricane Ava by far the most intense storm of the season . 
 At its peak , Hurricane Ava had winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . These winds made it a Category 5 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , the highest possible category and the first Category 5 since the 1959 season . Ava was also a hurricane with windspeeds rapidly increasing the closer to the eye they were measured . Over a distance of 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 5 km ) , wind speeds increased from 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) to 158 mph ( 255 km / h ) , and they increased from 105 ( 165 m / h ) to 158 mph ( 255 km / h ) over half that distance . The reading of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) was roughly 100 mbar ( 3 @.@ 0 inHg ) lower than the ambient environment far from the storm . 
 After its peak , Hurricane Ava started weakening on June 7 as it continued its westward path . Its winds were 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) on June 7 and 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) on the next day . It was no longer a major hurricane after its winds fell to 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on June 9 . Later that day it weakened to a tropical storm . Tropical Storm Ava became Tropical Depression Ava on June 11 . The system then turned north and dissipated on June 12 . Its remnants then became embedded in the trade winds as a tropical wave . 
 = = Forecasting and observation = = 
 In terms of how well it was forecast , Ava had the largest error of any cyclone during the season . This 14 ° error five days out was mainly due to its northward turn when it was a weakening depression . 
 For a few days , Ava was directly underneath Skylab during its first manned mission . Astronauts acquired photographs of the hurricane , which was big enough for Science Pilot Joseph Kerwin to describe it as " an enormous spiral " that was big enough to dominate the view outside the space station 's window and prevent anything else from being seen . Astronauts also provided microwave data through Earth Resources Experiment Package sensors . Skylab also used a scatterometer on the system . Unfortunately , Skylab 's scatterometer data was harder to use than normal as it was degraded . 
 Ava was also underneath the NOAA @-@ 2 and Nimbus 5 weather satellites . NOAA @-@ 2 provided photographs that were used to estimate Ava 's maximum windspeeds . Satellite images were useful throughout the cyclone 's existence , as did the wind reports of three ships when Ava was a young tropical storm . Nimbus 5 carried an Electrically Scanning Microwave Radiometer and Temperature @-@ Humidity Infrared Radiometer . Both were used to study Ava . The main data provided by the <unk> was data indicating cloud temperatures . The <unk> 's main data was on rainfall rates , densities , and distributions . The observations also provided confirmation that clouds that are not vertically developed very much can produce tropical rainfall . 
 Recon aircraft also penetrated Hurricane Ava . It was the first Pacific hurricane penetrated by National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration aircraft , but not by aircraft from other agencies . NOAA craft were laden with sensors and measured wave heights reaching 40 ft ( 12 m ) with a microwave radar system and a laser altimeter . That was the first time ever that sea conditions in a tropical cyclone had been measured that way . United States Air Force planes measured central pressure , air temperature , and humidity in the eye pressures using dropsondes . The collection of data from both space and the air was done in order to allow comparisons . Collectively , all of this measuring made Hurricane Ava the best @-@ measured northeastern Pacific tropical cyclone at the time . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Hurricane Ava stayed at sea . Consequently , no one was killed and there was no reported damage . However , when it was a recently named tropical storm , Ava did cause sustained winds below gale @-@ force to three ships called the Joseph Lykes , Hoegh Trotter , and <unk> . In addition , large ocean waves churned up by Ava created hazardous surf and strong riptides at Southern California beaches on June 9 and June 10 . Those waves reached heights of up to 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) at Newport Beach , 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) at Long Beach , and 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) at Seal Beach . Those waves made beaches more hazardous , resulting in double @-@ to @-@ triple the usual contingent of lifeguards throughout Southern California beaches . At Seal Beach and Newport Beach , lifeguards made 35 and 75 rescues , respectively . 
 When it was active , Hurricane Ava set many records . Several have since been broken , but Ava still holds a few . Ava ceased being a Category 5 hurricane on June 7 , 1973 . 1994 's Emilia reached Category 5 intensity on July 19 , 1994 . This span of 7 @,@ 712 days , which Ava began and Emilia ended , is the longest time between successive Category 5 hurricanes in the northeastern Pacific , and anywhere worldwide , in recorded history . When Hurricane Gilma reached Category 5 strength on July 24 also in 1994 , it marked the shortest gap between Category 5 Pacific hurricanes recorded . Ava was also a Category 5 hurricane for exactly 24 hours ; a record at the time . Hurricane John broke that in the 1994 season , and hurricanes Linda and Ioke also lasted longer , tied with John . In addition , Ava is the strongest June tropical cyclone in the western hemisphere north of the equator . 
 A spokesperson from the American National Weather Service was quoted as saying that , " Ava had sustained winds of about 180 knots with some gusts at 200 knots when she [ sic ] was peaking " . However the official " Best track " data file and the seasonal summary in the Monthly Weather Review contradict that report and give maximum winds of 140 knots . If Ava 's winds were that high , they would one of the highest ever reported in a tropical cyclone anywhere . Like any report of winds that high it is suspect . 
 At the time , Hurricane Ava 's minimum known pressure of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) was the lowest known in its basin , making Ava the most intense Pacific hurricane . Ava is now the fifth most intense , tied with Hurricane Ioke , as Hurricanes Patricia , Linda , Rick and Kenna recorded lower pressures . However , Linda 's and Rick 's pressures were only estimated from satellite imagery , so Ava held the record for lowest measured pressure until Kenna surpassed it in 2002 . However , the meteorological record for the eastern north Pacific are unreliable because geostationary satellite observation did not begin until 1966 . Ava 's pressure record is itself incomplete ; Ava was only a Category 4 when its 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) pressure was measured , and the only reading when it was a Category 5 is 928 mbar ( 27 @.@ 4 inHg ) . These two factors mean that Ava 's lowest pressure may be below 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) , and that there may be other cyclones stronger than Ava . 
 = Ride the Lightning = 
 Ride the Lightning is the second studio album by American heavy metal band Metallica , released on July 27 , 1984 , by the independent label Megaforce Records . The album was recorded in three weeks with producer Flemming Rasmussen at the Sweet Silence Studios in Copenhagen , Denmark . The artwork , based on a concept by the band , depicts an electric chair in the midst of a thunderstorm . The title was taken from a passage in Stephen King 's novel The Stand . Although rooted in the thrash metal genre , the album showcased the band 's musical maturity and lyrical sophistication . This was partly because bassist Cliff Burton introduced the basics of music theory to the rest of the band and had more input in the songwriting . Instead of relying strictly on fast tempos as on Kill ' Em All , Metallica broadened its approach by employing acoustic guitars , extended instrumentals , and more complex harmonies . The overall recording costs were paid by Metallica 's European label Music for Nations because Megaforce was unable to cover it . It was the last album to feature songwriting contributions from former lead guitarist Dave Mustaine . 
 Ride the Lightning received positive response from music critics , who saw it as a more ambitious effort than its predecessor . Metallica promoted the album on the Bang That Head That Doesn 't Bang European tour in late 1984 , and on its North American leg in the first half of 1985 . The band performed at a few major music festivals , such as Monsters of Rock and Day on the Green later that year . Two months after its release , Elektra Records signed Metallica to a multi @-@ year contract and reissued the album . Ride the Lightning peaked at number 100 on the Billboard 200 with no radio exposure . Although 75 @,@ 000 copies were initially pressed for the American market , the album sold half a million by November 1987 . It was certified 6 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in 2012 for shipping six million copies in the United States . Many rock publications have ranked Ride the Lightning on their best album lists , saying it had a lasting impact on the genre . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Metallica released its debut studio album Kill ' Em All on the independent label Megaforce Records in July 1983 . The album was seen as the birth of thrash metal , a heavy metal subgenre defined by its brisk riffs and intense percussion . After finishing its promotional tour , Metallica began composing new material and from September began performing the songs that were to make up Ride the Lightning at concerts . Because the band had little money , its members often ate one meal a day and stayed at fans ' homes throughout the tour . Frontman James Hetfield felt uneasy about performing vocals so the band offered the job to Armored Saint singer John Bush , who turned down the offer because Armored Saint was doing well at the time . Metallica started recording on February 20 , 1984 at Sweet Silence Studios in Copenhagen , Denmark . The album was produced by Flemming Rasmussen , founder of Sweet Silence , who went on to produce the band 's next two albums . Drummer Lars Ulrich chose Rasmussen because he liked his work on Rainbow 's Difficult to Cure ( 1981 ) and was keen to record in Europe . Rasmussen , who had not heard of Metallica , agreed to work on the album , even though his studio employees questioned the band 's talent . Rasmussen listened to Metallica 's tapes before the members arrived and thought the band had great potential . Metallica rehearsed the album 's material at Mercyful Fate 's practice room in Copenhagen . 
 Before entering the studio , Metallica collected ideas on " riff tape " recordings of various jam sessions . Hetfield and Ulrich went through the tapes and selected the strongest riffs to assemble into songs . Instruments were recorded separately , with Hetfield playing only rhythm guitar . Rasmussen , with the help of drum roadie Flemming Larsen , taught Ulrich the basics of timing and beat duration . Although four tracks were already arranged , the band members were not used to creating songs in the studio , as they had not done so for Kill ' Em All . Lead guitarist Kirk Hammett took the album 's name from a passage in Stephen King 's novel The Stand . The cover art , displaying an electric chair in the midst of lighting bolts , was conceived before recording began . Metallica initially had sound problems because its gear was stolen three weeks before the band arrived in Copenhagen . Band members slept in the studio by day and recorded by night . Because the group was looking for a major label deal , several A & R people were visiting the studio . Metallica was apparently going to sign with Bronze Records , but the deal fell through because Bronze executive Gerry Bron wanted the US edition to be remixed by engineer Eddie Kramer , which Metallica declined . 
 Metallica had to record quickly because of European shows scheduled 29 days after it entered the studio . Recording finished on March 14 and Megaforce released the album on July 27 . Although the original album budget was $ 20 @,@ 000 , the final expense was above $ 30 @,@ 000 . Metallica 's European label Music for Nations paid the studio costs because Megaforce owner Jon Zazula could not afford them . Metallica was unhappy with the lack of promotion by Megaforce , and decided to sever ties with Zazula . Major label Elektra Records employee Michael Alago noticed Metallica at The Stone gig in San Francisco and invited Elektra 's chairman and the head of promotion to see the August show in New York . The performance at Roseland Ballroom , opening with Anthrax and Raven , pleased the Elektra staff and the band was offered a contract the following morning . On September 12 , Metallica signed with Elektra , who re @-@ released the album on November 19 . Ride the Lightning was the last Metallica album to feature co @-@ writing contributions from former lead guitarist Dave Mustaine , who received credit on the title track and the instrumental " The Call of Ktulu " . The album also represented the first time Hammett was given writing credits . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Ride the Lightning exhibited greater musical maturity , with sonically broader songs , than Metallica 's debut Kill ' Em All , which was noted for its one @-@ dimensional sound . This was partially because of bassist Cliff Burton 's knowledge of music theory . He showed Hetfield how to augment core notes with complementary counter @-@ melodies and how basic guitar harmony worked , which reflected on the song compositions . Hetfield developed more socially aware lyrics , as well as ominous and semi @-@ philosophical references . Ulrich explained that Metallica opted not to rely strictly on fast tempos as on the previous album , but to explore other musical approaches that sounded powerful and heavy . Grinder magazine 's Kevin Fisher summarized the album as " ultimate thrash , destruction and total blur " that reminded him of the speed and power of Kill ' Em All . Music journalist Martin Popoff observed that Ride the Lightning offered " sophistication and brutality in equal measure " and was seen as something new at the time of its release . 
 The major @-@ key acoustic introduction to " Fight Fire with Fire " displayed Metallica 's evolving towards a more harmonically complex style of songwriting . The fastest Metallica song in terms of picking speed , it is driven by nimble tremolo @-@ picked riffs in the verses and chorus . The extended solo section at the end dissolves in a sound effect of a vast nuclear explosion . The song discourages the " eye for an eye " approach , and its lyrical themes focused on nuclear warfare and Armageddon . " Ride the Lightning " was Metallica 's first song to emphasize the misery of the criminal justice system . The lyrics were written from the perspective of someone who is anticipating execution by the electric chair . The song , one of the two album tracks that credited Mustaine , begins in a mid @-@ tempo which gradually accelerates as the song progress . It features an instrumental middle section highlighted by Hammett 's soloing . According to Hetfield , the song " was not a criticism of capital punishment , which I 'm actually a supporter of . Rather , it 's simply about a man who faces death in the electric chair for a crime he didn 't commit " , as in the opening lyrics : " Guilty as charged / But Damn it / It ain 't right " . 
 " For Whom the Bell Tolls " begins with a bell tolling , followed by a marching riff and high @-@ register bass melody . The chromatic introduction , which Burton wrote before he joined Metallica , is often mistaken for an electric guitar ; it is actually Burton 's bass guitar augmented with distortion and a wah @-@ wah pedal . The lyrics were based on Ernest Hemingway 's novel of the same name , which explores the horror and dishonor of modern warfare . " For Whom the Bell Tolls " was released as a promotional single in two versions , an edit on side A and the album version on side B. " Fade to Black " is a power ballad whose lyrics contemplate suicide . Hetfield wrote the words because he felt powerless after the band 's equipment was stolen before the January 1984 show in Boston . Musically , the song begins with an acoustic guitar introduction overlaid with electric soloing . The song becomes progressively heavier and faster , ending with multi @-@ layered guitar solos . The song 's structure foreshadows later Metallica ballads , " Welcome Home ( Sanitarium ) " and " One " . " Fade to Black " was released as a promotional single in 1984 , in glow in the dark green . 
 " Trapped Under Ice " is about a person who wakes from a cryonic state . Realizing there is nowhere to go , and no @-@ one will come to the rescue , the person helplessly awaits impending doom . The song is built on a fast @-@ picked galloping riff , reminiscent of the album 's opener . It was inspired by a track Hammett 's former band Exodus had demoed called " Impaler " , which was later released on that band 's album Tempo of the Damned ( 2004 ) . " Escape " was originally titled " The Hammer " and was intended to be released as a single due to its lighter riffs and conventional song structure . The intro features a counterpoint bass melody and a chugging guitar riff that resolves into a standard down @-@ stroked riff . Metallica performed " Escape " live only once , at the 2012 Orion Music + More festival , while performing Ride the Lightning in its entirety . 
 " Creeping Death " describes the Plague of the Death of the Firstborn ( Exodus 12 : 29 ) . The lyrics deal with the 10 plagues visited on Ancient Egypt ; four of them are mentioned throughout the song , as well as the Passover . The bridge , with its chant " Die , by my hand ! " , was originally written by Hammett for the song " Die by His Hand " while he was playing in Exodus , who recorded it as a demo but did not feature it on a studio album . " Creeping Death " was released as a single with a B @-@ side titled Garage Days Revisited made up of covers of Diamond Head 's " Am I Evil ? " and Blitzkrieg 's " Blitzkrieg " . " The Call of Ktulu " , tentatively titled " When Hell Freezes Over " , was inspired by H. P. Lovecraft 's book The Shadow over Innsmouth , which was introduced to the rest of the band by Burton . The title was taken from one of Lovecraft 's key stories featuring Cthulhu , The Call of Cthulhu , although the original name was modified to " Ktulu " for easier pronunciation . The song begins with D minor chord progression in the intro , followed by a two @-@ minute bass solo over a rhythmic riff pattern . Michael Kamen rearranged the song for Metallica 's 1999 S & M project and won a Grammy Award for Best Rock Instrumental Performance in 2001 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ride the Lightning received positive reviews from music critics . According to Q magazine , the album confirmed Metallica 's status as the leading heavy metal band of the modern era . The magazine credited the group for redefining the norms of thrash metal with " Fade to Black " , the genre 's first power ballad . Kerrang ! stated that the album 's maturity and musical intelligence helped Metallica expand heavy metal 's boundaries . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune described Ride the Lightning as a more refined extension of the group 's debut . In a retrospective review , Sputnikmusic 's Channing Freeman named it as one of the few albums that can be charming and powerful at the same time . He praised Hetfield 's vocal performance and concluded that Metallica was " firing on all cylinders " . AllMusic 's Steve Huey saw the album as a more ambitious and remarkable effort than Kill ' Em All . He called Ride the Lightning an " all @-@ time metal classic " because of the band 's rich musical imagination and lyrics that avoided heavy metal cliches . The Rolling Stone Album Guide viewed the album as a great step forward for the band and as an album that established the concept for Metallica 's following two records . Colin Larkin , writing in the Encyclopedia of Popular Music , singled out " For Whom the Bell Tolls " as an example of Metallica 's growing music potential . Popoff regards Ride the Lightning as an album where " extreme metal became art " . 
 Megaforce initially printed 75 @,@ 000 copies of the album for the US market , while Music for Nations took care of the European market . By the autumn of 1984 , Ride the Lightning had moved 85 @,@ 000 copies in Europe , resulting in Metallica 's first cover story for British rock magazine Kerrang ! in its December issue . After signing Metallica , Elektra released the single " Creeping Death " in a sleeve depicting a bridge and a skull painted grey and green . The album peaked at number 100 on the Billboard 200 with no radio exposure . In 1984 , the French record label <unk> Records misprinted the color of the album cover in green , rather than blue , and 400 copies with the green cover were pressed . Because of their rarity , these green albums have become collectors ' items . Ride the Lightning went gold by November 1987 and in 2012 was certified 6 × platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping six million copies in the US . Many rock publications have ranked Ride the Lightning on their best album lists . The album placed fifth on IGN Music 's " Top 25 Metal Albums " list . Spin listed it as a thrash metal essential , declaring it " the <unk> thrash ever " . According to Guitar World , Ride the Lightning " didn ’ t just change the band ’ s trajectory — it reset the course of metal itself " . Corey Deiterman of the Houston Press considers Ride the Lightning the most influential Metallica album , saying it had a lasting impact on genres such as crossover thrash and hardcore punk . 
 = = Touring = = 
 To promote Ride the Lightning , Metallica commenced the Bang That Head That Doesn 't Bang European tour on November 16 , 1984 , in Rouen , France , with British NWOBHM band Tank as support . The tour continued with dates in Belgium , Italy , Germany , and the Nordic countries . After a Christmas break , the group embarked on a US tour , firstly as a co @-@ headlining act with W.A.S.P. and then as headliners with Armored Saint supporting . At a gig in Portland , Oregon , Metallica covered " The Money Will Roll Right In " by Fang , with Armored Saint onstage . The American leg ended in May , and the band spent the following two months working on the next studio album , Master of Puppets , whose recording sessions were scheduled to begin in September . Metallica performed at the Monsters of Rock festival held at Castle Donington in England on August 17 in front of 70 @,@ 000 fans . The band was placed between Ratt and Bon Jovi , two glam metal groups whose sound and appearance were much unlike Metallica 's . At the start of the set , Hetfield pronounced to the audience : " If you came here to see spandex , eye make @-@ up , and the words ' oh baby ' in every fuckin ' song , this ain 't the fuckin ' band ! " Two weeks later , Metallica appeared on the Day on the Green festival in Oakland , California , before 90 @,@ 000 people . The last show Metallica played before recording began was the Loreley Metal Hammer festival in Germany , headlined by Venom . Metallica finished 1985 with a show at the Sacramento Memorial Auditorium on December 29 opening for Y & T , and a New Year 's Eve concert at the Civic Auditorium in San Francisco on a bill with Metal Church , Exodus , and Megadeth , the first time Metallica and Megadeth shared a stage . At this gig , Metallica premiered " Master of Puppets " and " Disposable Heroes " , songs from the then @-@ upcoming third studio album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by James Hetfield , except " Creeping Death " by Hetfield and Kirk Hammett . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = = Metallica = = = 
 James Hetfield – lead vocals , rhythm guitar , acoustic guitar 
 Kirk Hammett – lead guitar 
 Cliff Burton – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Lars Ulrich – drums 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Flemming Rasmussen – production , engineering 
 Metallica – production , cover concept 
 Mark Whitaker – executive production 
 Tom Coyne , Frankford Wayne – mastering on Megaforce release 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering on Elektra release 
 George Marino – remastering on 1995 reissue 
 Mike Gillies – mixing of digital reissue bonus tracks 
 Q Prime Inc . – management 
 Michael Alago – A & R coordinator 
 Peter Paterno – legal representation 
 Marsha Vlasic , Neil Warnock – booking agents for The Agency Group 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 AD Artists – cover design 
 Fin Costello , Robert <unk> , Pete Cronin , Rick Brackett , Harold <unk> - photography 
 Anthony D. <unk> - tour / live photography 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = George E. Crothers = 
 George Edward Crothers ( May 27 , 1870 – May 16 , 1957 ) was one of the first students at Stanford University and was instrumental in putting the university on a solid legal and financial footing following the deaths of its founders , Leland and Jane Stanford . He served as a member of Stanford 's board of trustees and as a California superior court judge . His monetary gifts to his alma mater made possible the construction of two student residences on the Stanford campus — one named for himself , the other dedicated to the memory of his mother . 
 = = Early life = = 
 George Crothers was born on May 27 , 1870 in Wapello , Iowa to John Crothers and Margaret Jane Crothers ( née Fair ) , who had emigrated to the United States from Ireland the previous year . The family moved to San Jose , California in 1883 , and George enrolled at Stanford in 1891 as part of the new university 's " pioneer class " . He received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Stanford in 1895 , followed by a law degree in 1896 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Crothers set up a law practice with his brother , Thomas — also a Stanford graduate and a lawyer — and became a close adviser to Jane Stanford . Together with his brother , Crothers identified and corrected numerous major legal defects in the terms of the university 's founding grant and successfully lobbied for an amendment to the California state constitution granting Stanford an exemption from taxation on its educational property — a change which allowed Jane Stanford to donate her stock holdings to the university . In 1902 , Crothers became the first alumnus of Stanford to serve as a member of the university 's board of trustees . 
 Crothers became involved in legal action over the estate of his maternal uncle , James Graham Fair . Nettie Craven claimed to have been married to Fair at the time of his death , but at a 1900 trial , Crothers ' detailed analysis of the handwriting on the documents Craven had offered in support of her claim convinced the court that they were forgeries . 
 From 1913 to 1921 , Crothers served as a judge of the Superior Court in San Francisco , California . One case which came before him involved a physician whose license had been revoked by the State Board of Medical Examiners for performing an abortion . Judge Crothers refused to overturn the board 's revocation on technical grounds , and his decision was upheld on appeal . Even after Crothers ' retirement from the bench and his return to private law practice , he was commonly referred to as " Judge " throughout the rest of his life . In a 1956 letter , former U.S. president ( and Stanford classmate ) Herbert Hoover wrote , " Judge George E. Crothers was my good friend in bad times and in good times for over sixty years " . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Crothers established a scholarship fund for Stanford law students in 1912 . In 1929 , he established an annual prize fund for literary composition at the University of California . A set of carillon bells for Grace Cathedral in San Francisco was cast with the help of donations from Crothers and other benefactors . 
 In his later years , Crothers made a donation to Stanford for the construction of Crothers Hall , an on @-@ campus dormitory for law students which opened in 1948 . With the help of additional gifts by Crothers , a second residence ( for graduate students in engineering ) was built next to the first ; opened in 1955 , it was named Crothers Memorial Hall in memory of the judge 's mother . These two residences were extensively renovated and converted into undergraduate housing in 2009 . The name " Crothers Memorial " is commonly abbreviated to " Cro Mem " — a short form which was the inspiration for the early personal computer company <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Crothers married Elizabeth Mills in 1911 . They were unable to have children , and Elizabeth was 38 years old when she died in 1920 . 
 = = Death = = 
 Crothers died at Stanford Hospital in Palo Alto , California on May 16 , 1957 . He is buried in San Jose , California , along with his parents . 
 = Thurman Tucker = 
 Thurman Lowell Tucker ( September 26 , 1917 – May 7 , 1993 ) was an American professional baseball player . A center fielder , Tucker played in Major League Baseball for nine seasons in the American League with the Chicago White Sox and Cleveland Indians . In 701 career games , Tucker recorded a batting average of .255 and accumulated 24 triples , nine home runs , and 179 runs batted in ( RBI ) . He was nicknamed " Joe E. " Tucker because of his resemblance to comedian Joe E. Brown . 
 Born and raised in Texas , Tucker first played professionally with the Siloam Springs Travelers . After gradually progressing through minor league baseball , he signed with the Chicago White Sox before the 1941 season . His major league debut came the following year and he spent two years as the White Sox 's starting center fielder until he enlisted in the armed forces during World War II . Upon his return , Tucker played two more seasons for the White Sox . Subsequently , he was traded to the Cleveland Indians , for whom he played four years , and continued to play minor league baseball throughout the 1950s . After his retirement , he became a major league scout and insurance agent . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thurman Tucker was born on September 26 , 1917 , and raised in Gordon , Texas . In high school , he was a three @-@ sport athlete , playing baseball ( where he was a second baseman ) , basketball , and track and field . After graduating in 1935 , he played semi @-@ professional baseball and enrolled in a baseball school located in Hot Springs , Arkansas . In 1936 , at age 18 , Tucker signed as a professional with the Fayetteville Bears of the Arkansas – Missouri League , but left the team after only two weeks , without playing a game . Soon after , he was signed by the Siloam Springs Travelers of the same league , where he began his professional career . 
 = = Minor league career = = 
 In 1936 , his first season with the Travelers , Tucker changed fielding positions and became an outfielder . In 117 games , he had a .319 batting average and 25 doubles . The following year , he was to play for the El Dorado Lions of the Cotton States League , but a back injury caused him to miss nearly the entire season . After recovering from the injury , Tucker continued to progress through the minors , spending 1938 with two separate clubs ; he played 55 games for the Abbeville A 's of the Evangeline Baseball League and 50 games for the Greenville Bucks of the Cotton States League . He remained in the Cotton States League for 1939 , playing for the Clarksdale Red Sox , at the time a minor league affiliate of the Boston Red Sox . In 136 games for Clarksdale , Tucker had a .298 batting average and 10 triples . During his first few years in the minor leagues , one manager asked him to take up clowning due to his resemblance to Joe E. Brown and his nickname as a result , Joe E. Tucker objected due to his serious nature and the idea was later dropped . 
 Tucker 's breakthrough minor league year came in 1940 , his second with Clarksdale . By the end of June , he was leading the Cotton State League with a batting average of .374 . After playing in 97 games , finishing with an average of .390 , Tucker was promoted and played in 40 games for the Oklahoma City Indians . At the end of the season , Chicago White Sox farm manager Billy Webb was impressed enough to purchase Tucker 's contract from Oklahoma City . At the beginning of the 1941 season , Tucker failed to win the final outfield spot on the White Sox roster from Dave Short , and consequently spent 1941 at Oklahoma City , where he was coached by Rogers Hornsby . In 141 games for the Indians , Tucker had a batting average of .246 and 12 triples . 
 At spring training for the 1942 season , Tucker competed against Dave Philley for the final outfield spot . White Sox management liked Tucker 's defensive abilities , leading to them adding Tucker to their 1942 major league roster ; Tucker made his major league debut on April 14 , 1942 . After playing two games for the White Sox , Tucker was sent down to the Fort Worth Cats of the Texas League , where he spent most of the season and hit .313 in 144 games . When the minor league season ended , Tucker returned to the major league squad , and finished the year having played seven games for the White Sox . 
 = = Chicago White Sox = = 
 Of the Chicago White Sox outfielders at the beginning of the 1943 season , only Wally Moses was assured of a place on the team . During spring training , manager Jimmy Dykes was impressed by Tucker , who was competing for the starting center fielder position alongside Moose <unk> . Consequently , after spring training Tucker became the starting center fielder for 1943 , and the team 's leadoff hitter . Partway through the season , Tucker 's performance caught the eye of American League President Will Harridge , who noted him as someone the public came out to watch in the absence of stars serving in World War II . Among Tucker 's achievements during the year were a walk @-@ off home run on July 26 to win a game against the New York Yankees 2 – 1 . Tucker finished the season with a .235 batting average , six triples , and 79 walks in 135 games . He also stole 29 bases , the third best total in the AL , and was caught stealing 17 times , which was second in the league . 
 Tucker passed a physical examination for the United States Navy before the 1944 season began . Although expected to be called up to serve in the war that year , he was able to play the entire season for the White Sox . Tucker hit very well during the first month of 1944 ; he had a .403 batting average on May 16 , which led the American League . His hitting and fielding abilities impressed critics : sportswriter Fred Lieb noted him as a breakout performer that year , and manager Jimmy Dykes called Tucker the finest defensive outfielder in the American League . Tucker and Dixie Walker led their respective leagues in batting average throughout June ; at the end of the month , Tucker had an average of .369 in the American League while Walker had an average of .377 in the National League . Owing to his achievements , Tucker was added to the 1944 All @-@ Star roster for the only time in his career . He was the leadoff hitter in the 1944 Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game , but went hitless in four at @-@ bats . 
 Tucker 's form faded after the All @-@ Star Game ; in early July , he had a hitless streak of 28 at @-@ bats , causing his batting average to shrink from .375 to .327 , resulting in losing his status as league leader . When his average fell to .320 after recording one base hit in 35 at @-@ bats , he was removed from the starting lineup for a weekend matchup against the Detroit Tigers in an attempt to halt his decline . Tucker returned to the starting lineup shortly after being removed , and finished the season with a batting average of .287 and six triples . At the end of July that season , both Tucker and George Case participated in a 75 @-@ yard dash as part of the White Sox 's annual benefit for the war effort ; Tucker lost the race to Case by a yard . After the season ended , Tucker formally joined the Navy , and spent the 1945 season serving in the war . 
 When the players returned to their teams at the end of the war , Tucker was slated to be the starting center fielder for the 1946 season , working alongside Wally Moses and Taffy Wright . Unlike the previous season , he struggled with the bat at first , and was relegated to his original status on the White Sox roster as a good fielder but a poor hitter . At the end of June , Tucker had a batting average of .229 , nearly 150 points lower than his average at the same point in 1944 . His form recovered in the second half of the season and he finished the year with a batting average of .288 and 20 doubles , both career highs . As the 1947 Chicago White Sox season began , Tucker remained in his center field position after hitting .400 in the last month of the 1946 season , while rookie Dave Philley played in left field and Taffy Wright and Bob Kennedy platooned in right field . However , he started the year by missing some playing time due to a stomach ailment , and did not play regularly for the White Sox until the middle of May . After returning to regular play , Tucker alternated playing time with Philley , and he finished the season with a .236 batting average in 89 games . 
 = = Cleveland Indians = = 
 On January 27 , 1948 , Tucker was traded to the Cleveland Indians for Ralph Weigel ; the Indians front office regarded Tucker as " the finest defensive player in baseball . " He started off the year as the starting center fielder for the Indians , and in one early matchup against the Detroit Tigers , was the only player not to record a hit in an 8 – 2 victory . He missed three weeks of playing time in June after breaking a finger when he was hit by a pitch . Upon returning to the lineup , Tucker spent most of the second half of the season as a fourth outfielder , splitting time with Allie Clark and playing in the outfield alongside Larry Doby and Dale Mitchell . He finished the season with a .260 batting average and 52 runs in 83 games , and ended the season with a perfect fielding percentage of 1 @.@ 000 . Tucker participated in game six of the 1948 World Series , scoring a run in the sixth inning on a walk en route to a 4 – 3 win for the Indians . 
 The Indians planned to use Tucker as their fourth outfielder for the 1949 season when he served mostly as backup to Doby . He was relegated mostly to pinch hitting duties , and finished the season with a .244 batting average in 20 games and under 200 at @-@ bats . Due to his hitting struggles , Indians manager Lou Boudreau tried converting Tucker to a switch hitter to start off the 1950 season . Tucker was again set to be a backup outfielder in 1950 . His performances during the year included hitting a home run , the only one he hit that season , in an 8 – 5 victory over the Brooklyn Dodgers ; the teams raised $ 60 @,@ 000 in that game to benefit sandlot teams in Cleveland . Tucker finished the season with a <unk> batting average in 54 games , the lowest mark of his career . 
 Tucker and Allie Clark both attempted to make the Indians roster to begin the 1951 season , as the additions of Harry Simpson and Minnie Miñoso made it likely that one or both of them would be traded or released . Tucker played only one game for the Indians , on April 29 when he recorded a strikeout in his lone at @-@ bat . In early May , the Indians sent him to their Triple @-@ A minor league affiliate , the San Diego Padres of the Pacific Coast League ; his last major league game was April 29 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After being sent to the Padres , Tucker completed the 1951 season with them . In 88 games , Tucker had two triples and a .222 batting average . In the offseason , Tucker operated his own taxicab in Texas , and he contemplated retirement from baseball during a contract dispute in February 1952 . He eventually played 47 games for the now @-@ unaffiliated Padres , hitting .225 in the process . In mid @-@ June , the Padres sold his contract to the Oklahoma City Indians . Tucker played in 72 games for the Indians that season , hitting .263 . He retired from baseball before the 1953 season , and did not play with any professional team during that time . 
 Tucker returned to baseball in 1954 to play for the Lubbock <unk> of the West Texas – New Mexico League . He played part @-@ time for the team , serving as a replacement when players needed time off , whether through injury or to spend time with their families . He hit .360 in 25 games for the <unk> . The following year , he served as player @-@ manager for the Carlsbad Potashers of the Longhorn League . Tucker hit .275 in 114 games for the Potashers , including 25 doubles and eight home runs . He continued as player @-@ manager for the Potashers in 1956 , but the management considered firing him during a 14 @-@ game losing streak . He finished the year with a .306 batting average in 128 games . The following season , he was the player @-@ manager of the Hobbs Sports , but only played in 16 games for them , hitting .273 . In 1958 , he ended his playing career , and became the general manager of the Hobbs team . 
 After retiring , Tucker became an insurance agent and lived in Oklahoma City . He married and had four children ; his son Ronald served in the Vietnam War . In 1962 , he also became one of the Houston Astros ' first scouts . Tucker died on May 7 , 1993 , in Oklahoma City and is buried at Gordon Cemetery in his hometown of Gordon , Texas . 
 = Ed Wood ( film ) = 
 Ed Wood is a 1994 American biographical period comedy @-@ drama film directed and produced by Tim Burton , and starring Johnny Depp as cult filmmaker Ed Wood . The film concerns the period in Wood 's life when he made his best @-@ known films as well as his relationship with actor Bela Lugosi , played by Martin Landau . Sarah Jessica Parker , Patricia Arquette , Jeffrey Jones , Lisa Marie , and Bill Murray are among the supporting cast . 
 The film was conceived by writers Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski when they were students at the USC School of Cinematic Arts . Irritated at being thought of solely as writers for family films with their work on Problem Child and its sequel , Alexander and Karaszewski struck a deal with Burton and Denise Di Novi to produce the Ed Wood biopic , and Michael Lehmann as director . Due to scheduling conflicts with <unk> , Lehmann had to vacate the director 's position , which was taken over by Burton . 
 Ed Wood was originally in development at Columbia Pictures , but the studio put the film in ' turnaround ' over Burton 's decision to shoot in black @-@ and @-@ white . Ed Wood was taken to the Walt Disney Studios , which produced the film through the studio 's Touchstone Pictures division . The film was released to critical acclaim , but was a box office bomb , making only $ 5 @.@ 9 million against an $ 18 million budget . It won two Academy Awards : Best Supporting Actor for Landau and Best Makeup for Rick Baker ( who designed Landau 's prosthetic makeup ) , Ve Neill and Yolanda <unk> . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1952 , Ed Wood is struggling to join the film industry . Upon hearing of an announcement in Variety magazine that producer George Weiss is trying to purchase Christine Jorgensen 's life story , Ed wants to meet Weiss . Weiss explains that Variety 's announcement was a news leak , and it is impossible to purchase Jorgensen 's rights . The producer decides to fictionalize the film , titled I Changed My Sex ! . Ed tries to convince Weiss that he is perfect to direct the film because he is a transvestite , but is unsuccessful since Weiss wants a director with experience . Ed meets his longtime idol Bela Lugosi and the two become friends . Wood persuades Weiss to let him direct the film by convincing him that having a star in the film would sell tickets , and they could sign Bela for a low price . 
 Ed and Weiss argue over the film 's title and subject matter : Weiss has the poster printed , which Ed changes to Glen or Glenda and writes the film about a transvestite rather than a sex change . Weiss allows Ed to shoot whatever he wants as long as the film meets the required length . Ed takes to film production with an unusual approach ; shooting only one take per scene , giving actors very little direction and using stock footage to fill in gaps . The movie is released to critical and commercial failure . Because of this , Ed is unsuccessful in getting a job at Screen Classics , but Ed 's girlfriend , Dolores Fuller , tells him that he should try financing his next film independently . Ed is unsuccessful in finding money for Bride of the Atom , but is introduced to the psychic The Amazing Criswell who gives him advice on how to sell himself better . 
 Ed meets Loretta King , who he thinks has enough money to fund Bride of the Atom and ends up casting her as the lead instead of Dolores as planned . Filming begins , but is halted when it is revealed that Loretta is actually poor , and Ed has no money to continue production . Ed convinces meat packing industry tycoon Don McCoy to take over funding the film , who agrees as long as the film stars his son Tony as the leading man and the film ends with an explosion . The filming finishes with the title being changed to Bride of the Monster , but Dolores breaks up with Ed after the wrap party because of his circle of friends , his work , and transvestism . Bela attempts to conduct a double suicide with Ed after the government cuts off his unemployment , but is talked out of it . Bela checks himself into rehab , and Ed meets Kathy O 'Hara , who is visiting her father there . Ed takes her on a date and reveals to her his transvestism , which she accepts . 
 Ed shoots a film with Bela outside his home . When Ed and company attend the premiere for Bride of the Monster , an angry mob chases them out of the theater . Bela passes away , leaving Ed without a star . Ed convinces a church leader named Reynolds that funding Ed 's script for Grave Robbers from Outer Space would result in a box office success , and generate enough money for Reynolds ' dream project . Dr. Tom Mason , Kathy 's chiropractor , is chosen to be Bela 's stand @-@ in for resembling Lugosi . Ed and the Baptists have conflicts over the title and content of the script which they want to have changed to Plan 9 from Outer Space , along with Ed 's B movie directing style , his casting decisions and his transvestism . Ed leaves the set to go to the nearest bar , where he encounters his idol , Orson Welles . Filming for Plan 9 finishes with Ed taking action against his producers . Plan 9 is premiered and Ed and Kathy go to Las Vegas to get married . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Johnny Depp as Ed Wood : Burton approached Depp and " within 10 minutes of hearing about the project , I was committed , " the actor remembers . At the time , Depp was depressed about films and filmmaking . By accepting this part , it gave him a " chance to stretch out and have some fun " , and working with Martin Landau , " rejuvenated my love for acting " . Depp was already familiar with some of Wood 's films through John Waters , who had shown him Plan 9 from Outer Space and Glen or Glenda . To get a handle on how to portray Wood , Depp studied the performance of Jack Haley as the Tin Man in The Wizard of Oz , and the acting of Mickey Rooney , Ronald Reagan and Casey Kasem . He watched several Reagan speeches because the actor felt he had a kind of blind optimism that was perfect for Ed Wood . Depp also borrowed some of Kasem 's cadence and " that utterly confident , breezy salesman quality in his voice " . 
 Martin Landau as Bela Lugosi : An old A @-@ list horror film actor whom Ed brings back into the spotlight . Rick Baker created the prosthetic makeup designs . Baker did not use extensive make @-@ up applications , only enough to resemble Lugosi and allow Landau to use his face to act and express emotion . For research , Landau watched 25 of Lugosi 's films and seven interviews between the years of 1931 and 1956 . Landau did not want to deliver an over @-@ the @-@ top performance . " Lugosi was theatrical , but I never wanted the audience to feel I was an actor chewing the scenery ... I felt it had to be Lugosi 's theatricality , not mine . " 
 Sarah Jessica Parker as Dolores Fuller : Ed 's girlfriend before his relationship with Kathy . Dolores is embarrassed by Ed 's transvestism , which leads to their breakup . Dolores later becomes a successful songwriter for Elvis Presley . 
 Patricia Arquette as Kathy O 'Hara : Ed 's girlfriend after his relationship with Dolores . Kathy does not have a problem with Ed 's transvestism , and is eventually married to Ed . Their marriage lasts until Ed 's death in 1978 . She never remarried . Arquette met her real @-@ life counterpart during filming . The actress found her to be " very graceful and very nice " . 
 Lisa Marie as Vampira : Hostess of the local Vampira Show . She is dismissive of Ed at first , but decides to join the cast of Plan 9 from Outer Space , on the condition that she have no lines . 
 Jeffrey Jones as The Amazing Criswell : A local psychic TV entertainer . Criswell helps Ed with usual production duties , finding investors and acting in Ed 's films . 
 Max Casella and Brent Hinkley portray Paul Marco and Conrad Brooks : Two of Ed 's all @-@ around production assistants and frequent actors . Paul is hired to find the Lugosi stand @-@ in for Plan 9 from Outer Space , while Conrad accidentally has a brief dispute with Lugosi during Glen or Glenda . 
 Bill Murray as Bunny Breckinridge : Ed 's openly @-@ gay friend . Bunny is assigned to find transvestites to appear in Glen or Glenda , as well as portraying " The Ruler " in Plan 9 from Outer Space . Bunny also has an unsuccessful sex reassignment therapy attempt . 
 George " The Animal " Steele as Tor Johnson : A Swedish professional wrestler hired by Wood to be in two of his films , Bride of the Monster and Plan 9 . 
 Juliet Landau as Loretta King : King replaces Dolores in the movie " Bride of the Monster " after Wood mistakes her for an heiress able to front the money for the production costs . 
 Ned Bellamy as Tom Mason : Kathy 's chiropractor who is chosen to be Lugosi 's stand @-@ in for Plan 9 . 
 Mike Starr as George Weiss : Foul @-@ mouthed Z movie producer known for his work on exploitation films . Weiss hires Ed to direct Glen or Glenda . 
 Vincent D 'Onofrio as Orson Welles : Appears in a cameo late in the film . Maurice LaMarche did Welles ' uncredited voice . 
 <unk> Pandit , credited as " Indian Musician , " essentially appears as himself ; Like he originally did on his 1950s TV program , Pandit plays organ and does not speak in this cameo . 
 The film also includes cameos from actors who worked with Wood on Plan 9 from Outer Space , Gregory Walcott and Conrad Brooks . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writers Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski conceived the idea for a biopic of Ed Wood when they were students at the USC School of Cinematic Arts . Alexander even proposed making a documentary about Wood , The Man in the Angora Sweater in his sophomore year at USC . However , Karaszewski figured , " there would be no one on the planet Earth who would make this movie or want to make this movie , because these aren 't the sort of movies that are made . " Irritated at being thought of solely as writers for family films for their work on Problem Child and Problem Child 2 , Alexander and Karaszewski wrote a 10 @-@ page film treatment for Ed Wood and pitched the idea to Heathers director Michael Lehmann , with whom they attended USC film school . The basis for their treatment came from Rudolph Grey 's Nightmare of Ecstasy , a full @-@ length biography , which draws on interviews from Wood 's family and colleagues . Lehmann presented their treatment to his producer on Heathers , Denise Di Novi . Di Novi had previously worked with Tim Burton on Edward Scissorhands , Batman Returns and The Nightmare Before Christmas , and a deal was struck with Lehmann as director and Burton and Di Novi producing . 
 Burton began reading Nightmare of Ecstasy and some of Wood 's letters . He was taken by how he " wrote about his films as if he was making Citizen Kane , you know , whereas other people perceived them as , like , the worst movies ever " . Burton admits to having always been a fan of Ed Wood , which is why the biopic is filmed with an aggrandizing bias borne of his admiration rather than derision of Wood 's work . The relationship between Wood and Lugosi in the script echoes closely Burton 's relationship with his own idol and two @-@ time colleague , Vincent Price . He said in an interview , " Meeting Vincent had an incredible impact on me , the same impact Ed must have felt meeting and working with his idol . " Meanwhile , Burton had been asked to direct Mary Reilly for Columbia Pictures with Winona Ryder in the title role . 
 However , Burton dropped out of Mary Reilly over Columbia 's decision to fast track the film and their interest with Julia Roberts in the title role instead of Ryder . This prompted Burton to becoming interested in directing Ed Wood himself , on the understanding it could be done quickly . Lehmann said , " Tim wanted to do this movie immediately and direct , but I was already committed to <unk> . " Lehmann was given executive producer credit . Alexander and Karaszewski delivered a 147 @-@ page screenplay in six weeks . Burton read the first draft and immediately agreed to direct the film as it stood , without any changes or rewrites . Ed Wood gave Burton the opportunity to make a film that was more character @-@ driven as opposed to style @-@ driven . He said in an interview , " On a picture like this I find you don 't need to storyboard . You 're working mainly with actors , and there 's no effects going on , so it 's best to be more spontaneous . " 
 Initially , Ed Wood was in development with Columbia , but when Burton decided he wanted to shoot the film in black @-@ and @-@ white , studio head Mark Canton would not agree to it unless Columbia was given a first look deal . Burton said black @-@ and @-@ white was " right for the material and the movie , and this was a movie that had to be in black @-@ and @-@ white " . He insisted on total creative control , and so in April 1993 , a month before the original start date , Canton put Ed Wood into turnaround . The decision sparked interest from Warner Bros. , Paramount Pictures and 20th Century Fox in optioning the film rights , but Burton accepted an offer from Walt Disney Studios , who had previously produced The Nightmare Before Christmas . Similar to Nightmare , Disney released Ed Wood under their Touchstone Pictures banner . With a budget of $ 18 million , Disney did not feel the film was that much of a risk , and granted Burton total creative autonomy . Burton also refused a salary , and was not paid for his work on Ed Wood . Principal photography began in August 1993 , and lasted 72 days . Despite his previous six @-@ film relationship with Danny Elfman , Burton chose Howard Shore to write the film score . Under the pressure of finishing the score for Batman Returns , the relationship between the two strained and Burton admitted he and Elfman experienced " creative differences " during The Nightmare Before Christmas 
 The movie was filmed at various locations in and around the Los Angeles area . 
 = = Historical accuracy = = 
 When describing the film 's accuracy , Burton explained , " it 's not like a completely hardcore realistic biopic . In doing a biopic you can 't help but get inside the person 's spirit a little bit , so for me , some of the film is trying to be through Ed a little bit . So it 's got an overly optimistic quality to it . " Burton acknowledged that he probably portrayed Wood and his crew in an exaggeratedly sympathetic way , stating he did not want to ridicule people who had already been ridiculed for a good deal of their life . Burton decided not to depict the darker side of Wood 's life because his letters never alluded to this aspect and remained upbeat . To this end , Burton wanted to make the film through Wood 's eyes . He said in an interview , " I 've never seen anything like them , the kind of bad poetry and redundancy – saying in , like , five sentences what it would take most normal people one [ ... ] Yet still there is a sincerity to them that is very unusual , and I always found that somewhat touching ; it gives them a surreal , weirdly heartfelt feeling . " 
 The scenes of Bela Lugosi used for Plan 9 from Outer Space were not filmed outside his own house , as the film depicts . They were , in fact , filmed outside Tor Johnson 's house . Additionally , Lugosi was not prone to fits of swearing , particularly in front of women and did not perform his own water stunt in Bride of the Monster . Lugosi is also depicted as dying alone and miserable . Lugosi 's wife of twenty years , Lillian , did leave him in 1953 , but he remarried in 1955 to Hope <unk> . They were together until his death a year later . This , plus any reference to Lugosi 's teenage son , Bela G. Lugosi , were omitted , as is any mention of Lugosi 's role in the 1956 United Artists film The Black Sleep . Also , when Ed Wood talks to George Weiss about making I Changed My Sex ! , Weiss mentions Chained Girls , implying that Chained Girls was made before Glen or Glenda , when in fact Chained Girls was made afterwards . 
 The scene where Bela is seen walking towards his house after Ed drops him off , he mentions how Hollywood has changed its horror films and how they aren 't what they used to be back in the 1930s . He mentions movies about giant bugs ( Them ! ) , giant spiders , ( Tarantula ) and giant grasshoppers ( Beginning of the End ) , however these movies came out after when the scene was supposed to be set and after the release of Glen or Glenda . 
 According to Bela G. Lugosi ( his son ) , Forrest Ackerman , Dolores Fuller and Richard Sheffield , the film 's portrayal of Lugosi is inaccurate : In real life , he never used profanity , owned small dogs , or slept in coffins . And contrary to this film , Bela did not struggle performing on The Red Skelton Show . 
 Burton biographer Ken Hanke criticized the depiction of Dolores Fuller . " The real Fuller is a lively , savvy , humorous woman , " Hanke said , " while Parker 's performance presents her as a kind of sitcom moron for the first part of the film and a rather judgmental and wholly unpleasant character in her later scenes . " During her years with Wood , Fuller had regular TV jobs on Queen for a Day and The Dinah Shore Show , which are not mentioned . Fuller criticized Parker 's portrayal and Burton 's direction , but still gave Ed Wood a positive review . " Despite the dramatic liberties , I think Tim Burton is fabulous . I wished they could have made it a deeper love story , because we really loved each other . We strove to find investors together , I worked so hard to support Ed and I. " 
 = = Release = = 
 Ed Wood had its premiere at the 32nd New York Film Festival at the Lincoln Center . The film was then shown shortly after at the 21st Telluride Film Festival and later at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival , where it was in competition for the Palme d 'Or . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The DVD edition of Ed Wood initially had difficulty reaching store shelves in North America due to unspecified legal issues . The initial release had a featurette on transvestites — not relating to the film or its actors in any way — which was removed from subsequent releases . An initial street date of August 13 , 2002 was announced only to be postponed . A new date of February 3 , 2003 was set , only for it to be recalled again without explanation , although some copies quickly found their way to collectors ' venues such as eBay . The DVD was finally released on October 19 , 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Ed Wood had its limited release on September 30 , 1994 . When the film went into wide release on October 7 , 1994 in 623 theaters , Ed Wood grossed $ 1 @,@ 903 @,@ 768 in its opening weekend . The film went on to gross $ 5 @,@ 887 @,@ 457 domestically , much less than the production budget of $ 18 million . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Ed Wood received positive reviews from critics and has a rating of 92 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 60 reviews with an average score of 8 out of 10 . The consensus states " Tim Burton and Johnny Depp team up to fete the life and work of cult hero Ed Wood , with typically strange and wonderful results . " The film also has a score of 70 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 19 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . 
 Roger Ebert gave a largely positive review : " What Burton has made is a film which celebrates Wood more than it mocks him , and which celebrates , too , the zany spirit of 1950s exploitation films , in which a great title , a has @-@ been star and a lurid ad campaign were enough to get bookings for some of the oddest films ever made . " Ebert and Gene Siskel gave the film ' Two Thumbs Up ' on Siskel and Ebert , with Siskel calling it " a tribute to creative passion and friendship " and " one of the year 's very best " . 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone presented Burton 's decision with positive feedback on not making a direct satire or parody of Wood 's life . " Ed Wood is Burton 's most personal and provocative movie to date , " he wrote . " <unk> disjointed and just as outrageously entertaining , the picture stands as a successful outsider 's tribute to a failed kindred spirit . " 
 Janet Maslin , writing in The New York Times , thought Johnny Depp " proved " himself as an established " certified great actor " . " Depp captures all the can @-@ do optimism that kept Ed Wood going , thanks to an extremely funny ability to look at the silver lining of any cloud . " Todd McCarthy from Variety called Ed Wood " a fanciful , sweet @-@ tempered biopic about the man often described as the worst film director of all time . Always engaging to watch and often dazzling in its imagination and technique , picture is also a bit distended , and lacking in weight at its center . The result is beguiling rather than thrilling . " 
 Richard Corliss , writing in Time magazine , gave a negative review . " The script by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski posits Wood as a classic American optimist , a <unk> hero with little to be optimistic about , since he was also a classic American loser . That 's a fine start , but the film then marches in staid chronological order . " Corliss continued , " One wonders why this Burton film is so <unk> , why it lacks the cartoon zest and outsider ache of Beetlejuice , Edward Scissorhands or Batman Returns . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Ed Wood was nominated for three Golden Globes : Best Musical or Comedy , Johnny Depp for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and Martin Landau for Best Supporting Actor . Landau won in his category , while Depp lost to Hugh Grant ( for " Four Weddings and a Funeral " ) . Landau and Rick Baker won Academy Awards for their work on the film . Landau also won Best Supporting Actor at the first Screen Actors Guild Awards . Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski were nominated for Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen by the Writers Guild of America , which was a surprise as few predicted that it would be considered . The film was also nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . 
 = Arthur Mold = 
 Arthur Webb Mold ( 27 May 1863 – 29 April 1921 ) was an English professional cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for Lancashire as a fast bowler between 1889 and 1901 . A Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1892 , he was selected for England in three Test matches in 1893 . Mold was one of the most effective bowlers in England during the 1890s but his career was overshadowed by controversy over his bowling action . Although he took 1 @,@ 673 wickets in first @-@ class matches , many commentators viewed his achievements as tainted . 
 Mold began his professional cricket career playing for Banbury and Northamptonshire in the mid @-@ 1880s , but by 1889 had qualified to play for Lancashire at county level . Immediately successful , he quickly established a good bowling partnership with Johnny Briggs and became one of the leading bowlers in the country . However , he only achieved selection for England in one series in 1893 . Many critics thought he threw rather than bowled the ball , and he was among several bowlers at the time about whom there were similar suspicions . Controversy erupted in 1900 when Mold was no @-@ balled for throwing by Jim Phillips , an umpire who had targeted several prominent bowlers with dubious bowling actions . After Mold avoided several games in which Phillips was umpire , the affair came to a head in 1901 . On the opening morning of a match , Phillips repeatedly no @-@ balled Mold . Several of Mold 's team @-@ mates and most Lancashire supporters continued to believe that Mold bowled legally , but his reputation was ruined and , after three more appearances in 1901 , he retired at the end of the season . After his departure from the game , throwing ceased to be a concern in English cricket for 50 years . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Mold was born on 27 May 1863 in the village of Middleton Cheney in Northamptonshire . His family had links with the thatching trade , but Mold pursued a career in professional cricket . He began to play for the village team , making good progress as a bowler ; in 1882 , Middleton Cheney were unbeaten and Mold had the best bowling average in the team . In 1885 and 1886 , he was employed as a professional at Banbury Cricket Club . In his second year , a successful match against the Free Foresters , an amateur team , impressed two Lancashire cricketers who played against him . Subsequently in 1887 , Mold was employed by Manchester Cricket Club , and played a few non @-@ competitive cricket matches for Lancashire . In the same season , Northamptonshire , which at the time had not been awarded first @-@ class status , asked Mold to play for them . Playing as a professional , Mold was immediately successful , taking ten wickets in a match against a team from Surrey and seven wickets for 22 runs ( seven for 22 ) in an innings against Staffordshire . He continued to represent Northamptonshire in the following season but hoped to play for Lancashire . At the time , cricketers who wished to play competitive first @-@ class matches for a county in which they were not born had to live there for two years to qualify . 
 By 1889 , Mold was qualified for Lancashire and was expected by critics to make an impact . At the time , Lancashire had no fast bowler in their team , making Mold potentially an important player . He made his first @-@ class debut for the county in a three @-@ day match against Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) starting on 9 May 1889 , taking one wicket in a drawn game . Throughout the rest of the season , Mold impressed critics . After a slow start in unhelpful conditions and unsuitable playing surfaces for his type of bowling , he took a total of 33 wickets in four consecutive games and established a reputation as the fastest bowler in England . His best performance statistically was seven for 35 against Yorkshire County Cricket Club , in a match during which he took 13 wickets , but he was successful in other high @-@ profile matches . In all games against county opposition , Mold took 80 wickets at an average of 11 @.@ 69 ; in all first @-@ class matches he took 102 wickets at an average of 11 @.@ 81 . This placed him third in the national bowling averages . Although less successful in 1890 , he took 118 wickets in first @-@ class games at 14 @.@ 72 , which was 11th in the averages . His best figures , nine for 41 , once more came against Yorkshire , and he helped Lancashire to second place in the first official County Championship . Mold came close to playing for England when he was included in the squad to play in the third Test match against Australia , but the match was abandoned owing to rain and no play took place . 
 = = Leading bowler = = 
 Mold established himself as one of the leading bowlers in England during 1891 . According to Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack , " The season of 1891 brought him a great increase of reputation , and all through the summer he was uniformly successful . " In all first @-@ class matches , he took 138 wickets at 12 @.@ 49 to finish second in the national bowling averages . As a result of his good performances in the season , he was chosen as one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year . Lancashire finished as runners @-@ up once again in the County Championship . 
 In 1892 , Mold 's aggregate of wickets fell to 120 at an average of 13 @.@ 63 , but he returned the best bowling figures of his career when he took nine for 29 against Kent . He was chosen in a representative match for the first time , playing for the North against the South . During the 1893 season , Mold took 166 wickets at 16 @.@ 96 ; at the end of the season , The Times described him as a great bowler and noted that he and Johnny Briggs were Lancashire 's only two effective bowlers . Between them , the pair took 225 wickets ; the other bowlers in combination took 46 . Once more representing the North during 1893 , this time in a match against the touring Australian team , Mold also made his debut in the prestigious Gentlemen v Players match , playing for the professional " Players " and taking nine wickets in the game . His performances brought about his international debut ; he played for England in all three Test matches against Australia , the only such appearances of his career . In the first game , he took three for 44 in Australia 's only innings , his best figures of the series , and took four wickets in the other two matches to finish with seven wickets at an average of 33 @.@ 42 . It is likely that doubts about the legality of his bowling action prevented him from playing further Test matches , or touring Australia with a representative side . However , other factors may have played a part in his subsequent omission , including the emergence of Tom Richardson as a successful fast bowler , and the opinion that Mold 's bowling was flattered by the difficult , uneven pitches on which Lancashire played their home games . 
 Mold 's annual total of wickets continued to increase in the following seasons . In 1894 , he again represented the North and the Players , taking 207 wickets in total at an average of 12 @.@ 30 . But as Lancashire increased the number of games they played , Mold and Briggs had an increased bowling workload and once more had little assistance from other bowlers . Between them , they took 324 wickets while the next most successful bowler took 13 . The following year , Mold reached his highest seasonal tally with 213 wickets at 15 @.@ 96 , and made his final appearance for the Players . The Times commented on the effectiveness of Mold : " Mold preserves all his pace and break in bowling , and his success on the hard wickets was phenomenal . " 
 Although Mold appeared for the North against the Australians , who toured again in 1896 , he did not play any Tests or other representative cricket that year and his wicket total fell to 150 at 18 @.@ 12 ; after this season , his bowling began to decline in effectiveness . Suffering frequently from injury in 1897 , Mold failed to reach 100 wickets in the season for the first time . His 90 wickets in 1898 were taken at an average over 20 , the only time his bowling average was so high , and he missed three weeks of the season owing to injury . After improving his record to 115 wickets at 18 @.@ 68 during 1899 , he was awarded a benefit match by Lancashire during 1900 which raised £ 2 @,@ 050 , a record total at the time and worth around £ 173 @,@ 000 in 2010 . 
 = = Throwing controversy = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 For many years in England , there had been controversy over bowling actions ; several bowlers were believed to throw rather than bowl the ball , which was contrary to the Laws of Cricket . Lancashire had a particularly poor reputation among other county teams for using bowlers who threw : by the early 1880s , up to four of Lancashire 's main bowlers were judged to be unfair , including John Crossland who bowled very quickly . By the mid @-@ 1880s , several teams refused to play Lancashire on account of their bowling attack . Mainly through the actions of Lord Harris , many of the suspect bowlers were forced out of cricket , and bowling actions became more legitimate . However , some players continued to bowl with questionable actions , including members of the Lancashire team . The issue intensified in 1896 when two of the Australian touring team , Ernie Jones and Tom McKibbin , seemed to throw the ball regularly ; Sydney Pardon , the editor of Wisden , wrote : " The mortifying fact was that the illegal bowling was due entirely to our own weakness in not having the laws of the game carried out . The Australians only did against us what we had over and over again done against them . " 
 Following the 1896 tour , the English authorities realised action had to be taken . Jim Phillips , an Australian @-@ born umpire who journeyed each year between his native country and England , travelled to Australia with an English touring team in 1897 – 98 . During two of the matches he umpired , Phillips no @-@ balled Ernie Jones for throwing . Upon returning to England for the 1898 season , Phillips also called C. B. Fry , a prominent amateur cricketer and all @-@ round sportsman , for throwing . This was the second of three occasions in 1898 that Fry was no @-@ balled . Other umpires , following Phillips ' lead , no @-@ balled Fry and Frank Hopkins . Two further bowlers , albeit not famous cricketers , were called for throwing in 1899 . 
 = = = Mold called for throwing = = = 
 During the 1900 season , Fry was once more no @-@ balled at the beginning of June , this time by William West . The concerted action against throwing reached a peak when Phillips umpired the match between Nottinghamshire and Lancashire in Nottingham on 26 June . Early on the first morning of the three @-@ day match , Mold came on to bowl when Nottinghamshire had scored 34 . In Mold 's first over , Phillips twice no @-@ balled him for throwing . Lancashire 's captain , Archie MacLaren , withdrew Mold from the bowling attack at the end of the over and he did not bowl again in the match . However , MacLaren later defended Mold in the press . The match reports in both The Times and Wisden commented that Mold had been lucky never to be no @-@ balled before in his career ; he was the most high @-@ profile bowler to be called in the Phillips @-@ led crackdown on bowling actions . Mold played another nine times in 1900 without being called for throwing , but he did not play in any of the Lancashire matches umpired by Phillips . Later in the season , Phillips called the Somerset bowler Ted Tyler . By the end of the season , Mold had taken 97 wickets at 14 @.@ 01 . 
 That December , at their annual meeting at Lord 's Cricket Ground , the captains of the first @-@ class counties discussed the problem of throwing . MacLaren asked those present at the meeting to give their opinion of Mold 's bowling . According to MacLaren , they " replied to a man that they considered that Mold was not always fair " . Reports in the press stated that they voted by a majority of eleven to one that Mold 's action was unfair , and that along with other bowlers whose actions were suspected , he should not bowl in the coming season . The captains further recommended that bowlers with illegal actions should be banned , suspended or warned depending on the severity of their transgression . The meeting proved controversial , and disputes arose over how many captains had supported the decision . MacLaren claimed that he was the only captain to support Mold . Despite the verdict of the meeting , Lancashire 's committee remained of the opinion that Mold bowled legally ; the Lancashire president A. N. Hornby and several of Mold 's team @-@ mates also publicly backed the bowler . Opinions among other players and in the press varied as to the fairness of Mold 's bowling , but sympathy was expressed for the damage to Mold 's career and reputation , while Pelham Warner suggested that it was unfair to ban Mold completely . Some critics believed that the captains should not have passed judgement at all . The MCC , responsible for the laws of cricket and the organisation of the English game , were asked to adjudicate by several county committees . Reluctant to let the decision stand , the MCC overruled the captains , preferring to leave the matter to individual umpires . However , the umpires were instructed to pay close attention to suspect bowlers during the coming season . 
 Although he may have been expected to retire following the controversy and in view of his age , Mold continued to play for Lancashire , who were short of quality bowlers , at the start of the 1901 season . At least one umpire was asked by the MCC to report specifically on Mold 's bowling , but decided it was fair , and no umpire initially called him for throwing . He missed two Lancashire matches in which Phillips was an umpire , wishing to avoid a confrontation , but Lancashire were criticised by the public for omitting Mold from these matches . Consequently , he played in the game against Somerset umpired by Phillips , which started on 11 July at Old Trafford Cricket Ground . Under the captaincy of MacLaren , Mold opened the attack and bowled with Phillips at square leg . In Mold 's second over of the game , Phillips no @-@ balled him for throwing . Acting at the request of the Lancashire committee , MacLaren then switched Mold to bowl from the opposite end so that Phillips would be at the bowler 's end . Even so , Phillips continued to no @-@ ball him , and after 10 overs , Mold had been called 16 times by Phillips . MacLaren removed Mold from the attack , although he returned to bowl later without further action from either umpire . For the remainder of the match , Mold bowled from Phillips ' end without censure ; Phillips believed he had made his point . The other umpire took no action at any point in the match . The crowd at the game protested noisily against Phillips , for a time shouting " no @-@ ball " as every ball was bowled , and making comments about him . According to Wisden , Phillips ' actions caused " a great sensation ... The incident naturally gave rise to much excitement , and for the next few days nothing else was talked about in the cricket world . " At the conclusion of the match , Mitchell and Kenyon , a film @-@ making company based in Blackburn , filmed the players leaving the field and took footage of Mold bowling in the nets . Phillips received criticism for his actions and Mold had some support in the press . Mold 's Times obituary noted : " Mold did not lack defenders , but those who argued that he was , and always had been , a perfectly fair bowler , had a very bad case . The weight of expert evidence was overwhelmingly against them . " 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 In December 1901 , the MCC approved the scheme previously suggested — that the county captains should meet to discuss the fairness of suspected bowlers . It was proposed that any bowler who was judged to be unfair by a two @-@ to @-@ one majority of captains would be banned for at least a season . The MCC also recommended that the counties not play suspected bowlers and that any bowler called for throwing should be removed from the attack in the interests of the spirit of cricket . In the 1902 Wisden , Sydney Pardon wrote : " Never in the last twenty years or more has there been so little unfair or doubtful bowling as in the season of 1901 . Indeed the improvement was so marked as to make it clear that , if the captains stick to their guns , we shall soon be entirely free from the evil of which not very long ago it seemed impossible to get rid . " After 1901 , there were only isolated incidents regarding illegal bowling actions until the Second World War , and throwing ceased to be an issue in English cricket , in which no cricketer was no @-@ balled for throwing between 1908 and 1952 . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Mold played another three matches in 1901 without being no @-@ balled for throwing , but his reputation was ruined and he retired at the end of the season , although Lancashire had offered him a new contract . In this final season , he took 59 wickets at 19 @.@ 35 . In his career as a whole , he took 1 @,@ 673 first @-@ class wickets at an average of 15 @.@ 54 . In 2012 , he is 57th on the list of leading first @-@ class wicket @-@ takers ; among those whose careers were contemporaneous with or preceded Mold 's , he is placed 19th . 
 Subsequently , Mold returned to play for Northamptonshire in 1903 , and played league cricket in his native county , although he struggled with increasing weight in his later years . In his retirement , he became the landlord of a public house in Middleton Cheney , the village in which he was born . He took up shooting as a hobby and looked after his ailing mother . After a long illness , he died on 29 April 1921 in Middleton Cheney . The memorial on his gravestone states : " This stone was erected by his old cricketing friends as a token of their affection , admiration and respect " . It was paid for by a subscription opened by the Lancashire Committee . 
 = = Bowling technique = = 
 A fast bowler who operated from a very short run @-@ up , Mold bowled extremely quickly , releasing the ball with his arm very high in his early years , although later in his career , his arm was lower in delivery . Unusually for a bowler of his pace , he could make the ball deviate from straight , either through seam movement or cutting his fingers over it before release , but most of his wickets were taken through sheer speed . His obituary in the Manchester Guardian stated that he was among the fastest bowlers of all time and his bowling action was " beautiful " and possessed " fine grace " . If the pitch was uneven or otherwise difficult for batting , he was extremely difficult to bat against : in 1892 , Wisden noted : " On anything like a rough or bumpy wicket [ pitch ] he is , beyond all question , the most difficult and dangerous bowler of the day , the ball getting up from the pitch so high and so fast as to intimidate all but the very <unk> of batsmen . " The Times later noted that he was very successful for Lancashire and a difficult bowler to face . In combination with Briggs , he bowled a very high proportion of Lancashire 's overs . At times , he struggled with a knee injury but continued to bowl with little opportunity to rest . 
 Opinion was divided over the legality of Mold 's bowling action . After no @-@ balling Mold for the second time , Phillips wrote that he had long suspected Mold of throwing . Even though he believed Mold was trying to bowl with a straight arm in the Somerset match , Phillips considered many more deliveries to be throws than merely those he called . In his own defence , Mold queried why Phillips never acted on his prior suspicions , and suggested that the umpire did not make it clear which part of Mold 's bowling action was unfair . The Manchester Guardian , reporting on the Somerset match in 1901 , noted that many umpires had apparently viewed Mold 's action as fair earlier in the season , even after the instruction from the MCC to pay careful attention to him . It stated that " the general opinion was that if one ball was to be called a throw then every ball he sent down was of the same order . " However , some critics noted that when bowling an occasional faster ball , Mold 's action changed slightly ; this was the delivery to which Phillips objected . His obituary in the Manchester Guardian stated that the lack of action by umpires other than Phillips in 1901 , and throughout Mold 's career , meant that the " charge against Mold , then , can hardly be said to have been ' proven ' " . 
 Mold continued to have his supporters . MacLaren later wrote that he believed Mold never intentionally threw ; A. N. Hornby consistently defended Mold , partly because , as Mold 's captain during the 1890s , it would have been a slur against his sportsmanship to admit that an unfair bowler had been in his team . Most Lancashire supporters never doubted that Mold 's action was fair . Cricket historian Don Ambrose suggests that Mold probably did throw his faster delivery , which may have accounted for the high proportion of his wickets which were bowled . It also explained his ability to produce a delivery that surprised the batsman ; W. G. Grace once observed that it was particularly painful to be struck by a delivery from Mold . The lack of action by Phillips ' fellow umpires was possibly , according to Ambrose , due to their unwillingness to cause problems for a fellow professional cricketer . However , Ambrose also suggests that in the Somerset match , Phillips was determined to end Mold 's career and that not every delivery that he called was actually a throw . 
 Mold was popular with other cricketers . The Times said : " Apart from the burning question of throwing , not a word could be said against him . He was liked by all his brother professionals , and popular wherever he played . " However , his achievements were always qualified by suspicion over the legality of his bowling action , even before he was no @-@ balled by Phillips . A batsman who played against him when he first appeared for Northamptonshire said : " If he is fair he is the best bowler in England , but I think he is a worse thrower than ever Crossland [ the Lancashire bowler of the 1880s with a suspect bowling action ] was . " Mold 's Times obituary stated : " He was a deadly fast bowler , but , all through his career , even his best feats in the cricket field were spoken of with something of apology " . 
 = Grey reef shark = 
 The grey reef shark ( Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos , sometimes misspelled <unk> or <unk> ) is a species of requiem shark , in the family Carcharhinidae . One of the most common reef sharks in the Indo @-@ Pacific , it is found as far east as Easter Island and as far west as South Africa . This species is most often seen in shallow water near the drop @-@ offs of coral reefs . The grey reef shark has the typical " reef shark " shape , with a broad , round snout and large eyes . This species can be distinguished from similar species by the plain or white @-@ tipped first dorsal fin , the dark tips on the other fins , the broad , black rear margin on the tail fin , and the lack of a ridge between the dorsal fins . Most individuals are less than 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) long . 
 Grey reef sharks are fast @-@ swimming , agile predators that feed primarily on free @-@ swimming bony fishes and cephalopods . Their aggressive demeanor enables them to dominate many other shark species on the reef , despite their moderate size . Many grey reef sharks have a home range on a specific area of the reef , to which they continually return . However , they are social rather than territorial . During the day , these sharks often form groups of five to 20 individuals near coral reef drop @-@ offs , splitting up in the evening as the sharks begin to hunt . Adult females also form groups in very shallow water , where the higher water temperature may accelerate their growth or that of their unborn young . Like other members of its family , the grey reef shark is viviparous , meaning the mother nourishes her embryos through a placental connection . Litters of one to six pups are born every other year . 
 Grey reef sharks were the first shark species known to perform a threat display , a stereotypical behavior warning that it is prepared to attack . The display involves a " hunched " posture with characteristically dropped pectoral fins , and an exaggerated , side @-@ to @-@ side swimming motion . Grey reef sharks often do so if they are followed or cornered by divers to indicate they perceive a threat . This species has been responsible for a number of attacks on humans , so should be treated with caution , especially if they begin to display . They are caught in many fisheries and are susceptible to local population depletion due to their low reproduction rate and limited dispersal . As a result , the International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed this species as Near Threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 Dutch ichthyologist Pieter Bleeker first described the grey reef shark in 1856 as Carcharias ( Prionodon ) amblyrhynchos , in the scientific journal <unk> Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch @-@ Indië . Later authors moved this species to the genus Carcharhinus . The type specimen was a 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) -long female from the Java Sea . Other common names used for this shark around the world include black @-@ vee whaler , bronze whaler , Fowler 's whaler shark , graceful shark , graceful whaler shark , grey shark , grey whaler shark , longnose blacktail shark , school shark , and <unk> blacktail shark . Some of these names are also applied to other species . 
 In older literature , the scientific name of this species was often given as C. <unk> . The blacktail reef shark ( C. <unk> ) , native to the western Indian Ocean , is now regarded as the same species as the grey reef shark by most authors . It was originally distinguished from the grey reef shark by a white tip on the first dorsal fin , a shorter snout , and one fewer upper tooth row on each side . Based on morphological characters , vertebral counts , and tooth shapes , Garrick ( 1982 ) concluded the grey reef shark is most closely related to the silvertip shark ( C. albimarginatus ) . This interpretation was supported by a 1992 allozyme phylogenetic analysis by Lavery . 
 = = Description = = 
 The grey reef shark has a streamlined , moderately stout body with a long , blunt snout and large , round eyes . The upper and lower jaws each have 13 or 14 teeth ( usually 14 in the upper and 13 in the lower ) . The upper teeth are triangular with slanted cusps , while the bottom teeth have narrower , erect cusps . The tooth serrations are larger in the upper jaw than in the lower . The first dorsal fin is medium @-@ sized , and there is no ridge running between it and the second dorsal fin . The pectoral fins are narrow and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) . 
 The coloration is grey above , sometimes with a bronze sheen , and white below . The entire rear margin of the caudal fin has a distinctive , broad , black band . There are dusky to black tips on the pectoral , pelvic , second dorsal , and anal fins . Individuals from the western Indian Ocean have a narrow , white margin at the tip of the first dorsal fin ; this trait is usually absent from Pacific populations . Grey reef sharks that spend time in shallow water eventually darken in color , due to tanning . Most grey reef sharks are less than 1 @.@ 9 m ( 6 @.@ 2 ft ) long . The maximum reported length is 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) and the maximum reported weight is 33 @.@ 7 kg ( 74 lb ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The grey reef shark is native to the Indian and Pacific Oceans . In the Indian Ocean , it occurs from South Africa to India , including Madagascar and nearby islands , the Red Sea , and the Maldives . In the Pacific Ocean , it is found from southern China to northern Australia and New Zealand , including the Gulf of Thailand , the Philippines , and Indonesia . This species has also been reported from numerous Pacific islands , including American Samoa , the Chagos Archipelago , Easter Island , Christmas Island , the Cook Islands , the Marquesas Islands , the Tuamotu Archipelago , Guam , Kiribati , the Marshall Islands , Micronesia , Nauru , New Caledonia , the Marianas Islands , Palau , the Pitcairn Islands , Samoa , the Solomon Islands , Tuvalu , the Hawaiian Islands , and Vanuatu . 
 Generally a coastal , shallow @-@ water species , grey reef sharks are mostly found in depths of less than 60 m ( 200 ft ) . However , they have been known to dive to 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) . They are found over continental and insular shelves , preferring the leeward ( away from the direction of the current ) sides of coral reefs with clear water and rugged topography . They are frequently found near the drop @-@ offs at the outer edges of the reef , particularly near reef channels with strong currents , and less commonly within lagoons . On occasion , this shark may venture several kilometers out into the open ocean . 
 usually near dropoffs , outer slopes and reef channels with strong currents near the outer edges of reefs . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Along with the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) and the whitetip reef shark ( Triaenodon obesus ) , the grey reef shark is one of the three most common sharks inhabiting Indo @-@ Pacific reefs . They actively expel most other shark species from favored habitats , even species larger in size . In areas where this species co @-@ exists with the blacktip reef shark , the latter species occupies the shallow flats , while the former stays in deeper water . Areas with a high abundance of grey reef sharks tend to contain few sandbar sharks ( C. plumbeus ) , and vice versa ; this may be due to their similar diets causing competitive exclusion . 
 On the infrequent occasions when they swim in oceanic waters , grey reef sharks often associate with marine mammals or large pelagic fishes , such as sailfish ( <unk> platypterus ) . There is an account of around 25 grey reef sharks following a large pod of bottlenose dolphins ( Tursiops sp . ) , along with 25 silky sharks ( C. falciformis ) and a single silvertip shark . Rainbow runners ( <unk> <unk> ) have been observed rubbing against grey reef sharks , using the sharks ' rough skin to scrape off parasites . 
 Grey reef sharks are prey for larger sharks , such as the silvertip shark . At Rangiroa Atoll in French Polynesia , great hammerheads ( Sphyrna mokarran ) feed opportunistically on grey reef sharks that are exhausted from pursuing mates . Known parasites of this species include the nematode <unk> lata and several copepod species that attach to the sharks ' skin , and juvenile stages of the isopods Gnathia trimaculata and G. grandilaris that attach to the gill filaments and septa ( the dividers between each gill ) . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Grey reef sharks feed mainly on bony fishes , with cephalopods such as squid and octopus being the second @-@ most important food group , and crustaceans such as crabs and lobsters making up the remainder . The larger sharks take a greater proportion of cephalopods . These sharks hunt individually or in groups , and have been known to pin schools of fish against the outer walls of coral reefs for feeding . They excel at capturing fish swimming in the open , and they complement hunting whitetip reef sharks , which are more adept at capturing fish inside caves and crevices . Their sense of smell is extremely acute , being capable of detecting one part tuna extract in 10 billion parts of sea water . In the presence of a large quantity of food , grey reef sharks may be roused into a feeding frenzy ; in one documented frenzy caused by an underwater explosion that killed several snappers , one of the sharks involved was attacked and consumed by the others . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 During mating , the male grey reef shark will bite at the female 's body or fins to hold onto her for copulation . Like other requiem sharks , it is viviparous : once the developing embryos exhaust their supply of yolk , the yolk sac develops into a placental connection that sustains them to term . Each female has a single functional ovary ( on the right side ) and two functional uteruses . One to four pups ( six in Hawaii ) are born every other year ; the number of young increases with female size . Estimates of the gestation period range from 9 to 14 months . Parturition is thought to take place from July to August in the Southern Hemisphere and from March to July in the Northern Hemisphere . However , females with " full @-@ term embryos " have also been reported in the fall off Enewetak . The newborns measure 45 – 60 cm ( 18 – 24 in ) long . Sexual maturation occurs at around seven years of age , when the males are 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 3 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long and females are 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 4 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 6 ft ) long . Females on the Great Barrier Reef mature at 11 years of age , later than at other locations , and at a slightly larger size . The lifespan is at least 25 years . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Grey reef sharks are active at all times of the day , with activity levels peaking at night . At Rangiroa , groups of around 30 sharks spend the day together in a small part of their collective home range , dispersing at night into shallower water to forage for food . Their home range is about 0 @.@ 8 km2 ( 0 @.@ 31 sq mi ) . At Enewetak in the Marshall Islands , grey reef sharks from different parts of the reef exhibit different social and ranging behaviors . Sharks on the outer ocean reefs tend to be nomadic , swimming long distances along the reef , while those around lagoon reefs and underwater pinnacles stay within defined daytime and night @-@ time home ranges . Where there are strong tidal currents , grey reef sharks move against the water : towards the shore with the ebbing tide and back out to sea with the rising tide . This may allow them to better detect the scent of their prey , or afford them the cover of turbid water in which to hunt . 
 There is little evidence of territoriality in the grey reef shark ; individuals will tolerate others of their species entering and feeding within their home ranges . Off Hawaii , individuals may stay around the same part of the reef for up to three years , while at Rangiroa , they regularly shift their locations by up to 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Individual grey reef sharks at Enewetak become highly aggressive at specific locations , suggesting they may exhibit dominant behavior over other sharks in their home areas . 
 = = = Sociality = = = 
 Social aggregation is well documented in grey reef sharks . In the northwestern Hawaiian Islands , large numbers of pregnant adult females have been observed slowly swimming in circles in shallow water , occasionally exposing their dorsal fins or backs . These groups last from 11 : 00 to 15 : 00 , corresponding to peak daylight hours . Similarly , at Sand Island off Johnston Atoll , females form aggregations in shallow water from March to June . The number of sharks per group differs from year to year . Each day , the sharks begin arriving at the aggregation area at 09 : 00 , reaching a peak in numbers during the hottest part of the day in the afternoon , and dispersing by 19 : 00 . Individual sharks return to the aggregation site every one to six days . These female sharks are speculated to be taking advantage of the warmer water to speed their growth or that of their embryos . The shallow waters may also enable them to avoid unwanted attention by males . 
 Off Enewetak , grey reef sharks exhibit different social behaviors on different parts of the reef . Sharks tend to be solitary on shallower reefs and pinnacles . Near reef drop @-@ offs , loose aggregations of five to 20 sharks form in the morning and grow in number throughout the day before dispersing at night . In level areas , sharks form polarized schools ( all swimming in the same direction ) of around 30 individuals near the sea bottom , arranging themselves parallel to each other or slowly swimming in circles . Most individuals within polarized schools are females , and the formation of these schools has been theorized to relate to mating or pupping . 
 = = = Threat display = = = 
 The " hunch " threat display of the grey reef shark is the most pronounced and well @-@ known agonistic display ( a display directed towards competitors or threats ) of any shark . Investigations of this behavior have been focused on the reaction of sharks to approaching divers , some of which have culminated in attacks . The display consists of the shark raising its snout , dropping its pectoral fins , arching its back , and curving its body laterally . While holding this posture , the shark swims with a stiff , exaggerated side @-@ to @-@ side motion , sometimes combined with rolls or figure @-@ 8 loops . The intensity of the display increases if the shark is more closely approached or if obstacles are blocking its escape routes , such as landmarks or other sharks . If the diver persists , the shark will either retreat or launch a rapid open @-@ mouthed attack , slashing with its upper teeth . 
 Most observed displays by grey reef sharks have been in response to a diver ( or submersible ) approaching and following it from a few meters behind and above . They also perform the display towards moray eels , and in one instance towards a much larger great hammerhead ( which subsequently withdrew ) . However , they have never been seen performing threat displays towards each other . This suggests the display is primarily a response to potential threats ( i.e. predators ) rather than competitors . As grey reef sharks are not territorial , they are speculated to be defending a critical volume of " personal space " around themselves . Compared to sharks from French Polynesia or Micronesia , grey reef sharks from the Indian Ocean and western Pacific are not as aggressive and less given to displaying . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Grey reef sharks are often curious about divers when they first enter the water and may approach quite closely , though they lose interest on repeat dives . They can become dangerous in the presence of food , and tend to be more aggressive if encountered in open water rather than on the reef . There have been several known attacks on <unk> , possibly by mistake , when the shark struck at the speared fish close to the diver . This species will also attack if pursued or cornered , and divers should immediately retreat ( slowly and always facing the shark ) if it begins to perform a threat display . Photographing the display should not be attempted , as the flash from a camera is known to have incited at least one attack . Although of modest size , they are capable of inflicting significant damage : during one study of the threat display , a grey reef shark attacked the researchers ' submersible multiple times , leaving tooth marks in the plastic windows and biting off one of the propellers . The shark consistently launched its attacks from a distance of 6 m ( 20 ft ) , which it was able to cover in a third of a second . As of 2008 , the International Shark Attack File listed seven unprovoked and six provoked attacks ( none of them fatal ) attributable to this species . 
 Although still abundant at Cocos Island and other relatively pristine sites , grey reef sharks are susceptible to localized depletion due to their slow reproductive rate , specific habitat requirements , and tendency to stay within a certain area . The IUCN has assessed the grey reef shark as Near Threatened ; this shark is taken by <unk> fisheries in many parts of its range and used for various products such as shark fin soup and fishmeal . Another threat is the continuing degradation of coral reefs from human development . There is evidence of substantial declines in some populations . Anderson et al .. ( 1998 ) reported , in the Chagos Archipelago , grey reef shark numbers in 1996 had fallen to 14 % of 1970s levels . Robbins et al .. ( 2006 ) found grey reef shark populations in Great Barrier Reef fishing zones had declined by 97 % compared to no @-@ entry zones ( boats are not allowed ) . In addition , no @-@ take zones ( boats are allowed but fishing is prohibited ) had the same levels of depletion as fishing zones , illustrating the severe effect of poaching . Projections suggested the shark population would fall to 0 @.@ 1 % of pre @-@ exploitation levels within 20 years without additional conservation measures . One possible avenue for conservation is ecotourism , as grey reef sharks are suitable for shark @-@ watching ventures , and profitable diving sites now enjoy protection in many countries , such as the Maldives . 
 = Kwinana Freeway = 
 The Kwinana Freeway is a 72 @-@ kilometre ( 45 mi ) freeway in and beyond the southern suburbs of Perth , Western Australia , linking central Perth with Mandurah to the south . It is the central section of State Route 2 , which continues north as Mitchell Freeway to Joondalup , and south as Forrest Highway towards Bunbury . A 4 @-@ kilometre ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) section between Canning and Leach highways is also part of National Route 1 . Along its length are interchanges with several major roads , including Roe Highway and Mandjoogoordap Drive . The northern terminus of the Kwinana Freeway is at the Narrows Bridge , which crosses the Swan River , and the southern terminus is at Pinjarra Road , east of Mandurah . 
 Planning for the Kwinana Freeway began in the 1950s , and the first segment in South Perth was constructed between 1956 and 1959 . The route has been progressively widened and extended south since then . During the 1980s , the freeway was extended to South Street in Murdoch , and in June 2001 , it reached Safety Bay Road in Baldivis . The final extension began as the New Perth Bunbury Highway project , constructed between December 2006 and September 2009 . In early 2009 , the section north of Pinjarra Road was named as part of the Kwinana Freeway , with the remainder named Forrest Highway . The freeway has been adapted to cater for public transport , with the introduction of bus priority measures in 1987 , and the 2007 opening of the Mandurah railway line , constructed in the freeway median strip . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Kwinana Freeway is the central section of State Route 2 . It commences at the northern end of the Narrows Bridge , Perth , continuing south from the Mitchell Freeway , and terminates at the Pinjarra Road interchange at <unk> , where it then transitions to Forrest Highway . All intersections with the freeway are grade separated . The speed limit is 100 kilometres per hour ( 60 mph ) north of Safety Bay Road and 110 kilometres per hour ( 70 mph ) to the south . From Perth to Mill Point Road , the freeway has five lanes northbound and six lanes southbound . This includes a bus lane in each direction , except on the Narrows Bridge , which only has a southbound bus lane . South of Mill Point Road to Roe Highway the freeway has three lanes in each direction , without any bus lanes except for bus @-@ only ramps at the Canning Bridge interchange . Beyond Roe Highway the freeway has two lanes in each direction . The median strip of the freeway north of The Spectacles also houses the Mandurah railway line . A shared pedestrian and bicycle path is built alongside the freeway . 
 Main Roads Western Australia monitors traffic volume across the state 's road network , including many locations along the Kwinana Freeway . The busiest section is at the northern end , on the Narrows Bridge , which averaged over 93 @,@ 000 vehicles per weekday in 1979 . This increased to over 135 @,@ 000 in 1988 / 89 , 156 @,@ 000 in 1998 / 99 , and 160 @,@ 000 in 2007 / 08 . The volume generally declines as the freeway travels south , with the fewest vehicles recorded near the southern end . There were fewer than 46 @,@ 000 vehicles per weekday near the Canning Highway terminus in 1978 , while in 1998 / 89 there were under 45 @,@ 000 north of South Street . For 1998 / 99 there were fewer than 27 @,@ 000 vehicles per weekday north of Thomas Road , and during 2007 / 08 fewer than 38 @,@ 000 were recorded between Mundijong Road and Safety Bay Road . As of 2013 , the Kwinana Freeway is one of the most congested commuter routes in Perth , during peak traffic periods . The average speed when driving north from Cockburn Central was measured as less than 40 kilometres per hour ( 25 mph ) during the morning peak . The slowest section was from South Street to Canning Highway , with an average travel speed of 24 kilometres per hour ( 15 mph ) . During the afternoon peak , the worst segment was southbound between Manning Road and Leach Highway , with a 31 kilometres per hour ( 19 mph ) average speed . 
 = = = Swan and Canning Rivers = = = 
 The Kwinana Freeway begins at the Narrows Bridge , and travels south from The Narrows alongside the Swan and Canning Rivers . South of the bridge is a northbound exit to Mill Point Road , whilst the southbound exit and both entrance ramps to the freeway are located a further 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) south . To the east of the freeway are residential homes in South Perth and Como , as well as the Royal Perth Golf Club . There is a southbound exit to South Terrace which provides access to the local area . Public access to the Swan River 's foreshore is available via footbridges that cross the freeway . 
 The first major interchange is with Canning Highway . National Route 1 is allocated to Canning Highway to the east , and to the Kwinana Freeway to the south of the interchange . The design is a diamond interchange , with additional bus @-@ only ramps connecting to the median lanes of the freeway . The Canning Bridge bus and railway transfer station is located at the interchange . A partial Y interchange with Manning Road , consisting of a northbound entrance ramp and southbound exit ramp , is located 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) south of Canning Highway . These ramps merge with the ramps on the south side of the Canning Highway interchange , allowing access between the highway and Manning Road . The Kwinana Freeway continues south , with the suburbs of Manning and Salter Point to the east , and Canning River to its west . The freeway passes by Aquinas College , 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) south of Manning Road , and reaches the Mount Henry Peninsula after another 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 The 660 @-@ metre @-@ long ( 2 @,@ 170 ft ) Mount Henry Bridge carries the freeway across the Canning River , from Salter Point to Mount Pleasant . The freeway travels through the suburb for 450 metres ( 1 @,@ 480 ft ) to Cranford Avenue , a half @-@ diamond interchange with northbound entrance and southbound exit ramps . The Kwinana Freeway continues south for another 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) through Brentwood to Leach Highway . 
 = = = Southern suburbs of Perth = = = 
 Through the southern suburbs of Perth , the Kwinana Freeway travels south as the boundary between various suburbs . The Leach Highway interchange houses the Bull Creek train and bus interchange station , and the Murdoch Station is co @-@ located with the South Street interchange , 2 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) further south . Halfway between these interchanges , Parry Avenue crosses the freeway via an overpass , connecting the suburbs of Bateman and Bull Creek . Beyond South Street , the land east of the Kwinana Freeway , in the suburb of Leeming , continues to be residential , whilst to the west the freeway passes by educational and health care facilities in Murdoch . Challenger TAFE , Murdoch University , St John of God Murdoch Hospital , and Fiona Stanley Hospital are adjacent to the freeway , though there is no direct access . The next interchange , after 1 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 87 mi ) , is with Farrington Road , which marks the southern edge of Murdoch . This is a half @-@ diamond interchange that only serves traffic travelling to or from areas further north . 
 A free @-@ flowing trumpet interchange , 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) south of Farrington Road , connects the Kwinana Freeway to Roe Highway . The interchange is situated between four suburbs : Leeming , ( north @-@ east ) , North Lake ( north @-@ west ) , <unk> Lake , ( south @-@ west ) , and Jandakot . Roe Highway is part of State Route 3 , Perth 's ring route , and is a major controlled @-@ access link to Perth 's north @-@ east . There are plans to extend Roe Highway west to Hamilton Hill , which would necessitate upgrading the interchange . Following Roe Highway , the freeway continues its journey south , between the residential areas of South Lake and Jandakot . Houses east of the freeway surround the Glen Iris Public Golf Course . After 2 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) there is a diamond interchange with Berrigan Drive , after which the freeway passes lower density lots in Cockburn Central and the industrial section of Jandakot . The freeway reaches the next interchange after 2 @.@ 1 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 3 mi ) , connecting with Armadale Road to the east and Beeliar Drive to the west . The Cockburn Central train station is located in the freeway median , 300 metres ( 980 ft ) north of the interchange . The freeway continues travelling south through the developing outer metropolitan suburbs of Atwell and Aubin Grove , east of the freeway , and Success and Hammond Park , west of the freeway . Here it connects to Russell Road and Gibbs Road via a diamond interchange after 3 @.@ 3 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) , and to Rowley Road after a further 2 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) . 
 = = = South of Rowley Road = = = 
 South of the Rowley Road diamond interchange , development is sparse , except in Bertram , southwest of the Thomas Road interchange . The freeway progresses through swampy rural land for 3 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 1 mi ) , passing by Lake <unk> in <unk> on its way to the diamond interchange at Anketell Road . The Kwinana Freeway continues south along the edge of Jandakot Regional Park , near to The Spectacles Wetlands , reaching Thomas Road after another 2 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) . The Mandurah rail line deviates from the freeway median 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) north of the interchange , thereafter travelling south @-@ west towards Rockingham . From Thomas Road to the next interchange at Mortimer Road , 2 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 7 mi ) further south , the land to the west of the freeway in Bertram has been developed into a residential area . After the latter interchange , development again becomes sparse , as the freeway travels south near swampland and bodies of water , including Folly Pool and <unk> Pool . The next interchanges are with Mundijong Road after 4 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) , Safety Bay Road after another 3 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 4 mi ) , and <unk> Road following a further 5 @.@ 2 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 2 mi ) . There is a pocket of newly developed urban land near Safety Bay Road , south of the freeway . 
 South of <unk> Road , the following two interchanges are constructed as dogbone interchanges , which use roundabouts instead of traffic lights to control the intersections between ramps . The Kwinana Freeway follows the Serpentine River southwards , with no interchanges for 7 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 6 mi ) . At this point , there is an interchange with <unk> Road to the west and Vine Road to the east . After 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) the freeway leaves the Perth Metropolitan Region , and encounters the next interchange with Lymon Road and Mandjoogoordap Drive . Lymon Road provides access to Stake Hill , whilst Mandjoogoordap Drive is a controlled access route into Mandurah . Following this interchange , the freeway turns south @-@ east , where it encounters a diamond interchange with Lakes Road after 4 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 9 mi ) . The freeway ends 7 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 7 mi ) further south , at the Pinjarra Road folded diamond interchange in Ravenswood . The road , and State Route 2 , continue south as Forrest Highway towards Bunbury . 
 = = History = = 
 The Kwinana Freeway began as a proposed controlled @-@ access road to link the Narrows Bridge in Perth with the developing area of Kwinana . Planning began in 1954 , after the concept had been announced by the Acting @-@ Premier John Tonkin on 24 July 1953 . The original route travelled through South Perth to Canning Highway , and included a new bridge over the Canning River . The planned route was later adjusted so that it crossed the river further south , due to the expected traffic volume , and difficulties in construction and traffic management at the existing Canning River Bridge . 
 = = = Initial construction = = = 
 In 1956 , the Western Australian State Government decided to construct the first section of the freeway , between the Narrows Bridge and Canning Highway . An extension was planned to be constructed seven years later . This first stage was built alongside the Swan River , on the edge of South Perth . Undeveloped land was used where possible , and the edge of the river was filled in at various points . Access to the river was maintained via five pedestrian bridges over the freeway , leading to the existing Como Beach and Jetty , and new areas on the river foreshore created during the project . A significant change to the foreshore was the relocation of the South of Perth Yacht Club . In 1960 , the club moved from the Canning River 's eastern shore , at Olives Reserve in Como , to Coffee Point in Applecross , on the western shore . The termination of the Kwinana Freeway at Canning Highway meant that the highway would be part of the main link between Perth and Kwinana , along with the freeway and Stock Road . Therefore , Canning Highway was upgraded to a dual carriageway . The upgrade works included the construction of a new bridge across the Canning River , next to the existing bridge , built in 1938 . This allowed for six lanes of traffic on Canning Highway . Construction of this stage was completed in 1959 , before the establishment of the Environmental Protection Authority ( EPA ) in 1971 . In 1974 , this first section was described by the EPA as " environmental desecration " . This was primarily due to the public being denied access to the foreshore environment . Pedestrian overpasses were described as ineffective for " obvious physical [ and ] psychological reasons " , and the impact on the riverfront was described as a " blight which has descended there " . 
 = = = First extension = = = 
 The first major work on the freeway after it opened was the construction of a new interchange in South Perth in the 1970s . The interchange included a complicated bridge design , which began at Judd Street , crossed over the freeway , and curved down to join the northbound carriageway . The $ 2 @.@ 7 million interchange was opened on 13 December 1976 by the Minister for Works , Ray O 'Connor . This was followed by a southern extension , which would be constructed alongside the environmentally sensitive area surrounding Canning River . Preparation work included an extensive study on the effects on the environment and community , the most detailed to be undertaken in Western Australia thus far . The EPA recommended abandoning the concept of a freeway , for both the existing road and the first extension , to restore accessibility to the foreshore . The Main Roads Department disagreed that a lower standard at @-@ grade road would be sufficient , as large volumes of traffic were forecast , and any pedestrian access would be " extremely dangerous " . Main Roads contended that a grade separated road would be the safest and most efficient option for both pedestrian and vehicles . A botanical report on the extension found that no unique species or ecological unit would be under threat from the proposal , and the Swan River Conservation Board had no objections . The extension was then approved by the State Government in 1974 , and by the Federal Government in 1975 . 
 As part of the extension project , construction began in 1976 on the Canning Interchange at Canning Highway . This interchange included a flyover bridge from Manning Road , which utilised a curved design similar to the South Perth Interchange bridge . The Canning Interchange opened on 19 July 1979 . Construction works south of the interchange began in 1979 . The freeway was initially planned to terminate at Leach Highway , but was extended as far as South Street , at the request of the Melville City Council . The council wanted the extra length of freeway to alleviate congestion on its local roads , and contributed $ 600 @,@ 000 to expedite the construction . This stage included construction of the Mount Henry Bridge across the Canning River . As of 1997 , it is Western Australia 's longest bridge , at a length of 660 metres ( 720 yd ) . The 6 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 0 mi ) , $ 35 @.@ 8 million extension was opened on 9 May 1982 by Ray O 'Connor , then Premier of Western Australia . Additional works undertaken to prepare for the opening included widening the existing stretch of freeway to three lanes in each direction , and reconfiguring the Narrows Bridge to include an additional central lane , reversible during peak traffic flows . 
 = = = Further extensions = = = 
 For the next stage of the freeway , an extension south to Thomas Road , multiple routes were investigated . The preferred route was selected based on the least impact from a combination of engineering , social , and environmental factors . The environmental factors considered were conservation areas associated with Thompsons Lake , west of the alignment , three " good quality " wetlands along the alignment , as well as patches of vegetation that were considered " nothing special " . The conservation of these areas and associated vegetation was considered desirable . This extension was completed in two stages . The first was a 7 @.@ 1 @-@ kilometre ( 4 @.@ 4 mi ) extension to Forrest Road , which opened on 12 December 1991 , at a cost of $ 36 @.@ 7 million . Subsequently , the freeway was extended a further 11 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 3 mi ) to Thomas Road . Main Roads looked for opportunities to improve the environment during the planning of this segment . These included the establishment of a protected strip of vegetation alongside the freeway , and the preservation or enhancement of remnant wetlands under threat from urban expansion . The main negative impacts of construction would be controlled through vegetation reinstatement and drainage management plans , as well as the use of " standard techniques " for preventing pollution , which was recognised as a severe environmental impact . The proposed route had the least environmental consequences compared with viable alternatives , and was the Department of Environment and Conservation 's preferred route . The impact on wetlands was further investigated by the EPA in 1992 . The EPA estimated that 50 hectares ( 120 acres ) of wetland habitat would be lost , including 20 hectares ( 49 acres ) with conservation status . The EPA 's report concluded that the alignment was not ideal from an environmental standpoint , but recognised the social importance of constructing the freeway , which would facilitate development of the area . The authority was satisfied that the project 's environmental repercussions could be managed , with the key recommendation of replacing the function of impacted wetlands . This $ 31 million section had three at @-@ grade traffic light controlled intersections , which were designed to be replaced by grade separated interchanges . Intersections were used to avoid delaying the extension , as Main Roads Western Australia considered the $ 30 million cost for interchanges to be prohibitively expensive . The extension opened on 11 September 1994 ; the Town of Kwinana contributed $ 1 million , per an agreement on completing the freeway prior to 1995 . 
 In 1988 , the State Planning Commission proposed defining a reservation for the extension of the Kwinana Freeway to the southern edge of Perth Metropolitan Region , north @-@ east of Mandurah . The northern and southern sections of the route were predetermined by factors including existing and proposed developments , power transmission lines , the location of wetlands and the Serpentine River , and required setbacks from an explosives depot at Baldivis . A number of routes were investigated for the central section , between Mortimer Road and <unk> Road . The EPA found all proposed routes acceptable , and that the preferred route minimised environmental impact . A report for a later stage regarded the approval for this section as lacking strict stipulations for the management of environmental impact , which was attributed to the assessment of the era not being subject to recent environmental regulations and scrutiny . A 12 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) extension along this alignment , to Safety Bay Road in Baldivis , was opened on 23 June 2001 by Premier Geoff Gallop . This project also included grade separation of the existing at @-@ grade intersections . The Kwinana Freeway Bus Transitway was completed soon afterwards , in February 2002 . 
 = = = New Perth Bunbury Highway = = = 
 Construction of an extension to the freeway , initially known as the " New Perth Bunbury Highway " , began in December 2006 . The project consisted of a 32 @-@ kilometre ( 20 mi ) freeway @-@ standard extension to Pinjarra Road and the Murray River at South Yunderup , and a 38 @-@ kilometre ( 24 mi ) highway @-@ standard dual carriageway to Old Coast Road at Lake Clifton . It had undergone an environmental assessment by the EPA in 2000 . Main Roads proposed management plans for each environmental factor identified by the EPA . Only clearing of vegetation critical for road construction would be undertaken , and more vegetation would be replaced than the amount impacted , using local native species . A flora survey found no rare species , and only one priority species , Lasiopetalum <unk> , near the southern end of the project . Road construction would impact one conservation class wetland , but no protected wetlands . To minimise impact , road drainage would be designed to contain spills , and prevent direct discharges into the surrounding environment . Noise levels would be contained to an acceptable limit in the road design , in accordance with the Main Roads traffic noise policy . The EPA concluded that the road could be designed and managed to an acceptable standard . Main Roads ' 2006 plan for environmental management of the project included numerous aspects , described as best management practices , which for the northern segment of the project were beyond the environmental approval requirements . Specific plans were developed regarding fauna , vegetation , dieback and weeds , and revegetation and rehabilitation . Other areas with specific plans included topsoil management , drainage , construction ( covering dust , noise , and vibrations ) , foreshores , and both Aboriginal and European heritage . The actual road names were not known until early 2009 , when Transport Minister Simon O 'Brien revealed that the section south of Pinjarra Road would be known as Forrest Highway , with the section to the north to become part of the Kwinana Freeway . The route bypasses Mandurah by taking traffic around the eastern side of the Peel @-@ Harvey Estuary prior to joining the existing dual carriageway on Old Coast Road , reducing the journey time from Perth to Bunbury . The Kwinana Freeway extension and Forrest Highway were opened on 20 September 2009 , with a ceremony held at the interchange between the freeway , highway , and Pinjarra Road . The roads were officially opened by Premier Colin Barnett , Senator Chris Evans , Transport Minister Simon O 'Brien , Member for Canning Don Randall , and the previous Transport Minister Alannah MacTiernan . 
 = = = Bus transitway = = = 
 Dedicated bus lanes have existed on the Kwinana Freeway since the late 1980s , when a project was set up to decrease bus commuters ' travel times into Perth from suburbs south of the Swan River . In 1987 , Main Roads Western Australia and Transperth trialled a contraflow bus lane along the Kwinana Freeway , from the Canning Interchange to the Narrows Interchange . The lane operated between 7 : 00 am and 9 : 30 am , the period with the most traffic congestion on the freeway . After two months , the results were examined , and the agencies decided to build an additional bus lane on the northbound carriageway . The construction included bus @-@ only ramps at the beginning and end of the lane . The works were mainly funded by Transperth , which contributed $ 8 @.@ 22 million out of the $ 10 @.@ 23 million total cost . The remaining $ 2 @.@ 01 million was provided by Main Roads Western Australia . The bus lane opened on 20 November 1989 , and received an Institute of Engineers award for engineering excellence . 
 In 1999 , the state government announced that a two way bus transitway would be built in the Kwinana Freeway median , to link Perth 's Esplanade <unk> with the Murdoch station at South Street . Construction of the first stage , between the Narrows Interchange and Canning Interchange , began in September 2000 , and was completed in February 2002 . The bus transitway was replaced by the Mandurah railway line , constructed in the freeway median between May 2004 and December 2007 . After rail services commenced , most freeway bus services ceased ; however , dedicated ramps and short priority lanes remain for bus services between Canning Highway and Perth . 
 = = = 2005 flooding = = = 
 During the afternoon on 13 May 2005 , a water pipe burst near the southbound Mill Point Road entrance ramp in South Perth , releasing 7 megalitres ( 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 imp gal ; 1 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 US gal ) of water and 60 tonnes ( 59 long tons ; 66 short tons ) of sand . This caused widespread flooding in the area , submerged the southbound lanes of the freeway , and collapsed the ramp . There was traffic gridlock in the city and much of the metropolitan area , lasting throughout the afternoon and into the night . Repairs to the entrance ramp took more than a week to be completed . 
 = = = Widening = = = 
 In March 2011 , it was announced that the Kwinana Freeway between Leach Highway and Roe Highway would be widened from two to three lanes in each direction . The $ 58 million project was brought forward to ease increased congestion on this part of the freeway . Construction began in July 2011 , with completion scheduled for May 2012 . The new southbound lane opened on 1 June 2012 . On 20 December 2012 , the State Transport Minister Troy Buswell , with Federal MP Gary Gray and State MLA for Riverton Mike Nahan , officially opened the northbound lane . By May 2013 , all major construction works had been completed , including a pedestrian underpass at South Street , a new carpark and access road for Murdoch railway station , and noise walls . Remaining landscaping works were expected to be finalised in September 2013 , and the whole projected had been completed by mid @-@ October . 
 = = Future works = = 
 Widening of the Kwinana Freeway with an extra southbound lane between Roe Highway and Armadale Road began in mid @-@ 2014 . The project aims to increase the freeway 's reliability , efficiency , and safety , as the current two @-@ lane configuration is subject to a large proportion of heavy vehicles and severe peak hour congestion . The project also involves the realignment of ramps at Berrigan Drive and Armadale Road , construction of noise barriers and noise walls where required , and installation of components for intelligent transport systems – optic fibre communications , vehicle detection devices , and closed circuit cameras . 
 There are preliminary plans for a southbound entrance ramp from the Manning Road interchange . The land requirements have been included on the Perth Metropolitan Region Scheme ; however , the project is not a State Government priority , and no funds have been allocated for its design or construction . The City of South Perth considers the ramp a " major priority " that would increase its road network connectivity , reduce traffic congestion , and improve commuter safety . In 2001 , the City estimated the construction cost to be $ 1 @.@ 77 million . 
 = = Interchanges = = 
 = The Clash = 
 The Clash were an English punk rock band that formed in 1976 as part of the original wave of British punk . Along with punk , their music incorporated elements of reggae , dub , funk , ska and rockabilly . For most of their recording career the Clash consisted of Joe Strummer ( lead vocals , rhythm guitar ) , Mick Jones ( lead guitar , lead vocals ) , Paul Simonon ( bass guitar , vocals ) and Nicky " Topper " Headon ( drums , percussion ) . Headon left the group in 1982 , and internal friction led to Jones 's departure the following year . The group continued with new members , but finally disbanded in early 1986 . 
 The Clash achieved commercial success in the United Kingdom with the release of their debut album , The Clash , in 1977 . Their third album , London Calling , released in the UK in December 1979 , earned them popularity in the United States when it was released there the following month . It was declared the best album of the 1980s a decade later by Rolling Stone magazine . In 1982 they reached new heights of success with the release of Combat Rock , which spawned the US top 10 hit " Rock the Casbah " , helping the album to achieve a 2 × Platinum certification there . Their final album , Cut the Crap , was released in 1985 . 
 The Clash 's politicised lyrics , musical experimentation , and rebellious attitude had a far @-@ reaching influence on rock , and alternative rock in particular . They became widely referred to as " The Only Band That Matters " , originally a promotional slogan introduced by the group 's record label , CBS . In January 2003 , shortly after the death of Joe Strummer , the band — including original drummer Terry Chimes — were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked the Clash number 28 on their list of the 100 greatest artists of all time . 
 Critic Sean Egan summarised what made them exceptional by writing , " They were a group whose music was , and is , special to their audience because that music insisted on addressing the conditions of poverty , petty injustice , and mundane life experienced by the people who bought their records . Moreover , although their rebel stances were often no more than posturing , from the Clash 's stubborn principles came a fundamental change in the perception of what is possible in the music industry , from subject matter to authenticity to quality control to price ceilings . " 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins : 1974 – 76 = = = 
 Before the Clash 's founding , the band 's future members were active in different parts of the London music scene . John Graham Mellor sang and played rhythm guitar in the pub rock act the 101'ers , which formed in 1974 . By the time the Clash came together two years later , he had already abandoned his original stage name , " Woody " Mellor , in favour of " Joe Strummer " , a reference to his rudimentary strumming skills on the ukulele as a busker in the London Underground . Mick Jones played guitar in protopunk band London SS , which rehearsed for much of 1975 without ever playing a live show and recording only a single demo . London SS was managed by Bernard Rhodes , a sometime associate of impresario Malcolm McLaren and a friend of the members of the McLaren managed band , the Sex Pistols . Jones and his bandmates became friendly with Sex Pistols Glen Matlock and Steve Jones , who would assist them as they tried out potential new members . Among those who auditioned for London SS without making the cut were Paul Simonon , who tried out as a vocalist , and drummer Terry Chimes . Nicky Headon drummed with the band for a week , then quit . After London SS broke up in early 1976 , Rhodes continued as Jones 's manager . In February , Jones saw the Sex Pistols perform for the first time : " You knew straight away that was it , and this was what it was going to be like from now on . It was a new scene , new values — so different from what had happened before . A bit dangerous . " At the instigation of Rhodes , Jones contacted Simonon in March , suggesting he learn an instrument so he could join the new band Jones was organising . Soon Jones , Simonon on bass , Keith Levene on guitar and " whoever we could find really to play the drums " were rehearsing . Chimes was asked to audition for the new band and got the job , although he soon quit . 
 The band was still searching for a lead singer . Chimes recalls one Billy Watts ( who " seemed to be , like , nineteen or eighteen then , as we all were " ) handling the duties for a time . Rhodes had his eye on Strummer , with whom he made exploratory contact . Jones and Levene had both seen him perform and were impressed as well . Strummer , for his part , was primed to make the switch . In April , he had taken in the opening act for one of his band 's gigs — the Sex Pistols . " I knew something was up , " Strummer later explained : 
 " So I went out in the crowd which was fairly sparse . And I saw the future — with a snotty handkerchief — right in front of me . It was immediately clear . Pub rock was , ' Hello , you bunch of drunks , I 'm gonna play these <unk> and I hope you like them . ' The Pistols came out that Tuesday evening and their attitude was , ' Here 's our tunes , and we couldn 't give a flying fuck whether you like them or not . In fact , we 're gonna play them even if you fucking hate them . ' " 
 On 30 May , Rhodes and Levene met surreptitiously with Strummer after a 101'ers gig . Strummer was invited to meet up at the band 's rehearsal location on Davis Road . After Strummer turned up , Levene grabbed his guitar , stood several inches away from Strummer , looked him in the eye and then began playing " Keys to Your Heart , " one of Strummer 's own tunes . 
 Rhodes gave him 48 hours to decide whether he wanted to join the new band that would " rival the Pistols " . Within 24 hours , Strummer agreed . Simonon later remarked , " Once we had Joe on board it all started to come together . " Strummer introduced the band to his old school friend Pablo <unk> , who sat in on drums during Strummer 's first few rehearsals with the group . <unk> 's stint with the band didn 't last long ( he subsequently joined 999 ) , and Terry Chimes — whom Jones later referred to as " one of the best drummers " in their circle — became the band 's regular drummer . In Westway to the World , Jones also says , " I don 't think Terry was officially hired or anything . He had just been playing with us . " Chimes did not take to Strummer at first : " He was like twenty @-@ two or twenty @-@ three or something that seemed ' old ' to me then . And he had these retro clothes and this croaky voice " . Simonon came up with the band 's name after they had briefly dubbed themselves the Weak <unk> and the Psychotic Negatives . He later explained the name 's origin : " It really came to my head when I started reading the newspapers and a word that kept recurring was the word ' clash ' , so I thought ' the Clash , what about that , ' to the others . And they and Bernard , they went for it . " 
 = = = Early gigs and the growing scene : 1976 = = = 
 After rehearsing with Strummer for less than a month , the Clash made their debut on 4 July 1976 , supporting the Sex Pistols at the Black Swan in Sheffield . The band apparently wanted to make it on @-@ stage before their rivals in the Damned — another London SS spinoff — made their own scheduled debut two days later . The Clash would not play in front of an audience again for another five weeks . Levene was becoming disaffected with his position in the group . At the Black Swan , he approached the Sex Pistols ' lead singer , John Lydon ( then going by Johnny Rotten ) , and suggested they get a band together if the Pistols ever broke up . 
 The night after their debut , the band members along with most of the Sex Pistols and much of the rest of London 's " inner circle " of punks showed up at Dingwalls club to attend a concert by New York 's leading punk rock band , the Ramones . Afterward " came the first example of the rivalry @-@ induced squabbling that was to dog the punk scene and undermine any attempts to promote a spirit of unity among the bands involved . " Simonon got into a scuffle with J.J. Burnel , the bass player of the Stranglers . A slightly older band , the Stranglers were publicly identified with the punk scene , but were not part of the " inner circle " centred on the Sex Pistols . 
 With Rhodes insisting that the band not perform live again until they were much tighter , the Clash rehearsed intensely over the following month . Strummer later described how seriously the band devoted itself to forging a distinct identity : " We were almost Stalinist in the way that you had to shed all your friends , or everything that you 'd known , or every way that you 'd played before . " Strummer and Jones shared most of the writing duties — " Joe would give me the words and I would make a song out of them " , Jones later said . Sometimes they would meet in the office over their Camden rehearsal studio to collaborate directly . According to a later description of Strummer 's , " Bernie [ Rhodes ] would say , ' An issue , an issue . Don 't write about love , write about what 's affecting you , what 's important . " 
 Strummer took the lead vocals on the majority of songs ; in some cases he and Jones shared the lead . Once the band began recording , Jones would rarely have a solo lead on more than one song per album , though he would be responsible for two of the group 's biggest hits . On 13 August , the Clash — sporting a paint @-@ spattered " Jackson Pollock " look — played before a small , invitation @-@ only audience in their Camden studio . Among those in attendance was Sounds critic Giovanni <unk> . His review described the band as a " runaway train ... so powerful , they 're the first new group to come along who can really scare the Sex Pistols <unk> " . 
 On 29 August , the Clash and Manchester 's Buzzcocks opened for the Sex Pistols at The Screen on the Green — the Clash 's first public performance since 4 July . The triple bill is seen as pivotal to the British punk scene 's crystallisation into a movement , though NME reviewer Charles Shaar Murray wrote , " The Clash are the sort of garage band that should be speedily returned to the garage , preferably with the motor still running " . Strummer later credited Murray 's comments with inspiring the band 's composition " <unk> " . 
 In early September , Levene was fired from the Clash . Strummer would claim that Levene 's dwindling interest in the band owed to his supposedly extravagant use of speed , a charge Levene has denied . Levene and Lydon would form Public Image Ltd. in 1978 . On 21 September , the Clash performed publicly for the first time without Levene at another seminal concert : the 100 Club Punk Special , sharing the bill with the Sex Pistols , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Subway Sect . Chimes left in late November ; he was briefly replaced by Rob Harper as the Clash toured in support of the Sex Pistols during December 's Anarchy Tour . 
 = = = Punk outbreak and UK fame : 1977 – 79 = = = 
 By the turn of the year , punk had become a major media phenomenon in the UK . On 25 January 1977 , the Clash signed to CBS Records for £ 100 @,@ 000 , a remarkable amount for a band that had played a total of about thirty gigs and almost none as a headliner . As Clash historian Marcus Gray describes , the " band members found themselves having to justify [ the deal ] to both the music press and to fans who picked up on the critics ' muttered asides about the Clash having ' sold out ' to the establishment . " Mark Perry , founder of the leading London punk periodical , Sniffin ' Glue , let loose with what he would later call his " big quote " : " Punk died the day the Clash signed to CBS . " As one band associate described it , the deal " was later used as a classic example of the kind of contract that no group should ever sign — the group had to pay for their own tours , recordings , remixes , artwork , expenses ... " 
 Mickey Foote , who worked as a technician at their concerts , was hired to produce the Clash 's debut album , and Terry Chimes was drafted back for the recording . The band 's first single , " White Riot " , was released in March 1977 and reached number 34 . The album , The Clash , came out the following month . Filled with fiery punk tracks , it also presaged the many eclectic turns the band would take with its cover of the reggae song " Police and Thieves " . " [ A ] midst the Sex Pistols ' inertia in the first half of 1977 , the Clash found themselves as the flag @-@ wavers of the punk rock consciousness " , according to music journalist and former punk musician John Robb . Though the album charted well in the UK , climbing to number 12 , CBS refused to give it a US release , believing that its raw , barely produced sound would make it unsalable in that market . A North American version of the album with a modified track listing was released in 1979 , after the UK original became the best @-@ selling import album of the year in the United States . 
 Chimes , whose career aspirations owed little to the punk ethos , had left the band again soon after the recording sessions . He later said , " The point was I wanted one kind of life and they wanted another and , like , why are we working together , if we want completely different things ? " As a result , only Simonon , Jones and Strummer were featured on the album 's cover , and Chimes was credited as " Tory Crimes " . Strummer later described what followed : " We must have tried every drummer that then had a kit . I mean every drummer in London . I think we counted 205 . And that 's why we were lost until we found Topper Headon . " Headon , who had played briefly with Jones 's London SS , was nicknamed " Topper " by Simonon , who felt he resembled the Topper comic book character Mickey the Monkey . An excellent musician , Headon could also play piano , bass and guitar . The day after he signed up , he declared , " I really wanted to join the Clash . I want to give them even more energy than they 've got — if that 's possible " ; interviewed over two decades later , he said his original plan was to stay briefly , gain a name for himself , and then move on to a better gig . In any event , Strummer later observed , " Finding someone who not only had the chops , but the strength and the stamina to do it was just the breakthrough for us " . 
 In May , the band set out on the White Riot Tour , headlining a punk package that included the Buzzcocks , Subway Sect , the Slits and the Prefects . The day after a Newcastle gig , Strummer and Headon were arrested for stealing pillowcases from their hotel room . That same month , CBS released " Remote Control " as the debut LP 's second single , defying the wishes of the band , who saw it as one of the album 's weakest tracks . Headon 's first recording with the band was the single " Complete Control " , which addressed the band 's anger at their record label 's behaviour . It was co @-@ produced by famed reggae artist Lee " Scratch " Perry , though Foote was summoned to " ground things " a bit and the result was pure punk rock . Released in September 1977 — NME noted how CBS allowed the group to " bait their masters " — it rose to number 28 on the British chart and has gone on to be cited as one of punk 's greatest singles . In February 1978 , the band came out with the single " Clash City Rockers " . June saw the release of " ( White Man ) In Hammersmith Palais " , which surprised fans with its ska rhythm and arrangement . 
 Before the Clash began recording their second album , CBS requested that they adopt a cleaner sound than its predecessor in order to reach American audiences . Sandy Pearlman , known for his work with Blue Öyster Cult , was hired to produce the record . Simonon later recalled , " [ R ] <unk> that album was just the most boring situation ever . It was just so nitpicking , such a contrast to the first album ... it ruined any spontaneity . " Strummer agreed that " it wasn 't our easiest session . " Although some listeners complained about its relatively mainstream production style , Give ' Em Enough Rope received largely positive reviews upon its November release . It hit number 2 in the UK , but it was not the American breakthrough CBS had hoped for , reaching only number 128 on the Billboard chart . The album 's first UK single , the hard rocking " Tommy Gun " , rose to number 19 , the highest chart position for a Clash single to date . In support of the album , the band toured the UK supported by the Slits and the Innocents . The series of concerts — there were more than thirty , from Edinburgh to Portsmouth — was promoted as the Sort It Out Tour . The band subsequently undertook its first , largely successful tour of North America in February 1979 . 
 = = = Changing style and US breakthrough : 1979 – 82 = = = 
 In August and September 1979 , the Clash recorded London Calling . Produced by Guy Stevens , a former A & R executive who had worked with Mott the Hoople and Traffic , the double album was a mix of punk rock , reggae , ska , rockabilly , traditional rock and roll and other elements possessed of an energy that had hardly flagged since the band 's early days and more polished production . It is regarded as one of the greatest rock albums ever recorded . Its final track , a relatively straightforward rock and roll number sung by Mick Jones called " Train in Vain " , was included at the last minute and thus did not appear in the track listing on the cover . It became their first US Top 40 hit , peaking at number 23 on the Billboard chart . In the UK , where " Train in Vain " was not released as a single , London Calling 's title track , stately in beat but unmistakably punk in message and tone , rose to number 11 — the highest position any Clash single reached in the UK before the band 's break @-@ up . 
 Released in December , London Calling hit number 9 on the British chart ; in the United States , where it was issued in January 1980 , it reached number 27 . The cover of the album , based on the cover of Elvis Presley 's self @-@ titled 1956 debut LP , became one of the best known in the history of rock . Its image , by photographer Pennie Smith , of Simonon smashing his bass guitar was later cited as the " best rock ' n roll photograph of all time " by Q magazine . During this period , the Clash began to be regularly billed as " The Only Band That Matters " . Musician Gary Lucas , then employed by CBS Records ' creative services department , claims to have coined the tagline . The epithet was soon widely adopted by fans and music journalists . 
 Around the turn of the year , the band members attended a special private screening of a new film , Rude Boy ; part fiction , part rockumentary , it tells the story of a Clash fan who leaves his job in a Soho sex shop to become a roadie for the group . The movie — named after the rude boy subculture — includes footage of the band on tour , at a London Rock Against Racism concert , and in the studio recording Give ' Em Enough Rope . The band was so disenchanted with it that they had Better Badges make buttons that declared " I don 't want <unk> <unk> Clash Film " . On 27 February 1980 , it premiered at the 30th Berlin International Film Festival , where it won an honourable mention . 
 The Clash had planned to record and release a single every month in 1980 . CBS balked at this idea , and the band came out with only one single — an original reggae tune , " <unk> " , in August — before the December release of the 3 @-@ LP , 36 @-@ song Sandinista ! The album again reflected a broad range of musical styles , including extended dubs and the first forays into rap by a major rock band . Produced by the band members with the participation of Jamaican reggae artist Mikey Dread , Sandinista ! was their most controversial album to date , both politically and musically . Critical opinion was divided , often within individual reviews . Trouser Press 's Ira Robbins described half the album as " great " , half as " nonsense " and worse . In the New Rolling Stone Record Guide , Dave Marsh argued , " Sandinista ! is nonsensically cluttered . Or rather seems nonsensically cluttered . One of the Clash 's principal concerns ... is to avoid being stereotyped . " The album fared well in America , charting at number 24 . 
 In 1981 , the band came out with a single , " This Is Radio Clash " , that further demonstrated their ability to mix diverse influences such as dub and hip hop . They set to work on their fifth album in September , originally planning it as a 2 @-@ LP set with the title Rat Patrol from Fort Bragg . Jones produced one cut , but the other members were dissatisfied . Production duties were handed to Glyn Johns , and the album was reconceived as a single LP , and released as Combat Rock in May 1982 . Though filled with offbeat songs , experiments with sound collage , and a spoken word vocal by Beat poet Allen Ginsberg , it contained two " radio friendly " tracks . The leadoff single in the US was " Should I Stay or Should I Go " , released in June 1982 . Another Jones feature in a rock and roll style similar to " Train in Vain " , it received heavy airplay on AOR stations . The follow @-@ up , " Rock the Casbah " , put lyrics addressing the Iranian clampdown on imports of Western music to a bouncy dance rhythm . ( The singles were released in the opposite order in the UK , where they were both preceded by " Know Your Rights " . ) The music for " Rock the Casbah " was composed by Headon , who performed not only the percussion but also the piano and bass heard on the recorded version . It was the band 's biggest US hit ever , charting at number 8 , and the video was put into heavy rotation by MTV . The album itself was the band 's most successful , hitting number 2 in the UK and number 7 in the US . 
 = = = Disintegration and break up : 1982 – 86 = = = 
 After Combat Rock , the Clash began to disintegrate . Headon was asked to leave the band just before the album 's release because heroin addiction was damaging his health and drumming . Chimes was brought back to drum for the next few months . The loss of Headon , well @-@ liked by the others , exposed growing friction within the band . Jones and Strummer began to feud . The band opened for the Who on a leg of their final tour in the US , including a show at New York 's Shea Stadium . 
 Though the Clash continued to tour , tension continued to increase . In early 1983 , Chimes left the band after the Combat Rock Tour because of in @-@ fighting and turmoil . He was replaced by Pete Howard for the US Festival in San Bernardino , California , which the Clash co @-@ headlined , along with David Bowie and Van Halen . The band argued with the event 's promoters over inflated ticket prices , threatening to pull out unless a large donation was made to a local charity . The group ultimately performed on 28 May , the festival 's New Music Day , which drew a crowd of 140 @,@ 000 . After the show , members of the band brawled with security staff . This was Jones ' last appearance with the group : in September 1983 , he was fired . Shortly thereafter , he became a founding member of General Public , but left that band as they were recording their first album . 
 Nick Sheppard , formerly of the Bristol @-@ based band the <unk> , and Vince White were recruited as the Clash 's new guitarists . Howard continued as the drummer . The reconstituted band played its first shows in January 1984 with a batch of new material and launched into the self @-@ financed Out of Control Tour , travelling widely over the winter and into early summer . At a striking miners ' benefit show ( " Scargill 's Christmas Party " ) in December 1984 , they announced that a new album would be released early in the new year . 
 The recording sessions for Cut the Crap were chaotic , with manager Bernard Rhodes and Strummer working in Munich . Most of the music was played by studio musicians , with Sheppard and later White flying in to provide guitar parts . Struggling with Rhodes for control of the band , Strummer returned home . The band went on a busking tour of public spaces in cities throughout the UK , playing acoustic versions of their hits and popular cover tunes . 
 After a concert in Athens , Strummer went to Spain to clear his mind . While he was abroad , the first single from Cut the Crap , the mournful " This Is England " , was released to mostly negative reviews . " CBS had paid an advance for it so they had to put it out " , Strummer later explained . " I just went , ' Well fuck this ' , and fucked off to the mountains of Spain to sit sobbing under a palm tree , while Bernie had to deliver a record . " However , critic Dave Marsh later championed " This Is England " as one of the top 1001 rock singles of all time . The single has also received retroactive praise from Q magazine and others . 
 " This Is England " , much like the rest of the album that came out later that year , had been drastically re @-@ engineered by Rhodes , with synths and football @-@ style chants added to Strummer 's incomplete recordings . Although Howard was an adept drummer , drum machines were used for virtually all of the percussion tracks . For the remainder of his life , Strummer largely disowned the album , although he did profess that " I really like ' This Is England ' [ and album track ] ' North and South ' is a vibe . " In early 1986 , the Clash disbanded . Strummer later described the group 's end : " When the Clash collapsed , we were tired . There had been a lot of intense activity in five years . Secondly , I felt we 'd run out of idea gasoline . And thirdly , I wanted to shut up and let someone else have a go at it . " 
 This period of disintegration which feature interviews with members of the Clash is the subject matter of Danny Garcia 's book and film , The Rise and Fall of the Clash . 
 = = = Collaborations and reunions : 1986 – present = = = 
 After the break @-@ up , Strummer contacted Jones in an effort to reform the Clash . Jones , however , had already formed a new band , Big Audio Dynamite ( B.A.D. ) , that had released its debut late in 1985 . The two did work together on their respective 1986 projects . Jones helped out with the two songs Strummer wrote and performed for the Sid and Nancy soundtrack . Strummer , in turn , cowrote a number of the tracks on the second B.A.D. album , No. 10 , <unk> St. , which he also co @-@ produced . With Jones committed to B.A.D. , Strummer moved on to various solo projects and screen acting work . Simonon formed a band called Havana 3am . Headon recorded a solo album , before once again spiraling into drug abuse . Chimes drummed with a succession of different acts . 
 On 2 March 1991 , a reissue of " Should I Stay or Should I Go " gave the Clash its first and only number 1 UK single . That same year , Strummer reportedly cried when he learned that " Rock the Casbah " had been adopted as a slogan by US bomber pilots in the Gulf War . 
 In 1999 , Strummer , Jones and Simonon cooperated in compiling of the live album From Here to Eternity and video documentary Westway to the World . On 7 November 2002 , the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame announced that the Clash would be inducted the following March . On 15 November , Jones and Strummer shared the stage , performing three Clash songs during a London benefit show by Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros . Strummer , Jones and Headon wanted to play a reunion show to coincide with their induction into the Hall of Fame . Simonon did not want to participate because he believed that playing at the high @-@ priced event would not have been in the spirit of the Clash . Strummer 's sudden death from a congenital heart defect on 22 December 2002 ended any possibility of a full reunion . In March 2003 , the Hall of Fame induction took place ; the band members inducted were Strummer , Jones , Simonon , Chimes and Headon . 
 In early 2008 , Carbon / Silicon , a new band founded by Mick Jones and his former London SS bandmate Tony James , entered into a six @-@ week residency at London 's Inn on the Green . On opening night , 11 January , Headon joined the band for the Clash 's " Train in Vain " . An encore followed with Headon playing drums on " Should I Stay or Should I Go " . This was the first time since 1982 that Headon and Jones had performed together on stage . 
 Jones and Headon reunited in September 2009 to record the 1970s Clash B @-@ side " Jail Guitar Doors " with Billy Bragg . The song is the namesake of a charity founded by Bragg which gives musical instruments and lessons to prison inmates . Jones , Headon , and Bragg were backed by former inmates during the session , which was filmed for a documentary about the charity , " Breaking Rocks . " Simonon and Jones were featured on the title track of the Gorillaz album Plastic Beach in 2010 . This reunion marked the first time the two performers had worked together in over twenty years . They later joined Gorillaz on their world tour for the remainder of 2010 . 
 In July 2012 , Strummer 's daughters , Jazz and Lola , gave a rare interview to discuss the upcoming tenth anniversary of their father 's passing , his legacy and the possibility of a Clash reunion had their father lived . Jazz said " There was talk about the Clash reforming before he died . But there had been talk for years and years about them reforming . They had been offered stupid amounts of money to do it , but they were very good at keeping the moral high ground and saying no . But I think if Dad hadn 't died , it would have happened . It felt like it was in the air . " 
 On 9 September 2013 in the UK ( and a day later in the US ) , the Clash released Sound System , a twelve @-@ disc box set featuring their studio albums completely re @-@ mastered on eight discs with an additional three discs featuring demos , non @-@ album singles , rarities and B @-@ sides , a DVD with previously unseen footage by both Don Letts and Julien Temple , original promo videos and live footage , an owner 's manual booklet , reprints of the band 's original ' <unk> Times ' fanzine as well as a brand new edition curated and designed by Paul Simonon and merchandise including dog tags , badges , stickers and an exclusive Clash poster . Both Mick Jones and Paul Simonon oversaw the project including the re @-@ masters . The box set came in a package shaped as an 80s ghetto blaster . The box set was accompanied by 5 Album Studio Set , which contains only the first five studio albums ( excluding Cut the Crap ) , and The Clash Hits Back , a 33 @-@ track , two @-@ CD best of collection sequenced to copy the set played by the band at the Brixton Fair Deal ( now the Academy ) on 19 July 1982 . 
 In a 3 September 2013 interview with Rolling Stone , Mick Jones discussed the band reuniting saying it likely would have never happened . Jones said " There were a few moments at the time I was up for it ( Hall of Fame reunion in 2003 ) , Joe was up for it . Paul wasn 't . And neither , probably , was Topper , who didn 't wind up even coming in the end . It didn 't look like a performance was going to happen anyway . I mean , you usually play at that ceremony when you get in . Joe had passed by that point , so we didn 't . We were never in agreement . It was never at a point where all of us wanted to do it at the same time . Most importantly for us , we became friends again after the group broke up , and continued that way for the rest of the time . That was more important to us than the band " . Jones also stated that the Sound System box set was the last time he will ever be involved in the band 's releases . " I 'm not even thinking about any more Clash releases . This is it for me , and I say that with an exclamation mark . " Jones said . 
 On 6 September 2013 the three surviving members of the classic lineup ( Mick Jones , Paul Simonon and Topper Headon ) reunited again for an exclusive BBC Radio 6 Music show to promote their legacy and the release of Sound System . 
 In an October 2013 interview with BBC <unk> , Jones confirmed that Strummer did have intentions of a Clash reunion and in fact new music was being written for a possible album . In the months prior to Strummer 's death , Jones and Strummer began working on new music for what he thought would be the next Mescaleros album . Jones said " We wrote a batch - we didn 't use to write one , we used to write a batch at a time - like gumbo . The idea was he was going to go into the studio with the Mescaleros during the day and then send them all home . I 'd come in all night and we 'd all work all night . " Jones said months had passed following their work together when he ran into Strummer at an event . Jones was curious as to what would become of the songs he and Strummer were working on and Strummer informed him that they were going to be used for the next Clash album . 
 = = Politics = = 
 The band 's music was often charged by a left @-@ wing political ideology . Strummer , in particular , was a committed left @-@ winger . The Clash are credited with pioneering the advocacy of radical politics in punk rock , and were dubbed the " Thinking Man 's <unk> " by NME . Like many early punk bands , the Clash protested against monarchy and aristocracy ; however , unlike many of their peers , they rejected nihilism . Instead , they found solidarity with a number of contemporary liberation movements and were involved with such groups as the Anti @-@ Nazi League . On 30 April 1978 , the Clash played the Rock Against Racism concert in London 's Victoria Park for a crowd of 50 – 100 @,@ 000 people ; Strummer wore a T @-@ shirt identifying two left @-@ wing terrorist groups : the words " Brigade [ sic ] Rosse " — Italy 's Red Brigades — appeared alongside the insignia of West Germany 's Red Army Faction . 
 Their politics were made explicit in the lyrics of such early recordings as " White Riot " , which encouraged disaffected white youths to riot like their black counterparts ; " Career Opportunities " , which addressed the alienation of low @-@ paid , <unk> jobs and discontent over the lack of alternatives ; and " London 's Burning " , about the bleakness and boredom of life in the inner city . Artist Caroline Coon , who was associated with the punk scene , argued that " [ t ] hose tough , militaristic songs were what we needed as we went into Thatcherism " . The scope of the band 's political interests widened on later recordings . 
 The title of Sandinista ! celebrated the left @-@ wing rebels who had recently overthrown Nicaraguan despot Anastasio Somoza Debayle , and the album was filled with songs driven by other political issues extending far beyond British shores : " Washington Bullets " addressed covert military operations around the globe , while " The Call @-@ Up " was a meditation on US draft policies . Combat Rock 's " Straight to Hell " is described by scholars Simon Reynolds and Joy Press as an " around @-@ the @-@ world @-@ at @-@ war @-@ in @-@ five @-@ verses guided tour of hell @-@ zones where boy @-@ soldiers had languished . " 
 The band 's political sentiments were reflected in their resistance to the music industry 's usual profit motivations ; even at their peak , tickets to shows and souvenirs were reasonably priced . The group insisted that CBS sell their double and triple album sets London Calling and Sandinista ! for the price of a single album each ( then £ 5 ) , succeeding with the former and compromising with the latter by agreeing to sell it for £ 5 @.@ 99 and forfeit all their performance royalties on its first 200 @,@ 000 sales . These " <unk> " ( value for money ) principles meant that they were constantly in debt to CBS , and only started to break even around 1982 . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 In 2004 , Rolling Stone ranked the Clash number 28 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time , and in 2010 , the band was ranked 22nd on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time . According to The Times , the Clash 's debut , alongside Never Mind the Bollocks , Here 's the Sex Pistols , is " punk 's definitive statement " and London Calling " remains one of the most influential rock albums " . In Rolling Stone 's 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , London Calling ranked number 8 , the highest entry by a punk band . The Clash was number 77 and Sandinista ! was number 404 . In the magazine 's 2004 list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time , " London Calling " ranked number 15 , again the highest for any song by a punk band . Four other Clash songs made the list : " Should I Stay Or Should I Go " ( 228 ) , " Train in Vain " ( 292 ) , " Complete Control " ( 361 ) , and " White Man in Hammersmith Palais " ( 430 ) . " London Calling " ranked number 48 in the magazine 's 2008 list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time . 
 Jake Burns of Stiff Little Fingers , the first major punk band from Northern Ireland , explained the record 's impact : 
 [ T ] he big watershed was the Clash album — that was go out , cut your hair , stop mucking about time , y 'know . Up to that point we 'd still been singing about bowling down California highways . I mean , it meant nothing to me . Although the Damned and the Pistols were great , they were only exciting musically ; lyrically , I couldn 't really make out a lot if it ... [ T ] o realise that [ the Clash ] were actually singing about their own lives in West London was like a bolt out of the blue . 
 The Clash also inspired many musicians who were only loosely associated , if at all , with punk . The band 's embrace of ska , reggae and England 's Jamaican subculture helped provide the impetus for the 2 Tone movement that emerged amid the fallout of the punk explosion . Other musicians who began performing while the Clash were active and acknowledged their debt to the band include Billy Bragg and Aztec Camera . U2 's the Edge has compared the Clash 's inspirational effect to that of the Ramones — both gave young rock musicians at large the " sense that the door of possibility had swung open . " He wrote , " The Clash , more than any other group , kick @-@ started a thousand garage bands across Ireland and the UK ... [ S ] <unk> them perform was a life @-@ changing experience . " Bono has described the Clash as " the greatest rock band . They wrote the rule book for U2 . " 
 In later years , the Clash 's influence can be heard in American political punk bands such as Rancid , Anti @-@ Flag , Bad Religion , NOFX , Green Day , and Rise Against as well as in the political hard rock of early Manic Street Preachers . California 's Rancid , in particular , are known as " incurable Clash zealots " . The title track of the band 's album Indestructible proclaims , " I 'll keep listening to that great Joe Strummer ! " 
 The Clash 's involvement with Jamaican musical and production styles has inspired similar cross @-@ cultural efforts by bands such as Bad Brains , Massive Attack , 311 , Sublime and No Doubt . They are credited with laying the groundwork for LCD Soundsystem 's " punk @-@ funk " . Jakob Dylan of the Wallflowers lists London Calling as the record that " changed his life " . Bands identified with the garage rock revival of the late 1990s and 2000s such as Sweden 's the Hives , Australia 's the Vines , Britain 's the Libertines , and America 's the White Stripes and the Strokes evince the Clash 's influence . Among the many latter @-@ day British acts identified as having been inspired by the Clash are Babyshambles , the Futureheads , the Charlatans and Arctic Monkeys . Before M.I.A. had an international hit in 2008 with " Paper Planes " , which is built around a sample from " Straight to Hell " , she referenced " London Calling " on 2003 's " Galang " . A cover of " The Guns of Brixton " by German punk band Die Toten Hosen was released as a single in 2006 . A version by reggae legend Jimmy Cliff with Tim Armstrong from Rancid was scheduled for release in November 2011 . American @-@ Irish punk band Dropkick Murphys released a cover of the song on Anti Heroes vs Dropkick Murphys in 1997 . 
 In June 2009 Bruce Springsteen & the E Street Band opened their concert in Hyde Park , London , with ' London Calling ' . The concert was later released on DVD as Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band : London Calling - Live in Hyde Park . Bruce Springsteen , Little Steven , Dave Grohl and Elvis Costello performed the same song at the Grammys in 2003 as a tribute to Joe Strummer who died the year before . In 2009 Springsteen & the E Street Band even covered Strummer 's " Coma Girl " while in 2014 and along with Tom Morello , they opened some of their shows on the High Hopes Tour with " Clampdown " . 
 The band has also had a notable impact on music in the Spanish @-@ speaking world . In 1997 , a Clash tribute album featuring performances by Buenos Aires punk bands was released . Many rock en español bands such as Todos Tus Muertos , Café <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Los Prisioneros , Tijuana No , and <unk> 77 are indebted to the Clash . Argentina 's Los Fabulosos Cadillacs covered " Should stay or should I go ! " , London Calling 's " Revolution Rock " and " The Guns of Brixton " and invited Mick Jones to sing on their song " Mal Bicho " . The Clash 's influence is similarly reflected in Paris @-@ founded Mano Negra 's politicised lyrics and fusion of musical styles . 
 = = Members = = 
 Classic line @-@ up 
 Joe Strummer – lead vocals , rhythm guitar 
 Mick Jones – lead guitar , vocals 
 Paul Simonon – bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Nicky " Topper " Headon – drums , percussion 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The Clash ( 1977 ) 
 Give ' Em Enough Rope ( 1978 ) 
 London Calling ( 1979 ) 
 Sandinista ! ( 1980 ) 
 Combat Rock ( 1982 ) 
 Cut the Crap ( 1985 ) 
 = USS Guam ( CB @-@ 2 ) = 
 USS Guam ( CB @-@ 2 ) was an Alaska @-@ class large cruiser which served with the United States Navy during the end of World War II . She was the second and last ship of her class to be completed . The ship was the second vessel of the US Navy to be named after the island of Guam , an American territory in the Pacific . Due to her commissioning late in the war , Guam saw relatively limited service during the war . She participated in operations off Okinawa in March – July 1945 , including providing anti @-@ aircraft defense for the carrier task force and conducting limited shore bombardment operations . She participated in sweeps for Japanese shipping in the East China and Yellow Seas in July – August 1945 . After the end of the war , she assisted in the occupation of Korea and transported a contingent of US Army troops back to the United States . She was decommissioned in February 1947 and placed in reserve , where she remained until she was stricken in 1960 and sold for scrapping the following year . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Guam was authorized under the Fleet Expansion Act on 19 July 1940 , and ordered on 9 September . She was laid down on 2 February 1942 at the New York Shipbuilding in Camden , New Jersey . She was launched on 12 November 1943 , after which fitting @-@ out work was effected . The ship was completed by September 1944 , and she was commissioned into the US Navy on 17 September , under the command of Captain Leland Lovette . She cost the US Navy $ 67 @,@ 053 @,@ 828 at her completion . 
 The ship was 808 feet 6 inches ( 246 @.@ 43 m ) long overall and had a beam of 91 ft 1 in ( 27 @.@ 76 m ) and a draft of 31 ft 10 in ( 9 @.@ 70 m ) . She displaced 29 @,@ 779 long tons ( 30 @,@ 257 t ) as designed and up to 34 @,@ 253 long tons ( 34 @,@ 803 t ) at full combat load . The ship was powered by four General Electric geared steam turbine sets , each driving one propeller , and eight oil @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers rated at 150 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 110 @,@ 000 kW ) and a top speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) . The ship had a cruising range of 12 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 000 km ; 14 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 15 kn ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . She carried four floatplanes , housed in two hangars , with a pair of aircraft catapults mounted amidships . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of nine 12 inch L / 50 Mark 8 guns in three triple gun turrets , two in a superfiring pair forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary battery consisted of twelve 5 @-@ inch L / 38 dual @-@ purpose guns in six twin turrets . Two were placed on the centerline superfiring over the main battery turrets , fore and aft , and the remaining four turrets were placed on the corners of the superstructure . The light anti @-@ aircraft battery consisted of 56 quad @-@ mounted 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) Bofors guns and 34 single @-@ mounted 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Oerlikon guns . A pair of Mk 34 gun directors aided gunlaying for the main battery , while two Mk 37 directors controlled the 5 @-@ inch guns and a Mk 57 director aided the 40 mm guns . The main armored belt was 9 in ( 229 mm ) thick , while the gun turrets had 12 @.@ 8 in ( 325 mm ) thick faces . The main armored deck was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick . 
 Guam was laid down on 2 February 1942 by the New York Shipbuilding Corporation , in Camden , New Jersey , launched on 12 November 1943 , and commissioned on 17 September 1944 . She received the first operational SC Seahawk floatplanes in October . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Guam left Philadelphia on 17 January 1945 , after completing her shakedown cruise off Trinidad . She proceeded through the Panama Canal to join the United States Pacific Fleet in Pearl Harbor , which she reached on 8 February . While there , Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal visited the ship . On 3 March , she departed Hawaii for Ulithi , where she joined her sister Alaska on 13 March . Shortly thereafter , Guam and the rest of Task Force 58 , the main strike force of the US Navy under the command of Admiral Arthur W. Radford , departed for a raid on the mainland Japanese islands of Kyushu and Shikoku . Task Force 58 arrived off Japan on the morning of 18 March and was quickly attacked by Japanese kamikazes and bombers . Guam was detached from the unit to escort the badly damaged carrier Franklin back to port , which lasted until 22 March . 
 Guam then returned to Task Force 58 , assigned to Cruiser Division 16 , part of Task Group 58 @.@ 4 , and steamed to Okinawa . On the night of 27 – 28 March , Guam and the rest of Cruiser Division 16 bombarded the airfield on Minamidaitō . After concluding the bombardment , Guam returned to the carrier screen while they conducted operations off Nansei Shoto until 11 May . The ship then steamed to Ulithi for periodic maintenance and to replenish ammunition and supplies . She then returned to Okinawa , assigned to Task Group 38 @.@ 4 of William Halsey 's Third Fleet . She continued to provide anti @-@ aircraft defense for the carriers while they launched fighter sweeps of Kyushu . Guam and Alaska bombarded Oki Daitō for an hour and a half on 9 June , after which they steamed to San Pedro Bay in the Leyte Gulf , arriving on 13 June . 
 After returning to Okinawa in July , Guam was assigned to Cruiser Task Force 95 , where she served as the flagship , along with her sister Alaska , under the command of Rear Admiral Francis S. Low . On 16 July , Guam and Alaska conducted a sweep into the East China and Yellow Seas to sink Japanese shipping . They had only limited success , however , and returned to the fleet on 23 July . They then joined a major raid , which included three battleships and three escort carriers , into the estuary of the Yangtze River off Shanghai . Again , the operation met with limited success , and they returned to Okinawa by 7 August . 
 Shortly after returning to Okinawa , Guam became the flagship of the North China Force , again commanded by Rear Admiral Low . The unit was tasked with showing the flag in the region , including the ports of Tsingtao , Port Arthur , and Dalian . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 On 8 September , Guam entered Jinsen , Korea , to assist in the occupation of the country . She left Jinsen on 14 November bound for San Francisco , carrying a group of Army soldiers back to the United States . She arrived in port on 3 December and departed two days later for Bayonne , New Jersey , arriving on the 17th . She remained there until she was decommissioned on 17 February 1947 . 
 She was then assigned to the Atlantic Reserve Fleet , where she remained until she was stricken from the Navy List on 1 June 1960 . She was sold on 24 May 1961 for $ 423 @,@ 076 to the Boston Metals Company in Baltimore . She was towed to the shipbreakers on 10 July 1961 . Guam had served only 29 months on active duty . In the course of her career , she received two battle stars for her service during World War II . 
 = = Awards = = 
 American Campaign Medal 
 Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal with two battle stars 
 World War II Victory Medal 
 Navy Occupation Service Medal with " ASIA " clasp 
 China Service Medal 
 = Side Effects ( song ) = 
 " Side Effects " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her eleventh studio album , E = MC ² ( 2008 ) . It was written by Carey , Scott Storch , Crystal Johnson and the songs featured artist , Young Jeezy . It was inspired by Carey 's marriage to record executive Tommy Mottola and his controlling nature over her and her career . Carey discusses how she still deals with the side effects of the experiences that she encountered during the relationship . Critical response to the song was positive , with many critics highlighting it as an album standout , praising its candid lyrics and honesty . It charted at number 93 on the U.S. Billboard Pop 100 chart upon the release of the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1988 , Carey moved to Manhattan , New York to pursue a career in music . After working as a background singer for rising pop singer Brenda K. Starr , Carey was introduced to Tommy Mottola , head of Columbia Records , at a record executives gala . Accompanied by Starr , Carey handed Mottola her demo tape , featuring four of the eleven songs that would eventually comprise her debut studio album . In what has been largely described as a " Cinderella @-@ like story " , Mottola heard the tape in his Limousine ride home , and quickly returned to the event to find the girl with the " elusive voice " . When he arrived , Carey had already left early , disappointed in the events of the evening . In what became a search , Mottola began to track Carey down through Star 's management and eventually signed her to Columbia 's roster of artists . After the release of her self @-@ titled debut album ( 1990 ) , Carey rose to fame , with the album selling over 15 million units globally . During the recording of Carey 's third album , Music Box ( 1993 ) , the pair became romantically involved , and wed by August 1993 , only one month short of the album 's release . The couple moved into a large 12 @-@ bedroom mansion in upstate New York , a home Carey would later come to be described as a " private prison " and " golden cage " . 
 Referring to Columbia , Carey said in an interview " That company , made a billion dollars from the raggedy girl he met at that party . " Throughout the marriage , Mottola , both Carey 's husband and boss , carefully manipulated and controlled her career , crafting her into the adult contemporary / pop singer he sought her to be . With each album , Carey 's genre influences and production styles evolved , leading her farther into R & B and hip @-@ hop territory . By 1994 , Carey was already the best @-@ selling artist of the 1990s , and the labels best @-@ selling act . Due to her continued success , Carey was able to take more creative control over subsequent projects . During the recording sessions for her fifth album Daydream ( 1995 ) , the couple had already begun " fighting at the drop of a feather " , due to his controlling nature over their personal life and her career . They separated in 1997 , and divorced the following year . Carey described her sixth album Butterfly ( 1997 ) as her magnum opus , and her greatest and most personal work , due to its personal and emotional background . On the album 's title track – written by Carey for Mottola – Carey reached out to him , asking to allow her to be free like a ' butterfly ' , and if the two were ' meant to be ' , then the butterfly ' would return ' . In an interview with Interview magazine , Carey described the importance the song held for her , as well as its meaning : 
 It was ' 97 and I was leaving my marriage [ to Tommy Mottola ] . which encompassed my life . I was writing the song ' Butterfly ' wishing that that 's what he would say to me . There 's a part that goes , ' I have learned that beauty / has to flourish in the light / wild horses run unbridled / or their spirit dies / you have given me the courage / to be all that I can / and I truly feel ... [ sings ] and I truly feel your heart will lead you back to me when you 're ready to land . ' At that point I really believed that I was going to go back to the marriage – I didn 't think I was going to leave forever . But then the things that happened to me during that time caused me to not go back . Had it been , ' Go be yourself , you 've been with me since you were a kid , let 's separate for a while , ' I probably would 've . " 
 " Butterfly " became what Carey later described as her " favorite and most heartfelt ballad . " Its lyrics were very personal , linking to her personal life and relationship with Mottola . Carey wrote " Butterfly " for Mottola , hoping he would say its contents to her , and choose to do what was best for her . She described it as " the best ballad she had ever written " and credited it as the epitome of Butterfly . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 " Side Effects " was written by Carey , Scott Storch , Crystal Johnson and featured artist Young Jeezy . It was produced by Carey for Maroon Entertainment and by Storch on behalf of Tuff Jew Productions / <unk> Foundation . Copyright is held by Rye Songs which is administered by Songs of Universal ( BMI ) / Scott Storch Music / TVT Publishing ( ASCAP ) / C @-@ Style Ink / Slide That Music / EMI @-@ April Songs ( ASCAP ) / YJ Music ( BMI ) . The track was recorded by Brian Garten at Honeysouth Studios in Miami , Florida , and mixed by Fabian <unk> at The Hit Factory , also in Miami . Carey and Johnson performed the background vocals . 
 It is an R & B song with elements of electro . Lyrically , Carey is recounting a past relationship which fell into " violent times " , and how she still deals with the effects of what she experienced . Carey begins with the line " I was a girl / You were ‘ the man ' / I was too young to understand / I was naïve / Believing everything you told me . " Although Carey never mentions Mottola 's name , many critics believed that she was addressing him directly in the lines " Shining like a chandelier / That decorated every room inside / The private hell we built " , " Sleeping with the enemy , aware that he was smothering every last part of me " and " Said you were strong / Protecting me / Then I found out that you were weak / Keepin ' me there , under your thumb / Cause you were scared that I 'd become much / More than you could handle . " After confessing that she would " [ wake ] up scared some nights , still dreaming about the violent times , " Carey decides to walk away from the relationship , and declares " but I still live with the side effects " . J. Freedom De Luc of The Washington Post likened the " echoing " repetition of " Side effects " to that of Rihanna 's on her 2007 single " Umbrella " . In an interview with Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News , Carey explained why she felt compelled to write the song : 
 'I wrote it because it was necessary for me to write it , ' Mariah said of her most personal , and angriest , song to date . Fans might be surprised at her references to ' the hell that we built ' and the ' violent times , ' but Mariah thinks this song is for ' anyone who ’ s been in an abusive relationship . ' ' You know what ? I ’ ve been through too much at this point , ' she said . ' I want happiness and I want pure and real love , but the side effects of what other relationships have put me through cause me to be kind of on the defensive a lot of the time . And if somebody isn ’ t mature or caring and loving and open @-@ hearted enough to understand that , then it ’ s tough , but this is a song for people who need that . ' Mariah hopes that this song helps people feel ' a little bit <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Guardian 's Alex Macpherson praised the song , writing " the magnificent Side Effects finds Carey at the height of her powers . Over synths as slow as molasses , she intones some of the darkest lyrics of her career , a meditation on the long @-@ term effects of an abusive relationship . Verbose to the point of opulence , she crams syllables into the verses , races against her own emotions and perfectly conveys the song 's claustrophobic intensity . " Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle singled out " Side Effects " as " an an electro @-@ tinged standout " in his review of the album . He praised Storch and Young Jeezy for giving the song a " menacing mood " . Writing for Fox News , Roger Friedman described Carey 's vocals performance as " gorgeous " , Jeezy 's rap verse as " cool " and the hook as having Top 40 appeal . He continued to write that Mottola would most likely do a spit @-@ take upon hearing the lyrics . Describing the song as " a not @-@ so @-@ thinly @-@ veiled swipe " at Mottola , Evan Sawdey of PopMatters thought that the lyrical content would " raise some eyebrows " . The New York Times writer Ben Ratliff labeled the track as a " drama bomb " which recounts how Carey lived under the spell of Mottola during their marriage . The Washington Post 's J. Freedom De Luc thought that " Side Effects " was one of the albums highlights along with " Touch My Body " and " I Wish You Well " , and continued to write that Carey appears to be unloading onto her ex @-@ husband . Nick Levine from Digital Spy described the song as Carey 's revenge on Mottola , and " her rawest , most personal track in years " . Jayanthi Daniels of The New York Sun was critical of " Side Effects " as well as " I 'm That Chick " , describing them as " throwaway pop tracks " on a hip @-@ hop album . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On July 31 , 2008 , Carey performed a free concert at the Hollywood and Highland Center shopping mall in Los Angeles , California , for 2 @,@ 000 people . Young Jeezy joined Carey on stage to perform " Side Effects " ; Todd Martens of the LA Times said of the performance that his " gruff intonations providing a surprisingly effective counterbalance to Carey 's pleasantly light phrasing " . Carey also performed " We Belong Together " , " Shake It Off " and a medley of " Touch My Body / I 'll Be Lovin ' U Long Time " . The concert was filmed and presented on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , as part of Samsung AT & T Summer Krush concert series . The production cost of the concert was estimated to be $ 250 @,@ 000 ; according to Kimmel 's music booker Scott Igoe . He confirmed that the cost was not incurred by Kimmel , and that Samsung made a contribution because " Carey doesn 't come cheap " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll = 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll is a platforming video game developed by Rare . It was published by Nintendo and released for the Nintendo Entertainment System in North America in July 1990 and in Europe on March 27 , 1991 . It was ported to the Mega Drive and released by Sega in June 1993 . The game features two snakes , Rattle and Roll , as they make their way through eleven 3D isometric levels . The object is to navigate the obstacles in each level and eat enough " Nibbley Pibbleys " to ring a weigh @-@ in bell located in the level , which will allow the snakes to exit . The game can be played by a single player or by two players simultaneously . 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll was developed by Rare members Tim Stamper and Mark Betteridge , with music composed by David Wise , which featured music inspired by " Shake , Rattle and Roll " , as well as other 1950s @-@ era oldies . It was well received by various video gaming magazines , and praises include well @-@ designed 3D environments and graphics , playability and controls , and challenge . A follow @-@ up for the Game Boy , titled Sneaky Snakes , was released by Tradewest in 1991 . Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll has been named one of the top games released on the NES and one of the top games released by Rare . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll features two snakes – Rattle and Roll – as they make their way through 11 isometric levels . The object in each level is to eat enough " Nibbley Pibbleys " – small round creatures found throughout each level – to gain enough weight to ring a bell on top of a weighing machine located at the end of the level ; this causes a door for the next level to open . Players maneuver their snakes throughout the level with the control pad and are able to pick up Nibbley Pibbleys by pressing the B button on the controller . The snakes ' lengths increase when they eat ; players ' snake length grows more quickly when they eat Nibbley Pibbleys of their own color , and they grow the most when they eat yellow ones . Located in each level are dispensers which randomly spew out Nibbley Pibbleys ; however , they also spew out bombs which can damage the snakes . When a snake reaches a long enough length , the tail begins to flash , which means the snake is heavy enough to exit that level . At that point , they must find and jump on the scale in order to ring the bell and open the exit door . 
 Each level contains various obstacles and enemies that the players must deal with . Players lose a segment from their snake if they are hit by an enemy , and they lose a life if their snake runs out of segments . Players can also lose a life if their snakes fall too far , the timer runs out , their snakes touch a sharp object , or if they are squashed by an object from above . Also , if they remain in some bodies of water for too long , a shark will attack . The game ends if players lose all their lives , but they have several continues in which they can restart the game from where they left off . Players can defeat enemies by hitting them with their tongues or by jumping on them . They can collect various items to help them along during gameplay , such as items that extend the length of the snakes ' tongues , extra lives and continues , time bonuses , invisibility diamonds , and items that speed up or reverse the direction of the snakes . Located throughout the game are lids ( in the shape of manhole covers ) in which players can open to uncover <unk> Pibbleys , items and extra lives , entrances to bonus levels , and sometimes enemies . Also located in the game are hidden warps which allow players to skip several levels and restart at a later point in the game . 
 = = Development = = 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll was developed primarily by Rare employees Tim Stamper and Mark Betteridge . Stamper worked on the game 's graphics and concepts , while Betteridge worked on the game program itself . Most of the ideas behind the game came from Betteridge , who had challenged himself to get the smallest file size for a NES game possible . According to Rare member Brendan Gunn , Betteridge found out how to develop cheap backgrounds that took up little space . After thinking about what and how to move objects on such backgrounds , he came up with the idea for a snake . Much of the game derived from another isometric video game Marble Madness , of which Rare published the NES version in 1989 . They would also use the same type of high speed scrolling that was used in the NES port of Marble Madness , which , according to a Nintendo Power overview of Rare , " many said couldn 't be done on the NES " . Rare 's future Creative Director , Gregg Mayles , started with the company play @-@ testing Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll . He recalls being impressed with Betteridge 's development of the controls , which he said " felt really responsive " . 
 The game 's soundtrack , which features music taken from the 1954 song " Shake , Rattle and Roll " , of which the game is named after , was composed by David Wise . He would also compose music from Wizards & Warriors , Battletoads , and the Donkey Kong Country series . According to website GamesRadar , the game 's compositions revolved around 1950s @-@ era " oldies so old they don ’ t even get played on the radio anymore " . One of the tunes was a homage to John Williams ' main theme from the 1975 film Jaws ; the theme plays when a snake lands in the water and gets chased back to land by a shark . 
 It was first published by Nintendo and released for the Nintendo Entertainment System in North America in July 1990 and in Europe on March 27 , 1991 . Rare would later port the game to the Sega Mega Drive , a version which was released only in Europe by Sega in 1993 ; this port featured an additional final level on top of the 11 levels on the NES version . In that version , the snakes make it into space , but a meteorite crashes into their spaceship , causing them to crash land on another planetoid , which serves at the 12th level . After completing the level , the ending shows the snakes on a new spaceship that is going back home . Although this game was never released for the Game Boy , in level 7 of the NES version , the landscape spells out " <unk> <unk> " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll first received preview coverage in January 1990 in Nintendo Power magazine . The preview said that the game " defies description " and that it would appeal to people who have enjoyed games such as Q * bert and Adventures of Lolo . The game would be featured in the magazine 's September – October 1990 issue , which featured a walkthrough of the game 's first three levels . It was also featured in UK @-@ based magazine Mean Machines , where it received high praise from editors Matt Regan and Julian Rignall . Regan praised the game 's 3D environment , fun gameplay , and level of humor , as noted by the odd objects such as toilet seats . Rignall called the game 's graphics " stunning , with beautifully drawn scrolling forced perspective 3D backdrops and some great sprites " ; he also lauded the game 's playability and simple controls , challenging difficulty , and overall fun factor . Overall , they said Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll was " one of the most original games seen in years " and was " a firm favourite here in the <unk> <unk> offices " . 
 The game received further reviews and praise in other video gaming magazines in 1991 . German magazine Video Games called Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll " a quaint and original game " that includes high @-@ quality graphics . The reviewer praised the animations in the characters , especially after the snakes eat <unk> Pibbleys , and he enjoyed the two @-@ player simultaneous mode ; however , he said that the game lacked in variety , though the gameplay and challenge remained consistent throughout the course of the game . Another German magazine , Power Play , gave a similar review , and it compared the game to the 1988 Rare title R.C. Pro @-@ Am in gameplay . American video gaming magazine Game Players awarded Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll the " Game Player 's NES Excellence Award " for 1990 as one of the best games released for the NES that year . 
 Nintendo Power reviewed Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll as part of an overview of NES games which the magazine felt were overlooked or otherwise did not sell well . Their main criticism was that the main characters were not recognizable to anyone , giving the game a lack of visibility amongst consumers . Otherwise , they praised the game for its precise controls and for its blend of puzzle and action elements . 
 Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll received some retrospective coverage years after its release . IGN ranked the game at # 32 in its " Top 100 NES Games " list , calling it " another of Rare 's excellent pre @-@ second @-@ party efforts on the NES " as well as " Marble Madness turned into a platformer " . Executive editor Craig Harris also noted the game 's high level of difficulty and its excellent soundtrack . UK @-@ based magazine Retro Gamer reviewed the game in its August 2006 issue , calling it one of the best isometric games on the NES and " an essential NES game " . The two title characters of the game would be named " Hero of the Month " in the magazine 's February 2007 issue . In a 25th anniversary retrospective of Rare in December 2010 , the same magazine called the game " an excellent platformer " and was one of the games they wished would be released on Kinect ; the magazine received a glimpse of a Marble Madness prototype on Kinect and wanted to see the control scheme in that game implemented in a new version of Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll . The game was also ranked # 23 on a readers ' poll of top 25 games made by Rare . UK @-@ based magazine Retro Gamer covered Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll as part of its retrospective on isometric video games , saying that the game " merged brilliantly the offbeat nature of games such as Head Over Heels with popular movement @-@ based isometric action / puzzle titles like Marble Madness and Spindizzy " . It was also covered in the GamesTM ' Retro book , where it was lauded as one of the more unheralded games in the NES library . The retrospective highly praised the its visuals and landscapes , as well as having a " quirky humour " and a " unique charm " . It concluded by saying that Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll stands apart from other NES titles , as also did other Rare titles such as Cobra Triangle and R.C. Pro @-@ Am . 
 Due to Microsoft 's current ownership of Rare , it is unlikely that either game will be released for the Virtual Console . Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll , along with Rare 's other NES titles , appear in the Xbox One compilation , Rare Replay . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In the ending of Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll , the game hints at a sequel titled Snakes in Space , but the game would never be released . However , Rare developed a follow @-@ up on the Game Boy titled Sneaky Snakes ; the game was published by Tradewest in June 1991 . The game features two Snakes named Genghis and Atilla who must save Sonia Snake from the Nasty Nibbler . The game features identical gameplay to Snake Rattle ' n ' Roll but in a 2D side @-@ scrolling platforming mode instead of the 3D isometric mode . Sneaky Snakes was received mediocre ratings from Electronic Gaming Monthly in its July 1991 issue . Reviewer Steve Harris criticized the game for its awkward controls , lack of originality , and a " zero @-@ <unk> effect " while jumping . Ed Semrad said that the game got old after the first several levels , and Martin Alessi said that while it is an original idea , likewise repeated the previous reviewers criticism of the game 's repetitiveness . Reviewer " Sushi @-@ X " called the game " average " and said , “ It lacks the rest of the positive traits that truly rates an exceptional game . ” 
 = USS Freedom ( ID @-@ 3024 ) = 
 USS Freedom ( ID @-@ 3024 ) was a cargo and transport ship in the United States Navy during World War I. Originally SS Wittekind for the North German Lloyd line , the ship also served as USAT Iroquois and USAT Freedom after being seized by the United States in 1917 . 
 SS Wittekind was built in Germany for the Bremen – New York service of the Roland Line service of North German Lloyd , and was the sister ship of SS Willehad . In March 1900 Wittekind was lengthened because her cargo capacity was found lacking . Later that same year , Wittekind was among the first transports to carry German Empire troops as part of the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance intended to put down the Boxer Rebellion in China . In August 1914 , at the start of World War I , the ship was interned at Boston in the neutral United States . 
 When the U.S. entered that conflict in April 1917 , Wittekind was seized and turned over to the United States Shipping Board . Renamed Iroquois , the ship was chartered to the United States Army as a cargo ship after a refit , and , in 1918 , was renamed Freedom . In January 1919 the ship was commissioned into the United States Navy , and carried almost 5 @,@ 000 troops home from Europe before her decommissioning in September . Held in reserve for transport duty , the ship was laid up for five years before being scrapped in 1924 . 
 = = SS Wittekind = = 
 SS Wittekind was built by Blohm & Voss of Hamburg for North German Lloyd ’ s Roland Line , which was a fortnightly steerage and freight service from Bremen to New York . Launched on 3 February 1894 , Wittekind — named for Wittekind ( c . 730 – 808 ) , the Duke of Saxony — and sister @-@ ship Willehad were the first twin @-@ screw steamers expressly built for North German Lloyd . The new liner sailed on her maiden voyage to Hoboken , New Jersey on 14 April . 
 Wittekind and sister @-@ ship Willehad were both quickly found to be deficient in cargo space , and plans were made to lengthen both vessels ( though Willehad was never lengthened ) . Wittekind ' s bridge was moved forward and a cargo hatch was installed behind it . After this , the ship was cut into two parts forward of the bridge 's new position , and a new 18 @.@ 29 @-@ meter ( 60 @.@ 0 ft ) section was inserted , which greatly increased the cargo capacity . Sources disagree as to where the procedure was performed with one reporting it was performed at the <unk> Yard in Germany , while another claims it was done by Tyne <unk> & Drydock Co . , at Newcastle . Wherever the work was performed , it was completed by March 1900 . 
 On 3 July 1900 , Wittekind sailed from Bremerhaven with Frankfurt as the initial transport ships to depart with troops of Germany ’ s contribution to the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance intended to put down the Boxer Rebellion in China . Wittekind remained in naval service as a transport and hospital ship through late October 1901 . After her naval service ended , Wittekind sailed variously to Baltimore , Maryland ; Galveston , Texas ; Montreal ; and ports in South America through mid @-@ 1914 . 
 At sea and headed for Montreal when the United Kingdom declared war on the German Empire , Wittekind instead headed for Boston and safety in the then @-@ neutral United States . The steamer — carrying a cargo of lead and coal tar products reportedly worth $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 — slipped past British cruiser Essex in a dense fog near Sable Island . Wittekind ' s wireless operator calculated that the ship passed fewer than 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ) from Essex . The steamer was interned by the U.S. and her Canadian @-@ bound passengers — 18 <unk> , and 305 steerage @-@ class who were not allowed to remain in the United States — were greeted by the Canadian Commissioner of Immigration who was stationed at Boston . 
 Wittekind was joined in Boston by sister @-@ ship Willehad ; North German Lloyd line @-@ mates Kronprinzessin Cecilie and Köln ; the Hamburg America Line steamers SS Amerika and Cincinnati ; and Hansa Line freighter Ockenfels . In March 1916 , all except Kronprinzessin Cecilie and Ockenfels were moved from their waterfront piers to an anchorage across the harbor from the Boston Navy Yard . Daily " neutrality duty " by United States Coast Guard harbor tug <unk> kept a watchful eye on the ships . Many crew members of the ships eventually went ashore , were processed through immigration , and found employment , while a contingent of musicians from the vessels toured New England , frequently playing at department stores and restaurants , and drawing the ire of the local musicians ' union . 
 After the U.S. declared war on Germany , Wittekind and the other interned ships were seized on 6 April 1917 and handed over to the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) . 
 = = United States service in World War I = = 
 After her seizure and refitting , the former liner was chartered to the United States Army as USAT Iroquois . In 1918 , her name was again changed , this time to Freedom . On 24 January 1919 , Freedom was acquired by the United States Navy and commissioned the same day , with Lieutenant J. C. C. Holier , USNRF , in command . 
 Freedom was assigned to the Cruiser and Transport Force , and after overhaul at New York , sailed on a voyage to Saint @-@ Nazaire , France , and embarked troops for return to the United States . The cargo ship made two more voyages to France , each to Brest , with a visit to Norfolk , Virginia , between trips . She returned a total of 4 @,@ 983 troops on her voyages from France . 
 She arrived at Hoboken on 5 September 1919 and was assigned to duty in the 3rd Naval District . Freedom was decommissioned at New York on 23 September and returned to the USSB the same day . The veteran ship was transferred to the United States Army transport reserve , and was laid up for five years . On 24 February 1924 , Freedom arrived at Baltimore for scrapping . 
 = Elda Emma Anderson = 
 Elda Emma Anderson ( October 5 , 1899 – April 17 , 1961 ) was an American physicist and health researcher . During World War II , she worked on the Manhattan Project at Princeton University and the Los Alamos Laboratory , where she prepared the first sample of pure uranium @-@ 235 at the laboratory . A graduate of the University of Wisconsin , she became professor of physics at Milwaukee @-@ Downer College in 1929 . After the war , she became interested in health physics . She worked in the Health Physics Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory , and established the professional certification agency known as the American Board of Health Physics . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elda Emma Anderson was born in Green Lake , Wisconsin , on October 5 , 1899 , to Edwin A. Anderson ( born in Wisconsin ) and his wife , Lena ( née Heller ) ( born in Germany ) . Elda was one of three siblings . Although she was captivated by numbers at an early age , young Elda actually sought to become a kindergarten teacher . This would shift to an interest in science later , partially due to the influence of her older sister , who was an assistant chemistry instructor . As a whole , although her family had certain lofty expectations for their younger daughter , they all supported her in her academic endeavors . Anderson earned a Bachelor of Arts ( AB ) degree from Ripon College in 1922 , then a master of arts ( AM ) in physics from the University of Wisconsin in 1924 . From 1924 to 1927 , she taught at <unk> Junior College in Iowa , where she was the dean of physics , chemistry and mathematics . In 1929 , she became professor of physics at Milwaukee @-@ Downer College , then head of the physics department in 1934 . 
 = = Career = = 
 In 1941 Anderson completed her PhD at the University of Wisconsin , writing her thesis on " Low energy levels in the atomic spectra Co VII and Ni VIII " . Immediately after finishing her PhD , Anderson requested time off from her position at Milwaukee @-@ Downer College , in order to conduct war research related to the Manhattan Project at the Office of Scientific Research and Development at Princeton University . Not long after , Anderson was recruited to continue her work specifically at Los Alamos Laboratory . At her new location , Anderson studied basic fission parameters , including analyzing the time delays associated with the absorption and emission of neutrons . Such work often entailed working upwards of sixteen hours a day . Among other accomplishments at Los Alamos , Anderson prepared the first sample of pure uranium @-@ 235 at the laboratory . She lived in a dormitory . Being older than most of the other women in the dormitory at the age of fifty , she was put in charge . She often worked at night , wearing jeans and a plaid shirt – not the usual attire for a woman at the time . 
 Following the war , in 1947 , Anderson left Los Alamos and returned to teaching at Milwaukee @-@ Downer College , but her involvement in atomic physics led to an interest in the health effects of radiation . In 1949 , she left teaching to begin a career in health physics . At the Health Physics Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , which was only five years old when she joined , she became the first chief of education and training . She spent her career helping to establish the new training program in health physics , teaching and advising graduate fellows in health physics from 1949 . 
 Outside of necessary obligations , Anderson was also known for helping students with problems both academic and personal , lending helpful guidance . In some cases , Anderson was known to have given loans to students , as well share a drink in troubling times . 
 Anderson organized the first international course in her field in Stockholm in 1955 ; she organized similar courses in Belgium in 1957 and Mumbai in 1958 . She supported the establishment of the Health Physics Society in 1955 , serving as secretary pro tem and then charter secretary , and eventually as president of the Society from 1959 to 1960 . In 1960 , she established the professional certification agency known as the American Board of Health Physics . Despite contracting leukemia in 1956 , Anderson remained undeterred in her career and maintained her position for several years until her eventual death in 1961 , during which she was also fighting breast cancer . 
 = = Atomic Energy Commission = = 
 In 1949 , Anderson moved to Oak Ridge , Tennessee to become the first chief of education and training in the Health Physics Division of the Oak Ridge National Laboratory . Karl Z. Morgan led the team responsible for training , that was headed by Anderson and assisted by Myron Fair and Mary Jane Cook <unk> with administrative support from Frances Neal . Anderson also worked with faculty members at Vanderbilt University in Nashville , Tennessee , to create a master 's degree program in health physics at that institution . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 In 1956 , Anderson , who never married and had no children , developed leukemia . She died nearly five years later in Oak Ridge , Tennessee , of breast cancer and leukemia , possibly as the result of her work with radioactive materials , on 17 April 1961 . Anderson was buried at Green Lake Cemetery in Green Lake , Wisconsin . She was survived by her sister , Mrs. Lucille McConnell and niece , Natalie Tarr <unk> . Dr. Anderson 's obituary was well covered in the press and scientific journals . Tributes were written by colleagues and former students . Anderson is honored each year at the annual meeting of the Health Physics Society when the Elda E. Anderson Award is presented to a young member of the Society . 
 The Elda E. Anderson Award of the Health Physics Society was named in her honor . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Ph.D. Dissertation : Anderson , Elda E. ( 1941 ) . Low Energy Levels in the Atomic Spectra of Cobalt VII and Nickel VIII . University of Wisconsin — Madison . 
 Mack , J. E. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1944 ) . A 21 ‐ Foot Multiple Range Grazing Incidence Spectrograph . Review of Scientific Instruments . 15 ( 2 ) : 28 @-@ 36 . 
 Anderson , E. E. , Lavatelli , L. S. , McDaniel , B. D. , & Sutton , R. B. ( 1944 ) . Boron cross sections for neutrons from 0 @.@ 01 to 1000 eV . Atomic Energy Commission . 
 Anderson , E. E. , Lavatelli , L. S. , McDaniel , B. D. , & Sutton , R. B. ( 1944 ) . <unk> ON THE CROSS @-@ <unk> OF 94 Pu @-@ 239 AS A <unk> OF <unk> <unk> IN THE <unk> FROM 0 @.@ 01 eV TO 3 @.@ 0 eV ( No . LA @-@ 91 ) . Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory . New Mexico . 
 Anderson , E. E. , McDaniel , B. D. , Sutton , R. B. , & Lavatelli , L. S. ( 1945 ) . <unk> AND <unk> CROSS <unk> OF 94 Pu @-@ 239 IN THE <unk> <unk> <unk> 0 @.@ 01 eV TO 100 eV ( No . LA @-@ 266 ) . Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory . New Mexico . 
 Sutton , R. B. , McDaniel , B. D. , Anderson , E. E. , & Lavatelli , L. S. ( 1947 ) . The Capture Cross Section of Boron for Neutrons of Energies from 0 @.@ 01 eV to 1000 eV . Physical Review . 71 ( 4 ) : 272 . 
 McDaniel , B. D. , Sutton , R. B. , Lavatelli , L. S. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1947 ) . The Absorption Cross Section of Gold for Neutrons of Energies from 0 @.@ 01 to 0 @.@ 3 eV . Physical Review . 72 ( 8 ) : 729 . 
 Sutton , R. B. , T. Hall , E. E. Anderson , H. S. Bridge , J. W. <unk> , L. S. Lavatelli , E. A. Long , T. Snyder , and R. W. Williams . ( 1947 ) . Scattering of Slow Neutrons by <unk> and <unk> . Physical Review . 72 ( 12 ) : 1147 . 
 Sutton , R. B. , T. Hall , E. E. Anderson , H. S. Bridge , J. W. <unk> , L. S. Lavatelli , E. A. Long , T. Snyder , and R. W. Williams . ( 1947 ) . Neutron diffraction studies of <unk> and <unk> . Physical Review . 72 : 1147 @-@ 56 . 
 Anderson , Elda E. ( 1950 ) . Manual on Radiological Protection for Civilian Defense ( No . M @-@ <unk> ) . Oak Ridge National Laboratory . 
 Anderson , E. E. ( 1952 ) . Units of radiation and radioactivity . Public Health Reports . 67 ( 3 ) : 293 . 
 Anderson , E. E. ( 1954 ) . Education and Training of Health Physicists . Radiology . 62 ( 1 ) : 83 @-@ 87 . 
 Lukens Jr , H. R. , Anderson , E. E. , & Beaufait Jr , L. J. ( 1954 ) . Punched Card System for Radioisotopes . Analytical Chemistry . 26 ( 4 ) : 651 @-@ 652 . 
 Kohl , J. , Newacheck , R. L. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1955 ) . Gaseous and Liquid <unk> for Underground Studies . In Proceedings . University of California . 
 Kohl , J. , Newacheck , R. L. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1955 ) . Locating Casing Shoe Leaks with Radioactive Argon . Transactions of the American Institute of Mining and Metallurgical Engineers . 204 ( 12 ) : 213 @-@ 216 . 
 Newacheck , R. L. , Beaufait , L. J. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1957 ) . Isotope <unk> Supplies <unk> from Parent 137Cs . <unk> . 15 ( 5 ) : 122 . 
 Beaufait Jr , L. J. , Anderson , E. E. , & Peterson , J. P. ( 1958 ) . Development and Preparation of Set of Gamma Spectrometer Standards . Analytical Chemistry . 30 ( 11 ) : 1762 @-@ 1764 . 
 Anderson , Elda E. ( 1959 ) . Assignment report on training course for health physicists . Bombay , India . November – December 1958 . 
 Zumwalt , L. R. , & Anderson , Elda E. ( 1960 ) . Xe @-@ 133 Release Data Obtained to Date on Various Sample Fuel Bodies ( No . GA @-@ P @-@ 32 @-@ 257 ) . General Atomic Division . General Dynamics Corp. San Diego , CA . 
 Anderson , E. E. , Gethard , P. E. , & Zumwalt , L. R. ( October 1961 ) . Use of the King Furnace in Fission @-@ Product Retention Studies of Graphite Reactor Fuels . In Proceedings of the Second Conference on Nuclear Reactor Chemistry . Gatlinburg , Tennessee ( pp. 171 – 192 ) . 
 Anderson , E. E. , Gethard , P. E. , & Zumwalt , L. R. ( 1962 ) . Steady @-@ State Release Fraction of Krypton and Xenon Fission Products at High Temperatures from ( U , Th ) C2 @-@ Graphite Fuel Matrix in Out @-@ Of @-@ Pile Experiments ( No . GA @-@ <unk> ) . General Atomic Div . General Dynamics Corp. San Diego , CA . 
 Zumwalt , L. R. , Anderson , E. E. , & Gethard , P. E. ( 1962 ) . Fission Product Retention Characteristics of Certain ( Th , U ) C2 @-@ Graphite Fuels . Proceedings . ANS Topical Meeting on Materials and Fuels for High @-@ Temperature Nuclear Energy Applications . 11 @-@ 13 . 
 Anderson , E. E. , <unk> , G. L. , & Zumwalt , L. R. ( 1962 ) . Fission Product Trapping — <unk> of <unk> by Activated Charcoal . Nuclear Science and Engineering . 12 ( 1 ) : 106 @-@ 110 . 
 Zumwalt , L. R. , Gethard , P. E. , & Anderson , E. E. ( 1963 ) . Fission @-@ Product Release from ' Single @-@ Crystal ' <unk> Particles . Transactions of the American Nuclear Society . 6 ( 1 ) : 132 . 
 Anderson , E. E. , Gardner , J. O. , Gethard , P. E. , <unk> , W. V. , Hooker , J. R. , Lonsdale , H. K. , ... & Zumwalt , L. R. ( 1963 ) . Advanced , Graphite @-@ Matrix , Dispersion @-@ Type Fuel Systems . Annual Report . April 1 , 1962 – March 31 , 1963 ( No . GA @-@ <unk> ; ( Pt . 1 ) ) . General Atomic Division . General Dynamics Corp. San Diego , CA . 
 Anderson , Elda E. , & Zumwalt , L. R. ( 1964 ) . The Diffusion of Barium in Simulated High @-@ Temperature Graphite Fuel Elements . Transactions of the American Nuclear Society . ( US ) . 7 . 
 = South Dakota = 
 South Dakota ( / <unk> <unk> / ; locally : [ <unk> <unk> ̞ <unk> ] ) is a state located in the Midwestern region of the United States . It is named after the Lakota and Dakota Sioux Native American tribes , who comprise a significant portion of the population and historically dominated the entire territory . South Dakota is the 17th most expansive , but the 5th least populous and the 5th least densely populated of the 50 United States . Once the southern portion of the Dakota Territory , South Dakota became a state on November 2 , 1889 , simultaneously with North Dakota . Pierre is the state capital and Sioux Falls , with a population of about 165 @,@ 000 , is South Dakota 's largest city . 
 South Dakota is bordered by the states of North Dakota , Minnesota , Iowa , Nebraska , Wyoming , and Montana . The state is bisected by the Missouri River , dividing South Dakota into two geographically and socially distinct halves , known to residents as " East River " and " West River " . Eastern South Dakota is home to most of the state 's population , and fertile soil in this area is used to grow a variety of crops . West of the Missouri , ranching is the predominant agricultural activity , and the economy is more dependent on tourism and defense spending . Most of the Native American reservations are located in West River . The Black Hills , a group of low pine @-@ covered mountains sacred to the Sioux , are located in the southwest part of the state . Mount Rushmore , a major tourist destination , is located there . South Dakota experiences a temperate continental climate , with four distinct seasons and precipitation ranging from moderate in the east to semi @-@ arid in the west . The ecology of the state features species typical of a North American grassland biome . 
 Humans have inhabited the area for several millennia , with the Sioux becoming dominant by the early 19th century . In the late 19th century , European @-@ American settlement intensified after a gold rush in the Black Hills and the construction of railroads from the east . <unk> miners and settlers triggered a number of Indian wars , ending with the Wounded Knee Massacre in 1890 . Key events in the 20th century included the Dust Bowl and Great Depression , increased federal spending during the 1940s and 50s for agriculture and defense , and an industrialization of agriculture that has much reduced family farming . 
 While several Democratic senators have represented South Dakota for multiple terms at the federal level , the state government is largely controlled by the Republican Party , whose nominees have carried South Dakota in each of the last 12 presidential elections . Historically dominated by an agricultural economy and a rural lifestyle , South Dakota has recently sought to diversify its economy in areas to attract and retain residents . South Dakota 's history and rural character still strongly influence the culture of the state . 
 = = Geography = = 
 South Dakota is situated in the north @-@ central United States , and is considered a part of the Midwest by the U.S. Census Bureau ; it is also part of the Great Plains region . The culture , economy , and geography of western South Dakota have more in common with the West than the Midwest . South Dakota has a total area of 77 @,@ 116 square miles ( 199 @,@ 730 km2 ) , making the state the 17th largest in the Union . 
 Harney Peak , with an elevation of 7 @,@ 242 ft ( 2 @,@ 207 m ) , is the state 's highest point , while the shoreline of Big Stone Lake is the lowest , with an elevation of 966 ft ( 294 m ) . South Dakota is bordered to the north by North Dakota ; to the south by Nebraska ; to the east by Iowa and Minnesota ; and to the west by Wyoming and Montana . The geographical center of the U.S. is 17 miles ( 27 km ) west of Castle Rock in Butte County . The North American continental pole of inaccessibility is located between Allen and Kyle , 1 @,@ 024 mi ( 1 @,@ 648 km ) from the nearest coastline . 
 The Missouri River is the largest and longest river in the state . Other major South Dakota rivers include the Cheyenne , James , Big Sioux , and White Rivers . Eastern South Dakota has many natural lakes , mostly created by periods of glaciation . Additionally , dams on the Missouri River create four large reservoirs : Lake Oahe , Lake Sharpe , Lake Francis Case , and Lewis and Clark Lake . 
 = = = Regions and geology = = = 
 South Dakota can generally be divided into three regions : eastern South Dakota , western South Dakota , and the Black Hills . The Missouri River serves as a boundary in terms of geographic , social , and political differences between eastern and western South Dakota . The geography of the Black Hills , long considered sacred ground by Native Americans , differs from its surroundings to such an extent that it can be considered separate from the rest of western South Dakota . At times the Black Hills are combined with the rest of western South Dakota , and people often refer to the resulting two regions divided by the Missouri River as West River and East River . 
 Eastern South Dakota generally features higher precipitation and lower topography than the western part of the state . Smaller geographic regions of this area include the Coteau des Prairies , the Dissected Till Plains , and the James River Valley . The Coteau des Prairies is a plateau bordered on the east by the Minnesota River Valley and on the west by the James River Basin . Further to the west , the James River Basin is mostly low , flat , highly eroded land , following the flow of the James River through South Dakota from north to south . The Dissected Till Plains , an area of rolling hills and fertile soil that covers much of Iowa and Nebraska , extends into the southeastern corner of South Dakota . Layers deposited during the Pleistocene epoch , starting around two million years ago , cover most of eastern South Dakota . These are the youngest rock and sediment layers in the state , and are the product of several successive periods of glaciation which deposited a large amount of rocks and soil , known as till , over the area . 
 The Great Plains cover most of the western two @-@ thirds of South Dakota . West of the Missouri River the landscape becomes more arid and rugged , consisting of rolling hills , plains , ravines , and steep flat @-@ topped hills called buttes . In the south , east of the Black Hills , lie the South Dakota Badlands . Erosion from the Black Hills , marine skeletons which fell to the bottom of a large shallow sea that once covered the area , and volcanic material all contribute to the geology of this area . 
 The Black Hills are in the southwestern part of South Dakota and extend into Wyoming . This range of low mountains covers 6 @,@ 000 sq mi ( 16 @,@ 000 km2 ) , with peaks that rise from 2 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 600 to 1 @,@ 200 m ) above their bases . The Black Hills are the location of Harney Peak ( 7 @,@ 242 ft or 2 @,@ 207 m above sea level ) , the highest point in South Dakota and also the highest point in the United States east of the Rocky Mountains . Two billion @-@ year @-@ old Precambrian formations , the oldest rocks in the state , form the central core of the Black Hills . Formations from the Paleozoic Era form the outer ring of the Black Hills ; these were created between roughly 540 and 250 million years ago . This area features rocks such as limestone , which were deposited here when the area formed the shoreline of an ancient inland sea . 
 = = = Ecology = = = 
 Much of South Dakota ( except for the Black Hills area ) is dominated by a temperate grasslands biome . Although grasses and crops cover most of this region , deciduous trees such as cottonwoods , elms , and willows are common near rivers and in shelter belts . Mammals in this area include bison , deer , pronghorn , coyotes , and prairie dogs . The state bird , the ring @-@ necked pheasant , has adapted well to the area after being introduced from China . Growing populations of bald eagles are spread throughout the state , especially near the Missouri River . Rivers and lakes of the grasslands support populations of walleye , carp , pike , bass , and other species . The Missouri River also contains the pre @-@ historic paddlefish . 
 Due to a higher elevation and level of precipitation , the Black Hills ecology differs significantly from that of the plains . The mountains are thickly blanketed by various types of pines , including ponderosa and lodgepole pines , as well as spruces . Black Hills mammals include deer , elk ( wapiti ) , bighorn sheep , mountain goats , pine marten , and mountain lions , while the streams and lakes contain several species of trout . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 South Dakota has a continental climate with four distinct seasons , ranging from cold , dry winters to hot and semi @-@ humid summers . During the summers , the average high temperature throughout the state is often close to 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) , although it cools to near 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) at night . It is not unusual for South Dakota to have severe hot , dry spells in the summer with the temperature climbing above 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) several times a year . Winters are cold with January high temperatures averaging below freezing and low temperatures averaging below 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) in most of the state . The highest recorded temperature is 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) at <unk> on July 15 , 2006 and the lowest recorded temperature is − 58 ° F ( − 50 ° C ) at McIntosh on February 17 , 1936 . 
 Average annual precipitation in South Dakota ranges from semi @-@ arid conditions in the northwestern part of the state ( around 15 inches or 380 mm ) to semi @-@ humid around the southeast portion of the state ( around 25 inches or 640 mm ) , although a small area centered on Lead in the Black Hills has the highest precipitation at nearly 30 inches ( 760 mm ) per year . 
 South Dakota summers bring frequent , sometimes severe , thunderstorms with high winds , thunder , and hail . The eastern part of the state is often considered part of Tornado Alley , and South Dakota experiences an average of 30 tornadoes each year . Severe weather in the form of blizzards and ice storms occurs often during winter . 
 = = = National parks and monuments = = = 
 South Dakota contains several sites that are administered by the National Park Service . Two national parks have been established in South Dakota , both located in the southwestern part of the state . Wind Cave National Park , established in 1903 in the Black Hills , contains an extensive cave network as well as a large herd of bison . Badlands National Park was created in 1978 . The park features an eroded , brightly colored landscape surrounded by semi @-@ arid grasslands . Mount Rushmore National Memorial in the Black Hills was established in 1925 . The sculpture of four U.S. Presidents was carved into the mountainside by sculptor Gutzon Borglum . 
 Other areas managed by the National Park Service include Jewel Cave National Monument near Custer , the Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail , the Minuteman Missile National Historic Site , which features a decommissioned nuclear missile silo and a separate missile control area located several miles away , and the Missouri National Recreational River . The Crazy Horse Memorial is a large mountainside sculpture near Mt . Rushmore that is being constructed with private funds . The Mammoth Site near Hot Springs is another privately owned attraction in the Black Hills . A working paleontological dig , the site contains one of the largest concentrations of mammoth remains in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 Humans have lived in what is today South Dakota for several thousand years , at least . The first inhabitants were Paleoindian hunter @-@ gatherers , and disappeared from the area around 5000 BC . Between 500 AD and 800 AD , a semi @-@ nomadic people known as the Mound Builders lived in central and eastern South Dakota . In the 14th century , the Crow Creek Massacre occurred , in which several hundred men , women , and children were killed near the Missouri River . 
 By 1500 , the Arikara ( or Ree ) had settled in much of the Missouri River valley . European contact with the area began in 1743 , when the <unk> brothers explored the region . The <unk> group buried a plate near the site of modern @-@ day Pierre , claiming the region for France as part of greater <unk> in 1762 the entire region became part of the Spanish Louisiana until 1802 . By the early 19th century , the Sioux had largely replaced the Arikara as the dominant group in the area . 
 In 1803 , the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory , an area that included most of South Dakota , from Napoleon Bonaparte , and President Thomas Jefferson organized a group commonly referred to as the " Lewis and Clark Expedition " to explore the newly acquired region . In 1817 , an American fur trading post was set up at present @-@ day Fort Pierre , beginning continuous American settlement of the area . In 1855 , the U.S. Army bought Fort Pierre but abandoned it in 1857 in favor of Fort Randall to the south . Settlement by Americans and Europeans was by this time increasing rapidly , and in 1858 the Yankton Sioux signed the 1858 Treaty , ceding most of present @-@ day eastern South Dakota to the United States . 
 Land speculators founded two of eastern South Dakota 's largest present @-@ day cities : Sioux Falls in 1856 and Yankton in 1859 . In 1861 , the Dakota Territory was established by the United States government ( this initially included North Dakota , South Dakota , and parts of Montana and Wyoming ) . Settlement of the area , mostly by people from the eastern United States as well as western and northern Europe , increased rapidly , especially after the completion of an eastern railway link to Yankton in 1873 . 
 In 1874 , gold was discovered in the Black Hills during a military expedition led by George A. Custer and miners and explorers began illegally entering land promised to the Lakota . Custer 's expedition took place despite the fact that the US had granted the entire western half of present @-@ day South Dakota ( West River ) to the Sioux in 1868 by the Treaty of Laramie as part of the Great Sioux Reservation . The Sioux declined to grant mining rights or land in the Black Hills , and war broke out after the U.S. failed to stop white miners and settlers from entering the region . Eventually the US defeated the Sioux and broke up the Great Sioux Reservation into five reservations , settling the Lakota in those areas . ( In 1980 , the US Supreme Court and Congress ordered payment to the Lakota for the illegal seizure of the Black Hills . The case remains unsettled , as the Lakota refuse to accept the money and instead insist on the return of the land . ) 
 A growing population and political concerns ( admitting two states meant having four new senators ) caused Dakota Territory to be divided in half and President Benjamin Harrison signed proclamations formally admitting both South Dakota and North Dakota to the union on November 2 , 1889 . Harrison had the papers shuffled to obscure which one was signed first and the order went unrecorded . 
 On December 29 , 1890 , the Wounded Knee Massacre occurred on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation . Commonly cited as the last major armed conflict between the United States and the Lakota Sioux Nation , the massacre resulted in the deaths of at least 146 Sioux , many of them women and children . 31 U.S. soldiers were also killed in the conflict . 
 During the 1930s , several economic and climatic conditions combined with disastrous results for South Dakota . A lack of rainfall , extremely high temperatures and inappropriate cultivation techniques produced what was known as the Dust Bowl in South Dakota and several other plains states . Fertile topsoil was blown away in massive dust storms , and several harvests were completely ruined . The experiences of the Dust Bowl , coupled with local bank foreclosures and the general economic effects of the Great Depression , resulted in many South Dakotans leaving the state . The population of South Dakota declined by more than 7 % between 1930 and 1940 . 
 Economic stability returned with the U.S. entry into World War II in 1941 , when demand for the state 's agricultural and industrial products grew as the nation mobilized for war . In 1944 , the Pick – Sloan Plan was passed as part of the Flood Control Act of 1944 by the U.S. Congress , resulting in the construction of six large dams on the Missouri River , four of which are at least partially located in South Dakota . Flood control , hydroelectricity , and recreational opportunities such as boating and fishing are provided by the dams and their reservoirs . 
 In recent decades , South Dakota has been transformed from a state dominated by agriculture to one with a more diversified economy . The tourism industry has grown considerably since the completion of the interstate system in the 1960s , with the Black Hills becoming more important as a destination . The financial service industry began to grow in the state as well , with Citibank moving its credit card operations from New York to Sioux Falls in 1981 , a move that has since been followed by several other financial companies . South Dakota was the first state to eliminate caps on interest rates . 
 In 2007 , the site of the recently closed Homestake gold mine near Lead was chosen as the location of a new underground research facility , the Deep Underground Science and Engineering Laboratory . Despite a growing state population and recent economic development , many rural areas have been struggling over the past 50 years with locally declining populations and the emigration of educated young adults to larger South Dakota cities , such as Rapid City or Sioux Falls , or to other states . < Mechanization and consolidation of agriculture has contributed greatly to the declining number of smaller family farms and the resulting economic and demographic challenges facing rural towns . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 = = = Population = = = 
 The United States Census Bureau estimates that the population of South Dakota was 858 @,@ 469 on July 1 , 2015 , a 5 @.@ 44 % increase since the 2010 United States Census . 
 As of 2015 , South Dakota had an estimated population of 858 @,@ 469 , an increase of 44 @,@ 289 , or 5 @.@ 44 % , since the year 2010 . 7 @.@ 3 % of South Dakota 's population was reported as under 5 , 24 % under 18 , and 14 @.@ 3 % were 65 or older . Females made up approximately 50 @.@ 2 % of the population . As of the 2000 census , South Dakota ranked fifth @-@ lowest in the nation in both population and population density . 
 Of the people residing in South Dakota , 65 @.@ 7 % were born in South Dakota , 31 @.@ 4 % were born in another US state , 0 @.@ 6 % were born in Puerto Rico , U.S. Island areas , or born abroad to American parent ( s ) , and 2 @.@ 3 % were born in another country . 
 The center of population of South Dakota is located in Buffalo County , in the unincorporated county seat of Gann Valley . 
 = = = Race and ethnicity = = = 
 According to the 2010 Census , the racial composition of the population was : 
 84 @.@ 7 % White ( 83 @.@ 8 % non @-@ Hispanic white ) 
 8 @.@ 8 % American Indian and Alaska Native 
 1 @.@ 2 % African American or black 
 0 @.@ 9 % Asian American 
 0 @.@ 1 % from some other race 
 1 @.@ 8 % of two or more races 
 Ethnically , 2 @.@ 7 % of South Dakota 's population was of Hispanic , Latino , or Spanish origin ( they may be of any race ) . 
 As of 2011 , 25 @.@ 4 % of South Dakota 's population younger than age 1 were minorities , meaning that they had at least one parent who was not non @-@ Hispanic white . 
 The five largest ancestry groups in South Dakota are German ( 40 @.@ 7 % ) , Norwegian ( 15 @.@ 3 % ) , Irish ( 10 @.@ 4 % ) , Native American ( 8 @.@ 3 % ) , and English ( 7 @.@ 1 % ) . German Americans are the largest ancestry group in most parts of the state , especially in East River ( east of the Missouri River ) , although there are also large Scandinavian @-@ descended populations in some counties . South Dakota has the nation 's largest population of Hutterites , a communal Anabaptist group which emigrated in 1874 from Europe , primarily from German @-@ speaking areas . 
 American Indians , largely Lakota , Dakota , and Nakota ( Sioux ) , are predominant in several counties and comprise 20 per cent of the population in West River . The seven large Indian reservations in the state occupy an area much diminished from their former Great Sioux Reservation of West River , which the US government had once allocated to the Sioux tribes . South Dakota has the third @-@ highest proportion of Native Americans of any state , behind Alaska and New Mexico . 
 Five of the state 's counties are wholly within the boundaries of sovereign Indian reservations . Because of the limitations of climate and land , and isolation from urban areas with more employment opportunities , living standards on many South Dakota reservations are often far below the national average ; <unk> County ranked as the poorest county in the nation in 2009 . The unemployment rate in Fort Thompson , on the Crow Creek Reservation , is 70 % , and 21 % of households lack plumbing or basic kitchen appliances . A 1995 study by the U.S. Census Bureau found that 58 % of homes on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation did not have a telephone . The reservations ' isolation also inhibits their ability to generate revenue from gaming casinos , an avenue that has proved profitable for many tribes closer to urban centers . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 In 1995 the legislature passed a law to make English the " common language " of the state . As of the 2000 census , 1 @.@ 90 % of the population aged 5 or older speak German at home , while 1 @.@ 51 % speak Lakota or Dakota , and 1 @.@ 43 % Spanish . As of 2010 , 93 @.@ 46 % ( 692 @,@ 504 ) of South Dakota residents aged 5 and older spoke English as their primary language . 6 @.@ 54 % of the population spoke a language other than English . 2 @.@ 06 % ( 15 @,@ 292 ) of the population spoke Spanish , 1 @.@ 39 % ( 10 @,@ 282 ) spoke Dakota , and 1 @.@ 37 % ( 10 @,@ 140 ) spoke German . Other languages spoken included Vietnamese ( 0 @.@ 16 % ) , Chinese ( 0 @.@ 12 % ) , and Russian ( 0 @.@ 10 % ) . 
 = = = Growth and rural flight = = = 
 Over the last several decades , the population in many rural areas has declined in South Dakota , in common with other Great Plains states . The change has been characterized as " rural flight " as family farming has declined . Young people have moved to cities for other employment . This trend has continued in recent years , with 30 of South Dakota 's counties losing population between the 1990 and the 2000 census . During that time , nine counties had a population loss of greater than 10 % , with Harding County , in the northwest corner of the state , losing nearly 19 % of its population . Low birth rates and a lack of younger immigration has caused the median age of many of these counties to increase . In 24 counties , at least 20 % of the population is over the age of 65 , compared with a national rate of 12 @.@ 8 % . 
 The effect of rural flight has not been spread evenly through South Dakota , however . Although most rural counties and small towns have lost population , the Sioux Falls area , the larger counties along Interstate 29 , the Black Hills , and many Indian reservations have all gained population . As the reservations have exercised more sovereignty , some Sioux have returned to them from urban areas . Lincoln County near Sioux Falls was the seventh fastest @-@ growing county ( by percentage ) in the United States in 2010 . The growth in these areas has compensated for losses in the rest of the state . South Dakota 's total population continues to increase steadily , albeit at a slower rate than the national average . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 The largest denominations by number of adherents in 2010 were the Roman Catholic Church with 148 @,@ 883 members ; the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America ( ELCA ) with 112 @,@ 649 members ; and the United Methodist Church ( UMC ) with 36 @,@ 020 members . ( Both the ELCA and UMC are specific denominations within the broader terms ' Lutheran ' and ' Methodist ' , respectively . ) The results of a 2001 survey , in which South Dakotans were asked to identify their religion , include : 
 Christian ( 86 % ) 
 Protestant ( 54 % ) 
 Lutheran ( 27 % ) 
 Methodist ( 13 % ) 
 Baptist ( 4 % ) 
 Presbyterian ( 4 % ) 
 Other Protestant ( 6 % ) 
 Roman Catholic ( 25 % ) 
 Non @-@ denominational Christian ( 7 % ) 
 Not religious ( 8 % ) 
 Other religions ( 3 % ) 
 Refused to answer ( 2 % ) 
 = = Economy = = 
 The current @-@ dollar gross state product of South Dakota was US $ 39 @.@ 8 billion as of 2010 , the fifth smallest total state output in the US . The per capita personal income was $ 38 @,@ 865 in 2010 , ranked 25th in the U.S. , and 12 @.@ 5 % of the population was below the poverty line in 2008 . CNBC 's list of " Top States for Business for 2010 " has recognized South Dakota as the seventh best state in the nation . In July 2011 , the state 's unemployment rate was 4 @.@ 7 % . 
 The service industry is the largest economic contributor in South Dakota . This sector includes the retail , finance , and health care industries . Citibank , which was the largest bank holding company in the United States at one time , established national banking operations in South Dakota in 1981 to take advantage of favorable banking regulations . Government spending is another important segment of the state 's economy , providing over ten percent of the gross state product . Ellsworth Air Force Base , near Rapid City , is the second @-@ largest single employer in the state . 
 Agriculture has historically been a key component of the South Dakota economy . Although other industries have expanded rapidly in recent decades , agricultural production is still very important to the state 's economy , especially in rural areas . The five most valuable agricultural products in South Dakota are cattle , corn ( maize ) , soybeans , wheat , and hogs . Agriculture @-@ related industries such as meat packing and ethanol production also have a considerable economic impact on the state . South Dakota is the sixth leading ethanol @-@ producing state in the nation . 
 Another important sector in South Dakota 's economy is tourism . Many travel to view the attractions of the state , particularly those in the Black Hills region , such as historic Deadwood , Mount Rushmore , and the nearby state and national parks . One of the largest tourist events in the state is the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally . The five @-@ day event drew over 460 @,@ 000 attendees in 2013 ; significant considering the state has a total population of 850 @,@ 000 . In 2006 , tourism provided an estimated 33 @,@ 000 jobs in the state and contributed over two billion dollars to the economy of South Dakota . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 South Dakota has 83 @,@ 609 miles ( 134 @,@ 556 km ) of highways , roads , and streets , along with 679 miles ( 1 @,@ 093 km ) of interstate highways . Two major interstates pass through South Dakota : Interstate 90 , which runs east and west through the southern half of the state ; and Interstate 29 , running north and south in the eastern portion of the state . The I @-@ 29 corridor features generally higher rates of population and economic growth than areas in eastern South Dakota that are further from the interstate . 
 Also located in the state are the shorter Interstates 190 , a spur into central Rapid City , and 229 , a loop around southern and eastern Sioux Falls . Several major U.S. highways pass through the state . U.S. routes 12 , 14 , 16 , 18 and 212 travel east and west , while U.S. routes 81 , 83 , 85 and 281 run north and south . South Dakota and Montana are the only states sharing a land border which is not traversed by a paved road . 
 South Dakota contains two National Scenic Byways . The Peter Norbeck National Scenic Byway is located in the Black Hills , while the Native American Scenic Byway runs along the Missouri River in the north @-@ central part of the state . Other scenic byways include the Badlands Loop Scenic Byway , the Spearfish Canyon Scenic Byway , and the Wildlife Loop Road Scenic Byway . 
 Railroads have played an important role in South Dakota transportation since the mid @-@ 19th century . Some 4 @,@ 420 miles ( 7 @,@ 110 km ) of railroad track were built in South Dakota during the late 19th century and early 20th century , but only 1 @,@ 839 miles ( 2 @,@ 960 km ) are active . BNSF Railway is currently the largest railroad in South Dakota ; the Rapid City , Pierre and Eastern Railroad ( formerly the Dakota , Minnesota and Eastern ) is the state 's other major carrier . Rail transportation in the state is confined only to freight , however , as South Dakota is one of the few states without any Amtrak service . 
 South Dakota 's largest commercial airports in terms of passenger traffic are the Sioux Falls Regional Airport and Rapid City Regional Airport . Delta Air Lines , Frontier Airlines , and Allegiant Airlines , as well as commuter airlines using the brand affiliation with major airlines serve the two largest airports . Several other cities in the state also have commercial air service : Aberdeen Regional Airport , Huron Regional Airport , Pierre Regional Airport , and Watertown Regional Airport , some of which is subsidized by the Essential Air Service program . 
 = = Government and politics = = 
 = = = Government = = = 
 Like that of other U.S. states , the structure of the government of South Dakota follows the same separation of powers as the federal government , with executive , legislative , and judicial branches . The structure of the state government is laid out in the Constitution of South Dakota , the highest law in the state . The constitution may be amended either by a majority vote of both houses of the legislature , or by voter initiative . 
 The Governor of South Dakota occupies the executive branch of the state government . The current governor is Dennis <unk> , a Republican from Garretson . The state constitution gives the governor the power to either sign into law or veto bills passed by the state legislature , to serve as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the South Dakota National Guard , to appoint a cabinet , and to commute criminal sentences or to pardon those convicted of crimes . The governor serves for a four @-@ year term , and may not serve more than two consecutive terms . 
 The state legislature is made up of two bodies , the Senate , which has 35 members , and the House of Representatives , with 70 members . South Dakota is divided into 35 legislative districts , with voters electing two representatives and one senator per district . The legislature meets for an annual session which begins on the second Tuesday in January and lasts for 30 days ; it also meets if a special session is called by the governor . 
 The judicial branch is made up of several levels . The state supreme court , with four justices and a chief justice , is the highest court in the state . Below the supreme court are the circuit courts ; 41 circuit judges serve in seven judicial circuits in the state . Below the circuit courts are the magistrate courts , which deal with more minor criminal and civil actions . 
 = = = State taxes = = = 
 As of 2005 , South Dakota has the lowest per capita total state tax rate in the United States . The state does not levy personal or corporate income taxes , inheritance taxes , or taxes on intangible personal property . The state sales tax rate is 4 percent , but has been voted to 4 @.@ 5 , which will come into effect 1 June 2016 . Various localities have local levies so that in some areas the rate is 6 percent . The state sales tax does not apply to sales to Indians on Indian reservations , but many reservations have a compact with the state . Businesses on the reservation collect the tax and the state refunds to the Indian Tribes the percentage of sales tax collections relating to the ratio of Indian population to total population in the county or area affected . Ad valorem property taxes are local taxes and are a large source of funding for school systems , counties , municipalities and other local government units . The South Dakota Special Tax Division regulates some taxes including cigarette and alcohol @-@ related taxes . 
 = = = Federal representation = = = 
 South Dakota is represented at the federal level by Senator John Thune , Senator Mike Rounds , and Representative Kristi <unk> . All three are Republicans . South Dakota is one of seven states with only one seat in the US House of Representatives . In United States presidential elections , South Dakota is allotted three of 538 votes in the Electoral College . As in all other states except Maine and neighboring Nebraska , South Dakota 's electoral votes are granted in a winner @-@ take @-@ all system . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 South Dakota politics are generally dominated by the Republican Party . Since statehood , Republicans have carried the state 's electoral votes in all but five presidential elections : 1896 , 1912 ( By Theodore Roosevelt 's Progressive Party ) , 1932 , 1936 and 1964 . Only Alaska has been carried fewer times by Democrat presidential candidates . Not even George McGovern , the Democratic nominee in 1972 as well as a native South Dakotan , was able to carry the state . Additionally , a Democrat has not won the governorship since 1974 . As of 2016 , Republicans hold a 15 % voter registration advantage over Democrats and hold large majorities in both the state House of Representatives and Senate . 
 Despite the state 's general Republican and conservative leanings , Democrats have found success in various statewide elections , most notably in those involving South Dakota 's congressional representatives in Washington . American Indians have been becoming more active in state and county electoral politics . In the 2002 election , American Indian voting carried Tim Johnson as the Democratic candidate by a margin of 532 votes . Until his electoral defeat in 2004 , Senator Tom Daschle was the Senate minority leader ( and briefly its majority leader during Democratic control of the Senate in 2001 – 02 ) . 
 In 2012 , South Dakota voted for Republican nominee Mitt Romney over Democratic President Barack Obama by a margin of 18 % . In 2014 , incumbent Republican Governor Dennis <unk> won a second term against Democrat Susan Wismer , incumbent Republican Kristi <unk> defeated Democrat Corinna Robinson for South Dakota 's at @-@ large seat in the US House , and former Governor Mike Rounds , a Republican , defeated Democrat Rick Weiland and former Senator Larry Pressler for the US Senate seat being vacated by retiring Democrat Tim Johnson . 
 Contemporary political issues in South Dakota include the costs and benefits of the state lottery , South Dakota 's relatively low rankings in education spending ( particularly teacher pay ) , and recent legislative and electoral attempts to ban abortion in the state . 
 = = Culture = = 
 South Dakota 's culture reflects the state 's American Indian , rural , Western , and European roots . A number of annual events celebrating the state 's ethnic and historical heritage take place around the state , such as Days of ' 76 in Deadwood , Czech Days in Tabor , and the annual St. Patrick 's Day and Cinco de Mayo festivities in Sioux Falls . The various tribes hold many annual pow wows at their reservations throughout the state , to which non @-@ Native Americans are sometimes invited . Custer State Park holds an annual Buffalo Roundup , in which volunteers on horseback gather the park 's herd of around 1 @,@ 500 bison . 
 Black Elk ( Lakota ) was a medicine man and <unk> , whose life spanned the transition to reservations . His accounts of the 19th @-@ century Indian Wars and Ghost Dance movement , and his deep thoughts on personal visions and Native American religion , form the basis of the book Black Elk Speaks , first published in 1932 . ( Among several editions , a premier annotated edition was published in 2008 . ) Paul Goble , an award @-@ winning children 's book author and illustrator , has been based in the Black Hills since 1977 . 
 Laura Ingalls Wilder , whose semi @-@ autobiographical books are based on her experiences as a child and young adult on the frontier , is one of South Dakota 's best @-@ known writers . She drew from her life growing up on a homestead near De Smet as the basis for five of her novels : By the Shores of Silver Lake , The Long Winter , Little Town on the Prairie , These Happy Golden Years , and The First Four Years . These gained renewed popularity in the United States when Little House on the Prairie was adapted and produced as a television series in the . Wilder 's daughter , Rose Wilder Lane , who became a well @-@ known writer in her own right , was born near De Smet in 1886 . 
 South Dakota has also produced several notable artists . Harvey Dunn grew up on a homestead near Manchester in the late 19th century . While Dunn worked most of his career as a commercial illustrator , his most famous works showed various scenes of frontier life ; he completed these near the end of his career . Oscar Howe ( Crow ) was born on the Crow Creek Indian Reservation and won fame for his watercolor paintings . Howe was one of the first Native American painters to adopt techniques and style heavily influenced by the mid @-@ 20th century abstraction movement , rather than relying on traditional Native American styles . Terry Redlin , originally from Watertown , is an accomplished painter of rural and wildlife scenes . Many of Redlin 's works are on display at the Redlin Art Center in Watertown . 
 = = Cities and towns = = 
 Sioux Falls is the largest city in South Dakota , with a 2010 population of 153 @,@ 888 , and a metropolitan area population of 238 @,@ 122 . The city , founded in 1856 , is located in the southeast corner of the state . Retail , finance , and healthcare have assumed greater importance in Sioux Falls , where the economy was originally centered on agri @-@ business and quarrying . 
 Rapid City , with a 2010 population of 67 @,@ 956 , and a metropolitan area population of 124 @,@ 766 , is the second @-@ largest city in the state . It is located on the eastern edge of the Black Hills , and was founded in 1876 . Rapid City 's economy is largely based on tourism and defense spending , because of the close proximity of many tourist attractions in the Black Hills and Ellsworth Air Force Base . 
 The next eight largest cities in the state , in order of descending 2010 population , are Aberdeen ( 26 @,@ 091 ) , Brookings ( 22 @,@ 056 ) , Watertown ( 21 @,@ 482 ) , Mitchell ( 15 @,@ 254 ) , Yankton ( 14 @,@ 454 ) , Pierre ( 13 @,@ 646 ) , Huron ( 12 @,@ 592 ) , and Vermillion ( 10 @,@ 571 ) . Pierre is the state capital , and Brookings and Vermillion are the locations of the state 's two largest universities ( South Dakota State University and University of South Dakota , respectively ) . With a population of about 14 @,@ 000 , Pierre is the second smallest state capital in the United States . Of the ten largest cities in the state , only Rapid City is located west of the Missouri River . 
 = = Media = = 
 South Dakota 's first newspaper , the Dakota Democrat , began publishing in Yankton in 1858 . Today , the largest newspaper in the state is the Sioux Falls Argus Leader , with a Sunday circulation of 63 @,@ 701 and a weekday circulation of 44 @,@ 334 . The Rapid City Journal , with a Sunday circulation of 32 @,@ 638 and a weekday circulation of 27 @,@ 827 , is South Dakota 's second largest newspaper . The next four largest newspapers in the state are the Aberdeen American News , the Watertown Public Opinion , the Huron Plainsman , and the Brookings Register . In 1981 , Tim <unk> founded the Lakota Times as a newspaper for the local American Indian community on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation . The newspaper , now published in New York and known as Indian Country Today , is currently available in every state in the country . The Sioux City Journal also covers parts of South Dakota . 
 There are currently nine television stations broadcasting in South Dakota ; South Dakota Public Television broadcasts from a number of locations around the state , while the other stations broadcast from either Sioux Falls or Rapid City . The two largest television media markets in South Dakota are Sioux Falls @-@ Mitchell , with a viewership of 246 @,@ 020 , and Rapid City , with a viewership of 91 @,@ 070 . The two markets rank as 114th and 177th largest in the United States , respectively . The first television station in the state , KELO @-@ TV , began airing in Sioux Falls in 1953 . Among KELO 's early programs was Captain 11 , an afternoon children 's program . Captain 11 ran from 1955 until 1996 , making it the longest continuously running children 's television program in the nation . 
 A number of South Dakotans are famous for their work in the fields of television and publishing . Former NBC Nightly News anchor and author Tom Brokaw is from Webster and Yankton , USA Today founder Al <unk> was from Eureka and Alpena , gameshow host Bob Barker spent much of his childhood in Mission , and entertainment news hosts Pat O 'Brien and Mary Hart are both from Sioux Falls . 
 = = Education = = 
 As of 2006 , South Dakota has a total primary and secondary school enrollment of 136 @,@ 872 , with 120 @,@ 278 of these students being educated in the public school system . There are 703 public schools in 168 school districts , giving South Dakota the highest number of schools per capita in the United States . The current high school graduation rate is 89 @.@ 9 % , and the average ACT score is 21 @.@ 8 , slightly above the national average of 21 @.@ 1 . 89 @.@ 8 % of the adult population has earned at least a high school diploma , and 25 @.@ 8 % has earned a bachelor 's degree or higher . South Dakota 's 2008 average public school teacher salary of $ 36 @,@ 674 , compared to a national average of $ 52 @,@ 308 , was the lowest in the nation . In 2007 South Dakota passed legislation modeled after Montana 's Indian Education for All Act ( 1999 ) , mandating education about Native American tribal history , culture , and heritage in all the schools , from pre @-@ school through college , in an effort to increase knowledge and appreciation about Indian culture among all residents of the state , as well as to reinforce Indian students ' understanding of their own cultures ' contributions . 
 The South Dakota Board of Regents , whose members are appointed by the governor , controls the six public universities in the state . South Dakota State University ( SDSU ) , in Brookings , is the largest university in the state , with an enrollment of 12 @,@ 831 . The University of South Dakota ( USD ) , in Vermillion , is the state 's oldest university , and has South Dakota 's only law school and medical school . South Dakota also has several private universities , the largest of which is Augustana College in Sioux Falls . 
 = = Sports and recreation = = 
 = = = Organized sports = = = 
 Because of its low population , South Dakota does not host any major league professional sports franchises . The state does have a number of minor league and independent league teams , all of which play in either Sioux Falls or Rapid City . Sioux Falls is currently home to four teams : the Sioux Falls Canaries ( baseball ) , the Sioux Falls Skyforce ( basketball ) , the Sioux Falls Stampede ( hockey ) , and the Sioux Falls Storm ( arena football ) . The Canaries play in the American Association , and their home field is Sioux Falls Stadium . The Skyforce play in the NBA D @-@ League , and are affiliated with the NBA 's Miami Heat . They play at the Sanford Pentagon . The Stampede and Storm share the Denny Sanford Premier Center . The Stampede play in the USHL , and the Storm play in the IFL . Rapid City has a hockey team named the Rapid City Rush , who play in the ECHL . The Rush began their inaugural season in 2008 at the Rushmore Plaza Civic Center . 
 Universities in South Dakota host a variety of sports programs . For many years , South Dakota was one of the only states in the country without a NCAA Division I football or basketball team . However , several years ago SDSU decided to move their teams from Division II to Division I , a move that has since been followed by the University of South Dakota . Other universities in the state compete at the NCAA 's Division II or III levels , or in the NAIA . 
