 Famous South Dakota athletes include Billy Mills , Mike Miller , Mark Ellis , Becky Hammon , Brock Lesnar , Chad Greenway , and Adam Vinatieri . Mills is from the town of Pine Ridge and competed at the 1964 Summer Olympic Games in Tokyo , becoming the only American to win a gold medal in the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ meter event . Miller , of Mitchell , is a two @-@ time NBA champion who played college basketball at the University of Florida , leading them to the 2000 NCAA Championship game his sophomore year , and won the 2001 NBA rookie of the year award . Ellis , of Rapid City , played for the University of Florida and four MLB teams before retiring in 2015 . Hammon , of Rapid City , played for the WNBA 's New York Liberty and San Antonio Silver Stars before becoming an assistant coach for the NBA 's San Antonio Spurs in 2014 . Lesnar , of Webster , is a former heavy @-@ weight champion in the UFC and WWE . Vinatieri is an NFL placekicker who grew up in Rapid City and attended SDSU . 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 Fishing and hunting are both popular outdoor activities in South Dakota . Fishing contributes over $ 224 million to South Dakota 's economy , and hunting contributes over $ 303 million . In 2007 , over 275 @,@ 000 hunting licences and 175 @,@ 000 fishing licences were sold in the state ; around half of the hunting licences and over two @-@ thirds of the fishing licences were purchased by South Dakotans . Popular species of game include pheasants , white @-@ tailed deer , mule deer , and turkeys , as well as waterfowl such as Canada geese , snow geese , and mallards . Targets of anglers include walleye in the eastern glacial lakes and Missouri River reservoirs , Chinook salmon in Lake Oahe , and trout in the Black Hills . 
 Other sports , such as cycling and running , are also popular in the state . In 1991 , the state opened the George S. Mickelson Trail , a 109 @-@ mile ( 175 km ) rail trail in the Black Hills . Besides being used by cyclists , the trail is also the site of a portion of the annual Mount Rushmore marathon ; the marathon 's entire course is at an elevation of over 4 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m ) . Other events in the state include the Tour de Kota , a 478 @-@ mile ( 769 km ) , six @-@ day cycling event that covers much of eastern and central South Dakota , and the annual Sturgis Motorcycle Rally , which draws hundreds of thousands of participants from around the United States . 
 = = State symbols = = 
 Some of South Dakota 's official state symbols include : 
 State bird : Ring @-@ necked pheasant 
 State flower : American pasque flower 
 State tree : Black Hills spruce 
 State nicknames : Mount Rushmore State ( official ) , Coyote state & Sunshine state ( both unofficial ) 
 State motto : " Under God , the people rule " 
 State slogan : " Great Faces . Great Places . " 
 State mineral : Rose quartz 
 State insect : Honey bee – Apis mellifera L. 
 State animal : Coyote 
 State fish : Walleye 
 State gemstone : Fairburn agate 
 State song : " Hail , South Dakota ! " 
 = Mayabazar = 
 Mayabazar ( English : Market of Illusions ) is a 1957 Indian bilingual epic fantasy film directed by Kadiri Venkata Reddy . It was produced by B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani under their banner , Vijaya Vauhini Studios . The film was shot in both Telugu and Tamil with the same title , but with a few differences in the cast . The story is an adaptation of the folk tale Sasirekha Parinayam , which in turn is based on the epic Mahabharata . It revolves around the roles of Krishna ( N. T. Rama Rao ) and Ghatotkacha ( S. V. Ranga Rao ) , as they try to reunite Arjuna 's son , Abhimanyu ( Telugu : Akkineni Nageswara Rao , Tamil : Gemini Ganesan ) , with his love , Balarama 's daughter ( Savitri ) . The Telugu version features Gummadi Venkateswara Rao , Mukkamala , Ramana Reddy , and Relangi Venkata Ramaiah in supporting roles , with D. Balasubramaniam , R. Balasubramaniam , V. M. <unk> , and K. A. Thangavelu playing those parts in the Tamil version . 
 The first mythological film produced by their studio , Mayabazar marked a milestone for Nagi Reddy and Chakrapani . In addition to the technical crew , 400 studio workers – including light men , carpenters , and painters – participated in the development of the film . Director Reddy was meticulous with the pre @-@ production and casting phases , which took nearly a year to complete . Though Rama Rao was initially reluctant to play the lead role , his portrayal of Krishna received acclaim and yielded more offers to reprise the same role in several unrelated films . The soundtrack features twelve songs , with most of the musical score composed by Ghantasala . Telugu lyrics were written by Pingali Nagendrarao and Tamil lyrics were written by Thanjai N. Ramaiah Dass . Four of the songs were composed by S. Rajeswara Rao prior to his unexplained departure from the project . One of them was accompanied by the first illusion of moonlight in Indian cinema , shot by cinematographer Marcus Bartley . 
 Mayabazar had a final film @-@ reel length of 5 @,@ 888 metres ( 19 @,@ 318 ft ) . The film 's Telugu version was released on 27 March 1957 ; the Tamil version was released two weeks later , on 12 April . Both were critically and commercially successful , with a theatrical run of 100 days in 24 theatres , and it became a silver @-@ jubilee film . Mayabazar was also dubbed into Kannada . The film is considered a landmark in both Telugu and Tamil cinema , with praise for its cast and technical aspects , despite the limitations of technology at the time . Mayabazar received the Filmfare Award for Best Film in Telugu , and was featured at the 1957 International Film Festival of India and the Indonesian Film Festival . The film was screened at the Public Gardens in Hyderabad for its 50th anniversary on 7 April 2007 . Raavi Kondala Rao novelised the film 's script based on Venkata Reddy 's screenplay . A May 2013 CNN @-@ News18 poll listed Mayabazar as the greatest Indian film of all time . 
 Mayabazar became the first Telugu film to be digitally remastered and colourised , at an estimated cost of ₹ 75 million ( valued at about US $ 1 @.@ 7 million in 2010 ) , after a Hyderabad @-@ based company Goldstone Technologies acquired world negative rights to fourteen films including that of Mayabazar in late November 2007 . The updated version was released on 30 January 2010 in 45 theatres in Andhra Pradesh . It was a commercial success that generated mostly positive reviews , one critic only expressing a preference for the original . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Subhadra ( the sister of Balarama and Krishna ) marries a Pandava named Arjuna . Their son Abhimanyu falls in love with Balarama 's daughter , Sasirekha . The families consent to their marrying when they reach adulthood . When Abhimanyu and Sasirekha have grown up , Krishna introduces them to each other . One day , the Pandavas are invited by Duryodhana , the eldest of the Kauravas to join in a game of dice . Duryodhana 's uncle , Shakuni , manipulates the results of the game , thereby costing the Pandavas their wealth , their liberty and their wife Draupadi . Duryodhana 's brother , Dushasana , attempts to disrobe Draupadi . He is seen by Krishna , who , furious , comes to her rescue . On hearing what happened to the Pandavas , Balarama decides to teach the Kauravas a lesson and travels to their capital <unk> . Shakuni and Duryodhana approach Balarama with an insincere respectful manner , then seek his approval of a marriage between Sasirekha and Duryodhana 's son Lakshmana Kumara . Their true goal is to force Balarama and Krishna to support them if the Pandavas wage war . Unaware of their real intentions , Balarama agrees to the marriage . 
 Because of the Pandavas ' ruined financial state , Balarama 's wife , Revati , refuses to honour her commitment to marry Sasirekha and Abhimanyu and expresses her support for the alliance with the Kauravas . Krishna , who is aware of Duryodhana and Shakuni 's real intentions , orders his charioteer <unk> to take Subhadra and Abhimanyu through the forests to Ghatotkacha 's hermitage . Ghatotkacha , who happens to be Abhimanyu 's cousin , at first thinks they are intruders in his forest and attacks them but later apologises for the misunderstanding . When Subhadra explains the change in the marriage arrangements , Ghatotkacha decides to wage war against both the Kauravas and Balarama . At the urging of his mother , <unk> , and Subhadra , Ghatotkacha drops his plans and is advised instead to try some trickery in Dvaraka . With the knowledge of Krishna and Sasirekha 's servant , he carries the sleeping Sasirekha in her bed from Dvaraka , and flies to his hermitage . Assuming Sasirekha 's form , he returns to Dvaraka and , with the help of his assistants Chinnamaya , Lambu and Jambu , wreaks havoc on her wedding to Lakshmana Kumara , preventing the marriage from being carried out . 
 With the help of Chinnamaya , Lambu and Jambu , Ghatotkacha creates a magical town consisting of an illusory marketplace and palace . He names the town Mayabazar and invites the Kauravas to stay there . Chinnamaya , Lambu and <unk> introduce themselves to the Kauravas as servants appointed by Balarama to look after them . They manage to trick Sarma and Sastry , Shakuni 's lackeys . Ghatotkacha ( in Sasirekha 's form ) makes Duryodhana 's wife rethink the marriage arrangement and teases Lakshmana Kumara . He plans the wedding of the real Sasirekha and Abhimanyu in his hermitage which is attended by Krishna . Using his divine powers , Krishna also attends as a guest for the marriage taking place in the Mayabazar . 
 On the wedding day , Ghatotkacha appears before Lakshmana Kumara in various tantalising form while , at the hermitage , Sasirekha marries Abhimanyu . When Shakuni discovers what has really happened , he blames Krishna . Satyaki , Arjuna 's disciple , asks Shakuni to speak standing on a magical box . He proceeds to stand on the box , which makes him involuntarily explain the Kauravas ' real intentions behind the marriage proposal . Ghatotkacha then reveals his identity . After humiliating the Kauravas , Ghatotkacha sends them back to <unk> . Sasirekha 's parents accept her marriage . They thank Ghatotkacha , who credits Krishna as the mastermind behind everything , including Abhimanyu and Sasirekha 's marriage . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Principal cast 
 Supporting cast 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development and casting = = = 
 After the success of Pathala Bhairavi ( 1951 ) , the production company , Vijaya Productions , selected the film 's technical crew for an adaptation of Sasirekha Parinayam ( 1936 ) , also known as Mayabazar . An adaptation of the folk tale Sasirekha Parinayam , it was the studio 's first mythological film . Kadiri Venkata Reddy wrote and directed Mayabazar , assisted by Singeetam Srinivasa Rao , and it was produced by B. Nagi Reddy and Aluri Chakrapani of Vijaya Productions . Nearly a year was spent on pre @-@ production and casting . Pingali Nagendrarao assisted with the story , script , and lyrics . Ghantasala composed the film 's score , and Marcus Bartley was the cinematographer . Mayabazar was edited by C. P. Jambulingam and G. Kalyanasundaram ; Madhavapeddi Gokhale and Kaladhar were the film 's art directors . 
 The film was produced in Telugu and Tamil versions , with a slightly different cast for each . Gemini Ganesan appeared as Abhimanyu in the Tamil version , which was portrayed by Akkineni Nageswara Rao in Telugu . Savitri was retained as the female lead in Tamil also , where her character was named <unk> instead of Sasirekha . N. T. Rama Rao , hesitant to play Krishna after a negative response to his cameo appearance in <unk> <unk> ( 1956 ) , agreed at Venkata Reddy 's insistence and special care was taken with his costume and body language ; Mayabazar was the first of Rama Rao 's many appearances as Krishna . S. V. Ranga Rao , described by Nageswara Rao as the film 's male lead in interviews , played the character of Ghatotkacha . 
 In the Telugu version , Gummadi Venkateswara Rao and <unk> Radhakrishna Murthy were cast as Balarama and Karna , respectively , whilst Sita had a supporting role as Sasirekha 's maid . Relangi Venkata Ramaiah portrayed Lakshmana Kumara , Duryodhana 's son ; his popularity inspired a song with him and Savitri . Allu Rama <unk> and <unk> Venkata Subbaiah enacted the parts of Shakuni 's lackeys , Sarma and Sastry . Kanchi Narasimha Rao played Krishna , disguised as an old man who stops Ghatotkacha when he enters Dwaraka . The playback singer Madhavapeddi Satyam made a cameo appearance as <unk> , singing " Bhali Bhali Bhali Deva " . Ramana Reddy portrayed <unk> , a tantrik who teaches witchcraft at Ghatotkacha 's ashram , with <unk> and Nalla Ramamurthy playing his apprentices Lambu and Jambu . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During rehearsals , Venkata Reddy timed his actors with a stopwatch , calculating the length of each scene ( including songs ) to determine the film 's length . D. S. Ambu Rao , Bartley 's assistant , said that Mayabazar was shot according to the screenplay and Bartley 's lighting . The song " Lahiri Lahiri " was shot in Ennore , a suburb of Chennai . Its outdoor filming lasted for 10 to 15 seconds . Bartley then created an illusion of moonlight , which according to Ambu Rao was a first for an Indian film . Nageswara Rao was injured on the film 's set , and action sequences featuring himself and Ranga Rao were shot only after his recovery , causing a three @-@ month delay in the release of the film . Ganesan volunteered to act as Nageswara Rao 's body @-@ double in a scene where Abhimanyu 's character would jump from a two @-@ floor high balcony . 
 In addition to the principal technicians and actors , a crew of 400 , including light men , carpenters , and painters , worked on Mayabazar during production . For the Dvaraka set , 300 unique miniature houses were created in an approximately 50 @-@ by @-@ 60 @-@ foot ( 15 m × 18 m ) electrified space at Vauhini Studios under the supervision of Madhavapeddi Gokhale and Kaladhar . The desired effect in the " <unk> gobbling " shots of Ghatotkacha in the song " Vivaha Bhojanambu " took four days to film . In the scene where Ghatotkacha ( disguised as Sasirekha ) stamps Lakshmana Kumara 's foot with his own , the expression is Savitri 's ; the stamping foot belongs to choreographer Pasumarthi Krishnamurthy , who pasted false hair on his foot to make it appear demonic . 
 = = Music = = 
 After writing the music for four songs – " <unk> <unk> " , " Lahiri Lahiri " , " Choopulu Kalisina <unk> " and " <unk> " – S. Rajeswara Rao left the project . Following his departure , Ghantasala orchestrated and recorded Rajeswara Rao 's compositions with N. C. Sen Gupta and A. Krishnamurthy , and composed the rest of the film 's score . The soundtrack album has 12 songs with lyrics by Pingali Nagendrarao and Thanjai N. Ramaiah Dass for the Telugu and Tamil versions , respectively , and was mixed by A. Krishnan and Siva Ram . The album was engineered by N. C. Sen Gupta and orchestrated by A. Krishnamurthy . P. Leela said in an interview that one of her songs took 28 takes to record , and her fifth song was finished by Ghantasala . " Lahiri Lahiri " ( " <unk> <unk> <unk> " in Tamil ) was based on the Mohanam raga . " Vivaha Bhojanambu " ( " Kalyana Samayal Saadham " in Tamil ) was heavily based on lyrics from Surabhi Nataka <unk> 's 1950s plays , which were influenced by 1940s Janaki <unk> <unk> records by B. <unk> . 
 <unk> was inspired by a song written by Gali <unk> Narasimha Rao for Sasirekha Parinayam ( 1936 ) , directed by P. V. Das . That song 's melody was inspired by Charles Penrose 's 1922 song " The Laughing Policeman " , written by Penrose under the pseudonym of Charles Jolly . According to M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu , music " flowed at its mellifluous best " in Mayabazar . He added that Ghantasala " gave a new lease of life " to the song " Vivaha Bhojanambu " , despite it being a borrowed tune . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Telugu version of Mayabazar was released on 27 March 1957 , and the Tamil version about two weeks later , on 12 April . Both versions have a film @-@ reel length of 5 @,@ 888 metres ( 19 @,@ 318 ft ) . A commercial success , Mayabazar had a theatrical run of 100 days in 24 theatres and went on to become a silver jubilee film . After the film 's release , 40 @,@ 000 colour calendars of Rama Rao as Krishna were distributed to the public . Mayabazar received the Filmfare Award for Best Film in Telugu . The Telugu version was featured at the 1957 International Film Festival of India and the Indonesian Film Festival . Mayabazar was dubbed into Kannada with the same name in 1965 ; it remained the last Indian film to be dubbed into Kannada until the announcement of a dubbed version of Kochadaiiyaan ( 2014 ) after 50 years . 
 Dasari Narayana Rao remade the film later with the same title . Mayabazar was shown at the Public Gardens in Hyderabad on 7 April 2007 for the film 's 50th anniversary , at a celebration organised by the Andhra Pradesh Department of Culture , the Film , TV and Theatre Development Corporation and <unk> Art Theatres . Nageswara Rao and C. Narayana Reddy , who were associated with the film , were honoured on the occasion . The former released a book written by Raavi Kondala Rao at Lalitha Kala <unk> located in the Public Gardens . Kondala Rao novelised the film 's script based on Venkata Reddy 's screenplay . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics , particularly for the work of its technical crew . In 2006 , W. Chandrakanth of The Hindu wrote : 
 The greatness of the director lies here – he successfully reduces all characters to ordinary mortals displaying all the follies of human beings except <unk> or Krishna . And then he injects into the Yadava household a Telugu atmosphere , full with its simile , imagery , adage , sarcasm and wit . The result – a feast for the eyes and soul . That is Mayabazar for you . 
 <unk> Venkatraman wrote for The Hindu in 2008 that the " special effects in this summer 's Hollywood superhero movies were spectacular , but , for me , the mythological Maya Bazaar [ sic ] hasn 't lost any of its magic " , adding , " If watching the genial half @-@ demon polish off a wedding feast single @-@ handedly remains a treat , seeing the greedy duo from the groom 's side get whacked alternately by the furniture and the wilful carpet has me in splits " . The Hindu film critic M. L. Narasimham wrote : " Though there were several movie versions in various Indian languages , the 1957 Vijaya Productions ' Mayabazar is still considered the best for its all round excellence " . According to The Times of India , " With a powerful cast and a strong script , this movie is a stealer . Savitri , NTR [ N. T. Rama Rao ] , ANR [ Akkineni Nageswara Rao ] , SV <unk> and not to mention Suryakantam add layers to their characters . Of course , the language and the dialogues , simply unbeatable . Some of the scenes are simply hilarious . " 
 In his 2013 book , Bollywood Nation : India through Its Cinema , <unk> Juluri wrote , " Maya Bazar 's appeal is of course as much in its story as in its stars . But the performances and the beautiful songs and sets aside , the film also reveals an interesting feature of the Telugu mythological in its Golden Age — it is a story about something not very important from a doctrinal view of religion at all " . Juluri also termed Ranga Rao 's performance as " mighty and majestic " . In April 2013 , CNN @-@ News18 referred to Mayabazar as a " pioneer in every sense " . They praised its cinematography and music , adding that Rama Rao " proved his calibre as a method actor " . In their 2015 book , <unk> Negotiations of Gender : Studies in ( Be ) longing , <unk> Bhaduri and Indrani Mukherjee opined that Mayabazar " both breaks and perpetuates the stereotypes for masculine and feminine <unk> by making a single female actor Savitri perform both the set of emotions " . 
 = = <unk> and colourisation = = 
 Mayabazar was the first colourised Telugu film , with its audio remastered from monaural to a DTS 5 @.@ 1 @-@ channel system . In late November 2007 a Hyderabad company , Goldstone Technologies , acquired world negative rights to 14 Telugu films produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios , including that of Mayabazar , to digitally remaster them in colour . C. Jagan Mohan of Goldstone Technologies ' experience at All India Radio gave him the idea of converting the film 's audio to DTS . The audio was restored , sound effects remastered , distortion eliminated , and the volume of the vocals increased , and musicians re @-@ recorded the film 's background music on seven tracks instead of one . 
 A team of 165 people worked for eight months ; Mohan used 180 @,@ 000 shades of colour to create a tone similar to human skin , and employed 16 @.@ 7 @-@ million @-@ shade colour technology . Apart from colouring clothing and jewellery , Mohan said that the song " Vivaha Bhojanambu " and the wedding scene in the climax were the most challenging sequences , and that the food should look more realistic after colourisation . In the wedding scene , Mohan explained : " Each and every rose petal strewn on the pathway had to be coloured . Further , each frame in the climax has many actors . In technical parlance , we refer to a set of colours used for skin tone , clothes , jewelry and so on as different masks . If five or six masks were used on one character , the presence of many actors in a frame called for that much more work . " Three songs ( " Bhali Bhali Deva " , " <unk> <unk> " and " Choopulu Kalisina Subha Vela " ) and many poems were cut from the remastered colour version to maintain print quality . 
 With an estimated <unk> budget of ₹ 75 million ( valued at about US $ 1 @.@ 7 million in 2010 ) , Mayabazar was released in colour on 30 January 2010 in 45 Andhra Pradesh theatres . The colourised version was distributed by R. B. Choudary under his production banner , Super Good Films . Nageswara Rao , Gummadi Venkateswara Rao , <unk> Radhakrishna Murthy and Sita were the only cast members still alive for the release of the digitally remastered version . The colour version received positive reviews and was commercially successful . M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu called the new version " laudable , but the soul was missing " , adding , " Get a DVD of the original ( Black & White ) movie , watch it and you will agree with ANR [ Akkineni Nageswara Rao ] who while talking about Mayabazar once exclaimed , ' What a picture it was ! ' " . 
 According to a 29 January 2010 government order , the remastered version was exempted from entertainment tax , although theatre owners charged full price because they and other film producers were uncertain of the order 's validity . Despite Mayabazar 's success , Mohan decided not to remaster the remaining 14 films ; according to him , most producers who sold negative rights to TV channels lost control of them , and he cited legal and copyright issues . 
 The Film Heritage Foundation announced in March 2015 that they would be restoring Mayabazar , along with a few other Indian films from 1931 to 1965 , as a part of their restoration projects carried out in India and abroad in accordance with international parameters . The foundation opposed digital colourisation , stating that they " believe in the original repair as the way the master or the creator had seen it " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Mayabazar is considered a classic of Telugu cinema , particularly in its use of technology . The film is memorable for Nagendra Rao 's dialogue : " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " How would words emerge if no one invented them ? " ) and " Subhadra , <unk> , <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Subhadra , these atrocities mean nothing to me . " ) . Various words and phrases , such as " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " Is everything fine ? " ) , " <unk> " ( " Friends " ) , " <unk> " ( " Enemies " ) , " <unk> " and " <unk> " ( " <unk> " and " room @-@ mat " ) , later became part of Telugu vernacular . The success of Donga Ramudu ( 1955 ) and Mayabazar prompted Venkata Reddy to produce the 1958 Telugu film <unk> <unk> ( <unk> <unk> in Tamil ) . It recovered its investment and won the silver medal at the annual National Film Awards . 
 A 1987 Telugu film directed by <unk> Subramanya Sastry and a 2011 Telugu film directed by Veerabhadram Chowdary were named after the song " Aha Naa Pellanta " from the film ; both were successful . <unk> Subramanya Sastry named his 1988 Telugu films <unk> Bhojanambu and Choopulu Kalisina <unk> after the songs of the same name . Telugu comedian Mallikarjuna Rao considered Mayabazar to be the " greatest comedy film ever " , adding that it represents " one of the most transcendental and joyful experiences any movie @-@ lover can hope for " . Telugu director Mohan Krishna <unk> named his second film Mayabazar ( 2006 , also a fantasy film ) . Regarding his title , <unk> said he was a fan of Mayabazar and named his film ( produced by B. Satyanarayana ) at the insistence of writer D. V. Narasaraju . 
 In January 2007 , M. L. Narasimham of The Hindu listed Mayabazar with Mala Pilla ( 1938 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1939 ) , Vara <unk> ( 1939 ) , Bhakta Potana ( 1942 ) , Shavukaru ( 1950 ) , Malliswari ( 1951 ) <unk> ( 1954 ) and Lava Kusa ( 1963 ) as films that have had an impact on society and Telugu cinema . Rama Rao reprised the role of Krishna in several films over a two @-@ decade career . 
 Singeetam Srinivasa Rao used Mayabazar 's storyline in his 2008 multilingual animation film , <unk> . Director Krishna Vamsi called Mayabazar more an " epic , than a mere classic " and said that the film 's tagline , " Sasirekha Parinayam " , inspired the title of his 2009 Telugu film . In February 2010 , acting coach and director L. Satyanand compared Mayabazar to films such as The Ten Commandments ( 1956 ) , Ben @-@ Hur ( 1959 ) , Sholay ( 1975 ) and Avatar ( 2009 ) , saying that they " are evergreen and never fade away from the mind " , with continued appeal . Satyanand praised Bartley 's cinematography , saying that the film 
 ... was definitely ahead of its time . It is still a mystery how Marcus Bartley could morph Sasirekha through the ripples in the pond . It was an absolute masterpiece , considering the equipment in use , those days . In the absence of hi @-@ def cameras , computer generated visual effects and high @-@ end computers , the direction , cinematography and visual effects were efforts of sheer human genius . 
 In the period drama <unk> ( 2011 ) , the central character <unk> ( played by Baby Annie ) listens to Mayabazar 's songs . Although this was criticised as anachronistic , director K. V. Vijayendra Prasad said that <unk> was set in 1958 , a year after Mayabazar 's release . In Ram Gopal Varma 's Katha Screenplay <unk> Appalaraju ( 2011 ) , its protagonist Appalaraju ( played by Sunil ) , an aspiring director , is shown enjoying a sequence from the song " Lahiri Lahiri " in the song " <unk> " . In her article " The making of Tollywood " , commemorating the 81st anniversary of the Indian Telugu film industry , Sunita Raghu of The New Indian Express called Mayabazar the " tour de force " of Telugu cinema . In November 2012 , The Times of India listed Mayabazar along with other unrelated films such as Missamma , Gundamma Katha , Narthanasala , and Bommarillu ( 2006 ) in the list " Telugu classics to watch along with family this Deepavali " . For the April 2013 centennial of Indian cinema , CNN @-@ News18 included Mayabazar in its list of " The 100 greatest Indian films of all time " , and a May 2013 CNN @-@ News18 poll ranked it the greatest Indian film of all time . In commemoration of the centennial of Indian cinema , The Hindu listed Mayabazar along with Pathala Bhairavi ( 1951 ) , Missamma ( 1955 ) , Gundamma Katha ( 1962 ) , Maduve Madi Nodu ( 1965 ) , Ram Aur Shyam ( 1967 ) , Julie ( 1975 ) , and Shriman Shrimati ( 1982 ) as the iconic films produced by Nagi Reddy . 
 CNN @-@ News18 included Mayabazar on its February 2014 list of " 12 Indian films that would make great books " , and in May 2014 Rediff included the film on its list of " The Best Mythological Films of Tamil Cinema " . The Tamil film Kalyana Samayal Saadham ( 2013 ) was named after the song of the same name . The Andhra Pradesh state government planned to introduce the film as part of the tenth standard English syllabus in 2014 . The fourth unit of the English textbook , " Films and Theatres " , mentions Mayabazar and its actors and has two stills from the film . In March 2012 , film historian Mohan V. Raman stated in an interview with The Times of India that Mayabazar , which " perfected the art of trick photography " , was " among the significant black and white films of yore " , along with Andha Naal ( 1954 ) and Uthama Puthiran ( 1940 ) . 
 A Tamil song written by Thamarai and Harris Jayaraj for the film <unk> <unk> ( 2015 ) was named Mayabazar . The scene in which Krishna reveals his identity to Ghatotkacha at Dvaraka was used in Gopala Gopala ( 2015 ) , with Pawan Kalyan as Krishna . References were made to Shakuni 's character in the film <unk> ( 2015 ) starring Rama Rao 's grandson Nandamuri Kalyan Ram . Director S. S. Rajamouli told film critic Subhash K. Jha that Venkata Reddy 's work in Mayabazar was a " huge inspiration " for him to make Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) and Baahubali : The Conclusion . Writing for <unk> , an online opinion platform from the India Today Group , actor Rana Daggubati opined that films like Mayabazar were " truly cutting edge " and added , " Considering the technological limitations technicians were working with back then , these were phenomenally commendable instances of the Indian cinema " . In an interview with The Hindu in November 2015 , actor Kamal Haasan noted , " Visual appeal has always gone hand @-@ in @-@ hand with content , since the days of Chandralekha and Maya Bazaar [ sic ] , not just after Baahubali . " 
 = The Magpie ( Monet ) = 
 The Magpie ( French : La Pie ) is an oil @-@ on @-@ canvas landscape painting by the French Impressionist Claude Monet , created during the winter of 1868 – 1869 near the commune of Étretat in Normandy . Monet 's patron , Louis Joachim Gaudibert , helped arrange a house in Étretat for Monet 's girlfriend Camille Doncieux and their newborn son , allowing Monet to paint in relative comfort , surrounded by his family . 
 Between 1867 and 1893 , Monet and fellow Impressionists Alfred Sisley and Camille Pissarro painted hundreds of landscapes illustrating the natural effect of snow ( effet de neige ) . Similar winter paintings of lesser quantity were produced by Pierre @-@ Auguste Renoir , Gustave <unk> , and Paul Gauguin . Art historians believe that a series of severe winters in France contributed to an increase in the number of winter landscapes produced by Impressionists . 
 The Magpie is one of approximately 140 snowscapes produced by Monet . His first snowscape , A Cart on the Snowy Road at Honfleur , was painted sometime in either 1865 or 1867 , followed by a notable series of snowscapes in the same year , beginning with the Road by Saint @-@ Simeon Farm in Winter . The Magpie was completed in 1869 and is Monet 's largest winter painting . It was followed by The Red Cape ( 1869 – 1871 ) , the only known winter painting featuring Camille Doncieux . 
 The canvas of The Magpie depicts a solitary black magpie perched on a gate formed in a wattle fence , as the light of the sun shines upon freshly fallen snow creating blue shadows . The painting features one of the first examples of Monet 's use of colored shadows , which would later become associated with the Impressionist movement . Monet and the Impressionists used colored shadows to represent the actual , changing conditions of light and shadow as seen in nature , challenging the academic convention of painting shadows black . This subjective theory of color perception was introduced to the art world through the works of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Michel Eugène Chevreul earlier in the century . 
 At the time , Monet 's innovative use of light and color led to its rejection by the Paris Salon of 1869 . Today , art historians classify The Magpie as one of Monet 's best snowscape paintings . The painting was privately held until the Musée d 'Orsay acquired it in 1984 ; it is considered one of the most popular paintings in their permanent collection . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the late 1850s , French landscape painter Eugène Boudin ( 1824 – 1898 ) introduced Monet ( 1840 – 1926 ) to the art of painting en plein air — " in the open air " , using natural light . The invention of the collapsible metal paint tube ( 1841 ) and portable easel brought painting , formerly confined to studios , into the outdoors . Boudin and Monet spent the summer of 1858 painting nature together . Like Boudin , Monet came to prefer painting outdoors rather than in a studio , the convention of the time . " If I have become a painter , " Monet said , " I owe it to Boudin . " 
 The landscape paintings of Dutch painter Johan Barthold Jongkind ( 1819 – 1891 ) influenced both Boudin and Monet and contributed to the development of early Impressionism . After meeting Jongkind in Sainte @-@ Adresse in 1862 , Monet began to cultivate an interest in Jongkind 's perspective on the changing conditions of the landscape . From Jongkind , Monet learned to substitute optical color for local color . " Complementing the teaching I received from Boudin , Jongkind was from that moment my true master , " Monet later reminisced . " It was he who completed the education of my eye " . This new way of seeing , a shift from a conceptual to a perceptual approach , formed the basis for Monet 's Haystacks ( 1890 @-@ 1891 ) , a series of 25 works showing the effects of dynamic atmospheric conditions over time on a single haystack motif . 
 Gustave Courbet ( 1819 – 1877 ) had been painting <unk> de neige , " snow effects " , from as early as 1856 , in a landscape style preferred by Japanese , Dutch , and Flemish artists . Influenced by Courbet , Monet painted his first snowscape , A Cart on the Snowy Road at Honfleur ( 1865 or 1867 ) . A journalist observed : 
 We have only seen him once . It was in the winter , during several days of snow , when communications were virtually at a standstill . It was cold enough to split stones . We noticed a foot @-@ warmer , then an easel , then a man , swathed in three coats , his hands in gloves , his face half @-@ frozen . It was M. Monet , studying a snow effect . 
 In A Cart on the Snowy Road at Honfleur , Monet avoided the usual hunting genre and motifs used by Courbet . Instead , he focused on light and color in a new way by reducing the number of shades . Monet chose an earth tone color scheme and increased the number of shades of blue to highlight reflections on the snow . Monet followed A Cart on the Snowy Road at Honfleur with a notable series of snowscapes in 1867 including Road by Saint @-@ Simeon Farm in Winter . 
 = = First Étretat campaign = = 
 In 1867 , Monet 's girlfriend , Camille Doncieux ( 1847 – 1879 ) , gave birth to their son Jean in Paris . Lacking money , Monet returned to his father 's house in Sainte @-@ Adresse and lived with his aunt , leaving Doncieux and their child in Paris . Monet married Doncieux in 1870 . Mme. Louis Joachim Gaudibert , an art collector , became Monet 's first patron . Gaudibert helped Monet rent a house in Étretat for Doncieux and Jean in late 1868 . Recovering from an episode of depression , Monet joined Doncieux and Jean at the house in Étretat in October , with Doncieux in the role of muse and life model . By December , Monet was in great spirits , " surrounded by everything that I love " , and began to focus on painting . In a letter to Frédéric Bazille ( 1841 – 1870 ) , Monet wrote : 
 I spend my time out in the open , on the shingle beach when the weather is bad or the fishing boats go out , or I go into the countryside which is very beautiful here , that I find perhaps still more charming in winter than in summer and , naturally I work all the time , and I believe that this year I am going to do some serious things . 
 Although he enjoyed living with Camille and Jean in Étretat , Monet preferred to paint alone in the countryside . He told Bazille : 
 Don 't you think that directly in nature and alone one does better ? ... I 've always been of this mind , and what I do under these conditions has always been better . One is too much taken up with what one sees and hears in Paris , however firm one may be , and what I am painting here has at least the merit of not resembling anyone ... because it will be simply the expression of what I shall have felt , I myself , personally . 
 During his time in Étretat , Monet completed three paintings of fishing boats , one of a rural road , and , sometime between late 1868 and January or February 1869 , The Magpie ( W 133 ) . Painted five years before the first major Impressionist exhibition in 1874 , The Magpie is one of Monet 's 140 winter landscapes , the largest in its class . The exact location of the snow scene depicted in The Magpie is unknown . Ralph T. Coe proposed that Monet painted the scene near the Farm Saint @-@ Siméon above the Seine estuary in Honfleur . 
 = = Rejection by the Salon = = 
 Monet submitted The Magpie and Fishing Boats at Sea ( W 126 ) to the Salon of 1869 . Both paintings were rejected in April . Critic Paul Richard said that the jurors rejected the painting as " too common and too coarse " . Monet 's experimental use of color and radical departure from the descriptive , academic style surprised the public and probably contributed to its dismissal by the jury . Monet told French novelist Arsène Houssaye ( 1815 – 1896 ) , " This rejection has taken the bread from my mouth , and in spite of my low prices , collectors and dealers turn their backs on me . " A century later , The Magpie was acquired by the Musée d 'Orsay in 1984 . It became one of the most popular paintings in their permanent collection . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 In the painting , a black magpie is perched on a gate in a wattle fence as sunlight falls on fresh white snow , creating shadows . With no human figures present , the bird on the gate becomes the focus . Michael Howard of Manchester Metropolitan University called the painting " an extraordinary evocation of the snow @-@ bound chill of a late winter 's afternoon . The blueness of the long shadows creates a delicate contrast with the creamy whites of the sky and landscape " . Curator Lynn Orr , then of the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco , noted Monet 's interest in the changing light that depended on the hour and the vagaries of the atmosphere : 
 Unusual weather phenomena , such as snow and mist , fascinated Monet because they altered the chromatic appearance of familiar topography . In such paintings as The Magpie , one of Monet 's early masterpieces , form dissolves under the combination of a greatly restricted color range , aerial perspective , and broken brushwork . A virtuoso color performance , the painting is an essay on the variations of white perceptible in the reflection of sun on crisp new snow . <unk> abstract passages of flat color , such as the strong violet shades along the fence , are divorced from the spatial realities of the objects portrayed . 
 The Magpie is an early example of Monet 's investigation of colored shadows . In this piece , Monet makes use of the complementary colors of blue and yellow . The shadow produced by yellow sunlight shining on the snow gives the impression of a blue @-@ violet color , the effect of simultaneous contrast . French Impressionists popularized the use of colored shadows , which went against the artistic convention of portraying shadows by darkening and <unk> the color . Colored shadows can be directly observed in nature , particularly in the type of snow scene presented by Monet . In his study of Impressionism , art historian John <unk> observed that artists used snowscapes to " investigate the problem of shadows " . The problem is summarized by Fred S. Kleiner in Gardner 's Art Through the Ages : 
 After scrutinizing the effects of light and color on forms , the Impressionists concluded that local color — an object 's true color in white light — becomes modified by the quality of the light shining on it , by reflections from other objects , and by the effects juxtaposed colors produce . Shadows do not appear gray or black , as many earlier painters thought , but are composed of colors modified by reflections or other conditions . Using various colors and short choppy brush strokes , Monet was able to catch accurately the vibrating quality of light . 
 Monet 's use of colored shadows arose from color theories that were popular in the 19th century . German scientist Johann Wolfgang von Goethe ( 1749 – 1832 ) published one of the first modern descriptions of colored shadows in his Theory of Colours ( 1810 ) . Goethe attempted to challenge the theory of color propounded by Isaac Newton ( 1643 – 1727 ) in his treatise on Opticks ( 1704 ) . Goethe raised questions about subjective and objective color theory and perception , but his intuitive , non @-@ mathematical approach was criticized as unscientific , and his attack on Newton was dismissed as a polemic . The questions Goethe raised about color persisted . Thirty years later , French chemist Michel Eugène Chevreul ( 1786 – 1889 ) expanded on Goethe 's theory with The Principles of Harmony and Contrast of Colors ( 1839 ) . Goethe and Chevreul 's colour theory greatly influenced the art world . It is generally thought that Vincent van Gogh , Camille Pissarro and Monet incorporated elements of these theories into their work . Georges Seurat ( 1859 – 1891 ) came to prominence in 1886 with his technique of chromatic division , a style influenced by the color scheme theories of Chevreul and American physicist Ogden Rood ( 1831 – 1902 ) . 
 = = Related work = = 
 Monet 's series of 11 paintings depicting the The Bridge at Argenteuil ( 1874 ) also explored the use of colored shadows in its portrayal of the blue and purple shadow on the top portion of the bridge . Over the years , Monet became more and more obsessed with color and light . When his wife was dying in September 1879 , Monet painted her in Camille Monet on Her <unk> ( 1879 ) , noting the " blue , yellow , grey tones " . Monet told his friend , French statesman Georges Clemenceau ( 1841 – 1929 ) , that he spent the time " focusing on her temples and automatically analyzing the succession of appropriately graded colors which death was imposing on her motionless face . " Camille died from cancer at the age of 32 . After her death , Monet largely ceased painting people , focusing instead on natural landscapes . Monet later returned to painting snow and colored shadows with <unk> Snow Effect ( 1891 ) . 
 = = Derivative work = = 
 In honor of the 150th anniversary of Monet 's birth , the Principality of Monaco issued a stamp of The Magpie in 1990 , designed by French engraver Pierre <unk> . 
 French design studio Les 84 created a 3D version of The Magpie for the 2010 – 2011 Monet exhibition at the Galeries nationales du Grand Palais . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Thor <unk> collection , Paris ( 1918 ) 
 Durand @-@ Ruel collection , Paris ( 1941 ) 
 Guerlain collection , Paris ( 1946 ) 
 Musée d 'Orsay ( 1984 ) 
 Louvre , Paris ( 1984 ) 
 Musée d 'Orsay , Paris ( 1984 ) 
 = Yesterday 's Wine = 
 Yesterday 's Wine is a 1971 concept album by country singer Willie Nelson . In the early stages of his contract with RCA Victor , Nelson had no significant hits . By 1970 , his recordings had reached mid @-@ chart positions . Nelson lost the money from his song @-@ writing royalties by financing unsuccessful tours that did not generate significant profits . In addition to the problems with his career , Nelson had problems in his personal life . He had divorced his wife , Shirley Collie , and his ranch in Tennessee burned down . 
 After moving to a new ranch in Bandera , Texas , Nelson was called by producer Felton Jarvis about the upcoming scheduled recording sessions . At the time , Nelson had not written any new material . He returned to Nashville , where he wrote new songs to use with others from his old repertoire . These new concept songs were recorded in two days . 
 The concept of the album is the story of the " Imperfect Man " , from the moment he is born to the day of his death . RCA originally released the singles " Yesterday 's Wine " and " Me and Paul " . The former peaked at number 62 in Billboard 's Hot Country Singles . The full release failed to reach the charts , and Nelson , frustrated by the failure , decided to retire from music without having been released from his contract with RCA . Later with his musical style revitalized , he returned to music in 1972 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 By the fall of 1964 , Nelson had moved from Monument Records to RCA Victor , under the leadership of Chet Atkins , signing a contract for US $ 10 @,@ 000 per year . During his first few years at RCA Victor , Nelson had no significant hits , but from November 1966 through March 1969 his singles reached the top 25 consistently : " One In a Row " ( number 19 , 1966 ) , " The Party 's Over " ( number 24 during a 16 @-@ week chart run in 1967 ) , and his cover of Morecambe & Wise 's " Bring Me Sunshine " ( number 13 , March 1969 ) . 
 Up to 1970 , Nelson had no major success . His royalties were invested in tours that did not produce significant profits . In addition to the problems in his career , Nelson divorced Shirley Collie in 1970 . In December , his ranch in Ridgetop , Tennessee burned down . He interpreted the incident as a signal for a change . He moved to a ranch near Bandera , Texas and married Connie Koepke . 
 In early 1971 his single " I 'm a Memory " reached the top 30 . Felton Jarvis contacted Nelson for the recording of his next album . Nelson had not written any material for the sessions by the time he arrived in Nashville in April 1971 . While living in the new ranch , Nelson read the Bible , Kahlil Gibran 's The Prophet , the works of Edgar Cayce and Episcopal priest <unk> Taliaferro 's work . Inspired by his readings , Nelson decided to work in new material . On May 1 – 2 , he wrote nine songs , combining new ones with previous material from his repertoire , such as " Family Bible " , to create the concept for the album . He recorded Yesterday 's Wine in four sessions , backed by David <unk> and the studio session players , beginning with two sessions on May 3 and finishing with the last two on May 4 . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The album describes the life of a man , called " The Imperfect Man " , from the beginning to the day of his death . 
 The story begins with a dialog between two characters . The first asks the other " You do know why you 're here ? " , and the second replies : " Yes , there 's great confusion on earth , and the power that is has concluded the following : Perfect man has visited earth already and His voice was heard ; The voice of imperfect man must now be made manifest ; and I have been selected as the most likely candidate . " This statement is followed by " Where 's the Show " and " Let Me Be a Man " . In the medley , Nelson depicts the birth of the character , who implores God to become a man . The song is followed by " In God 's Eyes " , depicting the character learning to act as a good Samaritan . In " Family Bible " , the character describes his memories of and nostalgia for his childhood , the times with his family and the reading of the family Bible . " It 's Not for Me to Understand " depicts the character praying , after watching a blind child listening to other children playing and finding himself unable to understand why God allowed that to happen . God replies to the Imperfect Man , " It 's not for you to reason why , you too are blind without my eyes , so question not what I command " . In the last stanza , the character now expresses his fear of the Lord and his reluctance to question the unfairness of the world again . The medley " These Are Difficult Times / Remember the Good Times " , describes the character 's bad times and his recovery by remembering the good times . 
 " Summer of Roses " depicts the character falling in love and in the prime of his life . It is followed by the anticipation of the beginning of the end in " December Day " , as the character announces " This looks like a December day . It looks like we 've come to the end of the way " . " Yesterday 's Wine " finds the character drinking in a bar , talking to the regulars about his life , and reflecting on aging . In " Me and Paul " , the Imperfect Man remembers the circumstances in which he lived with a friend in past times . The album ends with " Goin ' Home " , as the character watches his own funeral . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 RCA released the songs " Yesterday 's Wine " and " Me and Paul " as singles . The song " Yesterday 's Wine " peaked at number 62 in Billboard 's Country Singles . The promotion of the album was complicated for RCA 's marketing department by the changes of Imperfect Man between spirituality and mundane behavior . The album did not appear on any chart , failing to satisfy RCA 's expectations . Although his contract was not over , Nelson decided to retire because of the number of failures he had had . Nelson later wrote in his autobiography , " I think it 's one of my best albums , but Yesterday 's Wine was regarded by RCA as way too spooky and far out to waste promotion money on . " Nelson returned to music in the following year , as his style was influenced in the Armadillo World Headquarters . 
 Music critic Robert Christgau wrote : " The great Nashville <unk> has never bowled anyone over with his singing , and here he finds the concept to match . Most of these songs — though not the two best , " Yesterday 's Wine " and " Me and Paul " are on religious themes , which tends to limit their general relevance . " 
 Nathan Bush wrote for Allmusic : " ' Summer of Roses ' , ' December Day ' , and the title track – songs that detail a sense of longing and loss with the changing seasons mirroring the narrator 's own life ... many of the numbers stand on their own , outside the album context . ' Family Bible ' , ' Me and Paul ' , and the title track are all particularly fine examples of Nelson 's songcraft . As a whole , Yesterday 's Wine provides further insight into the development of his art during this prolific period . " 
 The New York Times later described Yesterday 's Wine as " the last and best of [ Nelson 's ] Nashville albums " , saying that it was " Organized in the manner of an epic poem , each cut a metaphor in the journey through life ... it was Nashville 's first fully conceived concept album , and nobody knew what to make of it . It soon disappeared quietly and utterly . " Rolling Stone wrote : " [ Yesterdays Wine ] is the first of his bold , conceptual departures from country 's hits @-@ plus @-@ filler norm . Rather than tack rock guitar riffs onto modern honky @-@ tonk sagas , Nelson absorbed the innovations of Bob Dylan and the singer @-@ songwriters into his own distinct style . Even if the narrative concepts don 't always hold together , Willie hangs his most ambitious albums on some of his catchiest tunes . " 
 Robert <unk> and Douglas B. Green , in their book The Listener 's Guide to Country Music , compared the album with Nelson 's later recordings for Columbia Records : " All of those are beautiful records . They 're all on Columbia and are made just the way Willie wanted them . It was not always so at his previous record label , RCA . Nevertheless , he made a few landmark recordings while he was with that company ... Few of the songs on Yesterday 's Wine are well @-@ known Nelson compositions , but all are minor masterpieces " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were composed by Willie Nelson . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Edward VII = 
 Edward VII ( Albert Edward ; 9 November 1841 – 6 May 1910 ) was King of the United Kingdom and the British Dominions and Emperor of India from 22 January 1901 until his death in 1910 . 
 The eldest son of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha , Edward was related to royalty throughout Europe . Before his accession to the throne , he served as heir apparent and held the title of Prince of Wales for longer than any of his predecessors . During the long reign of his mother , he was largely excluded from political power , and came to personify the fashionable , leisured elite . He travelled throughout Britain performing ceremonial public duties , and represented Britain on visits abroad . His tours of North America in 1860 and the Indian subcontinent in 1875 were popular successes , but despite public approval his reputation as a playboy prince soured his relationship with his mother . 
 As king , Edward played a role in the modernisation of the British Home Fleet and the reorganisation of the British Army after the Second Boer War . He re @-@ instituted traditional ceremonies as public displays and broadened the range of people with whom royalty socialised . He fostered good relations between Britain and other European countries , especially France , for which he was popularly called " Peacemaker " , but his relationship with his nephew , Kaiser Wilhelm II , was poor . The Edwardian era , which covered Edward 's reign and was named after him , coincided with the start of a new century and heralded significant changes in technology and society , including steam turbine propulsion and the rise of socialism . He died in 1910 in the midst of a constitutional crisis that was resolved the following year by the Parliament Act 1911 , which restricted the power of the unelected House of Lords . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Edward was born at 10 : 48 in the morning on 9 November 1841 in Buckingham Palace . He was the eldest son and second child of Queen Victoria and her husband ( and first cousin ) Prince Albert of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha . He was christened Albert Edward at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , on 25 January 1842 . He was named Albert after his father and Edward after his maternal grandfather Prince Edward , Duke of Kent and Strathearn . He was known as Bertie to the royal family throughout his life . 
 As the eldest son of the British sovereign , he was automatically Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay at birth . As a son of Prince Albert , he also held the titles of Prince of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha and Duke of Saxony . He was created Prince of Wales and Earl of Chester on 8 December 1841 , Earl of Dublin on 17 January 1850 , a Knight of the Garter on 9 November 1858 , and a Knight of the Thistle on 24 May 1867 . In 1863 , he renounced his succession rights to the Duchy of Saxe @-@ Coburg and Gotha in favour of his younger brother , Prince Alfred . 
 Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were determined that their eldest son should have an education that would prepare him to be a model constitutional monarch . At age seven , Edward embarked on a rigorous educational programme devised by Prince Albert , and supervised by several tutors . Unlike his elder sister Victoria , Edward did not excel in his studies . He tried to meet the expectations of his parents , but to no avail . Although Edward was not a diligent student — his true talents were those of charm , sociability and tact — Benjamin Disraeli described him as informed , intelligent and of sweet manner . After the completion of his secondary @-@ level studies , his tutor was replaced by a personal governor , Robert Bruce . 
 After an educational trip to Rome , undertaken in the first few months of 1859 , he spent the summer of that year studying at the University of Edinburgh under , amongst others , the chemist Lyon Playfair . In October , he matriculated as an undergraduate at Christ Church , Oxford . Now released from the educational strictures imposed by his parents , he enjoyed studying for the first time and performed satisfactorily in examinations . In 1861 , he transferred to Trinity College , Cambridge , where he was tutored in history by Charles Kingsley , Regius Professor of Modern History . Kingsley 's efforts brought forth the best academic performances of Edward 's life , and Edward actually looked forward to his lectures . 
 = = Early adulthood = = 
 In 1860 , Edward undertook the first tour of North America by an heir to the British throne . His genial good humour and confident bonhomie made the tour a great success . He inaugurated the Victoria Bridge , Montreal , across the St Lawrence River , and laid the cornerstone of Parliament Hill , Ottawa . He watched Charles Blondin traverse Niagara Falls by highwire , and stayed for three days with President James Buchanan at the White House . Buchanan accompanied the Prince to Mount Vernon , to pay his respects at the tomb of George Washington . Vast crowds greeted him everywhere . He met Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Ralph Waldo Emerson and Oliver Wendell Holmes . Prayers for the royal family were said in Trinity Church , New York , for the first time since 1776 . The four @-@ month tour throughout Canada and the United States considerably boosted Edward 's confidence and self @-@ esteem , and had many diplomatic benefits for Great Britain . 
 Edward had hoped to pursue a career in the British Army , but his mother vetoed an active military career . He had been gazetted colonel on 9 November 1858 — to his disappointment , as he had wanted to earn his commission by examination . In September 1861 , Edward was sent to Germany , supposedly to watch military manoeuvres , but actually in order to engineer a meeting between him and Princess Alexandra of Denmark , the eldest daughter of Prince Christian of Denmark and his wife Louise . Queen Victoria and Prince Albert had already decided that Edward and Alexandra should marry . They met at Speyer on 24 September under the auspices of his elder sister , Victoria , who had married the Crown Prince of Prussia in 1858 . Edward 's elder sister , acting upon instructions from their mother , had met Princess Alexandra at Strelitz in June ; the young Danish princess made a very favourable impression . Edward and Alexandra were friendly from the start ; the meeting went well for both sides , and marriage plans advanced . 
 From this time , Edward gained a reputation as a playboy . Determined to get some army experience , Edward attended manoeuvres in Ireland , during which he spent three nights with an actress , Nellie Clifden , who was hidden in the camp by his fellow officers . Prince Albert , though ill , was appalled and visited Edward at Cambridge to issue a reprimand . Albert died in December 1861 just two weeks after the visit . Queen Victoria was inconsolable , wore mourning clothes for the rest of her life and blamed Edward for his father 's death . At first , she regarded her son with distaste as frivolous , indiscreet and irresponsible . She wrote to her eldest daughter , " I never can , or shall , look at him without a shudder . " 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Once widowed , Queen Victoria effectively withdrew from public life . Shortly after Prince Albert 's death , she arranged for Edward to embark on an extensive tour of the Middle East , visiting Egypt , Jerusalem , Damascus , Beirut and Constantinople . The British Government wanted Edward to secure the friendship of Egypt 's ruler , Said Pasha , to prevent French control of the Suez Canal if the Ottoman Empire collapsed . It was the first royal tour on which an official photographer , Francis Bedford , was in attendance . As soon as Edward returned to Britain , preparations were made for his engagement , which was sealed at Laeken in Belgium on 9 September 1862 . Edward married Alexandra at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , on 10 March 1863 . He was 21 ; she was 18 . 
 The couple established Marlborough House as their London residence and Sandringham House in Norfolk as their country retreat . They entertained on a lavish scale . Their marriage met with disapproval in certain circles because most of Queen Victoria 's relations were German , and Denmark was at loggerheads with Germany over the territories of Schleswig and Holstein . When Alexandra 's father inherited the throne of Denmark in November 1863 , the German Confederation took the opportunity to invade and annex Schleswig @-@ Holstein . Queen Victoria was of two minds whether it was a suitable match given the political climate . After the marriage , she expressed anxiety about their socialite lifestyle and attempted to dictate to them on various matters , including the names of their children . 
 Edward had mistresses throughout his married life . He socialised with actress Lillie Langtry ; Lady Randolph Churchill ( born Jennie Jerome , she was the mother of Winston Churchill ) ; Daisy Greville , Countess of Warwick ; actress Sarah Bernhardt ; noblewoman Lady Susan Vane @-@ Tempest ; singer Hortense Schneider ; prostitute Giulia <unk> ( known as " La <unk> " ) ; wealthy humanitarian Agnes Keyser ; and Alice Keppel . At least fifty @-@ five liaisons are conjectured . How far these relationships went is not always clear . Edward always strove to be discreet , but this did not prevent society gossip or press speculation . One of Alice Keppel 's great @-@ granddaughters , Camilla Parker Bowles , became the mistress and subsequently wife of Charles , Prince of Wales , one of Edward 's great @-@ great @-@ grandsons . It was rumoured that Camilla 's grandmother , Sonia Keppel ( born in May 1900 ) , was the illegitimate daughter of Edward , but she was " almost certainly " the daughter of George Keppel , whom she resembled . Edward never acknowledged any illegitimate children . Alexandra is believed to have been aware of many of his affairs and to have accepted them . 
 In 1869 , Sir Charles Mordaunt , a British Member of Parliament , threatened to name Edward as co @-@ respondent in his divorce suit . Ultimately , he did not do so but Edward was called as a witness in the case in early 1870 . It was shown that Edward had visited the <unk> ' house while Sir Charles was away sitting in the House of Commons . Although nothing further was proven and Edward denied he had committed adultery , the suggestion of impropriety was damaging . 
 In the 1880s , Edward was a regular habitué of Parisian brothels , most notably Le <unk> , which was regarded as the top establishment in Paris where brothels were legal . One room contained a custom made bath which was sometimes filled with champagne ; and a specially designed and crafted <unk> d 'amour ( love seat ) that allowed easy access for oral and other forms of sex for two or three people . It is now a museum piece . 
 = = Heir apparent = = 
 During Queen Victoria 's widowhood , Edward pioneered the idea of royal public appearances as we understand them today — for example , opening Thames Embankment in 1871 , Mersey Tunnel in 1886 , and Tower Bridge in 1894 — but his mother did not allow Edward an active role in the running of the country until 1898 . He was sent summaries of important government documents , but she refused to give him access to the originals . He annoyed his mother by siding with Denmark on the Schleswig @-@ Holstein Question in 1864 ( she was pro @-@ German ) and in the same year annoyed her again by making a special effort to meet Giuseppe Garibaldi . Liberal Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone sent him papers secretly . From 1886 , Foreign Secretary Lord Rosebery sent him Foreign Office despatches , and from 1892 some Cabinet papers were opened to him . 
 In 1870 republican sentiment in Britain was given a boost when the French Emperor , Napoleon III , was defeated in the Franco @-@ Prussian War and the French Third Republic was declared . However , in the winter of 1871 , a brush with death led to an improvement in both Edward 's popularity with the public and his relationship with his mother . While staying at <unk> Lodge , near Scarborough , North Yorkshire , Edward contracted typhoid , the disease that was believed to have killed his father . There was great national concern , and one of his fellow guests ( Lord Chesterfield ) died . Edward 's recovery was greeted with almost universal relief . Public celebrations included the composition of Arthur Sullivan 's Festival Te Deum . Edward cultivated politicians from all parties , including republicans , as his friends , and thereby largely dissipated any residual feelings against him . 
 In October 1875 Edward set off for India on an extensive eight @-@ month tour of the sub @-@ continent . His advisors remarked on his habit of treating all people the same , regardless of their social station or colour . In letters home , he complained of the treatment of the native Indians by the British officials : " Because a man has a black face and a different religion from our own , there is no reason why he should be treated as a brute . " Consequently , Lord Salisbury , the Secretary of State for India , issued new guidance and at least one resident was removed from office . At the end of the tour , Queen Victoria was given the title Empress of India by Parliament , in part as a result of the tour 's success . 
 He was regarded worldwide as an arbiter of men 's fashions . He made wearing tweed , Homburg hats and Norfolk jackets fashionable , and popularised the wearing of black ties with dinner jackets , instead of white tie and tails . He pioneered the pressing of trouser legs from side to side in preference to the now normal front and back creases , and was thought to have introduced the stand @-@ up turn @-@ down shirt collar . A stickler for proper dress , he is said to have admonished Lord Salisbury for wearing the trousers of an Elder Brother of Trinity House with a Privy Councillor 's coat . Deep in an international crisis , Salisbury informed the Prince that it had been a dark morning , and that " my mind must have been occupied by some subject of less importance . " The tradition of men not <unk> the bottom button of waistcoats is said to be linked to Edward , who supposedly left his undone because of his large girth . His waist measured 48 inches ( 122 cm ) shortly before his coronation . He introduced the practice of eating roast beef , roast potatoes , horseradish sauce and <unk> pudding on Sundays , which remains a staple British favourite for Sunday lunch . 
 Edward was a patron of the arts and sciences and helped found the Royal College of Music . He opened the college in 1883 with the words , " Class can no longer stand apart from class ... I claim for music that it produces that union of feeling which I much desire to promote . " At the same time , he enjoyed gambling and country sports and was an enthusiastic hunter . He ordered all the clocks at Sandringham to run half an hour ahead to provide more daylight time for shooting . This so @-@ called tradition of Sandringham Time continued until 1936 , when it was abolished by Edward VIII . He also laid out a golf course at Windsor . By the 1870s the future king had taken a keen interest in horseracing and steeplechasing . In 1896 , his horse Persimmon won both the Derby Stakes and the St Leger Stakes . In 1900 , Persimmon 's brother , Diamond Jubilee , won five races ( Derby , St Leger , 2 @,@ 000 Guineas Stakes , Newmarket Stakes and Eclipse Stakes ) and another of Edward 's horses , Ambush II , won the Grand National . 
 In 1891 Edward was embroiled in the royal baccarat scandal , when it was revealed he had played an illegal card game for money the previous year . The Prince was forced to appear as a witness in court for a second time when one of the participants unsuccessfully sued his fellow players for slander after being accused of cheating . In the same year Edward was involved in a personal conflict , when Lord Charles Beresford threatened to reveal details of Edward 's private life to the press , as a protest against Edward interfering with Beresford 's affair with Daisy Greville , Countess of Warwick . The friendship between the two men was irreversibly damaged and their bitterness would last for the remainder of their lives . Usually , Edward 's outbursts of temper were short @-@ lived , and " after he had let himself go ... [ he would ] smooth matters by being especially nice " . 
 In late 1891 Edward 's eldest son , Albert Victor , was engaged to Princess Victoria Mary of Teck . Just a few weeks later , in early 1892 , Albert Victor died of pneumonia . Edward was grief @-@ stricken . " To lose our eldest son " , he wrote , " is one of those calamities one can never really get over " . Edward told Queen Victoria , " [ I would ] have given my life for him , as I put no value on mine " . Albert Victor was the second of Edward 's children to die . In 1871 , his youngest son , Alexander John , had died just 24 hours after being born . Edward had insisted on placing Alexander John in a coffin personally with " the tears rolling down his cheeks " . 
 On his way to Denmark through Belgium on 4 April 1900 Edward was the victim of an attempted assassination , when fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> shot at him in protest over the Boer War . <unk> , though obviously guilty , was acquitted by a Belgian court because he was underage . The perceived laxity of the Belgian authorities , combined with British disgust at Belgian atrocities in the Congo , worsened the already poor relations between the United Kingdom and the Continent . However , in the next ten years , Edward 's affability and popularity , as well as his use of family connections , assisted Britain in building European alliances . 
 = = Accession = = 
 When Queen Victoria died on 22 January 1901 , Edward became King of the United Kingdom , Emperor of India and , in an innovation , King of the British Dominions . He chose to reign under the name Edward VII , instead of Albert Edward — the name his mother had intended for him to use — declaring that he did not wish to " undervalue the name of Albert " and diminish the status of his father with whom the " name should stand alone " . The numeral VII was occasionally omitted in Scotland , even by the national church , in deference to protests that the previous Edwards were English kings who had " been excluded from Scotland by battle " . J. B. Priestley recalled , " I was only a child when he succeeded Victoria in 1901 , but I can testify to his extraordinary popularity . He was in fact the most popular king England had known since the earlier 1660s . " 
 He donated his parents ' house , Osborne on the Isle of Wight , to the state and continued to live at Sandringham . He could afford to be magnanimous ; his private secretary , Sir Francis Knollys , claimed that he was the first heir to succeed to the throne in credit . Edward 's finances had been ably managed by Sir Dighton Probyn , Comptroller of the Household , and had benefited from advice from Edward 's Jewish financier friends , such as Ernest Cassel , Maurice de Hirsch and the Rothschild family . At a time of widespread anti @-@ Semitism , Edward attracted criticism for openly socialising with Jews . 
 Edward 's coronation had originally been scheduled for 26 June , but two days before on 24 June , he was diagnosed with appendicitis . <unk> was generally not treated operatively and carried a high mortality rate , but developments in anaesthesia and antisepsis in the preceding 50 years made life @-@ saving surgery possible . Sir Frederick Treves , with the support of Lord Lister , performed a then @-@ radical operation of draining a pint of pus from the infected abscess through a small incision ( through 4 ½ inch thickness of belly fat and abdomen wall ) ; this outcome showed thankfully that the cause was not cancer . The next day , Edward was sitting up in bed , smoking a cigar . Two weeks later , it was announced that the King was out of danger . Treves was honoured with a baronetcy ( which Edward had arranged before the operation ) and appendix surgery entered the medical mainstream . Edward was crowned at Westminster Abbey on 9 August 1902 by the 80 @-@ year @-@ old Archbishop of Canterbury , Frederick Temple , who died only four months later . 
 Edward refurbished the royal palaces , reintroduced the traditional ceremonies , such as the State Opening of Parliament , that his mother had forgone , and founded new honours , such as the Order of Merit , to recognise contributions to the arts and sciences . In 1902 , the Shah of Persia , <unk> @-@ al @-@ Din , visited England expecting to receive the Order of the Garter . Edward refused to bestow the honour on the Shah because the order was meant to be in his personal gift and the Foreign Secretary , Lord Lansdowne , had promised it without his consent . Edward also objected to inducting a Muslim into a Christian order of chivalry . His refusal threatened to damage British attempts to gain influence in Persia , but Edward resented his ministers ' attempts to reduce the King 's traditional powers . Eventually , he relented and Britain sent a special embassy to the Shah with a full Order of the Garter the following year . 
 = = " Uncle of Europe " = = 
 As king , Edward 's main interests lay in the fields of foreign affairs and naval and military matters . Fluent in French and German , he made a number of visits abroad , and took annual holidays in Biarritz and Marienbad . One of his most important foreign trips was an official visit to France in May 1903 as the guest of President Émile Loubet . Following a visit to the Pope in Rome , this trip helped create the atmosphere for the Anglo @-@ French Entente Cordiale , an agreement delineating British and French colonies in North Africa , and ruling out any future war between the two countries . The Entente was negotiated between the French foreign minister , Théophile <unk> , and the British foreign secretary , Lord Lansdowne . Signed in London on 8 April 1904 by Lansdowne and the French ambassador Paul Cambon , it marked the end of centuries of Anglo @-@ French rivalry and Britain 's splendid isolation from Continental affairs , and attempted to counterbalance the growing dominance of the German Empire and its ally , Austria @-@ Hungary . 
 Edward was related to nearly every other European monarch and came to be known as the " uncle of Europe " . Kaiser Wilhelm II was his nephew ; Tsar Nicholas II was his nephew @-@ by @-@ marriage ; Queen Victoria Eugenia of Spain , Crown Princess Margaret of Sweden , Crown Princess Marie of Romania , Crown Princess Sophia of Greece , and Empress Alexandra of Russia were his nieces ; Haakon VII of Norway was both his nephew by marriage and his son @-@ in @-@ law ; Frederick VIII of Denmark and George I of Greece were his brothers @-@ in @-@ law ; Albert I of Belgium , Ferdinand of Bulgaria , and Charles I and Manuel II of Portugal were his second cousins . Edward doted on his grandchildren , and indulged them , to the consternation of their governesses . However , there was one relation whom Edward did not like : Wilhelm II . Edward 's difficult relationship with his nephew exacerbated the tensions between Germany and Britain . 
 In April 1908 , during Edward 's annual stay at Biarritz , he accepted the resignation of British Prime Minister Sir Henry Campbell @-@ Bannerman . In a break with precedent , Edward asked Campbell @-@ Bannerman 's successor , H. H. Asquith , to travel to Biarritz to kiss hands . Asquith complied , but the press criticised the action of the King in appointing a prime minister on foreign soil instead of returning to Britain . In June 1908 , Edward became the first reigning British monarch to visit the Russian Empire , despite refusing to visit in 1906 , when Anglo @-@ Russian relations were strained in the aftermath of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , the Dogger Bank incident , and the Tsar 's dissolution of the Duma . The previous month , Edward visited the Scandinavian countries , becoming the first British monarch to visit Sweden . 
 = = Political opinions = = 
 While Prince of Wales , Edward had to be dissuaded from breaking with constitutional precedent by openly voting for Gladstone 's Representation of the People Bill ( 1884 ) in the House of Lords . On other matters he was less progressive : he did not , for example , favour giving votes to women , although he did suggest that the social reformer Octavia Hill serve on the Commission for Working Class Housing . He was also opposed to Irish Home Rule , instead preferring a form of dual monarchy . 
 As Prince of Wales , he had come to enjoy warm and mutually respectful relations with W. E. Gladstone , whom his mother detested . But Gladstone 's son , Home Secretary Herbert Gladstone , angered the King by planning to permit Roman Catholic priests in vestments to carry the Host through the streets of London , and by appointing two ladies , Lady Frances Balfour and Mrs H. J. Tennant , to serve on a Royal Commission on reforming divorce law – Edward thought divorce could not be discussed with " delicacy or even decency " before ladies . Edward 's biographer Philip Magnus suggests that Gladstone may have become a whipping @-@ boy for the King 's general irritation with the Liberal government . Gladstone was sacked in the reshuffle the following year and the King agreed , with some reluctance , to appoint him Governor @-@ General of South Africa . 
 Edward involved himself heavily in discussions over army reform , the need for which had become apparent with the failings of the Boer War . He supported the redesign of army command , the creation of the Territorial Force , and the decision to provide an Expeditionary Force supporting France in the event of war with Germany . Reform of the Royal Navy was also suggested , partly due to the ever @-@ increasing Naval Estimates , and because of the emergence of the Imperial German Navy as a new strategic threat . Ultimately a dispute arose between Admiral Lord Charles Beresford , who favoured increased spending and a broad deployment , and the First Sea Lord Admiral Sir John Fisher , who favoured efficiency savings , scrapping obsolete vessels , and a strategic realignment of the Royal Navy relying on torpedo craft for home defence backed by the new dreadnoughts . 
 The King lent support to Fisher , in part because he disliked Beresford , and eventually Beresford was dismissed . Beresford continued his campaign outside of the navy and Fisher ultimately announced his resignation in late 1909 , although the bulk of his policies were retained . The King was intimately involved in the appointment of Fisher 's successor as the Fisher @-@ Beresford feud had split the service , and the only truly qualified figure known to be outside of both camps was Sir Arthur Knyvet Wilson , who had retired in 1907 . Wilson was reluctant to return to active duty , but Edward persuaded him to do so , and Wilson became First Sea Lord on 25 January 1910 . 
 Edward was rarely interested in politics , although his views on some issues were notably liberal for the time . During his reign he said use of the word nigger was " disgraceful " despite it then being in common parlance . In 1904 , during an Anglo @-@ German summit in Kiel between Wilhelm II and Edward , Wilhelm with the Russo @-@ Japanese War in mind started to go on about the " Yellow Peril " , which he called " the greatest peril menacing ... Christendom and European civilisation . If the Russians went on giving ground , the yellow race would , in twenty years time , be in Moscow and Posen " . Wilhelm went on to attack his British guests for supporting Japan against Russia , suggesting that the British were committing " race treason " . In response , Edward stated that he " could not see it . The Japanese were an intelligent , brave and chivalrous nation , quite as civilised as the Europeans , from whom they only differed by the pigmentation of their skin " . 
 Edward lived a life of luxury that was often far removed from that of the majority of his subjects . However , his personal charm with people at all levels of society and his strong condemnation of prejudice went some way to assuage republican and racial tensions building during his lifetime . 
 = = Constitutional crisis = = 
 In the last year of his life , Edward became embroiled in a constitutional crisis when the Conservative majority in the House of Lords refused to pass the " People 's Budget " proposed by the Liberal government of Prime Minister H. H. Asquith . The crisis eventually led – after Edward 's death – to the removal of the Lords ' right to veto legislation . 
 The King was displeased at Liberal attacks on the peers , which included a polemical speech by David Lloyd George at Limehouse . Cabinet minister Winston Churchill publicly demanded a general election , for which Asquith apologised to the King 's adviser Lord Knollys and rebuked Churchill at a Cabinet meeting . Edward was so depressed at the tone of class warfare – although Asquith told him that party rancour had been just as bad over the First Home Rule Bill in 1886 – that he introduced his son to Secretary of State for War Richard Haldane as " the last King of England " . After the King 's horse Minoru won the Derby on 26 July 1909 , he returned to the racetrack the following day , and laughed when a man shouted : " Now , King . You 've won the Derby . Go back home and dissolve this bloody Parliament ! " 
 In vain , the King urged Conservative leaders Arthur Balfour and Lord Lansdowne to pass the Budget , which Lord Esher had advised him was not unusual , as Queen Victoria had helped to broker agreements between the two Houses over Irish disestablishment in 1869 and the Third Reform Act in 1884 . On Asquith 's advice , however , he did not offer them an election ( at which , to judge from recent by @-@ elections , they were likely to gain seats ) as a reward for doing so . 
 The Finance Bill passed the Commons on 5 November 1909 but was rejected by the Lords on 30 November ; they instead passed a resolution of Lord Lansdowne 's stating that they were entitled to oppose the bill as it lacked an electoral mandate . The King was annoyed that his efforts to urge passage of the budget had become public knowledge and had forbidden his adviser Lord Knollys , who was an active Liberal peer , from voting for the budget , although Knollys had suggested that this would be a suitable gesture to indicate royal desire to see the Budget pass . In December 1909 , a proposal to create peers ( to give the Liberals a majority in the Lords ) or give the prime minister the right to do so was considered " outrageous " by Knollys , who thought the King should abdicate rather than agree to it . 
 The January 1910 election was dominated by talk of removing the Lords ' veto . During the election campaign Lloyd George talked of " guarantees " and Asquith of " safeguards " that would be necessary before forming another Liberal government , but the King informed Asquith that he would not be willing to contemplate creating peers until after a second general election . Balfour refused to be drawn on whether or not he would be willing to form a Conservative government , but advised the King not to promise to create peers until he had seen the terms of any proposed constitutional change . During the campaign the leading Conservative Walter Long had asked Knollys for permission to state that the King did not favour Irish Home Rule , but Knollys refused on the grounds that it was not appropriate for the monarch 's views to be known in public . 
 The election resulted in a hung parliament , with the Liberal government dependent on the support of the third largest party , the Irish nationalists . The King suggested a compromise whereby only 50 peers from each side would be allowed to vote , which would also redress the large Conservative majority in the Lords , but Lord Crewe , Liberal leader in the Lords , advised that this would reduce the Lords ' independence as only peers who were loyal party supporters would be picked . Pressure to remove the Lords ' veto now came from the Irish nationalist MPs , who wanted to remove the Lords ' ability to block the introduction of Irish Home Rule . They threatened to vote against the Budget unless they had their way ( an attempt by Lloyd George to win their support by amending whisky duties was abandoned as the Cabinet felt this would recast the Budget too much ) . Asquith now revealed that there were no " guarantees " for the creation of peers . The Cabinet considered resigning and leaving it up to Balfour to try to form a Conservative government . 
 The King 's Speech from the Throne on 21 February made reference to introducing measures restricting the Lords ' power of veto to one of delay , but Asquith inserted a phrase " in the opinion of my advisers " so the King could be seen to be distancing himself from the planned legislation . 
 The Commons passed resolutions on 14 April that would form the basis for the Parliament Act : to remove the power of the Lords to veto money bills , to replace their veto of other bills with a power to delay , and to reduce the term of Parliament from seven years to five ( the King would have preferred four ) . But in that debate Asquith hinted – to ensure the support of the nationalist MPs – that he would ask the King to break the deadlock " in that Parliament " ( i.e. contrary to Edward 's earlier stipulation that there be a second election ) . The Budget was passed by both Commons and Lords in April . 
 By April the Palace was having secret talks with Balfour and the Archbishop of Canterbury , who both advised that the Liberals did not have sufficient mandate to demand the creation of peers . The King thought the whole proposal " simply disgusting " and that the government was " in the hands of Redmond & Co " . Lord Crewe announced publicly that the government 's wish to create peers should be treated as formal " ministerial advice " ( which , by convention , the monarch must obey ) although Lord Esher argued that the monarch was entitled in extremis to dismiss the government rather than take their " advice " . Esher 's view has been called " obsolete and unhelpful " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Edward habitually smoked twenty cigarettes and twelve cigars a day . In 1907 , a rodent ulcer , a type of cancer affecting the skin next to his nose , was cured with radium . Towards the end of his life he increasingly suffered from bronchitis . He suffered a momentary loss of consciousness during a state visit to Berlin in February 1909 . In March 1910 , he was staying at Biarritz when he collapsed . He remained there to convalesce , while in London Asquith tried to get the Finance Bill passed . The King 's continued ill health was unreported and he attracted criticism for staying in France while political tensions were so high . On 27 April he returned to Buckingham Palace , still suffering from severe bronchitis . Alexandra returned from visiting her brother , King George I of Greece , in Corfu a week later on 5 May . 
 The following day , the King suffered several heart attacks , but refused to go to bed , saying , " No , I shall not give in ; I shall go on ; I shall work to the end . " Between moments of faintness , his son the Prince of Wales ( shortly to be King George V ) told him that his horse , Witch of the Air , had won at Kempton Park that afternoon . The King replied , " Yes , I have heard of it . I am very glad " : his final words . At 11 : 30 p.m. he lost consciousness for the last time and was put to bed . He died 15 minutes later . 
 Alexandra refused to allow the King 's body to be moved for eight days afterwards , though she allowed small groups of visitors to enter his room . On 11 May , the late King was dressed in his uniform and placed in a massive oak coffin , which was moved on 14 May to the throne room , where it was sealed and lay in state , with four guardsmen standing at each corner of the bier . Despite the time that had elapsed since his death , Alexandra noted the King 's body remained " wonderfully preserved " . On the morning of 17 May , the coffin was placed on a gun carriage and drawn by black horses to Westminster Hall , with the new King and his family walking behind . Following a brief service , the royal family left , and the hall was opened to the public ; over 400 @,@ 000 people filed past the coffin over the next two days . 
 As Barbara Tuchman noted in The Guns of August , his funeral , held on 20 May 1910 , marked " the greatest assemblage of royalty and rank ever gathered in one place and , of its kind , the last . " A royal train conveyed the King 's coffin from London to Windsor Castle , where Edward VII was buried at St George 's Chapel . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Before his accession to the throne , Edward was the longest @-@ serving heir apparent in British history . He was surpassed by his great @-@ great @-@ grandson Charles , Prince of Wales , on 20 April 2011 . The title Prince of Wales is not automatically held by the heir apparent ; it is bestowed by the reigning monarch at a time of his or her choosing . Edward is the longest @-@ serving holder of that title ; he was Prince of Wales for 59 years . Charles has held the title since 1958 . 
 As king , Edward VII proved a greater success than anyone had expected , but he was already past the average life expectancy and had little time left to fulfil the role . In his short reign , he ensured that his second son and heir , George V , was better prepared to take the throne . Contemporaries described their relationship as more like affectionate brothers than father and son , and on Edward 's death George wrote in his diary that he had lost his " best friend and the best of fathers ... I never had a [ cross ] word with him in my life . I am heart @-@ broken and overwhelmed with grief " . 
 Edward has been recognised as the first truly constitutional British sovereign and the last sovereign to wield effective political power . Though lauded as " Peacemaker " , he had been afraid his nephew , the German Emperor Wilhelm II , would tip Europe into war . Four years after Edward 's death , World War I broke out . The naval reforms he had supported and his part in securing the Triple Entente between Britain , France and Russia , as well as his relationships with his extended family , fed the paranoia of the German Emperor , who blamed Edward for the war . Publication of the official biography of Edward was delayed by its author , Sidney Lee , who feared German propagandists would select material to portray Edward as an anti @-@ German warmonger . Lee was also hampered by the extensive destruction of Edward 's personal papers ; Edward had left orders that all his letters should be burned on his death . Subsequent biographers have been able to construct a more rounded picture of Edward by using material and sources that were unavailable to Lee . 
 Edward received criticism for his apparent pursuit of self @-@ indulgent pleasure but he received great praise for his affable and kind good manners , and his diplomatic skill . As his grandson Edward VIII wrote , " his lighter side ... obscured the fact that he had both insight and influence . " " He had a tremendous zest for pleasure but he also had a real sense of duty " , wrote J. B. Priestley . Lord Esher wrote that Edward was " kind and debonair and not undignified – but too human " . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 9 November – 8 December 1841 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall and Rothesay 
 8 December 1841 – 22 January 1901 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales 
 22 January 1901 – 6 May 1910 : His Majesty The King 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 British honours 
 8 December 1841 : Knight of the Order of the Garter 
 25 June 1861 : Knight Companion of the Order of the Star of India 
 12 February 1863 : Fellow of the Royal Society 
 8 December 1863 : Member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom 
 10 February 1865 : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath 
 28 March 1866 : Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India 
 24 May 1867 : Knight of the Order of the Thistle 
 18 March 1868 : Knight of the Order of St Patrick 
 21 April 1868 : Member of the Privy Council of Ireland 
 30 May 1877 : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George 
 21 June 1887 : Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire 
 6 May 1896 : Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order 
 22 June 1897 : Great Master of the Order of the Bath 
 Foreign honours 
 May 1852 : Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece of Spain 
 March 1859 : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Tower and Sword of Portugal 
 March 1863 : Grand Officer of the Legion of Honour of France 
 27 September 1864 : Knight of the Order of the Seraphim of Sweden . 
 13 June 1867 : Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary 
 1869 : Knight of the Order of the Black Eagle of Prussia 
 January 1874 : Knight of the Order of St Andrew of Russia 
 8 October 1874 : Grand Cross of the Order of St Olav of Norway 
 May 1876 : Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Charles III of Spain 
 September 1901 : Grand Commander of the Order of the Dannebrog of Denmark 
 9 October 1901 : Grand Cross of the Order of the Star of Ethiopia 
 13 June 1902 : Collar of the Order of the Chrysanthemum of Japan 
 June 1902 : Order of the <unk> @-@ i @-@ Ali @-@ Osman of the Ottoman Empire 
 Knight of the Sovereign Military Order of Malta 
 Knight of St John of Germany 
 Knight of the Order of the Elephant of Denmark 
 Knight of the Order of St Hubert of Bavaria 
 Knight of the Order of the Southern Cross of Brazil 
 Order of the White Elephant of Siam 
 Order of the Annunciation of Italy 
 Honorary foreign military appointments 
 1870 : Honorary Colonel of the Guard Hussar Regiment ( Denmark ) 
 1883 : Field Marshal ( Generalfeldmarschall ) of the German Army 
 5 February 1901 : Honorary Colonel of the 27th ( King Edward 's ) Regiment of Dragoons of Kiev 
 26 June 1902 : Admiral of the Fleet ( Großadmiral ) à la suite of the Imperial German Navy 
 Honorary Captain General of the Spanish Army 
 Honorary Admiral of the Spanish Navy 
 Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Blücher Hussar Regiment 
 Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief 1st Guards Dragoons " Queen of Great Britain and Ireland " 
 Honorary Colonel of the Infantry Regiment " Zamora " No. 8 ( Spain ) 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 As Prince of Wales , Edward 's coat of arms was the royal arms differenced by a label of three points argent , and an inescutcheon of the shield of Saxony , representing his father . When he acceded as King , he gained the royal arms undifferenced . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Sea surface temperature = 
 Sea surface temperature ( SST ) is the water temperature close to the ocean 's surface . The exact meaning of surface varies according to the measurement method used , but it is between 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) and 20 metres ( 70 ft ) below the sea surface . Air masses in the Earth 's atmosphere are highly modified by sea surface temperatures within a short distance of the shore . Localized areas of heavy snow can form in bands downwind of warm water bodies within an otherwise cold air mass . Warm sea surface temperatures are known to be a cause of tropical cyclogenesis over the Earth 's oceans . Tropical cyclones can also cause a cool wake , due to turbulent mixing of the upper 30 metres ( 100 ft ) of the ocean . SST changes diurnally , like the air above it , but to a lesser degree . There is less SST variation on breezy days than on calm days . In addition , ocean currents such as the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation ( AMO ) , can effect SST 's on multi @-@ decadal time scales , a major impact results from the global thermohaline circulation , which affects average SST significantly throughout most of the world 's oceans . 
 Coastal SSTs can cause offshore winds to generate upwelling , which can significantly cool or warm nearby landmasses , but shallower waters over a continental shelf are often warmer . Onshore winds can cause a considerable warm @-@ up even in areas where upwelling is fairly constant , such as the northwest coast of South America . Its values are important within numerical weather prediction as the SST influences the atmosphere above , such as in the formation of sea breezes and sea fog . It is also used to calibrate measurements from weather satellites . 
 = = Measurement = = 
 There are a variety of techniques for measuring this parameter that can potentially yield different results because different things are actually being measured . Away from the immediate sea surface , general temperature measurements are accompanied by a reference to the specific depth of measurement . This is because of significant differences encountered between measurements made at different depths , especially during the daytime when low wind speed and high sunshine conditions may lead to the formation of a warm layer at the ocean 's surface and strong vertical temperature gradients ( a diurnal thermocline ) . Sea surface temperature measurements are confined to the top portion of the ocean , known as the near @-@ surface layer . 
 = = = Thermometers = = = 
 SST was one of the first oceanographic variables to be measured . Benjamin Franklin suspended a mercury thermometer from a ship while travelling between the United States and Europe in his survey of the Gulf stream in the late eighteenth century . SST was later measured by dipping a thermometer into a bucket of water that was manually drawn from the sea surface . The first automated technique for determining SST was accomplished by measuring the temperature of water in the intake port of large ships , which was underway by 1963 . These observations have a warm bias of around 0 @.@ 6 ° C ( 1 ° F ) due to the heat of the engine room . This bias has led to changes in the perception of global warming since 2000 . Fixed weather buoys measure the water temperature at a depth of 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) . Measurements of SST have had inconsistencies over the last 130 years due to the way they were taken . In the nineteenth century , measurements were taken in a bucket off of a ship . However , there was a slight variation in temperature because of the differences in buckets . Samples were collected in either a wood or an uninsulated canvas bucket , but the canvas bucket cooled quicker than the wood bucket . The sudden change in temperature between 1940 and 1941 was the result of an undocumented change in procedure . The samples were taken near the engine intake because it was too dangerous to use lights to take measurements over the side of the ship at night . Many different drifting buoys exist around the world that vary in design , and the location of reliable temperature sensors varies . These measurements are beamed to satellites for automated and immediate data distribution . A large network of coastal buoys in U.S. waters is maintained by the National Data Buoy Center ( <unk> ) . Between 1985 and 1994 , an extensive array of moored and drifting buoys was deployed across the equatorial Pacific Ocean designed to help monitor and predict the El Niño phenomenon . 
 = = = Weather satellites = = = 
 Weather satellites have been available to determine sea surface temperature information since 1967 , with the first global composites created during 1970 . Since 1982 , satellites have been increasingly utilized to measure SST and have allowed its spatial and temporal variation to be viewed more fully . Satellite measurements of SST are in reasonable agreement with in situ temperature measurements . The satellite measurement is made by sensing the ocean radiation in two or more wavelengths within the infrared part of the electromagnetic spectrum or other parts of the spectrum which can then be empirically related to SST . These wavelengths are chosen because they are : 
 within the peak of the blackbody radiation expected from the Earth , and 
 able to transmit adequately well through the atmosphere 
 The satellite @-@ measured SST provides both a synoptic view of the ocean and a high frequency of repeat views , allowing the examination of basin @-@ wide upper ocean dynamics not possible with ships or buoys . NASA 's ( National Aeronautic and Space Administration ) Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer ( MODIS ) SST satellites have been providing global SST data since 2000 , available with a one @-@ day lag . NOAA 's GOES ( Geostationary Orbiting Earth Satellites ) satellites are geo @-@ stationary above the Western Hemisphere which enables to them to deliver SST data on an hourly basis with only a few hours of lag time . 
 There are several difficulties with satellite @-@ based absolute SST measurements . First , in infrared remote sensing methodology the radiation emanates from the top " skin " of the ocean , approximately the top 0 @.@ 01 mm or less , which may not represent the bulk temperature of the upper meter of ocean due primarily to effects of solar surface heating during the daytime , reflected radiation , as well as sensible heat loss and surface evaporation . All these factors make it somewhat difficult to compare satellite data to measurements from buoys or shipboard methods , complicating ground truth efforts . Secondly , the satellite cannot look through clouds , creating a cool bias in satellite @-@ derived SSTs within cloudy areas . However , passive microwave techniques can accurately measure SST and " see " through clouds . Within atmospheric sounder channels on weather satellites , which peak just above the ocean 's surface , knowledge of the sea surface temperature is important to their calibration . 
 = = Local variation = = 
 The SST has a diurnal range , just like the Earth 's atmosphere above , though to a lesser degree due to its greater specific heat . On calm days , the temperature can vary by 6 ° C ( 10 ° F ) . The temperature of the ocean at depth lags the Earth 's atmosphere temperature by 15 days per 10 metres ( 33 ft ) , which means for locations like the Aral Sea , temperatures near its bottom reach a maximum in December and a minimum in May and June . Near the coastline , offshore winds move the warm waters near the surface offshore , and replace them with cooler water from below in the process known as Ekman transport . This pattern increases nutrients for marine life in the region . Offshore river deltas , freshwater flows over the top of the denser seawater , which allows it to heat faster due to limited vertical mixing . Remotely sensed SST can be used to detect the surface temperature signature due to tropical cyclones . In general , an SST cooling is observed after the passing of a hurricane primarily as the result of mixed layer deepening and surface heat losses . In the wake of several day long Saharan dust outbreaks across the adjacent northern Atlantic ocean , sea surface temperatures are reduced 0 @.@ 2 C to 0 @.@ 4 C ( 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 7 F ) . Other sources of short @-@ term SST fluctuation include extratropical cyclones , rapid influxes of glacial fresh water and concentrated phytoplankton blooms due to seasonal cycles or agricultural run @-@ off . 
 = = = Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation = = = 
 The Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation ( AMO ) is important for how external forcings are linked with North Atlantic SSTs . 
 = = Regional variation = = 
 El Niño is defined by prolonged differences in Pacific Ocean surface temperatures when compared with the average value . The accepted definition is a warming or cooling of at least 0 @.@ 5 ° C ( 0 @.@ 9 ° F ) averaged over the east @-@ central tropical Pacific Ocean . Typically , this anomaly happens at irregular intervals of 2 – 7 years and lasts nine months to two years . The average period length is 5 years . When this warming or cooling occurs for only seven to nine months , it is classified as El Niño / La Niña " conditions " ; when it occurs for more than that period , it is classified as El Niño / La Niña " episodes " . 
 The sign of an El Niño in the sea surface temperature pattern is when warm water spreads from the west Pacific and the Indian Ocean to the east Pacific . It takes the rain with it , causing extensive drought in the western Pacific and rainfall in the normally dry eastern Pacific . El Niño 's warm rush of nutrient @-@ poor tropical water , heated by its eastward passage in the Equatorial Current , replaces the cold , nutrient @-@ rich surface water of the Humboldt Current . When El Niño conditions last for many months , extensive ocean warming and the reduction in Easterly Trade winds limits upwelling of cold nutrient @-@ rich deep water and its economic impact to local fishing for an international market can be serious . 
 = = Importance to the Earth 's atmosphere = = 
 Sea surface temperature affects the behavior of the Earth 's atmosphere above , so their initialization into atmospheric models is important . While sea surface temperature is important for tropical cyclogenesis , it is also important in determining the formation of sea fog and sea breezes . Heat from underlying warmer waters can significantly modify an air mass over distances as short as 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) to 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) . For example , southwest of Northern Hemisphere extratropical cyclones , curved cyclonic flow bringing cold air across relatively warm water bodies can lead to narrow lake @-@ effect snow ( or sea effect ) bands . Those bands bring strong localized precipitation , often in the form of snow , since large water bodies such as lakes efficiently store heat that results in significant temperature differences — larger than 13 ° C ( 23 ° F ) — between the water surface and the air above . Because of this temperature difference , warmth and moisture are transported upward , condensing into vertically oriented clouds which produce snow showers . The temperature decrease with height and cloud depth are directly affected by both the water temperature and the large @-@ scale environment . The stronger the temperature decrease with height , the taller the clouds get , and the greater the precipitation rate becomes . 
 = = = Tropical cyclones = = = 
 Ocean temperature of at least 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) spanning through at minimum a 50 @-@ metre depth is one of the precursors needed to maintain a tropical cyclone ( a type of mesocyclone ) . These warm waters are needed to maintain the warm core that fuels tropical systems . This value is well above 16 @.@ 1 ° C ( 60 @.@ 9 ° F ) , the long term global average surface temperature of the oceans . However , this requirement can be considered only a general baseline because it assumes that the ambient atmospheric environment surrounding an area of disturbed weather presents average conditions . Tropical cyclones have intensified when SSTs were slightly below this standard temperature . 
 Tropical cyclones are known to form even when normal conditions are not met . For example , cooler air temperatures at a higher altitude ( e.g. , at the 500 hPa level , or 5 @.@ 9 km ) can lead to tropical cyclogenesis at lower water temperatures , as a certain lapse rate is required to force the atmosphere to be unstable enough for convection . In a moist atmosphere , this lapse rate is 6 @.@ 5 ° C / km , while in an atmosphere with less than 100 % relative humidity , the required lapse rate is 9 @.@ 8 ° C / km . 
 At the 500 hPa level , the air temperature averages -7 ° C ( 18 ° F ) within the tropics , but air in the tropics is normally dry at this height , giving the air room to wet @-@ bulb , or cool as it moistens , to a more favorable temperature that can then support convection . A wetbulb temperature at 500 hPa in a tropical atmosphere of − 13 @.@ 2 ° C ( 8 @.@ 2 ° F ) is required to initiate convection if the water temperature is 26 @.@ 5 ° C ( 79 @.@ 7 ° F ) , and this temperature requirement increases or decreases proportionally by 1 ° C in the sea surface temperature for each 1 ° C change at 500 hpa . Inside a cold cyclone , 500 hPa temperatures can fall as low as − 30 ° C ( − 22 ° F ) , which can initiate convection even in the driest atmospheres . This also explains why moisture in the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere , roughly at the 500 hPa level , is normally a requirement for development . However , when dry air is found at the same height , temperatures at 500 hPa need to be even colder as dry atmospheres require a greater lapse rate for instability than moist atmospheres . At heights near the tropopause , the 30 @-@ year average temperature ( as measured in the period encompassing 1961 through 1990 ) was <unk> ° C ( <unk> ° F ) . A recent example of a tropical cyclone that maintained itself over cooler waters was Epsilon of the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . 
 = Comcast Center ( Philadelphia ) = 
 Comcast Center is a skyscraper in Center City , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , United States . The 58 @-@ story , 297 @-@ meter ( 974 ft ) tower is the tallest building in Philadelphia and the state of Pennsylvania as well as the nineteenth tallest building in the United States . Originally called One Pennsylvania Plaza when the building was first announced in 2001 , the Comcast Center went through two redesigns before construction began in 2005 . Comcast Center was designed by architect Robert A. M. Stern for Liberty Property Trust . 
 At the beginning of 2005 , the final redesign and its new name the Comcast Center was unveiled . The building is named after its lead tenant , cable company Comcast , which makes the skyscraper its corporate headquarters . Leasing 1 @,@ 094 @,@ 212 square feet ( 101 @,@ 656 m2 ) , Comcast takes up 89 percent of the building . The building features retail and restaurant space and a connection to the nearby Suburban Station . In Comcast Center 's lobby is the Comcast Experience , which is a 2 @,@ 000 square feet ( 190 m2 ) high @-@ definition LED screen that has become a tourist attraction . Designed to be environmentally friendly , the skyscraper is the tallest Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) certified building in Philadelphia . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning ( 1999 – 2004 ) = = = 
 In 1999 , class A office vacancy in the city was at 6 @.@ 6 % , leading developer Willard Rouse to envision a new tower . Eventually the developer settled on the location where he constructed this building , a 2 @-@ acre ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) , $ 288 per square @-@ foot parcel owned by Equitable Life Assurance Co . In 2000 , architect Robert A. M. Stern began working on a design for a skyscraper being planned by Liberty Property Trust in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . In 2001 , Liberty Property Trust announced its plan to build the 52 @-@ story One Pennsylvania Plaza in Center City . Anticipated US $ 400 million , One Pennsylvania Plaza was to be 750 ft ( 230 m ) and made of <unk> stone similar to the Philadelphia Museum of Art . The site for the future skyscraper was at 17th Street and John F. Kennedy Boulevard , a site occupied by a building that housed the Defender Association of Philadelphia and a parking lot . Demolition of the building began in 2002 and ended in 2003 . 
 Cable company Comcast had been looking for possible new headquarters space in anticipation of the end of its lease in Centre Square in 2006 . Comcast was looking for more than 400 @,@ 000 square feet ( 37 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space and developers were actively courting the company for their developments . Comcast was the only employer in the city with major expansion plans at the time . Comcast was considering staying in Centre Square , while also contemplating moving their headquarters to the new Cira Centre building or One Pennsylvania Plaza . Comcast was spread out over 10 floors in two buildings at Centre Square and wanted space on contiguous floors . In January 2004 , Liberty Property Trust unveiled a redesign for the building . The redesign turned One Pennsylvania Plaza into a 60 @-@ story , 962 feet ( 293 m ) tower , making it the tallest building in the city . In the redesign , the <unk> stone was changed to a lighter granite and a short pyramidal roof was added . The redesign was a result of discussions that had begun in 2003 with Comcast about moving into the tower . 
 On January 3 , 2004 , Liberty Property Trust signed a 15 ½ year lease with Comcast and a construction contract with L.F. Driscoll Co . Liberty Property Trust also unveiled another redesign of the building and its new name , the Comcast Center . The now 975 feet ( 297 m ) , 58 @-@ story Comcast Center would no longer have a pyramid top and would have a complete glass facade . The architectural model was created by Richard <unk> . 
 = = = = Controversy = = = = 
 Liberty Property Trust hoped to get the One Pennsylvania Plaza site designated a Keystone Opportunity Improvement Zone ( KOZ ) . KOZ designation was intended to encourage development in poor , blighted areas by exempting the tenants of the building from all state and local taxes . Designating One Pennsylvania Plaza a KOZ was supported by then Pennsylvania Governor Ed Rendell , who said it was important to keep corporations within the city . At the time , many of Philadelphia 's big employers ' leases , including Comcast 's , were due to expire , and the employers were considering the possibility of moving out of the city and state . Rendell also said allowing Comcast to enlarge its headquarters by moving into One Pennsylvania Plaza could attract other corporate headquarters to the city . However , other Center City building owners , including Comcast 's landlord at Centre Square , <unk> Properties Trust , were opposed to the plan . They said giving the tower the KOZ designation would give it an unfair advantage because Liberty Property Trust could charge above @-@ market rents since the tax breaks would offset the cost for tenants . The group believed tenants attracted to One Pennsylvania Plaza because of the tax breaks would cause more vacancies in other Center City skyscrapers , rather than attracting more business to blighted areas as intended under the law . In early 2004 , Center City had a vacancy rate of 12 @.@ 8 % . 
 Both sides of the issue hired law firms , lobbyists , and business associates to promote their positions to city and state officials . A report by the Center City District said if both One Pennsylvania Plaza and the Cira Centre , another skyscraper in the KOZ controversy , were filled by corporations moving from other Center City office towers , the city could lose US $ 153 million by 2018 . A report released by the group of building owners opposed to KOZ says the two buildings could cost the city almost US $ 91 million a year . In contrast , a report issued by a consulting company hired by Liberty Property Trust said that a KOZ designation for the skyscraper could generate US $ 27 million for the city . Critics of the KOZ designation also claimed that close relationships between Liberty Property Trust and Comcast and the Rendell administration were inappropriately influencing the governor 's position on the issue . When Rendell was mayor of Philadelphia , David L. Cohen , a Comcast executive vice president , was Rendell 's chief of staff , and William P. <unk> , Liberty Property Trust 's chief executive , was director of Philadelphia 's development agency . Rendell dismissed the claims , saying " Every building owner in town was a contributor to me . " 
 Chances the bill would be passed ended in November 2004 when House Republicans in the Pennsylvania General Assembly decided not to bring the bill to a vote . Later that year , Governor Rendell released US $ 30 million from the Redevelopment Assistance Budget to Liberty Property Trust . Through the state 's Department of Economic and Community Development , Comcast received US $ 12 @.@ 75 million that included a US $ 4 @-@ million opportunity grant , US $ 6 @.@ 75 million in job @-@ creation tax credits , and US $ 2 million in job training assistance . Despite the failure to gain KOZ status , the project received US $ 42 @.@ 75 million in financial incentives from the state . 
 = = = Construction ( 2005 – 2008 ) = = = 
 The official groundbreaking ceremony was on March 31 , 2005 . The ceremony , which was held at night , featured a light show coordinated with the song " Elevation " . The song was composed specifically for the event by Curtis Institute of Music graduate Steven Hackman and recorded by the Curtis Institute of Music Orchestra . The groundbreaking also featured Kodo , the Germantown High School Drum Line , and a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall ice sculpture of the Comcast Center . 
 As the building was under construction , in March 2006 , Liberty Property Trust ran into trouble with Philadelphia 's Plumbers Union Local 690 , which had issues with the building 's waterless urinals . The waterless urinals were part of the plan to make the Comcast Center an environmentally friendly building because they would save an extra 1 @.@ 6 million US gallons ( 6 @,@ 100 m3 ) of water a year . The plumbers union opposed the waterless urinals , claiming they were unsanitary and would provide less work for the plumbers . Philadelphia 's Plumbing Advisory Board approved the waterless urinals on April 5 after a compromise , which stated that the building 's owners and city officials would monitor the performance of the waterless urinals , was reached . Piping that would allow water to flow to the urinals in case they needed to be converted was installed in the Comcast Center , which Liberty Property Trust says was always part of the building 's plan . 
 A week later , on April 13 , Liberty Property Trust sold an 80 percent interest in the Comcast Center to German real estate firm <unk> & <unk> AG , a subsidiary of Commerzbank AG . The deal completed Liberty Property Trust 's planned recapitalization of the anticipated cost of the building , and the value of the joint venture , called Liberty / <unk> 1701 JFK Boulevard L.P. , included mortgage debt and equity . 
 On June 18 , 2007 , the Comcast Center was topped out . The ceremony , which was held in the building 's future plaza , featured the raising of a steel beam to the skyscraper 's highest point . The beam was signed by workers and guests and as it was raised , on account of tradition , an American flag and a tree sat on the beam . Also sitting on the beam was a statue of Philadelphia founder William Penn . The statue was there to counteract the 1980s " curse " of Billy Penn , which prevented Philadelphia 's sports teams from winning a championship following the construction of buildings taller than the statue of William Penn on top of the 548 feet ( 167 m ) Philadelphia City Hall . The 25 inches ( 640 mm ) statue of William Penn remained on the beam until it was stolen . The statue was replaced and the " curse " ended when the Philadelphia Phillies won the 2008 World Series . 
 Even though the building had not officially opened , Comcast office workers began moving in early December 2007 , ahead of the scheduled completion in March 2008 . The Comcast Center officially opened on June 6 , 2008 . A study sponsored by Comcast and Liberty Property Trust said the construction of the Comcast Center created 17 @,@ 200 jobs and generated US $ 2 billion of economic activity for Pennsylvania . Despite opposition by other building owners to construction of the Comcast Center , by the time most space in the Comcast Center had been leased vacancy rates in Center City offices were falling and rents were rising . Even <unk> Properties Trust had leased 70 percent of the space Comcast vacated by 2007 . The predictions by opponents did not occur mainly because Comcast ended up leasing 89 percent of the building and the offices for the Comcast Center 's second largest tenant , Citizens Bank of Pennsylvania , were new to the city . 
 = = Building = = 
 The Comcast Center is a 58 @-@ story , 975 feet ( 297 m ) glass skyscraper located at 17th Street and John F. Kennedy Boulevard in Center City , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . The tower is the tallest building in Philadelphia and Pennsylvania and is the nineteenth tallest building in the United States ( tenth tallest by roof height ) , and the tallest building built in America outside of New York City or Chicago since 1993 . The 1 @,@ 250 @,@ 000 square feet ( 116 @,@ 000 m2 ) Comcast Center has 58 floors , of which 56 are occupiable . The structure of the Comcast Center comprises a central concrete core with steel framed floors . The building 's exterior features a glass curtain wall made of lightly tinted , non @-@ reflective low @-@ emissivity glass . The tower tapers inward towards the top and features two cutouts near the top of the building on the north and south sides . To prevent the tower from swaying too much in the wind , the Comcast Center contains a 300 @,@ 000 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 1 @,@ 100 m3 ) double @-@ chambered concrete tuned liquid column damper , the largest such damper in North America . Receiving a gold Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) rating in April 2009 , the Comcast Center is the tallest LEED building in Philadelphia . The building was designed to use 40 percent less water than a typical office building , and the plaza was designed to reduce heat @-@ island effect from the pavement by 70 percent . Reducing air conditioning and lighting costs , the low @-@ emissivity glass curtain wall blocks 60 percent of heat while allowing 70 percent of the Sun 's light inside . 
 The skyscraper has 1 @,@ 238 @,@ 000 square feet ( 115 @,@ 000 m2 ) of rentable space , including 36 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 300 m2 ) of restaurant and retail space called The Market at the Comcast Center . 16 @,@ 500 square feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m2 ) of retail space is on the underground concourse while the rest is located on the street level . The building features high ceilings with some floors having a ceiling height of 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . The lower floors on the south side of the building feature four three @-@ story stacked <unk> . The building also features a 500 @-@ seat concourse level dining court and an 87 @-@ space private underground parking garage . ThyssenKrupp provided the building 's 30 gearless elevators , seven hydraulic elevators , and two escalators . 
 The Comcast Center faces a half @-@ acre public plaza . The plaza , designed by Lucinda Sanders of <unk> , sits over underground railroad tracks . It features a seasonal outdoor restaurant , Plaza Cafe at Table 31 , that is sheltered by a trellis . Between the cafe and the building entrance is a choreographed fountain designed by Wet . The tower 's entrance is a 110 feet ( 34 m ) tall winter garden . The winter garden entrance directly connects to the underground concourse of Suburban Station . The building also has a lobby entrance that leads to the Arch Street Presbyterian Church adjacent to the tower . 
 The exterior lighting scheme of the building was designed by Quentin Thomas Associates , and consists primarily of white LEDs color @-@ temperature matched to the fluorescent lights used by the interior . Along each floor , the corner spandrel panels feature upward and downward @-@ facing <unk> LEDs to create the appearance that the length of the building has been bottom @-@ lit by spotlights . The only major consistently active color element can be found at the top of the tuned mass damper ; a single row of color @-@ changing LEDs that is programmed to commemorate special events . For example , the top would be colored pink for Breast Cancer Awareness Month . 
 Philadelphia Inquirer architecture critic Inga Saffron described the Comcast Center as " a respectable work of architecture " that was " dignified in its stance on the grid , generous in its relationship to the city , responsible in its treatment of the environment . " She felt the tower 's shape reminded her of a giant flash drive . Saffron said the building excelled at the street level , praising the plaza , concourse , and its connection to Suburban Station . In 2009 the Comcast Center was awarded the Urban Land Institute Award for Excellence in the Americas category for the transformation of what was once mostly a vacant lot into a transit gateway . 
 The design had many post @-@ 9 / 11 features to improve building security . 
 The building was featured prominently in scenes of the film Devil ( 2010 ) . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 The Comcast Center 's winter garden entrance contains two works of installation art . The Comcast Experience is a 25 @.@ 4 feet ( 7 @.@ 7 m ) tall , 83 @.@ 3 feet ( 25 @.@ 4 m ) wide , 2 @,@ 000 square feet ( 190 m2 ) high @-@ definition LED screen situated on a wall in the winter garden . The screen is composed of 7 @.@ 8 million , <unk> pitch pixels housed in 6 @,@ 771 LED modules of the type used in the Barco NX @-@ 4 panel . The installation , designed and produced by Niles Creative Group , premiered on June 6 , 2008 , and runs eighteen hours each day . The content of the video includes panoramic views of Philadelphia historic sites , images of space , dancers , acrobats and actors moving around a background designed to mimic wood paneling of the walls of the lobby . Another part of the installation displays images of cranes and machinery forming the design of a clock that tells the correct time of day . 
 The Comcast Experience quickly became a popular tourist attraction , prompting city officials to add the Comcast Center to its tourism website . Between Thanksgiving and New Year 's Day 2008 , a holiday video was included as part of the installation . 
 The second piece of art is Jonathan <unk> 's Humanity in Motion . Located in the glass atrium of the winter garden , Humanity in Motion shows ten life @-@ size human figures walking across ten horizontal poles positioned at different levels of the atrium . At ground level , looking up at the stainless steel figures , are two more figures shaped to look like a father and son . 
 = = Tenants = = 
 Comcast is the skyscraper 's largest tenant , leasing 1 @,@ 094 @,@ 212 square feet ( 101 @,@ 656 m2 ) , or 89 percent of the building . Their children 's cable network Sprout records or transmits their live studio @-@ based programming from studios based on the 30th floor . The second largest tenant is Citizens Bank of Pennsylvania , which leases 56 @,@ 000 square feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m2 ) of office and retail space . Other tenants include <unk> Media Inc . , which leases 23 @,@ 528 square feet ( 2 @,@ 200 m2 ) , Center City Film and Video , which leases 11 @,@ 498 square feet ( 1 @,@ 100 m2 ) and the Judge Group , which leases 6 @,@ 427 square feet ( 600 m2 ) . 
 Comcast 's office space was designed by <unk> Design + <unk> Architects and Gensler . Comcast 's space is topped by a conference room floor with the executive offices on the four floors below it . Below that are more offices and then , on the 43rd and 44th floors , is Ralph 's Cafe , a two @-@ story cafeteria space for employees . Below the cafe is the training center called Comcast University . The rest of the space is used for content and programing teams and customer service . The interior design of the offices are designed with a variety of shape and color ranging from the open white space of the upper offices to the colorful walls of the training center . Other designs include a glass and stainless steel staircase that wraps around a four @-@ story column of flat @-@ screen monitors and connects the executive floors . 
 The retail portion of the tower includes numerous shops and eateries . The shops and eateries include national and regional chains , and initially featured a restaurant called Table 31 . Table 31 , which had a cafe on the plaza and a restaurant spread over three floors in the tower , was owned by Philadelphia restaurateurs and chefs Georges Perrier and Chris <unk> . The restaurant was named after a popular table at the former Perrier and <unk> establishment Brasserie Perrier . Table 31 closed in 2013 , amid a dispute among its owners , and was replaced by another upscale steakhouse . 
 = Ponnar Shankar ( film ) = 
 Ponnar Shankar is a 2011 Indian epic historical drama film directed by Thiagarajan . It is a fictionalised account of the Ponnar Shankar epic , adapted from M. Karunanidhi 's novel of the same name . It features Thiagarajan 's son Prashanth in lead dual roles as warrior princes , portraying the title characters , with actresses Pooja Chopra and Divya Parameshwaran making their film debut as princesses . The film also features an extensive cast of supporting actors with Prabhu , Napoleon , Prakash Raj , Jayaram , Sneha and Kushboo amongst others . The background score and soundtrack of the film , composed by Ilaiyaraaja , was released on 27 March 2011 . 
 Filming , although significantly delayed , began in August 2009 at <unk> Kottam in Chennai , where an ancient township film set with temples , forts , a lake and palaces had been built . The film 's producers encountered difficulties in making prompt payments to its crew that consisted of more than 1000 members during the filming in the forests of Pollachi . The filming then shifted to Guindy National Park in Chennai , with the battle sequences shot in Kerala and Karnataka . 
 Prior to its release , the film drew criticism from the Kongu Nadu Munnetra Kazhagam ( <unk> ) Party with an unsuccessful petition filed at Madras High Court seeking a ban on the film , claiming that it portrayed the traditional deities of the gounder community in a bad light . The film was released on 9 April 2011 to a mixed response from critics . Although praised for its cinematography and art direction , it was criticised for having a weak plot and character deficiencies . The film was later dubbed and released as Prashanth Veer in Hindi and then as <unk> <unk> in Telugu in 2012 and 2013 respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A love affair between Thamarai ( Kushboo ) and her maternal uncle Nellaiyankondan ( Jayaram ) is badly received by their family , especially since he is not financially well off . Thamarai 's father , King Periyamalaikozhundhu Gounder ( Vijayakumar ) , arranges for her marriage to Mandhiyappan ( Prakash Raj ) , ruler of a neighbouring country . Thamarai rejects the arranged marriage , angering Mandhiyappan . She later marries her lover , who had come to see her marry Mandhiyappan , and challenges her brother Chinna Malaikozhundhu ( Ponvannan ) to marry his daughters off to her sons ( the marriage of cousins is a gounder custom ) . Periyamalaikozhundhu disowns his daughter for choosing Nellaiyankondan and banishes them from his kingdom . 
 Many years later , <unk> ( Nasser ) , a chieftain of a village in Periyamalaikozhundhu 's kingdom , encounters twin brothers Ponnar and Shankar ( both played by Prashanth ) , who are being tutored in martial arts by <unk> Annan ( Rajkiran ) . Ponnar and Shankar are valorous and compassionate to the sufferings of the poor . One day , the twins save two sisters , <unk> ( Pooja Chopra ) and <unk> ( <unk> Parameshwaran ) , from death . The girls are later revealed to be daughters of Chinna Malaikozhundhu . Impressed with Ponnar and Shankar 's valour , Chinna Malaikozhundhu agrees to marry off his daughters to them . 
 A flashback reveals that Ponnar and Sankar are actually Thamarai 's sons and that <unk> , who was then a servant of Nellaiyankondan , had saved the twins as small children from Mandhiyappan . Mandhiyappan had attempted to avenge himself on Thamarai for rejecting his hand in marriage . He learns that the twins are still alive and hatches a conspiracy to kill them . He tricks Kali Mannan ( Napoleon ) and Thamarai 's father into helping him . This leads to an intense battle which ends with good prevailing over evil . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Historical background = = 
 Ponnar and Shankar , believed to be Chera chieftains , were rulers of the Ponni <unk> ( now in the Tiruchirappalli area ) , in medieval Tamil Nadu . They were said to be in good terms with the Madurai ruler , Vijaya Renga <unk> ( 1706 - 1732 A. D ) , who was their contemporary . The legendary folk tale of these brothers , also known as <unk> Swamigal , has been passed down through many generations by means of village songs ( known as <unk> <unk> ) and traditional street theatre , known as <unk> . Absence of reliable written historical records makes it difficult to ascertain the credibility of any of the above claims , along with the widely held legend which was popularised by a late 1980s M Karunanidhi 's novel on the subject . According to the legend , the brothers were born to <unk> <unk> <unk> and <unk> of Manamadurai , belonging to the Kongu Vellalar community . They had attained the kingdom with help from the then king of Urayur , which was the capital of early Cholas . <unk> Kali , a neighbouring country king belonging to the rival <unk> Gounder caste , hatched a conspiracy against the brothers which led to a war and the subsequent death of Shankar who was tricked into proving his innocence by falling over a sword . Grieving the loss of his brother , Ponnar entered the battlefield , killing Kali Mannan , before proceeding to kill himself . The brothers were then brought to life by their sister Arukaani with help from the Goddess <unk> . The brothers , however , were told by the Gods that their earthly duties were over which led to their leaving the mortal world . Arukaani followed suit by throwing herself along with her royal ornaments into a well in <unk> , a village in Trichy . 
 A temple was later erected in the spot ( which falls in the present day <unk> ) where Shankar died , with <unk> as the presiding deity . There is also a belief that the well in <unk> <unk> , near <unk> , in which Arukaani drowned herself , still has her gold ornaments . This story has been the subject of poems , songs and a Tamil historical novel by M. Karunanidhi . Karunanidhi 's novel drew inspiration from a 1971 work written by Kavignar Sakthikanal , who had researched and documented the references to Ponnar and Shankar in the ancient palm leaves he came across at <unk> . Today the brothers are worshipped as <unk> deities by people belonging to Kongu Vellalar community as a tribute to the brave way the brothers defended their kingdom 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In early 2007 , Thiagarajan approached M. Karunanidhi with the intention of making a film on his adaptation of the Ponnar Shankar epic that he had written in the late 1970s . The latter accepted Thiagarajan 's offer and approved of his decision to cast his son , Prashanth , in the dual lead roles . In July 2008 , the project was officially announced in a press meet . The film subsequently began pre @-@ production , with Thyagarajan opting to produce the film under his Sri Lakshmi Shanthi Films banner . The preliminary stages of the production took more than a year , with story @-@ boarding , costume designs and colossal set designs all being finalized . Prashanth revealed that extensive research about the time period alone took a year and a half . 
 At the launch of the film in July 2009 , Thiagarajan announced that 36 prominent actors would play lead roles with a hundred others in supporting roles . The invitation cards for the launch had 3D holographic designs which won the <unk> awards of the year 2009 . Aishwarya Rai and Deepika Padukone were initially considered for the female lead roles , before Miss India 2009 Pooja Chopra and Divya Parameshwaran accepted the roles . The producers initially listed Sathyaraj in its cast , later replaced by Prabhu . Approximately 5000 junior artists and 1000 artists from the annual Chennai Sangamam had reportedly taken part in the film . For music , Thiagarajan approached A. R. Rahman in 2008 who declined the offer , and Ilaiyaraaja eventually replaced him . <unk> was selected as the art director for the film and Shaji Kumar as cinematographer while Prashanth took care of visual effects . 
 The film ran into production trouble in mid 2010 and was close to being shelved , with sources reporting that Thiagarajan sold the film to Santiago Martin to revive the project . The reports proved to be untrue , and Thiagarajan maintained that he was still the producer of the film . The film had also begun to surpass its budget , due to the casual nature of shooting and difficulties in creating historical sets . The first shots from the film and the video for three songs were unveiled publicly in March 2011 , with the publicity campaign initiated after this . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming commenced on July 12 , 2009 at <unk> Kottam in Chennai , where an entire ancient township film set with temples , forts , a lake and palaces was created . Scenes containing actor and politician Napoleon as the historical figure <unk> Kaali were shot there first . Thereafter , scenes featuring Jayaram and Kushboo were filmed , portraying characters which were considerably younger than they are in real life . Prashanth revealed that portraying a dual role meant that he was forced to change his costumes up to forty times a day in order portray the twin brothers ' differences correctly . In March 2010 , Sneha was roped in to play Arukaani , sister of the warrior twins , and her scenes were filmed . 
 The climax scenes of the film were shot in the deserts of Rajasthan in February 2011 . The final phase of filming was going on in the forests of Pollachi with elephants and horses resembling the region in the 1500s , when the production team couldn 't make prompt payments onsite to the onsite crew that consisted of more than 1000 members . The displeasure shown by the crew threatened to disrupt the filming process . Karunanidhi , the writer , visited the sets of the film in a <unk> studio in February 2011 to peruse over the scenes that had been shot at the time , and the filming then moved on to Guindy National Park in Chennai . The four battle sequences in the movie were shot in Perambalur , near Trichy and Warangal in Andhra Pradesh . The scene in Trichy took 28 days to complete , with 30 @,@ 000 junior artists used as soldiers along with 3000 horses and another battle scene was shot underwater . A few scenes in the film were reshot after the criticism it received at its premiere that Prashanth 's characters showed no emotions at the death of their parents . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for the film was composed by Ilaiyaraaja . The album was released on March 27 , 2011 at the Prasad Studios in Chennai with Karunanidhi presiding over the event . The soundtrack album consists of six tracks , with four of them sung by Shreya Ghoshal . The film initially had a track about the glories of Kongu Vellalar which was removed later during the editing process . One of its tracks , <unk> Kathai belongs to the Tamil folk genre . The song <unk> <unk> received a special mention in The Hindu newspaper where it was cited as " simply melodious and rings in ones ears for long " . The soundtrack received a negative review by Rediff , which stated that the " tunes were all generic " and that the operatic background score did not gel well with the film 's subject . It summed that " Ilaiyaraja had just skimmed the bare bones of his usually fulfilling musical compositions " . There was also a review in <unk> on the inappropriateness of the film 's tracks as the reviewer felt they were ill @-@ suited to the film 's historical themes . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film began its publicity campaign in February 2011 with the goal of releasing the film during the period of the 2011 Tamil Nadu legislative assembly elections to raise support of the Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam ( DMK ) Party , led by the film 's writer , M. Karunanidhi . Criticism mounted against Karunanidhi for being more involved in his artistic pursuits than in his Chief Ministerial duties as the elections approached . Prior to release , the film also drew criticism from the Kongu Nadu Munnetra Kazhagam ( <unk> ) Party claiming that the film portrayed the traditional deities of the gounder community in a bad light , showing them dancing with semi @-@ nude women . Leading figures from the party wrote to the Central Board of Film Certification ( CBFC ) to ban the film , holding the promotional material used for the movie as evidence . When they received no response from CBFC , a petition was filed at Madras High Court , seeking its ban under Article 226 of the Indian constitution . The petition was dismissed , given that Article 226 can only be used by a court on a body that falls within its jurisdiction . 
 The film was released on April 9 , 2011 , four days before the election . It received a lukewarm response at the box office , opening at 14 theatres in Chennai where it collected ₹ 1 @,@ 430 @,@ 349 ( US $ 21 @,@ 000 ) in the first three days . After a two @-@ week run it collected ₹ 3 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 ( US $ 58 @,@ 000 ) from Chennai , and was declared " average " by trade pundits . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The film received a mixed reception from critics . The film was praised for its technical merit and art direction , Shaji Kumar 's cinematography , <unk> 's re @-@ recording , crisp editing and predominantly colloquial dialogues ( unusual for Karunanidhi 's films ) , but criticised for its weak storyline and continuity problems . The Times of India praised the " terrific " art direction and Shaji Kumar 's cinematography but stated that there were far " too many gaps in the story to ensure that the movie never rises above its mediocrity and ends up being an epic disappointment " , giving it two out of five stars . <unk> and <unk> compared the grandeur of the film to that of S. Shankar , noted for making high budget films in Tamil . Eelam Press gave it a positive review , lauding on all aspects of the film , particularly the film 's war scenes , highlighting that by using contemporary Tamil , instead of its ancient counterpart in its dialogues , the audience could better relate to it . 
 Malathi Rangarajan 's review ( The Hindu ) was fair , labelling the film an " alluring canvas " , praising the opulent sets , locations , rich costumes and imposing cast , yet noted that it was " too short to negate the many loopholes " . Divya Parameshwaran was appreciated in her debut role , while Pooja Chopra was credited as being " attractive too , but [ her ] expressions needed some honing " . Though Prashanth 's stunt acts were appreciated , Rangarajan pointed out his character flaws , such as minimal expressions which were " barely a smirk " in the initial scenes , and the distinct lack of distinguishable traits between the twin characters he depicted . He also highlighted the lack of logic in <unk> Gounder 's ( Vijayakumar ) animosity towards his daughter Thamarai ( Kushboo ) and the cheerful appearance of Thamarai when she must have been sad and heartbroken in the wedding scene with <unk> . Vikatan stated that the only good aspects of the movie were its expensive sets and its avoidance of boring archaic Tamil dialogues , common in other period films in Tamil , giving it a rating of 41 points out of 100 . 
 = = = Historical inaccuracies = = = 
 Rediff declared that " there is nothing even remotely historical about the movie " . It added that though the film is said to be based on Karunanidhi 's novel , the film 's commercialised look , along with " half clad women prancing around " , made it resemble Ashutosh Gowariker 's 2008 film <unk> Akbar . It went on that " historical accuracy had been thrown to the winds " and that there were no references to actual places , kings or time periods . The Times of India noted the historical inconsistencies , such as the presence of a British constructed dam in a scene while the film is set in pre @-@ colonial period , " wire stunts of Prashanth in action sequences " , revealing costumes donned by the lead actresses and also the bamboo dance sequence in the film which is actually native to Nagaland . It summed that the film lacks attention to detail which is a necessary feature of historical films . The New Indian Express called it a " pseudo historical " . Kavignar Sakthikanal , whose 1971 work was the basis for Karunanidhi 's novel , observed that the inaccuracies originated from the novel itself due its usage of literary devices like exaggeration . He further stated that Ponnar and Shankar remained celibate throughout their lives while in the movie they were shown romancing with immodestly dressed women . They married only to avenge the ill treatment meted out to their mother and promptly sent their newly wed wives to prison denying coital relations with them , he added . Also , in the film the title characters were not shown committing suicide as in Sakthikanal and Karunanidhi 's version , but rather were depicted emerging victorious from the war alive . 
 = Ontario Highway 60 = 
 King 's Highway 60 , commonly referred to as Highway 60 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . The 255 @.@ 8 @-@ kilometre ( 158 @.@ 9 mi ) highway serves as the primary corridor through Algonquin Provincial Park , where it is dedicated as the Frank McDougall Parkway . East of Algonquin Park , the route serves east – west traffic in the highlands of central Ontario . It begins at Highway 11 in Huntsville and ends at Highway 17 near Renfrew . 
 Highway 60 was designated in 1937 between Huntsville and Lake Dore , near where it met Highway 41 . During the 1940s , the route shared a common termini with Highway 41 at Golden Lake . When Highway 41 was extended north to Pembroke in 1957 , Highway 60 was routed along it between Golden Lake and Eganville . It was extended east to Highway 17 in downtown Renfrew circa 1961 . It was extended further east when Highway 17 was rerouted around Renfrew in 1977 , establishing the current route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 60 begins at an interchange with Highway 11 in Huntsville . It crosses through central Ontario in a generally east – west orientation . The triangle @-@ shaped area bounded by Highways 11 , 17 and 60 is largely uninhabited wilderness dotted with lakes and muskeg . 
 West of Huntsville , Highway 60 meanders east then south through the northeastern corner of Muskoka District , meeting Highway 35 at Dwight . It travels northeast from there , briefly passing through Haliburton County before crossing into Nipissing District and entering Algonquin Park . An Ontario Parks visitor 's permit is not required to drive through Algonquin Park . However , one is required for the use of any trails , campgrounds , the Visitor Centre , or similar facilities within the park boundary . Moose and deer are very common through Algonquin , especially at night and in the morning , and present a major driving hazard . The 56 @-@ kilometre ( 35 mi ) journey through Algonquin Park offers some of the most famous scenery in Canada , including vistas of numerous lakes and geological formations that have been captured in the arts of Group of Seven painter Tom Thomson among others . The park is considered the most important place in Canada for biological and environmental research . 
 Highway 60 exits the park in the Township of South Algonquin travelling south into Whitney , curving east and intersecting Highway 127 . Beyond Highway 127 , it passes through the Madawaska Highlands , following the historic <unk> Line . It passes through Madawaska , encountering Secondary Highway 523 , then curves southeast into Renfrew County . The route enters Barry 's Bay , where it turns east and meets the southern leg of former Highway 62 , where a concurrency with it began prior to 1998 . After passing through Wilno , the route curves northeast around Killaloe , intersecting the northern leg of former Highway 62 and Highway 512 . 
 Continuing around Golden Lake and through the village of the same name , Highway 60 travels southeast into the Ottawa Valley towards Eganville , where it has a 3 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 4 mi ) concurrency with Highway 41 . For the remainder of the route , the highway travels near the <unk> River . It continues east then south to Douglas , where drivers must turn northeast to continue along the highway . Highway 60 slowly curves southeast before entering the town of Renfrew , where it is known as Stewart Street , Bridge Street , Raglan Street South , Veterans Memorial Boulevard and O 'Brien Road . It encounters the eastern terminus of Highway 132 before curving east to end at Highway 17 on the outskirts of the town . 
 = = History = = 
 Highway 60 was assumed on April 1 , 1937 , when the Department of Northern Development was amalgamated by the Department of Highways ( DHO ) . At that time , the highway ended in Lake Dore , north of Eganville and was 218 @.@ 2 km ( 135 @.@ 6 mi ) long . Highway 41 travelled along the portion of what is now Highway 60 between Eganville and Golden Lake . The route was shortened by 16 @.@ 9 kilometres ( 10 @.@ 5 mi ) to create a shared terminus with Highway 41 between 1942 and 1949 . 
 On April 11 , 1957 , the Eganville – Pembroke Road was assumed as an extension of Highway 41 , with the former portion of the route between Eganville and Golden Lake being renumbered as part of Highway 60 . Highway 60 was extended to Highway 17 near Rosebank , north of Renfrew , circa 1961 . With the construction of the Renfrew Bypass , which began in June 1974 , and was completed in 1977 , the section of Highway 17 between O 'Brien Road east of Renfrew and Haley Road north of Haley Station was renumbered as an extension of Highway 60 , establishing the current route of the highway . 
 In 1976 , the section through Algonquin Park was dedicated in honour of the 35 years of service by Frank Archibald MacDougall : ten years as park superintendent and 25 as Deputy Minister of Lands and Forests . It is signed as the Frank MacDougall Parkway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 60 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . 
 = Tosa @-@ class battleship = 
 The Tosa @-@ class battleships ( <unk> , Tosa @-@ gata <unk> ) were two dreadnoughts ordered as part of the " Eight @-@ Eight " fleet for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) during the early 1920s . The ships were larger versions of the preceding Nagato class , and carried an additional 41 @-@ centimeter ( 16 @.@ 1 in ) twin @-@ gun turret . The design for the class served as a basis for the Amagi @-@ class battlecruisers . 
 Both ships were launched in late 1921 , but the first ship , Tosa , was cancelled in accordance with the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty before it could be completed , and was used in experiments testing the effectiveness of its armor scheme before being scuttled in the Bungo Channel . The hull of the second ship , Kaga , was converted into an aircraft carrier of the same name . The carrier supported Japanese troops in China during the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War of the late 1930s , and took part in the attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 and the invasion of Rabaul in the Southwest Pacific in January 1942 . The following month her aircraft participated in a combined carrier airstrike on Darwin , Australia , during the Dutch East Indies campaign . She was sunk during the Battle of Midway in 1942 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The IJN believed that a modern battle fleet of eight battleships and eight armored cruisers was necessary for the defense of Japan ; the government ratified that idea in 1907 . This policy was the genesis of the Eight @-@ Eight Fleet Program , the development of a cohesive battle line of sixteen capital ships less than eight years old . Advances in naval technology represented by the British battleship HMS Dreadnought and the battlecruiser HMS Invincible forced the IJN to reevaluate on several occasions which ships it considered " modern " and , in 1911 , it restarted the program with orders for the Fusō @-@ class dreadnoughts and the Kongō @-@ class battlecruisers . By 1915 , the IJN was halfway to its goal and wanted to order four more dreadnoughts , but the Diet rejected the plan and authorized only the dreadnought Nagato and two battlecruisers in the 1916 budget . Later that year American President Woodrow Wilson announced plans for ten additional battleships and six battlecruisers , and the Diet authorized three more dreadnoughts in response the following year : a second Nagato @-@ class battleship — Mutsu — and two to a modified design , Tosa and Kaga . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The IJN began reevaluating the Nagato design in light of lessons learned from the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 , experiments evaluating armor protection , and newly acquired information on the protective schemes of British and American capital ships . These lessons highlighted the need for better protection of the main gun turrets and magazines , as well as thicker deck armor to protect against plunging fire . Existing methods of defense against mines and torpedoes had also proved to be inadequate and needed improvement . Eleven new designs were rejected between October and early 1917 before Captain Yuzuru Hiraga , superintendent of shipbuilding and the naval architect in charge of the fundamental design of the ships of the Eight @-@ Eight Fleet , presented a heavily modified version of the Nagato design , A @-@ 125 , to be built in lieu of the second ship of the class , Mutsu , on 12 June 1917 , well before she was actually laid down . 
 Hiraga 's design for the ship reflected the latest combat experience as well as incorporating advances in boiler technology . It added an extra twin main @-@ gun turret , using space and weight made available by the reduction of the number of boilers from 21 to 12 while the power remained the same . He reduced the secondary armament from 20 guns to 16 ; they were moved up a deck to improve their arcs of fire and their ability to shoot during heavy weather . To increase the ship 's protection he proposed to angle the belt armor outwards to improve its resistance to horizontal fire , and to thicken the lower deck armor and the torpedo bulkhead . Hiraga also planned to add anti @-@ torpedo bulges to improve the ship 's underwater protection . He estimated that his ship would displace as much as Nagato , although it would cost about a million yen more . These changes would have considerably delayed the ship 's completion and were rejected by the Navy Ministry . The rejected design formed the basis for a much larger 39 @,@ 000 @-@ metric @-@ ton ( 38 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ) battleship , designated as A @-@ 127 , with nearly twice as much armor weight as the <unk> . It was designed to achieve the same speed as the older ships , to allow them to maneuver together as a tactical formation . This design was accepted on 27 March 1918 and became the Tosa class . 
 The Tosa @-@ class ships had a planned displacement of 39 @,@ 900 t ( 39 @,@ 300 long tons ) , and 44 @,@ 200 t ( 43 @,@ 500 long tons ) at a full load . They would have been 231 @.@ 65 meters ( 760 @.@ 0 ft ) long at the waterline , and 234 @.@ 09 meters ( 768 @.@ 0 ft ) overall ; the ships would have had a beam of 30 @.@ 48 meters ( 100 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 39 meters ( 30 @.@ 8 ft ) . The Tosa class would have had a metacentric height of 1 @.@ 292 meters ( 4 ft 2 @.@ 9 in ) at normal load . A turbo @-@ electric propulsion system was considered for these ships after the United States announced that the system was a great success in the battleship USS New Mexico , and the Japanese estimated that a 70 @,@ 000 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 52 @,@ 000 kW ) turbo @-@ electric plant could be installed in the Tosa class , which would have given the ships a speed of 25 @.@ 25 knots ( 46 @.@ 76 km / h ; 29 @.@ 06 mph ) , a 2 @,@ 500 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 4 @,@ 600 km ; 2 @,@ 900 mi ) range at full speed , and a 7 @,@ 800 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 14 @,@ 400 km ; 9 @,@ 000 mi ) range at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , but this system was rejected . More conventional Curtis geared steam turbines were chosen , powered by 12 Kampon water @-@ tube boilers , eight of which would have used fuel oil and four of which would have used a mixture of oil and coal . This system would have provided 91 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 68 @,@ 000 kW ) to four propeller shafts for a top speed of 26 @.@ 5 knots ( 49 @.@ 1 km / h ; 30 @.@ 5 mph ) . The fuel stores would have amounted to 3 @,@ 600 long tons ( 3 @,@ 700 t ) of oil and 1 @,@ 800 long tons ( 1 @,@ 800 t ) of coal ; at a speed of 14 knots , this would have enabled a maximum range of 6 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 12 @,@ 000 km ; 7 @,@ 500 mi ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Tosa @-@ class ships were intended to be armed with a main battery of ten 45 @-@ caliber 41 @-@ centimeter guns in five twin turrets , four of which were superfiring fore and aft . Numbered one through five from front to rear , the hydraulically powered turrets had an elevation range of − 2 to + 35 degrees . The rate of fire for the guns was around two rounds per minute . The ships were designed to carry 90 rounds per gun , although space was available for 110 . 
 The guns used Type 91 armor @-@ piercing , capped shells . Each of these shells weighed 1 @,@ 020 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 250 lb ) and had a muzzle velocity of 780 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ) . Also available was a 936 @-@ kilogram ( 2 @,@ 064 lb ) high @-@ explosive shell that had a muzzle velocity of 805 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 640 ft / s ) . 
 The ships ' secondary armament of twenty 50 @-@ caliber 3rd Year Type 14 @-@ centimeter guns would have been mounted in casemates , 12 on the upper sides of the hull and eight in the superstructure . The 3rd Year Type guns had a maximum range of 19 @,@ 750 meters ( 21 @,@ 600 yd ) at an elevation of + 35 degrees . Each gun could fire a 38 @-@ kilogram ( 84 lb ) high @-@ explosive projectile at a rate up to 10 rounds per minute and was provided with 120 rounds . Anti @-@ aircraft defense was provided by four 40 @-@ caliber 3rd Year Type 8 @-@ centimeter AA guns in single mounts . The 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) high @-@ angle guns had a maximum elevation of + 75 degrees , and a rate of fire of 13 to 20 rounds per minute . They fired a 6 kg ( 13 lb ) projectile with a muzzle velocity of 680 m / s ( 2 @,@ 200 ft / s ) to a maximum height of 7 @,@ 500 meters ( 24 @,@ 600 ft ) . The guns were normally supplied with 250 rounds each , although space was available for a total of 400 rounds per gun . These 3rd Year Type guns were intended to be replaced by four 45 @-@ caliber 12 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 The <unk> were intended to mount eight 61 @-@ centimeter ( 24 in ) torpedo tubes , four above water and four below . The former were to be provided with two torpedoes each and the latter with three each . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The ships ' armor protection was designed to break up 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) shells from a distance of 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 meters ( 16 @,@ 000 – 22 @,@ 000 yd ) and the primary armor plates were backed up by splinter bulkheads intended to contain any shell fragments . They would have been protected by a waterline main belt of Vickers cemented armor that sloped outwards 15 degrees at the top . Amidships it would have been 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick and 254 mm ( 10 in ) thick fore and aft . Approximately 1 @.@ 83 meters ( 6 ft 0 in ) of the armor belt was below the waterline . The side armor was closed off at its ends by bulkheads 229 – 254 mm ( 9 – 10 in ) thick . The main battery turrets and the portions of the barbettes above the main deck would have had between 229 and 305 mm ( 9 @.@ 0 and 12 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plating , and the conning tower walls would have had armor 254 and 356 mm ( 10 @.@ 0 and 14 @.@ 0 in ) thick and a roof of 178 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) armor plates . The communications tube below the conning tower would have had walls 76 – 127 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 – 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick . 
 The middle deck was the primary armored deck and was connected to the top of the armor belt . It would have consisted of a 63 @.@ 5 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) plate of New Vickers non @-@ cemented armor on top of a 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) plate of high @-@ tensile steel ( HTS ) above the engine and boiler rooms . Above the magazines , the thickness of the HTS plate would have increased to 63 mm . The lower deck would have consisted of two 19 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 in ) plates of HTS . For the first time in a Japanese ship , the <unk> would have had the lower portion of the single funnel protected by 229 mm of armor . In addition , the funnel openings in the lower deck would have been protected by armor gratings . 
 The ships would have had an internal torpedo bulge to provide protection against underwater explosions . This was backed by a torpedo bulkhead also made up of three 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) layers of HTS and angled outwards to meet the base of the waterline belt . It connected to a 12 @.@ 7 – 32 mm ( 0 @.@ 50 – 1 @.@ 26 in ) splinter bulkhead on the lower deck behind the waterline belt . Behind the torpedo bulge and the splinter bulkhead was another splinter bulkhead 12 @.@ 7 – 19 mm thick . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Cancellation and fates = = 
 Construction of both ships began in 1920 , but the 1922 Washington Naval Treaty intervened , mandating the cancellation of all capital ships being built . Work stopped on the two Tosa @-@ class battleships on 5 February 1922 . After being stricken on 1 April 1924 , Tosa 's incomplete hull was used to test her armor scheme against long @-@ range naval gunfire , aerial bombs , mines , and torpedoes . Two of the shells fired at her fell short , but deeply penetrated her hull through the thin armor of the torpedo bulge below the waterline armor belt . This sparked an interest in optimizing underwater performance of Japanese shells that culminated in production of the Type 91 armor @-@ piercing shell . Conversely , the IJN took measures to defend against shells of this type when reconstructing its existing battleships during the 1930s , as well as in the designs of the Yamato @-@ class battleships and the heavy cruisers of the Mogami and Tone classes . Tosa 's torpedo defense system proved able to defeat 200 kg ( 440 lb ) torpedo warheads , but not larger 350 kg ( 770 lb ) ones . After the conclusion of the tests , the ship was scuttled by opening her Kingston valves on 9 February 1925 in 650 m ( 2 @,@ 130 ft ) of water in the Bungo Channel after the demolition charges failed to detonate . 
 The battlecruiser Amagi , which was being converted to an aircraft carrier under the terms of the treaty , was wrecked in the Great Kantō earthquake in 1923 and rendered unusable . As a result , Kaga , which was originally slated to be scrapped under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty ( Chapter I , Article IX ) , was converted in Amagi 's stead . No work took place until 1925 as new plans were drafted and earthquake damage to the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal was repaired . Although the ship was commissioned on 31 March 1928 , she did not join the Combined Fleet ( <unk> Kantai ) until 30 November 1929 . 
 Much like the converted Amagi @-@ class battlecruiser Akagi , Kaga was fitted with two flying @-@ off decks " stepped down " from a flight deck that extended two @-@ thirds of the ship ; in theory , this allowed planes to take off directly from the hangars while other planes landed on the top . As aircraft became heavier during the 1930s , they required longer distances to get airborne and the lower flight decks became useless . Kaga 's 1935 reconstruction removed the lower two decks and extended the top flight deck to the bow . As completed , the ship had two main hangar decks and a third auxiliary hangar with a total capacity of 60 aircraft . 
 Kaga was provided with a heavy gun armament in case she was surprised by enemy cruisers and forced to give battle , but her large and vulnerable flight deck , hangars , and other features made her more of a target in any surface action than a fighting warship . Carrier doctrine was still evolving at this time and the impracticability of carriers engaging in gun duels had not yet been realized . The ship was armed with ten 20 cm / 50 3rd Year Type guns : one twin @-@ gun turret on each side of the middle flight deck and six in casemates aft . Kaga 's waterline armored belt was reduced from 280 to 152 mm ( 11 @.@ 0 to 6 @.@ 0 in ) during her reconstruction and her deck armor was also reduced from 102 to 38 mm ( 4 @.@ 0 to 1 @.@ 5 in ) . The carrier displaced 26 @,@ 900 long tons ( 27 @,@ 300 t ) at standard load , and 33 @,@ 693 long tons ( 34 @,@ 234 t ) at full load , nearly 6 @,@ 000 long tons ( 6 @,@ 100 t ) less than her designed displacement as a battleship . This reduction in her displacement increased her speed to 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) and gave her a range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) . 
 In 1933 – 35 Kaga was rebuilt to increase her top speed , improve her exhaust systems , and adapt her flight decks to more modern , heavier aircraft . After the reconstruction , the ship displaced 38 @,@ 200 long tons ( 38 @,@ 800 t ) at standard load , better boilers gave her a top speed of 28 @.@ 3 knots ( 52 @.@ 4 km / h ; 32 @.@ 6 mph ) , and additional fuel storage increased her range to 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) and raised her aircraft capacity to 90 . The ten 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) guns , although now all mounted singly in casemates , were retained . 
 Kaga 's aircraft first supported Japanese troops in China during the Shanghai Incident of 1932 and participated in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War in the late 1930s . With five other fleet carriers , she took part in the Pearl Harbor raid in December 1941 and the invasion of Rabaul in the Southwest Pacific in January 1942 . The following month her aircraft participated in a combined carrier airstrike on Darwin , Australia , helping secure the conquest of the Dutch East Indies by Japanese forces . She missed the Indian Ocean raid in April as she had to return to Japan for repairs after hitting a reef in February . Following repairs , Kaga rejoined the 1st Air Fleet for the attack on Midway Atoll in June 1942 . 
 The IJN was surprised by the appearance of three American carriers and , partly due to Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto 's plan in which ships were too dispersed to support each other , Kaga , along with the other three carriers present , was sunk by aircraft from USS Enterprise , Hornet and Yorktown on 4 June . 
 = Danebury = 
 Danebury is an Iron Age hill fort in Hampshire in England , about 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) north @-@ west of Winchester ( grid reference <unk> ) . The site , covering 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) , was excavated by Barry Cunliffe in the 1970s . Danebury is considered a type @-@ site for hill forts , and was important in developing the understanding of hill forts , as very few others have been so intensively excavated . 
 Built in the 6th century BC , the fort was in use for almost 500 years , during a period when the number of hill forts in Wessex greatly increased . Danebury was remodelled several times , making it more complex and resulting in it becoming a " developed " hill fort . It is now protected as a Scheduled Ancient Monument , a Site of Special Scientific <unk> and a Local Nature Reserve . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Until the 19th century very little was known about hill forts , as none had been excavated and their original purpose had been long forgotten . In the medieval period , their construction was attributed variously to iconic figures such as King Arthur , King Alfred , the Danes , Julius Caesar , and even giants . By the 18th century , it was widely thought that hill forts were Roman in origin . 
 Interest in hill forts was roused by the investigation of a hill fort at Worlebury Hill in the early @-@ 19th century . The first excavation at Danebury was carried out in November 1859 , under antiquarian Augustus Wollaston Franks . His workers cleared out an Iron Age pit that was 2 metres ( 7 ft ) deep and 1 @.@ 5 m ( 5 ft ) in diameter , although they were not able to ascertain its purpose . 
 The first widespread investigation of hill forts was carried out in the second half of the 19th century under Augustus Pitt @-@ Rivers . Pitt @-@ Rivers ' work on the hill forts of Sussex led him to the conclusion that most hill forts were built in the Iron Age , and it paved the way for future work on hill forts . In the 1920s and 1930s , there was " hill fort mania " in British archaeology ; by 1940 , about 80 had been archaeologically excavated . 
 In the late 1960s , Barry Cunliffe decided to examine a single hill fort and its surrounding territory in an attempt to shed light on Iron Age society , its politics , and population . With the permission of the site 's owner , Hampshire County Council , archaeological excavations began in 1969 and continued until 1988 . Over the twenty seasons archaeologists spent examining the site , they looked at the defences and the gateway , and excavated 57 % of the interior , where the remains of wattle and timber houses were discovered . It was the lengthiest investigation of any hill fort in western Europe . 
 A further non @-@ invasive survey was carried out in 1997 , as part of the Wessex Hillforts Project , using a magnetometer . 
 = = History = = 
 There is no historical record of events in Iron Age Britain , so archaeological investigation is the only way to reconstruct the history of Danebury , and other such hill forts . It is impossible to state with certainty every significant event in the hill fort ’ s history , but where an event leaves an archaeologically identifiable trace , a general chronology can be established , although dates are much less easy to establish . The hill fort was occupied from the mid @-@ 6th century BC until around 100 BC , and the defences were remodelled numerous times . 
 Early in its life the site consisted of a single ditch encompassing an area of about 5 ha ( 12 acres ) , with two gateways , one in the south @-@ west and another in the east ; two more rings of ditches were added later . The north part of the fort was occupied by four @-@ post structures , probably granaries , which were later replaced by storage pits , and in the south part , there were roundhouses in between granaries and storage pits . When Danebury was built in the 6th century BC , it coincided with the construction of several other hillforts in the Wessex region , all of a similar size and layout . 
 The first phase of defences dates from around 550 BC , and consists of a rampart behind a ditch . When the ditch was cut , the chalk rubble fill was used to build the rampart , along with some of the local clay soil . The material was contained by timber , making it a box rampart with a vertical face . The east gateway was a simple 4 m ( 13 ft ) wide gap in the defences with a timber gatehouse ( the south @-@ west gateway has not been excavated ) . 
 At least 50 years after the rampart was first built , it was raised with the addition of more chalk material ; this has been interpreted as maintenance work due to the ramparts beginning to collapse as the timber box started to rot . Around the same time the ramparts were altered , the east gateway was widened to 9 m ( 30 ft ) . The gates were burnt down not long after the east gateway was altered . For a short time the hill fort was <unk> , when the east gateway was repaired the passage from the entrance was lengthened . 
 In around 400 BC the third phase heightened the rampart and at the same time the ditch was re @-@ dug . The V @-@ shaped ditch was 6 m ( 20 ft ) deep and between 11 m ( 36 ft ) and 12 m ( 39 ft ) wide ; the size of the previous ditch is unknown as re @-@ cutting the ditch has made it hard to ascertain . The wooden box was abandoned in favour of allowing the rampart to slope down to the ditch , but to provide protection the rampart would probably have been surmounted by a dry stone wall made from flint . From the top of the ramparts to the bottom of the ditch is about 16 m ( 52 ft ) . 
 Although the rampart and ditch were in use for a long time , during this period the east gateway was remodelled twice , making it longer , and creating earthworks on each side of the approach . The southwest gateway was given extra defences in the form of earthworks before being abandoned and filled in . Also in this period , the southern part of the fort became populated with four- and six @-@ post structures , probably granaries , replacing the earlier roundhouses . The fort 's centre was probably used for shrines while houses were mainly built close to the ramparts . A new series of earthworks was created beyond the already existing ring , turning Danebury into a complex multivallate ( more than one series of earthworks ) fort . They added 5 @.@ 3 ha ( 13 acres ) to the fort and probably were used to protect livestock . 
 Danebury was abandoned around 100 BC , in common with the trend across Britain for hill forts to fall out of use around that time . Once again , the east gate was burnt down , although this time it was not replaced . Most of the inhabitants deserted Danebury , and groups of bodies were disposed of in charnel pits . The site continued in use , but on a much smaller scale than before . Buildings were left to decay and the interior of the fort became used for grazing . By the start of the 1st century AD , the settlement of Danebury was probably nothing more than a single farm . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Danebury Hill , on top of which the hill fort sits , rises to 143 m ( 469 ft ) . The hill fort dominates the local landscape , which rarely rises above 100 m ( 330 ft ) , and has commanding views of the area . The surrounding country has light soil that would have been easily cultivated . Territory commanded by Danebury included areas of forest , pasture in the uplands , and access to water sources in the form of the River Test . To the west runs Wallop Brook which flows south east into the River Test . 
 The nearby hill forts of <unk> Ring , <unk> Hill , and Bury Hill were probably established around the same time as Danebury . All of a similar size , the hillforts were generally equally spaced , commanding similar sized territories and resources . There is some debate whether hill forts were purely defensive structures , and to what extent they were occupied . Cunliffe interprets the ramparts as essentially defensive , although he concedes that they may have been a means of displaying wealth and power , as Danebury would have been visible for miles around . 
 The ramparts were the strongest part of the fort , with the entrances the weakest . The complex gateways support the view that the site was militaristic ; the long , curving east entrance maximised the time it would have taken for attackers to enter the fort and would have allowed defenders on the ramparts more time to hurl missiles , while the southwest entrance narrowed forcing attackers together and causing disarray . Iron Age society was , in Cunliffe 's view , " effervescent ... essentially unstable , and prone to conflict " , and he uses the possible military nature of hill forts to support this view . The burning of the gates was probably the result of an attack , and the charnel pits dating from the end of the intense period of Danebury 's occupation contain about 100 bodies , many with injuries that appear to have been inflicted by weapons such as spears and swords . 
 Surrounding Danebury hill fort are many smaller farmsteads , between 1 ha ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) and 2 ha ( 4 @.@ 9 acres ) in size . The fort was supplied with grain from the surrounding farmsteads , and could hold 20 times more food than the average farmstead , indicating Danebury had a higher status than local farmsteads . This is further supported by the fact that the hill fort was used as a " central place " where people could gather to trade and store commodities . Periods of intensified activity in hill forts such as Danebury coinciding with depopulation of the surrounding landscape could indicate the increasing importance of hill forts in society , or that there were times of unrest when people would retreat to the relative safety of a hill fort 's ramparts . 
 While other hill forts were abandoned in the 4th century BC , in about 400 BC Danebury grew into what is known as a " developed hill fort " . Danebury 's importance in the landscape increased over time , as demonstrated by its continued use until around 100 AD . It was possibly inhabited by a king or chieftain and his family , retinue , and craftsmen , and may have housed a population of 200 – 350 . There are traces of craft and industry on a large scale , and use of the site by a social elite is indicated by the presence of shrines in the centre of the fort . 
 = My Immortal = 
 " My Immortal " is a song by American nu @-@ metal band Evanescence from their debut studio album Fallen ( 2003 ) . It was released by Wind @-@ up Records on December 8 , 2003 , as the third single from the album . The song was written by guitarist Ben Moody , lead singer Amy Lee and keyboardist David Hodges , and it was produced by Moody and Dave Fortman . Various versions of " My Immortal " were recorded ; one of them was included on the demo album Origin ( 2000 ) and another on the EP release <unk> ( 2003 ) . The version originally appearing on Origin was later included on Fallen , featuring piano with backing strings . The version of the song released as a single was dubbed the " band version " because of the complete band 's performance of the bridge and final chorus of the song . 
 " My Immortal " is a piano power ballad written in slow tempo . Lyrically , it talks about " a spirit staying with you after its death and haunting you until you actually wish that the spirit were gone because it won 't leave you alone . " Critical reception towards the song was positive , with critics complimenting its piano melody . In 2005 it received a nomination for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 47th Grammy Awards . The song was also commercially successful , peaking within the top ten in more than ten countries . It also peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the charts in Canada , Greece and the US Adult Pop Songs chart . The single was certified gold in the United States , and platinum in Australia . 
 An accompanying music video directed by David Mould was filmed entirely in black @-@ and @-@ white in Gothic Quarter , Barcelona on October 10 , 2003 . The video shows Lee sitting and singing on various locations , but never touching the ground . Shots of Moody are also shown but he is never together with his band or Lee . The video was nominated in the category for Best Rock Video at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards . The song was performed by the band during their three concert tours : the Fallen Tour ( 2003 ) , The Open Door Tour ( 2007 ) and the Evanescence Tour ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) . It was also performed live during some of their television appearances and award ceremonies such as the Billboard Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 The song was written by Ben Moody , Amy Lee and David Hodges and produced by Moody and Dave Fortman ; it was the fourth song to be written for Evanescence . Amy Lee 's vocals and the piano parts of the song were recorded in NRG Recording Studios , California . " My Immortal " was mixed by Dave Fortman at Conway Recording Studios in North Hollywood while it was mastered by Ted Jensen at Sterling Sound in New York City . The orchestral parts in the song were arranged by the composer Graeme Revell . 
 The first known recording of " My Immortal " was made for the band 's self @-@ titled EP , which solely featured Lee 's vocals accompanied by a piano , and slightly different lyrics . The song was cut from the EP before it was released . In 2000 , the song was re @-@ recorded for the band 's demo album , Origin , which contains a rearranged piano melody and lyrics , including the bridge added by Lee . It was again recorded for the band 's debut full @-@ length debut studio album , Fallen where the vocals of the demo version ( that were recorded by Lee at 18 years old ) were accompanied by slightly different instrumentation . It is also featured on the band 's 2003 EP , <unk> , which is much more similar to the band version . Wind @-@ up Records preferred the Origin version , which is why the exact vocals recorded from 2000 are again included in the song 's album version . The version that was recorded and released as a single is moderately alternative to that of the album version , and is often referred to as the " band version " because of the additional band performing the bridge and final chorus of the song . The later pressings of Fallen contain the single version ( or " band version " ) of " My Immortal " as a hidden track . Lee expressed some dissatisfaction with the early versions of the song saying , " It 's not even a real piano . And the sound quality is bad because we had to break into the studio to record it late at night when no one was around because we couldn 't afford a real session . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " My Immortal " is a piano and power ballad written in the key of A major . It was described as a " goth @-@ meets @-@ pop " song . According to the sheet music published by Alfred Music Publishing on the website Musicnotes.com , the song is set in common time and performed in slow and free tempo of 80 beats per minute . Lee 's vocal range for the song runs from the low musical note of A3 to the high note of C ♯ 5 . Her vocals are accompanied by a simple piano . Adrien Begrand of PopMatters concluded that in " My Immortal " , Lee is " doing her McLachlan / Tori Amos schtick " . The song was also compared with some of Enya 's material . 
 The lyrics of the song refer to a spirit that haunts the memory of a grieving loved one . Similar to several other songs written by Moody , the lyrics of the song are based on a short story he had previously written . According to Lee , it was " Ben [ Moody ] ' s song . " Moody said that the song talks about " a spirit staying with you after its death and haunting you until you actually wish that the spirit were gone because it won 't leave you alone . " He also stated in the booklet of Fallen that he dedicated the song to his grandfather , Bill Holcomb . In " My Immortal " , Lee expresses her feelings through the line , " Though you 're still with me / I 've been alone all along . " A writer for IGN said that " ' My Immortal ' is a song of pain and despair caused by the loss of a family member or very close friend and how it drove her [ Lee ] to the edge of insanity . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received critical acclaim from music critics . Kirk Miller of Rolling Stone said that " ' My Immortal ' lets Lee wail about her personal demons over simple piano and some symphonic dressings — it 's a power ballad that P.O.D. and Tori Amos fans could both appreciate . " Chris Harris of the same publication found it to be a " song that 's become something of an Alanis Morissette @-@ like battle hymn for her [ Lee 's ] goth disciples over the last few years . " Richard Harrington of The Washington Post called " My Immortal " a " majestic " song that helped the band win a Grammy Award . Blair R. Fischer from MTV News described the song as a " delicate , heartfelt ballad " . IGN 's Ed Thompson concluded that " My Immortal " was " one of the first and best songs Evanescence ever wrote " . Jordan Reimer , a writer of The Daily Princetonian found a " haunting beauty " in the song . In 2005 the band was nominated in the category for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals at the 47th Grammy Awards for the song . 
 A less positive review was written for The Guardian by Tom Reynolds , where he put the song at number 24 on his list " Sad songs say so much " . Talking about the composition and the meaning of the song , he wrote that the song was a " whimpering post @-@ breakup tune in which lead singer Amy Lee pitifully mourns the end of a relationship over a piano accompaniment that sounds like Pachelbel after the Prozac wore off " , and that it " closely follows the ' quantum tragedy paradigm ' : the shorter the time two people spent together as a couple , the more overwrought the song is that describes their break @-@ up . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song is considered the band 's second most successful single of all time , generally peaking within the top 20 of more than 10 countries internationally . On the chart issue dated April 10 , 2004 , " My Immortal " peaked at number seven on the Billboard Hot 100 , while on the Pop Songs chart it peaked at number two on March 27 , 2004 . It has peaked at number nineteen on the Adult Contemporary chart as well . On February 17 , 2009 , " My Immortal " was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for selling more than 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The song managed to top the charts of Canada , Greece and Billboard 's Adult Pop Songs in the United States . It also helped Fallen to move from number nine to number three on the Billboard 200 chart , selling another 69 @.@ 000 copies . On the Billboard 's Radio Songs chart , the song peaked at number seven on April 10 , 2004 . Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems placed the song at number six on the list of most played radio songs in 2004 with 317 @,@ 577 spins . 
 On the Australian Singles Chart , " My Immortal " debuted at number four on January 25 , 2004 which later became its peak position . The next eleven weeks , it remained in the top ten of the chart , and it was seen on the chart at number forty @-@ four for the week ending June 13 , 2004 . The single was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies in that country . On December 20 , 2003 , " My Immortal " debuted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart which later also became its peak position . On February 14 , 2004 the song dropped out of the chart , and it later re @-@ entered at number eighty @-@ four on July 18 , 2008 . After spending several weeks on different positions on the UK Rock Chart , on August 27 , 2011 , it peaked at number one . The next week , " My Immortal " moved to number two being replaced by the band 's single " What You Want " ( 2011 ) , and one week later it returned at number one on the chart . That achievement helped the song re @-@ enter on the UK Singles Chart at number eighty @-@ one on August 27 , 2011 and at number eighty @-@ nine on October 22 , 2011 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A music video directed by David Mould was filmed entirely in black @-@ and @-@ white in Plaça de Sant Felip Neri , Gothic Quarter ( Barri <unk> ) , Barcelona on October 10 , 2003 . Lee described the place of the filming during an interview with MTV News : " We did it in a cool , old area of town . [ ... ] We shot some of it at this scenic point , and there was a rooftop where you could see Barcelona below . It was really neat . " The version of the song used on the video is different from the one off the record , with the band entering the song at the end of the bridge and a string arrangement by David Campbell . Evanescence wanted the band version to be on the album as well , but " the label was stuck on the demo and wouldn 't let us use the version we really wanted . [ ... ] We fought back and forth about it and finally we gave in , but we were all so angry about it . " The video was filmed two weeks before Ben Moody 's departure from the band . Amy Lee admitted that the visuals in the video were " striking in retrospect " , but added that the similarities between what was filmed and Moody 's departure were coincidental : " We shot it in Barcelona about a week before Ben left the band unexpectedly . I think none of us knew , including him , that he was going anywhere . And when we got the video back and watched it , it was right after he had left . And it 's bizarre how much the video is about that . We all sat there with goose bumps , like , ' Holy crap . We 've got to watch that again . ' " In an interview with the British magazine Rock Sound , Lee further explained the concept which was related with his departure : 
 " You know what ? When you see the video it 's really amazing . Obviously we filmed it before this [ Ben Moody 's departure ] happened and it 's amazing irony , how much it makes sense . We 're all separated and wandering the streets looking like it 's the day after a funeral , with Ben in a suit and bare feet , and I 'm never touching the ground . I 'm sitting on a phone booth or lying on a car , to hint that I 'm dead , that I 'm singing from the dead . It 's all about separation . It 's almost like the director knew what was going to happen , but he can 't have known . It 's just one of those fate things . " 
 The music video for " My Immortal " begins with Lee sitting on a fountain . Her legs and arms are covered with bandage as she puts them in the water . She is wearing a long white dress and is seen walking around the fountain , surrounded by children and other people . Shots of Moody follow , who appears to be sullen and withdrawn . He is wearing a suit and his feet are bare . His shoulders sag and his head slumps forward as he delicately plays piano , and he later picks up his jacket as if he is about to leave . When the bridge starts , the band is shot performing in one room while Moody is in another , playing on the piano . Throughout the video , Lee is never filmed on ground level . She walks along the ledge of a fountain , sits in a tree and sings lying on top of a building . She also lies atop scaffolding and on the hood of a car surrounded with leaves . 
 The video for the song was nominated in the category for Best Rock Video at the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards . According to Jon Wiederhorn from MTV News , the shots of the video are " evocative and artistic , resembling a cross between a foreign film and a Chanel advertisement . " Joe D 'Angelo of MTV News said that Lee 's disconnection in the video shows a " distressed and emotionally wrought heroine . " Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone praised the video saying that Lee looked like a " teen @-@ misery titan " and that she " <unk> through a marble castle of pain " . He also concluded that she could have borrowed the dress from Stevie Nicks . During an interview with Spin in 2011 Lee said that it was weird for her to watch the old videos of the band including the one for " My Immortal " . She explained , " Just watching our oldest videos , it 's weird . I definitely remember watching ' My Immortal , ' like , ' That was not some dream where it was really somebody else . ' I 've totally had a couple of those moments . It 's cool . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Evanescence performed the song at the 2004 Billboard Music Awards on December 8 , 2004 . The band was joined by an eight @-@ piece string section during the performance and a stage backdrop of knotted , decaying trees were placed on stage in order to showcase the " powerful vocals " by Amy Lee as stated by a writer of Billboard . The band additionally performed the song at Late Show with David Letterman in March 2004 . 
 The band performed " My Immortal " during various stops of their first Fallen Tour ( 2003 ) . " My Immortal " was the closing song of the concerts , and Lee performed it after asking the fans " Just promise not to fall asleep . " A live version of the song from the performance at Le Zénith , Paris is featured on their first live album , Anywhere but Home ( 2004 ) . Johnny Loftus of AllMusic praised the live version saying that Lee takes a " softer approach " while performing " My Immortal " and added that it " becomes a singalong moment for 5 @,@ 000 souls . " " My Immortal " was also part of the set list during the band 's second tour , called The Open Door Tour ( 2007 ) in support of their second studio album The Open Door ( 2006 ) . Evanescence also played the song live at their secret New York gig which took place on November 4 , 2009 and during the 2011 Rock in Rio festival on October 2 , 2011 . The song was later added on the set list of their third worldwide tour in support of their third self @-@ titled studio album , the Evanescence Tour ( 2011 @-@ 12 ) . 
 = = Covers and usage in media = = 
 " My Immortal " was featured on the soundtrack Daredevil : The Album from the movie Daredevil ( 2003 ) along with " Bring Me to Life " . It was also heavily used in promos for the series finale of Friends . The song has been used during several television episodes . It featured during the Smallville season three episode " Memoria " . Lucy Walsh , a contestant of the show Rock the Cradle , covered the song during the fifth episode , " Judge 's Picks " . Dancer Hampton Williams performed to this song during his audition for the season 9 premiere of So You Think You Can Dance , broadcast on May 24 , 2012 , where he received a standing ovation , and in season 11 the song accompanied a performance by the top seven women , choreographed by Mandy Moore and broadcast on July 30 , 2014 , that earned similar reviews . 
 An arrangement of the song inspired by Gregorian chant was covered by the group Gregorian on their 2004 album The Dark Side . In 2013 , violinist Lindsey Stirling recorded an instrumental version of " My Immortal " for the Target edition of her first self @-@ titled studio album . In July 2013 it was uploaded to her personal channel on YouTube along with an accompanying performance video and it was released to the iTunes Store on October 1 , 2013 . The following year , Andrea Begley covered " My Immortal " for her debut studio album The Message . Robert Copsey of Digital Spy wrote that the cover " range [ s ] from the excruciating to the offensively inoffensive " . Teenage classical vocalist Jackie Evancho covered " My Immortal " in 2014 on her fifth full @-@ length album , Awakening , as a bonus track for Japanese fans . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Fallen . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Jeff Heath = 
 John Geoffrey " Jeff " Heath ( 1 April 1915 – 9 December 1975 ) was a Canadian @-@ born American left fielder in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) who played most of his career for the Cleveland Indians . 
 He was one of the American League 's most promising power hitters of the late 1930s and early 1940s , twice led the AL in triples , and batted at least .340 with over 100 runs batted in ( RBIs ) each time . In 1941 he was selected to his first All @-@ Star Game and that same season became the first player from the American League to become a member of the 20 – 20 – 20 club when he hit 20 each of doubles , triples and home runs in the same season . His other All @-@ Star Game selections were in 1943 and 1945 . 
 Heath played for the Washington Senators and St. Louis Browns during the 1946 season and the National League 's ( NL ) Boston Braves beginning in 1948 . He incurred a compound fracture to his ankle in September 1948 and subsequently the Braves were without their starting left fielder for the 1948 World Series . In 1949 , Heath 's last season in the majors , sportswriter Franklin Lewis wrote , " There was the inimitable Heath who ... should have been one of the greatest players in history . But there were no valves on his temper . He grinned in the manner of a schoolboy or he snarled with the viciousness of a tiger . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 Heath was born 1 April 1915 , in Fort William , Ontario . His family moved to Victoria , British Columbia before settling in Seattle , Washington . He attended Garfield High School in Seattle where he played baseball and football . As a freshman he made the varsity baseball squad . Heath was a multi @-@ sport athlete and was offered scholarships from various schools to play American football . University of Washington head coach Jimmy Phelan said Heath was the best fullback in the country . Heath chose a future in baseball , however , and in 1935 , he signed with the Yakima Bears of the semipro Northwest League , where he hit .390 . He was selected as an All @-@ American amateur team member , managed by Les Mann and played games in Japan . For the tour his batting average was .483 . Heath faced difficulties being allowed re @-@ entry upon the team 's arrival to the U.S. and became a naturalized U.S. citizen . 
 Cleveland Indians scout Willie Kamm helped sign Heath to a contract with the organization in 1936 . Kamm said , " If this kid isn 't a big leaguer I 've wasted a lot of time learning baseball . " He reported to spring training with the New Orleans Pelicans of the Southern Association . One of his hands became infected and the Indians moved him to their Class C Mid @-@ Atlantic team , the Zanesville Greys . With the Greys , he hit league @-@ bests with 187 RBIs and a .383 average , while his 28 home runs were second @-@ most . He was called up to join the Indians before the 1936 season ended . 
 = = Cleveland Indians = = 
 Heath , who batted left @-@ handed and threw right @-@ handed and broke in with the Indians in 1936 at the age of 21 , appeared in 12 games with the club and recorded a .341 batting average and seven extra @-@ base hits . During spring training leading up to the 1937 season , Heath was describing as getting " as much attention as the backline of a Broadway chorus . " He appeared in 20 games and hit .230 for the season . During spring training before the 1938 season , Indians manager Oscar Vitt said Heath was " the best natural hitter I 've seen since Joe Jackson . " One columnist described Vitt 's decision to employ Heath : 
 " Vitt finally decided to use Jeff Heath , the chap with the bulging muscles , in his left pasture . There are few better hitters in the American league than the husky from Washington . Jeff is not the most graceful <unk> in captivity and he may toss to the wrong base , but put a bat in his hands and the opposition 's pitcher will tremble . " 
 In his first full season in 1938 , he batted .343 – behind only batting champion Jimmie Foxx 's .349 – while leading the league with 18 triples . Upon the conclusion of the season , Heath joined fellow American League ( AL ) players , and Indians teammate Bob Feller , in exhibition games played around the country ( also known as barnstorming ) , mostly in cities which did not have a major league team . He had 21 home runs and 112 RBIs , collected 58 hits in August alone , and was among the league leaders in slugging average and total bases for the 1938 season . In January 1939 , he married <unk> Callard . He finished with a .292 batting average in 1939 . The season also included a late @-@ season punch to a fan from Heath during a home game in Cleveland . " It was just another blunder in a bad season that has been full of mistakes " , Heath said of the incident . Before the 1940 season , Heath said , " I 'm going to show ' em I 'm no flash in the pan . Last year I was <unk> and taking my eye of the ball . I 'm not going to do that this season . " During the season , Heath was one of 12 reported players who presented a list of grievances against Vitt to Indians President Alva Bradley . Bradley called a meeting with the players and by the end of it , a statement of support from the players for Vitt was released . Twenty @-@ one Indians signed the document , while Heath was one of four who did not , as he was one of two in the hospital at the time of the meeting . Instances between Vitt and his players , including Heath , continued past June , however . Heath was suspended by Vitt after a game in August after the two exchanged words following a strikeout by Heath , who was put in the game as a pinch @-@ hitter . Indians Vice President C.C. Slapnicka withdrew the suspension . The Indians finished the regular season with an 89 – 65 record in Vitt 's last season as manager and Heath a career @-@ low .219 average . The Indians lost the AL pennant by one game to the Detroit Tigers and Heath received much of the blame , although Vitt was released as the team 's manager and replaced by Roger Peckinpaugh . 
 Peckinpaugh announced in December 1940 Heath would remain a starting outfielder with the club . Heath came back in 1941 with a season campaign in which he again led the AL with 20 triples , batted .340 ( fourth in the league ) , and was third in slugging behind Ted Williams and Joe DiMaggio . He also finished second in total bases and RBIs ( behind DiMaggio ) as well as second in hits , made his first All @-@ Star team , and finished eighth in the Most Valuable Player award voting . He became the first AL player to make the 20 @-@ 20 @-@ 20 club , having recorded 20 doubles , triples and home runs in one season . 
 Heath worked as a draftsman for Seattle @-@ Tacoma Shipbuilding Corporation during the off @-@ season leading up to 1943 . In years previous , Heath had been described as " lazy " and " lacking aggressiveness " but the 1943 season appeared to be different , including investing extra time in batting practice . He was selected for the All @-@ Star Game and finished fourth in the AL in home runs with 18 . Heath was rejected in 1944 for military duty due to knee problems . During the 1944 season Heath was mainly used as a pinch @-@ hitter . In the off @-@ season he underwent knee surgery and entered a contract dispute with the Indians . He did not join the team until June of the 1945 season after a two @-@ month holdout . Despite missing the beginning part of the season , he was still named an All @-@ Star although the game was not played due to travel restrictions during World War II . He finished the season with a batting average of .305 and his 15 home runs were fifth in the AL . In 1943 he became the second player born outside the U.S. to hit 100 home runs , and he surpassed George Selkirk with his 109th home run in 1945 . 
 Heath , who had acquired the nickname " Lord Jeff " , was called a " problem child " by Indian player @-@ manager Lou Boudreau . Peckinpaugh once said that Heath " could have been one of the greatest players . He had the ability to do about anything . He could run , he could throw , and he could hit . But he just had no hustle , no nothing . If a ball went by him , he just might walk after it . " In December 1945 the Indians traded Heath to the Washington Senators where he started in right field . 
 = = Washington Senators and St. Louis Browns = = 
 In 1946 , Senators ' President Clark Griffith agreed to send outfielder George Case to Cleveland in exchange for Heath . Of the trade , Griffith said , " We 've sacrificed plenty of speed for a man of tremendous hitting power . " During spring training , the addition of Heath led to the Senators being described as a " dark horse . " The Associated Press continued : 
 " Heath 's performance may be the key to the Senators ' fate . The husky Canadian is the kind of slugger Washington was crying for last fall . He can break up a ball game with one mighty swish of his bat but , to put it mildly , there always has been an uncertain quality about him . Big Jeff was dissatisfied in Cleveland , didn 't like the ballpark , didn 't like the management , didn 't like anything . Still , he has been a most valuable hitter , perhaps one of the best in the game when he is settled down to business . " 
 But Heath would appear in just 48 games with the Senators . He finished with the team hitting .283 with four home runs and 27 RBIs , his last game on 15 June before he was traded to the St. Louis Browns in mid @-@ June for Al <unk> and Joe Grace . In his first game with the Browns on 17 June he went 1 @-@ for @-@ 3 with one RBI . The Browns , who were 23 – 32 at the time Heath joined the club , finished the 1946 season 66 – 88 . Heath finished with 12 home runs and 57 RBIs in 86 games with the Browns . 
 Again , the Heath tendency for resentment and trouble led to the Browns trade . Washington had a utility infielder , Sherry Robertson , who was the nephew of owner Clark Griffith . During games , Heath would ride Robertson on the bench , calling him " owner 's pet " , in reference to the possibility that Robertson was only on the team due to that relationship , and the possibility that Robertson was better paid than Heath . This was the subject of a column in the Washington Post after Heath was gone by longtime sports writer Shirley Povich , who hated to see the Heath bat leave Washington . 
 The Browns were the second team in the AL to add black players to their roster after the Indians signed Larry Doby in July 1947 . Willard Brown and Hank Thompson were teammates of Heath 's during the 1947 season , but Heath was described as committing a " petulant display of prejudice " towards Brown after Brown hit a home run with one of Heath 's old bats . Brown preferred to use a heavy bat and did not bring his own after being told by the Browns the team would supply him with bats . Brown found one of Heath 's damaged bats and applied tape to the affix the knob to the end of the bat . When he tried to use the bat during a game , the umpire told him he could not use the bat with tape applied , so Brown discarded the loose fragments of the bat and proceeded to hit a home run during the at @-@ bat . When he returned to the dugout , however , Heath destroyed the bat when he hit it against the dugout wall . 
 Heath had a career @-@ high 27 home runs during the 1947 season , but the Browns finished in eighth and last place in the AL . In the Browns ' final game , Heath was already in the clubhouse showers when it was his turn to bat in the ninth inning . Upon the conclusion of the season , Browns management was looking to overhaul the team roster . Browns General Manager Bill DeWitt tried to shop Heath to a National League team rather than leave him in the AL . On 4 December it was announced the Boston Braves of the National League had acquired Heath . 
 = = Boston Braves = = 
 Unlike the Browns , the Braves were contenders all the way to the end of the 1948 season . In a game against the Philadelphia Phillies on 3 September , and with the Braves tied for the NL lead , Heath hit a two @-@ run home run and the Braves went on to win the game , 3 – 1 , and stayed in first place for the remainder of the regular season . With the Braves up five games in the NL standings and four games remaining on their regular season schedule , the Braves had a match @-@ up with the Brooklyn Dodgers on 29 September but according to teammate Clint <unk> , Heath asked Braves manager Billy Southworth for the night off but his request was denied . During the game , Heath attempted to score from second base and slid towards home plate to try and beat the tag by Dodgers catcher Roy Campanella . As he slid , his foot got caught in the dirt which caused his ankle to twist . " I began to slide about five feet from the plate . Funny thing , I generally get my spikes up off the ground , but this time I didn 't . I looked at my foot , which was twisted all the way around , and honestly I thought it would come right off " , Heath said the next day from a local hospital . After playing in the majors for parts of 12 years , he would be forced to miss the World Series as it was later diagnosed he fractured his ankle . He called the broken ankle " the biggest disappointment of my life . " A widely published newspaper photograph of the play showed Heath sliding toward the plate , mouth open in shock , with his leg bent mid @-@ ankle with the lower ankle rotated ninety degrees to the upper ankle . He was quoted asking himself " Why did I slide ? " when he was carried off the field on a stretcher and later put in an ambulance . In 1964 , Heath said : 
 " I guess I didn 't tuck my leg while sliding . Carl Furillo ( Dodger <unk> ) made the throw . He had a great arm and I was out a mile . They ( sportswriters ) said it was an unnecessary slide in a game that didn 't mean anything . The hell it was , you always slide . Besides Johnny Sain ( Braves pitcher ) was after his 23rd win and we wanted to shove Brooklyn into third place . " 
 Heath 's regular season came to an end , as he batted .319 with 20 home runs on the season . The Braves ' season came to an end after six games in the World Series as they lost to the Indians , four games to two . 
 Heath played in the minors the following season before eventually rejoining the Braves during the 1949 season . In a game on 28 August , Heath helped tie the Cincinnati Reds with a home run in the ninth inning and helped win the game for the Braves with another in the 10th inning . He ended his final major league season after 36 games into the 1949 season . He batted .306 with nine homers and 23 RBIs . In October 1949 , the Braves placed Heath on waivers and general manager John Quinn offered him a managing position with a team in the Braves farm system , but he never accepted Quinn 's offer to manage . Baseball historian Bill James when summarizing the 1940s listed Heath as the recipient for his designation of " A Better <unk> Than a Human Being . " Southworth said , " They told me when I got him from the American League that Heath was a troublemaker . If he is , I 'd sure like to have eight other troublemakers like him . " 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Before he retired from professional baseball , Heath appeared in 57 games for the Seattle Rainiers of the Pacific Coast League . He was later fired from the team . In 1951 , he was given a trial basis with the Rainiers but was never signed . 
 Sportswriter Franklin Lewis interviewed Heath and asked if he would do anything differently in his career if he was given the chance . Heath responded , " I wouldn 't gag around as much . I shouldn 't have popped off . It 's all right for little guys to talk loud , but not a big ox like me . " 
 In his 14 @-@ season major league career , Heath posted a .293 batting average and a <unk> slugging average , with 194 home runs , 1 @,@ 447 hits , 887 RBIs , 777 runs , 279 doubles , 102 triples and 56 stolen bases in 1 @,@ 383 games played . Bobby Thomson surpassed him in 1955 to become the major leagues ' home run leader among foreign @-@ born players . Heath was the first player to hit a home run in all AL and NL ballparks . He was named as one of the " Top 100 Greatest Indians . " In 1988 he was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame . 
 He worked briefly as a scout for the Cleveland Indians . He later worked as a color commentator with the Rainiers and did advertising work in the Seattle area . During one game while Heath provided commentary , he cursed into the microphone on @-@ air and later apologized . A station manager later approached him regarding the incident and Heath responded by throwing the manager down a flight of stairs . 
 Heath died of a heart attack in Seattle at age 60 . He had suffered a heart attack in 1957 at the age of 43 . He was survived by two daughters and one son . 
 = Banksia aculeata = 
 Banksia aculeata , commonly known as prickly banksia , is a species of plant of the family Proteaceae native to the Stirling Range in the southwest of Western Australia . A shrub up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) tall , it has dense foliage and leaves with very prickly serrated margins . The unusual pinkish , pendent ( hanging ) flower spikes , known as inflorescences , are generally hidden in the foliage and appear during the early summer . Although it was collected by the naturalist James Drummond in the 1840s , Banksia aculeata was not formally described until 1981 — by Alex George in his monograph of the genus . 
 A rare plant , Banksia aculeata is found in gravelly soils in elevated areas . Native to a habitat burnt by periodic bushfires , it is killed by fire and regenerates from seed afterwards . In contrast to other Western Australian banksias , it appears to have some resistance to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi . 
 = = Description = = 
 A bushy shrub , Banksia aculeata grows up to 2 m ( 7 ft ) tall , with fissured grey bark on its trunk and branches . It does not have a woody base , known as a lignotuber , that many other banksias have . The leaves are from 4 – 9 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 – 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long , and 0 @.@ 8 – 3 cm ( 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 1 ⁄ 4 in ) wide , with sharply pointed rigid lobes on the margins . Appearing in February and March , the cylindrical flower spikes — known as inflorescences — are from 6 – 9 cm ( 2 1 ⁄ 4 – 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long , growing at the ends of short leafy 2 @-@ 3 year old side branches . Hanging downwards rather than growing upright like most other banksias , they are composed of a central woody spike or axis , from which a large number of compact individual flowers arise perpendicularly . These floral units are made up of a smooth tubular perianth that envelopes the flower 's sexual organs . It is 3 – 4 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long and pink at the base grading into cream . In late bud the end of the perianth has a characteristic four @-@ angled ( squarish ) appearance . It then splits at anthesis to reveal the smooth straight pistil , which is slightly shorter than its enveloping structure at 3 – 4 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long . The fruiting cone , known as an infructescence , is a swollen woody spike embedded with up to 20 massive follicles ; the withered flower parts persist on the spike , giving it a hairy appearance . Oval in shape , the follicles are wrinkled in texture and covered with fine hair . They are 3 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 4 – 1 3 ⁄ 4 in ) long , 2 @.@ 5 – 3 cm ( 1 – 1 1 ⁄ 4 in ) high , and 2 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 in ) wide . 
 The obovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) seed is 4 – 5 cm ( 1 5 ⁄ 8 – 2 in ) long and fairly flattened , and is composed of the wedge @-@ shaped seed body ( containing the embryonic plant ) , measuring 1 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 5 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 4 in ) wide , and a papery wing . One side , termed the outer surface , is grey and wrinkled and the other is black and sparkles slightly . The seeds are separated by a sturdy dark brown seed separator that is roughly the same shape as the seeds with a depression where the seed body sits adjacent to it in the follicle . Known as cotyledons , the first pair of leaves produced by seedlings are cuneate ( wedge @-@ shaped ) and measure 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long by 1 @.@ 9 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 in ) wide . They are dull dark green , sometimes with a reddish tinge , and the margin of the wedge is convex . The auricle at the base of the cotyledon leaf is pointed and measures 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 1 ⁄ 8 in ) long . The hypocotyl is <unk> smooth and dark red . The obovate to oblong seedling leaves are 4 – 9 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 2 – 3 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long by 2 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 1 in ) wide with serrated margins , with v @-@ shaped sinuses and sharp teeth . 
 The related Banksia caleyi is similar in appearance but can be distinguished by its recurved ( curving downwards ) leaf margins , and smaller follicles and perianths . Its flowers appear from October to December . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Banksia aculeata was first collected by James Drummond on one of his three trips to the Stirling Ranges between 1843 and 1848 , though he did not recognise it as distinct from B. caleyi — this was only discovered over a century later by Alex George . George described B. aculeata in his 1981 monograph " The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) " . He based the species on a specimen collected by him on Chester Pass Road in the Stirling Range east of Cranbrook on 20 March 1972 . He gave it the specific epithet aculeata ( Latin for " sharp " ) , in reference to the sharply pointed leaf lobes . 
 George placed B. aculeata in B. subg . Banksia because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike ; in B. sect . Banksia because of its straight styles ; and B. ser . Tetragonae because of its pendulous inflorescences . He considered its closest relative to be B. caleyi , from which it differs in having narrower leaves with fewer , larger lobes ; longer perianths , which grade from red to cream rather than from cream to red ; shorter pistils ; and also differences in the follicles , seeds and flowering time . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . George 's B. ser . Tetragonae was found to be monophyletic , and therefore retained ; and their analysis of the relationships within the series supported the placement of B. aculeata alongside B. caleyi . 
 B. aculeata 's placement in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 B. elegans ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. elderiana 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 The arrangement of Thiele and Ladiges was not accepted by George , and was discarded in his 1999 revision . Under George 's 1999 arrangement , B. aculeata 's placement was as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 11 species , 7 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Crocinae ( 4 species ) 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 6 species , 3 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis ( 13 species ) 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is rather different from previous taxonomic arrangements , but support the placement of B. aculeata alongside B. caleyi in a clade corresponding closely with B. ser . Tetragonae . A 2013 molecular study by Marcel Cardillo and colleagues using chloroplast DNA and combining it with earlier results found that B. aculeata was sister to B. lemanniana and that B. caleyi was the next closest relative . 
 Early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. aculeata is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 B. aculeata is native to the foothills of the Stirling Range in the southwest of Western Australia , occurring at elevations between 250 and 500 m ( 820 – 1650 ft ) , in shrubland in gravelly , <unk> soils . The annual rainfall is around 600 mm ( 24 in ) . It is a fairly rare plant , with most populations consisting of fewer than 100 plants . With fairly small populations and a narrow distribution , B. aculeata is considered rare , but is not currently classed as endangered because at least some populations are thought not to be under immediate threat . The Department of Environment and Conservation of the Western Australian State Government classes it as " Priority Two – Poorly Known " flora . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Like many plants in Australia 's southwest , Banksia aculeata is adapted to an environment in which bushfire events are relatively frequent . Most Banksia species can be placed in one of two broad groups according to their response to fire : reseeders are killed by fire , but fire also triggers the release of their canopy seed bank , thus promoting recruitment of the next generation ; resprouters survive fire , resprouting from a lignotuber or , more rarely , epicormic buds protected by thick bark . Banksia aculeata is killed by fire because it possesses neither thick protective bark nor a lignotuber to reshoot from . However it is serotinous — it accumulates an aerial seed bank that is released only in response to fire — so populations typically recover rapidly after fire . This strategy makes it depend upon a suitable fire regime , however . Plants take three to four years to reach flowering after a bushfire . 
 Pollinators have not been observed , and the flowering period is brief when compared with other banksias . However , the flowers appear when little else is in flower , rendering it a valuable food source . 
 Banksia aculeata has previously been reported as moderately susceptible to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi , but in a recent study this pathogen was found to have no direct impact on the species . As a result of this finding , together with the low percentage of populations infested or facing imminent infestation , the species was classed as having a very low extinction risk . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Banksia aculeata grows slowly , taking five to six years to flower from seed . Regarding its potential as an ornamental plant , Alex George observes that the flowers are brightly coloured but have a short life and are obscured by the foliage , which is quite prickly . However he considers both the new foliage and the infructescence are attractive . This species can grow in a range of soil types so long as they provide good drainage . The nominal pH range is from 5 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 5 . It prefers full sun , although it will grow in partly shaded situations but produce fewer flowers . It will tolerate light pruning . 
 = Gebelein predynastic mummies = 
 The Gebelein predynastic mummies are six naturally mummified bodies , dating to approximately 3400 BC from the Late Predynastic period of Ancient Egypt . They were the first complete predynastic bodies to be discovered . The well @-@ preserved bodies were excavated at the end of the nineteenth century by Wallis Budge , the British Museum Keeper for Egyptology , from shallow sand graves near Gebelein ( modern name Naga el @-@ <unk> ) in the Egyptian desert . 
 Budge excavated all the bodies from the same grave site . Two were identified as male and one as female , with the others being of undetermined gender . The bodies were given to the British Museum in 1900 . Some grave @-@ goods were documented at the time of excavation as " pots and flints " , however they were not passed on to the British Museum and their whereabouts remain unknown . Three of the bodies were found with coverings of different types ( reed matting , palm fibre and an animal skin ) , which still remain with the bodies . The bodies were found in foetal positions lying on their left sides . 
 From 1901 the first body excavated has remained on display in the British Museum . This body was originally nicknamed ' Ginger ' due to his red hair ; this nickname is no longer officially used as part of recent ethical policies for human remains . 
 = = Excavation = = 
 In 1895 and 1896 the ruins at Abydos , <unk> , Hierakonpolis and Gebelein were excavated . In 1892 Jacques de Morgan , Director of Antiquities in Egypt , proved that pottery found at Abydos and <unk> pre @-@ dated the dynastic period , stimulating interest by many European Archaeologists . As each excavation was completed , local Egyptian residents would continue to search the sites for remains . In 1895 E. A. Wallis Budge , on behalf of the British Museum , procured inscribed coffins and funerary furniture from the 12th Dynasty tombs at Al @-@ <unk> by working with the Egyptian Service of Antiquities . Budge started purchasing predynastic finds from the locals including bowls , spear and arrow heads , carved flint and bone figures and partial human remains ( described as chiefly bones without skin or flesh remaining ) . 
 In 1896 , Budge was approached by a resident of Gebelein who claimed to have found more mummies . Budge was taken to the bodies , and he immediately recognized them as from the predynastic period and the first complete pre @-@ dynastic bodies identified . He began excavations and a total of six mummified bodies were removed from shallow sand graves at <unk> Bila <unk> ( <unk> River ) located at the eastern slopes of the north @-@ most hill at Gebelein . 
 The only grave goods were a pot found with the female adult body and partial remains of wicker , fur and linen with the other bodies . In the predynastic period bodies were usually buried naked and sometimes loosely wrapped . In such a burial , when the body is covered in warm sand , the environmental conditions mean that most of the water in the body is quickly evaporated or drained away , meaning that the corpse is naturally dried and preserved . This method was widely used in the pre @-@ dynastic Egyptian period , before artificial mummification was developed . The natural mummification that occurred with these dry sand burials may have led to the original Egyptian belief in an after @-@ death survival and started the tradition of leaving food and implements for an afterlife . 
 All bodies were in similar flexed positions lying on their left sides with knees raised up towards their chin . In comparison , most bodies excavated from Egypt dating to the predynastic period are in a similar position , however at <unk> Beni Salama and El @-@ Amra bodies were found on their right sides . From the time these bodies were buried up until the Middle Kingdom period , the dead were laid on their sides . After this period they were buried on their backs ( dorsal position ) , and from the Fifth Dynasty the bodies were always fully extended . 
 Archaeological interest in <unk> started in the early 18th century and was included in Benoît de Maillet 's Description de l 'Egypte . The site includes the remains from a temple to the deity Hathor with a number of cartouches on mud bricks and a royal stela from the 2nd Dynasty and 3rd Dynasty . Later period finds include 400 Demotic and Greek ostraca from a 2nd – 1st century BC mercenary garrison . As well as official excavations , many artefacts from the site were traded on the antiquities market and can be found in the museums of Turin , Cairo , Berlin , Lyons and the British Museum . 
 = = Description = = 
 The bodies were buried in separate shallow graves , placed in the fetal position ( knees raised towards their heads ) , which was the most common form for Egyptian burials of the time . 
 In 1967 a series of X @-@ rays and photographs of all mummified bodies in the British Museum 's Egyptian Antiquities collection provided a detailed analysis for the mummies from the Gebelein excavations . The findings are summarized below : 
 The first body excavated had red hair , this led to the nickname of " Ginger " by curators and later by the public . After the Human Tissue Act 2004 , the British Museum has developed policies for ethical treatment of human remains and no longer uses this nickname . 
 = = = Death of Gebelein Man = = = 
 In November 2012 it was revealed that EA 32751 ( Gebelein Man ) had probably been murdered . A CAT scan of the mummified body taken at the Cromwell Hospital in London showed that Gebelein Man had been aged about 18 to 20 at the time of his death and had been well muscled . Under his left shoulder blade the scan revealed a puncture to the body ; the murder weapon had been used with such force that it had slightly damaged the shoulder blade but had shattered the rib beneath it and penetrated the lung . It was believed that the injury had been caused by a copper blade or flint knife at least 12 cm in length and 2 cm wide . Daniel Antoine , the British Museum 's expert on human remains , believes that Gebelein Man had been taken by surprise by the attack as there were no defense wounds . 
 = = Exhibition history = = 
 The mummies were acquired by the British Museum in 1900 . One male adult body , museum number EA 32751 ( then nicknamed " Ginger " ) , went on display in 1901 , and was the earliest mummified body seen by the public . Apart from maintenance , it has been on continuous display in the same gallery since 1901 . In 1987 the body was temporarily taken off display for restoration and a female mummified body replaced it . She was nicknamed " <unk> " even though the body has long brown hair . 
 The male body , EA 32751 , is displayed in a reconstructed sand grave in the British Museum in room 64 and case 15 . Though Budge wrote of " pots and flints " with the body , these artefacts were not acquired by the museum . A number of Egyptian grave goods taken from similar graves of the period are instead used in the display . The grave goods include black @-@ topped clay pots that were typical of the predynastic period through to Naqada II , and plain and buff coloured pots and bowls typical of slightly later periods . There are also slate palettes , hard stone vessels and flint knives which would be associated with more elaborate burials of the historical period . 
 One man was wrapped in a skin , a second in a mat of palm fibre , and the third was rolled up in a reed mat . The woman was without covering , and the only pot in her grave contained what seemed to be a sort of dried porridge ... 
 I unpacked the first man we had taken out of his grave at <unk> one Saturday in March 1900 , in the presence of Lord Crawford and the Principal Librarian , and when it was laid on a table it was as complete as when I first saw it at <unk> . But when it was examined again on the following Monday morning it was discovered that the top joint of one of the forefingers was missing , and it has , to my knowledge never been found since . The body was exhibited at once in the First Egyptian Room , and for the first time the British public saw a neolithic Egyptian . 
 Of the other five bodies , only the female adult , given museum number EA <unk> , has been exhibited . In 1997 @-@ 8 the body was part of a tour to Rome as part of the Palazzo <unk> , Ancient Faces exhibition . Again in 2001 the body went to Birmingham as part of the Gas Hall , Egypt Revealed exhibition . In 2001 before going out on loan , the body had some restoration using Japanese <unk> paper to secure a loose finger , reattach a rib and to reattach some locks of hair . Strips of polyethylene were used to reduce movement of the right arm . 
 = The Day the Violence Died = 
 " The Day the Violence Died " is the eighteenth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 17 , 1996 . It was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Wesley Archer . Kirk Douglas guest stars as Chester J. Lampwick , Alex Rocco as Roger Meyers Jr . , Jack Sheldon as an anthropomorphic constitutional amendment , Suzanne Somers as herself , and Phil Hartman as Lionel Hutz . The end of the episode features Lester and Eliza , versions of Bart and Lisa Simpson that appeared in The Tracey Ullman Show in the 1980s . 
 In the episode , Bart meets Chester J. Lampwick , who claims and successfully proves that he is the creator of Itchy from The Itchy & Scratchy Show . Lampwick sues Itchy and Scratchy Studios , the owner of the Itchy and Scratchy characters , which he claims stole his idea . After the studio awards Lampwick a US $ 800 billion settlement , it is forced into bankruptcy and shuts down . When The Itchy & Scratchy Show is replaced by a parody of Schoolhouse Rock ! ' s " I 'm Just a Bill " segment , Bart and Lisa try to bring the show back . They find a legal precedent that could help their cause , but before they can act , other kids save the day instead . 
 The episode finished 47th in ratings for the week of March 11 – 17 , 1996 with a 9 @.@ 2 Nielsen rating . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . The episode received a generally positive reception from television critics . DVD Movie Guide and the Los Angeles Daily News enjoyed the episode 's focus on The Itchy & Scratchy Show . Criticism of the episode focused on its observations of generic television shows . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a parade honoring The Itchy & Scratchy Show , Bart meets an elderly homeless person , Chester J. Lampwick , who claims to be the creator of Itchy . He insists Roger Meyers , the supposed creator of the characters Itchy and Scratchy , stole the idea from him and proves this claim to Bart with his animated short Manhattan Madness from 1919 . The film , however , is suddenly destroyed by the projector . To shelter Lampwick , Bart lets him live at his house . However , the Simpson family want Lampwick to leave , but Bart does not want him to live on the streets . Suddenly coming up with an idea to properly compensate Lampwick for creating Itchy , Bart and Chester go to Roger Meyers Jr . , CEO of Itchy & Scratchy Studios , and ask him for $ 800 million . They are quickly thrown out . 
 Lampwick then decides , with the help of Bart and lawyer Lionel Hutz , to sue Itchy and Scratchy Studios . His case is not solid , until Bart remembers that he saw an original animation cel created by Lampwick for sale by Comic Book Guy and tricks Homer to give him the money . Buying the cel , Bart shows its inscription , proving that Lampwick is the creator of Itchy . Roger Meyers Jr. then admits that his father stole Itchy from Lampwick , but still rebuffs him by saying that animation is based on plagiarism . The judge rules in favor of Lampwick and orders Meyers to pay Lampwick the $ 800 million , which was apparently the entire corporation ’ s welfare . While Bart is happy that Lampwick is no longer poor , he is sad when he realizes that by helping Lampwick , he has helped take The Itchy & Scratchy Show off television because the studio is bankrupt and forced to close down . 
 When Bart and Lisa discover that The Itchy & Scratchy Show has been replaced by a parody of Schoolhouse Rock ! ' s " I 'm Just a Bill " segment , they search for a way to resurrect the cartoon . They find a legal precedent that could help , but discover that two other kids , Lester and Eliza , have beaten them to it . Discovering that the post office mascot Mr. Zip had been ripped off from Itchy & Scratchy Studios , Lester and Eliza helped secure a large cash settlement from the government for Itchy & Scratchy Studios . Despite being happy that Itchy & Scratchy are back on the air , Bart and Lisa leave , disturbed that their spotlight has been stolen . Later that day as Marge tries to comfort her kids , Lester skateboards by the Simpson household and glares at Bart through the window ( as if telling Bart , this was his fault for helping Lampwick bankrupt Myers and shut down the studio ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 During their tenure as executive producers of The Simpsons , Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein tried to include one episode related to The Itchy & Scratchy Show in every season . " The Day the Violence Died " , written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Wes Archer , was The Itchy & Scratchy Show @-@ related episode for the seventh season , and became a vehicle for jokes about animation . After completing the episode , Oakley commented , " This episode is one of the craziest episodes ever , I would dare say . It is so packed with references and inside jokes and the ending is so bizarre that a lot of people didn 't understand it . " The episode was considered polarizing . In one of its jokes , Bart asks Homer for a large sum of money and Homer immediately pulls out his wallet . Oakley described the scene as " very controversial " among the show 's producers ; Matt Groening , the creator of The Simpsons , in particular did not like it . 
 In Swartzwelder 's original script , the " Amendment to Be " segment was a cartoon that was consciously a parody of the humor style of The Simpsons , but the producers felt that it was not funny . As a result , it was replaced by the " Amendment to Be " cartoon , which is a parody of the " I 'm Just a Bill " segment of the educational television series Schoolhouse Rock . Worried about potential lawsuits , the lawyer of The Simpsons made the animators change the design of the senator in the segment . The end of the episode features Lester and Eliza , different versions of Bart and Lisa , who save Itchy & Scratchy Studios . Bart and Lisa typically solve problems in the show , but the writers decided to try something different and have a new pair of characters take their positions . Lester 's design is a slightly altered version of Bart 's design in The Tracey Ullman Show and is voiced by Tress MacNeille , who normally voices Bart on temporary tracks . 
 American actor Kirk Douglas guest stars in the episode as Chester J. Lampwick . William Hickey , not Douglas , was the producers ' first choice for the role , who they described as " famous for being a grouchy , mean old man " . Oakley and Weinstein , who often search for " the absolutely perfect voice " when looking for guest stars rather than simply using celebrities , felt that Hickey 's gruff raspy voice would be perfect for the role , but he turned them down . In Nancy Cartwright 's autobiography My Life as a 10 @-@ Year @-@ Old Boy , she comments that the episode 's script was a " gem " and recalls that Kirk Douglas ' recording session , directed by Josh Weinstein , was fraught with interruptions . He refused to wear the earphones supplied to him in the recording studio , saying they hurt his ears , so he was unable to hear Weinstein from his booth . Cartwright directed Douglas , who was in a hurry and said that he would do two takes per line at the most . However , despite reading his lines all at once , he only had trouble with one scene ; the scene in which Lampwick tells Bart he created Itchy & Scratchy required three takes , as Douglas continuously misread the line " I changed all that " as " I charged all that " . Cartwright managed to get him to do a third reading of the line by pretending to sneeze during his second take . 
 In his script , Swartzwelder randomly paired David Brinkley and Suzanne Somers together as the parade commentators . The producers were unable to get Brinkley to play his part , so he was instead voiced by Harry Shearer . However , they were successful in getting Somers to voice herself . Alex Rocco returned to voice Roger Meyers , Jr . He had previously voiced the character in the episode " Itchy & Scratchy & Marge " , and while the character had reappeared in several episodes , in those instances he was voiced by Hank Azaria . The episode also stars Pamela Hayden and Tress MacNeille , and Phil Hartman as lawyer Lionel Hutz . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Roger Meyers , Sr. being cryogenically frozen is a reference to the myth that Walt Disney was frozen . When Roger Meyers Jr. pleads his case in court , he mentions that several animated television series and characters were " plagiarized " from other series and characters : " Animation is built on plagiarism ! If it weren 't for someone plagiarizing The Honeymooners , we wouldn 't have The Flintstones . If someone hadn 't ripped off Sergeant Bilko , there 'd be no Top Cat . Huckleberry Hound , Chief Wiggum , Yogi Bear ? Hah ! Andy Griffith , Edward G. Robinson , Art Carney . " The Manhattan Madness cartoon in " The Day the Violence Died " is based on one of the first animated cartoons Gertie the Dinosaur . The original name of Itchy on the film reel , " Itchy the Lucky Mouse " , is a direct reference to one of Walt Disney 's first cartoon characters " Oswald the Lucky Rabbit " , created by Disney and Ub Iwerks . The cartoon also features a caricature of US President Theodore Roosevelt . The " Amendment To Be " segment is a parody of the educational show Schoolhouse Rock , and more specifically " I 'm Just a Bill " , and refers to the Flag Desecration Amendment . Jack Sheldon , who sang the original song in " I 'm Just a Bill " , voices the song in the " Amendment to Be " segment . 
 The cartoon " Itchy and Scratchy Meets Fritz The Cat " is a reference to the 1972 animated film Fritz the Cat that depicts drug use and sexual situations openly . Fritz the Cat was also the first animated movie to be rated X , before the NC @-@ 17 rating existed . The first Itchy & Scratchy cartoon entitled " Steamboat Itchy " , which originally appeared in " Itchy & Scratchy : The Movie " , is a reference to Steamboat Willie , the first Mickey Mouse sound cartoon to be released , and Joseph P. Kennedy , father of former United States President John F. Kennedy , is listed as one of the cartoon 's producers . The episode 's title alludes to the line " the Day the Music Died " from Don McLean 's 1971 song " American Pie " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Day the Violence Died " finished 47th in the ratings for the week of March 11 – 17 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 2 . The episode was the highest rated show on the Fox network that week . " The Day the Violence Died " received generally positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and called it a " hoot " , praising Harry Shearer 's impression of David Brinkley . " It ’ s hard to top the original Itchy cartoon – where else can you see a cartoon mouse kill both an Irishman and Teddy Roosevelt ? " said Jacobson , further complimenting the episode 's twist ending : " For once , when Bart and Lisa team up to do the right thing , it backfires badly . " He also applauded the casting of Kirk Douglas as a guest star , and ended the review by calling the episode a " winner " . Total Film 's Nathan Ditum named Douglas the 18th best guest star on The Simpsons . 
 DVD Movie Guide claimed that any show focused on The Itchy & Scratchy Show is " hard to beat " and the Los Angeles Daily News considered this a " cause for joy " . Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict said that the best part of the episode is during The Itchy & Scratchy Show copyright trial , when lawyer " Lionel Hutz stalls for time by calling all of his surprise witnesses again : a ventriloquist and his dummy , Santa Claus with a broken leg , a caricature of John Swartzwelder , Ralph Wiggum , and the fattest twins in The Guinness Book of World Records . " Malkowski concluded her review by giving the episode a grade of B- . The episode was considered a classic by The Rockford Register Star , which enjoyed the " perfect parody of the old ' Schoolhouse Rock ' cartoon , ' I 'm Just a Bill . ' " DVD Movie Guide " loved " the first The Itchy & Scratchy Show cartoon , " Itchy & Scratchy Meet Fritz the Cat " . In the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Unofficial " Simpsons " Guide by Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , they comment that " The Day the Violence Died " is " a great episode , with some clever observations on ideas and copyright , and a superb – and sinister – twist ending featuring the return of both Bart and Lisa from their days on The Tracey Ullman Show . " 
 Criticism of the episode stemmed from its observations of generic television shows . Dave Foster of DVD Times commented that it features " clever inside jokes , a few astute gags at the expense of the often ridiculous situations found in sitcoms as well as some keen insights on the oft @-@ debated TV violence issue " but that " its played @-@ out observations on how generic shows can be are often too adept making this one tough to fully appreciate with the same affection as the other well @-@ realised scripts found in this season . " Columbia University offered a course that analyzed The Simpsons during the September 2005 school term . In one of the classes , entitled " The Simpsons ' Self @-@ <unk> " , students viewed " The Day the Violence Died " , and later considered one of the episode 's most memorable quotes to be : " Bart : ' Lisa , if I ever stop loving violence , I want you to shoot me . ' Lisa : ' Will do . ' " 
 = Moral rights in United Kingdom law = 
 Moral rights in United Kingdom law are parts of copyright law that protect the personal interests of the author of a copyrighted work , as well as the economic interests protected by other elements of copyright . Found in the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , the moral rights are the right to be identified as the author of a work , known as the right of paternity , the right to object to derogatory treatment of a work , known as the right of integrity , the right not to be identified as the author of someone else 's work , and the right to privacy . The right of paternity exists for the entire copyright term , and requires individuals who commercially broadcast , sell , perform or exhibit literary , dramatic , musical or artistic works to identify the author of the work – but this does not apply to things such as typefaces , encyclopaedias or works subject to crown copyright . 
 The right of integrity protects authors from having their copyrighted works altered in such a fashion as to constitute a " distortion " or " mutilation " of the original work , or in a way that harms the author 's reputation or honour . Cases vary as to how the right of integrity should be interpreted , with some judges saying that " distortion " or " mutilation " should be taken to be part of the wider clause on reputation and honour to avoid subjective decisions , and others interpreting each clause as distinct types of violation . The right to object to false attribution protects individuals from being identified as the authors of works they have not contributed to ; unlike the other moral rights it exists only for the individual 's lifetime and the 20 years after death , not for the full term of copyright . The United Kingdom 's law on moral rights has been criticised for failing to correctly implement the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works , and for being unreasonably narrow in the types of creative works it covers . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Copyright law , throughout its history , has sought to protect not only the financial interests of the authors but also their personality rights . Evolving from the French droit moral , moral rights protect the personality and reputation of the copyrighted work 's author . Under the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works , providing protection for moral rights is a requisite part of member states ' legal systems . The actual rights provided vary from nation to nation ; French law treats moral rights as supreme and perpetual , and German law gives both moral and economic rights the same weighting , but the British legal system has traditionally " manifested a certain scepticism towards claims that authors deserve special protection in law " , and until the Copyright , Designs and Patents Act 1988 , there was little protection . Even with the passage of the 1988 Act , academics still debate over how far the rights should go . 
 = = Rights = = 
 Authors can still rely on the old common law rights which remain in force ; they act as alternate forms of relief if a claim under dedicated moral rights is dubious , or is seen as unlikely to succeed . Similarly , an author can sometimes rely on contractual rights , as in Frisby v BBC , where the claimant was allowed to block modifications to his work by virtue of a contractual clause prohibiting the BBC from making " structural " changes to his script . Originally these were the only forms of relief for injured authors , although Section 43 of the Copyright Act 1956 created a " tort of misattribution " . With the 1988 Act , however , four distinct moral rights were recognised : the right to be identified as the author ( the right of paternity ) , the right to object to derogatory treatment ( the right of integrity ) , the right to object to false attribution , and the right to privacy in private films and photographs . Because moral rights are personal rights attached to the author , rather than economic rights attached to the work , they cannot be transferred or assigned , but they can be waived . 
 = = = Right to be identified = = = 
 The right to be identified , known as the right of paternity , applies to the creators of original literary , dramatic , musical or artistic works ; for films , the right to be identified is granted to the director rather than the writer . Some specific types of work are not protected by this right , particularly those made to report current events , periodicals , newspapers or encyclopaedias . These exceptions were included as a result of lobbying by the publishing industry , and the fear that the need to name the author of a current events report could interfere with its speedy delivery , and undermine the image of the news as objective and neutral . Under Section 79 , the right to be identified also does not apply to authors of computer programs , computer @-@ generated works , typefaces or works protected by crown copyright . On those works which are covered by this moral right , there is a need to assert it ; this may be done through an instrument assigning copyright , or any other instrument written by the author or director . If the asserting is done through a document designed to assign copyright , it binds the assignee and anyone who claims through him , with or without notice ; if it is done through another instrument , it only applies to those who are directly informed of the assertion . 
 Once the right to be identified has been asserted , it applies for the duration of copyright , but only for works created after 1 August 1989 . If the right is then infringed , the author or director has legal recourse . For the right to be infringed , the author must show that they have not been properly identified , that this was in circumstances where the work should have been attributed , and that none of the exceptions or defences apply . In regards to the lack of proper identification , for identification to be acceptable the name of the author must appear in each copy of the work in a prominent fashion , under Section 77 ( 7 ) of the 1988 Act ; where it is not appropriate for the author 's name to appear on each copy , it must appear in a fashion that brings their identity to the attention of any person using or acquiring a copy of the work . If the work is a building , the name must be visible to people entering or approaching it . If the author specifies a pseudonym or some other form of identification when asserting the right of attribution , that form of identification should be adopted . 
 Specific circumstances lead to a requirement for attribution , and it is only in these circumstances that the right to be identified can be infringed . An author of a literary or dramatic work has the right to be identified whenever the work is broadcast , performed in public or sold commercially , while the director of a film has the right to be named when videos are commercially sold , or when the film is broadcast on television or in other formats . Songwriters are treated slightly differently , in that while the author of a song has the right to be named on commercial publications , there is no requirement to identify them when the song is broadcast or performed in public . Where the work is artistic , the artist has the right to be identified where the work is commercially published , exhibited in public , or where a visual image is broadcast ; if the artwork is recorded , the artist should be identified when the resulting film is shown in public . If the work is a sculpture , " work of artistic craftsmanship " or building , the author should also be named where " copies of a graphic work representing it or of a photograph of it " are shown to the public . 
 = = = Right to object to derogatory treatment = = = 
 The right to object to derogatory treatment , or " right of integrity " , is considered by Bently and Sherman to be " one of the most important of the innovations in the 1988 Act " . Applying to authors of literary , dramatic , musical or artistic works , as well as the directors of films , the right forbids " derogatory treatment " of the copyrighted work in circumstances where the author should be protected from such treatment . The word treatment refers to " any addition to , deletion from , alteration to or adaptation of the work " – in other words , any interference with the work 's internal structure . This deliberately excludes translations of literary works , or arrangements or transcriptions of musical works involving nothing more than a change in key or register . 
 Once it has been proven that modifications amounted to a " treatment " , that treatment must then be derogatory . Section 80 ( 2 ) ( b ) of the 1988 Act provides that a treatment is derogatory if it constitutes a " distortion " or " mutilation " of the work , or otherwise damages the honour or reputation of the author . The Act gives no guidance as to what constitutes distortion or mutilation , and the courts have in some cases adopted the idea that these concepts should be considered part of the clause prohibiting damage to the author 's honour or reputation , as in Confetti Records v Warner Music UK Ltd . This is because the alternative – simply looking at distortion and mutilation as individual concepts – could result in confusion due to the highly subjective nature of the words . Other judges have supported the interpretation that distortions and mutilations can be treated as individual concepts , and that treatments harming the author 's reputation are only considered in that light if the treatment is not derogatory enough to constitute a distortion , as in Tidy v Trustees of the Natural History Museum . 
 <unk> treatment must also have occurred in circumstances where the author has the right to be protected from it . The right to object to such treatment does not exist simply to protect damage , mutilation or the author 's reputation . For literary , dramatic or musical works , the author is protected from derogatory treatment if the treatment is published commercially , performed in public or communicated to the public ; he is also protected when a film or sound recording including the derogatory treatment is publicly issued . If the work is an artistic one , the author can sue when the derogatory treatment is commercially published or publicly exhibited , or when someone publicly shows a film or sound recording of the treatment . For films , the author is protected when the derogatory treatment is shown or communicated to the public , or when copies of it are issued to the public . 
 While exceptions to normal infringement such as fair dealing do not apply , the right to object to derogatory treatment has its own , individualised exceptions . When works are created by employees of a company in the course of their work , the company or its other employees can alter the work in question , with the author 's rights " giving way to the light of business reality " . This exception does not apply if the employee has already been identified on the work , either at the time of alteration or at any point beforehand . Another exception allows for the alteration of work in order to avoid committing a criminal offence , such as one of those under the Obscene Publications Act 1959 . 
 = = = Right to object to false attribution = = = 
 The right to object to false attribution is the oldest of the statutory moral rights , originating ( albeit in a limited form ) in the Fine Arts Copyright Act 1862 . Found in Section 84 of the 1988 Act , the right to object to false attribution allows individuals to avoid being named on works they are not the author of , and applies to literary , dramatic , musical or artistic works , as well as films . It only applies to acts of false attribution perpetrated after 1 August 1989 , and lasts for 20 years after the death of the person falsely attributed with authorship . It is infringed whenever an individual issues copies of a work to the public , exhibits them in public or broadcasts them with a false attribution . 
 Whether or not a work is attributed to the wrong person depends on , according to Clark v Associated Newspapers , " the single meaning which ... the work conveys to the notional reasonable reader " . There is no need to prove that the false attribution caused any harm to the actual author , and the right has been interpreted to cover situations as diverse as a newspaper parody of Alan Clark 's diaries , an interview with Dorothy Squires and a replica painting that contained the signature of the original author . The right is closely linked to passing off , defamation and other non @-@ statutory causes of action , which may be used to supplement a claim for infringing the right to object to false attribution . David <unk> , writing in the International Journal of Law and Information Technology , goes as far as to say that the right to object to false attribution is merely " passing off , writ large " . Cornish , Llewelyn and Aplin also note a strong overlap between the rights against false attribution and against derogatory treatment . 
 = = = Right to privacy = = = 
 The moral right to privacy was the " first acknowledgement in English law of any right to privacy " , although it operates in limited circumstances . Under it , where an individual has a photograph or film commissioned for private use , and this is original enough to be copyrighted , they hold a monopoly on broadcasting it , showing it publicly and issuing copies to the public . This right lasts for the length of the copyright , and each commissioner of the work holds the right individually ; any person who has commissioned the work may choose to license it . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 The United Kingdom law relating to moral rights has been repeatedly criticised , primarily for failing to entirely comply with the Berne Convention . Bently and Sherman point out that the right to object to derogatory treatment uses a far narrower definition of treatment than the Convention , which merely requires that the author be able to object to " any ... derogatory action " without limitation . <unk> notes a " grudging attitude toward moral rights , at least if the expression given these rights in [ the 1988 Act ] is any testament " . Article 5 ( 2 ) of the Berne Convention requires that the exercise of authors ' moral rights " shall not be subject to any formality " , while the right to attribution requires that the author assert ownership in writing , and is not available to authors by default . In addition , the exclusion of things such as encyclopedias , computer programs and typefaces is " out of step with international practise " . 
 = Margaret Chin = 
 Margaret Chin ( born May 26 , 1954 ) is the Council member for the 1st District of the New York City Council . A Democrat , she and Queens Council member Peter Koo comprise the Asian American delegation of the city council . 
 The district includes all or parts of Battery Park City , Chinatown , Civic Center , East Village , Ellis Island , Financial District , Governors Island , Greenwich Village , Liberty Island , Little Italy , Lower East Side , <unk> , <unk> , SoHo , Tribeca , and the West Village . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 Born on May 26 , 1954 in Hong Kong as the third of five children and the only daughter in the family , Chin immigrated to the United States from Hong Kong in 1963 . Her father , who arrived to the U.S. before his family did , was an undocumented worker , working as a waiter in the Bronx ; his experiences inspired her to advocate for immigration reform during her political tenure . 
 Chin grew up in Chinatown and graduated from the Bronx High School of Science and the City College of New York with a degree in education . She worked for 14 years at LaGuardia Community College 's Division of Adult and Continuing Education . She is married to Alan Tung , a public school teacher . Their son , Kevin , also graduated from the Bronx High School of Science . He completed his studies at Syracuse University , and is now studying photography in Santa Barbara , California . 
 Chin has been a member of several public service groups and organizations . In 1974 , she was a founding member of Asian Americans for Equality , a group dedicated to " empowering Asian Americans and others in need " , and she served as the board 's president from 1982 to 1986 . She was the chairperson of the New York Immigration Coalition , a policy and advocacy organization which works on issues concerning immigrants and refugees . She was a board member of the Association for Neighborhood and Housing Development , an affordable housing non @-@ profit organization . Chin was also a founding member of the Chinatown Partnership Local Development Corporation , a group that was formed in 2006 to " rebuild Chinatown following 9 / 11 , and to preserve the neighborhood 's unique culture while ensuring its vitality in the future . " 
 In local and state politics , Chin was a member of Manhattan Community Board 1 and Manhattan Community Board 3 , and was elected to the New York State Democratic Committee for two terms from 1986 to 1990 . 
 Chin speaks Cantonese , Mandarin , and Taishanese , and has stated that her ethnicity helped her win the district that includes Chinatown . In her words , many new immigrants and seniors do not speak English , and appreciated that they could speak to her directly and " talk to a City Council member without having to go through an interpreter . " Hunter College professor and sociologist Peter Kwong , who has written books on Chinese Americans , said that Chin 's election victory was a " milestone in an increasingly active Asian American community " and a " special moment in Chinatown history " . Margaret Fung , head of Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund , a national Asian American civil rights group , described Chin 's win as a " significant step forward for Asian American political representation " . 
 = = New York City Council = = 
 Prior to winning the 2009 city council election , Chin had run and lost in the Democratic Party primary election for the District 1 seat in 1991 , 1993 , and 2001 . 
 In a primary that had a small turn @-@ out , she won the Democratic nomination with 39 % of the vote , ousting two @-@ term incumbent Alan Gerson . Chin earned 4 @,@ 541 votes to Gerson 's 3 @,@ 520 ; the other three candidates , PJ Kim , Pete Gleason , and Arthur Gregory won 1 @,@ 927 votes , 1 @,@ 293 votes , and 235 votes , respectively . Campaigning on the issues of affordable housing , improving infrastructure , immigration reform , and better services for senior citizens , Chin won the general election held on November 3 against Republican candidate Irene Horvath in a landslide victory , carrying 86 % of the vote . 
 In 2013 , Council Member Chin ran for reelection for the New York City Council . She received an endorsement from the Stonewall Democratic Club of New York prior to the September 2013 Democratic Party Primary . She was challenged in the primary by Democrat Jenifer Rajkumar , a Lower Manhattan District Leader , in a widely publicized race . Chin won with 58 @.@ 5 % of the vote . Chin is a member of the Progressive Caucus , and the Women 's Caucus . Chin has twice been elected by her colleagues to serve as an executive member of the Black , Latino , and Asian Caucus 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Aging ( Chair ) 
 Education 
 Recovery and Resiliency 
 Rules 
 Privileges 
 Elections 
 Transportation 
 Youth Services 
 = = Election history = = 
 = The Painted Skin = 
 " The Painted Skin " ( Chinese : 畫皮 ; pinyin : <unk> ) is a short story by the Chinese writer Pu Songling collected in Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio in 1740 . Literary critics have recognised it as one of the best and best @-@ known entries in Strange Tales ; in particular , its textual detail and in @-@ depth characterisation are lauded . " The Painted Skin " has also received numerous adaptations in popular media , especially in film . The story 's original title has become a common phrase in Chinese vocabulary , " a synonym for duplicity that wears an outwardly human face but is inwardly demonic " . 
 Set in Shandong , the story revolves around a Chinese scholar , Wang , who becomes infatuated by a demon in disguise as a beautiful young maiden . They develop a romantic relationship which goes awry after Wang discovers her true identity . Thereafter , a Taoist priest 's skills are put to the task of exorcising the demon ; a fight between good and evil ensues . 
 = = Plot = = 
 An academician from Taiyuan , referred to only by his surname Wang , chances upon a homeless girl who claims to be an ill @-@ treated concubine . Noting her beauty , as well as feeling pity for her , Wang agrees to let her stay at his residence temporarily . They make love at his study , unbeknownst to anybody else . A few days afterwards , Wang 's spouse , Chen , discovers their affair and is unhappy with the arrangement , but fails at changing his mind . At the marketplace , a Taoist priest informs Wang that he has been possessed by an evil spirit . Wang dismisses this with incredulity . He returns home but finds the gates locked . Nevertheless , he manages to find a way into the courtyard and notices that the front door is bolted too . <unk> through the window , Wang makes a startling discovery − the girl is actually a " green @-@ faced monster , a ghoul with great jagged teeth like a saw . " All this while , she had been wearing a mask made of human skin , on which her attractive features were painted . 
 In petrification , he returns to the Taoist priest and begs him for help . The priest agrees but concurrently wishes to be lenient on a likewise sentient being , thus only offers Wang a charm meant to ward off demons . Wang goes back home and hangs the charm outside his bedroom , but it has no effect on the demon . Instead , she turns enraged and rips out Wang 's heart . Wang 's spouse reports this to the priest who , incited to fury , launches a full @-@ scale offensive on the demon . They find that it has transformed into an elderly helper working at Wang 's brother 's place . In the climax , the demon reverts to its original form , and the priest beheads it with his wooden sword . The demon 's remains dissipate into smoke which the priest stores in his calabash . He also rolls up the demon 's " painted skin " and stores it away . 
 Later on , the priest tells Chen to visit a lunatic beggar at the marketplace , should she wish to revive her husband . The madman treats her with disrespect by continuously demeaning her , but she takes it in her stride and patiently pleads with him for help . Finally , he coughs out some phlegm and makes her swallow it . The beggar makes his leave and Chen is left feeling deeply ashamed . Back home , during funeral preparations , the phlegm hardens gradually and rises from Chen 's stomach to her throat . Ultimately she disgorges a throbbing heart , which she places into the gaping wound in Wang 's chest ; slowly , his life is restored . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The story was originally titled " Huapi " ( 畫皮 ) and first appeared in Pu Songling 's anthology of supernatural tales , Strange Tales from a Chinese Studio ( Liaozhai ) in 1740 . It was first translated into English as " The Painted Skin " by the British sinologist Herbert A. Giles and was included in his 1880 translation of Strange Tales . It reappeared with modifications in a subsequent edition , published in 1908 . Since then , many other translators , including John Minford ( 2006 ) , have published their translations of " The Painted Skin " . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 How foolish men are , to see nothing but beauty in what is clearly evil ! And how benighted to dismiss as absurd what is clearly well @-@ intended ! It is folly such as this that obliges the lady Chen to steel herself to eat another man 's phlegm , when her husband has fallen prey to lust . Heaven 's Way has its inexorable justice , but some mortals remain foolish and never see the light ! 
 At surface , " The Painted Skin " is a story of a lustful scholar 's encounter with a demon who disguises itself as a lady . Pu Songling intended for the story to be viewed as a parable of human desire and its negative consequences , and emphasised this with his appended comment , " a typical piece of moral didacticism that denounces sexual promiscuity , extols faithfulness , and endorses belief in karma and retribution . " " The Painted Skin " utilises both the zhiguai and chuanqi styles of writing in bringing out " the ghost 's critical and creative writing " , whereas the complexity of prose parallels the " cultural ramifications of the ghost . " 
 Skin is a major plot device in " The Painted Skin " , serving as a " path between the separate worlds of human and animal , or the natural and the supernatural " . Reality versus perception of it is another overarching issue ; what Wang deems to be a pretty female is in fact a vicious demon . Moral courage trumps the occult and supernatural powers ; the Taoist priest is unable to revive Wang with his magic , whereas Chen 's sacrificial love is arguably more effective in doing so . By extension , this also decreases the credibility of religious institutions , continuing Pu 's subtle criticism of religion present in many other Liaozhai stories . Pu also presents the trope of the " beautiful talented ghost " in an inverted fashion , portraying art , represented by the demon , as something " utterly demonic " ; Man 's " blind admiration " of it can lead to his dire downfall . 
 = = Literary significance and reception = = 
 " The Painted Skin " stays true to the early style of zhiguai by showcasing the chaotic relations between " human society and the world beyond " , unlike majority of Liaozhai tales which narrate peaceful coexistence between the two groups . It is also significant for being , in the words of Lu Xun , " zhiguai in the chuanqi style " ; Pu was one of the earliest writers to amalgamate the two similar genres in their writings . 
 The story was positively received . As translator John Minford notes , " ( the story ) is one of the most widely read of all the Strange Tales ... and continues to be popular for its powerful theme and the sheer gruesomeness of its detail . " Pu Songling is praised by literary critics for offering readers vivid characterisation and an emboldened stance against lust . Qing dynasty critic Dan <unk> ( <unk> ) offers in his 1842 interlinear commentary of Liaozhai , " ( Wang ) is clearly a man in the grip of a serious sexual delusion ... ( Chen ) should not bother bringing her worthless husband back from the dead . " Taiwanese writer Yi @-@ <unk> Wang ( <unk> ) provides a psychoanalytical review of " The Painted Skin " , describing Wang as relying on his wife to restore " the Deep Structure of male @-@ dominated Chinese culture . " 
 Due to its widespread popularity and usage , the term huapi ( 畫皮 ) became a Chinese idiom . According to Mair and Mair , " the words “ painted skin ” have become a synonym for duplicity that wears an outwardly human face but is inwardly demonic . " During the rise of Communist China , led by Chairman Mao Zedong , the meaning of huapi took on a political undertone ; at different points in time it was used to describe United States colonisation , USSR revisionists , as well as the Gang of Four , amongst a host of other political factions or figures . In 21st @-@ century China , huapi is still used in political contexts , but generally means refers to the " mask of an evildoer " and has been used in conjunction with " quack herbal cures " and " fake cell @-@ phones " . 
 = = Inspiration = = 
 Before " The Painted Skin " , there was already a plethora of zhiguai @-@ chuanqi stories about lady – beast metamorphosis . An account in the fifth @-@ century anthology of fictitious accounts , titled Garden of the Strange ( Yi yuan <unk> ) , by Liu <unk> ( <unk> ) concerns a bachelor named Xu Huan ( <unk> ) who gets acquainted with a tiger spirit passing off as a beautiful woman . Blinded by lust , Xu is kidnapped by the tiger , who returns him home after ten days . Tang dynasty writer Xue <unk> ( <unk> ) penned a story on a <unk> native , Cui Tao , who marries a tiger spirit that ultimately devours their child and him . " Scholar Wu of Jiangnan " ( <unk> ) by Zhang Du ( <unk> ) revolves around the Wu household , and Wu 's eventual discovery that his spouse , Madam Liu , is a demon . Pu Songling , in writing " The Painted Skin " and many of the other Liaozhai entries , is written to have been inspired by the above @-@ mentioned zhiguai texts , and expended upon the early authors ' efforts . 
 = = Legacy and adaptations = = 
 " The Painted Skin " has been adapted or represented in film , television , and cartoons on numerous occasions . The long list of adaptations underscore the story 's enduring legacy ; in particular , it is written to have inspired generations of filmmakers . One of the earliest film adaptations of the story is Bao Feng 's Huapi ( 1965 ) . A rumoured 1970s Painted Skin film was reportedly banned in China after a short run at the box office because of its overly intense horror scenes – it is claimed that some audience members died of fright . Its existence , however , has yet to be proven . King Hu 's last film was a " faithful " adaptation of " The Painted Skin " , released in 1993 . Other film adaptations of the story include Painted Skin ( 2008 ) , and its sequel Painted Skin : The Resurrection ( 2012 ) . 
 A television series based on " The Painted Skin " , directed by Danny Ko , was first broadcast in 2011 . In 2001 , China Post issued commemorative Liaozhai postage stamps in Shandong , the birthplace of Pu Songling . Amongst the collection is one depicting a scene in " The Painted Skin " ; others show scenes from entries such as " <unk> " and " Stealing Peaches " . 
 = Charles Holden = 
 Charles Henry Holden <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ( 12 May 1875 – 1 May 1960 ) was a Bolton @-@ born English architect best known for designing many London Underground stations during the 1920s and 1930s , for Bristol Central Library , the Underground Electric Railways Company of London 's headquarters at 55 Broadway and for the University of London 's Senate House . He also created many war cemeteries in Belgium and northern France for the Imperial War Graves Commission . 
 After working and training in Bolton and Manchester , Holden moved to London . His early buildings were influenced by the Arts and Crafts Movement , but for most of his career he championed an unadorned style based on simplified forms and massing that was free of what he considered to be unnecessary decorative detailing . Holden believed strongly that architectural designs should be dictated by buildings ' intended functions . After the First World War he increasingly simplified his style and his designs became pared @-@ down and modernist , influenced by European architecture . He was a member of the Design and Industries Association and the Art Workers ' Guild . He produced complete designs for his buildings including the interior design and architectural fittings . 
 Although not without its critics , his architecture is widely appreciated . He was awarded the Royal Institute of British Architects ' ( RIBA 's ) Royal Gold Medal for architecture in 1936 and was appointed a Royal Designer for Industry in 1943 . His station designs for London Underground became the corporation 's standard design influencing designs by all architects working for the organisation in the 1930s . Many of his buildings have been granted listed building status , protecting them from unapproved alteration . He twice declined the offer of a knighthood . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Henry Holden was born on 12 May 1875 at Great Lever , Bolton , the fifth and youngest child of Joseph Holden ( 1842 – 1918 ) , a draper and milliner , and Ellen ( née Broughton , 1841 – 1890 ) Holden . Holden 's childhood was marred by his father 's bankruptcy in 1884 and his mother 's death when he was fifteen years old . Following the loss of his father 's business , the family moved 15 miles ( 24 km ) to St Helens ( present @-@ day Merseyside ) , where his father returned to his earlier trade and worked as an iron turner and fitter and where he attended a number of schools . 
 He briefly had jobs as a laboratory assistant and a railway clerk in St Helens . During this period he attended draughting classes at the YMCA and considered a career as an engineer in Sir Douglas Fox 's practice . In 1891 he began working for his brother @-@ in @-@ law , David Frederick Green , a land surveyor and architect in Bolton . In April 1892 he was articled to Manchester architect Everard W. Leeson and , while training with him , also studied at the Manchester School of Art ( 1893 – 94 ) and Manchester Technical School ( 1894 – 96 ) . 
 While working and studying in Manchester , Holden formed friendships with artist Muirhead Bone and his future brother @-@ in @-@ law Francis Dodd . About this time Holden was introduced to the writings of Walt Whitman and became friends with James William Wallace and a number of the members of Bolton 's Whitman society known as the " Eagle Street College " . Whitman 's writings and those of Henry David Thoreau , Ralph Waldo Emerson and Edward Carpenter were major influences on Holden 's life . He incorporated many of their philosophies and principles into his style of living and method of working . 
 In 1895 and 1896 Holden submitted designs to Building News Designing Club competitions using the pseudonym " The Owl " . Although the number of competing submissions made was not always large , from nine competition entries , Holden won five first places , three second places and one third place . In 1897 , he entered the competition for the RIBA 's prestigious Soane Medallion for student architects . Of fourteen entries , Holden 's submission for the competition 's subject , a " Provincial Market Hall " , came third . Holden described the design as being inspired by the work of John Belcher , Edgar Wood and Arthur Beresford <unk> . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Around 1898 Holden began living with Margaret Steadman ( née Macdonald , 1865 – 1954 ) , a nurse and midwife . They were introduced by Holden 's older sister , Alice , and became friends through their common interest in Whitman . Steadman had separated from her husband James Steadman , a university tutor , because of his alcoholism and abuse . Steadman and her husband were never divorced and , though she and Holden lived as a married couple and Holden referred to her as his wife , the relationship was never formalised , even after James Steadman 's death in 1930 . 
 The Holdens lived in suburban Norbiton , Surrey ( now Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames ) until 1902 , when they moved to <unk> in Hertfordshire . Around 1906 , they moved to Harmer Green near Welwyn , where Holden designed a house for them . The house was plainly furnished and the couple lived a simple life , described by Janet Ashbee in 1906 as " bananas and brown bread on the table ; no hot water ; plain living and high thinking and strenuous activity for the betterment of the World " . The couple had no children together , though Margaret had a son , Allan , from her marriage . Charles and Margaret Holden lived at Harmer Green for the rest of their lives . 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Holden left Leeson 's practice in 1896 and worked for Jonathan Simpson in Bolton in 1896 and 1897 , working on house designs there and at Port Sunlight , before moving to London to work for Arts and Crafts designer Charles Robert Ashbee . His time with Ashbee was short and , in October 1899 , he became chief assistant in H. Percy Adams ' practice , where he remained for the rest of his career . 
 A number of Holden 's early designs were for hospitals , which Adams ' practice specialised in . At this early stage in his career , he produced designs in a variety of architectural styles as circumstances required , reflecting the influences of a number of architects . Holden soon took charge of most of the practice 's design work . From 1900 to 1903 , Holden studied architecture in the evenings at the Royal Academy School . He also continued to produce designs in his spare time for his brother @-@ in @-@ law and Jonathan Simpson . 
 His red brick arts and craft façades for the Belgrave Hospital for Children in Kennington , south London ( 1900 – 03 ) , were influenced by Philip Webb and Henry Wilson and feature steeply pitched roofs , corner towers and stone window surrounds . The building , now converted to apartments , is Grade II * listed . 
 In 1902 , Holden won the architectural competition to design the Bristol Central Library . His Tudor Revival façades in bath stone incorporate modernist elements complementing the adjacent Abbey Gate of Bristol Cathedral . The front façade features oriel windows and sculpture groups with Chaucer , Bede and Alfred the Great by Charles <unk> . Internally , the design is classical , with the furniture designed by Holden and the stone carving mostly by William Aumonier . It was described by architectural historian Sir Nikolaus Pevsner as " free Neo @-@ Tudor " and " extremely pretty " and by Andor Gomme as " one of the great masterpieces of the early Modern Movement " . It has been compared with Charles Rennie Mackintosh 's Glasgow School of Art and it is sometimes suggested that Mackintosh 's designs for the later part of the school were inspired by Holden 's , although Pevsner noted that Mackintosh 's designs were in circulation earlier . The building is Grade I listed . 
 At Midhurst , West Sussex , Holden designed Tudor @-@ style façades for the Sir Ernest Cassel @-@ funded King Edward VII Sanatorium ( 1903 – 06 ) . The building features long wings of south @-@ facing rooms to maximise patients ' exposure to sunlight and fresh air . The design is in keeping with the building 's rural setting , with façades in the local tile @-@ hung style . Pevsner called this " certainly one of the best buildings of its date in the country " and " a model of how to build very large institutions " . He designed the sanitorium 's V @-@ shaped open @-@ air chapel so that it could be used for both outdoor and indoor worship . Both buildings are Grade II listed . Other hospitals he designed in this period include the British Seamen 's Hospital in Istanbul ( 1903 – 04 ) and the Women 's Hospital in Soho , central London ( 1908 ) . 
 For The Law Society he designed ( 1902 – 04 ) a simplified neoclassical extension to the existing Lewis Vulliamy @-@ designed building in Chancery Lane with external sculptures by Charles <unk> and a panelled arts and crafts interior with carving by William Aumonier and friezes by Conrad Dressler . Pevsner considered the façades to be Mannerist : " The fashionable term Mannerism can here be used legitimately ; for Holden indeed froze up and invalidated current classical motifs , which is what Mannerist architects did in the <unk> . " 
 In 1906 , Holden won the architectural competition to design a new headquarters for the British Medical Association on the corner of The Strand and Agar Street ( now Zimbabwe House ) . The six @-@ storey L @-@ shaped building replaced a collection of buildings on the site already occupied by the Association and provided it with accommodation for a council chamber , library and offices on the upper floors above space for shops on the ground floor and in the basement . Described by Powers as " classicism reduced to geometric shapes " , the first three storeys are clad in grey Cornish granite with Portland stone above . Located at second floor level was a controversial series of 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) tall sculptures representing the development of science and the ages of man by Jacob Epstein . The building is Grade II * listed . Alastair Service considered it " perhaps his best London building " . 
 In 1909 , Holden won the design competition for an extension to the Bristol Royal Infirmary . Subsequently dedicated to the memory of King Edward VII ( died 1910 ) , the extension ( 1911 – 12 ) was built on steeply sloping ground for which Holden designed a linked pair of Portland stone @-@ faced blocks around a courtyard . The plain , abstract blocks have towers on the corners and two @-@ storey loggias , and are a further simplification of Holden 's style . 
 The practice became Adams & Holden in 1907 when Holden became a partner and Adams , Holden & Pearson when Lionel Pearson became a partner in 1913 . In 1913 , Holden was awarded the RIBA 's Godwin medal and £ 65 to study architecture abroad . He travelled to America in April 1913 and studied the organisation of household and social science departments at American universities in preparation for his design of the Wren @-@ influenced Kings College for Women , Kensington . Other buildings by Holden before the First World War include modernist office buildings in Holborn and Oxford Street , an extension in red brick of Alfred Waterhouse 's Shire Hall in Bedford , and Arts and Crafts Sutton Valence School , Kent . 
 Holden also worked with Epstein on the tomb of Oscar Wilde at Père Lachaise cemetery in Paris ( 1911 – 12 ) . In 1915 , he was a founding member of the Design and Industries Association and he was a member of the Art Workers ' Guild from 1917 . Unsuccessful competition entries for which he produced designs include Strathclyde Royal Infirmary ( 1901 ) , Manchester Royal Infirmary ( 1904 ) , County Hall ( 1907 ) , the National Library of Wales ( 1909 ) , Coventry Town Hall ( 1911 ) and the Board of Trade building ( 1915 ) . 
 = = = War cemeteries and memorials = = = 
 The Holdens shared a strong sense of personal duty and service . In the First World War , Margaret Holden joined the " Friends ' Emergency Committee for the Assistance of Germans , Austrians and Hungarians in distress " which helped refugees of those countries stranded in London by the conflict . Charles Holden served with the Red Cross 's London Ambulance Column as a stretcher @-@ bearer transferring wounded troops from London 's stations to its hospitals . Holden also served on the fire watch at St Paul 's Cathedral between 1915 and 1917 . 
 On 3 October 1917 , Holden was appointed a temporary lieutenant with the army 's Directorate of Graves Registration and Enquiries . He travelled to the French battlefields for the first time later that month and began planning new cemeteries and expanding existing ones . Holden described his experience : 
 The country is one vast wilderness , blasted out of recognition where once villages & orchards & fertile land , now tossed about & churned in hopeless disorder with never a landmark as far as the eye can reach & dotted about in the scrub and untidiness of it all are to be seen here & there singly & in groups little white crosses marking the place where men have fallen and been buried . 
 In September 1918 , Holden transferred to the Imperial War Graves Commission ( now the Commonwealth War Graves Commission ) with the new rank of major . From 1918 until 1928 he worked on 69 Commission cemeteries . Initially , Holden ran the drawing office and worked as the senior design architect under the three principal architects in France and Belgium ( Edwin Lutyens , Reginald Blomfield and Herbert Baker ) . Holden worked on the experimental war cemetery at <unk> and , according to <unk> and Karol , probably on the one at <unk> that was selected as the prototype for all that followed . 
 In 1920 , he was promoted to be the fourth principal architect . His work for the Commission included memorials to the New Zealand missing dead at Messines Ridge British Cemetery , and the Buttes New British Cemetery at Zonnebeke . His designs were stripped of ornament , often using simple detailed masses of Portland stone in the construction of the shelters and other architectural elements . Philip Longworth 's history of the Commission described Holden 's pavilions at Wimereux Communal Cemetery as " almost cruelly severe " . 
 In 1922 , Holden designed the War Memorial Gateway for Clifton College , Bristol , using a combination of limestone and gritstone to match the Gothic style of the school 's buildings . For the British War Memorials Committee , he produced a design for a Hall of Remembrance ( 1918 ) that would have been in the form of an art gallery , and for New College , Oxford , he created a design for a tiny memorial chapel ( 1919 ) . Neither was constructed . 
 = = = London Transport = = = 
 Through his involvement with the Design and Industries Association Holden met Frank Pick , general manager of the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) . Holden at the time had no experience in designing for transport , but this would change through his collaboration with Pick . In 1923 , Pick commissioned Holden to design a façade for a side entrance at Westminster tube station . This was followed in 1924 with an appointment to design the UERL 's pavilion for the British Empire Exhibition . Also in 1924 , Pick commissioned Holden to design seven new stations in south London for the extension of the City and South London Railway ( now part of the Northern line ) from Clapham Common to Morden . The designs replaced a set by the UERL 's own architect , Stanley Heaps , which Pick had found unsatisfactory . The designs reflect the simple modernist style he was using in France for the war cemeteries ; double @-@ height ticket halls are clad in plain Portland stone framing a glazed screen , each adapted to suit the street corner sites of most of the stations . The screens feature the Underground roundel made up in coloured glass panels and are divided by stone columns surmounted by capitals formed as a three @-@ dimensional version of the roundel . Holden also advised Heaps on new façades for a number of the existing stations on the line and produced the design for a new entrance at Bond Street station on the Central London Railway . 
 During the later 1920s , Holden designed a series of replacement buildings and new façades for station improvements around the UERL 's network . Many of these featured Portland stone cladding and variations of the glazed screens developed for the Morden extension . At Piccadilly Circus , one of the busiest stations on the system , Holden designed ( 1925 – 28 ) a spacious travertine @-@ lined circulating concourse and ticket hall below the roadway of the junction from which banks of escalators gave access to the platforms below . 
 In 1926 , Holden began the design of a new headquarters for the UERL at 55 Broadway above St. James 's Park station . Above the first floor , the steel @-@ framed building was constructed to a cruciform plan and rises in a series of receding stages to a central clock tower 175 feet ( 53 m ) tall . The arrangement maximises daylight to the building 's interior without the use of light wells . Like his stations of the period and his pre @-@ First World War commercial buildings , the block is austerely clad in Portland stone . Holden again detailed the façades with commissioned sculptures ; Day and Night , two compositions by Epstein , are at first floor level , and a series of eight bas @-@ reliefs at the seventh floor represent the four winds ( two for each of the cardinal directions , on each side of the projecting wings ) . The building is Grade I listed . 
 In 1930 , Holden and Pick made a tour of Germany , the Netherlands , Denmark and Sweden to see the latest developments in modern architecture . The UERL was planning extensions of the Piccadilly line to the west , north @-@ west and north of London , and a new type of station was wanted . Adapting the architectural styles he had seen on the tour , Holden created functional designs composed of simple forms : cylinders , curves and rectangles , built in plain brick , concrete and glass . The extensions to the west and north @-@ west were over existing routes operated by the District line and required a number of stations to be rebuilt to accommodate additional tracks or to replace original , basic buildings . Sudbury Town , the first station to be rebuilt in 1931 , formed a template for many of the other new stations that followed : a tall rectangular brick box with a concrete flat roof and panels of vertical glazing to allow light into the interior . The Grade II * listed building was described by Pevsner as " an outstanding example of how satisfying such unpretentious buildings can be , purely through the use of careful details and good proportions . " 
 For Arnos Grove station , one of eight new stations on the northern extension of the line , Holden modified the rectangular box into a circular drum , a design inspired by Gunnar Asplund 's Stockholm Public Library . Also notable on the northern extension is Southgate station ; here Holden designed a single @-@ storey circular building with a canopied flat roof . Above this , the central section of roof rises up on a continuous horizontal band of clerestory windows , supported internally by a single central column . The building is topped by an illuminated feature capped with a bronze ball . Other stations show the influence of Willem Marinus <unk> 's work in Hilversum , Netherlands . In order to handle such a large volume of work , Holden delegated significant design responsibility to his assistants , such as Charles Hutton , who took the lead on Arnos Grove Station . For some other Piccadilly line stations the design was handled in @-@ house by Stanley Heaps or by other architectural practices . All followed the modern brick , glass and concrete house style defined by Holden , but some lacked Holden 's originality and attention to detail ; Pick dubbed these " <unk> " . 
 The UERL became part of London Transport in 1933 , but the focus remained on high quality design . Under Pick , Holden 's attention to detail and idea of integrated design extended to all parts of London 's transport network , from designing bus and tram shelters to a new type of six @-@ wheeled omnibus . In the late 1930s , Holden designed replacement stations at Highgate , East Finchley and Finchley Central and new stations at Elstree South and Bushey Heath for the Northern line 's Northern Heights plan . Holden 's designs incorporated sculpture relevant to the local history of a number of stations : Dick Whittington for Highgate , a Roman centurion at Elstree South and an archer for East Finchley . Much of the project was postponed shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War and was later cancelled . Only East Finchley station was completed in full with Highgate in part ; the other plans were scrapped . East Finchley station is located on an embankment and the platforms are accessed from below . Making use of the station 's air @-@ rights , Holden provided staff office space spanning above the tracks accessed through semi @-@ circular glazed stairways from the platforms . Eric Aumonier provided the statue The Archer , a prominent feature of the station . 
 Holden 's last designs for London Transport were three new stations for the Central line extension in north @-@ east London . These were designed in the 1930s , but were also delayed by the war and were not completed until 1947 . Post @-@ war austerity measures reduced the quality of the materials used compared with the 1930s stations and the building at Wanstead was adapted from a temporary structure constructed during the line 's wartime use as an underground factory . Gants Hill is accessed through subways and has no station building , but is notable for the design of its platform level concourse , which features a barrel vaulted ceiling inspired by stations on the Moscow Metro . 
 = = = University of London = = = 
 After the First World War , the University of London needed a replacement for its overcrowded and scattered accommodation in Kensington . A site was acquired in Bloomsbury near the British Museum and Holden was commissioned in 1931 to design the new buildings , partly due to the success of 55 Broadway . His original plan was for a single structure covering the whole site , stretching almost 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) from Montague Place to Torrington Street . It comprised a central spine linked by a series of wings to the perimeter façade and enclosing a series of courtyards . The scheme was to be topped by two towers : a smaller one to the north , and a 19 @-@ storey , 210 @-@ foot ( 64 m ) tall Senate House . 
 Construction began in 1932 , but due to a shortage of funds , the design was gradually revised and cut back , and only the Senate House and Library were completed in 1937 , with the buildings for the Institute of Education and the School of Oriental Studies completed later . The design featured façades of load @-@ bearing brickwork faced with Portland stone . Holden 's intention to adorn the building with sculpture was also not fulfilled . As he had with his earlier buildings , Holden also prepared the designs for the individual elements of the interior design . From its completion until 1957 , it was the tallest office building in London . 
 Senate House divided opinion . Pevsner described its style as " strangely semi @-@ traditional , undecided modernism " , and summarised : " The design certainly does not possess the vigour and directness of Charles Holden 's smaller Underground stations . " Others have described it as Stalinist , or as totalitarian due to its great scale . Functionalist architect Erich Mendelsohn wrote to Holden in 1938 that he was " very much taken and ... convinced that there is no finer building in London . " Historian Arnold <unk> described the building as a " static massive pyramid ... obviously designed to last for a thousand years " , but thought " the interior is more pleasing than the exterior . There is essentially the atmosphere of dignity , serenity and repose that one associates with the architecture of ancient Greece . " The onset of the Second World War prevented any further progress on the full scheme , although Adams , Holden & Pearson did design further buildings for the university in the vicinity . 
 = = = Town planning = = = 
 With virtually no new work being commissioned , Holden spent the war years planning for the reconstruction that would be required once it was over . Holden was a member of the RIBA 's twelve @-@ man committee which formulated the institute 's policy for post @-@ war reconstruction . Holden 's town planning ideas involved the relocation of industry out of towns and cities to new industrial centres in the style of Port Sunlight or Bournville where workers could live close to their workplace . The new industrial centres would be linked to the existing towns with new fast roads and reconstruction in town centres would be planned to provide more open space around the administrative centres . 
 In 1944 – 45 , Holden produced plans for the reconstruction of Canterbury , Kent , with the City Architect Herbert Millson Enderby . Canterbury had been badly damaged by Luftwaffe bombing including the Baedeker raids in May and June 1942 . Holden and Enderby aimed to preserve much of the character of the city , but planned for the compulsory purchase of 75 acres ( 30 ha ) of the town centre for large scale reconstruction including a new civic way from the cathedral to a new town hall . Outside the city , they planned bypasses and a ring road at a two @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 @-@ kilometre ) radius of the centre . Although approved by the city council , the plan was widely opposed by residents and freeholders and the " Canterbury Citizens Defence Association " issued an alternative plan before taking control of the council at local elections in November 1945 . The change in administration ended the proposals , although a new plan prepared in 1947 without Holden 's or Enderby 's involvement retained some of their ideas including the ring road . 
 The City of London 's first reconstruction plan was written by the City Engineer F. J. Forty and published in 1944 . It had met with considerable criticism and William Morrison , Minister for Town and Country Planning , asked the City of London Corporation to prepare a new plan . Holden was approached , and he accepted provided that William Holford also be appointed . Holden 's and Holford 's City of London Plan ( 1946 – 1947 ) recommended a relaxation of the strict height limits imposed in the capital and the first use in London of plot ratio calculations in the planning process so that buildings could be designed with floor space of up to five times the ground area . For the bomb @-@ devastated area around St Paul 's Cathedral , Holden proposed a new precinct around which buildings would be positioned to provide clear views of the cathedral and from which new ceremonial routes would radiate . The heights of buildings would be strictly defined to protect these views . The plan was accepted by the Minister for Town and Country Planning in 1948 and was incorporated into the wider London Development Plan . 
 In 1947 , Holden planned a scheme on behalf of the London County Council for the South Bank of the River Thames between County Hall and Waterloo Bridge , including a plan for a concert hall with the council 's architect Edwin Williams . The scheme received little attention and was almost immediately superseded by plans to develop the area as the site of the Festival of Britain . Holden was also architectural and planning consultant to the University of Edinburgh and to the Borough of Tynemouth . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Although Charles Holden had gradually reduced his workload , he was still continuing to go into the office three days per week during the early 1950s . He did not formally retire until 1958 , but even then he visited occasionally . Margaret Holden died in 1954 after a protracted illness which had left her nearly blind since the mid @-@ 1940s . In the last decade of his life , Holden was himself physically weaker and was looked after by his niece Minnie Green . 
 One of Holden 's last public engagements was when he acted as a sponsor at the award of the RIBA 's Royal Gold Medal to Le Corbusier in 1953 . The last project that Holden worked on was a much criticised headquarters building for English Electric in Aldwych , London . In 1952 , Adams , Holden & Pearson were appointed by English Electric 's chairman , Sir George Nelson , and Holden designed a monolithic stone building around a courtyard . In 1955 , the London County Council persuaded English Electric to put the scheme aside and hold a limited architectural competition for a new design . Adams , Holden & Pearson submitted a design , but were beaten by Sir John Burnet , Tait and Partners . When that practice later refused Sir George Nelson 's request to redesign the façades , Adams , Holden & Pearson were reappointed and Charles Holden revised his practice 's competition entry . The new design was criticised by the Royal Fine Art Commission and a further redesign was carried out by one of Holden 's partners to produce the final design , described by Pevsner as " a dull , lifeless building , stone @-@ faced and with nothing to recommend it " . 
 Holden died on 1 May 1960 . His body was cremated at Enfield crematorium and his ashes were spread in the garden of the Friends ' Meeting House in Hertford . On 2 June 1960 a memorial service was held at St Pancras New Church , where Holden had designed the altar in 1914 . Obituaries were published in daily newspapers The Manchester Guardian , The Times and The Daily Telegraph and in construction industry periodicals including The Builder , Architectural Review , Journal of the Royal Institute of British Architects and Journal of the Town Planning Institute . Generally , the obituaries were positive about Holden 's early work and the stations for London Underground , were neutral about Senate House and were negative about his practice 's later works . The Harmer Green house and most of its contents were auctioned with the proceeds left to family members . Holden also left £ 8 @,@ 400 to friends and staff and £ 2 @,@ 000 to charity . 
 = = Holden on architecture = = 
 Holden recognised that his architectural style placed him in " rather a curious position , not quite in the fashion and not quite out of it ; not enough of a traditionalist to please the traditionalists and not enough of a modernist to please the modernists . " He believed that the principal aim of design was to achieve " fitness for purpose " , and repeatedly called for a style of architecture that avoided unnecessary architectural adornment . 
 In 1905 , in an essay titled " If Whitman had been an Architect " , Holden made an anonymous plea to architects for a new form of modern architecture : " Often I hear of the glory of the architecture of ancient Greece ; of the proud Romans ; of sombre Egypt ; the praise of vast Byzantium and the lofty Middle Ages , too , I hear . But of the glory of the architecture of the Modern I never hear . Come , you Modern Buildings , come ! Throw off your mantle of <unk> ; your cornices , pilasters , mouldings , swags , scrolls ; behind them all , behind your dignified proportions , your picturesque groupings , your arts and crafts <unk> and exaggerated techniques ; behind and beyond them all hides the one I love . " 
