 = = = World War I = = = 
 The assistance of the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet was called upon by the German Mediterranean Division , which consisted of the battlecruiser SMS Goeben and light cruiser SMS Breslau . The German ships were attempting to break out of Messina , where they had been coaling prior to the outbreak of war — British ships had begun to assemble off Messina in an attempt to trap the Germans . By this time , the Austro @-@ Hungarians had not yet fully mobilized their fleet , though the three <unk> and three Tegetthoffs , along with several cruisers and smaller craft , were available . The Austro @-@ Hungarian high command , wary of instigating war with Great Britain , ordered the fleet to avoid the British ships , and to only openly support the Germans while they were in Austro @-@ Hungarian waters . On August 7 , when the Germans broke out of Messina , the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet , including the Radetzky @-@ class battleships , sailed as far south as Brindisi , before returning to port . 
 In October 1914 , the French army established artillery batteries on Mount <unk> to support the Army of Montenegro against the Austrian army at Cattaro . By the time they were operational , on October 15 , the Austro @-@ Hungarians were ready with the pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the Habsburg class . However , their 24 cm guns were insufficient to dislodge the French artillery batteries , and so Radetzky was sent to assist them . On October 21 , the ship arrived , and the gunfire from her 30 @.@ 5 cm guns forced the French to abandon the position . On May 24 , 1915 , all three ships bombarded the Italian coast , including the important naval base at Ancona , following the entrance of Italy into the war on the side of the Triple Entente . 
 By October 1918 , Austria prepared to transfer her entire fleet to Yugoslavia in order to keep it out of Italian hands . On November 10 , 1918 , one day before the armistice , Yugoslav officers with scratch crews sailed Radetzky and Zrínyi out of Pola . As they cleared the breakwater at Pola , they sighted the approaching Italian fleet . The two battleships hoisted American flags and sailed south along the Adriatic coast to Castelli Bay near <unk> . They appealed for American naval forces to meet them and accept their surrender , which a squadron of USN submarine chasers in the area did . However , under the subsequent peace treaty , the Allied powers ignored the transfer of the Austro @-@ Hungarian ships to the Yugoslav navy ; instead , the ships were to be ceded to Italy . Radetzky and Zrínyi were broken up in Italy between 1920 – 21 ; Erzherzog Franz Ferdinand survived until 1926 , when she too was scrapped in Italy . 
 = Pleiades = 
 In astronomy , the Pleiades ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) , or Seven Sisters ( Messier 45 or M45 ) , is an open star cluster containing middle @-@ aged , hot B @-@ type stars located in the constellation of Taurus . It is among the nearest star clusters to Earth and is the cluster most obvious to the naked eye in the night sky . The celestial entity has several meanings in different cultures and traditions . 
 The cluster is dominated by hot blue and extremely luminous stars that have formed within the last 100 million years . Dust that forms a faint reflection nebulosity around the brightest stars was thought at first to be left over from the formation of the cluster ( hence the alternative name Maia Nebula after the star Maia ) , but is now known to be an unrelated dust cloud in the interstellar medium , through which the stars are currently passing . Computer simulations have shown that the Pleiades was probably formed from a compact configuration that resembled the Orion Nebula . Astronomers estimate that the cluster will survive for about another 250 million years , after which it will disperse due to gravitational interactions with its galactic neighborhood . 
 = = Origin of name = = 
 The name of the Pleiades comes from Ancient Greek . It probably derives from plein ( ' to sail ' ) because of the cluster 's importance in delimiting the sailing season in the Mediterranean Sea : ' the season of navigation began with their heliacal rising ' . However , the name was later mythologised as the name of seven divine sisters , whose name was imagined to derive from that of their mother Pleione , effectively meaning ' daughters of Pleione ' . In reality , the name of the star @-@ cluster almost certainly came first , and Pleione was invented to explain it . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 The Pleiades are a prominent sight in winter in the Northern Hemisphere , and have been known since antiquity to cultures all around the world , including the Celts , Māori , Aboriginal Australians , the Persians , the Arabs ( who called them Thurayya ) , the Chinese , the Japanese , the Maya , the Aztec , the Sioux and the Cherokee . In Hinduism , the Pleiades are known as Krittika and are associated with the war @-@ god Kartikeya ( Murugan , Skanda ) , who derives his name from them . The god is raised by the six Krittika sisters , also known as the Matrikas . He is said to have developed a face for each of them . 
 The Babylonian star catalogues name the Pleiades <unk> or " star of stars " , and they head the list of stars along the ecliptic , reflecting the fact that they were close to the point of vernal equinox around the 23rd century BC . The Ancient Egyptians may have used the names " Followers " and " Ennead " in the prognosis texts of the Calendar of Lucky and Unlucky Days of papyrus Cairo <unk> . The earliest known depiction of the Pleiades is likely a bronze age artifact known as the Nebra sky disk , dated to approximately 1600 BC . Some Greek astronomers considered them to be a distinct constellation , and they are mentioned by Hesiod , and in Homer 's Iliad and Odyssey . They are also mentioned three times in the Bible ( Job 9 : 9 and 38 : 31 , as well as Amos 5 : 8 ) . Some scholars of Islam suggested that the Pleiades ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) are the star mentioned in the sura ( chapter ) Najm of the Quran . The Persian equivalent is <unk> ( pronounced " <unk> " ) . 
 In Japan , the constellation is mentioned under the name <unk> ( " six stars " ) in the 8th century Kojiki and <unk> documents . The constellation is now known in Japan as Subaru ( " to unite " ) . It was chosen as the brand name of Subaru automobiles to reflect the origins of the firm as the joining of five companies , and is depicted in the firm 's six @-@ star logo . 
 The rising of the Pleiades is mentioned in the Ancient Greek text <unk> . The Greeks oriented the <unk> temple of 550 BC and the Parthenon of 438 BC to their rising . The rising of the Pleiades before dawn ( usually at the beginning of June ) has long been regarded as the start of the new year in Māori culture , with the star group being known as Matariki . The rising of Matariki is celebrated as a midwinter festival in New Zealand . In Hawaiian culture the cluster is known as the Makali 'i and their rising shortly after sunset marks the beginning of <unk> , a 4 @-@ month time of peace in honor of the god <unk> . 
 Galileo Galilei was the first astronomer to view the Pleiades through a telescope . He thereby discovered that the cluster contains many stars too dim to be seen with the naked eye . He published his observations , including a sketch of the Pleiades showing 36 stars , in his treatise Sidereus Nuncius in March 1610 . 
 The Pleiades have long been known to be a physically related group of stars rather than any chance alignment . The Reverend John Michell calculated in 1767 that the probability of a chance alignment of so many bright stars was only 1 in 500 @,@ 000 , and so correctly surmised that the Pleiades and many other clusters of stars must be physically related . When studies were first made of the stars ' proper motions , it was found that they are all moving in the same direction across the sky , at the same rate , further demonstrating that they were related . 
 Charles Messier measured the position of the cluster and included it as M45 in his catalogue of comet @-@ like objects , published in 1771 . Along with the Orion Nebula and the <unk> cluster , Messier 's inclusion of the Pleiades has been noted as curious , as most of Messier 's objects were much fainter and more easily confused with comets — something that seems scarcely possible for the Pleiades . One possibility is that Messier simply wanted to have a larger catalogue than his scientific rival Lacaille , whose 1755 catalogue contained 42 objects , and so he added some bright , well @-@ known objects to boost his list . 
 Edme @-@ Sébastien <unk> then drew in 1782 a map of 64 stars of the Pleiades from his observations in 1779 , which he published in 1786 . 
 = = Distance = = 
 The distance to the Pleiades can be used as an important first step to calibrate the cosmic distance ladder . As the cluster is so close to the Earth , its distance is relatively easy to measure and has been estimated by many methods . Accurate knowledge of the distance allows astronomers to plot a Hertzsprung @-@ Russell diagram for the cluster , which , when compared to those plotted for clusters whose distance is not known , allows their distances to be estimated . Other methods can then extend the distance scale from open clusters to galaxies and clusters of galaxies , and a cosmic distance ladder can be constructed . Ultimately astronomers ' understanding of the age and future evolution of the universe is influenced by their knowledge of the distance to the Pleiades . Yet some authors argue that the controversy over the distance to the Pleiades discussed below is a red herring , since the cosmic distance ladder can ( presently ) rely on a suite of other nearby clusters where consensus exists regarding the distances as established by Hipparcos and independent means ( e.g. , the Hyades , Coma Berenices cluster , etc . ) . 
 Measurements of the distance have elicited much controversy . Results prior to the launch of the Hipparcos satellite generally found that the Pleiades were about 135 parsecs away from Earth . Data from Hipparcos yielded a surprising result , namely a distance of only 118 parsecs by measuring the parallax of stars in the cluster — a technique that should yield the most direct and accurate results . Later work consistently argued that the Hipparcos distance measurement for the Pleiades was erroneous . In particular , distances derived to the cluster via the Hubble Space Telescope and infrared color @-@ magnitude diagram fitting favor a distance between 135 – 140 pc ; a dynamical distance from optical interferometric observations of the Pleiad double Atlas favors a distance of 133 @-@ 137 pc . However , the author of the 2007 – 2009 catalog of revised Hipparcos parallaxes reasserted that the distance to the Pleiades is ~ 120 pc , and challenged the dissenting evidence . Recently , Francis and Anderson proposed that a systematic effect on Hipparcos parallax errors for stars in clusters biases calculation using the weighted mean , and gave a Hipparcos parallax distance of 126 pc , and photometric distance 132 pc based on stars in the AB Doradus , Tucana @-@ Horologium , and Beta Pictoris moving groups , which are all similar in age and composition to the Pleiades . Those authors note that the difference between these results can be attributed to random error . 
 The latest result ( August , 2014 ) used very long baseline radio interferometry ( VLBI ) to determine a distance of 136 @.@ 2 ± 1 @.@ 2 pc , thereby claiming " that the Hipparcos measured distance to the Pleiades cluster is in error . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 The cluster core radius is about 8 light years and tidal radius is about 43 light years . The cluster contains over 1 @,@ 000 statistically confirmed members , although this figure excludes unresolved binary stars . It is dominated by young , hot blue stars , up to 14 of which can be seen with the naked eye depending on local observing conditions . The arrangement of the brightest stars is somewhat similar to Ursa Major and Ursa Minor . The total mass contained in the cluster is estimated to be about 800 solar masses . 
 The cluster contains many brown dwarfs , which are objects with less than about 8 % of the Sun 's mass , not heavy enough for nuclear fusion reactions to start in their cores and become proper stars . They may constitute up to 25 % of the total population of the cluster , although they contribute less than 2 % of the total mass . Astronomers have made great efforts to find and analyse brown dwarfs in the Pleiades and other young clusters , because they are still relatively bright and observable , while brown dwarfs in older clusters have faded and are much more difficult to study . 
 = = Age and future evolution = = 
 Ages for star clusters can be estimated by comparing the Hertzsprung @-@ Russell diagram for the cluster with theoretical models of stellar evolution . Using this technique , ages for the Pleiades of between 75 and 150 million years have been estimated . The wide spread in estimated ages is a result of uncertainties in stellar evolution models , which include factors such as convective overshoot , in which a convective zone within a star penetrates an otherwise non @-@ convective zone , resulting in higher apparent ages . 
 Another way of estimating the age of the cluster is by looking at the lowest @-@ mass objects . In normal main sequence stars , lithium is rapidly destroyed in nuclear fusion reactions . Brown dwarfs can retain their lithium , however . Due to lithium 's very low ignition temperature of 2 @.@ 5 million kelvin , the highest @-@ mass brown dwarfs will burn it eventually , and so determining the highest mass of brown dwarfs still containing lithium in the cluster can give an idea of its age . Applying this technique to the Pleiades gives an age of about 115 million years . 
 The cluster is slowly moving in the direction of the feet of what is currently the constellation of Orion . Like most open clusters , the Pleiades will not stay gravitationally bound forever . Some component stars will be ejected after close encounters with other stars ; others will be stripped by tidal gravitational fields . Calculations suggest that the cluster will take about 250 million years to disperse , with gravitational interactions with giant molecular clouds and the spiral arms of our galaxy also hastening its demise . 
 = = Reflection nebulosity = = 
 Under ideal observing conditions , some hint of nebulosity may be seen around the cluster , and this shows up in long @-@ exposure photographs . It is a reflection nebula , caused by dust reflecting the blue light of the hot , young stars . 
 It was formerly thought that the dust was left over from the formation of the cluster , but at the age of about 100 million years generally accepted for the cluster , almost all the dust originally present would have been dispersed by radiation pressure . Instead , it seems that the cluster is simply passing through a particularly dusty region of the interstellar medium . 
 Studies show that the dust responsible for the nebulosity is not uniformly distributed , but is concentrated mainly in two layers along the line of sight to the cluster . These layers may have been formed by deceleration due to radiation pressure as the dust has moved towards the stars . 
 = = Brightest stars = = 
 The nine brightest stars of the Pleiades are named for the Seven Sisters of Greek mythology : Sterope , Merope , Electra , Maia , <unk> , Celaeno , and Alcyone , along with their parents Atlas and Pleione . As daughters of Atlas , the Hyades were sisters of the Pleiades . The English name of the cluster itself is of Greek origin ( <unk> ) , though of uncertain etymology . Suggested derivations include : from <unk> plein , " to sail , " making the Pleiades the " sailing ones " ; from <unk> <unk> , " full , many " ; or from <unk> <unk> , " flock of doves . " The following table gives details of the brightest stars in the cluster : 
 = = = List = = = 
 = = Possible planets = = 
 Analyzing deep @-@ infrared images obtained by the Spitzer Space Telescope and Gemini North telescope , astronomers discovered that one of the cluster 's stars – HD <unk> , which has a mass and luminosity a bit greater than that of the Sun , is surrounded by an extraordinary number of hot dust particles . This could be evidence for planet formation around HD <unk> . 
 = Harder to Breathe = 
 " Harder to Breathe " is a song by American band Maroon 5 . The song was written by frontman Adam Levine for the band 's debut album , Songs About Jane ( 2002 ) . The song expresses tension , having been written quickly under trying circumstances . It tells the story about a former relationship Levine was involved in . " Harder to Breathe " was met with positive reception by music critics , who praised the track 's sound . It was released in 2002 as the lead single of Songs About Jane . 
 The song peaked at number six on Airplay Monitor . It also appeared on the Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart at number 31 and the Billboard Hot 100 at number 18 . Internationally , the single charted at # 13 in the United Kingdom . " Harder to Breathe " also appeared in the Netherlands , Sweden , Australia , and New Zealand charts , respectively . The song also appears in Maroon 5 's 2004 EP 1.22.03.Acoustic in an acoustic version and the live album Live – Friday the 13th ( 2005 ) . 
 " Harder to Breathe " was featured in One Tree Hill , ER , Birds of Prey and <unk> . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with MTV News in August 2002 , Maroon 5 vocalist Adam Levine , when asked behind the development of " Harder to Breathe " , admitted that the song describes the band 's frustration with their label , Octone Records , during the making of their debut album , Songs About Jane . The band thought they had enough material for a release , but when the label told them to keep writing , Levine wrote this song in frustration at the pressure . " That song comes sheerly from wanting to throw something . It was the 11th hour , and the label wanted more songs . It was the last crack . I was just pissed . I wanted to make a record and the label was applying a lot of pressure , but I 'm glad they did . " 
 " Harder to Breathe " tells the story of a relationship Levine had with a woman named Jane , who , according to Levine was the " muse " in the band 's album . MacKenzie Wilson of AllMusic described the song as a " soulful disposition " . Meghan Bard of The Daily Campus described the single featuring " a great up @-@ tempo number with gritty guitar riffs and powerful vocals " from Levine . Bard noted that the theme in the song was about " recovering from heartbreak " . Angus Batey of The Times compared " Harder to Breathe " sounding as " Zeppelin @-@ esque " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received positive reception from critics . In the Rolling Stone review of the album , critic Christian Hoard called " Harder to Breathe " " a strong single " . C. Spencer Beggs of The Observer wrote : " The two singles [ ' Harder to Breathe ' and ' This Love ' ] are the most popular songs on the album , showing off Maroon 5 's characteristic clean , crisp and upbeat sound . " Sam <unk> of the Daily Lobo , who was less enthusiastic about the album , complimented Maroon 5 on " Harder to Breathe " , in which he said , " The song is enjoyable . There are some aspects of mellow , soulful rockers like Train , John Mayer — maybe even a little Stevie Wonder or Jamiroquai . The track has a good rock meets R & B sound and is predictable enough to get radio play . " 
 In October 2003 , Levine told USA Today , regarding the success of the song , " I didn 't love or hate the song , and I didn 't care if it got on the album . We have a lot of pop songs on our record , and the idea was to start out with something different . Why come out of the gate with another pop song by another pop band ? " The following year , the band released an EP titled 1.22.03.Acoustic ( 2004 ) , which features " Harder to Breathe " in an acoustic version . In 2005 , Maroon 5 released a live album , Live – Friday the 13th , which features the song performed live . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Maroon 5 released " Harder to Breathe " in 2002 as the lead single of their debut album . The single charted on Airplay Monitor in the number six position . It peaked at number 18 on Billboard 's Hot 100 . The song also appeared on Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart in the number 31 position in 2002 when it was an independent single before it hit commercial radio stations in 2003 – 04 , it is the band 's only song played on alternative rock stations along with " This Love " , while the rest of the band 's other singles were only played on pop and adult contemporary radio outlets considering Maroon 5 as a pop rock band and not an alternative band . Internationally , " Harder to Breathe " appeared in the UK Singles Chart on January 31 , 2004 in the number 13 spot . The song spent seven weeks on the chart . The single appeared in the Netherlands , Sweden , Australia , and New Zealand charts . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Harder to Breathe " was directed by Marc Webb , who later worked with the band for their 2008 video " Goodnight Goodnight " . The video debuted in July 2002 . 
 The video is centered on Maroon 5 playing in a dimly @-@ lit house / factory . Throughout the course of the video , items such as darts on a dart board , candles , pictures , and even members of the band with their instruments are shown fading in and out . Towards the end of the video , Adam Levine is seen walking through a narrow corridor dragging a guitar with pictures on both sides of the wall fading in and out . When he reaches the end of the corridor , he is face to face with a wall with a small light coming out of it and then flings his guitar backwards and then pounds on the wall . The camera then quickly moves to a scene of the band playing and the lights suddenly flickering on . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Ganga Bruta = 
 Ganga Bruta ( literally translated as " Brutal Gang " ; also known as Rough Diamond ) is a 1933 Brazilian drama film directed by Humberto Mauro . Starring Durval Bellini and <unk> Selva , it follows a man who , after killing his wife on their wedding night , moves to a city where he becomes part of a love triangle . It was produced between 1931 and 1932 for Adhemar Gonzaga at his studio Cinédia . On its initial release , the film was highly criticized and its poor viewing figures resulted in financial losses for the distribution company , but later critics and film directors expressed praise for it . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Marcos , a rich engineer , discovers on his wedding night that his bride was not a virgin and murders her in the bridal chamber . Despite the sensation caused in the media by the resultant case , Marcos is acquitted and moves to <unk> in an attempt to put the affair behind him . He finds a job managing the construction of a factory and becomes a co @-@ worker of Décio , who lives with his paralyzed mother and Sônia , his adoptive sister . Sônia , who is engaged to Décio , is attracted to Marcos and although he is initially unaware of her feelings , he eventually acknowledges that he has fallen in love with her . After discovering that Marcos has seduced Sônia , Décio swears to kill him , but a fight culminates in Décio 's death instead . At the end of the film , Marcos and Sônia get married . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Durval Bellini as Marcos 
 <unk> Selva as Sônia 
 Lu <unk> as Marcos ' wife 
 Décio Murillo as Décio 
 <unk> Duarte as Décio 's mother 
 Alfredo Nunes as butler 
 Ivan Villar as servant 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was initially called <unk> das <unk> ( lit . " Dance of Flames " ) . Raul Schnoor , Tamar <unk> , and Ruth Gentil were planned to take starring roles , with shooting taking place in Amazonas and Pará . The film was eventually shot with a different cast in Ilha das Cobras and Quinta da Boa Vista , in the city of Rio de Janeiro , and in <unk> , São Gonçalo , Rio de Janeiro between September 2 , 1931 and October 21 , 1932 , using a hand @-@ held camera . 
 Ganga Bruta was the sixth feature film directed by Humberto Mauro and his second for film studio Cinédia , a company owned by Adhemar Gonzaga . Gonzaga , who was the film producer , conceived it as a silent film with a score recorded on disk and synchronized to the film during its exhibition . When it was almost finished , however , Gonzaga agreed to adding voices recorded on Vitaphone , a change prompted by the advent of sound films and their rise in popularity in the Brazilian market during the production of the film . 
 = = Reception and analysis = = 
 The film was first released on May 29 , 1933 in the Alhambra cinema in Rio de Janeiro . It was not well received on its release ; Ganga Bruta was labeled " the worst film of all time " by critics and resulted in " huge financial losses " for Cinédia . Time Out Rio de Janeiro stated that " It was roundly rejected by traditional critics and short @-@ sighted viewers . " Opinions were revised after its restoration in 1952 for a screening at the 1st Brazilian Cinema Retrospective , when it " deeply impressed " the directors who would be part of Cinema Novo movement in the 1960s and 1970s . For example , Glauber Rocha was especially impressed and later cited it as " one of the 20 best films of all time " in his book <unk> <unk> do Cinema Brasileiro . Another film director , Walter Lima , Jr . , declared , " there are two films that are such clear archetypes of Brazil 's eternal quest , namely <unk> and Ganga Bruta . They represent something that you have to polish and something that determines its own space , suggesting at the same time that something more exists beyond its confines . " 
 Randal Johnson and Robert Stam , writers of Brazilian Cinema , called the film " Mauro 's masterpiece " , saying that it " creatively melds the cinematic styles of expressionism and Soviet montage " . Encyclopedia of Contemporary Latin American and Caribbean Cultures 's Daniel Balderston , Mike Gonzalez and Ana M. Lopez wrote that the film is " magisterial " , combining lyricism , naturalism and expressionism . Writing in South American Cinema : A Critical Filmography , Peter Rist praised its music , saying " Mauro 's audio @-@ visual mélange " has a " full lyrical effect " . Georges Sadoul , author of Dictionary of Films , noted that " despite its silly and conventional plot , this [ is ] Humberto Mauro 's best film and a landmark in the history of Brazilian cinema . " Sadoul suggested the industrial elements were used as " erotic symbols " , and compared a scene to Luis Buñuel 's film Él . French critic Jacques <unk> asserted the main theme of Ganga Bruta is violence , alongside which is " an atmosphere of both carnal and cosmic eroticism " . Writing for the book Le cinéma <unk> , Carlos Roberto de Souza commented that " there are Freudian and surreal echoes " in the film . 
 = Changeling ( film ) = 
 Changeling is a 2008 American psychological drama film , directed , co @-@ produced and scored by Clint Eastwood and written by J. Michael Straczynski , that explores child endangerment , female disempowerment , political corruption , mistreatment of mental health patients , and the repercussions of violence . Based partly on real @-@ life events – the 1928 " Wineville Chicken Coop " kidnapping and murder case in Los Angeles , California – the film stars Angelina Jolie as a woman supposedly reunited with a boy she immediately realizes is not her missing son . When , however , she tries to demonstrate this to the police and city authorities , she is vilified as delusional and an unfit mother . 
 Straczynski spent a year researching the story after hearing about the Wineville Chicken Coop case from a contact at Los Angeles City Hall . Almost all of the film 's script was drawn from thousands of pages of documentation . His first draft became the shooting script and his first film screenplay to be produced . Ron Howard had meant to direct the film , but scheduling conflicts led to his replacement by Eastwood . Instead , Howard and his Imagine Entertainment partner Brian Grazer produced Changeling alongside Malpaso Productions ' Robert Lorenz and Eastwood . Universal Pictures financed and distributed the film . 
 Several actors campaigned for the leading role ; ultimately , the key factor in Eastwood 's decision to cast Jolie was his feeling that her face would suit the 1920s period setting . The film also stars Jeffrey Donovan , Jason Butler Harner , John Malkovich , Michael Kelly and Amy Ryan . While some characters are composites , most are based on actual people . Principal photography , which began on October 15 , 2007 and concluded a few weeks later in December , took place in Los Angeles and other locations in southern California . Eastwood 's low @-@ key direction led actors and crew to note the calmness of the set and the short working days . In post @-@ production , scenes were supplemented with computer @-@ generated skylines , backgrounds , vehicles and people . 
 Changeling premiered to critical acclaim at the 61st Cannes Film Festival on May 20 , 2008 . Further festival appearances preceded a limited release in the United States on October 24 , 2008 , followed by a general release in North America on October 31 , 2008 ; in the United Kingdom on November 26 , 2008 ; and in Australia on February 5 , 2009 . Critical reaction was more mixed than at Cannes . While the acting and story were generally praised , the film 's " conventional staging " and " lack of nuance " were criticized . Changeling earned $ 113 million in box @-@ office revenue worldwide – of which $ 35 @.@ 7 million came from the United States and Canada – and received nominations in three Academy Award and eight BAFTA Award categories . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Los Angeles in 1928 , single mother Christine Collins ( Jolie ) returns home to discover her nine @-@ year @-@ old son , Walter ( Gattlin Griffith ) , is missing . Reverend Gustav Briegleb ( Malkovich ) publicizes Christine 's plight and rails against the Los Angeles Police Department ( LAPD ) for its incompetence , corruption and the extrajudicial punishment meted out by its " Gun Squad " led by Chief James E. Davis ( Feore ) . Several months after Walter 's disappearance , the LAPD tells Christine that he has been found alive . Believing the positive publicity will negate recent criticism of the department , the LAPD organizes a public reunion . Although " Walter " ( Devon Conti ) claims he is Christine 's son , she says he is not . Captain J. J. Jones ( Donovan ) , the head of the LAPD 's Juvenile Division , insists the boy is Walter and pressures Christine into taking him home " on a trial basis " . 
 After Christine confronts Jones with physical discrepancies between " Walter " and her son , Jones arranges for a medical doctor to visit her . He tells Christine that " Walter " is three inches shorter than before his disappearance because trauma has shrunk his spine , and that the man who took Walter had him circumcised . A newspaper prints a story that implies Christine is an unfit mother ; Briegleb tells Christine it was planted by police to discredit her . Walter 's teacher and dentist give Christine signed letters confirming " Walter " is an impostor . Christine tells her story to the press ; as a result , Jones sends her to Los Angeles County Hospital 's " psychopathic ward " . She befriends inmate Carol Dexter ( Ryan ) , who tells Christine she is one of several women who were sent there for challenging police authority . Dr. Steele ( O 'Hare ) deems Christine delusional and forces her to take mood @-@ regulating pills . Steele says he will release Christine if she admits she was mistaken about " Walter " ; she refuses . 
 Detective Ybarra ( Kelly ) travels to a ranch in Wineville , Riverside County , to arrange the deportation of 15 @-@ year @-@ old Sanford Clark ( Eddie Alderson ) to Canada . The boy 's uncle , Gordon Northcott ( Harner ) , has fled after a chance encounter with Ybarra , who mentions his business there being a juvenile matter . Clark tells Ybarra that Northcott forced him to help kidnap and murder around twenty children , and identifies Walter as one of them . Jones tells Briegleb that Christine is in protective custody following a mental breakdown . Jones orders Clark 's deportation , but Ybarra takes Clark to the murder site tells him to dig where the bodies are buried . Clark hesitates , but soon uncovers body parts . Briegleb secures Christine 's release by showing Steele a newspaper story about the Wineville killings that names Walter as a possible victim . Under interrogation by Ybarra , Walter 's impostor reveals his motive was to secure transport to Los Angeles to see his favorite actor , Tom Mix , and says the police told him to lie about being Christine 's son . The police capture Northcott in Vancouver , Canada . Christine 's attorney ( Pierson ) secures a court order for the release of other unjustly imprisoned women who the police wanted to silence . 
 On the day of the city council 's hearing into the case , Christine and Briegleb arrive at Los Angeles City Hall , where they encounter thousands of protesters who are demanding answers from the city . The hearing is intercut with scenes from Northcott 's trial . The council concludes that Jones and Davis should be removed from duty , and that extrajudicial internments by police must be stopped . Northcott 's jury finds him guilty of murder and the judge sentences him to death by hanging . 
 Two years later , Christine has not given up her search for Walter . Northcott sends her a message saying he is willing to admit to killing Walter on condition that Christine meets him before his execution . She visits Northcott , but he refuses to tell her if he killed her son . Northcott is executed the next day . 
 In 1935 , David Clay , one of the boys assumed to have been killed , is found alive in Hesperia , California . He reveals that one of the boys with whom he was imprisoned was Walter . David , Walter , and another boy escaped , but were separated . David does not know whether Walter was recaptured , but he says Walter helped him escape , giving Christine hope he is alive . 
 In the epilogue , it states that after the hearing , Captain Jones was suspended , Chief Davis was demoted , and Los Angeles Mayor George Cryer chose not to run for reelection . California 's state legislature made it illegal to forcibly commit people to psychiatric facilities by mere words alone of authorities , and Rev. Briegleb continued to use his radio show to expose police misconduct and political corruption . Wineville is said to have changed its name to Mira Loma , and Christine Collins reportedly never stopped searching for her son . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Angelina Jolie as Christine Collins 
 John Malkovich as Rev. Gustav Briegleb 
 Jeffrey Donovan as J.J. Jones 
 Michael Kelly as Det . Lester Ybarra 
 Colm Feore as Chief James E. Davis 
 Jason Butler Harner as Gordon Northcott 
 Amy Ryan as Carol Dexter 
 Geoff Pierson as Sammy " S.S. " Hahn 
 Denis O 'Hare as Dr. Jonathan Steel 
 Frank Wood as Ben Harris 
 Peter <unk> as Dr. Earl W. Tarr 
 Reed Birney as Mayor Cryer 
 Gattlin Griffith as Walter Collins 
 = = Historical context = = 
 In 1926 , 13 @-@ year @-@ old Sanford Clark was taken from his home in Saskatchewan ( with the permission of his mother and reluctant father ) by his uncle , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Gordon Stewart Northcott . Northcott took Clark to a ranch in Wineville , California , where he regularly beat and sexually abused the boy — until August 1928 , when the police took Clark into custody after his sister , 19 @-@ year @-@ old Jessie Clark , informed them of the situation . Clark revealed that he was forced to help Northcott and his mother , Sarah Louise Northcott , in killing three young boys after Northcott had kidnapped and molested them . The police found no bodies at the ranch — Clark said they were dumped in the desert — but discovered body parts , blood @-@ stained axes , and personal effects belonging to missing children . The <unk> fled to Canada , but were arrested and extradited to the United States . Sarah Louise initially confessed to the murders , including that of Walter Collins . She later retracted her statement ; Gordon , who had confessed to killing five boys , did likewise . 
 Christine Collins was placed in Los Angeles County Hospital by Captain Jones . After her release , she sued the police department twice , winning the second lawsuit . Although Captain Jones was ordered to pay Collins $ 10 @,@ 800 , he never did . A city council welfare hearing recommended that Jones and Chief of Police James E. Davis leave their posts , but both were later reinstated . The California State Legislature later made it illegal for the police to commit someone to a psychiatric facility without a warrant . Northcott was convicted of the murders of Lewis Winslow ( 12 ) , Nelson Winslow ( 10 ) and an unidentified Mexican boy ; after his conviction , Northcott was reported to have admitted to up to 20 murders , though he later denied the claim . Northcott was executed by hanging in 1930 at the age of 23 . Sarah Louise was convicted of Walter Collins ' murder and served almost 12 years in prison . In 1930 , the residents of Wineville changed the town 's name to Mira Loma to escape the notoriety brought by the case . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Several years before writing Changeling , television screenwriter and former journalist J. Michael Straczynski was contacted by a source at Los Angeles City Hall . The source told him that officials were planning to burn numerous archive documents , among them " something [ Straczynski ] should see " . The source had discovered a transcript of the city council welfare hearings concerning Collins and the aftermath of her son 's disappearance . Straczynski became fascinated with the case ; he carried out some research , and wrote a spec script titled The Strange Case of Christine Collins . Several studios and independent producers optioned the script , but it never found a buyer . Straczynski felt he lacked the time to devote to making the story work and only returned to the project following the cancellation of his television show Jeremiah in 2004 . After 20 years as a screenwriter and producer for television , Straczynski felt he needed a break from the medium , so he spent a year researching the Collins case through archived criminal , county courthouse , city hall and city morgue records . He said he collected around 6 @,@ 000 pages of documentation on Collins and the Wineville murders , before learning enough to " figure out how to tell it " . He wrote the first draft of the new script in 11 days . Straczynski 's agent passed the script to producer Jim Whitaker . He forwarded it to Ron Howard , who optioned it immediately . 
 In June 2006 , Universal Studios and Howard 's Imagine Entertainment bought the script for Howard to direct . The film was on a shortlist of projects for Howard after coming off the commercial success of The Da Vinci Code . In March 2007 , Universal fast @-@ tracked the production . When Howard chose Frost / Nixon and Angels & Demons as his next two directing projects , it became clear he could not direct Changeling until 2009 . After Howard stepped down , it looked as if the film would not be made , despite admiration for the script in the industry . Howard and Imagine partner Brian Grazer began looking for a new director to helm the project ; they pitched the film to Eastwood in February 2007 , and he agreed to direct immediately after reading the script . Eastwood said his memories of growing up during the Great Depression meant that whenever a project dealing with the era landed in his hands , he " redoubled his attention " upon it . Eastwood also cited the script 's focus on Collins — rather than the " Freddy Krueger " story of Northcott 's crimes — as a factor in deciding to make the film . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Straczynski viewed " sitting down and ferreting out [ the ] story " as a return to his journalistic roots . He also drew on his experience writing crime drama for the procedural elements of the plot . Straczynski said he had gathered so much information about the case that it was difficult to work out how to tell it . To let the story develop at its own pace , he put the project aside to allow himself to forget the less essential elements and bring into focus the parts he wanted to tell . He described what he saw as two overlaid triangles : " the first triangle , with the point up , is Collins ' story . You start with her , and her story gets broader and broader and begins having impact from all kinds of places . The overlay on that was an upside down triangle with the base on top , which is the panorama of Los Angeles at that time — 1928 . And it begins getting narrower and narrower toward the bottom , bearing down on her . " Once Straczynski saw this structure , he felt he could write the story . He chose to avoid focusing on the atrocities of the Wineville murders in favor of telling the story from Collins ' perspective ; Straczynski said she was the only person in the story without a hidden agenda , and it was her tenacity — as well as the legacy the case left throughout California 's legal system — that had attracted him to the project . He said , " My intention was very simple : to honor what Christine Collins did . " 
 With Collins as the inspiration , Straczynski said he was left with a strong desire " to get it right " ; he approached it more like " an article for cinema " than a regular film . He stuck close to the historical record because he felt the story was bizarre enough that adding too many fictional elements would call into question its integrity . Straczynski claimed that 95 % of the script 's content came from the historical record ; he said there were only two moments at which he had to " figure out what happened " , due to the lack of information in the records . One was the sequence set in the psychopathic ward , for which there was only limited after @-@ the @-@ fact testimony . Straczynski originally wrote a shorter account of Collins ' incarceration . His agent suggested the sequence needed development , so Straczynski extrapolated events based on standard practice in such institutions at the time . It was at this stage he created composite character Carol Dexter , who was intended to symbolize the women of the era who had been unjustly committed . Straczynski cited his academic background , including majors in psychology and sociology , as beneficial to writing the scenes , specifically one in which Steele distorts Collins ' words to make her appear delusional . Straczynski worked at making the dialogue authentic , while avoiding an archaic tone . He cited his experience imagining alien psyches when writing Babylon 5 as good practice for putting himself in the cultural mindset of the 1920s . 
 Straczynski described specific visual cues in the screenplay , such as in Sanford Clark 's confession scene . Clark 's flashback to a falling axe is juxtaposed with the crumbling ash from Detective Ybarra 's cigarette . The image served two purposes : it was an aesthetic correlation between the axe and the cigarette , and it suggested that Ybarra was so shocked by Clark 's confession that he had not moved or even smoked in the 10 minutes Clark took to tell his story . As with most of the cues , Eastwood shot the scene as written . To ensure the veracity of the story , Straczynski incorporated quotes from the historical record , including court testimony , into the dialogue . He also included photocopies of news clippings every 15 – 20 pages in the script to remind people the story was a true one . So the credits could present the film as " a true story " rather than as " based on " one , Straczynski went through the script with Universal 's legal department , providing attribution for every scene . Straczynski believed the only research error he made was in a scene that referenced Scrabble , pre @-@ dating its appearance on the market by two years . He changed the reference to a crossword puzzle . He did not alter the shooting script any further from his first draft ; though Straczynski had written two more drafts for Howard , Eastwood insisted the first draft be filmed as he felt it had the clearest voice of the three . Straczynski said , " Clint 's funny — if he likes it , he 'll do it , that 's the end of the discussion . When I met with him to ask , ' Do you want any changes , do you want any things cut , added to , subtracted from , whatever ' , he said , ' No . The draft is fine . Let 's shoot the draft . ' " 
 Among the changes Straczynski made from the historical record was to omit Northcott 's mother — who participated in the murders — from the story . He also depicted Northcott 's trial as taking place in Los Angeles , though it was held in Riverside . The title is derived from Western European folklore and refers to a creature — a " changeling " — left by fairies in place of a human child . Due to the word 's association with the supernatural , Straczynski intended it only as a temporary title , believing he would be able to change it later on . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The filmmakers retained the names of the real @-@ life protagonists , though several supporting characters were composites of people and types of people from the era . Angelina Jolie plays Christine Collins ; five actresses campaigned for the role , including Reese Witherspoon and Hilary Swank . Howard and Grazer suggested Jolie ; Eastwood agreed , believing that her face fit the period setting . Jolie joined the production in March 2007 . She was initially reluctant because , as a mother , she found the subject matter distressing . She said she was persuaded by Eastwood 's involvement , and the screenplay 's depiction of Collins as someone who recovered from adversity and had the strength to fight the odds . Jolie found playing Collins very emotional . She said the most difficult part was relating to the character , because Collins was relatively passive . Jolie ultimately based her performance on her own mother , who died in 2007 . For scenes at the telephone exchange , Jolie learned to roller skate in high heels , a documented practice of the period . 
 Jeffrey Donovan portrays Captain J. J. Jones , a character Donovan became fascinated with because of the power Jones wielded in the city . The character quotes the real Jones ' public statements throughout the film , including the scene in which he has Collins committed . Donovan 's decision to play Jones with a slight Irish accent was his own . John Malkovich joined the production in October 2007 as Reverend Gustav Briegleb . Eastwood cast Malkovich against type as he felt this would bring " a different shading " to the character . Jason Butler Harner plays Gordon Northcott , whom Harner described as " a horrible , horrible , wonderful person " . He said Northcott believes he shares a connection with Collins due to their both being in the headlines : " In his eyes , they 're kindred spirits . " Harner landed the role after one taped audition . Casting director Ellen Chenoweth explained that Eastwood chose Harner over more well @-@ known actors who wanted the part because Harner displayed " more depth and variety " and was able to project " a slight craziness " without evoking Charles Manson . Eastwood was surprised by the resemblance between Northcott and Harner , saying they looked " very much " alike when Harner was in makeup . 
 As Harner did for the Northcott role , Amy Ryan auditioned via tape for the role of Carol Dexter . She cited the filming of a fight scene during which Eastwood showed her " how to throw a movie punch " as her favorite moment of the production . Michael Kelly portrays Detective Lester Ybarra , who is a composite of several people from the historical record . Kelly was chosen based on a taped audition ; he worked around scheduling conflicts with the television series Generation Kill , which he was filming in Africa at the same time . Geoff Pierson plays Sammy Hahn , a defense attorney known for taking high @-@ profile cases . He represents Collins and in doing so plants the seeds for overturning " Code 12 " internments , used by police to jail or commit those deemed difficult or an inconvenience . Code 12 was often used to commit women without due process . Colm Feore portrays Chief of Police James E. Davis , whose backstory was changed from that of his historical counterpart . Reed Birney plays Mayor George E. Cryer ; Denis O 'Hare plays composite character Doctor Jonathan Steele ; Gattlin Griffith plays Walter Collins ; and Devon Conti plays his <unk> , Arthur Hutchins . Eddie Alderson plays Northcott 's nephew and accomplice , Sanford Clark . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 = = = = Locations and design = = = = 
 James J. Murakami supervised the production design . Location scouting revealed that many of the older buildings in Los Angeles had been torn down , including the entire neighborhood where Collins lived . Suburban areas in San Dimas , San Bernardino and Pasadena doubled for 1920s Los Angeles instead . The Old Town district of San Dimas stood in for Collins ' neighborhood and some adjacent locales . Murakami said Old Town was chosen because very little had changed since the 1920s . It was used for interiors and exteriors ; the crew decorated the area with a subdued color palette to evoke feelings of comfort . For some exterior shots they renovated derelict properties in neighborhoods of Los Angeles that still possessed 1920s architecture . The crew staged the third floor of the Park Plaza Hotel in Los Angeles into a replica of the 1920s Los Angeles City Council chambers . 
 The 1918 Santa Fe Depot in San Bernardino doubled for the site of Collins ' reunion with " Walter " . The production filmed scenes set at San Quentin in the community . A small farm on the outskirts of Lancaster , California , stood in for the Wineville chicken ranch . The crew recreated the entire ranch , referencing archive newspaper photographs and visits to the original ranch to get a feel for the topography and layout . Steve Lech , president of the Riverside Historical Society , was employed as a consultant and accompanied the crew on its visits . 
 The production sourced around 150 vintage motor cars , dating from 1918 to 1928 , from collectors throughout Southern California . In some cases the cars were in too good a condition , so the crew modified them to make the cars appear like they were in everyday use ; they sprayed dust and water onto the bodywork , and to " age " some of the cars they applied a coating that simulated rust and scratches . The visual effects team retouched shots of Los Angeles City Hall — on which construction was completed in 1928 — to remove weathering and newer surrounding architecture . Costume designer Deborah Hopper researched old Sears department store catalogs , back issues of Life magazine , and high @-@ school yearbooks to ensure the costumes were historically accurate . Hopper sourced 1920s clothing for up to 1 @,@ 000 people ; this was difficult because the fabrics of the period were not resilient . She found sharp wool suits for the police officers . The style for women of all classes was to dress to create a boyish silhouette , using dropped waist dresses , cloche hats that complemented bob cut hairstyles , fur @-@ trimmed coats and knitted gloves . Jolie said the costumes her Collins character wore formed an integral part of her approach to the character . Hopper consulted historians and researched archive footage of Collins to replicate her look . Hopper dressed Jolie in austere grays and browns with knitted gloves , wool serge skirts accompanying cotton blouses , Mary Jane shoes , crocheted <unk> and Art Deco jewelry . In the 1930s sequences at the end of the film , Jolie 's costumes become more shapely and feminine , with a decorative stitching around the waistline that was popular to the era . 
 = = = = Principal photography = = = = 
 Principal photography began on October 15 , 2007 , finishing two days ahead of its 45 @-@ day schedule on December 14 , 2007 . Universal Pictures provided a budget of $ 55 million . The film was Eastwood 's first for a studio other than Warner Bros. since Absolute Power ( 1997 ) . Filming mainly took place on the Universal Studios backlot in Los Angeles . The backlot 's New York Street and Tenement Street depicted downtown Los Angeles . Tenement Street also stood in for the exterior of Northcott 's sister 's Vancouver apartment ; visual effects added the city to the background . The production also used the Warner Bros. backlot in Burbank , California . Eastwood had clear childhood memories of 1930s Los Angeles and attempted to recreate several details in the film : the town hall , at the time one of the tallest buildings in the city ; the city center , which was one of the busiest in the world ; and the " perfectly functioning " Pacific Electric Railway , the distinctive red streetcars of which feature closely in two scenes . The production used two functioning replica streetcars for these shots , with visual effects employed for streetcars in the background . 
 Eastwood is known for his economical film shoots ; his regular camera operator , Steve Campanelli , indicated the rapid pace at which Eastwood films — and his intimate , near @-@ wordless direction — also featured during Changeling 's shoot . Eastwood limited rehearsals and takes to garner more authentic performances . Jolie said , " You 've got to get your stuff together and get ready because he doesn 't linger ... He expects people to come prepared and get on with their work . " Campanelli sometimes had to tell Jolie what Eastwood wanted from a scene , as Eastwood talked too softly . To provide verisimilitude to certain scenes , Eastwood sometimes asked Jolie to play them quietly , as if just for him . At the same time he would ask his camera operator to start filming discreetly , without Jolie 's seeing it . Malkovich noted Eastwood 's direction as " redefining economical " , saying Eastwood was quiet and did not use the phrases " action " and " cut " . He said , " Some [ directors ] — like Clint Eastwood or Woody Allen — don 't really like to be tortured by a million questions . They hire you , and they figure you know what to do , and you should do it ... And that 's fine by me . " Ryan also noted the calmness of the set , observing that her experiences working with director Sidney Lumet on 100 Centre Street and Before the Devil Knows You 're Dead were useful due to his sharing Eastwood 's preference for filming a small number of takes . Donovan said Eastwood seldom gave him direction other than to " go ahead " , and that Eastwood did not even comment on his decision to play Jones with a slight Irish accent : " Actors are insecure and they want praise , but he 's not there to praise you or make you feel better ... All he 's there to do is tell the story , and he hired actors to tell their story . " Gaffer Ross <unk> said he often had to work on a scene without having seen a rehearsal : " Chances are we 'll talk about it for a minute or two , and then we 're executing it . " 
 The original edit was almost three hours long ; to hone it to 141 minutes , Eastwood cut material from the first part of the film to get to Collins ' story sooner . To improve the pacing he also cut scenes that focused on Reverend Briegleb . Eastwood deliberately left the ending of the film ambiguous to reflect the uncertain fates of several characters in the history . He said that while some stories aimed to finish at the end of a film , he preferred to leave it open @-@ ended . 
 = = = = Cinematography = = = = 
 Changeling was director of photography Tom Stern 's sixth film with Eastwood . Despite the muted palette , the film is more colorful than some previous Stern – Eastwood collaborations . Stern referenced a large book of period images . He attempted to evoke Conrad Hall 's work on Depression @-@ set film The Day of the Locust , as well as match what he called the " <unk> " of Mystic River 's look . Stern said the challenge was to make Changeling as simple as possible to shoot . To focus more on Jolie 's performance , he tended to avoid the use of fill lighting . Eastwood did not want the flashbacks to Northcott 's ranch to be too much like a horror film — he said the focus of the scene was the effect of the crimes on Sanford Clark — so he avoided graphic imagery in favour of casting the murders in shadow . 
 Stern shot Changeling in anamorphic format on 35mm film using Kodak Vision 500T <unk> film stock . The film was shot on Panavision cameras and C @-@ Series lenses . Due to the large number of sets , the lighting rigs were more extensive than on other Eastwood productions . The crew made several ceilings from bleached muslin tiles . Stern lit the tiles from above to produce a soft , warm light that was intended to evoke the period through tones close to antique and sepia . The crew segregated the tiles using fire safety fabric <unk> to prevent light spilling onto neighboring clusters . The key light was generally softer to match the warm tones given off by the <unk> . Stern used stronger <unk> — more intense than is commonly used for key lighting — to reduce contrasts when applying daytime rain effects , as a single light source tended to produce harder shadows . 
 Stern lit scenes filmed at the Park Plaza Hotel using <unk> <unk> and tungsten lights rigged within balloon lights . This setup allowed him to " dial in " the color he wanted , as the blend of tones from the tungsten fixtures , wooden walls and natural daylight made it difficult to illuminate the scenes using <unk> or daylight exclusively . Stern said the period setting had little effect overall on his lighting choices because the look was mostly applied in the production design and during digital intermediate ( DI ) , the post @-@ production digital manipulation of color and lighting . Technicolor Digital Intermediates carried out the DI . Stern supervised most of the work via e @-@ mailed reference images as he was in Russia shooting another film at the time . He was present at the laboratory for the application of the finishing touches . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 = = = = Overview = = = = 
 CIS Vancouver and Pac Title created most of the visual effects , under the overall supervision of Michael Owens . CIS ' work was headed by Geoff Hancock and Pac Title 's by Mark Freund . Each studio created around 90 shots . Pac Title focused primarily on 2D imagery ; <unk> House of Moves handled the motion capture . The effects work consisted mainly of peripheral additions : architecture , vehicles , crowds and furniture . CIS used 3D modeling package Maya to animate city scenes before rendering them in mental ray ; they generated matte paintings in Softimage XSI and Maya , and used Digital Fusion for some 2D shots . The team 's work began with research into 1928 Los Angeles ; they referenced historical photographs and data on the urban core 's population density . CIS had to generate mostly new computer models , textures and motion capture because the company 's existing effects catalog consisted primarily of modern era elements . CIS supplemented exteriors with skylines and detailed backdrops . They created set extensions digitally and with matte paintings . CIS created city blocks by using shared elements of period architecture that could be combined , rearranged and <unk> to make buildings of different widths and heights ; that way , the city could look diverse with a minimum of textural variation . CIS referenced vintage aerial photographs of downtown Los Angeles so shots would better reflect the geography of the city , as Hancock felt it important to have a consistency that would allow audiences to understand and become immersed in the environment . 
 To maintain the rapid shooting pace Eastwood demanded , Owens chose to mostly avoid using bluescreen technology , as the process can be time @-@ consuming and difficult to light . He instead used rotoscoping , the process whereby effects are drawn directly onto live action shots . Rotoscoping is more expensive than bluescreen , but the technique had proved reliable for Eastwood when he made extensive use of it on Flags of Our Fathers ( 2006 ) to avoid shooting against bluescreen on a mountaintop . For Owens , the lighting was better , and he considered rotoscoping to be " faster , easier and more natural " . Owens used bluescreen in only a few locations , such as at the ends of backlot streets where it would not impact the lighting . The Universal Studios backlot had been used for so many films that Owens thought it important to disguise familiar architecture as much as possible , so some foreground and middle distance buildings were swapped . One of his favorite effects shots was a scene in which Collins exits a taxi in front of the police station . The scene was filmed almost entirely against bluescreen ; only Jolie , the sidewalk , the taxi cab and an extra were real . The completed shot features the full range of effects techniques used in the film : digital extras in the foreground , set extensions , and computer @-@ generated vehicles . 
 = = = = Digital extras = = = = 
 For crowd scenes , CIS supplemented the live @-@ action extras with digital pedestrians created using motion capture . House of Moves captured the movements of five men and four women during a two @-@ day shoot supervised by Hancock . The motion capture performers were coached to make the " small , formal and refined " movements that Owens said reflected the general public 's conduct at the time . CIS combined the motion data with the Massive software package to generate the interactions of the digital pedestrians . The use of Massive presented a challenge when it came to blending digital pedestrians with live @-@ action extras who had to move from the foreground into the digital crowd . Massive worked well until this stage , when the effects team had to move the digital pedestrians to avoid taking the live @-@ action extras out of the shot . To allow close @-@ ups of individual Massive extras , the effects team focused on their faces and walking characteristics . Hancock explained , " We wanted to be able to push Massive right up to the camera and see how well it held up . In a couple of shots the characters might be 40 feet away from the camera , about 1 / 5 screen height . The bigger the screen is , the bigger the character . He could be 10 feet tall , so everything , even his hair , better look good ! " Typically , a limited number of motion performances are captured and Massive is used to create further variety , such as in height and walking speed . Because the digital extras were required to be close to the foreground , and to integrate them properly with the live action extras , House of Moves captured twice as much motion data than CIS had used on any other project . CIS created nine distinct digital characters . To eliminate inaccuracies that develop when creating a digital extra of different proportions to the motion capture performer , CIS sent nine skeleton rigs to House of Moves before work began . This gave House of Moves time to properly adapt the rigs to its performers , resulting in motion capture data that required very little editing in Massive . CIS wrote shaders for their clothing ; displacement maps in the air shader were linked with the motion capture to animate wrinkles in trousers and jackets . 
 = = = = Closing sequence = = = = 
 <unk> the closure favored by its contemporaries , Changeling 's final sequence reflects Collins ' renewed hope that Walter is alive . The shot is a two and a half minute sequence showing Collins ' walking off to become lost in a crowd . The sequence is representative of the range of effects that feature throughout the film ; Los Angeles is presented as major character , brought to life by unobtrusive peripheral imagery that allows the viewer to focus on the story and the emotional cues . The " hustle and bustle " of the sequence was required to convey that downtown Los Angeles in 1935 was a congested urban center . In the closing shot , the camera tilts up to reveal miles of city blocks , pedestrians on the streets , cars going by and streetcars running along their tracks . The version of the film that screened at Cannes did not include this sequence ; the scene faded to black as Collins walked away . The new 4 @,@ 000 @-@ frame shot was Owens ' idea . He felt the abrupt cut to black pulled the viewer out of the film too quickly , and that it left no room for emotional reflection . Owens said , " There is a legend at the end before the credits . The legend speaks to what happened after the fact , and I think you need to just swallow that for a few moments with the visual still with you . " Owens told Eastwood the film should end like Chinatown ( 1974 ) , in which the camera lifts to take in the scene : " The camera booms up and she walks away from us from a very emotional , poignant scene at the end , walks away into this mass of people and traffic . It 's very hopeful and sad at the same time . " 
 Owens did not have time to complete the shot before the Cannes screenings , but afterwards he used <unk> to conduct most of the work from home . The shot includes two blocks of computer @-@ generated buildings that recede into the distance of a downtown set extension . As Collins disappears into the crowd about a minute into the shot , the live footage is gradually joined with more digital work . The streetcars , tracks and power lines were all computer generated . Live @-@ action extras appear for the first minute of the shot before being replaced by digital ones . The shot was made more complicated by the need to add Massive extras . Owens constructed the scene by first building the digital foreground around the live action footage . He then added the background before filling the scene with vehicles and people . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Eastwood composed Changeling 's jazz @-@ influenced score . Featuring lilting guitars and strings , it remains largely low @-@ key throughout . The introduction of brass instruments evokes film noir , playing to the film 's setting in a city controlled by corrupt police . The theme shifts from piano to a full orchestra , and as the story develops , the strings become more imposing , with an increasing number of sustains and rises . Eastwood introduces voices reminiscent of those in a horror film score during the child murder flashbacks . The score was orchestrated and conducted by Lennie Niehaus . It was released on CD in North America on November 4 , 2008 , through record label Varèse Sarabande . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = <unk> of women = = = 
 Changeling begins with an abduction , but largely avoids framing the story as a family drama to concentrate on a portrait of a woman whose desire for independence is seen as a threat to male @-@ dominated society . The film depicts 1920s Los Angeles as a city in which the judgment of men takes precedence ; women are labeled " hysterical and unreliable " if they dare to question it . Film critic Prairie Miller said that in its portrayal of female courage the film was " about as feminist as Hollywood can get " , and that because of this it had been the subject of sexist disdain . She compared this with the sexism shown to the women in Changeling and those who vied for high political office in 2008 . Miller surmised that attitudes to independent , career @-@ minded women had not changed significantly in the intervening years : Collins defies male @-@ generated cultural expectations that women are not suited for professional careers and are punished for it . Rather than " an expression of feminist awareness " , David Denby argues , the film — like Eastwood 's Million Dollar Baby — is " a case of awed respect for a woman who was strong and enduring " . The portrait of a vulnerable woman whose mental state is manipulated by the authorities was likened to the treatment of Ingrid Bergman 's character in Gaslight ( 1944 ) , who also wondered if she might be insane ; Eastwood cited photographs that show Collins smiling with the child she knows is not hers . Like many other women of the period who were deemed disruptive , Collins is forced into the secret custody of a mental institution . The film shows that psychiatry became a tool in the gender politics of the era , only a few years after women 's suffrage in the United States was guaranteed by the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment . As women ceased to be second @-@ class citizens and began to assert their independence , the male establishment used mental institutions in an effort to disempower them ; in common with other unmanageable women , Collins is subjected to medical treatment designed to break her spirit and compel obedience , though some of the treatments , specifically the electroconvulsive therapy depicted in the film , did not exist ca . 1928 @-@ 1930 . The film quotes the testimony of the psychiatrist who treated Collins . Eastwood said the testimony evidenced how women were <unk> , and that the behavior of the police reflected how women were seen at the time . He quoted the words of the officer who sent Collins to the mental facility : " ' Something is wrong with you . You 're an independent woman . ' " Clint Eastwood said , " The period could not accept [ it ] " . 
 = = = Corruption in political hierarchies = = = 
 Romantic notions of the 1920s as a more innocent period are put aside in favor of depicting Los Angeles as ruled by a despotic political infrastructure , steeped in sadistic , systematic corruption throughout the city government , police force and medical establishment . In addition to being a Kafkaesque drama about the search for a missing child , the film also focuses on issues relevant to the modern era . Eastwood noted a correlation between the corruption of 1920s Los Angeles and that of the modern era , manifesting in the egos of a police force that thinks it cannot be wrong and the way in which powerful organizations justify the use of corruption . " [ The ] Los Angeles police department every so often seems to go into a period of corruption , " he said , " It 's happened even in recent years ... so it was nice to comment [ on that ] by going back to real events in 1928 . " Eastwood said that Los Angeles had always been seen as " glamorous " , but he believed there had never been a " golden age " in the city . In Changeling , this dissonance manifests in the actions of Arthur Hutchins , who travels to the city in the hope of meeting his favorite actor . Eastwood said that given the corruption that the story covers , Hutchins ' <unk> seemed " bizarre " . As a lesson in democratic activism , the film shows what it takes to provoke people to speak against unchecked authority , no matter the consequences . Richard Brody of The New Yorker said this rang as true for 1928 Los Angeles as it did for Poland in 1980 or Pakistan in 2008 . The film directly quotes Chief of police James E. Davis : " We will hold trial on gunmen in the streets of Los Angeles . I want them brought in dead , not alive , and I will reprimand any officer who shows the least bit of mercy to a criminal . " It compares police excess to the vigilantism of the Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s , as the department 's " Gun Squad " carries out illegal executions of criminals — " not to stamp out crime ... but ' competition ' " . The pressure from the police hierarchy was a motivator for officers to quickly solve Walter Collins ' disappearance , and a potential reason why they ignored the fact they had returned the wrong child . 
 = = = Children and violence = = = 
 Changeling sits with other late @-@ period Eastwood films in which parenting — and , the search for family — is a theme . It makes literal the parental struggle to communicate with children . It can also be seen as a variation of the Eastwood " revenge movie " ethic ; in this case , the " avenging grunt " transforms into a courteous woman who only once makes a foul @-@ mouthed outburst . Eastwood dealt with themes of child endangerment in A Perfect World ( 1993 ) and Mystic River ( 2003 ) . Changeling is a thematic companion piece to Mystic River , which also depicted a community contaminated by an isolated , violent act against a child — a comparison with which Eastwood agreed . He said that showing a child in danger was " about the highest form of drama you can have " , as crimes against them were to him the most horrible . Eastwood explained that crimes against children represented a theft of lives and innocence . He said , " When [ a crime ] comes along quite as big as this one , you question humanity . It never ceases to surprise me how cruel humanity can be . " Samuel Blumenfeld of Le Monde said the scene featuring Northcott 's execution by hanging was " unbearable " due to its attention to detail ; he believed it one of the most convincing pleas against the death penalty imaginable . Eastwood noted that for a supporter of capital punishment , Northcott was an ideal candidate , and that in a perfect world the death penalty might be an appropriate punishment for such a crime . He said that crimes against children would be at the top of his list for justifications of capital punishment , but that whether one were pro- or anti @-@ capital punishment , the barbarism of public executions must be recognized . Eastwood argued that in putting the guilty party before his victims ' families , justice may be done , but after such a spectacle the family would find it hard to find peace . The scene 's realism was deliberate : the audience hears Northcott 's neck breaking , his body swings , and his feet shake . It was Eastwood 's intention to make it unbearable to watch . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Strategy = = = 
 Changeling premiered in competition at the 61st Cannes Film Festival on May 20 , 2008 . The film was Eastwood 's fifth to enter competition at the festival . Its appearance was not part of the original release plan . Universal executives had been looking forward to the festival without the worry associated with screening a film , until Eastwood made arrangements for Changeling 's appearance . He was pleased with the critical and commercial success that followed Mystic River 's appearance at the festival in 2003 and wanted to generate the same " positive buzz " for Changeling . The film was still in post @-@ production one week before the start of the festival . It appeared at the 34th Deauville American Film Festival , held September 5 – 14 , 2008 , and had its North American premiere on October 4 , 2008 as the centerpiece of the 46th New York Film Festival , screening at the Ziegfeld Theatre . 
 The producers and Universal considered opening Changeling wide in its first weekend to capitalize on Jolie 's perceived box office appeal , but they ultimately modeled the release plan after those of other Eastwood @-@ directed films , Mystic River in particular . While the usual strategy is to open films by notable directors in every major city in the United States to ensure a large opening gross , in what the industry calls a " platform release " , Eastwood 's films generally open in a small number of theaters before opening wide a week later . Changeling was released in 15 theaters in nine markets in the United States on October 24 , 2008 . The marketing strategy involved trailers that promoted Eastwood 's involvement and the more commercial mystery thriller elements of the story . Universal hoped the limited release would capitalize on good word @-@ of @-@ mouth support from " serious movie fans " rather than those in the 18 – 25 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The film was released across North America on October 31 , 2008 , playing at 1 @,@ 850 theaters , expanding to 1 @,@ 896 theaters by its fourth week . Changeling was released in the United Kingdom on November 26 , 2008 , in Ireland on November 28 , 2008 , and in Australia on February 5 , 2009 . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Changeling performed modestly at the box office , grossing more internationally than in North America . The worldwide gross revenue was $ 113 million . The film 's limited American release saw it take $ 502 @,@ 000 — $ 33 @,@ 441 per theater — in its first two days . Exit polling showed strong commercial potential across a range of audiences . CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed the average grade cinemagoers gave Changeling was A − on an A + to F scale . Audiences were mostly older ; 68 % were over 30 and 61 % were women . Audience evaluations of " excellent " and " definitely recommended " were above average . The main reasons given for seeing the film were its story ( 65 % ) , Jolie ( 53 % ) , Eastwood ( 43 % ) , and that it was based on fact ( 42 % ) . The film made $ 2.3M in its first day of wide release , going on to take fourth place in the weekend box office chart with $ <unk> — a per @-@ theater average of $ 5 @,@ 085 . This return surpassed Universal 's expectations for the weekend . Changeling 's link to the Inland Empire — the locale of the Wineville killings — generated additional local interest , causing it to outperform the national box office by 45 % in its opening weekend . The film surpassed expectations in its second weekend of wide release , declining 22 % to take $ <unk> By the fourth week , Changeling had dropped to fifth place at the box office , having taken $ <unk> overall . In its sixth week the number of theaters narrowed to 1 @,@ 010 , and Changeling dropped out of the national top ten , though it remained in ninth place on the Inland chart . Changeling completed its theatrical run in North America on January 8 , 2009 , having earned $ <unk> overall . 
 Changeling made its international debut in four European markets on November 12 – 14 , 2008 , opening in 727 theaters to strong results . Aided by a positive critical reaction , the film took $ 1.6M in Italy from 299 theaters ( a per @-@ location average of $ 5 @,@ 402 ) , and $ 209 @,@ 000 from 33 screens in Belgium . Changeling had a slower start in France , but improved to post $ <unk> from 417 theaters in its first five days , and finished the weekend in second place at the box office . The second week in France saw the box office drop by just 27 % , for a total gross of $ <unk> By November 23 , 2008 , the film had taken $ <unk> outside North America . The weekend of November 28 – 30 saw Changeling take $ <unk> from 1 @,@ 040 theaters internationally ; this included its expansion into the United Kingdom , where it opened in third place at the box office , taking $ 1.9M from 349 theaters . It took $ 1.5M from the three @-@ day weekend , but the total was boosted by the film 's opening two days earlier to avoid competition from previews of Madagascar : Escape 2 Africa . The return marked the best opening of any Eastwood @-@ directed film in the United Kingdom to that point . Its second week of release in the United Kingdom saw a drop of 27 % to $ <unk> Changeling earned $ <unk> in Ireland and the United Kingdom . 
 Changeling 's release in other European markets continued throughout December 2008 . By December 8 , the film had opened in 1 @,@ 167 theaters in nine markets for an international gross of $ <unk> Changeling 's next significant international release came in Spain on December 19 , 2008 , where it opened in first place at the box office with $ <unk> from 326 theaters . This figure marked the best opening for an Eastwood @-@ directed film in the country to that point ; after six weeks it had earned $ <unk> In January 2009 , major markets in which the film opened included Germany , South Korea and Russia . In Germany , it opened in ninth place at the box office with $ 675 @,@ 000 from 194 theaters . South Korea saw a " solid " opening of $ 450 @,@ 000 from 155 theaters . In Russia , it opened in eighth place with $ 292 @,@ 000 from 95 theaters . By January 26 , 2009 , the film had taken $ <unk> from 1 @,@ 352 international theaters . Aided by strong word @-@ of @-@ mouth support , Changeling 's Australian release yielded $ <unk> from 74 screens after eight weeks . The film opened in Japan on February 20 , 2009 , where it topped the chart in its first week with $ <unk> from 301 screens . After six weeks , it had earned $ <unk> in the country . The film 's last major market release was in Mexico on February 27 , 2009 , where it earned $ <unk> The international gross was $ <unk> 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Changeling was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc , DVD , and Video on Demand in North America on February 17 , 2009 , and in the United Kingdom on March 30 , 2009 . After its first week of release , Changeling placed fourth in the DVD sales chart with 281 @,@ 000 units sold for $ 4 @.@ 6 million ; by its fourth week of release , the film had dropped out of the top 10 , having earned $ 10 @.@ 1 million . As of the latest figures , 762 @,@ 000 units have been sold , translating to $ 12 @,@ 638 @,@ 223 in revenue . The DVD release included two featurettes : Partners in Crime : Clint Eastwood and Angelina Jolie and The Common Thread : Angelina Jolie Becomes Christine Collins . The Blu @-@ ray Disc release included two additional features : Archives and Los Angeles : Then and Now . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film 's screening at Cannes met with critical acclaim , prompting speculation it could be awarded the Palme d 'Or . The award eventually went to Entre les murs ( The Class ) . Straczynski claimed that Changeling 's loss by two votes was due to the judges ' not believing the story was based on fact . He said they did not believe the police would treat someone as they had Collins . The loss led to Universal 's request that Straczynski annotate the script with sources . Although the positive critical notices from Cannes generated speculation that the film would be a serious contender at the 2009 Academy Awards , the North American theatrical release met with a more mixed response . Critics generally judged Changeling well @-@ acted and beautifully shot , but considered the compelling story to have been told too conventionally . Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , reported that reviews were " generally favorable , " with an average score of 63 based on 38 reviews . As of June 10 , 2014 , 63 % of 196 critics listed by review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes had given the film a positive review , with an average rating of 6 @.@ 3 / 10 . The film 's reception in several European countries was more favorable , and in the United Kingdom 83 % of critics listed by Rotten Tomatoes gave Changeling a positive review . 
 Todd McCarthy of Variety said Jolie was more affecting than in A Mighty Heart ( 2007 ) because she relied less on artifice . He also noted a surfeit of good supporting performances , Michael Kelly 's in particular . Oliver Séguret of Libération said the cast was the film 's best feature . He praised the supporting actors and said Jolie 's performance was forceful yet understated . Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter said Jolie shunned her " movie star " persona to appear vulnerable and resolute . He perceived the supporting characters — Amy Ryan 's excepted — as having few shades of gray . David Ansen , writing in Newsweek , echoed the sentiment , but said that " some stories really are about the good guys and the bad " . He said that with the distractions of Jolie 's celebrity and beauty put aside , she carried the role with restraint and intensity . Manohla Dargis of The New York Times felt that Jolie 's celebrity was distracting enough to render her unconvincing , and David Denby of The New Yorker said that while Jolie showed skill and selflessness , the performance and character were uninteresting . He said Collins was one @-@ dimensional , lacking desires or temperament . He cited similar problems with Malkovich 's Briegleb , concluding , " The two of them make a very proper and dull pair of collaborators . " 
 McCarthy admired the " outstanding " script , calling it ambitious and deceptively simple . He said Eastwood respected the script by not playing to the melodramatic aspects and not telegraphing the story 's scope from the start . Honeycutt wrote that due to its close adherence to the history the drama sagged at one point , but that the film did not feel as long as its 141 minutes because the filmmakers were " good at cutting to the chase " . Ansen said Straczynski 's dialogue tended to the obvious , but that while the film lacked the moral nuance of Eastwood 's others , the well @-@ researched screenplay was " a model of sturdy architecture " , each layer of which built audience disgust into a " fine fury " . He said , " when the tale is this gripping , why resist the moral outrage ? " 
 Séguret said the film presented a solid recreation of the era , but that Eastwood did not seem inspired by the challenge . Séguret noted that Eastwood kept the embers of the story alight , but that it seldom burst into flames . He likened the experience to being in a luxury car : comfortable yet boring . Denby and Ansen commented that Eastwood left the worst atrocities to audiences ' imaginations . Ansen said this was because Eastwood was less interested in the lurid aspects of the case . McCarthy praised the thoughtful , <unk> treatment , while Denby cited problems with the austere approach , saying it left the film " both impressive and monotonous " . He said Eastwood was presented with the problem of not wanting to exploit the " gruesome " material because this would contrast poorly with the delicate emotions of a woman 's longing for her missing son . Denby said Eastwood and Straczynski should have explored more deeply the story 's perverse aspects . Instead , he said , the narrative methodically settled the emotional and dramatic issues — " reverently chronicling Christine 's apotheosis " — before " [ ambling ] on for another forty minutes " . Ansen said the classical approach lifted the story to another level , and that it embraced horror film conventions only in the process of transcending them . McCarthy said Changeling was one of Eastwood 's most vividly realized films , noting Stern 's cinematography , the set and costume design , and CGI landscapes that merged seamlessly with location shots . Dargis was not impressed by the production design ; she cited the loss of Eastwood 's regular collaborator Henry Bumstead — who died in 2006 — as a factor in Changeling 's " overly pristine " look . 
 Damon Wise of Empire called Changeling " flawless " , and McCarthy said it was " emotionally powerful and stylistically sure @-@ handed " . He stated that Changeling was a more complex and wide @-@ ranging work than Eastwood 's Mystic River , saying the characters and social commentary were brought into the story with an " almost breathtaking deliberation " . He said that as " a sorrowful critique of the city 's political culture " , Changeling sat in the company of films such as Chinatown and L.A. Confidential . Honeycutt said the film added a " forgotten chapter to the L.A. noir " of those films , and that Eastwood 's melodic score contributed to an evocation of a city and a period " undergoing galvanic changes " . Honeycutt said , " [ the ] small @-@ town feel to the street and sets ... captures a society resistant to seeing what is really going on " . Séguret said that while Changeling had few defects , it was mystifying that other critics had such effusive praise for it . Denby said it was beautifully made , but that it shared the chief fault of other " righteously indignant " films in congratulating the audience for feeling contempt for the " long @-@ discredited " attitudes depicted . Ansen concluded that the story was told in such a sure manner that only a hardened cynic would be left unmoved by the " haunting , sorrowful saga " . 
 = = = Awards and honors = = = 
 In addition to the following list of awards and nominations , the National Board of Review of Motion Pictures named Changeling one of the 10 best films of 2008 , as did the International Press Academy , which presents the annual Satellite Awards . Several critics included the film on their lists of the top 10 best films of 2008 . Anthony Lane of The New Yorker named it second best , Empire magazine named it fourth best , and Rene Rodriguez of The Miami Herald named it joint fourth best with Eastwood 's Gran Torino . Japanese film critic Shigehiko Hasumi listed the film as one of the best films of 2000 @-@ 2009 . 
 = Albert A. Murphree = 
 Albert Alexander Murphree ( April 29 , 1870 – December 20 , 1927 ) was an American college professor and university president . Murphree was a native of Alabama , and became a mathematics instructor after earning his bachelor 's degree . He later served as the third president of Florida State College ( later renamed Florida State University ) from 1897 to 1909 , and the second president of the University of Florida from 1909 to 1927 . Murphree is the only person to have been the president of both of Florida 's original state universities , the University of Florida and Florida State University , and he played an important role in the organization , growth and ultimate success of both institutions . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Murphree was born near <unk> , Alabama in 1870 . His father was <unk> Ellis Murphree , a Confederate veteran of the Civil War ; his mother was Emily Helen Cornelius . His parents raised him in a family of ten children in Walnut Grove , Alabama , where he attended community schools and a local two @-@ year college . He graduated from the University of Nashville with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1894 , and taught mathematics at several high schools and small colleges in Alabama , Tennessee and Texas . In 1895 , he became a mathematics instructor at the West Florida Seminary ( now known as Florida State University ) in Tallahassee , Florida , and two years later , its board of trustees appointed him as the seminary 's third president in 1897 , at the age of 27 . Later , Murphree married Jennie Henderson , the daughter of one of the seminary 's trustees . He subsequently started and completed the academic work for a Master of Arts degree while serving as president of the seminary , renamed Florida State College in 1901 . 
 = = Professor and university president = = 
 As President of West Florida Seminary , Murphree worked to create Florida 's first liberal arts college by 1897 , and in 1901 it was reorganized into the Florida State College with four departments : the College , the College Academy , the School for Teachers and the School of Music . Under his leadership , the Florida State College produced the state 's first Rhodes Scholar in 1905 , Frederic " Fritz " Buchholz ( 1885 @-@ 65 ) . 
 In 1905 , several prominent political backers advanced Murphree 's name to be the first president of the new University of the State of Florida located in Gainesville , Florida , which was the newly consolidated men 's university and land @-@ grant college created by the Florida Legislature 's passage of the Buckman Act , which segregated Florida 's schools of higher learning by race and gender . Instead , the Florida Board of Control selected Andrew Sledd , then the president of the University of Florida in Lake City , to be the first president of the new men 's university . Murphree continued to serve as the president of Florida State College , which became the all @-@ female Florida Female College under the Buckman Act . From 1905 to 1909 , Murphree emphasized greater academic expectations for his female students , while upgrading and expanding the college 's curriculum to meet modern university standards . In 1909 , Murphree convinced the legislature to change the name of the college to the Florida State College for Women . 
 When the first president of the University of Florida , Andrew Sledd , was not re @-@ appointed for the 1909 – 10 school year because of a conflict over what the new governor and members of the Florida Board of Education believed were Sledd 's inflexible admissions standards that were impeding the growth of the university , Murphree 's name was once again advanced as a replacement . This time , the Board of Control voted unanimously to approve his appointment . Murphree assumed his new duties during the summer of 1909 , and worked diligently with his predecessor to ensure a smooth transition that capitalized on previous successes . In a surprise to some of his previous political supporters , Murphree endorsed Sledd 's admissions standards , and thereafter actually tightened the requirements for entry again in 1912 . 
 Beginning in 1910 , Murphree reorganized the university 's administration into four academic colleges : the College of Arts and Sciences , the College of Law , the College of Agriculture , and the College of Engineering , as well as the Graduate School . Murphree took particular interest in the " School of Graduate Studies , " and the university awarded its first master 's degree in 1910 . He later oversaw the addition of the College of Education in 1912 , the School of Pharmacy in 1924 , the School of Architecture in 1925 , and the College of Commerce and Journalism in 1927 . During Murphree 's term , he oversaw the construction of ten new major buildings , including such historical landmarks as Flint Hall ( Science Department ) , Floyd Hall ( College of Agriculture ) , Peabody Hall ( College of Education ) , the University Auditorium , and the new University Library ( now known as Smathers Library East ) . The University of Florida 's enrollment grew from 186 students in 1909 to over 2 @,@ 000 in 1927 . 
 Murphree is reported to have taken pride in knowing every Florida student by name . Under Murphree , student leaders formed the Florida Blue Key leadership society in 1923 , the university celebrated its first homecoming parade in 1924 , and students organized the first Gator <unk> pep rally and variety show in 1925 . 
 While president of Florida , Murphree became a friend of William Jennings Bryan , the former U.S. Representative from Nebraska and the Democratic Party nominee for President in 1896 , 1900 and 1908 . Bryan established a winter residence in Miami , Florida in 1912 , and became a full @-@ time Florida resident in 1921 . Bryan was a frequent speaker throughout Florida , and first met Murphree at a speech at the university in 1916 . As a result of his friendship with Murphree , Bryan volunteered to be the fund @-@ raising drive chairman for the construction of the university 's new Florida Union building ( now known as Dauer Hall ) . 
 Murphree 's name was floated as a possible gubernatorial candidate on several occasions , but he publicly disavowed any personal interest in elected office . Without consulting Murphree in advance , on January 13 , 1924 , William Jennings Bryan announced his candidacy to be a delegate to the 1924 Democratic National Convention , where , if elected , he would nominate Murphree as the party 's candidate for President of the United States in the 1924 election . Bryan campaigned vigorously despite Murphree 's steadfast refusal to do so as a candidate . Murphree stated that he was flattered by Bryan 's effort , but " Nobody expects a Southern man to be nominated President , much less a Florida man . " Florida newspapers urged Murphree to run , but few others took his candidacy seriously . Bryan was elected as a delegate to the Democratic Convention , pledged to support Murphree 's nomination , but Bryan was greeted by boos and jeers at the convention because of his nomination of Murphree . Bryan later told Senator J. Thomas Heflin that his reception by his fellow convention delegates was the most humiliating of his life . 
 Murphree was elected president of the National Association of State Universities in 1927 . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Murphree died unexpectedly in his sleep , at the age of 57 , in Gainesville on December 20 , 1927 . His wife Jennie had died six years earlier in 1921 . They are both buried in St. John 's Episcopal Church cemetery in downtown Tallahassee , only a few blocks from Florida State University . Murphree and his wife were survived by four children – – two sons , John A.H. Murphree and Albert A. Murphree , Jr . , and two daughters , Alberta Murphree Worth and Martha Murphree Wallace . Murphree 's daughter Martha graduated from Florida State College for Women with a bachelor 's degree in 1925 . His son and namesake , Albert A. " Waddy " Murphree , Jr . , graduated from the University of Florida with a bachelor 's degree in 1929 , earned a master 's degree from Oxford University as a Rhodes Scholar from 1929 to 1933 , and would later serve as a professor of English literature at the university from 1941 to 1974 . 
 Murphree , who was the second choice to be the first president of the University of Florida , served longer as the second leader of the university than all but one of its other ten presidents . While he was not the founding president , Murphree built upon the solid academic standards , faculty selections and planning of his predecessor , Andrew Sledd , and greatly expanded and improved upon them ; he imposed the university 's modern organizational structure and was responsible for the beginnings of many of its traditions . 
 After his death , Murphree was widely praised on the editorial pages of newspapers throughout the state and region . He was credited with helping the University of Florida grow from a small state college into a rapidly expanding regional university in his eighteen years as its president . 
 The two universities that Murphree nurtured in their infancy continued to grow and prosper after his death . In 2010 , Florida State University had a total enrollment of over 41 @,@ 000 undergraduate , graduate and professional students ; the University of Florida enrolled over 50 @,@ 000 total students . In a little over one hundred years , the two national research universities , in whose early expansion and improvement Murphree had played a fundamental role , had grown to take their places among the largest single @-@ campus universities in the United States , the University of Florida among the ten largest . 
 In honor of its second president , the University of Florida erected a statue of Murphree on its Gainesville campus , adjacent to such landmarks as the Plaza of the Americas , Library East and Peabody Hall ; Murphree is the only Florida president so honored . Florida also named one of its early dormitories , Murphree Hall , in tribute . In remembrance of its third president , Florida State University erected a campus statue adjacent to Jennie Murphree Hall , named for Murphree 's wife . 
 = Clindamycin = 
 Clindamycin is an antibiotic useful for the treatment of a number of bacterial infections . This includes middle ear infections , bone or joint infections , pelvic inflammatory disease , strep throat , pneumonia , and endocarditis among others . It can be useful against some cases of methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) . It may also be used for acne and in addition to quinine for malaria . It is available by mouth , intravenously , and as a cream to be applied to the skin or in the vagina . 
 Common side effects include nausea , diarrhea , rash , and pain at the site of injection . It increases the risk of Clostridium difficile colitis about fourfold . Other antibiotics may be recommended instead due to this reason . It appears to be generally safe in pregnancy . It is of the <unk> class and works by blocking bacteria from making protein . 
 Clindamycin was first made in 1967 . It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most important medication needed in a basic health system . It is available as a generic medication and is not very expensive . The wholesale cost in the developing world is about 0 @.@ 06 to 0 @.@ 12 USD per pill . In the United States it costs about 2 @.@ 70 USD a dose . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 Clindamycin is used primarily to treat anaerobic infections caused by susceptible anaerobic bacteria , including dental infections , and infections of the respiratory tract , skin , and soft tissue , and peritonitis . In people with hypersensitivity to penicillins , clindamycin may be used to treat infections caused by susceptible aerobic bacteria , as well . It is also used to treat bone and joint infections , particularly those caused by Staphylococcus aureus . Topical application of clindamycin phosphate can be used to treat mild to moderate acne . 
 = = = Acne = = = 
 The use of clindamycin in conjunction with benzoyl peroxide is more effective in the treatment of acne than the use of either product by itself . 
 Clindamycin and adapalene in combination are also more effective than either drug alone , although adverse effects are more frequent . 
 = = = Susceptible bacteria = = = 
 It is most effective against infections involving the following types of organisms : 
 Aerobic Gram @-@ positive cocci , including some members of the Staphylococcus and Streptococcus ( e.g. <unk> ) genera , but not enterococci . 
 Anaerobic , Gram @-@ negative rod @-@ shaped bacteria , including some Bacteroides , <unk> , and <unk> , although resistance is increasing in Bacteroides fragilis . 
 Most aerobic Gram @-@ negative bacteria ( such as Pseudomonas , Legionella , Haemophilus influenzae and Moraxella ) are resistant to clindamycin , as are the facultative anaerobic Enterobacteriaceae . A notable exception is <unk> <unk> , for which clindamycin is a first @-@ line drug of choice . 
 The following represents MIC susceptibility data for a few medically significant pathogens . 
 Staphylococcus aureus : 0 @.@ 016 μg / ml - > 256 μg / ml 
 Streptococcus pneumoniae : 0 @.@ 002 μg / ml - > 256 μg / ml 
 Streptococcus pyogenes : < 0 @.@ 015 μg / ml - > 64 μg / ml 
 = = = D @-@ Test = = = 
 When testing a Gram @-@ positive culture for sensitivity to clindamycin , it is common to perform a " D @-@ Test " to determine if there is a macrolide @-@ resistant subpopulation of bacteria present . This test is necessary because some bacteria express a phenotype known as <unk> , in which susceptibility tests will indicate the bacteria are susceptible to clindamycin , but in vitro the pathogen displays inducible resistance . 
 To perform a D @-@ test , an agar plate is inoculated with the bacteria in question and two drug @-@ impregnated disks ( one with erythromycin , one with clindamycin ) are placed 15 – 20 mm apart on the plate . If the area of inhibition around the clindamycin disk is " D " shaped , the test result is positive and clindamycin should not be used due to the possibility of resistant pathogens and therapy failure . If the area of inhibition around the clindamycin disk is circular , the test result is negative and clindamycin can be used . 
 = = = Malaria = = = 
 Given with chloroquine or quinine , clindamycin is effective and well tolerated in treating Plasmodium falciparum malaria ; the latter combination is particularly useful for children , and is the treatment of choice for pregnant women who become infected in areas where resistance to chloroquine is common . Clindamycin should not be used as an antimalarial by itself , although it appears to be very effective as such , because of its slow action . Patient @-@ derived isolates of Plasmodium falciparum from the Peruvian Amazon have been reported to be resistant to clindamycin as evidenced by in vitro drug susceptibility testing . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Clindamycin may be useful in skin and soft tissue infections caused by methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) ; many strains of MRSA are still susceptible to clindamycin ; however , in the United States spreading from the West Coast eastwards , MRSA is becoming increasingly resistant . 
 Clindamycin is used in cases of suspected toxic shock syndrome , often in combination with a bactericidal agent such as vancomycin . The rationale for this approach is a presumed synergy between vancomycin , which causes the death of the bacteria by breakdown of the cell wall , and clindamycin , which is a powerful inhibitor of toxin synthesis . Both in vitro and in vivo studies have shown clindamycin reduces the production of <unk> by staphylococci ; it may also induce changes in the surface structure of bacteria that make them more sensitive to immune system attack ( opsonization and phagocytosis ) . 
 Clindamycin has been proven to decrease the risk of premature births in women diagnosed with bacterial vaginosis during early pregnancy to about a third of the risk of untreated women . 
 The combination of clindamycin and quinine is the standard treatment for severe <unk> . 
 Clindamycin may also be used to treat toxoplasmosis , and , in combination with <unk> , is effective in treating mild to moderate Pneumocystis <unk> pneumonia . 
 = = Adverse effects = = 
 Common adverse drug reactions associated with systemic clindamycin therapy — found in over 1 % of people — include : diarrhea , <unk> colitis , nausea , vomiting , abdominal pain or cramps and / or rash . High doses ( both intravenous and oral ) may cause a metallic taste . Common adverse drug reactions associated with topical formulations - found in over 10 % of people - include : dryness , burning , itching , <unk> , or peeling of skin ( lotion , solution ) ; erythema ( foam , lotion , solution ) ; <unk> ( gel , lotion ) . Additional side effects include contact dermatitis . Common side effects - found in over 10 % of people - in vaginal applications include fungal infection . 
 <unk> colitis is a potentially lethal condition commonly associated with clindamycin , but which occurs with other antibiotics , as well . <unk> of Clostridium difficile , which is inherently resistant to clindamycin , results in the production of a toxin that causes a range of adverse effects , from diarrhea to colitis and toxic megacolon . 
 Rarely — in less than 0 @.@ 1 % of patients — clindamycin therapy has been associated with anaphylaxis , blood <unk> , <unk> , jaundice , raised liver enzyme levels , renal dysfunction , cardiac arrest , and / or hepatotoxicity . 
 = = Interactions = = 
 Clindamycin may prolong the effects of neuromuscular @-@ blocking drugs , such as <unk> and vecuronium . Its similarity to the mechanism of action of macrolides and chloramphenicol means they should not be given simultaneously , as this causes antagonism and possible cross @-@ resistance . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 Clindamycin is a semisynthetic derivative of lincomycin , a natural antibiotic produced by the <unk> Streptomyces <unk> . It is obtained by 7 ( S ) <unk> @-@ substitution of the 7 ( R ) -hydroxyl group of lincomycin . The synthesis of clindamycin was first announced by BJ <unk> , RD <unk> , and F Kagan on the fifth Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy ( <unk> ) in 1966 . It has been on the market since 1968 . 
 = = Mechanism of action = = 
 Clindamycin has a primarily bacteriostatic effect . It is a bacterial protein synthesis inhibitor by inhibiting ribosomal translocation , in a similar way to macrolides . It does so by binding to the 50S rRNA of the large bacterial ribosome subunit . 
 The structures of the complexes between several antibiotics ( including clindamycin ) and a Deinococcus radiodurans ribosome have been solved by X @-@ ray crystallography by a team from the Max Planck Working Groups for Structural Molecular Biology , and published in the journal Nature . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 = = = Cost = = = 
 It is available as a generic medication and is not very expensive . The wholesale cost in the developing world is about 0 @.@ 06 to 0 @.@ 12 USD per pill . In the United States it costs about 2 @.@ 70 USD a dose . 
 The wholesale price in UK is less than 5 pence per pill , however the RX system covers the cost for citizens . Canada and Mexico also have a similar cost , with average price of 4 cents per pill . 
 = = = Available forms = = = 
 Clindamycin preparations for oral administration include capsules ( containing clindamycin hydrochloride ) and oral suspensions ( containing clindamycin palmitate hydrochloride ) . Oral suspension is not favored for administration of clindamycin to children , due to its extremely foul taste and odor . Clindamycin is formulated in a vaginal cream and as vaginal ovules for treatment of bacterial vaginosis . It is also available for topical administration in gel form , as a lotion , and in a foam delivery system ( each containing clindamycin phosphate ) and a solution in ethanol ( containing clindamycin hydrochloride ) and is used primarily as a prescription acne treatment . 
 Several combination acne treatments containing clindamycin are also marketed , such as single @-@ product formulations of clindamycin with benzoyl peroxide — sold as <unk> ( Sanofi @-@ Aventis ) , <unk> ( a gel form made by Stiefel ) , and <unk> , among other trade names — and , in the United States , a combination of clindamycin and tretinoin , sold as <unk> . In India , vaginal suppositories containing clindamycin in combination with clotrimazole are manufactured by Olive Health Care and sold as <unk> @-@ V. In Egypt , vaginal cream containing clindamycin produced by <unk> sold as <unk> indicated for vaginosis . 
 Clindamycin is available as a generic drug , for both systemic ( oral and intravenous ) and topical use ( The exception is the vaginal suppository , which is not available as a generic in the USA ) . 
 Clindamycin is marketed as generic and under trade names including <unk> HCl , <unk> , <unk> ( Bangladesh ) , <unk> , and <unk> . Combination products include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> ( in combination with benzoyl peroxide ) , and <unk> ( with tretinoin ) . 
 = = Veterinary use = = 
 The veterinary uses of clindamycin are quite similar to its human indications , and include treatment of osteomyelitis , skin infections , and toxoplasmosis , for which it is the preferred drug in dogs and cats . <unk> rarely causes symptoms in cats , but can do so in very young or immunocompromised kittens and cats . 
 = John Tyler = 
 John Tyler ( March 29 , 1790 – January 18 , 1862 ) was the tenth President of the United States ( 1841 – 45 ) . He was also , briefly , the tenth vice president ( 1841 ) , elected to that office on the 1840 Whig ticket with William Henry Harrison . Tyler became president after Harrison 's death in April 1841 , only a month after the start of the new administration . Known to that point as a supporter of states ' rights , which endeared him to his fellow Virginians , his actions as president showed that he was willing to back nationalist policies as long as they did not infringe on the powers of the states . Still , the circumstances of his unexpected rise to the presidency and its threat to the presidential ambitions of Henry Clay and other politicians , left him estranged from both major parties . A firm believer in manifest destiny , President Tyler sought to strengthen and preserve the Union through territorial expansion , most notably the annexation of the independent Republic of Texas in his last days in office . 
 Tyler , born to an eminent Virginia family , came to national prominence at a time of political upheaval . In the 1820s the nation 's only political party , the Democratic @-@ Republicans , split into factions . Though initially a Democrat , his opposition to Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren led him to ally with the Whig Party . Tyler served as a Virginia state legislator , governor , U.S. representative , and U.S. senator before his election as vice president in the presidential election of 1840 . He was put on the ticket to attract states ' rights Southerners to what was then a Whig coalition to defeat Van Buren 's re @-@ election bid . 
 Harrison 's death made Tyler the first vice president to succeed to the presidency without being elected to the office . Because of the short duration of Harrison 's one @-@ month term , Tyler served longer than any president in U.S. history who was never elected to the office . To forestall constitutional uncertainty , Tyler immediately took the oath of office , moved into the White House , and assumed full presidential powers , a precedent that would govern future successions and eventually become codified in the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment . A strict constructionist , Tyler found much of the Whig platform unconstitutional , and vetoed several of his party 's bills . Believing that the president should set policy instead of deferring to Congress , he attempted to bypass the Whig establishment , most notably Kentucky Senator Henry Clay . Most of Tyler 's Cabinet resigned soon into his term , and the Whigs , dubbing him His Accidency , expelled him from the party . Though Tyler was not the first president to veto bills , he was the first to see his veto overridden by Congress . Although he faced a stalemate on domestic policy , he had several foreign @-@ policy achievements , including the Webster – Ashburton Treaty with Britain and the Treaty of <unk> with Qing China . 
 President Tyler dedicated his last two years in office to the annexation of Texas . He initially sought election to a full term , but after failing to gain the support of either Whigs or Democrats , he withdrew . In the last days of his term , Congress passed the resolution authorizing the Texas annexation , which was carried out by Tyler 's successor , James K. Polk . When the American Civil War began in 1861 , Tyler sided with the Confederate government , and won election to the Confederate House of Representatives shortly before his death . Although some have praised Tyler 's political resolve , his presidency is generally held in low esteem by historians ; today he is considered an obscure president , with little presence in the American cultural memory . 
 = = Early life and law career = = 
 John Tyler was born on March 29 , 1790 . Like his future running mate William Henry Harrison , he hailed from Charles City County , Virginia ; both descended from aristocratic and politically entrenched families . The Tyler family traced its lineage to colonial Williamsburg in the seventeenth century . John Tyler , Sr. , commonly known as Judge Tyler , was a friend and college roommate of Thomas Jefferson and served in the House of Delegates , the lower house of the Virginia General Assembly , alongside Benjamin Harrison V , father of William . The elder Tyler served four years as Speaker of the House of Delegates before becoming a state court judge . He subsequently served as governor and as a judge on the U.S. District Court at Richmond . His wife , Mary Marot ( Armistead ) , was the daughter of a prominent plantation owner , Robert Booth Armistead . She died of a stroke when her son John was seven years old . 
 With his two brothers and five sisters , Tyler was raised on Greenway Plantation , a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ acre ( 5 km2 ) estate with a six @-@ room manor house his father had built . The Tylers ' forty slaves grew various crops , including wheat , corn and tobacco . Judge Tyler was willing to pay high wages for tutors who would challenge his children academically . Tyler was an unhealthy child , thin and prone to diarrhea ; such afflictions would burden him throughout his life . At the age of twelve , he entered the preparatory branch of the elite College of William and Mary , continuing the Tyler family 's tradition of attending the college . Tyler graduated from the school 's collegiate branch in 1807 , at age seventeen . Among the books that informed his economic views was Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations , and he acquired a lifelong love of Shakespeare . His political opinions were shaped by Bishop James Madison , the college 's president and a cousin to the future president of the same name ; the bishop served as a second father and mentor to Tyler . 
 After graduation Tyler studied law with his father , who was a state judge at the time , and later with former United States Attorney General Edmund Randolph . Tyler was admitted to the bar at the age of 19 , in violation of the rules : the judge who examined him neglected to ask his age . By this time his father was serving as Governor of Virginia ( 1808 – 1811 ) , and the young Tyler started a practice in Richmond , the state capital . In 1813 he purchased Woodburn plantation , and he resided there until 1821 . 
 = = Political rise = = 
 = = = Start in Virginia politics = = = 
 In 1811 , at the age of 21 , Tyler was elected by his fellow Charles City County residents to the House of Delegates . He served five successive one @-@ year terms , and sat on the Courts and Justice committee . The young politician 's defining positions were on display by the end of his first term in 1816 : a strong support of states ' rights and opposition to a national bank . He joined fellow legislator Benjamin W. Leigh in pushing for the censure of U.S. senators William Branch Giles and Richard Brent of Virginia , who had voted for the recharter of the First Bank of the United States against the legislature 's instructions . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 The United States was then facing hostilities with Britain in the War of 1812 . Tyler , like most Americans of his day , was anti @-@ British , and at the onset of the war he urged military action in a speech to the House of Delegates . After the British capture of Hampton , Virginia in the summer of 1813 , Tyler eagerly organized a militia company to defend Richmond , the Charles City Rifles , which he commanded with the rank of captain . No attack came , and he dissolved the company two months later . For his military service , Tyler received a land grant near what later became Sioux City , Iowa . 
 Tyler 's father died in 1813 , and Tyler inherited thirteen slaves along with his father 's plantation . In 1816 , he resigned his legislative seat to serve on the Governor 's Council of State , a group of eight advisers elected by the General Assembly . 
 = = = U.S. House of Representatives = = = 
 The death of U.S. Representative John Clopton in the fall of 1816 left a vacancy in the 23rd district . Tyler sought the seat , as did his friend and political ally Andrew Stevenson . As the two men did not differ politically , the race was a popularity contest . Tyler 's political connections and campaigning skills won him the election by a slim margin . He was sworn in on December 17 , 1816 , to serve as a Democratic @-@ Republican , the major political party in the Era of Good Feelings , in the Fourteenth Congress . 
 While the Democratic @-@ Republicans had supported states ' rights , in the wake of the War of 1812 , many members urged a stronger central government . A majority in Congress wanted to see the federal government help to fund internal improvements such as ports and roadways . Tyler held fast to his strict constructionist beliefs , rejecting such proposals on both constitutional and personal grounds . He believed each state should construct necessary projects within its borders using locally generated funds . Virginia was not " in so poor a condition as to require a charitable donation from Congress , " he contended . He was chosen to participate in an audit of the Second Bank of the United States in 1818 as part of a five @-@ man committee , and was appalled by corruption he perceived within the bank . He argued for the revocation of the bank charter , although Congress rejected any such proposal . His first clash with General Andrew Jackson followed Jackson 's 1818 invasion of Florida during the First Seminole War . While praising Jackson 's character , Tyler condemned him as overzealous , and for the execution of two British subjects . Tyler was elected for a full term without opposition in early 1819 . 
 Tyler was a slaveholder for his entire life , at one point keeping forty slaves at Greenway . Although he regarded slavery as an evil , and did not attempt to justify it , he never freed any of his slaves . Tyler considered slavery a matter for each state , and felt the federal government lacked the authority to abolish it . The living conditions of his slaves are not well documented , but historians agree that he cared for their well @-@ being and abstained from physical violence against them . 
 The major issue of the Sixteenth Congress ( 1819 – 21 ) was whether Missouri should be admitted to the Union , and whether slavery would be permitted in the new state . Acknowledging the ills of slavery , he hoped that by letting it expand , there would be fewer slaves in the east as slave and master journeyed west , making it feasible to consider abolishing the institution in Virginia . Thus , slavery would be abolished through the action of individual states as the practice became rare , as had been done in some Northern states . Believing that Congress did not have the power to regulate slavery and that admitting states based on whether they were slave or free was a recipe for sectional conflict , Tyler voted against the Missouri Compromise , which admitted Missouri as a slave state and Maine as a free one . It also forbade slavery in states formed from the northern part of the territories . Despite Tyler 's opposition , the Compromise passed . Throughout his time in Congress , he voted against bills which would restrict slavery in the territories . 
 Tyler declined to seek renomination in late 1820 , citing ill health . He privately acknowledged his dissatisfaction with the position , as his opposing votes were largely symbolic and did little to change the political culture in Washington ; he also observed that funding his children 's education would be difficult on a congressman 's low salary . He left office on March 3 , 1821 , endorsing his former opponent Stevenson for the seat , and returned to private law practice full @-@ time . 
 = = = Return to state politics = = = 
 Restless and bored after two years at home practicing law , Tyler sought election to the House of Delegates in 1823 . Neither member from Charles City County was seeking re @-@ election , and Tyler was elected easily that April , finishing first among the three candidates seeking the two seats . Upon taking his seat in December , he found the chamber thrust into debate over the impending presidential election of 1824 . The congressional nominating caucus , an early system for choosing presidential candidates , was still used despite its growing unpopularity . Tyler attempted to bring the lower house to endorse the caucus system and choose William H. Crawford as the Democratic @-@ Republican candidate . Despite the legislature 's support of Crawford , opposition to the caucus system killed Tyler 's proposal . Tyler 's most enduring effort in this second legislative tenure was saving the College of William and Mary , which suffered from waning enrollment and risked closure . Rather than move it from rural Williamsburg to the populous capital of Richmond , as some suggested , Tyler proposed that a series of administrative and financial reforms be enacted . These were passed into law and were successful ; by 1840 the school would see its highest @-@ ever enrollment . 
 Tyler 's political fortunes were growing ; he was considered as a possible candidate in the legislative deliberation for the 1824 U.S. Senate election . He was nominated in December 1825 for Governor of Virginia , a position which was then appointed by the legislature . Tyler was elected 131 – 81 over John Floyd . The office of governor was powerless under the original Virginia Constitution ( 1776 – 1830 ) , lacking even veto authority . Tyler enjoyed a prominent oratorical platform but could do little to influence the legislature . His most visible act as governor was delivering the funeral address for former president Jefferson , a Virginian , who had died on July 4 , 1826 . Tyler was deeply devoted to Jefferson , and his eloquent eulogy was well received . 
 Tyler 's governorship was otherwise uneventful . He promoted states ' rights and adamantly opposed any concentration of federal power . In order to thwart federal infrastructure proposals , he suggested Virginia actively expand its own road system . A proposal was made to expand the state 's poorly funded public school system , but no significant action was taken . Tyler was re @-@ elected unanimously to a second one @-@ year term in December 1826 . 
 = = = U.S. Senate = = = 
 In January 1827 , the General Assembly considered whether to elect U.S. Senator John Randolph for a full six @-@ year term . Randolph was a contentious figure : although he shared the staunch states ' rights views held by most of the Virginia legislature , he had a reputation for fiery rhetoric and erratic behavior on the Senate floor , which put his allies in an awkward position . Furthermore , he had made enemies by fiercely opposing President John Quincy Adams and Kentucky Senator Henry Clay . The nationalists of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party , who supported Adams and Clay , were a sizable minority in the Virginia legislature . They hoped to unseat Randolph by capturing the vote of states ' rights supporters who were uncomfortable with the senator 's reputation . They approached Tyler , and promised their endorsement if he sought the seat . Tyler repeatedly declined the offer , endorsing Randolph as the best candidate , but the political pressure continued to mount . Eventually he conceded that he would accept the seat if chosen . On the day of the vote , it was argued by one assemblyman that there was no political difference between the two candidates — Tyler was simply a more agreeable character than Randolph . The incumbent 's supporters , though , contended that Tyler 's election would be a tacit endorsement of the Adams administration . The legislature selected Tyler in a vote of 115 – 110 , and he resigned his governorship on March 4 , 1827 , as his Senate term began . 
 = = = = Democratic maverick = = = = 
 By the time of Tyler 's election to the Senate , campaigning for the 1828 presidential election was in progress . Adams , the incumbent president , was challenged by General Jackson . The Democratic @-@ Republicans had splintered into Adams 's National Republicans and Jackson 's Democrats . Tyler disliked Adams for seeking to increase the power of the federal government ; he feared Jackson would do the same . Still , Tyler was increasingly drawn to Jackson , hoping that he would not seek to spend as much federal money on internal improvements as Adams . In considering Jackson he wrote , " Turning to him I may at least indulge in hope ; looking on Adams I must despair . " 
 The first session of the Twentieth Congress began in early December 1827 . Tyler served alongside his Virginia colleague and close friend Littleton Waller Tazewell , who shared his strict constructionist views and uneasy support of Jackson . Throughout his Senate service , Tyler vigorously opposed all bills which provided for national infrastructure projects , feeling these were matters for individual states to decide . He and his Southern colleagues unsuccessfully opposed the protectionist Tariff of 1828 , known to its detractors as the " Tariff of Abominations " . Tyler suggested that the Tariff 's only positive outcome would be a national political backlash , restoring a respect for states ' rights . Tyler remained a strong supporter of states ' rights , stating " they may strike the Federal Government out of existence by a word ; demolish the Constitution and scatter its fragments to the winds . " 
 Jackson was elected , and Tyler soon came to disagree with him politically . The senator was frustrated by Jackson 's newly emerging spoils system , describing it as an " electioneering weapon " . He voted against many of the President 's nominations when they appeared to be based on patronage or did not follow constitutional procedure . Opposing the nominations of a president of his own party was considered " an act of insurgency " against his party . Tyler was particularly offended by Jackson 's use of the recess appointment power to name three treaty commissioners to meet with emissaries from the Ottoman Empire ; Tyler introduced a bill chastising the president for this . 
 Tyler attempted to remain on good terms with Jackson , only opposing him on principle rather than partisanship . He defended Jackson for vetoing the Maysville Road funding project , which Jackson considered unconstitutional . He voted to confirm several of the president 's appointments , including Jackson 's future running mate Martin Van Buren as United States Minister to Britain . The leading issue in the 1832 presidential election was the recharter of the Second Bank of the United States , which both Tyler and Jackson opposed . Congress voted to recharter the bank in July 1832 , and Jackson vetoed the bill for a mixture of constitutional and practical reasons . Tyler voted to sustain the veto and endorsed the president in his successful bid for re @-@ election . 
 = = = = Break with the party = = = = 
 Tyler 's uneasy relationship with his party came to a head during the 22nd Congress , as the Nullification Crisis of 1832 – 33 began . South Carolina , threatening secession , passed the Ordinance of Nullification in November 1832 , declaring the " Tariff of Abominations " null and void within its borders . This raised the constitutional question of whether states could nullify federal laws . President Jackson , who denied such a right , prepared to sign a Force Bill allowing the federal government to use military action to enforce the tariff . Tyler , who sympathized with South Carolina 's reasons for nullification , rejected Jackson 's use of military force against a state and gave a speech in February 1833 outlining his views . He supported Clay 's Compromise Tariff , enacted that year , to gradually reduce the tariff over ten years , alleviating tensions between the states and the federal government . 
 In voting against the Force Bill , Tyler knew he would permanently alienate the pro @-@ Jackson faction of the Virginia legislature , even those who had tolerated his irregularity up to this point . This would jeopardize his re @-@ election in February 1833 , in which he faced the pro @-@ administration Democrat James McDowell . With Clay 's endorsement , Tyler was re @-@ elected by a margin of 12 votes ; several legislators who had supported him only weeks beforehand were moved to vote against him as a result of his position on the Force Bill . 
 Jackson further offended Tyler by moving to dissolve the Bank by executive fiat . In September 1833 , Jackson issued an executive order directing Treasury Secretary Roger B. Taney to transfer federal funds from the Bank to state @-@ chartered banks without delay . Tyler saw this as " a flagrant assumption of power " , a breach of contract , and a threat to the economy . After months of agonizing , he decided to join with Jackson 's opponents . Sitting on the Senate Finance Committee , he voted for two censure resolutions against the president in March 1834 . By this time , Tyler had become affiliated with Clay 's newly formed Whig Party , which held control of the Senate . On March 3 , 1835 , with only hours remaining in the congressional session , the Whigs voted Tyler President pro tempore of the Senate as a symbolic gesture of approval . He is the only U.S. president to have held this office . 
 Shortly thereafter , the Democrats took control of the Virginia House of Delegates . Tyler was offered a judgeship in exchange for resigning his seat , but he declined . Tyler understood what was to come : he would soon be forced by the legislature to cast a vote that went against his constitutional beliefs . Senator Thomas Hart Benton of Missouri had introduced a bill expunging the censure of Jackson . By resolution of the Democratic @-@ controlled legislature , Tyler could be instructed to vote for the bill . If he disregarded the instructions , he would be violating his own principles : " the first act of my political life was a censure on Messrs. Giles and Brent for opposition to instructions , " he noted . Over the next few months he sought the counsel of his friends , who gave him conflicting advice . By mid @-@ February he felt that his Senate career was likely at an end . He issued a letter of resignation to the Vice President , Van Buren , on February 29 , 1836 , saying in part : 
 I shall carry with me into retirement the principles which I brought with me into public life , and by the surrender of the high station to which I was called by the voice of the people of Virginia , I shall set an example to my children which shall teach them to regard as nothing place and office , when either is to be attained or held at the sacrifice of honor . 
 = = = Presidential election , 1836 = = = 
 While Tyler wished to attend to his private life and family , he was soon swept up in the presidential election of 1836 . He had been suggested as a vice presidential candidate since early 1835 , and the same day the Virginia Democrats issued the expunging instruction , the Virginia Whigs nominated him as their candidate . The new Whig Party was not organized enough to hold a national convention and name a single ticket against Van Buren , Jackson 's chosen successor . Instead , Whigs in various regions each put forth their own preferred ticket , reflecting the party 's tenuous coalition : the Massachusetts Whigs nominated Daniel Webster and Francis Granger , the Anti @-@ Masons of the Northern and border states backed William Henry Harrison and Granger , and the states ' rights advocates of the middle and lower South nominated Hugh Lawson White and John Tyler . In Maryland , the Whig ticket was Harrison and Tyler and in South Carolina it was Willie P. Mangum for president and Tyler for vice @-@ president . The Whigs wanted to deny Van Buren a majority in the Electoral College , throwing the election into the House of Representatives , where deals could be made . Tyler hoped electors would be unable to elect a vice president , and that he would be one of the top two vote @-@ getters , from whom the Senate , under the Twelfth Amendment , must choose . 
 Following the custom of the times that candidates not appear to seek the office , Tyler stayed home throughout the campaign , and did not make speeches . Tyler received only 47 electoral votes , from Georgia , South Carolina and Tennessee , in the November 1836 election , trailing both Granger and the Democratic candidate , Richard Mentor Johnson of Kentucky . Harrison was the leading Whig candidate for president , but he lost to Van Buren . The presidential election was settled by the Electoral College , but for the only time in American history , the vice presidential election was decided by the Senate , which selected Johnson over Granger on the first ballot . 
 = = = National political figure = = = 
 Tyler had been drawn into Virginia politics even as a U.S. Senator . From October 1829 to January 1830 , he served as a member of the state constitutional convention , a role which he had been reluctant to accept . The original Virginia Constitution gave outsize influence to the state 's more conservative eastern counties , as it allocated an equal number of legislators to each county ( regardless of population ) and only granted suffrage to property owners . The convention gave the more populous and liberal counties of western Virginia an opportunity to expand their influence . Tyler , a slaveowner from eastern Virginia , supported the existing system . He largely remained on the sidelines during the debate , however , not wishing to alienate any of the state 's political factions . He was focused on his Senate career , which required a broad base of support , and gave speeches during the convention promoting compromise and unity . 
 After the 1836 election , Tyler thought his political career was at an end , and planned to return to private law practice . In the fall of 1837 a friend sold him a sizable property in Williamsburg . Unable to remain away from politics , Tyler successfully sought election to the House of Delegates . He took his seat in 1838 . Tyler was a national political figure by this point , and his third delegate service touched on such national issues as the sale of public lands . 
 Tyler 's successor in the Senate was William Cabell Rives , a conservative Democrat . In February 1839 , the General Assembly considered who should fill the seat that was to expire the following month . Rives had drifted away from his party , signalling a possible alliance with the Whigs . As Tyler had already fully rejected the Democrats , he expected the Whigs would support him . Still , many Whigs found Rives a more politically expedient choice , as they hoped to ally with the conservative wing of the Democratic Party in the 1840 presidential election . This strategy was supported by Whig leader Henry Clay , who nevertheless admired Tyler at that time . With the vote split among three candidates , including Rives and Tyler , the Senate seat remained vacant for almost two years , until January 1841 . 
 = = Presidential election , 1840 = = 
 = = = Adding Tyler to the ticket = = = 
 By the time the 1839 Whig National Convention in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , convened to choose the party 's ticket for the following year 's presidential election , the United States was in the third year of a serious recession , dubbed the Panic of 1837 . President Van Buren 's ineffective efforts to deal with the situation cost him public support . With the Democratic Party torn into factions , the head of the Whig ticket would likely be the next president . Harrison , Clay , and General Winfield Scott all sought the nomination . Tyler attended the convention and was with the Virginia delegation , although he had no official status . Because of bitterness over the unresolved Senate election , the Virginia delegation refused to make Tyler its favorite son candidate for vice president . Tyler himself did nothing to aid his chances . If his favored candidate for the presidential nomination , Clay , was successful , he would likely not be chosen for the second place on the ticket , which would probably go to a Northerner to assure geographic balance . 
 The convention deadlocked among the three main candidates , with Virginia 's votes going to Clay . Many Northern Whigs opposed Clay , and some , including Pennsylvania 's Thaddeus Stevens , showed the Virginians a letter written by Scott in which he apparently displayed abolitionist sentiments . The influential Virginia delegation then announced that Harrison was its second choice , causing most Scott supporters to abandon him in favor of Harrison , who gained the presidential nomination . 
 The vice presidential nomination was considered of little moment ; no president had failed to complete his elected term . Not much attention was given to the choice , and the specifics of how Tyler came to gain it are unclear . Chitwood pointed out that Tyler was a logical candidate : as a Southern slaveowner , he both balanced the ticket and assuaged the fears of Southerners who felt Harrison might have abolitionist leanings . Tyler had been a vice @-@ presidential candidate in 1836 , and having him on the ticket might win Virginia , the most populous state in the South . One of the convention managers , New York publisher Thurlow Weed , alleged that " Tyler was finally taken because we could get nobody else to accept " , but he did not say this until after the break between President Tyler and the Whig Party . Other Tyler foes claimed that he had wept himself into the White House , having been given the nomination after crying at Clay 's defeat , although such emotion would be unlikely as the Kentuckian had not reciprocated Tyler 's support , backing Rives in the Senate election . When Tyler 's name was submitted in the balloting , Virginia abstained from voting , but he received the necessary majority . Tyler , as president , was accused of having gained the nomination by concealing his views , and responded that he had not been asked about them . His biographer , Robert Seager II , held that Tyler was selected because of a dearth of alternative candidates . Seager concluded , " He was put on the ticket to draw the South to Harrison . No more , no less . " 
 = = = General election = = = 
 There was no Whig platform ; leaders decided that trying to put one together would tear the party apart . Thus , the Whigs ran on their opposition to Van Buren , and blamed him and his Democrats for the recession . In campaign materials , Tyler was praised for integrity in resigning over the legislature 's instructions . The Whigs initially hoped to muzzle Harrison and Tyler , lest they make policy statements that alienated parts of the party . But after Tyler 's Democratic rival , Vice President Johnson , made a successful speaking tour , Tyler was called upon to travel from Williamsburg to Columbus , Ohio , and there address a local convention , a speech intended to assure Northerners that he shared Harrison 's views . In his journey of nearly two months , Tyler made speeches at rallies . He could not avoid questions , and after being heckled into an admission that he supported the Compromise Tariff ( many Whigs did not ) , resorted to quoting from Harrison 's vague speeches . In his two @-@ hour speech at Columbus , Tyler entirely avoided the issue of the Bank of the United States , one of the major questions of the day . 
 To win the election , Whig leaders decided they had to mobilize people across the country , including women , who could not then vote . This was the first time that an American political party included women in campaign activities on a widespread scale , and women in Tyler 's Virginia were active on his behalf . The party hoped to avoid issues and win through public enthusiasm , with torchlight processions and alcohol @-@ fueled political rallies . The interest in the campaign was unprecedented , with many public events . When the Democratic press depicted Harrison as an old soldier , who would turn aside from his campaign if given a barrel of hard cider to drink in his log cabin , the Whigs eagerly seized on the image , and the log cabin campaign was born . The facts that Harrison lived on a palatial estate along the Ohio River and Tyler was well @-@ to @-@ do were not publicized , but log cabin images appeared everywhere , from banners to whiskey bottles . Cider was the favored beverage of many farmers and tradesmen , and Whigs claimed that Harrison preferred that drink of the common man . Democrats complained that the Harrison / Tyler campaign 's liberal provision of hard cider at rallies was encouraging drunkenness . 
 The presidential candidate 's military service was emphasized , thus the campaign jingle , " Tippecanoe and Tyler Too " , referring to Harrison 's victory at the Battle of Tippecanoe ; the slogan remains well @-@ known today . Glee clubs sprouted all over the country , singing patriotic and inspirational songs : one Democratic editor stated that he found the <unk> in support of the Whig Party to be unforgettable . Among the lyrics sung were " We shall vote for Tyler therefore / Without a why or wherefore " . Louis Hatch , in his history of the vice presidency , noted , " the Whigs roared , sang , and hard @-@ <unk> the ' hero of Tippecanoe ' into the White House " . 
 Clay , though embittered by another of his many defeats for the presidency , was appeased by Tyler 's withdrawal from the still @-@ unresolved Senate race , which would permit the election of Rives , and campaigned in Virginia for the Harrison / Tyler ticket . Tyler predicted the Whigs would easily take Virginia ; he was embarrassed when he was proved wrong , but was consoled by an overall victory — Harrison and Tyler won by an electoral vote of 234 – 60 and with 53 percent of the popular vote . Van Buren took only seven scattered states out of 26 . The Whigs gained control of both houses of Congress . 
 = = Vice Presidency , 1841 = = 
 As vice president @-@ elect , Tyler remained quietly at his home in Williamsburg . He privately expressed hopes that Harrison would prove decisive and not allow intrigue in the Cabinet , especially in the first days of the administration . Tyler did not participate in selecting the Cabinet , and did not recommend anyone for federal office in the new Whig administration . Harrison , beset by office seekers and the demands of Senator Clay , twice sent letters to Tyler asking his advice as to whether a Van Buren appointee should be dismissed . In both cases , Tyler recommended against ; Harrison accordingly stated , " Mr. Tyler says they ought not to be removed , and I will not remove them . " The two men met briefly in Richmond in February , and reviewed a parade together , though they did not discuss politics . 
 Tyler was sworn in on March 4 , 1841 , in the Senate chamber , and delivered a three @-@ minute speech about states ' rights before swearing in the new senators and attending President Harrison 's inauguration . Following Harrison 's two @-@ hour speech on that freezing March 4 , the Vice President returned to the Senate to receive the President 's Cabinet appointments , presiding over their confirmations the following day — a total of two hours as President of the Senate . Expecting few responsibilities , he then left Washington , quietly returning to his home in Williamsburg . Seager later wrote , " Had William Henry Harrison lived , John Tyler would undoubtedly have been as obscure as any vice @-@ president in American history . " 
 Harrison , meanwhile , struggled to keep up with the demands of Henry Clay and others who sought offices and influence in his administration . Harrison 's old age and fading health were no secret during the campaign , and the question of the presidential succession was on every politician 's mind . The first few weeks of the presidency took a toll on Harrison 's health , and after being caught in a rainstorm in late March he came down with pneumonia and pleurisy . Secretary of State Daniel Webster sent word to Tyler of Harrison 's illness on April 1 ; two days later , Richmond attorney James Lyons wrote with the news that the president had taken a turn for the worse , remarking that " I shall not be surprised to hear by tomorrow 's mail that Gen 'l Harrison is no more . " Tyler determined not to travel to Washington , not wanting to appear unseemly in anticipating the president 's death . At dawn on April 5 , Webster 's son Fletcher , Chief Clerk of the State Department , arrived at Tyler 's plantation with a letter from Webster , informing the new president of Harrison 's death the morning before . 
 = = Presidency ( 1841 – 1845 ) = = 
 = = = " His Accidency " = = = 
 Harrison 's unprecedented death in office caused considerable uncertainty regarding presidential succession . The Constitution of the United States then stated only that : 
 In Case of the Removal of the President from Office , or of his Death , Resignation , or Inability to discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office , the same shall devolve on the Vice President . 
 This led to the question of whether the actual office of president " devolved " upon Vice President Tyler , or merely its powers and duties . The Cabinet met within an hour of Harrison 's death and , according to a later account , determined that Tyler would be " Vice @-@ President acting President " . However , by the time Tyler arrived in Washington at 4 : 00 a.m. on April 6 , 1841 , he had firmly resolved that he was , in name and fact , the President of the United States . Acting on this determination , he had himself sworn in as president , without any qualifiers , in his hotel room . He considered the presidential oath redundant to his oath as vice president , but wished to quell any doubt over his accession . 
 Immediately after his inauguration , Tyler called the Cabinet into session , having decided to retain its members . Webster informed him of Harrison 's practice of making policy by a majority vote . The Cabinet fully expected the new president to continue this practice . Tyler was astounded and immediately corrected them : 
 I beg your pardon , gentlemen ; I am very glad to have in my Cabinet such able statesmen as you have proved yourselves to be . And I shall be pleased to avail myself of your counsel and advice . But I can never consent to being dictated to as to what I shall or shall not do . I , as president , shall be responsible for my administration . I hope to have your hearty co @-@ operation in carrying out its measures . So long as you see fit to do this , I shall be glad to have you with me . When you think otherwise , your resignations will be accepted . 
 He delivered a de facto inaugural address on April 9 reasserting his fundamental tenets of Jeffersonian democracy and limited federal power . Tyler 's claim to be president was not immediately accepted by opposition members of Congress such as John Quincy Adams , who felt that Tyler should be a caretaker under the title of " Acting President " , or remain vice president in name . Among those who questioned Tyler 's authority was Clay , who had planned to be " the real power behind a fumbling throne " while Harrison was alive , and intended the same for Tyler . Clay saw Tyler as the " vice @-@ president " and his presidency as a mere " regency " . 
 Ratification of the decision by Congress came through the customary notification that it makes to the president , that it is in session and available to receive messages . In both houses , unsuccessful amendments were offered to strike the word " president " in favor of language including the term " vice president " to refer to Tyler . Mississippi Senator Robert J. Walker , in opposition , stated that the idea that Tyler was still vice president and could preside over the Senate was absurd . 
 Tyler 's opponents never fully accepted him as president . He was referred to by many mocking nicknames , including " His Accidency " . However , Tyler never wavered from his conviction that he was the rightful president ; when his political opponents sent correspondence to the White House addressed to the " vice president " or " acting president " , Tyler had it returned unopened . 
 = = = Economic policy and party conflicts = = = 
 Harrison had been expected to adhere closely to Whig Party policies and to defer to party congressional leaders , particularly Clay . When Tyler succeeded him , he at first was in accord with the new Whig Congress in signing into law such measures as a preemption bill granting " squatters ' sovereignty " to settlers on public land , a Distribution Act ( discussed below ) , a new bankruptcy law , and the repeal of the Independent Treasury enacted under Van Buren . But when it came to the great banking question , Tyler was soon at odds with the Congressional Whigs . Twice he vetoed Clay 's legislation for a national banking act . Although the second bill supposedly had been tailored to meet his stated objections in the first veto , its final version did not . This practice , designed to protect Clay from having a successful incumbent president as a rival for the Whig nomination in 1844 , became known as " heading Captain Tyler " , a term coined by Whig Representative John Minor Botts of Virginia . Tyler proposed an alternative fiscal plan to be known as the " Exchequer " , but Clay 's friends , who controlled the Congress , would have none of it . 
 On September 11 , 1841 , following the second bank veto , members of the cabinet entered Tyler 's office one by one and resigned — an orchestration by Clay to force Tyler 's resignation and place his own lieutenant , Senate President pro tempore Samuel L. Southard , in the White House . The only exception was Webster , who remained to finalize what became the 1842 Webster – Ashburton Treaty , and to demonstrate his independence from Clay . When told by Webster that he was willing to stay , Tyler is reported to have said , " Give me your hand on that , and now I will say to you that Henry Clay is a doomed man . " On September 13 , when the president did not resign or give in , the Whigs in Congress expelled Tyler from the party . Tyler was lambasted by Whig newspapers and received hundreds of letters threatening his assassination . Whigs in Congress were so angry with Tyler that they refused to allocate funds for the repair of the White House , which had fallen into disrepair . 
 = = = = Tariff and distribution debate = = = = 
 By mid @-@ 1841 , the federal government faced a projected budget deficit of $ 11 million . Tyler recognized the need for higher tariffs , but wished to stay within the 20 percent rate created by the 1833 Compromise Tariff . He also supported a plan to distribute to the states any revenue from the sales of public land , as an emergency measure to manage the states ' growing debt , even though this would cut federal revenue . The Whigs supported high protectionist tariffs and national funding of state infrastructure , and so there was enough overlap to forge a compromise . The Distribution Act of 1841 created a distribution program , with a ceiling on tariffs at 20 percent ; a second bill increased tariffs to that figure on previously low @-@ tax goods . Despite these measures , by March 1842 it had become clear that the federal government was still in dire fiscal straits . 
 The root of the trouble was an economic crisis — initiated by the Panic of 1837 — which was entering its sixth year in 1842 . A speculative bubble had burst in 1836 – 39 , causing a collapse of the financial sector and a subsequent depression . The country became deeply divided over the best response to the crisis . Almost all of President Tyler 's cabinet had resigned in September 1841 , after he vetoed two successive attempts to re @-@ establish a central bank for the United States . Conditions got even worse in early 1842 because a deadline was looming . A decade earlier , when the economy was strong , Congress had promised Southern states that there would be a reduction in hated federal tariffs . Northern states welcomed tariffs , which protected their infant industries . But the South had no industrial base and depended on open access to British markets for their cotton . In a recommendation to Congress , Tyler lamented that it would be necessary to override the Compromise Tariff of 1833 and raise rates beyond the 20 percent limit . Under the previous deal , this would suspend the distribution program , with all revenues going to the federal government . 
 The defiant Whig Congress would not raise tariffs in a way that would affect the distribution of funds to states . In June 1842 they passed two bills that would raise tariffs and unconditionally extend the distribution program . Believing it improper to continue distribution at a time when federal revenue shortage necessitated increasing the tariff , Tyler vetoed both bills , burning any remaining bridges between himself and the Whigs . Congress tried again , combining the two into one bill ; Tyler vetoed it again , to the outrage of many in Congress , who nevertheless failed to override the veto . As some action was necessary , Whigs in Congress passed , in each house by one vote , a bill restoring tariffs to 1832 levels and ending the distribution program . Tyler signed the Tariff of 1842 on August 30 , pocket vetoing a separate bill to restore distribution . 
 = = = = Impeachment attempt = = = = 
 Shortly after the tariff vetoes , Whigs in the House of Representatives initiated American history 's first impeachment proceedings against a president . This was not only a matter of the Whigs ' support of legislation Tyler vetoed ; until the presidency of the Whigs ' arch @-@ enemy Andrew Jackson , presidents rarely vetoed bills , and then , generally only on the grounds of whether or not something was unconstitutional . Tyler 's actions opposed the Whigs ' opinion that the presidency should allow Congress to make decisions regarding policy . Congressman John Botts , who opposed Tyler , introduced a resolution on July 10 , 1842 . It levied several charges against Tyler and called for a nine @-@ member committee to investigate his behavior , with the expectation of a formal impeachment recommendation . Clay found this measure prematurely aggressive , favoring a more moderate progression toward Tyler 's " inevitable " impeachment . The Botts bill was tabled until the following January , when it was rejected , 127 − 83 . 
 A House select committee , headed by John Quincy Adams , condemned the president 's use of the veto and assailed his character . Adams , an ardent abolitionist , disliked the fact that Tyler was a slaveholder . While the committee 's report did not formally recommend impeachment , it clearly established the possibility . In August 1842 , by a vote of 98 – 90 , the House endorsed the committee 's report . Adams sponsored a constitutional amendment to change both houses ' two @-@ thirds requirement ( for overriding vetoes ) to a simple majority , but neither house passed such a measure . The Whigs were unable to pursue further impeachment proceedings in the subsequent 28th Congress , as in the elections of 1842 they retained a majority in the Senate but lost control of the House . Near the end of Tyler 's term in office , on March 3 , 1845 , Congress overrode his veto of a minor bill relating to revenue cutters . This was the first overriding of any presidential veto in US history . 
 = = = Administration and cabinet = = = 
 The battles between Tyler and the Whigs in Congress resulted in a number of his nominees being rejected . He received little support from Democrats and , without much support from either major party in Congress , a number of his nominations were rejected without regard for the qualifications of the nominee . To reject a president 's nominees for his Cabinet was unprecedented , though in 1809 , James Madison had withheld the nomination of Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin as Secretary of State because of opposition in the Senate . A Cabinet nominee would not fail of confirmation , after Tyler 's term , until Henry Stanbery 's nomination as Attorney General was rejected by the Senate in 1868 . 
 Four of Tyler 's Cabinet nominees were rejected , the most of any president . These were Caleb Cushing ( Treasury ) , David Henshaw ( Navy ) James Porter ( War ) , and James S. Green ( Treasury ) . Henshaw and Porter served as recess appointees before their rejections . Tyler repeatedly renominated Cushing , who was rejected three times in one day , March 3 , 1843 , the last day of the 27th Congress . 
 = = = Foreign and military affairs = = = 
 Tyler 's difficulties in domestic policy contrasted with notable accomplishments in foreign policy . He had long been an advocate of expansionism toward the Pacific and free trade , and was fond of evoking themes of national destiny and the spread of liberty in support of these policies . His policies were largely in line with Jackson 's earlier efforts to promote American commerce across the Pacific . Eager to compete with Great Britain in international markets , he sent lawyer Caleb Cushing to China , where he negotiated the terms of the Treaty of <unk> ( 1844 ) . The same year , he sent Henry Wheaton as a minister to Berlin , where he negotiated and signed a trade agreement with the Zollverein , a coalition of German states that managed tariffs . This treaty was rejected by the Whigs , mainly as a show of hostility toward the Tyler administration . 
 In an 1842 special message to Congress , the president also applied the Monroe Doctrine to Hawaii ( dubbed the " Tyler Doctrine " ) , told Britain not to interfere there , and began a process that led to the eventual annexation of Hawaii by the United States . 
 In 1842 Secretary of State Daniel Webster negotiated with Britain the Webster – Ashburton Treaty , which concluded where the border between Maine and Canada lay . That issue had caused tension between the United States and Britain for decades and had brought the two countries to the brink of war on several occasions . The treaty improved Anglo @-@ American diplomatic relations . However , Tyler was unsuccessful in concluding a treaty with the British to fix the boundaries of Oregon . On Tyler 's last full day in office , March 3 , 1845 , Florida was admitted to the Union as the 27th state . 
 Tyler advocated an increase in military strength . His administration drew praise from naval leaders , who saw a marked increase in warships . Tyler brought the long , bloody Second Seminole War to an end in 1842 , and expressed interest in the forced cultural assimilation of the Native Americans . He also advocated the establishment of a chain of American forts from Council Bluffs , Iowa , to the Pacific . 
 In May 1842 , when the Dorr Rebellion in Rhode Island came to a head , Tyler pondered the request of the governor and legislature to send federal troops to help it suppress the <unk> insurgents . The insurgents under Thomas Dorr had armed themselves and proposed to install a new state constitution . Before such acts , Rhode Island had been following the same constitutional structure that was established in 1663 . Tyler called for calm on both sides , and recommended that the governor enlarge the franchise to let most men vote . Tyler promised that in case an actual insurrection should break out in Rhode Island he would employ force to aid the regular , or Charter , government . He made it clear that federal assistance would be given , not to prevent , but only to put down insurrection , and would not be available until violence had been committed . After listening to reports from his confidential agents , Tyler decided that the ' lawless assemblages ' had dispersed and expressed his confidence in a " temper of conciliation as well as of energy and decision . " He did not send any federal forces . The rebels fled the state when the state militia marched against them , but the incident led to broader suffrage in Rhode Island . 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 Two vacancies occurred on the Supreme Court during Tyler 's presidency , as Justices Smith Thompson and Henry Baldwin died in 1843 and 1844 , respectively . Tyler , ever at odds with Congress — including the Whig @-@ controlled Senate — nominated several men to the Supreme Court to fill these seats . However , the Senate successively voted against confirming John C. Spencer , Reuben Walworth , Edward King and John M. Read ( Walworth was rejected three times , King rejected twice ) . One reason cited for the Senate 's actions was the hope that Clay would fill the vacancies after winning the 1844 presidential election . Tyler 's four unsuccessful nominees are the most by a president . 
 Finally , in February 1845 , with less than a month remaining in his term , Tyler 's nomination of Samuel Nelson to Thompson 's seat was confirmed by the Senate . Nelson , a Democrat , had a reputation as a careful and noncontroversial jurist . Still , his confirmation came as a surprise . Baldwin 's seat remained vacant until James K. Polk 's nominee , Robert Grier , was confirmed in 1846 . 
 Tyler was able to appoint only six other federal judges , all to United States district courts . 
 = = = Annexation of Texas = = = 
 Tyler made the annexation of the Republic of Texas part of his platform soon after becoming president . Texas had declared independence from Mexico in the Texas Revolution of 1836 , although Mexico still refused to acknowledge it as a sovereign state . The people of Texas actively pursued joining the Union , but Jackson and Van Buren had been reluctant to inflame tensions over slavery by annexing another Southern state . Tyler , on the other hand , intended annexation to be the focal point of his administration . Secretary Webster was opposed ; he convinced Tyler to focus on Pacific initiatives until later in his term . Although Tyler 's desire for western expansionism is agreed upon by historians and scholars , views differ regarding the motivations behind it . Biographer Edward C. Crapol notes that during the presidency of James Monroe , Tyler ( then in the House of Representatives ) had suggested slavery was a " dark cloud " hovering over the Union , and that it would be " well to disperse this cloud " so that with fewer blacks in the older slave states , a process of gradual emancipation would begin in Virginia and other upper Southern states . Historian William W. Freehling , however , wrote that Tyler 's official motivation in annexing Texas was to outmaneuver suspected efforts by Great Britain to promote an emancipation of slaves in Texas that would weaken the institution in the United States . 
 = = = = Early attempts = = = = 
 In early 1843 , having completed the Webster – Ashburton treaty and other diplomatic efforts , Tyler felt ready to pursue Texas . Now lacking a party base , he saw annexation of the republic as his only pathway to independent re @-@ election in 1844 . For the first time in his career he was willing to play " political hardball " to see it through . As a trial balloon he dispatched his ally Thomas Walker Gilmer , then a U.S. Representative from Virginia , to publish a letter defending annexation , which was well received . Despite his successful relationship with Webster , Tyler knew he would need a Secretary of State who supported the Texas initiative . Recognizing this shift in the president 's focus , and with his work on the British treaty now completed , he forced Webster 's resignation and installed Hugh S. <unk> of South Carolina as an interim successor . 
 With the help of newly appointed Treasury Secretary John C. Spencer , Tyler cleared out an array of officeholders , replacing them with pro @-@ annexation partisans , in a reversal of his former stand against patronage . He elicited the help of political organizer Michael Walsh to build a political machine in New York . In exchange for an appointment as consul to Hawaii , journalist Alexander G. Abell wrote a flattering biography , Life of John Tyler , which was printed in large quantities and given to postmasters to distribute . Seeking to rehabilitate his public image , Tyler embarked on a nationwide tour in the spring of 1843 . The positive reception of the public at these events contrasted with his ostracism back in Washington . The tour centered on the dedication of the Bunker Hill Monument in Boston , Massachusetts . Shortly after the dedication , Tyler learned of <unk> 's sudden death , which dampened the festivities and caused him to cancel the rest of the tour . 
 Tyler appointed Abel P. Upshur , a popular Secretary of the Navy and close adviser , as his new Secretary of State , and nominated Gilmer to fill Upshur 's former office . Tyler and Upshur began quiet negotiations with the Texas government , promising military protection from Mexico in exchange for a commitment to annexation . Secrecy was necessary , as the Constitution required congressional approval for such military commitments . Upshur planted rumors of possible British designs on Texas to drum up support among Northern voters , who were wary of admitting a new pro @-@ slavery state . By January 1844 Upshur told the Texas government that he had found a large majority of senators in favor of an annexation treaty . The republic remained skeptical , and finalization of the treaty took until the end of February . 
 = = = = USS Princeton disaster = = = = 
 A ceremonial cruise down the Potomac River was held aboard the newly built USS Princeton on February 28 , 1844 , the day after completion of the annexation treaty . Aboard the ship were 400 guests , including Tyler and his cabinet , as was the world 's largest naval gun , the " Peacemaker . " The gun was ceremonially fired several times in the afternoon to the great delight of the onlookers , who then filed downstairs to offer a toast . Several hours later , Captain Robert F. Stockton was convinced by the crowd to fire one more shot . As the guests moved up to the deck , Tyler paused briefly to watch his son @-@ in @-@ law , William Waller , sing a ditty . 
 At once an explosion was heard from above : the gun had malfunctioned . Tyler was unhurt , having remained safely below deck , but a number of others were killed instantly , including his crucial cabinet members , Gilmer and Upshur . Also killed or mortally wounded were Virgil Maxcy of Maryland , Rep. David Gardiner of New York , Commodore Beverly Kennon , Chief of Construction of the United States Navy , and Armistead , Tyler 's black slave and body servant . The death of David Gardiner had a devastating effect on his daughter , Julia , who fainted and was carried to safety by the president himself . Julia later recovered from her grief and married President Tyler . 
 For Tyler , any hope of completing the Texas plan before November ( and with it , any hope of re @-@ election ) was instantly dashed . Historian Edward P. Crapol later wrote that " Prior to the Civil War and the assassination of Abraham Lincoln , " the Princeton disaster " unquestionably was the most severe and debilitating tragedy ever to confront a President of the United States . " 
 = = = = Ratification and 1844 election = = = = 
 In what the Miller Center of Public Affairs considers " a serious tactical error that ruined the scheme [ of establishing political respectability for him ] " , Tyler appointed former Vice President John C. Calhoun in early March 1844 as his Secretary of State . Tyler 's good friend , Virginia Representative Henry A. Wise , wrote that following the Princeton disaster , Wise went on his own to extend Calhoun the position through a colleague , who assumed that the offer came from the president . When Wise went to tell Tyler what he had done , the president was angry but felt that the action now had to stand . Calhoun was a leading advocate of slavery , and his attempts to get an annexation treaty passed were resisted by abolitionists as a result . When the text of the treaty was leaked to the public , it met political opposition from the Whigs , who would oppose anything that might enhance Tyler 's status , as well as from foes of slavery and those who feared a confrontation with Mexico , which had announced that it would view annexation as a hostile act by the United States . Both Clay and Van Buren , the respective frontrunners for the Whig and Democratic nominations , decided in a private meeting at Van Buren 's home to come out against annexation . Knowing this , when Tyler sent the treaty to the Senate for ratification in April 1844 , he did not expect it to pass . 
 Following Tyler 's break with the Whigs in 1841 , he had begun to shift back to his old Democratic party , but its members , especially the followers of Van Buren , were not ready to receive him . He knew that , with little chance of election , the only way to salvage his presidency and legacy was to move public opinion in favor of the Texas issue . He formed a third party , the Democratic @-@ Republicans , using the officeholders and political networks he had built over the previous year . A chain of pro @-@ Tyler newspapers across the country put out editorials promoting his candidacy throughout the early months of 1844 . Reports of meetings held throughout the country suggest that support for the president was not limited to officeholders , as is often inferred . The Tyler supporters , holding signs reading " Tyler and Texas ! " , held their nominating convention in Baltimore in May 1844 , just as the Democratic Party was holding its presidential nomination . With their high visibility and energy as they gave Tyler their own nomination , they were able to force the Democrats ' hand in favor of annexation . Ballot after ballot , Van Buren failed to win the necessary super @-@ majority of Democratic votes , and slowly fell in the ranking . It was not until the ninth ballot that the Democrats turned their sights to James K. Polk , a less prominent candidate who supported annexation . They found him to be perfectly suited for their platform , and he was nominated with two @-@ thirds of the vote . Tyler considered his work vindicated , and implied in an acceptance letter that annexation was his true priority rather than election . 
 Tyler was unfazed when the Whig @-@ controlled Senate rejected his treaty by a vote of 16 – 35 in June 1844 , as he felt that annexation was now within reach . He called for Congress to annex Texas by joint resolution rather than by treaty . Former President Andrew Jackson , a staunch supporter of annexation , persuaded Polk to welcome Tyler back into the Democratic party and ordered Democratic editors to cease their attacks on him . Satisfied by these developments , Tyler dropped out of the race in August and endorsed Polk for the presidency . Polk 's narrow victory over Clay in the November election was seen by the Tyler administration as a mandate for completing the resolution . Tyler announced in his annual message to Congress that " a controlling majority of the people and a large majority of the states have declared in favor of immediate annexation . " In late February 1845 , the House by a substantial margin and the Senate by a bare 27 – 25 majority approved a joint resolution offering terms of annexation to Texas . On March 1 , three days before the end of his term , Tyler signed the bill into law . After some debate , Texas accepted the terms and entered the union on December 29 , 1845 , as the 28th state . 
 = = Family and personal life = = 
 Tyler fathered more children than any other American president in history . His first wife was Letitia Christian ( November 12 , 1790 – September 10 , 1842 ) , with whom he had eight children : Mary ( 1815 – 1847 ) , Robert ( 1816 – 1877 ) , John ( 1819 – 1896 ) , Letitia ( 1821 – 1907 ) , Elizabeth ( 1823 – 1850 ) , Anne ( 1825 – 1825 ) , Alice ( 1827 – 1854 ) and Tazewell ( 1830 – 1874 ) . 
 Tyler 's wife Letitia died of a stroke in the White House in September 1842 . His second wife was Julia Gardiner ( July 23 , 1820 – July 10 , 1889 ) , with whom he had seven children : David ( 1846 – 1927 ) , John Alexander ( 1848 – 1883 ) , Julia ( 1849 – 1871 ) , Lachlan ( 1851 – 1902 ) , Lyon ( 1853 – 1935 ) , Robert Fitzwalter ( 1856 – 1927 ) and Pearl ( 1860 – 1947 ) . 
 Although Tyler 's family was dear to him , during his political rise he was often away from home for extended periods . As a Southern gentleman , duty was important to Tyler , including his duties to his family . When Tyler chose not to seek re @-@ election to the House of Representatives in 1821 because of illness , he wrote that he would soon be called upon to educate his growing family . It was difficult to practice law while away in Washington part of the year , and his plantation was more profitable when Tyler was available to manage it himself . By the time he entered the Senate in 1827 , he had resigned himself to spending part of the year away from his growing family . Still , he sought to remain close to his children through letters . 
 In December 1841 , Tyler was attacked by abolitionist publisher Joshua Leavitt , who alleged that Tyler had fathered several sons with his slaves , and later sold his offspring . A number of African American families today have an oral tradition of descent from Tyler , but no firm evidence of such a link has ever surfaced . 
 As of 2015 , Tyler has two living grandsons through his son Lyon Gardiner Tyler ; he is the earliest former president with living grandchildren . Lyon Gardiner Tyler , Jr. was born in 1924 , and Harrison Ruffin Tyler was born in 1928 ; Lyon Tyler Jr. resides in Franklin , Tennessee , and Harrison Tyler maintains the family home , Sherwood Forest Plantation in Charles City County , Virginia . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency and death = = 
 Tyler retired to a Virginia plantation , originally named Walnut Grove ( or " the Grove " ) , located on the James River in Charles City County . He renamed it Sherwood Forest , in a reference to the folk legend Robin Hood , to signify that he had been " outlawed " by the Whig Party . He did not take farming lightly and worked hard to maintain large yields . His neighbors , largely Whigs , appointed him to the minor office of overseer of roads in 1847 in an effort to mock him . To their displeasure he treated the job seriously , frequently summoning his neighbors to provide their slaves for road work , and continuing to insist on carrying out his duties even after his neighbors asked him to stop . He withdrew from politics , rarely receiving visits from his friends . He was asked to give an occasional public speech , but was not sought out as an adviser . One notable speech was at the unveiling of a monument to Henry Clay ; acknowledging the political battles between the two , he spoke highly of his former colleague , whom he had always admired for bringing about the Compromise Tariff of 1833 . The former president 's time was spent with the doings of the Virginia aristocracy , including parties , visiting or being visited by prominent families , and summers at the family seaside home , " Villa Margaret " . 
 After John Brown 's raid on Harpers Ferry ignited fears of an abolitionist attempt to free the slaves , or an actual rebellion by the slaves , several Virginia communities organized militia units , or reenergized existing ones . Tyler 's community organized a cavalry troop and a home guard company ; Tyler was chosen to command the home guard company with the rank of captain . 
 On the eve of the Civil War , Tyler re @-@ entered public life as a participant in the Virginia Peace Conference held in Washington , D.C. , in February 1861 as an effort to devise means to prevent a war . The convention sought a compromise to avoid civil war even as the Confederate Constitution was being drawn up at the Montgomery Convention . Despite of his leadership role in the Peace Conference , Tyler opposed the convention 's final resolutions . He felt that they were written by the free state delegates , did not protect the rights of slave owners in the territories and would do little to bring back the lower South and restore the Union . He voted against the conference 's seven resolutions , which the conference sent to Congress for approval late in February 1861 as an amendment to the Constitution . 
 On the same day the Peace Conference had started , Tyler was elected to the Virginia Secession Convention and presided over the opening session on February 13 , 1861 , while the Peace Conference was still under way . Tyler abandoned hope of compromise and saw secession as the only option , predicting that a clean split of all Southern states would not result in war . In mid @-@ March he spoke against the Peace Conference resolutions , and on April 4 he voted for secession when the convention rejected it . On April 17 , after the attack on Fort Sumter and Lincoln 's call for troops , Tyler voted with the majority for secession . He headed a committee that negotiated the terms for Virginia 's entry into the Confederate States of America and helped set the pay rate for military officers . On June 14 , Tyler signed the Ordinance of Secession , and one week later the convention unanimously elected him to the Provisional Confederate Congress . Tyler was seated in the Confederate Congress on August 1 , 1861 , and he served until just before his death in 1862 . In November 1861 , he was elected to the Confederate House of Representatives but he died in his room at the Ballard House hotel in Richmond before the first session could open in February 1862 . 
 Throughout Tyler 's life , he suffered from poor health . As he aged , he suffered more frequently from colds during the winter . On January 12 , 1862 , after complaining of chills and dizziness , he vomited and collapsed . He was treated , but his health did not improve , and he made plans to return to Sherwood Forest by the 18th . As he lay in bed the night before , he began suffocating , and Julia summoned his doctor . Just after midnight , Tyler took a last sip of brandy , and told his doctor , " I am going . Perhaps it is best . " He died shortly thereafter , most likely due to a stroke . 
 Tyler 's death was the only one in presidential history not to be officially recognized in Washington , because of his allegiance to the Confederacy . He had requested a simple burial , but Confederate President Jefferson Davis devised a grand , politically pointed funeral , painting Tyler as a hero to the new nation . Accordingly , at his funeral , the coffin of the tenth president of the United States was draped with a Confederate flag , the only former president ever to be buried and honored ceremoniously under a foreign non @-@ US flag . 
 Tyler is buried in Hollywood Cemetery in Richmond , Virginia , in front of the gravesite of former President James Monroe , the black structure visible in the illustration behind the left side of Tyler 's obelisk . Tyler has since been the namesake of several U.S. locations , including the city of Tyler , Texas , named for him because of his role in the annexation of Texas . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Tyler 's presidency has provoked highly divided responses among political commentators . It is generally held in low esteem by historians ; Edward P. Crapol began his biography John Tyler , the Accidental President ( 2006 ) by noting : " Other biographers and historians have argued that John Tyler was a hapless and inept chief executive whose presidency was seriously flawed . " In The Republican Vision of John Tyler ( 2003 ) , Dan Monroe observed that the Tyler presidency " is generally ranked as one of the least successful " . Seager wrote that Tyler " was neither a great president nor a great intellectual , " adding that despite a few achievements , " his administration has been and must be counted an unsuccessful one by any modern measure of accomplishment " . A survey of 65 historians , conducted by C @-@ SPAN in 2009 , ranked Tyler as 35th of 42 men to hold the office . 
 Tyler 's assumption of complete presidential powers " set a hugely important precedent " , according to a biographical sketch by the University of Virginia 's Miller Center of Public Affairs . Tyler 's successful insistence that he was president , and not a caretaker or acting president , was a model for the succession of seven other presidents over the 19th and 20th centuries . Tyler 's action of assuming both the title of the presidency and its full powers would be legally recognized in 1967 , when it was codified in the Twenty @-@ fifth Amendment . 
 Some scholars in recent years have praised Tyler 's foreign policy . Monroe credits him with " achievements like the Webster – Ashburton treaty which heralded the prospect of improved relations with Great Britain , and the annexation of Texas , which added millions of acres to the national domain . " Crapol argued that Tyler " was a stronger and more effective president than generally remembered " , while Seager wrote , " I find him to be a courageous , principled man , a fair and honest fighter for his beliefs . He was a president without a party . " Author Ivan Eland , in an update of his 2008 book <unk> Rushmore , rated all 44 US presidents by the criteria of peace , prosperity , and liberty ; with the finished ratings , John Tyler was ranked the best president of all time . Louis <unk> , in his article in History Today , pointed out that Tyler brought integrity to the White House at a time when many in politics lacked it , and refused to compromise his principles to avoid the anger of his opponents . Crapol argues that Tyler 's allegiance to the Confederacy overshadows much of the good he did as president , " John Tyler 's historical reputation has yet to fully recover from that tragic decision to betray his loyalty and commitment to what he had once defined as ' the first great American interest ' — the preservation of the Union . " 
 Norma Lois Peterson , in her book on Tyler 's presidency , suggested that Tyler 's general lack of success as president was due to external factors , that would have rebounded upon whoever was in the White House . Chief among them was Henry Clay , who was determined to realize the vision he had for America , and who would brook no opposition . In the aftermath of Jackson 's determined use of the powers of the Executive Branch , the Whigs wanted the president to be dominated by Congress , and Clay treated Tyler as a subordinate . Tyler resented this , leading to the conflict between the branches that dominated his presidency . Pointing to Tyler 's advances in foreign policy , she deemed Tyler 's presidency " flawed ... but it was not a failure " . 
 While academics have both praised and criticized Tyler , the general American public has little awareness of him at all . Several writers have portrayed Tyler as among the nation 's most obscure presidents . As Seager remarked , " His countrymen generally remember him , if they have heard of him at all , as the rhyming end of a catchy campaign slogan . " 
 = Molybdenum = 
 Molybdenum is a chemical element with symbol Mo and atomic number 42 . The name is from Neo @-@ Latin <unk> , from Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> , meaning lead , since its ores were confused with lead ores . Molybdenum minerals have been known throughout history , but the element was discovered ( in the sense of differentiating it as a new entity from the mineral salts of other metals ) in 1778 by Carl Wilhelm Scheele . The metal was first isolated in 1781 by Peter Jacob <unk> . 
 Molybdenum does not occur naturally as a free metal on Earth ; it is found only in various oxidation states in minerals . The free element , a silvery metal with a gray cast , has the sixth @-@ highest melting point of any element . It readily forms hard , stable carbides in alloys , and for this reason most of world production of the element ( about 80 % ) is used in steel alloys , including high @-@ strength alloys and superalloys . 
 Most molybdenum compounds have low solubility in water , but when molybdenum @-@ bearing minerals contact oxygen and water , the resulting molybdate ion <unk> − 
 4 is quite soluble . <unk> , molybdenum compounds ( about 14 % of world production of the element ) are used in high @-@ pressure and high @-@ temperature applications as pigments and catalysts . 
 Molybdenum @-@ bearing enzymes are by far the most common bacterial catalysts for breaking the chemical bond in atmospheric molecular nitrogen in the process of biological nitrogen fixation . At least 50 molybdenum enzymes are now known in bacteria and animals , although only bacterial and cyanobacterial enzymes are involved in nitrogen fixation . These <unk> contain molybdenum in a form different from other molybdenum enzymes , which all contain fully oxidized molybdenum in a molybdenum cofactor . These various molybdenum cofactor enzymes are vital to the organisms , and molybdenum is a essential element for life in all higher eukaryote organisms , though not in all bacteria . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Physical properties = = = 
 In its pure form , molybdenum is a silvery @-@ grey metal with a Mohs hardness of 5 @.@ 5 . It has a melting point of 2 @,@ 623 ° C ( 4 @,@ 753 ° F ) ; of the naturally occurring elements , only tantalum , osmium , rhenium , tungsten , and carbon have higher melting points . Weak oxidation of molybdenum starts at 300 ° C ( 572 ° F ) . It has one of the lowest coefficients of thermal expansion among commercially used metals . The tensile strength of molybdenum wires increases about 3 times , from about 10 to 30 GPa , when their diameter decreases from ~ 50 – 100 nm to 10 nm . 
 = = = Isotopes = = = 
 There are 35 known isotopes of molybdenum , ranging in atomic mass from 83 to 117 , as well as four metastable nuclear isomers . Seven isotopes occur naturally , with atomic masses of 92 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 97 , 98 , and 100 . Of these naturally occurring isotopes , only molybdenum @-@ 100 is unstable . 
 Molybdenum @-@ 98 is the most abundant isotope , comprising 24 @.@ 14 % of all molybdenum . Molybdenum @-@ 100 has a half @-@ life of about 1019 y and undergoes double beta decay into ruthenium @-@ 100 . Molybdenum isotopes with mass numbers from 111 to 117 all have half @-@ lives of approximately 150 ns . All unstable isotopes of molybdenum decay into isotopes of niobium , technetium , and ruthenium . 
 As also noted below , the most common isotopic molybdenum application involves molybdenum @-@ 99 , which is a fission product . It is a parent radioisotope to the short @-@ lived gamma @-@ emitting daughter radioisotope technetium @-@ 99m , a nuclear isomer used in various imaging applications in medicine . In 2008 , the Delft University of Technology applied for a patent on the molybdenum @-@ 98 @-@ based production of molybdenum @-@ 99 . 
 = = = Compounds and chemistry = = = 
 Molybdenum is a transition metal with an electronegativity of 2 @.@ 16 on the Pauling scale and a standard atomic weight of 95 @.@ 95 g / mol . It does not visibly react with oxygen or water at room temperature , and the bulk oxidation occurs at temperatures above 600 ° C , resulting in molybdenum trioxide : 
 2 Mo + 3 O 
 2 → 2 <unk> 
 3 
 The trioxide is volatile and sublimes at high temperatures . This prevents formation of a continuous protective ( passivating ) oxide layer , which would stop the bulk oxidation of metal . Molybdenum has several oxidation states , the most stable being + 4 and + 6 ( bolded in the table at left ) . The chemistry and the compounds show more similarity to tungsten than to chromium ; the instability of molybdenum ( III ) and tungsten ( III ) compounds , for example , contrasts with the stability of the chromium ( III ) compounds . The highest oxidation state is seen in molybdenum ( VI ) oxide ( MoO3 ) , while the normal sulfur compound is molybdenum disulfide MoS2 . 
 Molybdenum ( VI ) oxide is soluble in strong alkaline water , forming <unk> ( MoO42 − ) . <unk> are weaker oxidants than chromates , but they show a similar tendency to form complex oxyanions by condensation at lower pH values , such as [ <unk> ] 6 − and [ <unk> ] 4 − . <unk> can incorporate other ions , forming <unk> . The dark @-@ blue phosphorus @-@ containing <unk> P [ <unk> ] 3 − is used for the spectroscopic detection of phosphorus . The broad range of oxidation states of molybdenum is reflected in various molybdenum chlorides : 
 Molybdenum ( II ) chloride <unk> ( yellow solid ) 
 Molybdenum ( III ) chloride <unk> ( dark red solid ) 
 Molybdenum ( IV ) chloride <unk> ( black solid ) 
 Molybdenum ( V ) chloride <unk> ( dark green solid ) 
 Molybdenum ( VI ) chloride <unk> ( brown solid ) 
 The structure of the <unk> is clusters of <unk> + and four chloride ions compensating the charge . 
 Like chromium and some other transition metals , molybdenum forms quadruple bonds , such as in <unk> ( CH3COO ) 4 . This compound can be transformed into <unk> − , which also has a quadruple bond . 
 The oxidation state 0 is possible with carbon monoxide as ligand , such as in molybdenum <unk> , Mo ( CO ) 6 . 
 = = History = = 
 <unk> — the principal ore from which molybdenum is now extracted — was previously known as molybdena . <unk> was confused with and often utilized as though it were graphite . Like graphite , molybdenite can be used to blacken a surface or as a solid lubricant . Even when molybdena was distinguishable from graphite , it was still confused with the common lead ore <unk> ( now called galena ) ; the name comes from Ancient Greek <unk> <unk> , meaning lead . ( The Greek word itself has been proposed as a loanword from Anatolian <unk> and Lydian languages ) . 
 Although ( reportedly ) molybdenum was deliberately alloyed with steel in one 14th @-@ century Japanese sword ( <unk> ca . 1330 ) , that art was never employed widely and was later lost . In the West in 1754 , Bengt Andersson Qvist examined a sample of molybdenite and determined that it did not contain lead and thus was not galena . 
 By 1778 Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele stated firmly that molybdena was ( indeed ) neither galena nor graphite . Instead , Scheele correctly proposed that molybdena was an ore of a distinct new element , named molybdenum for the mineral in which it resided , and from which it might be isolated . Peter Jacob <unk> successfully isolated molybdenum using carbon and linseed oil in 1781 . 
 For the next century , molybdenum had no industrial use . It was relatively scarce , the pure metal was difficult to extract , and the necessary techniques of metallurgy were immature . Early molybdenum steel alloys showed great promise of increased hardness , but efforts to manufacture the alloys on a large scale were hampered with inconsistent results , a tendency toward brittleness , and recrystallization . In 1906 , William D. Coolidge filed a patent for rendering molybdenum ductile , leading to applications as a heating element for high @-@ temperature furnaces and as a support for tungsten @-@ filament light bulbs ; oxide formation and degradation require that molybdenum be physically sealed or held in an inert gas . In 1913 , Frank E. Elmore developed a froth flotation process to recover molybdenite from ores ; flotation remains the primary isolation process . 
 During the World War I , demand for molybdenum spiked ; it was used both in armor plating and as a substitute for tungsten in high speed steels . Some British tanks were protected by 75 mm ( 3 in ) manganese steel plating , but this proved to be ineffective . The manganese steel plates were replaced with much lighter 25 mm ( 1 @.@ 0 in ) molybdenum steel plates allowing for higher speed , greater maneuverability , and better protection . The Germans also used molybdenum @-@ doped steel for heavy artillery , like in the super @-@ heavy howitzer Big Bertha , because traditional steel melts at the temperatures produced by the propellant of the one ton shell . After the war , demand plummeted until metallurgical advances allowed extensive development of peacetime applications . In World War II , molybdenum again saw strategic importance as a substitute for tungsten in steel alloys . 
 = = Occurrence and production = = 
 Molybdenum is the 54th most abundant element in the Earth 's crust and the 25th most abundant element in its oceans , with an average of 10 parts per billion ; it is the 42nd most abundant element in the Universe . The Russian Luna 24 mission discovered a molybdenum @-@ bearing grain ( 1 × 0 @.@ 6 µm ) in a pyroxene fragment taken from Mare Crisium on the Moon . The comparative rarity of molybdenum in the Earth 's crust is offset by its concentration in a number of water @-@ insoluble ores , often combined with sulfur in the same way as copper , with which it is often found . Though molybdenum is found in such minerals as wulfenite ( <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> ) , the main commercial source is molybdenite ( MoS2 ) . Molybdenum is mined as a principal ore and is also recovered as a byproduct of copper and tungsten mining . 
 The world 's production of molybdenum was 250 @,@ 000 tonnes in 2011 , the largest producers being China ( 94 @,@ 000 t ) , United States ( 64 @,@ 000 t ) , Chile ( 38 @,@ 000 t ) , Peru ( 18 @,@ 000 t ) and Mexico ( 12 @,@ 000 t ) . The total reserves are estimated at 10 million tonnes , and are mostly concentrated in China ( 4 @.@ 3 Mt ) , US ( 2 @.@ 7 Mt ) and Chile ( 1 @.@ 2 Mt ) . By continent , 93 % of world molybdenum production is about evenly shared between North America , South America ( mainly in Chile ) , and China . Europe and the rest of Asia ( mostly Armenia , Russia , Iran and Mongolia ) produce the remainder . 
 In molybdenite processing , the ore is first roasted in air at a temperature of 700 ° C ( 1 @,@ 292 ° F ) . The process gives gaseous sulfur <unk> and the molybdenum ( VI ) oxide : 
 2 MoS2 + 7 O2 → 2 MoO3 + 4 SO2 
 The oxidized ore is then usually extracted with aqueous ammonia to give ammonium molybdate : 
 MoO3 + 2 NH3 + H2O → ( NH4 ) 2 ( <unk> ) + H2O 
 Copper , an impurity in molybdenite , is less soluble in ammonia . To completely remove it from the solution , it is precipitated with hydrogen sulfide . Ammonium molybdate converts to ammonium <unk> , which is isolated as a solid . Heating this solid gives molybdenum trioxide : 
 ( NH4 ) <unk> → 2 MoO3 + 2 NH3 + H2O 
 The crude trioxide can be further purified by sublimation at 1 @,@ 100 ° C ( 2 @,@ 010 ° F ) . 
 Metallic molybdenum is produced by reduction of the oxide with hydrogen : 
 MoO3 + 3 H2 → Mo + 3 H2O 
 The molybdenum for steel production is reduced by the aluminothermic reaction with addition of iron to produce <unk> . A common form of <unk> contains 60 % molybdenum . 
 Molybdenum has a value of approximately $ 30 @,@ 000 per tonne as of August 2009 . It maintained a price at or near $ 10 @,@ 000 per tonne from 1997 through 2003 , and reached a peak of $ 103 @,@ 000 per tonne in June 2005 . In 2008 the London Metal Exchange announced that molybdenum would be traded as a commodity on the exchange . 
 = = = History of molybdenum mining = = = 
 Historically , the Knaben mine in southern Norway , opened in 1885 , was the first dedicated molybdenum mine . It was closed from 1973 to 2007 , but was reopened that year. and now produces 100 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 98 long tons ; 110 short tons ) of molybdenum disulfide per year . Large mines in Colorado ( such as the Henderson mine and the Climax mine ) and in British Columbia yield molybdenite as their primary product , while many porphyry copper deposits such as the Bingham Canyon Mine in Utah and the Chuquicamata mine in northern Chile produce molybdenum as a byproduct of copper mining . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Alloys = = = 
 About 86 % of molybdenum produced is used in metallurgy , with the rest used in chemical applications . The estimated global use is structural steel 35 % , stainless steel 25 % , chemicals 14 % , tool & high @-@ speed steels 9 % , cast iron 6 % , molybdenum elemental metal 6 % , and superalloys 5 % . 
 Molybdenum can withstand extreme temperatures without significantly expanding or softening , making it useful in environments of intense heat , including military armor , aircraft parts , electrical contacts , industrial motors , and filaments . 
 Most high @-@ strength steel alloys ( for example , <unk> steels ) contain 0 @.@ 25 % to 8 % molybdenum . Even in these small portions , more than 43 @,@ 000 tonnes of molybdenum are used each year in stainless steels , tool steels , cast irons , and high @-@ temperature superalloys . 
 Molybdenum is also valued in steel alloys for its high corrosion resistance and weldability . Molybdenum contributes corrosion resistance to type @-@ 300 stainless steels ( specifically type @-@ 316 ) and especially so in the so @-@ called <unk> stainless steels ( such as alloy AL @-@ <unk> , <unk> or <unk> ) . Molybdenum increases lattice strain , thus increasing the energy required to dissolve iron atoms from the surface . Molybdenum is also used to enhance the corrosion resistance of ferritic ( for example grade 444 ) and martensitic ( for example 1 @.@ <unk> and 1 @.@ <unk> ) stainless steels . 
 Because of its lower density and more stable price , molybdenum is sometimes used in place of tungsten . An example is the ' M ' series of high @-@ speed steels such as M2 , M4 and M42 as substitution for the ' T ' steel series , which contain tungsten . Molybdenum can also be used as a flame @-@ resistant coating for other metals . Although its melting point is 2 @,@ 623 ° C ( 4 @,@ 753 ° F ) , molybdenum rapidly oxidizes at temperatures above 760 ° C ( 1 @,@ 400 ° F ) making it better @-@ suited for use in vacuum environments . 
 <unk> ( Mo ( ~ 99 % ) , Ti ( ~ 0 @.@ 5 % ) , Zr ( ~ 0 @.@ 08 % ) and some C ) is a corrosion @-@ resisting molybdenum superalloy that resists molten fluoride salts at temperatures above 1 @,@ 300 ° C ( 2 @,@ 370 ° F ) . It has about twice the strength of pure Mo , and is more ductile and more weldable , yet in tests it resisted corrosion of a standard eutectic salt ( FLiBe ) and salt vapors used in molten salt reactors for 1100 hours with so little corrosion that it was difficult to measure . 
 Other molybdenum @-@ based alloys that do not contain iron have only limited applications . For example , because of its resistance to molten zinc , both pure molybdenum and molybdenum / tungsten alloy ( 70 % / 30 % ) are used for piping , stirrers and pump impellers that come into contact with molten zinc . 
 = = = Other applications as the pure element = = = 
 Molybdenum powder is used as a fertilizer for some plants , such as cauliflower . 
 Elemental molybdenum is used in NO , NO2 , NOx analyzers in power plants for pollution controls . At 350 ° C ( 662 ° F ) , the element acts as a catalyst for NO2 / NOx to form NO molecules for detection by infrared light . 
 Molybdenum anodes replace tungsten in certain low voltage X @-@ ray sources for specialized uses such as mammography . 
 The radioactive isotope molybdenum @-@ 99 is used to generate technetium @-@ 99m , used for medical imaging . 
 = = = = Compounds ( 14 % of global use ) = = = = 
 Molybdenum disulfide ( MoS2 ) is used as a solid lubricant and a high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature ( HPHT ) <unk> agent . It forms strong films on metallic surfaces and is a common additive to HPHT greases — in the event of a catastrophic grease failure , a thin layer of molybdenum prevents contact of the lubricated parts . It also has semiconducting properties with distinct advantages over traditional silicon or graphene in electronics applications . MoS2 is also used as a catalyst in hydrocracking of petroleum fractions containing nitrogen , sulfur and oxygen . 
 Molybdenum <unk> ( <unk> ) is an electrically conducting ceramic with primary use in heating elements operating at temperatures above 1500 ° C in air . 
 Molybdenum trioxide ( MoO3 ) is used as an adhesive between enamels and metals . Lead molybdate ( wulfenite ) co @-@ precipitated with lead chromate and lead sulfate is a bright @-@ orange pigment used with ceramics and plastics . 
 The molybdenum @-@ based mixed oxides are versatile catalysts in the chemical industry . Some examples are the catalysts for the selective oxidation of propylene to acrolein and acrylic acid , the <unk> of propylene to acrylonitrile . Suitable catalysts and process for the direct selective oxidation of propane to acrylic acid are being researched . 
 Ammonium <unk> is used in biological staining . 
 Molybdenum coated soda lime glass is used in CIGS solar cells . 
 <unk> acid is a stain used in thin layer chromatography . 
 Molybdenum @-@ 99 is a parent radioisotope of the daughter radioisotope technetium @-@ 99m , used in many medical procedures . The isotope is handled and stored as the molybdate . 
 = = Biological role = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The most important role of the molybdenum in living organisms is as a metal heteroatom at the active site in certain enzymes . In bacterial nitrogen fixation , the nitrogenase enzyme involved in the terminal step of reducing molecular nitrogen usually contains molybdenum in the active site ( though replacement of Mo with iron or vanadium is also known ) . The structure of the catalytic center of the enzyme is similar to that in iron @-@ sulfur proteins : it incorporates a <unk> and multiple <unk> clusters . 
 The reaction that nitrogenase enzymes perform is : 
 <formula> 
 With protons and electrons from the electron transport chain , nitrogen is reduced to ammonia and free hydrogen gas . This is an energy @-@ using process , requiring the splitting ( hydrolysis ) of ATP into ADP plus free phosphate ( Pi ) . 
 In 2008 , evidence was reported that a scarcity of molybdenum in the Earth 's early oceans was a limiting factor for nearly two billion years in the further evolution of eukaryotic life ( which includes all plants and animals ) . The chain of causation is as follows : 
 The relative lack of oxygen in the early ocean resulted in a scarcity in dissolved molybdenum . Most molybdenum compounds have low solubility in water , but the molybdate ion MoO42 − is soluble and forms when molybdenum @-@ containing minerals are in contact with oxygen and water . 
 The lack of dissolved molybdenum limited the growth of prokaryotic nitrogen @-@ fixing bacteria , which require molybdenum @-@ bearing enzymes for the process 
 The lack of prokaryotic nitrogen @-@ fixing bacteria limited the growth of ocean eukaryotes , which require oxidized nitrogen suitable for the production of organic nitrogen compounds or the organics themselves ( like proteins ) from prokaryotic bacteria . 
 However , once oxygen had been created in seawater by the limited eukaryotes , it reacted with water and the molybdenum in minerals on the sea bottom to produce soluble molybdate , making it available to nitrogen @-@ fixing bacteria . Those bacteria provided fixed usable nitrogen compounds for higher forms of life . In 2013 , it was suggested that boron and molybdenum catalyzed the production of RNA on Mars , and that life was transported to Earth by a meteorite around 3 billion years ago . 
 Although oxygen once promoted nitrogen fixation by making molybdenum available in water , it also directly poisons nitrogenase enzymes . Thus , in Earth 's ancient history , after oxygen arrived in large quantities in Earth 's air and water , organisms that continued to fix nitrogen in aerobic conditions isolated and protected their nitrogen @-@ fixing enzymes from too much oxygen in heterocysts or equivalent structures . This structural isolation of nitrogen fixation reactions in aerobic organisms continues to the present . 
 = = = Molybdenum cofactor enzymes = = = 
 Though molybdenum forms compounds with various organic molecules , including carbohydrates and amino acids , it is transported throughout the human body as MoO42 − . At least 50 molybdenum @-@ containing enzymes were known by 2002 , mostly in bacteria , and the number is increasing with every year ; those enzymes include aldehyde oxidase , sulfite oxidase and xanthine oxidase . In some animals , and in humans , the oxidation of xanthine to uric acid , a process of purine catabolism , is catalyzed by xanthine oxidase , a molybdenum @-@ containing enzyme . The activity of xanthine oxidase is directly proportional to the amount of molybdenum in the body . However , an extremely high concentration of molybdenum reverses the trend and can act as an inhibitor in both purine catabolism and other processes . Molybdenum concentration also affects protein synthesis , metabolism , and growth . 
 In animals and plants , a tricyclic compound called molybdopterin ( which , despite the name , contains no molybdenum ) is reacted with molybdate to form a complete molybdenum @-@ containing cofactor called molybdenum cofactor . Other than the phylogenetically @-@ ancient <unk> ( discussed above ) that fix nitrogen in some bacteria and cyanobacteria , all molybdenum @-@ using enzymes ( so far identified ) use the molybdenum cofactor , where molybdenum is in the oxidation state of VI , similar to molybdate . Molybdenum enzymes in plants and animals catalyze the oxidation and sometimes reduction of certain small molecules in the process of regulating nitrogen , sulfur , and carbon . 
 = = = Human dietary intake and deficiency = = = 
 Molybdenum is a trace dietary element necessary for the survival of humans and the few mammals that have been studied . Four mammalian Mo @-@ dependent enzymes are known , all of them harboring a <unk> @-@ based molybdenum cofactor ( <unk> ) in their active site : sulfite oxidase , xanthine oxidoreductase , aldehyde oxidase , and mitochondrial <unk> reductase . People severely deficient in molybdenum have poorly functioning sulfite oxidase and are prone to toxic reactions to sulfites in foods . The human body contains about 0 @.@ 07 mg of molybdenum per kilogram of body weight , with higher concentrations in the liver and kidneys and in lower in the vertebrae . Molybdenum is also present within human tooth enamel and may help prevent its decay . 
 The average daily intake of molybdenum varies between 0 @.@ 12 and 0 @.@ 24 mg , depending on the molybdenum content of the food . Pork , lamb , and beef liver each have approximately 1 @.@ 5 parts per million of molybdenum . Other significant dietary sources include green beans , eggs , sunflower seeds , wheat flour , lentils , cucumbers and cereal grain . Acute toxicity has not been seen in humans , and the toxicity depends strongly on the chemical state . Studies on rats show a median lethal dose ( LD50 ) as low as 180 mg / kg for some Mo compounds . Although human toxicity data is unavailable , animal studies have shown that chronic ingestion of more than 10 mg / day of molybdenum can cause diarrhea , growth retardation , infertility , low birth weight , and gout ; it can also affect the lungs , kidneys , and liver . Sodium tungstate is a competitive inhibitor of molybdenum . Dietary tungsten reduces the concentration of molybdenum in tissues . 
 Low soil concentration of molybdenum in a geographical band from northern China to Iran results in a general dietary molybdenum deficiency , and is associated with increased rates of esophageal cancer . Compared to the United States , which has a greater supply of molybdenum in the soil , people living in those areas have about 16 times greater risk for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma . 
 Molybdenum deficiency has also been reported as a consequence of non @-@ molybdenum supplemented total parenteral nutrition ( complete intravenous feeding ) for long periods of time . It results in high blood levels of sulfite and urate , in much the same way as molybdenum cofactor deficiency . However ( presumably since pure molybdenum deficiency from this cause occurs primarily in adults ) , the neurological consequences are not as marked as in cases of congenital cofactor deficiency . 
 = = = Related diseases = = = 
 A congenital molybdenum cofactor deficiency disease , seen in infants , is an inability to synthesize molybdenum cofactor , a heterocyclic molecule that binds molybdenum at the active site in all known human enzymes that use molybdenum . The resulting deficiency results in high levels of sulfite and urate , and neurological damage . 
 = = = Copper @-@ molybdenum antagonism = = = 
 High levels of molybdenum can interfere with the body 's uptake of copper , producing copper deficiency . Molybdenum prevents plasma proteins from binding to copper , and it also increases the amount of copper that is excreted in urine . Ruminants that consume high levels of molybdenum suffer from diarrhea , stunted growth , anemia , and <unk> ( loss of fur pigment ) . These symptoms can be alleviated by copper supplements , either dietary and injection . The effective copper deficiency , can be aggravated by excess sulfur . 
 Copper reduction or deficiency can also be deliberately induced for therapeutic purposes by the compound ammonium tetrathiomolybdate , in which the bright red anion tetrathiomolybdate is the copper @-@ chelating agent . <unk> was first used therapeutically in the treatment of copper toxicosis in animals . It was then introduced as a treatment in Wilson 's disease , a hereditary copper metabolism disorder in humans ; it acts both by competing with copper absorption in the bowel and by increasing excretion . It has also been found to have an inhibitory effect on angiogenesis , potentially by inhibiting the membrane translocation process that is dependent on copper ions . This is a promising avenue for investigation of treatments for cancer , age @-@ related macular degeneration , and other diseases that involve a pathologic proliferation of blood vessels . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 Molybdenum dusts and fumes , generated by mining or metalworking , can be toxic , especially if ingested ( including dust trapped in the sinuses and later swallowed ) . Low levels of prolonged exposure can cause irritation to the eyes and skin . Direct inhalation or ingestion of molybdenum and its oxides should be avoided . OSHA regulations specify the maximum permissible molybdenum exposure in an 8 @-@ hour day as 5 mg / m3 . Chronic exposure to 60 to 600 mg / m3 can cause symptoms including fatigue , headaches and joint pains . At levels of 5000 mg / m3 , molybdenum is immediately dangerous to life and health . 
 = Action of 28 February 1799 = 
 The Action of 28 February 1799 was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars , fought off the mouth of the Hooghly River in the Bay of Bengal between the French frigate Forte and the Royal Navy frigate HMS Sybille . Forte was an exceptionally large and powerful ship engaged on a commerce raiding operation against British merchant shipping off the port of Calcutta in British India . To eliminate this threat , Sybille was sent from Madras in pursuit . Acting on information from released prisoners , Edward Cooke , captain of Sybille , was sailing off Balasore when distant gunfire alerted him to the presence of Forte on the evening of 28 February . The French frigate was discovered at anchor in the sandbanks at the mouth of the Hooghly with two recently captured British merchant ships . 
 For unclear reasons the French captain Hubert Le Loup de Beaulieu did not properly prepare Forte to receive the attack from Cooke 's frigate and he was consequently killed in the first raking broadside from the British ship . Forte 's crew continued to resist for more than two hours , only surrendering when their ship had been reduced to a battered wreck and more than a third of the crew killed or wounded . British losses by contrast were light , although Cooke had been struck by grape shot during the height of the action and suffered a lingering death three months later from his wounds . The captured merchant ships subsequently escaped under their French prize crews while Cooke 's executive officer Lieutenant Lucius Hardyman repaired Sybille and Forte . Hardyman took both ships into Calcutta , where Forte was commissioned into the Royal Navy under the same name , although the frigate was accidentally wrecked in the Red Sea two years later . 
 = = Background = = 
 In the spring of 1796 the Royal Navy enjoyed naval supremacy in the East Indies , the French Navy presence limited to two frigates loosely blockaded in Port Louis on Île de France . In April 1796 reinforcements were sent from Rochefort comprising four frigates commanded by Contre @-@ amiral Pierre César Charles de Sercey . The squadron avoided the blockade and arrived at Île de France in July and sailed eastwards during the summer , intending to raid British trading ports in the East Indies . On 9 September the squadron was intercepted and driven off by a British squadron off the northeastern coast of Sumatra , sheltering in Batavia over the winter . In January Sercey sailed once more , encountering the large annual convoy of East Indiamen from Macau in the Bali Strait on 28 January . In the ensuing Bali Strait Incident the British commander managed to deceive Sercey into believing that the convoy was made up of warships , the French admiral retreating back to Île de France . 
 Sercey 's flagship during these operations was the 40 @-@ gun frigate Forte . Forte , commanded by the elderly Captain Hubert Le Loup de Beaulieu , had been built in 1794 based on the hull and frame of a ship of the line : the frigate weighed 1 @,@ 400 tons bm , the largest purpose @-@ built frigate at sea . The main battery of Forte consisted of 28 24 @-@ pounder long guns , only the second frigate ever built ( after Pomone ) which could manage such a heavy armament . This was augmented by fourteen 8 @-@ pounder long guns on the upper deck and eight 36 @-@ pounder carronades on the quarterdeck , totaling 52 heavy cannon complemented by eight 1 @-@ pounder swivel guns . Uniquely , the sides of the ship were lined with cork matting to prevent splinters while the more common precaution had been taken of stringing netting over the deck to protect the crew from falling debris . The ship was however weakened by an ill @-@ disciplined crew , and Sercey had expressed doubts about the ability of the aged Beaulieu . 
 After Sercey returned to Île de France his squadron broke up . Four ships were sent back to France in 1797 and 1798 as Île de France could no longer supply repairs , manpower or provisions in support of Sercey . This dispersal of the squadron was encouraged by the Colonial Assembly of Île de France and Governor Malartic neither of whom were well @-@ disposed to the Directory then ruling France . With his remaining crews becoming rebellious , Sercey sent Forte and Prudente on a commerce raiding operation during the autumn of 1798 , during which they achieved some success in the Bay of Bengal . By the time this force returned to Île de France Sercey had sailed to Batavia , leaving instructions for Forte and Prudente to follow him . Malartic countermanded this order , seizing Prudente and selling the frigate to a privateer concern and ordering Forte to operate independently in the Bay of Bengal in the autumn of 1798 . Sercey was furious , but could do nothing to alter Malartic 's arrangements . 
 At the start of 1799 the Bay of Bengal was largely undefended . The British naval commander , Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier , had taken most of his ships westwards to the Red Sea to participate in opposition to Napoleon Bonaparte 's campaign in Egypt , leaving only a single frigate to protect trade shipping in the region . This ship was the 40 @-@ gun HMS Sybille , a large , powerful ship captured from the French at the Battle of Mykonos in 1794 . Weighing more than 1 @,@ 000 tons bm and with a maindeck battery of 28 18 @-@ pounder long guns supplemented by six 9 @-@ pounder long guns and fourteen 32 @-@ pounder cannonades , Sybille was a formidable ship , but significantly weaker than the massive Forte . Many of Sybille 's crew had fallen ill while the ship had been stationed at Calcutta , leaving her undermanned . To compensate , the crew had been augmented by a detachment from the frigate HMS Fox and soldiers from the Scotch Brigade . In command was Captain Edward Cooke , who had distinguished himself early in the war by negotiating the surrender of the French Mediterranean port city of Toulon in 1793 . This action , under threat of execution by the Republican faction in the city , led to the Siege of Toulon and the destruction of almost half of the French Mediterranean Fleet . In January 1798 Cooke and Sybille had participated in the successful Raid on Manila . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Forte 's raiding cruise initially proved devastating . The usual raiding season had passed , and the shipping transiting the mouth of the Hooghly River was unprepared for Beaulieu 's assault . In rapid succession Forte seized the local @-@ trading country ships Recovery , Yarmouth , Chance and Surprise . Beaulieu was forced to send 143 sailors away as prize crews , reducing the complement on Forte by a quarter . Beaulieu had also only just missed a major convoy from the Cape Colony , escorted only by HMS Sceptre . The Canton East Indiamen Endeavour and Lord Mornington were taken off Balasore on 28 February , after coming under fire from Forte 's bow chasers . The gunfire attracted the attention of Sybille , which was returning to Calcutta after transporting Lord Mornington , Governor @-@ General of India , to Madras . Sybille had sailed on 19 February with instructions to search for Forte . On 23 February Cooke had encountered a cartel sent to Madras by Beaulieu and brought the ship into Balasore on 26 February . At 20 : 30 , while sailing to the southeast , flashes were seen on the northeast horizon . Although this was initially dismissed as lightning , it continued until 21 : 00 , convincing Cooke that it had another cause . Turning to the northeast , he took Sybille to investigate . 
 At 21 : 30 Forte and the captured merchant ships were visible from Sybille , Forte brilliantly illuminated in the tropical night . Cooke brought Sybille westwards in order to take the weather gage before wearing and bearing down on the French ship , under a light wind from the southwest . Despite the illumination on the French ship , Sybille 's sails were clearly identified on Forte but Beaulieu gave no orders to prepare for action : he seems to have thought that the sails belonged to an approaching East Indiaman despite the concerns of his officers , or that he wished to lure Sybille close enough to ensure its defeat in the coming engagement . 
 At approximately midnight Forte slowly moved to the lee of Sybille , firing a small broadside at long range at the British ship 's bow , accompanied by scattered fire from the French prize crews on the merchant ships . Apart from damage to the jib , Sibylle remained unharmed , advancing silently and in darkness . French fire continued with little effect , allowing Cooke to bring Sybille within 25 yards ( 23 m ) of the stern of Forte at 12 : 45 and fire a raking broadside , followed by a second as the British ship pulled alongside the French frigate . The cannon were complemented by musketry from the soldiers aboard , which swept the exposed deck of Forte . The damage to the French ship was catastrophic : guns were smashed from their carriages and dozens of men killed and more wounded , the dead including Beaulieu and his first lieutenant . 
 Despite their losses the French survivors returned to the remaining guns , although most of their first broadside scattered into the sea , and at least some of their shot was misdirected towards the merchant ships . The French gunners aimed too high however , most of their shot tearing through the rigging of Sybille while the British broadsides slammed into the hull of Forte . This problem was partly attributed to the French gun quoins which had been <unk> three days earlier , exacerbated by the lack of suitable gun crews which meant that many of the <unk> guns were unmanned . The French gunners were also more used to firing warning shots at distant merchant ships and may not have realised that their guns needed to be depressed for combat at point blank range . 
 For the next hour and a half the frigates poured shot into one another at close range , until Cooke was struck by grape shot at 01 : 30 on 1 March , replaced by his first lieutenant Lucius Hardyman . For another hour the action continued , French fire gradually slackening until it stopped completely at 02 : 30 , by which time only four French guns remained operational . Hardyman hailed to ask whether Forte had surrendered but the French did not reply and he ordered another broadside . A second hail also brought no response but sailors were seen attempting to repair the rigging on Forte . Concerned that the French were attempting to escape , Hardyman concentrated his fire on the masts of Forte , bringing them crashing down one by one until at 03 : 00 Forte was completely dismasted . With all resistance ended , British merchant prisoners on board Forte emerged from below decks and hailed Sybille , requesting a boat be sent across so that British Lieutenant Nicholas Manger could formally take the surrender of the French ship . 
 = = = Combatant summary = = = 
 In this table , " Guns " refers to all cannon carried by the ship , including the maindeck guns which were taken into consideration when calculating its rate , as well as any carronades carried aboard . Broadside weight records the combined weight of shot which could be fired in a single simultaneous discharge of an entire broadside . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Damage to Forte was extensive . The stern and side facing Sybille had been beaten in by gunfire as more than 300 shot holes combined to form gaping holes in hull above the waterline . As well as the masts the bulkheads had been smashed apart and all deck furniture blasted to splinters . 65 of the crew had been killed , including Captain Beaulieu , and approximately 80 wounded , more than a third of the crew listed as casualties ; many of the wounded later died from the effects of amputation . Damages to Sybille were considerably lighter : only six shot had struck the hull in the entire battle : one gun was dismounted , but the worst damage was to Cooke 's cabin where a round shot had destroyed most of his furniture . In addition , most of the damage to the masts and rigging proved superficial . Just five crew were killed outright , with another 17 wounded , the latter including Cooke . The British captain had been struck in the left arm , the shot exiting near his spine , with additional injuries to the chest and right arm . He eventually died after a long and agonising deterioration at Calcutta on 25 May 1799 and was buried under a monument with full military honours . A memorial was subsequently placed in Westminster Abbey in his memory . 
 In the initial aftermath of victory , Hardyman attempted to lure the captured merchant ships close to Sybille by raising the French tricolor over the British ensign . Lord Mornington took the bait and closed with the British ship . However when Sybille gave chase the prizes fled , the fatigued British crew unable to effectively pursue after losing their damaged cross @-@ jack yard . Forte had lost its anchors in the battle and was consequently lashed to Sybille . Repairs to the combatants took two days , particularly the fitting of jury masts on Forte , before Hardyman was comfortable making the journey up the Hooghly to Calcutta for more permanent repairs . Hardyman was commended for the victory , promoted to commander and then later post captain . Forte was subsequently taken into service in the Royal Navy under the same name as a 44 @-@ gun fifth rate frigate with Hardyman in command . Forte continued in service in the Indian Ocean under Hardyman until June 1801 , when the frigate was wrecked on the Arabian Red Sea coast near Jeddah . Nearly five decades after the battle , the Admiralty recognised the action with the clasp " <unk> 28 <unk> 1799 " attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants still living in 1847 . 
 The battle has been considered by British historians as an unusual engagement marked by extremely disciplined fire from Sybille , the product of unusually extensive gunnery training by Cooke and complemented by the musket fire of the soldiers which affected the accuracy of the French gunners . Naval historian William James wrote that " the action of the Sibylle [ sic ] and Forte was gallantly fought on both sides , but skilfully fought on one side only ; the weaker side , and , by the due exercise of that skill , the one which was ultimately successful . 
 = 2000 Monaco Grand Prix = 
 The 2000 Monaco Grand Prix ( formally the LVIII Grand Prix Automobile de Monaco ) was a Formula One motor race held on 4 June 2000 at the Circuit de Monaco . It was the seventh race of the 2000 Formula One season and the 58th Monaco Grand Prix . The 78 @-@ lap race was won by McLaren driver David Coulthard after starting from third position . Rubens Barrichello finished second for the Ferrari team with Benetton driver Giancarlo Fisichella third . 
 Championship leader Michael Schumacher started from pole position alongside Jordan driver Jarno Trulli . The race was aborted due to a software glitch in the starting procedure and Jenson Button and Pedro de la Rosa collided which started a traffic jam . At the second start , Michael Schumacher maintained his lead into the first corner . After the second round of pit stops , Michael Schumacher 's exhaust broke causing a left rear suspension failure and his retirement from the race . Coulthard , in second place , became the new race leader on lap 57 . Coulthard maintained his lead throughout the remainder of the race and secured his second victory of the season , with Barrichello a further 15 @.@ 8 seconds back . 
 Coulthard 's victory allowed him to narrow the lead of Michael Schumacher in the World Drivers ' Championship to 12 points . Häkkinen retained third with Barrichello a further seven points behind . In the World Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari retained their lead which was reduced to five points over McLaren . Fisichella 's strong result reduced the gap to Benetton 's rivals Williams to one point , with ten races of the season remaining . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Grand Prix was contested by eleven teams , each of two drivers . The teams , also known as constructors , were McLaren , Ferrari , Jordan , Jaguar , Williams , Benetton , Prost , Sauber , Arrows , Minardi and BAR . Tyre supplier Bridgestone brought two different tyre types to the race ; two @-@ dry compounds , the Softs and the Extra Softs . 
 Going into the race , Ferrari driver Michael Schumacher led the Drivers ' Championship with 46 points , ahead of Mika Häkkinen on 28 points and his teammate David Coulthard with 24 points . Rubens Barrichello was fourth on 16 points while Ralf Schumacher was fifth on 12 points . In the Constructors ' Championship Ferrari were leading with 62 points , with their rivals McLaren second on 52 points . Williams were third on 15 points while Benetton with 10 points and Jordan on 9 points contended for fourth place . McLaren and Ferrari had so far taken command of the championship , winning the previous six races . Championship competitors Barrichello and Fisichella had gained second place podium finishes while Ralf Schumacher and Heinz @-@ Harald Frentzen had achieved third place podium finishes . 
 Following the European Grand Prix on 21 May the teams conducted testing sessions across European circuits between 23 – 27 May to prepare for the Grand Prix . Jordan , Sauber , Benetton , Jaguar and Arrows opted to test at the Circuit Ricardo Tormo circuit which made its Formula One testing début that garnered mixed reviews from the drivers . Frentzen was fastest on the first day of testing , ahead of Sauber test driver Enrique Bernoldi . Jos Verstappen for the Arrows team set the second day 's quickest times . Late in the session Fisichella hit the right rear tyre of Jordan driver Jarno Trulli , causing his Benetton to flip over and brought a brief halt to testing . Fisichella suffered minor bruising to his thumb and Benetton withdrew their second driver Alexander Wurz from testing . Sauber 's Mika Salo topped the final days running . Williams and BAR went to the Circuit Paul Armagnac circuit which was where the teams undertook shake down runs and used car set @-@ ups . BAR tested a new control system called " Athena 2000 " which managed the software of the car 's engine and different sections on the chassis . Ferrari tested at their private test facility , the Fiorano Circuit , for five days where test driver Luca Badoer and Michael Schumacher concentrated on aerodynamic and tyre testing , as well as undertaking different set @-@ ups and running on an artificially wet track . 
 Due to the configuration of the Circuit de Monaco , with its low average speed and abundance of low @-@ speed corners , allied to the low @-@ grip nature of the public road surface , the teams all set their cars up to produce the maximum amount of downforce and mechanical grip possible . Benetton modified their car 's suspensions to work better on the circuit 's low @-@ speed corners . The Minardi cars came equipped with a new titanium cast gearbox and new rear suspensions . McLaren brought an additional spare car to the event , with four in total being shared between Häkkinen and Coulthard . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Four practice sessions were held before the Sunday race — two on Thursday , and two on Saturday . The Thursday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted an hour . The third and final practice sessions were held on Saturday morning and lasted 45 minutes . The Thursday morning and afternoon practice sessions were held in dry and hot weather conditions . Michael Schumacher set the fastest time in the first session , a 1 : 23 @.@ 039 , three @-@ tenths of a second quicker than Häkkinen . Coulthard was third fastest , ahead of Fisichella and Frentzen . Alesi managed sixth despite suffering from gearbox issues which caused him to pull up on the track . Eddie Irvine , Jenson Button , Barrichello and Salo completed the top ten fastest drivers in the session . Minardi 's Gastón Mazzacane spun and lost his front right wheel in a crash at turn 17 and Ralf Schumacher made contact with the barrier at turn 8 . In the second practice session , Häkkinen set the quickest lap of the day , a 1 : 21 @.@ 387 ; Coulthard finished with the third fastest time . The McLaren drivers were separated by Michael Schumacher . Eddie Irvine was running quicker and was fourth fastest , in front of Frentzen and Ralf Schumacher . Alesi continued to encounter problems though he managed to be seventh <unk> de la Rosa , Trulli and Barrichello followed in the top ten . Both Nick Heidfeld and Pedro Diniz made contact with the barriers at turn 17 and Wurz crashed at the swimming pool complex . 
 The weather remained hot and dry for the Saturday morning practice sessions . Michael Schumacher was the fastest driver in the third session , setting a time of 1 : 20 @.@ 762 ; Barrichello ended with the third quickest lap time . Häkkinen set a time one @-@ tenth of a second slower than Michael Schumacher and was second fastest . Alesi continued to run quicker and was fourth fastest , faster than Coulthard and Frentzen . Irvine , Trulli , Fisichella and Johnny Herbert completed the top ten . In the final practice session , Coulthard was fastest with a time of 1 : 20 @.@ 405 though he ran down the escape road at Ste Devote and his engine subsequently stalled . Michael Schumacher was second fastest , nearly one @-@ tenth slower than Coulthard . Fisichella opted to use a softer damper and set the third quickest lap , in front of Trulli and Häkkinen . Barrichello , Alesi , Wurz , Frentzen and Ralf Schumacher completed the top ten fastest drivers ahead of qualifying . A crash by Irvine at the swimming pool complex ended his session prematurely . 
 Saturday 's afternoon qualifying session lasted for an hour . Each driver was limited to twelve laps , with the grid order decided by the drivers ' fastest laps . During this session , the 107 % rule was in effect , which necessitated each driver set a time within 107 % of the quickest lap to qualify for the race . The session was held in dry and hot weather conditions ; the air temperature was 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) and the track temperature was 39 ° C ( 102 ° F ) . Michael Schumacher clinched his second pole position of the season , his third at the circuit , with a time of 1 : 19 @.@ 475 . He was joined on the front row of the grid by Trulli who recorded a lap 0 @.@ 271 seconds slower than the pole sitter and took his best qualifying performance of the season . Coulthard qualified third and said he could have set a better lap time as he saw a yellow flag out on the track . Trulli 's teammate Frentzen qualified fourth but criticised Irvine for an apparent blocking manoeuvre . Häkkinen took fifth and suffered from understeer along with traffic during his second qualifying run . Barrichello secured the sixth place and reported his car was nervous . Alesi recorded the seventh @-@ fastest time , despite experiencing alternator problems on his race car in the opening minutes of qualifying and switch to the spare Prost . Fisichella occupied the eighth position and reported his Benetton 's handling had worsened . Ralf Schumacher and Irvine completed the top ten positions . Herbert set the eleventh fastest time , five one hundredths slower than his teammate and reported excessive oversteer on his car . He was ahead of Wurz in the slower of the two <unk> . Salo qualified in 13th position despite having a misunderstanding with his race engineer with a yellow flag . Similarly , Jenson Button who took 14th in the other Williams , was caught out by the waved yellow flags . The two Arrows drivers filled the next two positions with Verstappen in 15th and Pedro de la Rosa in 16th ; the latter crashed at the <unk> chicane . BAR 's Jacques Villeneuve started from 17th experienced an engine failure and was forced to use his team 's spare car . Heidfeld took 18th and reported he experienced a lack of grip and understeer . He qualified ahead of Diniz and Ricardo Zonta in 19th and 20th respectively . The two Minardi drivers qualifed at the rear of the grid ; Marc Gené ahead of Gastón Mazzacane and both crashed at <unk> . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The drivers took to the track at 09 : 30 CEST ( UTC + 2 ) for a 30 @-@ minute warm @-@ up session . It took place in dry and warm weather conditions . Both Ferrari drivers maintained their good performance from qualifying ; Barrichello had the fastest time of 1 : 22 @.@ 251 . Michael Schumacher set the second fastest time . Ralf Schumacher recorded the third fastest time with Coulthard rounding out the top four . The session was disrupted by an incident which involved de la Rosa when he struck the barriers at turn 12 – the session was prematurely ended as marshals were required to clear the track – and Herbert clipped the tyre barrier at turn 14 after spinning on oil on the circuit . 
 The race started at 14 : 00 local time . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race ; the air temperature was 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) and the track temperature was 42 ° C ( 108 ° F ) . At the start of the parade lap Diniz was unable to get away and was forced to start at the back of the grid . At the starting procedure Wurz 's car suffered an engine failure and the start was aborted . Diniz , meanwhile , was allowed to start from his qualifying position after Wurz 's engine issues . Michael Schumacher maintained his lead heading into the first corner . Trulli , behind him , remained in second position . Immediately afterwards a glitch in the FIA computer software caused the race to be suspended and marshals did not wave red flags across the circuit , apart from the start / finish line . At the hairpin de la Rosa attempted to overtake Button and the latter sent de la Rosa into a spin . The result created a traffic jam for cars who were behind the two drivers . During the red flag period Button , Zonta , Heidfeld , Diniz and Gené got into their team 's spare cars and were required to start from the pit <unk> de la Rosa , however , did not have a spare car available and could not take the restart . 
 At the restart , Michael Schumacher and Trulli again held their positions , whilst Ralf Schumacher made the best start in the field moving from 9th to 6th place by the end of the first lap . Barrichello had lost two positions over the same distance . At the conclusion of the first lap , the order was Michael Schumacher , Trulli , Coulthard , Frentzen , Häkkinen , Ralf Schumacher , Alesi , Barrichello , Fisichella , Herbert , Irvine , Salo , Verstappen , Diniz , Villeneuve , Zonta , Mazzacane , Wurz , Button , Gené and Heidfeld . Michael Schumacher began to immediately pull clear from Trulli as he began setting consecutive fastest laps . Häkkinen started to challenge Frentzen for second position on lap two . By the eleventh lap , Michael Schumacher had built up his lead to Trulli over eleven seconds as Wurz performed the race 's first overtake when he passed Mazzacane for 17th position . Button pulled over to the side of the track with engine problems and retired on lap 16 . Michael Schumacher continued to increase his lead to Trulli to 19 @.@ 5 seconds by lap 19 . Trulli was in turn 0 @.@ 7 seconds ahead of Coulthard . Frentzen was a further 2 @.@ 1 seconds behind the McLaren driver and continued to battle Coulthard 's teammate Häkkinen for fifth . 
 On the same lap Irvine overtook his teammate Herbert for tenth position . Wurz crashed into the barriers at turn 1 and was forced to retire . Gené retired on lap 22 with a gearbox issue as his teammate Mazzacane subsequently collided with the barriers at turn one on the same lap and had to retire from the event . Herbert became the first driver to make a pit stop on lap 27 although his pit crew came unprepared and Herbert was stationary for half a minute before he exited in 17th position . On the 31st lap , Diniz made contact with the barriers at turn one and he damaged his left rear wheel , causing him to retire . Häkkinen 's pace was reduced by lap 36 as he slowed with an blockage on his brake pedal and made an unscheduled pit stop . His team 's mechanics opened his car 's inspection hatch and rearranged radio cables . They subsequently removed a data transmitter which was the cause the blockage and Häkkinen rejoined in 9th . Trulli became the next retirement of the race when he pulled to the side of the track with a gearbox problem on the following lap . 
 Ralf Schumacher , who was running fourth , crashed heavily into the turn one barriers on the 38th lap . He suffered a deep cut to his leg and was taken to hospital . Michael Schumacher held a 36 @-@ second lead over Coulthard by lap 38 and the McLaren driver lapped consistently in the low 1 : 22 range to close the gap . Verstappen made the first scheduled pit stop on lap 41 , five laps in front of Zonta and Heidfeld . Michael Schumacher made a pit stop on lap 49 and retained the first position . Fisichella made a pit stop earlier than expected on lap 51 as he had a slow puncture developing . Frentzen , Barrichello , Salo , Villeneuve and Coulthard made pit stops over the following six laps . After Coulthard emerged from the pit lane , Michael Schumacher 's car suffered a broken exhaust which broke his left rear suspension and Schumacher was forced to retire . 
 At the completition of lap 57 , with the scheduled pit stops completed , the order was Coulthard , Frentzen , Barrichello , Fisichella , Irvine , Salo , Häkkinen , Villeneuve , Verstappen , Heidfeld and Herbert . Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the race on the same lap , a 1 : 21 @.@ 571 as he closed the gap to Salo in seventh . Verstappen , who was fending off Heidfeld for ninth place , spun into retirement at turn twelve on lap 61 . On the 71st lap , Frentzen became the final retirement of the race when he broke his rear suspension in a crash at turn 1 . Häkkinen started to reduce his pace on lap 74 ending his battle with Salo but managed to stay ahead of Villeneuve in seventh . Coulthard opened the gap to 17 @.@ 4 seconds and crossed the finish line on lap 78 to take his second win of the season in a time of 1 ' 49 : 28 @.@ 213 , at an average speed of 89 @.@ 522 miles per hour ( 144 @.@ 072 km / h ) . Barrichello finished second in his Ferrari , ahead of Fisichella in third . Irvine finished in fourth , Salo in fifth and Häkkinen rounded out the points @-@ scoring positions in sixth . Villeneuve , Heidfeld and Herbert filled the next three positions , with Frentzen last of the classified finishers despite his crash . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 The top three drivers appeared in Prince Rainier III of Monaco 's Royal box to collect their trophies and in the subsequent press conference . Coulthard was delighted as securing victory at the Grand Prix which he considered as one of the races he wanted to win during his career because of the challenges the drivers take on the circuit . He also commented that he wanted to wait until the pit stop stages to get ahead of Michael Schumacher and Trulli to prevent unnecessary repairs to his car . Barrichello revealed that he was conserving his tyres and fuel , as well as being informed by Ferrari technical director Ross Brawn to reduce his pace towards the race 's latter stages . Fisichella said that he was pleased at taking third place . He also revealed that he wanted to remain at Benetton for the 2001 season after his strong result . 
 Irvine scored the first points for the Jaguar team in the race , having failed to score up to that point . He described the race as one of the hardest in his Formula One career as his drink bottle did not function correctly along with suffering a blistered foot . He also said that the team 's issues were not fully rectified and it would take " six months or so to solve ... hopefully we can do it quicker . " Salo said that his hands were bruised during the race as his car had no power steering equipped . Michael Schumacher admitted to feeling disappointed after the race , having led the majority of the race until his lap 56 retirement . The Ferrari driver stated : " The exhaust was too hot and that was why the rest went wrong . It basically cooked the suspension . I felt a few laps before that something was wrong but there was nothing I could do about it . " 
 Ralf Schumacher suffered a three @-@ inch gash on his left calf . He was taken to Princess Grace Hospital for a routine check @-@ up and his cut was stitched . Ralf Schumacher was later cleared to race in the next Grand Prix , two weeks later . He said that he had no prior indication of where his injuries originated from . Williams had their test driver Bruno Junqueira to fill in for Ralf Schumacher should the need arise . 
 As a consequence of the race , Michael Schumacher 's remained the leader in the World Drivers ' Championship though his lead was reduced by ten points to twelve . Coulthard 's victory moved him into second place on 34 points , ahead of teammate Häkkinen on 29 points . Barrichello and Fisichella remained fourth and fifth , with 22 and 14 points respectively . In the World Constructors ' Championship , McLaren reduced the lead of Ferrari to five points . Benetton in fourth closed the points gap to their rivals Williams to one point . Jordan remained fifth on 9 points , with ten races of the season remaining . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 * Failed to restart 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Note : Only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings . 
 = Athelm = 
 For other men called Æthelhelm , see Æthelhelm ( disambiguation ) 
 Athelm ( or Æthelhelm ; died 926 ) was an English churchman , who was the first Bishop of Wells , and later Archbishop of Canterbury . His translation , or moving from one bishopric to another , was a precedent for later translations of ecclesiastics , because prior to this time period such movements were considered illegal . While archbishop , Athelm crowned King Æthelstan , and perhaps wrote the coronation service for the event . An older relative of Dunstan , a later Archbishop of Canterbury , Athelm helped promote Dunstan 's early career . After Athelm 's death , he was considered a saint . 
 = = Background = = 
 Athelm was a monk of Glastonbury Abbey before his elevation in 909 to the see of Wells , of which he was the first occupant . The see was founded to divide up the diocese of Sherborne , which was very large , by creating a bishopric for the county of Somerset . Wells was likely chosen as the seat because it was the center of the county . Some scholarly works suggest that Athelm may be the same person as Æthelhelm , son of King Æthelred of Wessex , but this is not accepted by most historians . A few sources state that Athelm was Abbot of Glastonbury before he became bishop , but other sources disagree and do not give him that office . This traces to later medieval chroniclers , not to contemporary accounts . His brother was Heorstan , who held land near Glastonbury . 
 = = Archbishopric = = 
 Between August 923 and September 925 he became archbishop . His translation from the see of Wells set a precedent for the future , and marks a break with historical practice . Previously the moving of a bishop from one see to another had been held to be against canon , or ecclesiastical , law . Recently , however , the popes had themselves been translated , and this practice was to become common in England after Athelm 's time . He was West Saxon , unlike his predecessor , Plegmund , who was Mercian , reflecting the shift in power to Wessex . Athelm was a paternal uncle of Dunstan , who later became Archbishop of Canterbury . It was Athelm who brought Dunstan to the king 's court . 
 Athelm presided at the coronation of King Athelstan of England on 4 September 925 , and probably composed or organised the new Ordo ( order of service ) in which for the first time the king wore a crown instead of a helmet . He also attested the king 's first grant to St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury . It is unclear if the reason that no coins were minted with his name was his short term of office or a change in policy towards the Archbishop of Canterbury minting coins in his own name . Nothing else is known of Athelm 's brief time as archbishop . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 Athelm died on 8 January 926 . He was later considered a saint , with a feast day of 8 January . He was buried at first the church of St John the Baptist near the Saxon @-@ era Canterbury Cathedral . When a new cathedral was constructed under Archbishop Lanfranc after the Norman Conquest of England , the earlier archbishops of Canterbury were moved to the north transept of the new cathedral . Later , Athelm and his successor as archbishop Wulfhelm were moved to a chapel dedicated to St Benedict , which later was incorporated into the Lady Chapel constructed by Prior Thomas Goldstone ( d . 1468 ) . 
 = Sonic : After the Sequel = 
 Sonic : After the Sequel is a 2013 platform video game created by Brazilian student Felipe Daneluz ( <unk> ) . It is an unofficial game based on the Sonic the Hedgehog series and set between the official games Sonic the Hedgehog 2 and Sonic the Hedgehog 3 . Daneluz 's second Sonic game , it follows Sonic : Before the Sequel , which was set after the original Sonic the Hedgehog . Like its predecessor , After the Sequel stars Sonic the Hedgehog and his sidekick Tails in a quest to retrieve the Chaos Emeralds from Doctor Eggman . 
 After the Sequel was inspired by Sonic Heroes and other games both inside and outside the Sonic series , and it was developed with Sonic Worlds , an engine based in Multimedia Fusion 2 that reduces the amount of computer programming involved in game creation . It was released as a free download for Microsoft Windows personal computers . The game was very well received by video game journalists , who lauded its preservation of retro Sonic gameplay and its eclectic , 1990s @-@ style soundtrack . The trilogy of Before the Sequel , After the Sequel , and their successor Sonic Chrono Adventure performed unusually well for fangames , having been downloaded 120 @,@ 000 times by March 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 After the Sequel is a 2D platformer in the style of the Sonic games for the Sega Genesis . As such , it lets the player control either the blue hedgehog Sonic or his orange fox friend Tails . Both characters can move left and right with the arrow keys and jump with the " Z " key ; Tails can also fly to reach areas Sonic cannot . The game takes place in seven levels , known as zones , each divided into three acts followed by a boss fight with Doctor Eggman . These zones are designed for fast @-@ paced gameplay , featuring typical Sonic obstacles such as bottomless pits and vertical loops . The zones are based on various themes , including haunted houses , cities , magma caverns , winter theme parks , and sugar processing plants . 
 The player collects rings in zones and boss fights as a form of health : upon being hit by an enemy or harmful obstacle , the player 's rings will scatter and can be recollected . Being hit while carrying no rings , being crushed by an obstacle , or falling into a bottomless pit causes the player to lose a life ; running out of lives results in a game over screen , after which the player must restart the zone from act one . Conversely , collecting 100 rings gets the player an extra life , and completing an act with 50 takes the player to a special stage , where they can collect rings for extra lives . The game also features power @-@ ups throughout its zones , which are activated with the " X " key : these include typical Sonic power @-@ ups such as shields and extra lives , as well as new ones . The " Beam " power @-@ up for Sonic and the " Mirror " power @-@ up for Tails are borrowed from and credited to Nintendo 's Kirby series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the end of Sonic the Hedgehog 2 , Sonic and Tails fly over the ocean in Tails ' biplane , the Tornado , after defeating Doctor Eggman . Beginning from this point , After the Sequel depicts Sonic and Tails noticing a forested island and deciding to make a landing and explore . After completing the first zone , Sonic finds a robot resembling Tails — a trap sprung by Eggman . The robot <unk> Sonic in a forcefield while Eggman steals Sonic 's Chaos Emeralds . Sonic escapes and sets out with Tails to recover the Emeralds . 
 The two travel through more zones and fight Eggman at the end of each one . They follow Eggman to a forest , where he leads a massive logging operation . Together with Mighty the Armadillo , they destroy his machinery and stop the operation . They continue through the forest and find ghosts that frighten Tails . Destroying one of Eggman 's robots lets Sonic see its internal architecture , including a screen that shows Eggman 's plans to create an empire and drop a floating island into the sea . 
 In <unk> Peak , the game 's snow zone , Sonic and Tails notice a feather float down from the sky . They board another of Eggman 's airships and complete another zone , whereupon they find another feather . They trace the feathers to Eggman 's bird @-@ like robot , which is guarding the Emeralds . Sonic retrieves the Emeralds and uses them to become Super Sonic . He fights the robot as the game 's final boss . After its defeat , Sonic and Tails fly aboard the Tornado once more — the segue into the events of Sonic the Hedgehog 3 . 
 = = Development = = 
 After the Sequel was created by Felipe Daneluz ( known on the Internet as " <unk> " ) , a student from São Paulo , Brazil . Unlike many longtime Sonic fans , Daneluz remained supportive of the series through its " dark age " in the mid to late 2000s and enjoyed games such as Sonic Riders . Because of his continued enthusiasm toward later Sonic games , Daneluz decided to create a retro @-@ styled Sonic game . Not being well versed in computer programming , Daneluz took to the open @-@ source , visual game engine Sonic Worlds , which is tailored to create Sonic zones within the program Multimedia Fusion 2 . Determined to make his game stand out despite his limited technical proficiency , Daneluz decided to set his first game in the time between Sonic the Hedgehog and Sonic 2 , calling it Sonic : Before the Sequel . He set the follow @-@ up , entitled Sonic : After the Sequel , between Sonic 2 and Sonic 3 , and a third installment , Sonic Chrono Adventure , between Sonic 3 and Sonic & Knuckles . 
 After the Sequel 's zones were inspired largely by those of Sonic Heroes . One level called <unk> Ride Zone , however , was based mainly on a level of the same name in Donkey Kong Country 2 : Diddy 's Kong Quest . Ideas for other zones came from Sonic Riders and a Sonic @-@ style song called " Combat Night Zone " by electronic artist <unk> . Daneluz imagined Sonic being high on sugar in the Sugar Splash Zone . Daneluz began creating each level by sketching out ideas on paper , then transferring them to Adobe Photoshop before working on the enemies and level design . Unlike the publishers of many other games on which fangames have been based , particularly Nintendo , Sonic series publisher Sega has not sent a cease and desist order or other indication of disapproval to Daneluz . He has speculated that the company does not want to upset its fanbase . 
 The music composition and recording were handled by underground musicians Falk Au Yeong , Funk Fiction , Andy Tunstall , James <unk> , DJ Max @-@ E , Mr. Lange , and Li Xiao 'an . Daneluz had not made plans to incorporate original music until Falk approached him requesting collaboration on the game . Funk Fiction has claimed that the music spans more than twenty genres and was influenced by rock , jazz , disco , and trip hop and the soundtracks of game franchises like Sonic , Donkey Kong , and Kirby . Due to the levels in After the Sequel generally taking longer to complete than those in Before the Sequel , the music tracks are longer , estimated by Falk as ranging from one minute and 45 seconds to three minutes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After the Sequel has received positive coverage for its revitalization of retro Sonic gameplay . Tony Ponce of Destructoid summarized it as " quite the fun little gem that keeps the Genesis @-@ era Sonic spirit alive " . He contrasted the retro , fan @-@ made After the Sequel with Sega 's efforts to create high @-@ quality 3D titles , lamenting that , fifteen years after the release of Sonic Adventure , Sega was " only now starting to get the hang of the third dimension . " John Polson from IndieGames.com called the game " fantastic " and " stunning " , while Kotaku 's András <unk> stated that " it looks amazing " and advised readers not to let the game 's status as a fan work turn them away from it . Nintendo Life writer Damien McFerran also called the game " impressive " . The UK gaming staff for Red Bull 's website stated that , despite Sega 's continual releases of Sonic games , " few have quite recaptured the thrill of blazing through a 2D labyrinth at <unk> in the way that fan made Sonic After The Sequel has . " A second Red Bull article , by author Ben <unk> , exclaimed that " you have to play " it . 
 The game 's music has been particularly well received . Ponce called it " the best music ever " and " simply indescribable " , opining that it raised an already high @-@ quality product " to god tier " . Ponce wrote an article dedicated to the game 's music two days later , clarifying that it equals or surpasses the quality of any other Sonic game 's soundtrack . The more reserved Polson claimed that the music " definitely rocks " and is clearer than that of Genesis games . Similarly , the Red Bull staff called the music " absolutely stunning " , likening it to gaming soundtracks of the early 1990s . For McFerran , the soundtrack was " just as noteworthy " as the rest of the game . 
 The game is available as a free download for Windows personal computers . As of March 2014 , the trilogy had been downloaded 120 @,@ 000 times — an unusually high number for fangames — as compared to the 640 @,@ 000 copies of the official game Sonic Lost World ( also released in 2013 ) sold on the Wii U by the same time . 
 = Halo ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Halo " is a song by American singer Beyoncé from her third studio album I Am ... Sasha Fierce ( 2008 ) . Included on the I Am ... disc , it was intended to give a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes glimpse of Beyoncé 's life , stripped of her make @-@ up and celebrity trappings . Columbia Records released the song , the album 's fourth single , to mainstream radio in the United States on January 20 , 2009 , and to international markets from February 20 . Inspired by Ray LaMontagne 's 2004 song " Shelter " , " Halo " was composed by Ryan Tedder , Evan Bogart and Beyoncé . It was conceived by Tedder specifically for Beyoncé , although there was media speculation that it had been originally written for Leona Lewis . 
 " Halo " is a contemporary R & B power ballad whose lyrics describe a sublime love . It features drum , piano , keyboard , string , synthesizer , and percussion instrumentation . Kelly Clarkson claimed that Tedder reused the musical arrangement in her 2009 song " Already Gone " . " Halo " received acclaim from music critics , who made comparisons with Lewis ' 2007 song " Bleeding Love " . Its production and Beyoncé 's emotional vocals also received critical praise . " Halo " was nominated for Record of the Year and won Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 52nd Grammy Awards . It won Best Song at the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards . " Halo " topped the singles charts of Brazil , Norway and Slovakia , and reached the top five on the singles chart of Australia , Germany , Ireland , Italy , New Zealand , Switzerland , the United Kingdom and the US . It was certified quintuple @-@ platinum in Australia , and double @-@ platinum in New Zealand , Spain and the US . 
 Philip Andelman directed the ballad 's music video , which features American actor Michael Ealy . It portrays a romantic relationship between Beyoncé 's and Ealy 's characters . Critics complimented Beyoncé 's looks in the clip . An alternative music video , which shows Ealy 's character being chased by police through a forest at night , was posted on the Internet in May 2010 . The lyrics to " Halo " were changed for two of Beyoncé 's special live performances : in a tribute to Michael Jackson following his death , and in a tribute to the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake . The song has been covered by many artists , including Florence and the Machine , LP , Harper <unk> , Gary Lightbody , and Westlife . It was performed on the television show Glee , and was added to the international soundtrack of the Brazilian soap opera India – A Love Story . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " Halo " was composed by Ryan Tedder , lead vocalist of OneRepublic , together with Evan " Kidd " Bogart and Beyoncé . In an interview for HitQuarters , Kidd narrated the events that led to writing the song . OneRepublic canceled their tour after Tedder had broken his Achilles tendon and had undergone surgery . The following day , the band sent Tedder to Los Angeles . There , he and Kidd were socializing when Tedder expressed his desire to write a song . Kidd was initially opposed to the idea because Tedder was supposed to be recuperating , but the pair went to Tedder 's studio . During the writing sessions , singer Ray LaMontagne was the primary inspiration for " Halo " . Kidd suggested they create a song in the style of LaMontagne 's " Shelter " for Beyoncé and her husband Jay @-@ Z , and proposed the title " Halo " after hearing Tedder play " angelic " chords . They wrote the song in three hours . 
 According to Simon Cowell , owner of the music production company Syco Entertainment , Bogart and Tedder intended " Halo " for his client , singer Leona Lewis , who could not record the song because of her tight schedule . Cowell was upset that Beyoncé chose to record the song . David Balls , editor of the British media website Digital Spy , asked Tedder during an interview whether " Halo " had initially been written for Lewis . Tedder answered that he had only tentatively offered the track to Lewis , after Beyoncé waited a long time before recording it . He commented : 
 There was this huge scandal that originally " Halo " was meant to go to Leona . That was never the case ... That song was written for Beyoncé . What happened was that Beyoncé waited long enough to record that song ... I thought this would be a brilliant first single for Leona , which it would have ... What I did was foolishly say to Leona 's camp , " I have it on hold for another A @-@ list artist and I 'm pretty sure they 'll take it , but if they don 't , I just want to know if you like it enough to consider it " . I sent it to them and they flipped on it . They loved it and instantly said they wanted to do it . I was like , " Wait , wait , wait , no , it 's not free yet ! " 
 Tedder and Beyoncé produced " Halo " in 2008 at Los Angeles ' Manfield Studios , and at New York City 's Germano and Roc The Mic Studios . Tedder did the musical arrangements and played the instruments , while Christian Baker assisted in recording the music . Mark " Spike " Stent mixed the track with assistance from Matt Green , and Jim Caruana recorded Beyoncé 's vocals ; both these tasks were done at Roc the Mic Studios . " Halo " is present on the I Am ... disc of the double album I Am ... Sasha Fierce , as it is a ballad that shows Beyoncé 's insecurities about love , and the person she is " underneath all the makeup , underneath the lights and underneath all the exciting star drama " . Beyoncé has said that she loves singing ballads because , " ... the music and the emotion in the story is told [ sic ] so much better . It 's a better connection because you can hear it and it 's not all these other distractions . I really wanted people to hear my voice and hear what I had to say . " 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Halo " is a downtempo contemporary R & B power ballad that features a pop production . It has elements of gospel and soul music . Instrumentation is provided by a piano , a keyboard , big drums , a synthesizer , strings , and percussion instruments . The cascading piano work is accompanied by percussive beats that alternate between handclaps and foot stomps . " Halo " was composed using common time in the key of A major , with a tempo of 80 beats per minute . It is built on the chord progression A – Bm – F ♯ m – D , and is written in the common verse – chorus form . Beyoncé 's vocals span from C ♯ 3 to the falsetto note of F ♯ 5 , incorporate melisma , and are supported by backing vocals . She ornaments her singing with vibrato yelps and trills — rapid alternations between two adjacent notes , usually a semitone or tone apart . The arrangement also consists of symphonic crescendos and electronic accents . 
 In " Halo " , Beyoncé professes her all @-@ encompassing love to her heavenly lover with open @-@ hearted emotion . She said , " [ ' Halo ' ] is angelic ... like you see [ angels ' ] faces instantly when you hear it . [ Its lyrics ] are basically saying that I had these walls built up about love ; you completely tore them down and when I look at you I see your halo , it 's really beautiful . " Backed by a piano , claps and step stomps that set a <unk> atmosphere , Beyoncé opens the song with the lines : " Remember those walls I built ? Well , baby , they 're tumbling down " . She sings the introduction in a low register , and the power of her voice gradually increases as the song progresses . In the pre @-@ chorus , she chants , " Everywhere I 'm looking now , I 'm surrounded by your embrace , baby I can see your halo , you know you 're my saving grace , you 're everything I need and more , it 's written all over your face " . Beyoncé then echoes the word " halo " in the chorus ; the third and final one is preceded by a 1980s drum breakdown , and is complemented by sweeping strings and percussion . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Halo " and " Ego " were initially planned for simultaneous release in the US , following the 2008 dual lead singles " If I Were a Boy " and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " . But the release of " Ego " was canceled and replaced with " Diva " . " Halo " was taken from a different disc of I Am ... Sasha Fierce to " Diva " ; the intention was to demonstrate the concept that Beyoncé has conflicting personalities — the central theme of the album . The motif was demonstrated by placing the album 's ballads and uptempo tracks on separate discs . " Halo " was sent by Music World Entertainment and Columbia Records to contemporary hit radio playlists on January 20 , 2009 , while " Diva " was classified for rhythmic contemporary and urban contemporary radio playlists . A digital extended play ( EP ) containing a radio edit and four remixes of " Halo " was later released on April 14 , 2009 . 
 On February 20 , 2009 , " Halo " was released as a two @-@ track digital download , including a remix of " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " in Australia , New Zealand , and Canada — where the song was also made available on a digital EP , as a maxi single and a vinyl single on April 14 , 2009 . In France , it was released as a stand @-@ alone digital download on March 20 , 2009 . On the same date , " Halo " was serviced digitally alongside the album version of " Diva " in mainland Europe , including Germany , where it was also made available as a CD single on April 3 and a vinyl single on April 12 , 2009 . In the United Kingdom , a digital EP containing the album version and three remixes of " Halo " was released on April 13 , 2009 . 
 = = Kelly Clarkson accusation = = 
 Soon after composing " Halo " , Tedder worked with Kelly Clarkson on her fourth studio album , All I Ever Wanted ( 2009 ) , for which they wrote " Already Gone " together . When the song came out , critics noted a resemblance to Beyoncé 's " Halo " . Clarkson , however , initially stated that she was unaware of any similarities between the two songs . She eventually realized their resemblance when she listened to both recordings closely ; the similarities are most notable in the backing tracks , which in both cases feature a melancholy piano , loud drums , and handclaps . Clarkson tried to prevent " Already Gone " from being included on All I Ever Wanted , but the decision was out of her hands , as her album was already being printed when I Am ... Sasha Fierce came out . She accused Tedder of using the same arrangement on both " Already Gone " and " Halo " , and complained that people would , incorrectly , assume she was stealing it from Beyoncé . 
 Clarkson was furious , and confronted Tedder on the phone . In response , Tedder commented that he would never give two artists the same musical arrangement , and that her criticism was " hurtful and absurd " . He asserted that the concept , melodies , and lyrics of " Already Gone " and " Halo " are completely different . Calling " Already Gone " one of the best songs he had ever composed , Tedder challenged people to " listen [ to the two ballads ] and form their own opinions " . Clarkson discouraged her label , RCA , from releasing " Already Gone " as a single because she respected Beyoncé , but they went against her will and released it . She said , " It 's one of those things I have no control over . I already made my album . At this point , the record company can do whatever they want with it . " Clarkson later told James Montgomery of MTV News that it was unfortunate " Already Gone " and " Halo " sound so similar , but noted that at least they have different vocal melodies . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Upon its release , " Halo " received acclaim from music critics who praised Beyoncé 's vocal performance . Christian Williams of Billboard magazine wrote that the pop sound of " Halo " should take it to the top of the charts . He added that comparisons could be made to Lewis ' " Bleeding Love " ( 2007 ) , but concluded that " Halo " " hangs high on its own merits " . Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly described " Halo " as " an absolutely glorious and perfectly produced track " , which had the potential to be as commercially successful as " Crazy in Love " ( 2003 ) and " Irreplaceable " ( 2007 ) . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle wrote that it was an immediate standout on I Am ... Sasha Fierce . Praising the " big and wide " melodies of " Halo " , Matos Michaelangelo of The A.V. Club commented that Beyoncé has " a real flair for grandeur " . Jennifer Cady of E ! Online wrote that the song could be included on a romantic mixtape , and James Montgomery of MTV News noted that the " tear @-@ jerking power " of " Halo " reveals " sides of Beyoncé we never knew existed " . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media wrote that Beyoncé 's vocal delivery was " strident and exposed " , reminiscent of Céline Dion 's style . 
 In spite of what he called the " garden @-@ variety lyrics " of the ballad , James Reed of The Boston Globe wrote that " Halo " was " the most evocative power ballad " recorded by Beyoncé , comparing it to the work done by American record producer and songwriter Phil Spector on his Wall of Sound mixing board . Critics have highlighted the similarities of " Halo " to Rihanna 's " Umbrella " ( 2007 ) ; Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted that " Halo " has the same " icy synths , drivetime rock dynamic , and a similar repetitive chorus " . This view was echoed by Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News and Brent DiCrescenzo of Timeout , who viewed " Halo " as a " Bette Midler – level hymn from [ ' Umbrella ' ] , lift [ ing its ] savior theme " . Nick Levine of Digital Spy described " Halo " as a " muscular hybrid " of " Umbrella " and Lewis ' " Bleeding Love " . David Balls of the same website wrote , " Halo ' is a contemporary power ballad in the ' Bleeding Love ' mould ... Could Lewis have pulled this off better ? Well , that 's a matter of opinion of course , but Mrs. Jay @-@ Z doesn 't leave much room for improvement . " 
 = = = Awards and recognition = = = 
 " Halo " was nominated for Best Single at the 2009 Urban Music Awards , and for Best Love Song at the 2009 Teen Choice Awards . It won Best Song at the MTV Europe Music Awards 2009 . The ballad was placed at number seven of Rap @-@ Up 's list of the 25 best songs of 2009 . " Halo " was nominated at the 52nd Grammy Awards , in the categories of Record of the Year and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance , winning the latter . It also won Best Foreign Song at the 2010 Croatian Porin Awards . The live version of " Halo " , featured on I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas ( 2009 ) , was nominated for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 53rd Grammy Awards . The American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers ( ASCAP ) recognized " Halo " as one of the most performed songs of 2009 at the 27th ASCAP Pop Music Awards . On the occasion of Beyoncé 's thirtieth birthday , Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine placed the ballad at number 18 on their list of Beyoncé 's 30 biggest Billboard hits . On The Village Voice ' year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Halo " was ranked at numbers 443 and 114 in 2008 and 2009 respectively . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the song at number three on their list of ten best Beyoncé 's songs writing that other power ballads " don 't come more powerful than this one , which finds Beyoncé belting alongside what sounds to be every instrument in the entire world ( including a dope one @-@ second drum solo ) " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Halo " debuted at number 93 in the US Billboard Hot 100 chart issue dated February 7 , 2009 . It peaked at number 5 in the chart issue dated May 23 , 2009 . " Halo " ' s US success helped Beyoncé achieve more top 10 singles on the Hot 100 chart than any other female artist during 2001 – 10 . After spending 30 weeks in the top 40 of the Hot 100 chart , " Halo " last charted on the week ending August 29 , 2009 . It peaked at number 5 on the US Pop Songs chart , at number 1 on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , and at number 16 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . On January 5 , 2010 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single double @-@ platinum , denoting sales of two million copies . As of October 2012 , " Halo " had sold 3 @,@ 123 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . 
 " Halo " debuted at number 40 on the New Zealand Singles Chart on February 2 , 2009 , and attained a high point of number 2 three weeks later . The song spent 33 non @-@ consecutive weeks on the chart , and was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , representing sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . On February 15 , 2009 , it entered the ARIA Singles Chart at number 29 . The ballad peaked at number 3 for four non @-@ consecutive weeks , and spent a total of 36 weeks in the top 50 . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified " Halo " five @-@ times platinum for selling 350 @,@ 000 copies . On the Spanish Singles Chart , " Halo " debuted at number 45 on January 25 , 2009 , but it fell off the chart the following week . However , the song re @-@ entered the chart four months later on May 3 , 2009 , at number 44 , and reached a high point of number 5 on October 11 , 2009 . It was certified double @-@ platinum by the Productores de Música de España ( PROMUSICAE ) , indicating sales of 80 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " Halo " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 98 for the week ending February 21 , 2009 ; over a period of seven weeks , it climbed to number 4 on March 29 , 2009 ( for the week ending April 4 , 2009 ) . It spent almost one year in the top 100 of UK Singles Chart ; 44 non @-@ consecutive weeks after its debut , it was at number 94 on March 4 , 2012 , before dropping out the following week . " Halo " was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) , denoting sales of 600 @,@ 000 copies . As of October 2014 , it has sold 690 @,@ 000 copies in the UK and is her fourth biggest selling single there . It debuted on the Irish Singles Chart at number 32 on January 22 , 2009 , and peaked at number 4 for three consecutive weeks . " Halo " topped the Brasil Billboard Hot 100 chart for more than 20 consecutive weeks in 2009 . It emerged as the most listened to song on radio in Brazil during the same period as it registered 24 @,@ 734 plays on radio stations throughout the country . " Halo " was also the most downloaded song in Brazil from November 2009 to November 2010 , as highlighted by the first edition of the Brazilian Digital Music Awards selling 1 @,@ 726 @,@ 398 copies bringing its total to more than 2 @.@ 5 million by November 2010 . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 The accompanying music videos for " Halo " and " Diva " premiered simultaneously on the US iTunes Store on December 23 , 2008 . Shot in late November 2008 in a SoHo townhouse owned by Beyoncé , the video was directed by Philip Andelman and features actor Michael Ealy as Beyoncé 's love interest . Ealy was happy to work with Beyoncé , as he had loved the song immediately after hearing it . This was the second time he was asked to star in a video for a song by Beyoncé ; the first was " Irreplaceable " , which he had refused because he did not appreciate its theme and concept . He had advised Beyoncé : " Call me when you have a hero role . " 
 The video , which Beyoncé has considered intimate and romantic , begins as she stands against a wall , illuminated by light that passes through a window . In one scene , Beyoncé 's character , dressed in a skin @-@ tight leotard , performs a dance sequence while her love interest looks down at her from a balcony . According to Michael Slezak of Entertainment Weekly , the dance routines pay homage to the 1983 romantic drama film Flashdance . Beyoncé and Ealy later stare <unk> at each other as they snuggle on a sofa . During the climax of the video , Beyoncé is shown underwater , dressed in white , moving slowly upwards . As the chorus begins , she opens her eyes ; after Ealy kisses the back of her neck , the pair come face to face in the final scene , in which Beyoncé lies in bed , with Ealy above her . Jennifer Cady of E ! Online wrote that the bright shiny lights in the video " make [ Beyoncé ] look like an angel " . Alison Maloney of The Sun praised Beyoncé 's " amazing figure " . The video was ranked at number 74 on BET 's Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 An alternative video surfaced online in late May 2010 , explaining why Beyoncé 's character was remembering her love interest in the original version . It begins with a view of the night sky and many trees , as Beyoncé drives a car and Ealy 's character is chased by the police through a forest . As the video progresses , she parks her car on the side of the road and scenes from the original version are shown . Police dogs eventually catch Ealy 's character and attack him savagely . An open bag reveals stolen money , which is dispersed by the wind . At the end of the video , in the forest , Beyoncé finds Ealy lying <unk> on the ground . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé 's first live performance of " Halo " was at the NAACP Awards on February 12 , 2009 . Wearing a white gown , she sang the ballad while archival footage from the Civil Rights movement was shown on many screens in the background . Brennan Williams of Entertainment Newswire wrote that Beyoncé 's " breathtaking performance " showed why she received the 2009 NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Female Artist . She also sang " Halo " on the Late Show with David Letterman on April 22 , 2009 , and on The Today Show the following day . The song was later added to the set list of her I Am ... Tour in 2009 – 10 , when it was performed during the concert 's encore . After Beyoncé finished her " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " performance , she sang " Halo " . She initially sang the ballad on stage before descending to shake hands with everybody in the front rows . Deborah McAleese and Lauren <unk> of The Belfast Telegraph commented that the ballad " was sung with great passion " . It was included on her CD / DVD live albums I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas and I Am ... World Tour ( 2010 ) . Beyoncé performed " Halo " live , as the closing song at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival , in front of an audience of more than 175 @,@ 000 . During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé , which aired on December 4 , 2011 in the UK , she sang the ballad to a selected crowd of fans . 
 On June 25 , 2009 , American entertainer Michael Jackson died while Beyoncé was touring . His death led her to perform tributes to Jackson at tour venues , including Atlanta , Georgia on July 1 , 2009 ; and New Orleans , Louisiana on July 3 , 2009 . During the tribute , an image of Jackson was shown on the main screen . As Beyoncé sang an emotional rendition of " Halo " , she changed the lyrics to " Michael I can see your Halo / I pray your music won 't fade away " . On January 12 , 2010 , Haiti was struck by an earthquake . A charity telethon called Hope for Haiti Now : A Global Benefit for Earthquake Relief took place on January 22 , 2010 , in which many artists , including Beyoncé , participated . She performed an acoustic version of " Halo " with Coldplay 's lead vocalist Chris Martin playing the piano . To make the song match the night 's purpose , Beyoncé weaved " Haiti " into its lyrics , singing " Haiti , we can see your halo / You know you 're my saving grace / You 're everything I need and more , it 's written all over your face / Haiti , we can see your halo / I pray you won 't fade away " . This version was included on the 2010 live album Hope for Haiti Now . 
 Beyoncé performed a tribute to Whitney Houston during her revue Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in May , 2012 , in Atlantic City , New Jersey at the Revel resort following her death earlier that year . Wearing a red dress , Beyoncé began the performance of " Halo " singing the first verse of Houston 's " I Will Always Love You " . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice praised the performance noting that the song was " given an explosive coda " which showed how " the most basically structured song by one of pop 's most template @-@ hewing songwriters ... could be turned into something glorious with the right singer . " While reviewing the revue , Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " the most attention @-@ grabbing moments of the night ... came when she dipped into other artists ' catalogs " . Ben Ratliff of The New York Times mentioned the song in the " almost continuous high point " of the concert . On February 3 , 2013 , Beyoncé performed the song during the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show . " Halo " was added to the set list of her The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour ( 2013 – 14 ) where it was preceded by a short a cappella performance of " I Will Always Love You " . In 2014 , during the On the Run Tour , Beyoncé 's co @-@ headlining venture with Jay @-@ Z , the song was performed during the end of the concert along with " Young Forever " . Throughout the performance , home videos of the pair and their daughter Blue Ivy were shown on the screen on the stage . A live rendition during a stop in Paris was broadcast on September 20 , 2014 on HBO during a documentary special chronicling the tour . The following day , a seven @-@ minute video of the medley was released on Beyoncé 's official YouTube channel . 
 = = Cover versions and usage in media = = 
 In 2009 , " Halo " was covered by Florence and the Machine on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . Elementary school group PS22 chorus covered " Halo " and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " during the 2009 Billboard Women in Music luncheon held at The Pierre in New York City . At the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , American singer Katy Perry performed a mash @-@ up of " Halo " and the other Best Song nominees . American singer Mike Posner also covered the ballad with different lyrics , and placed it on his 2009 album A Matter of Time . According to an MTV writer , Posner 's rendition was " a refreshing take on the original " . David Sides also made a piano cover of the song and released it on his album The Collection , Vol . 3 . " Halo " is featured on the British compilation album Now ! 73 . The song was blended with " How to Break a Heart " by the Irish boy band Westlife , on their 2010 Where We Are Tour . On February 5 , 2012 , the team on the Australian talent show , Young Talent Time , sang " Halo " as the closing song of that night . On April 17 , 2013 , Angie Miller , a contestant on the 12th season of American Idol covered the song during an episode of the show . Melissa Locker of Rolling Stone magazine commented that she was " at her best " and " managed to tap into that power sans piano " . On May 20 , 2014 , Soli <unk> covered " Halo " during the blind auditions round of the third series of The Voice Australia . 
 " Halo " has been covered by other musicians , including <unk> , ceo ( Eric <unk> ) and Harper <unk> . Marc Hogan of Pitchfork Media has written that no cover has been " quite as inspired or as perversely logical " as the one by ceo . Built essentially on bumpy beats , this version makes use of an acoustic guitar , 1980s @-@ era stylized electric guitar , strings , and horns , and ends with a rapped outro . A dancehall cover of " Halo " by Major Lazer , with lead vocals by Elephant Man , was posted on the former 's Twitter account the night after Beyoncé won Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 2011 Grammy Awards . Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson of Entertainment Weekly commented that their version " stays fairly close to the original , except with Elephant Man growling instead of Beyoncé belting the verses " . In 2012 , Swedish singer Robin <unk> , member of the boy band What 's Up ! , covered the song and included it on his solo debut album My Versions . In 2013 , " Halo " was covered by the Icelandic band <unk> , with their version of " Halo " appearing as the B @-@ side of their single " Crack in a Stone " . A gospel @-@ style version of the song was recorded by Jahméne Douglas and was released on his album Love Never Fails ( 2013 ) . Indian singer Sunidhi Chauhan covered " Halo " during a concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London in late September 2013 . A writer of The Times of India included the performance of the song as one of the highlights of the concert . Mark Vincent covered the song on his 2013 album The Quartet Sessions . 
 " Halo " was blended with Katrina and the Waves ' 1985 song " Walking on Sunshine " , in the " Vitamin D " episode of the Fox Broadcasting Company television show Glee . Released as a single , this version peaked at number 4 on the Irish Singles Chart , number 8 on the UK Official Download Chart , number 9 on the UK Singles Chart , number 10 on the ARIA Singles Chart , number 28 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , and number 40 on the Hot 100 chart . It was certified gold by ARIA , denoting shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies . The mash @-@ up was included on the set list of the group 's debut concert Glee Live ! In Concert ! ( 2010 – 11 ) . " Halo " was included on the international soundtrack of India – A Love Story , an Emmy @-@ winning Brazilian soap opera . In 2013 Ane Brun , accompanied by Linnea Olsson on cello and backing vocals , released a personal and stripped @-@ down version of " Halo " on her album Rarities . This cover is included on the soundtrack of the 2014 movie If I Stay . In 2015 , Gary Lightbody covered the song for the movie Cake starring Jennifer Aniston . 
 On November 9 , 2015 , Jordan Smith covered the song choice pick selection in the live playoffs of The Voice ( U.S. season 9 ) . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Action of 20 October 1793 = 
 The Action of 20 October 1793 was a minor naval engagement of the French Revolutionary Wars fought off Cape Barfleur on the French coast of the English Channel . The early months of the war , which had begun in February , had seen a number of French frigates raiding British merchant shipping in the Channel , and HMS Crescent under Captain James Saumarez was deployed to watch the port of Cherbourg with the aim of disrupting the operations of the French frigates Réunion and Sémillante that were based in the harbour . On 20 October , Saumarez was waiting off Cape Barfleur for French movement when his lookout sighted Réunion and the cutter Espérance approaching from open water . 
 Saumarez immediately moved to engage the French ship and managed to isolate the frigate and subject it to a fierce barrage of fire for more than two hours . Captain François A. Dénian on Réunion responded , but aside from inflicting minor damage to Saumarez 's rigging achieved little while his own vessel was heavily battered , suffering severe damage to rigging masts and hull and more than 80 and possibly as many as 120 casualties . British losses were confined to a single man wounded by an accident aboard Crescent . Eventually Dénian could not hold out any longer and was forced to surrender on the arrival of the 28 @-@ gun British frigate HMS Circe . Réunion was later repaired and commissioned into the Royal Navy , while Saumarez was knighted for his success . 
 = = Background = = 
 At the outbreak of war between the Kingdom of Great Britain and the French Republic in the early spring of 1793 , the French Revolutionary Wars were already a year old . The French Navy was already suffering from the upheavals of the French Revolution and the consequent dissolution of the professional officer class , while the Royal Navy had been at a state of readiness since the summer of 1792 . During the early months of the war the French Navy focused heavily on raiding and disrupting British commerce and deployed frigates on raiding operations against British commercial shipping . In the English Channel , two of the most successful raiders were the frigates Réunion and Sémillante , based in Cherbourg on the Cotentin Peninsula . These frigates would make short cruises , leaving Cherbourg in the early evening and returning in the morning with any prizes they had encountered during the night . 
 To counter the depredations from Cherbourg , the Admiralty despatched a number of warships to blockade the French coast , including the 36 @-@ gun frigate HMS Crescent under Captain James Saumarez , which was sent from Portsmouth to the Channel Islands before operating off the Cotentin . On 19 October , Saumarez learned of the French routine and took up a station close inshore near Cape Barfleur , a rocky headland on the eastern extremity of the Cotentin Peninsula which the Cherbourg raiders passed whenever leaving or entering port . At dawn on 20 October lookouts on Crescent reported two sails approaching the land from the Channel , one significantly larger than the other . Saumarez immediately ordered his ship to edge into the wind towards the strange vessels and rapidly came up on the port side of the new arrivals , with the wind behind him allowing freedom of movement . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The two ships encountered by Crescent were the 38 @-@ gun frigate Réunion and a 14 @-@ gun cutter named Espérance , returning from a raiding cruise in the Channel under the command of Captain François A. Dénian ( in some sources <unk> ) . Réunion was a substantially larger ship than Crescent , weighing 951 long tons ( 966 t ) to the British ship 's 888 long tons ( 902 t ) and carrying 300 men to Crescent 's 257 . However these advantages were countered by the slight advantage Saumarez held in weight of shot , which measured 315 pounds ( 143 kg ) to 310 pounds ( 141 kg ) in favour of the British vessel . Crescent was also faster than Réunion , having only recently completed a dockyard refit . 
 Firing broke out between the frigates at 10 : 30 , while the cutter steered away from the battle towards Cherbourg . One other ship was visible throughout the engagement , the 28 @-@ gun British frigate HMS Circe under Captain Joseph Sydney Yorke , which lay stranded approximately 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ) distant , unable to approach the battling ships due to calm winds separating Circe from the engagement . In the opening exchanges , both frigates suffered damage to their rigging and sails , Crescent losing the fore topmast and Réunion the fore yard and mizzen topmast . In an effort to break the deadlock , Saumarez suddenly swung his ship onto the opposite tack and , taking advantage of the damage to Dénian 's vessel that left it unable to effectively manoeuvre , managed to fire several raking broadsides into Réunion 's stern . 
 The raking fire inflicted massive damage and casualties on the French ship , and although Dénian continued to resist for some time , his ship was no longer effectively able to respond once Saumarez had crossed his bow . Eventually , with Circe now rapidly approaching with a strengthening of the wind , Dénian accepted that he had no choice but to surrender his vessel after an engagement lasting two hours and ten minutes . The cutter , which had been ignored during the battle , successfully escaped to Cherbourg while the captain of Sémillante , anchored in the harbour , made a fruitless effort to reach the engagement , delayed by contrary wind and tides that prevented the frigate from sailing . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both ships were damaged in the engagement , although Saumarez 's damage was almost entirely confined to his rigging : very few shots had actually struck his hull during the battle , and the only one that provoked notice passed across the deck without causing injury and struck a cannon on the opposite site , setting it off in the direction of a number of small gunboats that were approaching from the shore . Casualties on Crescent were equally light , with just one man injured ; he had been standing too close to his own cannon during the opening broadside and had been struck by the recoiling gun , suffering a broken leg . Damage and losses on the French ship were very severe , with the rigging in tatters , the hull and lower masts repeatedly struck and casualties that Saumarez initially estimated at more than 120 men killed or wounded , although French accounts give the lower figure of 33 killed and 48 wounded . 
 Saumarez was widely praised for his conduct in only the second successful frigate action of the war after Edward Pellew 's capture of Cléopâtre four months earlier at the Action of 18 June 1793 . In reward , Saumarez was knighted by King George III and given a presentation plate by the City of London , although Saumarez later received a bill for £ 103 6s and 8d ( the equivalent of £ 10 @,@ 900 as of 2016 ) , from a Mr. Cooke for " the honour of a knighthood " . Saumarez refused to pay , telling Cooke to charge whomever had paid for Edward Pellew 's knighthood after his successful action . Saumarez later wrote to his brother that " I think it hard to pay so much for an honour which my services have been thought to deserve " . In recognition of his success , Saumarez was subsequently given command of a frigate squadron operating against the Normandy coast from the Channel Islands . In addition , the first lieutenant , George Parker , was promoted to commander and the two other lieutenants were also praised . Réunion was purchased for service with the Royal Navy after repairs had been completed , and became HMS Reunion , rated as a 36 @-@ gun frigate carrying 12 pounder cannon . Authorisation for the payment of prize money was published in the London Gazette on 4 February 1794 , amounting to £ 5 @,@ 239 ( the equivalent of £ 542 @,@ 800 as of 2016 ) divided between the men of Crescent and Circe . More than five decades later the battle was among the actions recognised by a clasp attached to the Naval General Service Medal , awarded upon application to all British participants from Crescent still living in 1847 . 
 = Themistocles = 
 Themistocles ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> [ <unk> ̂ ːs ] <unk> ; " Glory of the Law " ; c . 524 – 459 BC ) was an Athenian politician and general . He was one of a new breed of non @-@ aristocratic politicians who rose to prominence in the early years of the Athenian democracy . As a politician , Themistocles was a populist , having the support of lower class Athenians , and generally being at odds with the Athenian nobility . Elected archon in 493 BC , he convinced the polis to increase the naval power of Athens , a recurring theme in his political career . During the first Persian invasion of Greece , he fought at the Battle of Marathon , and was possibly one of the ten Athenian strategoi ( generals ) in that battle . 
 In the years after Marathon , and in the run up to the second Persian invasion he became the most prominent politician in Athens . He continued to advocate a strong Athenian navy , and in 483 BC he persuaded the Athenians to build a fleet of 200 triremes ; these would prove crucial in the forthcoming conflict with Persia . During the second invasion , he was in effective command of the Greek allied navy at the battles of Artemisium and Salamis . Due to subterfuge on the part of Themistocles , the Allies lured the Persian fleet into the Straits of Salamis , and the decisive Greek victory there was the turning point in the invasion , which ended the following year by the defeat of the Persians at the land Battle of Plataea . 
 After the conflict ended , Themistocles continued to be pre @-@ eminent among Athenian politicians . However , he aroused the hostility of Sparta by ordering Athens to be re @-@ fortified , and his perceived arrogance began to alienate him from the Athenians . In 472 or 471 BC , he was ostracised , and went into exile in Argos . The Spartans now saw an opportunity to destroy Themistocles , and implicated him in the treasonous plot of their own general Pausanias . Themistocles thus fled from Greece and was temporarily given sanctuary by Alexander I of Macedon at Pydna before traveling to Asia Minor , where he entered the service of the Persian king Artaxerxes I. He was made governor of Magnesia , and lived there for the rest of his life . 
 Themistocles died in 459 BC , probably of natural causes . Themistocles 's reputation was posthumously rehabilitated , and he was re @-@ established as a hero of the Athenian ( and indeed Greek ) cause . Themistocles can still reasonably be thought of as " the man most instrumental in achieving the salvation of Greece " from the Persian threat , as Plutarch describes him . His naval policies would have a lasting impact on Athens as well , since maritime power became the cornerstone of the Athenian Empire and golden age . It was Thucydides 's judgement that Themistocles was " a man who exhibited the most indubitable signs of genius ; indeed , in this particular he has a claim on our admiration quite extraordinary and unparalleled " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Themistocles was born in Athens around 524 BC , the son of Neocles , who was , in the words of Plutarch " no very conspicuous man " . His mother is more obscure ; according to Plutarch , she was either a Thracian woman called <unk> , or Euterpe , a Carian from Halicarnassus . Like many contemporaries , little is known of his early years . Some authors report that he was unruly as a child and was consequently disowned by his father . Plutarch considers this to be false . Plutarch indicates that , on account of his mother 's background , Themistocles was considered something of an outsider ; furthermore the family appear to have lived in an immigrant district of Athens , Cynosarges , outside the city walls . However , in an early example of his cunning , Themistocles persuaded " well @-@ born " children to exercise with him in Cynosarges , thus breaking down the distinction between " alien and legitimate " . Plutarch further reports that Themistocles was preoccupied , even as a child , with preparing for public life . His teacher is said to have told him : 
 " My boy , you will be nothing insignificant , but definitely something great , either for good or evil . " 
 Themistocles left three sons by <unk> , daughter to Lysander of <unk> , — <unk> , Polyeuctus , and <unk> . Plato the philosopher mentions <unk> as a most excellent horseman , but otherwise insignificant person . And Themistocles had two sons older than these three , Neocles and Diocles . Neocles died when he was young by the bite of a horse , and Diocles was adopted by his grandfather , Lysander . Themistocles had many daughters , of whom <unk> , whom he had by a second marriage , was wife to <unk> , her brother by another mother , and became priestess of Cybele ; Italia was married to <unk> , of the island of Chios ; Sybaris to <unk> the Athenian . After the death of Themistocles , his nephew , <unk> , went to Magnesia , and married , with her brothers ' consent , another daughter , <unk> , and took charge of her sister Asia , the youngest of all ten children . 
 = = Political and military career = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Themistocles grew up in a period of upheaval in Athens . The tyrant Peisistratos had died in 527 BC , passing power to his sons , Hipparchus and Hippias . Hipparchus was murdered in 514 BC , and in response to this , Hippias became paranoid and started to rely increasingly on foreign mercenaries to keep a hold on power . The head of the powerful , but exiled ( according to Herodotus only — the fragmentary Archon List for 525 / 4 shows a Cleisthenes , an Alcmaeonid , holding office in Athens during this period ) Alcmaeonid family , Cleisthenes , began to scheme to overthrow Hippias and return to Athens . In 510 BC , he persuaded the Spartan king Cleomenes I to launch an attack on Athens , which succeeded in overthrowing Hippias . However , in the aftermath , the other noble ( ' <unk> ' ) families of Athens rejected Cleisthenes , electing Isagoras as archon , with the support of Cleomenes . On a personal level , Cleisthenes wanted to return to Athens ; however , he also probably wanted to prevent Athens becoming a Spartan client state . <unk> the other nobles , he proposed to the Athenian people a radical program in which political power would be invested in the people — a " democracy " . The Athenian people thus overthrew Isagoras , repelled a Spartan attack under Cleomenes , and invited Cleisthenes to return to Athens , to put his plan into action . The establishment of the democracy was to radically change Athens : 
 " And so it was that the Athenians found themselves suddenly a great power ... they gave vivid proof of what equality and freedom of speech might achieve " 
 = = = Early years of the democracy = = = 
 The new system of government in Athens opened up a wealth of opportunity for men like Themistocles , who previously would have had no access to power . Moreover , the new institutions of the democracy required skills that had previously been unimportant in government . Themistocles was to prove himself a master of the new system ; " he could <unk> , he could network , he could spin ... and crucially , he knew how to make himself visible . " Themistocles moved to the <unk> , a down @-@ market part of Athens . This move marked him out as a ' man of the people ' , and allowed him to interact more easily with ordinary citizens . He began building up a support base among these newly empowered citizens : 
 " he wooed the poor ; and they , not used to being courted , duly loved him back . Touring the taverns , the markets , the docks , canvassing where no politician had thought to canvas before , making sure never to forget a single voter 's name , Themistocles had set his eyes on a radical new constituency " 
 However , he took care to ensure that he did not alienate the nobility of Athens . He began to practice law , the first person in Athens to prepare for public life in this way . His ability as attorney and arbitrator , used in the service of the common people , gained him further popularity . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Themistocles probably turned 30 in 494 BC , which qualified him to become an archon , the highest of the <unk> in Athens . On the back of his popularity , he evidently decided to run for this office and was elected Archon Eponymous , the highest government office in the following year ( 493 BC ) . Themistocles 's archonship saw the beginnings of a major theme in his career ; the advancement of Athenian sea @-@ power . Under his guidance , the Athenians began the building of a new port at Piraeus , to replace the existing facilities at Phalerum . Although further away from Athens , Piraeus offered three natural harbours , and could be easily fortified . Since Athens was to become an essentially maritime power during the 5th century BC , Themistocles 's policies were to have huge significance for the future of Athens , and indeed Greece . In advancing naval power , Themistocles was probably advocating a course of action he thought essential for the long @-@ term prospects of Athens . However , as Plutarch implies , since naval power relied on the mass mobilisation of the common citizens ( thetes ) as rowers , such a policy put more power into the hands of average Athenians — and thus into Themistocles 's own hands . 
 = = = Rivalry with Aristides = = = 
 After Marathon , probably in 489 , Miltiades , the hero of the battle , was seriously wounded in an abortive attempt to capture Paros . Taking advantage of his incapacitation , the powerful Alcmaeonid family arranged for him to be prosecuted . The Athenian aristocracy , and indeed Greek aristocrats in general , were loath to see one person pre @-@ eminent , and such maneuvers were commonplace . Miltiades was given a massive fine for the crime of ' deceiving the Athenian people ' , but died weeks later as a result of his wound . In the wake of this prosecution , the Athenian people chose to use a new institution of the democracy , which had been part of Cleisthenes 's reforms , but remained so far unused . This was ' ostracism ' — each Athenian citizen was required to write on a shard of pottery ( <unk> ) the name of a politician that they wished to see exiled for a period of ten years . This may have been triggered by Miltiades 's prosecution , and used by the Athenians to try and stop such power @-@ games among the noble families . Certainly , in the years ( 487 BC ) following , the heads of the prominent families , including the Alcmaeonids , were exiled . The career of a politician in Athens thus became fraught with more difficulty , since displeasing the population was likely to result in exile . 
 Themistocles , with his power @-@ base firmly established among the poor , moved naturally to fill the vacuum left by Miltiades 's death , and in that decade became the most influential politician in Athens . However , the support of the nobility began to coalesce around the man who would become Themistocles 's great rival — Aristides . Aristides cast himself as Themistocles 's opposite — virtuous , honest and incorruptible — and his followers called him " the just " . Plutarch suggests that the rivalry between the two had begun when they competed over the love of a boy : " ... they were rivals for the affection of the beautiful <unk> of <unk> , and were passionate beyond all moderation . " 
 During the decade , Themistocles continued to advocate the expansion of Athenian naval power . The Athenians were certainly aware throughout this period that the Persian interest in Greece had not ended ; Darius 's son and successor , Xerxes I , had continued the preparations for the invasion of Greece . Themistocles seems to have realised that for the Greeks to survive the coming onslaught required a Greek navy that could hope to face up to the Persian navy , and he therefore attempted to persuade the Athenians to build such a fleet . Aristides , as champion of the zeugites ( the upper , ' hoplite @-@ class ' ) vigorously opposed such a policy . 
 In 483 BC , a massive new seam of silver was found in the Athenian mines at Laurium . Themistocles proposed that the silver should be used to build a new fleet of 200 triremes , while Aristides suggested it should instead be distributed among the Athenian citizens . Themistocles avoided mentioning Persia , deeming that it was too distant a threat for the Athenians to act on , and instead focused their attention on Aegina . At the time , Athens was embroiled in a long @-@ running war with the Aeginetans , and building a fleet would allow the Athenians to finally defeat them at sea . As a result , Themistocles 's motion was carried easily , although only 100 warships of the trireme type were to be built . Aristides refused to countenance this ; conversely Themistocles was not pleased that only 100 ships would be built . Tension between the two camps built over the winter , so that the ostracism of 482 BC became a direct contest between Themistocles and Aristides . In what has been characterized as the first referendum , Aristides was ostracised , and Themistocles 's policies were endorsed . Indeed , becoming aware of the Persian preparations for the coming invasion , the Athenians voted for the construction of more ships than Themistocles had initially asked for . In the run up to the Persian invasion , Themistocles had thus become the foremost politician in Athens . 
 = = = Second Persian invasion of Greece = = = 
 In 481 BC , a congress of Greek city @-@ states was held , during which 30 or so states agreed to ally themselves against the forthcoming invasion . The Spartans and Athenians were foremost in this alliance , being sworn enemies of the Persians . The Spartans claimed the command of land forces , and since the Greek ( hereafter referred to as " Allied " ) fleet would be dominated by Athens , Themistocles tried to claim command of the naval forces . However , the other naval powers , including Corinth and Aegina refused to give command to the Athenians , and Themistocles pragmatically backed down . Instead , as a compromise , the Spartans ( an insignificant naval power ) , in the person of Eurybiades were to command the naval forces . It is clear from Herodotus , however , that Themistocles would be the real leader of the fleet . 
 The ' congress ' met again in the spring of 480 BC . A Thessalian delegation suggested that the allies could muster in the narrow Vale of Tempe , on the borders of Thessaly , and thereby block Xerxes 's advance . A force of 10 @,@ 000 hoplites was dispatched under the command of the Spartan polemarch <unk> and Themistocles to the Vale of Tempe , which they believed the Persian army would have to pass through . However , once there , Alexander I of Macedon warned them that the vale could be bypassed by several other passes , and that the army of Xerxes was overwhelmingly large , and the Greeks retreated . Shortly afterwards , they received the news that Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont . 
 Themistocles now developed a second strategy . The route to southern Greece ( Boeotia , Attica and the Peloponnesus ) would require the army of Xerxes to travel through the very narrow pass of Thermopylae . This could easily be blocked by the Greek hoplites , despite the overwhelming numbers of Persians ; furthermore , to prevent the Persians bypassing Thermopylae by sea , the Athenian and allied navies could block the straits of Artemisium . However , after the Tempe debacle , it was uncertain whether the Spartans would be willing to march out from the Peloponnesus again . To persuade the Spartans to defend Attica , Themistocles had to show them that the Athenians were willing to do everything necessary for the success of the alliance . In short , the entire Athenian fleet must be dispatched to Artemisium . 
 To do this , every able @-@ bodied Athenian male would be required to man the ships . This in turn meant that the Athenians must prepare to abandon Athens . <unk> the Athenians to take this course was undoubtedly one of the highlights of Themistocles 's career . As Holland has it : 
 " What precise heights of oratory he attained , what stirring and memorable phrases he pronounced , we have no way of knowing ... only by the effect it had on the assembly can we gauge what surely must have been its electric and vivifying quality — for Themistocles ' audacious proposals , when put to the vote , were ratified . The Athenian people , facing the gravest moment of peril in their history , committed themselves once and for all to the alien element of the sea , and put their faith in a man whose ambitions many had long profoundly dreaded . " 
 His proposals accepted , Themistocles issued orders for the women and children of Athens to be sent to the city of Troezen , safely inside the Peloponnesus . He was then able to travel to a meeting of the Allies , at which he proposed his strategy ; with the Athenian fleet fully committed to the defence of Greece , the other Allies accepted his proposals . 
 = = = = Battle of Artemisium = = = = 
 Thus , in August 480 BC , when the Persian army was approaching Thessaly , the Allied fleet sailed to Artemisium , and the Allied army marched to Thermopylae . Themistocles himself took command of the Athenian contingent of the fleet , and went to Artemisium . When the Persian fleet finally arrived at Artemisium after a significant delay , Eurybiades , who both Herodotus and Plutarch suggest was not the most inspiring commander , wished to sail away without fighting . At this point Themistocles accepted a large bribe from the local people for the fleet to remain at Artemisium , and used some of it to bribe Eurybiades to remain , while pocketing the rest . From this point on , Themistocles appears to have been more @-@ or @-@ less in charge of the Allied effort at Artemisium . Over three days of battle , the Allies held their own against the much larger Persian fleet , but sustained significant losses . However , the loss of the simultaneous Battle of Thermopylae to the Persians made their continued presence at Artemisium irrelevant , and the Allies thus evacuated . According to Herodotus , Themistocles left messages at every place where the Persian fleet might stop for drinking water , asking the Ionians in the Persian fleet to defect , or at least fight badly . Even if this did not work , Themistocles apparently intended that Xerxes would at least begin to suspect the Ionians , thereby sowing dissension in the Persian ranks . 
 = = = = Battle of Salamis = = = = 
 In the aftermath of Thermopylae , Boeotia fell to the Persians , who then began to advance on Athens . The Peloponnesian Allies prepared to now defend the Isthmus of Corinth , thus abandoning Athens to the Persians . From Artemisium , the Allied fleet sailed to the island of Salamis , where the Athenian ships helped with the final evacuation of Athens . The Peloponnesian contingents wanted to sail to the coast of the Isthmus to concentrate forces with the army . However , Themistocles tried to convince them to remain in the Straits of Salamis , invoking the lessons of Artemisium ; " battle in close conditions works to our advantage " . After threatening to sail with the whole Athenian people into exile in Sicily , he eventually persuaded the other Allies , whose security after all relied on the Athenian navy , to accept his plan . Therefore , even after Athens had fallen to the Persians , and the Persian navy had arrived off the coast of Salamis , the Allied navy remained in the Straits . Themistocles appears to have been aiming to fight a battle that would cripple the Persian navy , and thus guarantee the security of the Peloponnesus . 
 To bring about this battle , Themistocles used a cunning mix of subterfuge and misinformation , psychologically exploiting Xerxes 's desire to finish the invasion . Xerxes 's actions indicate that he was keen to finish the conquest of Greece in 480 BC , and to do this , he needed a decisive victory over the Allied fleet . Themistocles sent a servant , Sicinnus , to Xerxes , with a message proclaiming that Themistocles was " on king 's side and prefers that your affairs prevail , not the Hellenes " . Themistocles claimed that the Allied commanders were infighting , that the Peloponnesians were planning to evacuate that very night , and that to gain victory all the Persians needed to do was to block the straits . In performing this subterfuge , Themistocles seems to have been trying to lure the Persian fleet into the Straits . The message also had a secondary purpose , namely that in the event of an Allied defeat , the Athenians would probably receive some degree of mercy from Xerxes ( having indicated their readiness to submit ) . At any rate , this was exactly the kind of news that Xerxes wanted to hear . Xerxes evidently took the bait , and the Persian fleet was sent out to effect the block . Perhaps overconfident and expecting no resistance , the Persian navy sailed into the Straits , only to find that , far from disintegrating , the Allied navy was ready for battle . 
 According to Herodotus , after the Persian navy began its maneuvers , Aristides arrived at the Allied camp from Aegina . Aristides had been recalled from exile along with the other ostracised Athenians on the order of Themistocles , so that Athens might be united against the Persians . Aristides told Themistocles that the Persian fleet had encircled the Allies , which greatly pleased Themistocles , as he now knew that the Persians had walked into his trap . The Allied commanders seem to have taken this news rather <unk> , and Holland therefore suggests that they were party to Themistocles 's ruse all along . Either way , the Allies prepared for battle , and Themistocles delivered a speech to the marines before they embarked on the ships . In the ensuing battle , the cramped conditions in the Straits hindered the much larger Persian navy , which became disarrayed , and the Allies took advantage to win a famous victory . 
 Salamis was the turning point in the second Persian invasion , and indeed the Greco @-@ Persian Wars in general . While the battle did not end the Persian invasion , it effectively ensured that all Greece would not be conquered , and allowed the Allies to go on the offensive in 479 BC . A number of historians believe that Salamis is one of the most significant battles in human history . Since Themistocles ' long @-@ standing advocacy of Athenian naval power enabled the Allied fleet to fight , and his stratagem brought about the Battle of Salamis , it is probably not an exaggeration to say , as Plutarch does , that Themistocles , " ... is thought to have been the man most instrumental in achieving the salvation of Hellas . " 
