 = = = Broadcasting = = = 
 Tokyo Tower , a member of the World Federation of Great Towers , is utilized by many organizations for various broadcasting purposes . The structure was originally intended for broadcasting television , but radio antennas were installed in 1961 because it could accommodate them . The tower now broadcasts analog television , digital television , radio and digital radio . Stations that use the tower 's antenna include : 
 NHK General TV Tokyo ( JOAK @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 1 ( Analog ) 
 NHK Educational TV Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 2 ( Analog ) 
 NHK Radio FM Tokyo ( JOAK @-@ FM ) : 82 @.@ 5 @-@ MHz 
 NHK Radio 1 AM Tokyo ( JOAK @-@ AM ) : 594 @-@ KHz 
 NHK Radio 2 AM Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ AM ) : 693 @-@ KHz 
 TV Asahi Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : TV Asahi Analog Television / VHF Channel 10 ( Analog ) 
 Fuji Television Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : Fuji Television Analog / VHF Channel 8 ( Analog ) 
 Tokyo Broadcasting System Television ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : TBS Television / VHF Channel 6 ( Analog ) 
 Nippon Television Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 4 ( Analog ) 
 TV Tokyo ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 12 ( Analog ) 
 J @-@ WAVE ( <unk> @-@ FM ) : 81 @.@ 3 @-@ MHz 
 Tokyo FM ( <unk> @-@ FM ) : 80 @.@ 0 @-@ MHz 
 FM <unk> ( <unk> @-@ FM ) : 76 @.@ 1 @-@ MHz 
 The University of the Air TV ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 16 ( Analog ) 
 The University of the Air @-@ FM ( <unk> @-@ FM ) : 77 @.@ 1 @-@ MHz 
 Tokyo Metropolitan Television ( <unk> @-@ TV ) : VHF Channel 14 ( Analog ) 
 Nikkei Radio Broadcasting Relay Antenna ( <unk> @-@ SW ) : 3 @.@ 925 @-@ MHz 
 Japan currently employs both analog and digital broadcasting , but by July 2011 all television broadcasting is to be digital . Tokyo Tower is not a reliable broadcasting antenna for completely digital broadcasting because the tower is not tall enough to transmit the higher frequency waves needed to areas surrounded by forests or high @-@ rise buildings . As an alternative , a new 634 @-@ metre @-@ tall ( 2 @,@ 080 ft ) tower called the Tokyo Skytree was opened in 2012 . To make Tokyo Tower more appealing to NHK and five other commercial broadcasters who plan to move their transmitting stations to the new tower , Nihon Denpatō officials drafted a plan to extend its digital broadcasting antenna by 80 to 100 metres at a cost of approximately ¥ 4 billion ( US $ 50 million ) . Because these plans have not been realized , Tokyo Tower is expected to stop transmitting digital TV radio waves with the exception of Open University of Japan , who will continue to broadcast through the tower . FM radio stations will also continue to utilize the tower for broadcasting in the Tokyo area . Masahiro Kawada , the tower 's planning director , also pointed out the possibility of the tower becoming a backup for the Tokyo Skytree , depending on what the TV broadcasters want or need . 
 The tip of the antenna was damaged on March 11 , 2011 as a result of the Tōhoku earthquake . On July 19 , 2012 , the Tokyo Tower 's height shrank to 315 meters while the top antenna was repaired for damage sustained during the earthquake . 
 = = = Attractions = = = 
 = = = = FootTown = = = = 
 Located in the base of the tower is a 4 @-@ story building known as FootTown . The first floor includes the Aquarium Gallery , a reception hall , the 400 @-@ person @-@ capacity " Tower Restaurant " , a <unk> convenience store and a souvenir shop . This floor 's main attractions , however , are the three elevators that serve as a direct ride to the Main Observatory . The second floor is primarily a food and shopping area . In addition to the five standalone restaurants , the second floor 's food court consists of four restaurants , including a McDonald 's and a Pizza @-@ La . 
 FootTown 's third and fourth floors house several tourist attractions . The third floor is home to the Guinness World Records Museum Tokyo , a museum that houses life @-@ size figures , photo panels and memorabilia depicting interesting records that have been authenticated by the Guinness Book . The Tokyo Tower Wax Museum , opened in 1970 , displays wax figures imported from London where they were made . The figures on display range from pop culture icons such as The Beatles to religious figures such as Jesus Christ . A hologram gallery named the Gallery <unk> , a lounge and a few specialty stores are also located on this floor . Tokyo Tower 's Trick Art Gallery is located on the building 's fourth and final floor . This gallery displays optical illusions , including paintings and objects that visitors can interact with . 
 On the roof of the FootTown building is a small amusement park that contains several small rides and hosts live performances for children . On weekends and holidays , visitors can use the roof to access the tower 's outside stairwell . At approximately 660 steps , the stairwell is an alternative to the tower 's elevators and leads directly to the Main Observatory . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 Tokyo Tower requires a total of 28 @,@ 000 litres ( 7 @,@ 400 US gal ) of paint to completely paint the structure white and international orange , complying with air safety regulations . Before the tower 's 30th anniversary in 1987 , the only lighting on the tower were light bulbs located on the corner contours that extended from the base to the antenna . In the spring of 1987 , Nihon Denpatō invited lighting designer Motoko Ishii to visit the tower . Since its opening 30 years earlier , the tower 's annual ticket sales had dropped significantly , and in a bid to revitalize the tower and again establish it as an important tourist attraction and symbol of Tokyo , Ishii was hired to redesign Tokyo Tower 's lighting arrangement . 
 Unveiled in 1989 , the new lighting arrangement required the removal of the contour @-@ outlining light bulbs and the installation of 176 floodlights in and around the tower 's frame . From dusk to midnight , the floodlights illuminate the entire tower . Sodium vapor lamps are used from October 2 to July 6 to cover the tower in an orange color . From July 7 to October 1 , the lights are changed to metal halide lamps to illuminate the tower with a white color . The reasoning behind the change is a seasonal one . Ishii reasoned that orange is a warmer color and helps to offset the cold winter months . Conversely , white is thought a cool color that helps during the hot summer months . 
 Occasionally , Tokyo Tower 's lighting is changed to specific , unique arrangements for special events . The tower is specially lit for some annual events . Since 2000 , the entire tower has been illuminated in a pink light on October 1 to highlight the beginning of National Breast Cancer Awareness Month . The tower has also had a variety of special lighting arrangements for Christmas since 1994 . During New Year 's Eve , the tower lights up at midnight with a year number displayed on one side of the observatory to mark the arrival of the new year . Special Japanese events have also been cause to light the tower in several nontraditional ways . In 2002 , alternating sections of the tower were lit blue to help celebrate the opening of the FIFA World Cup in Japan . Alternating sections of the tower were lit green on Saint Patrick 's Day in 2007 to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Japanese @-@ Irish relations . On a few occasions , Tokyo Tower has even been specially lit to correspond with corporate events . For example , the top half of the tower was lit green to correspond with the Japanese premiere of The Matrix Reloaded and different sections of the tower were lit red , white and black to commemorate the first day of sales of Coca @-@ Cola C2 . The tower was also uniquely lit for the new millennium in 2000 with Motoko Ishii again reprising her role as the designer . In December 2008 , Nihon Denpatō spent $ 6 @.@ 5 million to create a new nighttime illumination scheme — titled the " Diamond Veil " — to celebrate the tower 's 50th anniversary . The arrangement featured 276 lights in seven colors equally distributed across the towers four faces . 
 When employing specialty lighting on the tower , the Main Observatory often plays an important role . During the second international " White Band Day " on September 10 , 2005 , the tower was completely unlit except for the Main Observatory , which was lit with a bright white light . The resulting white ring represented the White Band referenced in the day 's name . The two floors of windows that make up the exterior of the Main Observatory are utilized to display words or numbers . When the tower employed unique lighting to commemorate terrestrial digital broadcasting first being available in the Kantō region on December 1 , 2005 , each side of the Main Observatory displayed the characters <unk> ( chi <unk> , an abbreviation for <unk> <unk> <unk> hōsō terrestrial digital broadcasting ) . More recently , the observatory displayed both " TOKYO " and " 2016 " to stress Tokyo 's 2016 Olympic bid . Primitive images , such as hearts , have also been displayed using the observatory 's windows . 
 = = Mascots = = 
 The Tokyo Tower has two mascots named <unk> . They are two brothers : Older Brother , who wears blue dungarees , and Younger Brother , who wears red dungarees . They were " born " on December 23 , 1998 to celebrate the 40th anniversary of the Tokyo Tower . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Just as the Eiffel Tower is often used in popular culture to immediately locate a scene in Paris , France , the Tokyo Tower is often used in the same way for Tokyo . It is used in anime and manga such as Tokyo Magnitude 8 @.@ 0 , Magic Knight Rayearth , Please Save My Earth , Cardcaptor Sakura , Digimon , Detective Conan , Sailor Moon , and Death Note . The tower is also frequently used in the Japanese kaiju ( giant monster ) film genre . It has been the location of the climactic battles between Godzilla , Mothra and King Kong ( King Kong Escapes ) wherein it is frequently destroyed and rebuilt . Based on the popular manga series by <unk> <unk> , the 2005 film Always <unk> no <unk> was a nostalgic view of life in the neighbourhoods under the construction of the Tokyo Tower . 
 The Japanese culture and lifestyle television show Begin <unk> aired on NHK World , featuring a full episode on Tokyo Tower in 2008 . 
 = Camping ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " Camping " is the eighth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 38th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 24 , 2011 . In the episode , the parks department goes on a camping trip to think of a way to follow up on the harvest festival , but Leslie struggles to come up with an idea . Meanwhile , Chris returns to Pawnee as the new city manager , as Ann continues trying to cope with their recent break @-@ up . 
 The episode was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Rob Schrab . It marked the reappearance of Rob Lowe , who was originally expected to depart the show after the episode " Indianapolis " after a recurring guest role , but instead joined the regular cast . " Camping " featured guest appearances by Phil Reeves as outgoing city manager Paul and Annie O 'Donnell as the owner of a bed and breakfast . 
 Prior to the episode 's broadcast , Rashida Jones said she liked the new storylines that had developed for Ann Perkins ' character , preferring that she remain single than simply get back together with Chris . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Camping " was seen by 5 @.@ 15 million household viewers , a 39 percent increase from the previous episode , " Harvest Festival " . The episode received generally positive reviews , with several commentators praising Jones ' performance and the new direction her character was taking . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During a press conference about the success of the recent Pawnee harvest festival , city manager Paul ( Phil Reeves ) suffers a massive heart attack . Chris ( Rob Lowe ) accepts an offer to work as acting city manager while Paul recovers from bypass surgery . Chris requests of Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) more large @-@ scale ideas to generate revenue , placing pressure on her to follow up the harvest festival , so she organizes a camping trip for the parks department to discuss ideas . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) feels awkward now that Chris is back ; the two previously dated , but Chris broke up with Ann in such a friendly manner that she did not initially realize it was a break @-@ up . Leslie invites Ann to the camping trip to help her feel better . 
 Nobody except Leslie really cares about the trip : Ron ( Nick Offerman ) just wants to fish , Ben ( Adam Scott ) failed to bring a tent , and Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) just wants to relax in his huge tent filled with luxury electronic items . Tom expresses confusion as to why Ben , a state auditor who had been helping with Pawnee 's financial problems , has not returned to his old job at Indianapolis ; Ben does not explain his reasons , but it is hinted he harbors romantic feelings for Leslie . Meanwhile , Andy ( Chris Pratt ) sets up a romantic tent for April ( Aubrey Plaza ) in the wrong campsite miles away , forcing him to trek through the wilderness to find everyone and leaving April miserable on the campsite without Andy . During brainstorming sessions , nobody produces any good ideas because they assume Leslie will think of one . However , she worriedly confides to Ann and Ben she cannot think of anything on the same level of the harvest festival . 
 Chris pays a visit during his nightly jog , and Ann leaves with him so they can clear the air . Over dinner , Chris once again acts so optimistic while discussing the break @-@ up that Ann thinks their relationship is back on and tries to kiss him , severely embarrassing her . Meanwhile , the camping trip proves unsuccessful and everybody decides to go home that night , but they are left without transportation because Tom and Ben have hooked all of their electronics to the van 's battery , draining it . Everybody hikes to a strange bed and breakfast filled with cats and dolls called The Quiet Corn , run by a strict old lady named Elsa Clack ( Annie O 'Donnell ) . Andy arrives and rebuilds the romantic tent in the yard for a flattered April . Leslie tells Ron about her mental block , worrying she will never again reproduce an idea better than harvest festival . Ron , recognizing how burnt out she is , solves Leslie 's problem by locking her in a bedroom and ordering her to get some sleep . With a rare full night 's sleep energizing her , Leslie wakes up with numerous big ideas that are well received by Chris . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Camping " was written by Aisha Muharrar and directed by Rob Schrab . It featured a guest appearance by Phil Reeves , who has played Pawnee township manager Paul Iaresco in several episodes dating back to the first season episode " Canvassing " . Paul 's departure from that position is used as a means to reintroduce Rob Lowe 's character , Chris Traeger . Lowe was originally expected to be a guest star departing from the show after the episode " Indianapolis " . However , after his original string of episodes were filmed , Lowe was signed as a permanent Parks and Recreation cast member , prompting the writers to find a way to reintroduce the character to the series . " Camping " also featured a guest appearance by New York @-@ based actress Annie O 'Donnell as Elsa Clack , owner of The Quiet Corn . 
 Prior to the episode 's broadcast , Rashida Jones said she liked the new storylines that had developed for Ann Perkins ' character , preferring that she remain single than simply get back together with Chris : " It was pretty embarrassing what Ann went through , so I think she kind of has to recover from that before anything else . And this is a good time for Ann to be single too , because she hasn 't been single ever on the show . I think she needs to do that a little bit . " Shortly after " Camping " first aired , a fake website for the bed and breakfast business The Quiet Corn was put up on the official NBC website , advertising the fictional establishment 's features , room amenities and meal services . During one scene in " Camping " , Tom refers to one of the gadgets in his tent as DJ Roomba , an iPod music player attached to an autonomous robotic vacuum cleaner . The gadget , built by Tom , was previously featured in the second season episode " Sweetums " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Tom fills his tent with electronics and other extravagant items from Sky Mall , a chain of luxury item retail stores . He nicknames the tent " The Thunderdome " , named after the gladiator arena in the action film Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome ( 1985 ) . While watching TV inside his tent , Tom claims to be recording the Food Network show Cupcake Wars , the CBS police procedural drama NCIS : Los Angeles and the sixth season of the Bravo reality series Top Chef . Later , while pitching his idea for a Pawnee amphitheatre , Tom expresses hope it would entice performances from such rappers as Lil Wayne , Drake and Jay @-@ Z. 
 While searching for inspiration for an idea , Leslie reads from her dream journal and recalls a dream where she happily married ALF , the alien protagonist of a science fiction sitcom of the same name . Later , Leslie listens to the Len song " Steal My Sunshine " , which she calls a one @-@ hit wonder and compares to her own lack of ability to come up with a second idea . Ben cheers Leslie up and compliments her work ethic by calling her the " Energizer Bunny of city government . " During a later scene , Tom mockingly calls Ben the " white Urkel " , a reference to the archetype nerd character Steve Urkel from the comedy series Family Matters . Donna can be seen reading a book called Your <unk> Zones . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Camping " was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 15 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 3 @.@ 0 rating / 5 share among all viewers and a 2 @.@ 4 rating / 7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It constituted a 39 percent increase from the previous episode , " Harvest Festival " , which was seen by 4 @.@ 08 million household viewers , a low for the season . Parks and Recreation was defeated in its 9 : 30 p.m. timeslot by the ABC medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , which was seen by an average 10 @.@ 1 million households ; the Fox crime drama Bones , which was seen by 8 @.@ 78 million households ; and CBS coverage of NCAA basketball , which was seen by 6 @.@ 82 million household . In network television , it beat only a repeat of the CW Network drama Nikita , which drew 1 @.@ 397 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Camping " received generally positive reviews , with several commentators praising the performance of Rashida Jones and the new comedic direction her character was taking . Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com praised how the script featured the entire ensemble cast together , rather than in separate subplots like recent episodes . He also enjoyed the developments with Ann 's character , claiming it gave Jones more opportunities to shine than past episodes . Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis said she particularly enjoyed the jokes involving Jerry 's character , and said she enjoyed that Ann once again misinterpreted Chris , although she said the joke was predictable . Zap2it writer Rick Porter said the episode was not as funny as the previous episode , " Harvest Festival " , but said " if this is what qualifies as a ( slightly ) down episode for the show , then that 's the sign of a comedy that 's hitting for a very high average " . He particularly praised the " fantastic dynamic " that has developed between Rashida Jones and Rob Lowe . TV Squad writer Joel Keller said the camping trip was a good way to avoid making the show feel stale following " Harvest Festival " , and that the outdoors setting created strong potential for character @-@ driven jokes by putting them out of their elements . 
 Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club praised the episode for highlighting each of its characters , all of whom he said were at their best except for April , who he said seemed out of place in the camping storyline . He also said he was glad Ann 's recent breakup with Chris " has allowed her true colors to shine through " . Matt Richenthal of TV Fanatic called it a " tremendously enjoyable episode " and " mostly just a chance to sit back and spend time with these goofy , lovable individuals " . He praised the new storyline for Ann Perkins , claiming it created more comedic potential for Jones . Matt Fowler of IGN praised the performance of Rashida Jones and Chris Pratt , and called Leslie 's stress over failing to come up with a new idea a " great little story " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix said " Camping " was not as funny as previous third season episodes but was still an enjoyable episode that he found more " slow and contemplative " , which he found indicative of the fact that the series was still on a strong track . 
 Steve Kandell of New York magazine compared it to the second season episode " Hunting Trip " , but said " Camping " was " somewhat more of a placeholder " . Kandell compared the characters ' pressure to meet the city 's expectations to those the show faces now that they have been renewed for a fourth season . ChicagoNow writer Andy Daglas called it " a fun episode , but also one that felt like sort of a pause , a chance to reset the pins " . He compared the pressure on Leslie to come up with an idea on the harvest festival to pressure on the show 's writing staff to follow up on the harvest festival story arc . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow called it funny and charming , but also a low point in the season following seven excellent episodes . He said it depended too much on the show 's romantic relationships , which he feels are growing stale , although he praised Rashida Jones 's performance and the focus on the strong platonic relationship between Leslie and Ron . 
 = Tiffany Doggett = 
 Tiffany " Pennsatucky " Doggett is a fictional character in the Netflix series Orange Is the New Black , portrayed by Taryn Manning . Manning was offered the role without needing to audition . The character of Doggett is based on a real life prisoner ; a " young woman from western Pennsylvania who proudly called herself a redneck " . She is originally from Waynesboro , Virginia . Prior to her imprisonment , she is shown to be exchanging sexual favours for soda or money . Doggett is also known to have had five abortions . She is charged with shooting an abortion doctor and decides to hire a Christian lawyer ; this leads to Doggett becoming a born @-@ again Christian . 
 Doggett makes her first appearance in the fifth episode of the first season and is initially an antagonist . In her debut episode , she unsuccessfully attempts to hang up a cross in the prison chapel and expresses homophobic views . She has conflict with Alex Vause and Piper Chapman throughout the first season . In the second season , Doggett 's storyline revolves around her friendships with Sam Healy and Carrie " Big Boo " Black . This friendship with Big Boo continues into the third season . Big Boo comforts Doggett when she is feeling remorse for her abortions and when she is raped by a correctional officer . The character of Doggett has received mixed reviews from critics , though Manning 's performance has received positive feedback . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 Tiffany Doggett 's nickname " Pennsatucky " is derived from <unk> ; a pejorative term for the people from the rural western and central parts of Pennsylvania . The author , Piper Kerman , of the book , Orange Is the New Black : My Year in a Women 's Prison , which inspired Orange is the New Black describes the real life version of Pennsatucky as " a young woman from western Pennsylvania who proudly called herself a redneck " . Kerman further describes her as someone addicted to crack cocaine and dealing with the loss of custody of her child . 
 Taryn Manning , already an established actress , did not have to audition for the role of Doggett and was offered it . Manning , when speaking about this to Joshua Rotter of Download.com , said that she immediately accepted the offer " I loved it and didn 't need to look any further . I was sold . " To prepare for the role , Manning did some research on faith healing and evangelistic ceremonies . She also states that her inspiration for Doggett at least partly comes from the White family in the 2009 documentary film The Wild and Wonderful Whites of West Virginia . The only make @-@ up that Manning wears for her role as Doggett , in the first season , is on her teeth to create the effect of receding gums and missing teeth . From the second season onwards , however , Doggett has false teeth in place and so the teeth seen are Manning 's own . 
 = = Fictional background = = 
 Doggett is from Waynesboro , Virginia . After Doggett has her first period , her mother gives her advice about sex : " go on and let them [ referring to men ] do their business . " This leads to her , later in life , to have sex with men in exchange for soda or money . Her perspective of sex changes when she meets Nathan . Jonathon <unk> , of Entertainment Weekly writes " [ Nathan ] wants them both to enjoy the experience [ of sex ] , and it opens Tiffany 's perception of relationships . " Nathan and his family move away , causing their relationship to end , and , almost immediately afterwards , Doggett is raped by an ex @-@ boyfriend . 
 Doggett has had five abortions . After having her fifth abortion , which takes place at an abortion clinic in <unk> , Virginia , the nurse remarks " we should give you a punch card , get the sixth one free . " Doggett is so offended by this joke that she shoots the nurse with a shotgun . She agrees to have a Christian lawyer as it was likely to lead to a lighter sentence and her legal bills being paid for . Since she shot an abortion nurse , she became a ' hero ' of the pro @-@ life movement . Although her Christian faith was initially fake , at some point Doggett did become a Christian ; this was confirmed by Manning in an interview . Manning describes Doggett 's faith as " a hybrid of Christianity , Baptism , Presbyterian " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Doggett first appears in the fifth episode . She wishes to hang up a cross in Litchfield Penitentiary 's chapel but is refused permission . She ignores this and hangs her cross up on a light fixture ; this causes the entire fixture to fall down and hence damages the chapel 's ceiling . She also displays transphobia ; calling the transgender woman Sophia <unk> ( played by Laverne Cox ) an ' abomination ' and ' it ' and blaming her for the damage to the chapel . Doggett has numerous clashes with Alex Vause ( played by Laura <unk> ) ; firstly Vause threatens to rape Doggett after growing tired of her complaining about Piper Chapman ( played by Taylor Schilling ) ; Doggett locks Vause in a dryer while she is helping Chapman to fix it and , lastly , Doggett <unk> on Chapman and Vause for dancing provocatively with each other ; resulting in Chapman being placed in solitary confinement . 
 Chapman and Vause get revenge on Doggett and trick her into believing that she has faith healing powers , eventually culminating in her being sent to the psychiatric ward . Although Chapman aids in Doggett 's release from the psychiatric ward , Doggett still bears a grudge against her . Doggett 's lawyer encourages her to evangelize to Chapman instead and this leads to Chapman ' converting ' but then refusing to be baptized . Doggett sees this as disrespectful and expresses a wish to kill Chapman . The two have a confrontation at the end of the season 's final episode . Doggett attacks Chapman with a shiv made from a wooden cross ; Chapman throws Doggett to the ground and hits her repeatedly . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 It is revealed in the third episode that Suzanne Warren ( played by Uzo Aduba ) is also involved in the fight at the end of season one . She punches Chapman in the face twice and knocks her unconscious ( Doggett is already unconscious at this stage ) . This gives the impression that Doggett and Chapman were evenly matched and therefore equally responsible . Following Doggett 's return to full health , she finds that her previous best friends , Leanne Taylor ( played by Emma Myles ) and Angie Rice ( played by Julie Lake ) , no longer want to be associated with her . This leaves Doggett seeking prison counsellor Sam Healy ( played by Michael J. Harney ) for comfort . 
 Following her friendships with Taylor and Rice continuing to deteriorate , Doggett forms friendships with Healy and Carrie " Big Boo " Black ( played by Lea <unk> ) . Healy and Doggett unite to form " Safe Place " , a therapy group where prisoners can share their feelings in a confidential and supportive environment . " Safe Place " is short @-@ lived , however , and Healy decides to cancel the group indefinitely after Doggett fails to attend one of the sessions ; when he investigates her reason for non @-@ attendance , he finds her getting a hair cut from <unk> . Doggett initially talks to Big Boo , an openly lesbian inmate , during a blackout in the prison as she believes that there is a secret ' gay agenda ' and she believes that Big Boo will give her the answers that she is seeking . Doggett 's physical appearance also changes in this season ; she has white false teeth , neater hair and her skin looks smoother . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 In the first episode , Big Boo and Doggett 's friendship continues to develop . Seeing that Doggett bears strong feelings of guilt relating to the six abortions that she has had , Big Boo makes reference to the book Freakonomics , which suggests that crime rates in the 1990s fell because of Roe v. Wade . Following Lorna Morello ( played by Yael Stone ) being relieved of her duty of driving the prison van , the role is given to Doggett . She comes into contact with one of the new correctional officers called Charlie Coates ( played by James McMenamin ) . Coates is initially friendly towards Doggett . Despite relationships between prison staff and prisoners being forbidden , Coates kisses Doggett , against her will , after feeding some ducks . Following another outing , Coates gets in trouble with his boss Joe Caputo ( played by Nick Sandow ) for being late for count and is placed on probation . Doggett apologises for having caused him trouble , and he rapes her in the back of the prison van . 
 When Big Boo learns of the rape , she encourages Doggett to take revenge on Coates by making him unconscious and then raping him with a broomstick . Whilst they successfully drug Coates , neither of them are willing to violate him with the broomstick . In order to end contact with Coates , Doggett fakes a seizure on her next outing with him and is declared unfit for driving a van . She is replaced as prison van driver by another inmate , Maritza Ramos ( played by Diane Guerrero ) . 
 = = Critical commentary = = 
 Doggett was widely perceived to have been the series ' main antagonist in its first season . She was seen to be homophobic and racist ; one Cosmopolitan critic described her as ' vile ' . A critic for TV Insider described the first season Doggett as " terrifying , manipulative and so entirely unlikable " but also " hypnotic to watch " . Horatia Harrod 's review in the Daily Telegraph described Manning 's portrayal of Doggett as " brilliantly unhinged " . Other critics have praised the character , especially in the final episode of season one ; calling her " fantastic " , a " solid character " and " one of the best characters on the show " . Some also felt that Manning 's performance was worthy of an Emmy nomination . 
 Following the release of the first season of Orange is the New Black , Doggett received some criticism from different media . Writing for The American Conservative , B. D. McClay claimed that Doggett was a poor and inaccurate representation of American Christians ; " Pennsatucky is such an aggressively terrible character " and " her faith is neither well @-@ understood nor well @-@ drawn " . Laura Leonard of Christianity Today , supports Clay 's view and goes further to say " it was frustrating to see this one painful narrative represent Christian faith on <unk> , a show that masters other aspects of the melting pot so well " , speaking about Doggett 's background story and conflict with Chapman . Two critics for The A.V. Club also gave negative reviews of Doggett ; Todd VanDerWerff says that " Pennsatucky never really comes together as a character in the same way as some of the others on the show " and Myles McNutt opted to criticize the storyline of the final episode of the first season specifically , saying that it " [ treats ] her like a cartoon villain instead of a real character " . Betsy <unk> @-@ Wright accused the series ' creators of classism and said that Doggett was an " outrageous Redneck stereotype " . 
 Doggett 's rape storyline in the third season garnered much reaction , both positive and negative . Jada Yuan of Vulture described the rape scenes ( both the one in the flashback and the one involving correctional officer Coates ) as " heartbreaking " and praised episode director Jesse Peretz 's decision to keep the camera focused on Manning during the scenes . Megan Vick praised the ' transformation ' of the character of Doggett , calling it " the season ’ s breakout storyline and performance " . McNutt , who had been critical of Doggett in the first season , spoke positively about the rape storyline . 
 Marissa Higgins , writing for <unk> , contended that the show " didn 't accomplish anything with their portrayal of sexual assault " and said that she disliked the way that the story ended with Doggett effectively quitting her job as van driver in order to avoid further contact with Coates . Emma Eisenberg , of Salon , criticized the scenes depicting Doggett growing up in Waynesboro , as being " riddled with excessive Appalachian clichés " . She went further by calling Doggett 's mother unrealistic in her attitude towards sex : " the mothers I met [ near Waynesboro ] wanted their daughters to understand sex and to make informed choices " . Eisenberg claimed that , therefore , Doggett 's mother 's speech about sex − " it ’ s like a bee sting , in and out , over before you knew it was happening " − was not representative of people in Waynesboro at that time . Chloe Stillwell completely disagreed with Eisenberg and insisted that the character of Doggett was realistic : " Eisenberg 's argument completely misses the point that perhaps the show is trying to be as real as possible , and acknowledging that there are real life <unk> in this world isn 't to disenfranchise Appalachia . " 
 = Victoria Cross = 
 The Victoria Cross ( VC ) is the highest award of the United Kingdom honours system . It is awarded for gallantry " in the face of the enemy " to members of the British armed forces . It may be awarded posthumously . It was previously awarded to Commonwealth countries , most of which have established their own honours systems and no longer recommend British honours . It may be awarded to a person of any military rank in any service and to civilians under military command although no civilian has received the award since 1879 . Since the first awards were presented by Queen Victoria in 1857 , two thirds of all awards have been personally presented by the British monarch . These investitures are usually held at Buckingham Palace . 
 The VC was introduced on 29 January 1856 by Queen Victoria to honour acts of valour during the Crimean War . Since then , the medal has been awarded 1 @,@ 358 times to 1 @,@ 355 individual recipients . Only 15 medals , 11 to members of the British Army , and four to the Australian Army , have been awarded since the Second World War . The traditional explanation of the source of the metal from which the medals are struck is that it derives from Russian cannon captured at the Siege of Sevastopol . Some research suggested a variety of origins for the material actually making up the medals themselves . Research has established that the metal for the medals came from two Chinese cannons that were captured from the Russians in 1855 . 
 Owing to its rarity , the VC is highly prized and the medal has fetched over £ 400 @,@ 000 at auction . A number of public and private collections are devoted to the Victoria Cross . The private collection of Lord Ashcroft , amassed since 1986 , contains over one @-@ tenth of all VCs awarded . Following a 2008 donation to the Imperial War Museum , the Ashcroft collection went on public display alongside the museum 's Victoria and George Cross collection in November 2010 . 
 Beginning with the Centennial of Confederation in 1967 , Canada followed in 1975 by Australia and New Zealand developed their own national honours systems , separate and independent of the British or Imperial honours system . As each country 's system evolved , operational gallantry awards were developed with the premier award of each system , the VC for Australia , the Canadian VC and the VC for New Zealand being created and named in honour of the Victoria Cross . These are unique awards of each honours system , recommended , assessed , gazetted and presented by each country . 
 = = Origin = = 
 In 1854 , after 39 years of peace , Britain found itself fighting a major war against Russia . The Crimean War was one of the first wars with modern reporting , and the dispatches of William Howard Russell described many acts of bravery and valour by British servicemen that went unrewarded . 
 Before the Crimean War , there was no official standardised system for recognition of gallantry within the British armed forces . Officers were eligible for an award of one of the junior grades of the Order of the Bath and brevet promotions while a Mention in Despatches existed as an alternative award for acts of lesser gallantry . This structure was very limited ; in practice awards of the Order of the Bath were confined to officers of field rank . Brevet promotions or Mentions in Despatches were largely confined to those who were under the immediate notice of the commanders in the field , generally members of the commander 's own staff . 
 Other European countries had awards that did not discriminate against class or rank ; France awarded the Légion d 'honneur ( Legion of Honour , established 1802 ) and The Netherlands gave the Order of William ( established in 1815 ) . There was a growing feeling among the public and in the Royal Court that a new award was needed to recognise incidents of gallantry that were unconnected with a man 's lengthy or meritorious service . Queen Victoria issued a Warrant under the Royal sign @-@ manual on 29 January 1856 ( gazetted 5 February 1856 ) that officially constituted the VC . The order was backdated to 1854 to recognise acts of valour during the Crimean War . 
 Queen Victoria had instructed the War Office to strike a new medal that would not recognise birth or class . The medal was meant to be a simple decoration that would be highly prized and eagerly sought after by those in the military services . To maintain its simplicity , Queen Victoria , under the guidance of Prince Albert , vetoed the suggestion that the award be called The Military Order of Victoria and instead suggested the name Victoria Cross . The original warrant stated that the Victoria Cross would only be awarded to soldiers who have served in the presence of the enemy and had performed some signal act of valour or devotion . The first ceremony was held on 26 June 1857 where Queen Victoria invested 62 of the 111 Crimean recipients in a ceremony in Hyde Park , London . 
 It was originally intended that the VCs would be cast from the cascabels of two cannon that were captured from the Russians at the siege of Sevastopol . In 1990 Creagh and Ashton conducted a metallurgical examination of the VCs in the custody of the Australian War Memorial . Later , the historian John Glanfield , wrote that , through the use of x @-@ ray studies of older Victoria Crosses , it was determined that the metal used for VCs is from antique Chinese guns and not of Russian origin . Theories abound . One theory is that the cannon were originally Chinese weapons but the Russians captured them and deployed them at Sevastopol . However , there had been no hostilities between Russia and China for nearly 200 years before 1855 and no ready explanation of how such cannons would come to be in Sebastopol . They are indeed Chinese cannon : Creagh noted the existence of Chinese inscriptions on the cannon which are now barely legible due to corrosion . A more likely explanation is that these cannons were taken as trophies during Britain 's military intervention in China in the 1840s and held in the Woolwich repository . Whilst it had been suggested that the new medal be made of Sebastopol cannons , the Hancocks employees who went to cut metal picked the Chinese guns instead . There is no evidence that the VC guns have ever been near Sebastopol . It was also thought that some medals made during the First World War were composed of metal captured from different Chinese guns during the Boxer Rebellion . This is not so , however . The VCs examined by Creagh and Ashton both in Australia ( 58 ) and at the QE II Army Memorial Museum in New Zealand ( 14 ) spanned the entire time during which VCs have been issued and no compositional inconsistencies were found . It was also believed that another source of metal was used between 1942 and 1945 to create five Second World War VCs when the Sevastopol metal " went missing " . Creagh accessed the Army records at MoD Donnington in 1991 and did not find any gaps in the custodial record . The composition found in the WW2 VCs , amongst them those for Edwards ( Australia ) and Upham ( New Zealand ) , is similar to that for the early <unk> medals . This is likely to be due to the reuse of material from earlier <unk> , casting sprues , defective medals , etc . 
 The barrels of the cannon in question are on display at Firepower - The Royal Artillery Museum at Woolwich . The remaining portion of the only remaining cascabel , weighing 358 oz ( 10 kg ) , is stored in a vault maintained by 15 Regiment Royal Logistic Corps at MoD Donnington . It can only be removed under armed guard . It is estimated that approximately 80 to 85 more VCs could be cast from this source . A single company of jewellers , Hancocks of London , has been responsible for the production of every VC awarded since its inception . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The decoration is a bronze cross pattée , 1 39 / 64 " ( 41 mm ) high , 1 27 / 64 " ( 36 mm ) wide , bearing the crown of Saint Edward surmounted by a lion , and the inscription FOR VALOUR . This was originally to have been FOR THE BRAVE , until it was changed on the recommendation of Queen Victoria , as it implied that not all men in battle were brave . The decoration , suspension bar and link weigh about 0 @.@ 87 troy ounces ( 27 g ) . 
 The cross is suspended by a ring from a seriffed " V " to a bar ornamented with laurel leaves , through which the ribbon passes . The reverse of the suspension bar is engraved with the recipient 's name , rank , number and unit . On the reverse of the medal is a circular panel on which the date of the act for which it was awarded is engraved in the centre . 
 The Original Warrant Clause 1 states that the Victoria Cross " shall consist of a Maltese cross of bronze " . Nonetheless , it has always been a cross pattée ; the discrepancy with the Warrant has never been corrected . 
 The ribbon is crimson , 1 1 / 2 " ( 38 mm ) wide . The original ( 1856 ) specification for the award stated that the ribbon should be red for army recipients and dark blue for naval recipients . However the dark blue ribbon was abolished soon after the formation of the Royal Air Force on 1 April 1918 . On 22 May 1920 King George V signed a warrant that stated all recipients would now receive a red ribbon and the living recipients of the naval version were required to exchange their ribbons for the new colour . Although the army warrants state the colour as being red it is defined by most commentators as being crimson or " wine @-@ red " . 
 = = Award process = = 
 The Victoria Cross is awarded for 
 ... most conspicuous bravery , or some daring or pre @-@ eminent act of valour or self @-@ sacrifice , or extreme devotion to duty in the presence of the enemy . 
 A recommendation for the VC is normally issued by an officer at regimental level , or equivalent , and has to be supported by three witnesses , although this has been waived on occasion . The recommendation is then passed up the military hierarchy until it reaches the Secretary of State for Defence . The recommendation is then laid before the monarch who approves the award with his or her signature . Victoria Cross awards are always promulgated in the London Gazette with the single exception of the award to the American Unknown Soldier in 1921 . The Victoria Cross warrant makes no specific provision as to who should actually present the medals to the recipients . Queen Victoria indicated that she would like to present the medals in person and she presented 185 medals out of the 472 gazetted during her reign . Including the first 62 medals presented at a parade in Hyde Park on 26 June 1857 by Queen Victoria , nearly 900 awards have been personally presented to the recipient by the reigning British monarch . Nearly 300 awards have been presented by a member of the royal family or by a civil or military dignitary . About 150 awards were either forwarded to the recipient or next of kin by registered post or no details of the presentations are known . 
 The original Royal Warrant did not contain a specific clause regarding posthumous awards , although official policy was not to award the VC posthumously . Between the Indian Mutiny in 1857 and the beginning of the Second Boer War the names of six officers and men were published in the London Gazette with a memorandum stating they would have been awarded the Victoria Cross had they survived . A further three notices were published in the London Gazette in September 1900 and April 1901 for gallantry in the Second Boer War . In an exception to policy for the South Africa War 1899 – 1902 , six posthumous Victoria Crosses , three to the officers and men mentioned in the notices in 1900 and 1901 and a further three , the first official posthumous awards , were granted on 8 August 1902 . Five years later in 1907 , the posthumous policy was reversed and medals were sent to the next of kin of the six officers and men . The awards were mentioned in notices in the Gazette dating back to the Indian Mutiny . The Victoria Cross warrant was not amended to explicitly allow posthumous awards until 1920 , but one quarter of all awards for World War I were posthumous . Although the 1920 Royal Warrant made provision for awards to women serving in the Armed Forces , no women have been awarded a VC . 
 In the case of a gallant and daring act being performed by a squadron , ship 's company or a detached body of men ( such as marines ) in which all men are deemed equally brave and deserving of the Victoria Cross then a ballot is drawn . The officers select one officer , the NCOs select one individual and the private soldiers or seamen select two individuals . In all 46 awards have been awarded by ballot with 29 of the awards during the Indian Mutiny . Four further awards were granted to Q Battery , Royal Horse Artillery at Korn <unk> on 31 March 1900 during the Second Boer War . The final ballot awards for the army were the six awards to the Lancashire Fusiliers at W Beach during the landing at Gallipoli on 25 April 1915 although three of the awards were not gazetted until 1917 . The final seven ballot awards were the only naval ballot awards with three awards to two Q @-@ Ships in 1917 and four awards for the Zeebrugge Raid in 1918 . The provision for awards by ballot is still included in the Victoria Cross warrant but there have been no further such awards since 1918 . 
 Between 1858 and 1881 the Victoria Cross could be awarded for actions taken " under circumstances of extreme danger " not in the face of the enemy . Six such awards were made during this period — five of them for a single incident during an Expedition to the Andaman Islands in 1867 . In 1881 , the criteria were changed again and the VC was only awarded for acts of valour " in the face of the enemy " . Due to this it has been suggested by many historians including Lord Ashcroft that the changing nature of warfare will result in fewer VCs being awarded . 
 = = = Colonial awards = = = 
 The Victoria Cross was extended to colonial troops in 1867 . The extension was made following a recommendation for gallantry regarding colonial soldier Major Charles Heaphy for action in the New Zealand land wars in 1864 . He was operating under British command and the VC was gazetted in 1867 . Later that year , the Government of New Zealand assumed full responsibility for operations but no further recommendations for the Victoria Cross were raised for local troops who distinguished themselves in action . Following gallant actions by three New Zealand soldiers in November 1868 and January 1869 during the New Zealand land wars , an Order in Council on 10 March 1869 created a " Distinctive Decoration " for members of the local forces without seeking permission from the Secretary of State for the Colonies . Although the governor was chided for exceeding his authority , the Order in Council was ratified by the Queen . The title " Distinctive Decoration " was later replaced by the title New Zealand Cross . 
 The question of whether recommendations could be made for colonial troops not serving with British troops was not asked in New Zealand , but in 1881 , the question was asked in South Africa . Surgeon John McCrea , an officer of the South African forces was recommended for gallantry during hostilities which had not been approved by British Government . He was awarded the Victoria Cross and the principle was established that gallant conduct could be rewarded independently of any political consideration of military operations . More recently , four Australian soldiers were awarded the Victoria Cross in Vietnam although Britain was not involved in the conflict . 
 Indian troops were not originally eligible for the Victoria Cross since they had been eligible for the Indian Order of Merit since 1837 which was the oldest British gallantry award for general issue . When the Victoria Cross was created , Indian troops were still controlled by the Honourable East India Company and did not come under Crown control until 1860 . European officers and men serving with the Honourable East India Company were not eligible for the Indian Order of Merit and the Victoria Cross was extended to cover them in October 1857 . It was only at the end of the 19th century that calls for Indian troops to be awarded the Victoria Cross intensified . Indian troops became eligible for the award in 1911 . The first awards to Indian troops appeared in the London Gazette on 7 December 1914 to <unk> Sing Negi and Khudadad Khan . Negi was presented with the Victoria Cross by King George V during a visit to troops in France . The presentation occurred on 5 December 1914 and he is one of a very few soldiers presented with his award before it appeared in the London Gazette . 
 = = = Separate Commonwealth awards = = = 
 Since the Second World War , most but not all Commonwealth countries have created their own honours systems and no longer participate in the British honours system . This began soon after the Partition of India in 1947 , when the new countries of India and Pakistan introduced their own systems of awards . The VC was replaced by the Param Vir Chakra ( PVC ) and Nishan @-@ e @-@ Haider ( NH ) respectively . Most if not all new honours systems continued to permit recipients of British honours to wear their awards according to the rules of each nation 's order of wear . Sri Lanka , whose defence personnel were eligible to receive the Victoria Cross until 1972 , introduced its own equivalent , the Parama <unk> <unk> medal . Three Commonwealth realms — Australia , Canada and New Zealand — have each introduced their own decorations for gallantry and bravery , replacing British decorations such as the Victoria Cross with their own . The only Commonwealth countries that still can recommend the VC are the small nations , none of whose forces have ever been awarded the VC , that still participate in the British honours system . 
 With effect from 6 April 1952 , when the Union of South Africa instituted its own range of military decorations and medals , these new awards took precedence before all earlier British decorations and medals awarded to South Africans , with the exception of the Victoria Cross , which still took precedence before all other awards . The other older British awards continued to be worn in the order prescribed by the British Central Chancery of the Orders of Knighthood . 
 Australia was the first Commonwealth realm to create its own VC , on 15 January 1991 . Although it is a separate award , its appearance is identical to its British counterpart . Canada followed suit when in 1993 Queen Elizabeth signed Letters Patent creating the Canadian VC , which is also similar to the British version , except that the legend has been changed from FOR VALOUR to the Latin PRO VALORE This language was chosen so as to favour neither French nor English , the two official languages of Canada . New Zealand was the third country to adapt the VC into its own honours system . While the New Zealand and Australian VCs are technically separate awards , the decoration is identical to the British design , including being cast from the same Crimean War gunmetal as the British VC . The Canadian Victoria Cross also includes metal from the same cannon , along with copper and other metals from all regions of Canada . 
 Five of the separate VCs have so far been awarded . Willie Apiata received the Victoria Cross for New Zealand on 2 July 2007 , for his actions in the War in Afghanistan in 2004 . The Victoria Cross for Australia has been awarded four times . Mark Donaldson was awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia on 16 January 2009 for actions during Operation Slipper , the Australian contribution to the War in Afghanistan . Ben Roberts @-@ Smith was awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia on 23 January 2011 for actions in the Shah Wali Kot Offensive , part of the War in Afghanistan . Daniel Keighran was awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia on 1 November 2012 for his actions during the Battle of Derapet in Oruzgan Province , Afghanistan , on 24 August 2010 . A posthumous award was made to Corporal Cameron Baird for actions in Afghanistan in 2013 . A Canadian version has been cast that was originally to be awarded to the Unknown Soldier at the rededication of the Vimy Memorial on 7 April 2007 . This date was chosen as it was the 90th anniversary of the battle of Vimy Ridge but pressure from veterans ' organisations caused the plan to be dropped . 
 = = Authority and privileges = = 
 As the highest award for valour of the United Kingdom , the Victoria Cross is always the first award to be presented at an investiture , even before knighthoods , as was shown at the investiture of Private Johnson <unk> , who received his medal before General Sir Mike Jackson received his knighthood . Owing to its status , the VC is always the first decoration worn in a row of medals and it is the first set of post @-@ nominal letters used to indicate any decoration or order . Similar acts of extreme valour that do not take place in the face of the enemy are honoured with the George Cross , which has equal precedence but is awarded second because the GC is newer . 
 There is a widespread though erroneous belief that it is statutory for " all ranks to salute a bearer of the Victoria Cross " . There is no official requirement that appears in the official Warrant of the VC , nor in Queen 's Regulations and Orders , but tradition dictates that this occurs and as such the Chiefs of Staff will salute a Private awarded a VC or GC . 
 The Victoria Cross was at first worn as the recipient fancied . It was popular to pin it on the left side of the chest over the heart , with other decorations grouped around the VC . The Queen 's Regulations for the Army of 1881 gave clear instructions on how to wear it ; the VC had to follow the badge of the Order of the Indian Empire . In 1900 it was ordained in Dress Regulations for the Army that it should be worn after the cross of a Member of the Royal Victorian Order . It was only in 1902 that King Edward VII gave the cross its present position on a bar brooch . The cross is also worn as a miniature decoration on a brooch or a chain with mess jacket , white tie or black tie . As a bearer of the VC is not a Companion in an Order of Chivalry , the VC has no place in a coat of arms . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The original warrant stated that NCOs and private soldiers or seamen on the Victoria Cross Register were entitled to a £ 10 per annum annuity . In 1898 , Queen Victoria raised the pension to £ 50 for those that could not earn a livelihood , be it from old age or infirmity . Today holders of the Victoria Cross or George Cross are entitled to an annuity , the amount of which is determined by the awarding government . Since 2015 , the annuity paid by the British Government is £ 10 @,@ 000 per year . This is exempted from tax for British taxpayers by Section 638 Income Tax ( Earnings and Pensions ) Act 2003 , along with pensions or annuities from other awards for bravery . In Canada under the Gallantry Awards Order , members of the Canadian Forces or people who joined the British forces before 31 March 1949 while domiciled in Canada or Newfoundland receive Can $ 3 @,@ 000 per year . Under <unk> 103 @.@ 4 of the Veterans ' Entitlements Act 1986 , the Australian Government provides a Victoria Cross Allowance . Until November 2005 the amount was A $ 3 @,@ 230 per year . Since then this amount has been increased annually in line with the Australian Consumer Price Index . 
 = = = Forfeited awards = = = 
 The original Royal Warrant involved an expulsion clause that allowed for a recipient 's name to be erased from the official register in certain wholly discreditable circumstances and his pension cancelled . King George V felt very strongly that the decoration should never be forfeited and in a letter from his Private Secretary , Lord Stamfordham , on 26 July 1920 , his views are forcefully expressed : 
 The King feels so strongly that , no matter the crime committed by anyone on whom the VC has been conferred , the decoration should not be forfeited . Even were a VC to be sentenced to be hanged for murder , he should be allowed to wear his VC on the scaffold . 
 The power to cancel and restore awards is still included in the Victoria Cross warrant but none has been forfeited since 1908 . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 A total of 1 @,@ 358 Victoria Crosses have been awarded since 1856 to 1 @,@ 355 men . There are several statistics related to the greatest number of VCs awarded in individual battles or wars . The greatest number of Victoria Crosses won on a single day is 24 , for deeds performed on 16 November 1857 in Lucknow during the Indian Mutiny . The greatest number won by a single unit during a single action is seven , to the 2nd / 24th Foot , for the defence of Rorke 's Drift , 22 – 23 January 1879 , during the Zulu War . The greatest number won in a single conflict is 628 , being for the First World War . There are only six living holders of the VC — four British , one Australian , one Gurkha — one award for the Second World War and four awards since ; in addition one New Zealander holds the Victoria Cross for New Zealand and four Australians hold the Victoria Cross for Australia . Eight of the then @-@ twelve surviving holders of the Victoria Cross attended the 150th Anniversary service of remembrance at Westminster Abbey on 26 June 2006 . 
 In 1921 the Victoria Cross was given to the American Unknown Soldier of the First World War ( the British Unknown Warrior was reciprocally awarded the US Medal of Honor ) . One VC is in existence that is not counted in any official records . In 1856 , Queen Victoria laid the first Victoria Cross beneath the foundation stone of Netley Military hospital . When the hospital was demolished in 1966 the VC , known as " The Netley VC " , was retrieved and is now on display in the Army Medical Services Museum , Mytchett , near Aldershot . 
 Three people have been awarded the VC and Bar , the bar representing a second award of the VC . They are : Noel Chavasse and Arthur Martin @-@ Leake , both doctors in the Royal Army Medical Corps , for rescuing wounded under fire ; and New Zealander Charles Upham , an infantryman , for combat actions . Upham remains the only combatant soldier to have received a VC and Bar . An Irishman , Surgeon General William Manley , remains the sole recipient of both the Victoria Cross and the Iron Cross . The VC was awarded for his actions during the Waikato @-@ <unk> Maori War , New Zealand on 29 April 1864 while the Iron Cross was awarded for tending the wounded during the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 . Royal New Zealand Air Force Flying Officer Lloyd Trigg has the distinction of being the only serviceman ever awarded a VC on evidence solely provided by the enemy , for an action in which there were no surviving Allied witnesses . The recommendation was made by the captain of the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 468 sunk by Trigg 's aircraft . Lieutenant Commander Gerard Roope was also awarded a VC on recommendation of the enemy , the captain of the Admiral Hipper , but there were also numerous surviving Allied witnesses to corroborate his actions . 
 The St Nazaire Raid or Operation Chariot on 28 March 1942 , a successful British amphibious attack on the heavily defended Normandie dry dock at St Nazaire in German @-@ occupied France , resulted in the award of five Victoria Crosses . 
 Since the end of the Second World War the original VC has been awarded 15 times : four in the Korean War , one in the Indonesia @-@ Malaysia confrontation in 1965 , four to Australians in the Vietnam War , two during the Falklands War in 1982 , one in the Iraq War in 2004 , and three in the War in Afghanistan in 2006 and 2012 . On 18 March 2005 , Lance Sergeant ( then Private ) Johnson <unk> of the 1st Battalion , Princess of Wales 's Royal Regiment became the first recipient of the VC since Sergeant Ian McKay in 1982 . Three VCs have been awarded since then in actions arising form the UK 's involvement in Afghanistan . 
 = = Public sales = = 
 Since 1879 , more than 300 Victoria Crosses have been publicly auctioned or advertised . Others have been privately sold . The value of the VC can be seen by the increasing sums that the medals reach at auction . In 1955 the set of medals awarded to Edmund Barron Hartley was bought at Sotheby 's for the then record price of £ 300 ( approximately £ 7100 in present @-@ day terms ) . In October 1966 the Middlesex Regiment paid a new record figure of £ 900 ( approximately £ <unk> in present @-@ day terms ) for a VC awarded after the Battle of the Somme . In January 1969 , the record reached £ 1700 ( £ <unk> ) for the medal set of William Rennie . In April 2004 the VC awarded in 1944 to Sergeant Norman Jackson , RAF , was sold at auction for £ 235 @,@ 250 . On 24 July 2006 , an auction at Bonhams in Sydney of the VC awarded to Captain Alfred Shout fetched a world record hammer price of A $ 1 million ( approximately £ 410 @,@ 000 at then exchange rates ) . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Several VCs have been stolen and , being valuable , have been placed on the Interpol watch @-@ list for stolen items . The VC awarded to Milton Gregg , which was donated to the Royal Canadian Regiment Museum in London , Ontario Canada in 1979 , was stolen on Canada Day ( 1 July 1980 ) , when the museum was overcrowded and has been missing since . A VC awarded in 1917 to Canadian soldier Corporal Filip <unk> was stolen from the same museum in 1973 and was not recovered until 2004 . 
 On 2 December 2007 , nine VCs were among 100 medals stolen from locked , reinforced glass cabinets at the QEII Army Memorial Museum in Waiouru , New Zealand with a value of around NZD $ 20 million . Charles Upham 's VC and Bar was among these . A reward of NZ $ 300 @,@ 000 was posted for information leading to the recovery of the decorations and conviction of the thieves , although at the time there was much public debate about the need to offer reward money to retrieve the medals . On 16 February 2008 New Zealand Police announced all the medals had been recovered . 
 = = Collections = = 
 = = = Ashcroft collection = = = 
 The VC collection of businessman and politician Lord Ashcroft , amassed since 1986 , contains 162 medals , over one @-@ tenth of all VCs awarded . It is the largest collection of such decorations . In July 2008 it was announced that Ashcroft was to donate £ 5 million for a permanent gallery at the Imperial War Museum where the 50 VCs held by the museum will be put on display alongside his collection . The Lord Ashcroft Gallery at the Imperial War Museum opened on 12 November 2010 containing a total of 210 VCs and 31 <unk> . 
 = = = Australian War Memorial = = = 
 Prior to November 2010 , the largest collection of VCs on public display was held by the Australian War Memorial , whose collection includes all nine VCs awarded to Australians at Gallipoli . Of the 100 medals awarded to Australians ( 96 VCs , and 4 VCs for Australia ) , this collection contains around 70 medals , including 3 medals awarded to British soldiers ( Grady , 1854 ; Holbrook , 1914 ; and Whirlpool , 1858 ) , and 3 of the VCs for Australia ( Donaldson , 2008 ; Keighran , 2010 ; and Roberts @-@ Smith , 2010 ) . 
 = = = List of collections = = = 
 Museums with holdings of ten or more VCs include : 
 ( note 1 = Many VCs are on loan to the museums and are owned by individuals and not owned by the museums themselves . ) 
 = = Other = = 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 In 2004 a national Victoria Cross and George Cross memorial was installed in Westminster Abbey close to the tomb of the Unknown Warrior . Westminster Abbey is a living monument to British history in that it contains monuments and memorials to central figures in British History including Isaac Newton , Charles Darwin and James VI & I. As such it was a significant honour for the VC to be commemorated in Westminster Abbey . 
 Canon William Lummis , MC , was a military historian who built up an archive on the service records and final resting places of Victoria Cross holders . This was then summarised into a pamphlet which was taken to be an authoritative source on these matters . However , Lummis was aware of short @-@ comings in his work and encouraged David Harvey to continue it . The result was Harvey 's seminal book Monuments to Courage . In 2007 the Royal Mail used material from Lummis ' archives to produce a collection of stamps commemorating Victoria Cross recipients . 
 It is a tradition within the Australian Army for soldiers ' recreational clubs on military bases to be named after a particular recipient of the Victoria Cross . Australia has a unique means of remembering recipients of the Victoria Cross . Remembrance Drive is a path through city streets and highways linking Sydney and Canberra . Trees were planted in February 1954 by Queen Elizabeth II in a park near Sydney Harbour and at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra , marking either end of the route , with various plantations along the roadsides in memory of the fallen . Beginning in 1995 , 23 rest stop memorials named for Australian recipients of the VC from World War II onwards have been sited along the route , providing picnic facilities and public amenities to encourage drivers to take a break on long drives . 23 of the 26 memorial sites have been dedicated , with a further three reserved for the surviving VC recipients , including two of the newer Victoria Cross for Australia awards . Edward Kenna , VC , was honoured with the most recent rest stop on 16 August 2012 , having died in 2009 . 
 = = = In art = = = 
 The subject of soldiers earning the VC has been popular with artists since the medal 's inception . In particular are the fifty paintings by Louis William <unk> that were painted in the late 1850s and early 1860s . Many of these were exhibited at the Egyptian Gallery in Piccadilly , but in 1900 , they were brought together by Lord Wantage as the Victoria Cross Gallery and exhibited in the town of Wantage , Berkshire . Later the collection was broken up and many of the paintings were sent to the various regiments depicted . Some were damaged or destroyed . A number of the acts were also portrayed in a Second World War propaganda pamphlet , and the images commissioned by the Ministry of Information are presented in an online gallery available on the website of The National Archives . 
 = USS Philadelphia ( 1776 ) = 
 Philadelphia is a gunboat ( referred to in contemporary documents as a gundalow or gondola ) of the Continental Navy . Manned by Continental Army soldiers , she was part of a fleet under the command of General Benedict Arnold that fought the 11 October 1776 Battle of Valcour Island against a larger Royal Navy fleet on Lake Champlain . Although many of the American boats in the battle were damaged in the battle , Philadelphia was one of the few actually sunk that day . On the days following the main battle , most of the other boats in the American fleet were sunk , burned , or captured . She is one of a few such vessels used during the American Revolutionary War to be raised . 
 In 1935 , amateur military marine archaeologist Lorenzo Hagglund located her remains standing upright at the bottom of Lake Champlain , and had her raised . <unk> to the Smithsonian Institution in 1961 , Philadelphia and associated artifacts are part of the permanent collection of the National Museum of American History , in Washington , D.C. , where curator Philip K. Lundeberg was responsible for arranging her initial display . The vessel is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and is a National Historic Landmark . 
 = = Background = = 
 The American Revolutionary War , which began in April 1775 with the Battles of Lexington and Concord , widened in September 1775 when the Continental Army embarked on an invasion of the British Province of Quebec . The province was viewed by the Second Continental Congress as a potential avenue for British forces to attack and divide the rebellious colonies , and was at the time lightly defended . The invasion reached a peak on December 31 , 1775 , when the Battle of Quebec ended in disaster for the Americans . In the spring of 1776 , 10 @,@ 000 British and German troops arrived in Quebec , and General Guy Carleton , the provincial governor , drove the Continental Army out of Quebec and back to Fort Ticonderoga . 
 Carleton then launched his own offensive intended to reach the Hudson River , whose navigable length begins south of Lake Champlain and extends down to New York City . Control of the upper Hudson would enable the British to link their forces in Quebec with those in New York , recently captured in the New York campaign by Major General William Howe . This strategy would separate the American colonies of New England from those farther south and potentially quash the rebellion . 
 The only ships on the lake following the American retreat from Quebec were those of a small fleet of lightly armed ships that Benedict Arnold had assembled following the capture of Fort Ticonderoga in May 1775 . This fleet , even if it had been in British hands , was too small to transport the large British army to Fort Ticonderoga . 
 = = Fleet development = = 
 During their retreat from Quebec , the Americans carefully took or destroyed all ships on Lake Champlain that might prove useful to the British . When Arnold and his troops , making up the rear guard of the army , abandoned Fort Saint @-@ Jean , they burned or sank all the boats they could not use , and set fire to the sawmill and the fort . These actions effectively denied the British any hope of immediately moving onto the lake . 
 The two sides set about building fleets : the British at Saint @-@ Jean and the Americans at the other end of the lake in Skenesborough ( present @-@ day Whitehall , New York ) . While planning Quebec 's defenses in 1775 , General Carleton had anticipated the problem of transportation on Lake Champlain , and had requested the provisioning of prefabricated ships from Europe . Because of this planning , the British were able to assemble a fleet that significantly overpowered that of the Americans . In total , the British fleet ( 25 armed vessels ) had more firepower than the Americans ' 15 vessels , with more than 80 guns outweighing the 74 smaller American guns . 
 The American shipbuilding effort at Skenesborough was overseen by Hermanus Schuyler ( possibly a relation of Major General Philip Schuyler ) , and the outfitting was managed by military engineer <unk> Baldwin . Schuyler began work in April to produce boats larger and more suitable for combat than the small shallow @-@ draft boats known as bateaux that were used for transport on the lake . The process eventually came to involve General Benedict Arnold , who was an experienced ship 's captain , and David Waterbury , a Connecticut militia leader with maritime experience . Major General Horatio Gates , in charge of the overall defense of the lake , eventually asked Arnold to take more responsibility in the shipbuilding effort , because " I am intirely uninform 'd as to Marine Affairs . " 
 = = Construction of Philadelphia = = 
 Philadelphia was one of eight gundalows ( also called gondolas in contemporary documents ) constructed at Skenesboro . She was laid down early in July 1776 and launched in mid @-@ August . Constructed primarily of oak , she was larger than a bateaux at 53 ft 2 in ( 16 @.@ 21 m ) long with a beam of 15 ft 2 in ( 4 @.@ 62 m ) . She featured a single 36 @-@ foot ( 10 @.@ 97 m ) mast with square @-@ rigged sail and topsail , and mounted three cannons , one 12 @-@ pounder ( 5 @.@ 4 kg ) facing forward and two 9 pounders ( 4 @.@ 1 kg ) facing port and starboard respectively . She also had mounting points for up to eight swivel guns , and was estimated by the Smithsonian to displace 29 long tons ( 32 @.@ 5 short tons ; 29 @.@ 5 t ) . Late in her construction General Arnold ordered that her aft deck be raised in order to accommodate a mortar . This modification was apparently undone after the mortar exploded during test firing at Fort Ticonderoga . In order to maintain equilibrium , ballast rocks were probably used in the aft portion of the boat once the mortar was removed . For the relative comfort of its crew , the boat had a canvas awning aft of the mast and fascines were probably lashed to its sides to diffuse musket fire aimed at the boat . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Philadelphia was placed in service under a Captain Rice shortly after she was completed . Late in August General Arnold assembled his fleet and cruised provocatively on the northern stretches of Lake Champlain . On September 23 , in anticipation of the larger British fleet 's arrival , he stationed his ships in Valcour Bay , the strait separating the western shore of the lake from Valcour Island . When the two forces clashed on October 11 , Philadelphia was under the command of Benjamin Rue , and was part of the formation Arnold established in the Valcour strait . Early in the six @-@ hour fight the 12 @-@ gun schooner USS Royal Savage ran aground and was burned . Toward dusk the British guns holed Philadelphia with a 24 @-@ pound ( 10 @.@ 9 kg ) shot and she soon sank . Darkness ended the action , and Arnold was able to slip away during the night . Many of his remaining ships were burned , sunk , or captured over the next two days as the British pursued him toward Ticonderoga . 
 In sea trials of the replica Philadelphia II , the Lake Champlain Maritime Museum determined that the boat was not particularly maneuverable : contemporary accounts of sailing the vessels include reports that the gondolas skipped across the waters of the lake , blown by the wind , and needed safe shelter when winds were high . 
 = = Raising the wreck = = 
 In the 1930s , Lorenzo Hagglund , a veteran of World War I and a history buff , began searching the strait for remains of the battle . In 1932 he found the remains of Royal Savage 's hull , which he successfully raised in 1934 . Hagglund followed up his discovery of Royal Savage with the discovery of Philadelphia 's remains in 1935 , sitting upright on the lake bottom . He raised her that year ; in addition to the guns and hull , hundreds of other items were recovered from the vessel . These relics included shot , cooking utensils , tools , buttons , buckles and human bones . 
 Philadelphia was exhibited at various locations on Lake Champlain and the Hudson River before becoming a long @-@ term display at Exeter , New York . Lorenzo Hagglund spent years searching for other ships in Arnold 's fleet , and raised another gunboat in 1952 . Funding for a structure to house that find and the Royal Savage fell through , and that boat 's remains were eventually ruined through neglect and looting . 
 In the wake of that failure Hagglund approached the Smithsonian Institution to preserve Philadelphia , and in 1961 , bequeathed her and associated artifacts to that organization . According to the Whitehall Times , the remains had suffered more damage during their time above water than below . The boat and artifacts are now part of the permanent collection of the National Museum of American History , in Washington , D.C. She is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and is designated a National Historic Landmark . She remains in precarious condition : as of 2001 the wood and iron fittings continued to show signs of deterioration despite attempts to stabilize them . 
 In 1997 , another pristine underwater wreck was located during a survey by the Lake Champlain Maritime Museum . Two years later it was conclusively identified as the gundalow Spitfire . 
 = Mundo Perdido , Tikal = 
 The Mundo Perdido ( Spanish for " Lost World " ) is the largest ceremonial complex dating from the Preclassic period at the ancient Maya city of Tikal , in the Petén Department of northern Guatemala . The complex was organised as a large E @-@ Group astronomical complex consisting of a pyramid aligned with a platform to the east that supported three temples . The Mundo Perdido complex was rebuilt many times over the course of its history . By AD 250 – 300 its architectural style was influenced by the great metropolis of Teotihuacan in the Valley of Mexico , including the use of the talud @-@ tablero form . During the Early Classic period ( c . 250 – 600 ) the Mundo Perdido became one of the twin foci of the city , the other being the North Acropolis . From AD 250 to 378 it may have served as the royal necropolis . The Mundo Perdido complex was given its name by the archaeologists of the University of Pennsylvania . 
 The large plaza centred upon the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) and the ceremonial platform to the west ( 5C @-@ 53 ) is divided into two clearly demarcated areas referred to as the High Plaza and the Low Plaza . The High Plaza is the area around the Lost World Pyramid . It is closed on the south side by Structures 6C @-@ 24 and 6C @-@ 25 . A range of eight adjoining structures divide the High Plaza from the Plaza of the Seven Temples to the east . On the north side , the Plaza is principally delimited by Structures 5D @-@ 77 , 5D @-@ 45 , 5D @-@ 46 , together with some smaller structures . The Low Plaza lies to the west of the Lost World Pyramid , centred upon Structure 5C @-@ 53 , a low platform . The Low Plaza is closed on its north side by the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) , which is the second largest structure in the whole complex . The complex has a surface area of approximately 60 @,@ 000 square metres ( 650 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . 
 Guatemalan archaeologists have made major discoveries in the Mundo Perdido since the 1970s . The National Tikal Project ( Proyecto Nacional Tikal ) investigated the Mundo Perdido from 1979 until 1985 , and partially restored the principal structures of the complex . The Mundo Perdido was the first architectural complex to be built at Tikal in the Preclassic period and the last to be abandoned during the Terminal Classic . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Preclassic = = = 
 The Mundo Perdido underwent six phases of construction ; four of these date to the Preclassic and two to the Classic . Each construction phase produced a new version of the E @-@ Group ( the Lost World Pyramid and the East Platform ) . Evidence recovered from the Mundo Perdido dates back to the earliest years of occupation at Tikal in the Middle Preclassic prior to 700 BC , although these remains represent rubbish rather than structures . The complex began to take form around the end of the Middle Preclassic , around 600 BC , when structures started to be added to a series of artificially levelled surfaces or platforms . Gradually both the complexity and the height of the structures increased . The Lost World Pyramid and the East Platform together form an E @-@ Group that is the oldest architectural complex in Tikal . During the Late Preclassic a causeway was built to unite the Mundo Perdido with the North Acropolis ; this causeway channelled runoff rainwater into a canal that fed into the Temple Reservoir . About AD 100 , toward the end of the Late Preclassic , three temples were built upon the East Platform . 
 = = = Early Classic = = = 
 Around AD 250 , at the beginning of the Early Classic , the Mundo Perdido plaza was expanded westwards in order to make the Lost World Pyramid the centre of the complex rather than the western extreme . It was this construction phase that led to the Mundo Perdido achieving its final surface area of around 60 @,@ 000 square metres ( 650 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . After this the various structures in the Mundo Perdido were remodelled many times to match the architectural styles developing throughout the city . 
 A small platform was added to the East Platform in the Early Classic , the surface of the platform possesses a series of holes that may have supported banners . The platform covered a large pit that contained the bodies of seventeen sacrificial victims , including men , women and children , possibly sacrificed during a dedicatory ceremony for the platform itself . In the 4th century AD the first version of Structure 5D @-@ 82 was built , to the north of the East Platform . In the second half of the 4th century six tombs were built in the East Platform . Ceramic offerings in the tombs included effigy vessels representing monkeys and macaws . The high artistic and technical quality of the funerary offerings in these tombs identify the deceased as members of Tikal 's elite ; they may have been members of a line of the ruling dynasty that lost power among the political upheaval of the late 4th century and included the kings K 'inich Muwaan Jol and Chak Tok Ich 'aak I. With the entry of Siyaj K 'ak ' and the establishment of a new political order in the city , the focus of royal funerary rites was shifted from the Mundo Perdido to the North Acropolis . 
 From the 4th century through to the 6th century the use of talud @-@ tablero architecture became notable in the Mundo Perdido . In the 5th century the talud @-@ tablero form was applied to Structures 5C @-@ 51 and 5C @-@ 52 at the western limit of the complex , and 6C @-@ 24 on the south side . In the latter part of the 6th century or during the 7th century a fifth version of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple 5C @-@ 49 was built , with a new stairway and summit shrine . 
 = = = Late Classic = = = 
 During the 7th century there were significant changes to the East Platform , including a new version of Temple 5D @-@ 87 that faced away from the Mundo Perdido . Around AD 700 this version was sealed and another version built on top , making Temple 5D @-@ 87 one of the three highest structures in the Mundo Perdido . This new version created a new orienting axis in the complex , breaking the primary axis associated with the ancient E @-@ Group complex and its relationship with the old solar cult , thus marking a major change in the ceremonial use of the Mundo Perdido complex . It is about this same time that the twin pyramid complex came into use , demonstrating a major internal reorganisation of the city . During the Late Classic , access to the complex was gradually restricted by closing various access points with new structures , this included discontinuing the use of the causeway that had linked the complex with the North Acropolis since the Preclassic . A new palace complex was built in the northern section of the Mundo Perdido , developing during the 7th and 8th centuries AD ; This marked an important change in the use of the Mundo Perdido , which until then had been dedicated to purely ritual activities . The construction of the palace indicates the permanent inhabitation of the complex by an elite group , apparently involved in some way with the administration of the city . 
 The Mundo Perdido continued to serve as an important burial site during the 8th and 9th centuries . The final version of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple received three elite status burials , possibly members of the royal family to judge by the extremely high quality of the associated offerings . These burials have been dated to the second half of the 8th century , during the reign of Yax Nuun Ayiin II . 
 = = = Terminal Classic = = = 
 Tikal as a whole went into general decline during the Terminal Classic , with some parts of the city apparently being abandoned . The Mundo Perdido , however , continued to be a centre of vigorous ceremonial activity . Evidence of this continued activity in the complex includes burials and collections of ceramic and lithic artefacts , together with significant construction activity . The main Late Classic structures were fitted with new benches and a change to access routes to the complex took place . Activity was concentrated in the northern portion of the Mundo Perdido , perhaps because it was closest to the Temple Reservoir water supply . Some minor changes were made to the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple at this time . The greatest residential activity during the Terminal Classic took place in the vaulted palace immediately to the east of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( Structures 5C @-@ 45 through to 5C @-@ 47 ) . This activity included complex construction projects and indicates that the elite were still in residence immediately prior to the complete abandonment of the city . Further construction activity , in the form of structural strengthening , also took place in other structures in the northern sector , including Structures 5D @-@ 77 and 5D @-@ 82 . Ritual activity also continued , and the bottom half of Early Classic Stela 39 was placed in Temple 5D @-@ 86 on the East Platform and worshipped . 
 That a large population remained in residence in the north sector of Mundo Perdido during the Terminal Classic is evidenced by the quantity of burials of differing gender and age . Some were interred inside collapsed buildings or in casual graves . They were usually accompanied by very few funerary offerings , generally bone and lithic artefacts . The dense occupation of the north sector , which included elite activity , continued for at least a hundred years after the abandonment of the rest of Tikal and is perhaps linked to the nearby water supply and to continued ritual activity at Temple III . While the northern portion of the Mundo Perdido continued in use , the rest of the complex was partially abandoned . The occupation of the Mundo Perdido came to an end in the Terminal Classic and very few traces of Postclassic activity have been recovered , limited to a few ceramic finds in Structure 3D @-@ 43 to the north . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 The University of Pennsylvania carried out exploratory investigations of the Lost World Pyramid prior to the work undertaken by the Proyecto Nacional Tikal . These included test cores and trenches in the summit as well as the west and south sides . Exploratory tunnels excavated up to 27 metres ( 89 ft ) into the pyramid 's interior recovered surprisingly early ceramic fragments , which led to the complex becoming the focus of later investigations . A wide @-@ ranging programme of investigations of the Mundo Perdido was instigated by the newly formed Proyecto Nacional Tikal in September 1979 . The first operation carried out was the clearing of forest overgrowth from the Lost World Pyramid late that year . The main phase of investigations ran until 1982 , although test pitting and topographical surveys continued until 1984 . Both the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) and the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple were excavated and restored from 1980 through to 1982 . Soon after work started upon the Mundo Perdido in 1979 adverse weather conditions resulted in severe damage to various structures , including the collapse of the east face of the Lost World Pyramid , the northeast corner of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) and the north wall of Structure 5D @-@ 77 . 
 = = Structures = = 
 Archaeologist William R. Coe divided the Mundo Perdido complex into two clearly demarcated areas that he referred to as the High Plaza and the Low Plaza . The High Plaza is the area around the Lost World Pyramid . It is closed on the south side by Structures 6C @-@ 24 and 6C @-@ 25 . A range of eight adjoining structures divide the High Plaza from the Plaza of the Seven Temples to the east . On the north side , the Plaza is principally delimited by Structures 5D @-@ 77 , 5C @-@ 45 , 5C @-@ 46 , together with some smaller structures . The Low Plaza lies to the west of the Lost World Pyramid , centred upon Structure 5C @-@ 53 , a low platform . The Low Plaza is closed on its north side by the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) , which is the second largest structure in the whole complex . 
 More recently , the Proyecto Nacional Tikal has defined the complex as an area divided into four plazas . The North , East and West Plazas are defined by their relationship to the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) while the South Plaza is on the south side of Structures 6C @-@ 25 and 6C @-@ 25 , themselves to the south of the Lost World Pyramid . 
 = = = E @-@ Group = = = 
 The original core of the Mundo Perdido was an E @-@ Group astronomical complex . The east stairway of the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) was the observation point and the three original temples on the East Platform ( 5D @-@ 84 , 5D @-@ 86 and 5D @-@ 88 ) were markers used to plot the sunrise on the equinoxes and the solstices . Over the course of Tikal 's history the E @-@ Group underwent seven distinct construction phases , with the earliest dating to the end of the Middle Preclassic period . 
 = = = = Lost World Pyramid = = = = 
 The Lost World Pyramid ( Structure 5C @-@ 54 , also known as the Great Pyramid ) dates to the Late Preclassic . This structure is the focus of the Mundo Perdido complex ; it currently stands approximately 31 metres ( 102 ft ) high and has a maximum width across the base of 67 @.@ 5 metres ( 221 ft ) . The Lost World Pyramid was one of the most massive construction projects ever undertaken at Tikal . The pyramid is accessed via a stairway on the west side ; this was flanked by giant masks . The final version of the structure had stairways on both the east and west sides that extended to the top , with additional stairways on the north and south sides climbing only as far as the eighth of ten levels . This structure was one of the most massive buildings in the whole of Late Preclassic Mesoamerica and its construction used masonry blocks that measured over 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) long . The pyramid was periodically rebuilt throughout its history , in common with the rest of the complex . The version now visible is the fifth version , dating to around AD 250 . When it was built it was the tallest structure in the entire city . The stepped levels of the pyramid have inset vertical panels that were forerunners of the talud @-@ tablero style ; these early tableros first made an appearance in the second half of the 3rd century AD when they were built into the fifth construction phase of the pyramid . The masks that once adorned the sides of the building are now so eroded that it is not possible to determine if they were anthropomorphic or zoomorphic . Traces of painted stucco on the final version of the pyramid reveal that at some point the exterior of the structure was painted blue and red . 
 The five versions of the Lost World Pyramid were each larger than the previous version . They were not built directly centred upon the preceding version due to the necessity of maintaining the E @-@ Group plaza area between the pyramid and the East Platform . This led to the destruction of the previous version 's east face each time a new version was superimposed over the older version . 
 = = = = = Phase 1 = = = = = 
 The earliest version of the pyramid was built at the end of the Middle Preclassic ; it was raised upon a 1 @.@ 42 @-@ metre ( 4 @.@ 7 ft ) deep infill that levelled the natural terrain . This earliest phase of construction has not survived in its entirety but is believed to have possessed three stepped levels with stairways on all four sides . It measured 23 @.@ 46 metres ( 77 @.@ 0 ft ) north @-@ south and stood 2 @.@ 94 metres ( 9 @.@ 6 ft ) high . 
 = = = = = Phase 2 = = = = = 
 The second version dates to the Late Preclassic , between 600 and 400 BC . At this time two adult males were interred without funerary offerings under the summit platform of the pyramid ( Burials PNT @-@ 002 and PNT @-@ 003 ) . Although they lacked associated offerings , the presence of cranial deformation and dental decoration suggests that the deceased may have been members of the elite . The investigating archaeologists of the Proyecto Nacional Tikal consider that the deceased themselves were a dedicatory offering upon construction of this newer version of the pyramid . The second version of the pyramid possessed four stepped levels and measured 37 @.@ 25 metres ( 122 @.@ 2 ft ) north @-@ south ; it stood 7 @.@ 8 metres ( 26 ft ) high . 
 = = = = = Phase 3 = = = = = 
 The third version was built between 400 and 200 BC as a part of the formal layout of the E @-@ Group . This version measured 37 @.@ 67 metres ( 123 @.@ 6 ft ) north @-@ south and stood 9 @.@ 46 metres ( 31 @.@ 0 ft ) high . The construction of the third version of the temple damaged the underlying second version and covered it completely . The third version was a radial pyramid with six stepped levels and a raised upper platform built from stone blocks that were not finished with stucco . This upper platform had rounded corners . The three lower levels of the pyramid had a talud ( sloping @-@ sided ) form , while the fourth had a tablero ( vertical @-@ sided ) form . The fifth level was of greater height and supported the weight of giant masks flanking the central stairways as they ascend the upper ( sixth ) level . The pyramid possessed auxiliary stairways that climbed the lower four levels , flanking the central stairways ; they ascended the fifth level in a modified form , such that they enclosed the giant masks between the auxiliary stairways and the central stairways on each side . Upon the upper platform was a 1 @-@ metre ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) high bench accessed via three steps on its east and west sides only . The third version pyramid was of high quality construction with complex architectural detail and fine quality stucco covering . Burial PNT @-@ 001 was discovered interred within the infill of the upper level of the fourth version of the pyramid ; it was accompanied by a number of offerings . 
 = = = = = Phase 4 = = = = = 
 The fourth version of the pyramid was built upon a much larger scale ; it was built sometime between 200 BC and 200 AD . It stood 18 metres ( 59 ft ) high and measured 60 metres ( 200 ft ) across . This represented the greatest leap in volume between successive versions of the pyramid . Once again it was a radial pyramid with auxiliary stairways ; the temple had at least eight stepped levels although archaeologists could not determine the exact number due to the destruction wrought upon the summit by the construction of the next ( fifth and final ) version . It possessed giant masks on the fifth stepped level . Due to the method of construction employed , with weight dispersed across the shorter sides of its stone blocks , the fourth version of the pyramid was structurally weak and it required periodic reinforcement . The architects soon realised their error and the architectural techniques used in the construction of the fourth version were never used again ; the fourth version itself remained in use for a relatively short period of time before being replaced by the fifth version . 
 = = = = = Phase 5 = = = = = 
 The fifth and final version of the Lost World Pyramid was built around 200 @-@ 300 AD . When excavated it was found to be poorly preserved due to the poor quality structural infill used in its construction ; its sides had subsided in a number of places . The final version of the pyramid had ten levels and stood 30 @.@ 7 metres ( 101 ft ) high . The pyramid measured 72 by 67 @.@ 5 metres ( 236 by 221 ft ) ( NS by EW ) through its central axis . This narrowed to 61 @.@ 3 by 56 @.@ 25 metres ( 201 @.@ 1 by 184 @.@ 5 ft ) measuring from corner to corner . These measurements make it the most massive construction project at Tikal . The fifth version of the pyramid started with 8 levels between 200 to 300 AD ; a ninth level was added in the 4th century and the tenth level sometime between the late 4th century and the early 6th century . Each of the stairways was flanked by large tablero panels . The 0 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 1 @.@ 6 ft ) bench upon the summit faced west , breaking the long tradition that incorporated the pyramid within the ancient E @-@ Group . A large slab of slate measuring 0 @.@ 9 metres ( 3 @.@ 0 ft ) high by 0 @.@ 35 metres ( 1 @.@ 1 ft ) wide and 0 @.@ 24 metres ( 0 @.@ 79 ft ) thick was found embedded in the bench ; it was highly eroded and may have been a stela that was erected upon the pyramid during the Late Classic . Large quantities of Early and Late Classic ceramic fragments were found upon the pyramid , demonstrating the continued importance of the structure within Tikal as a whole . A well @-@ preserved limestone model of an architectural complex was recovered from the upper east side of the pyramid ; it may originally have been deposited in a cache and represented a number of pyramids and a Mesoamerican ballcourt - the model does not match any known architectural group at Tikal itself . 
 = = = = East Platform = = = = 
 The East Platform divides the Mundo Perdido complex from the Plaza of the Seven Temples . The structures are numbered from 5D @-@ 82 at the north end through to 5D @-@ 89 where it joins with the south range . Although this is one of the earliest examples of architecture at Tikal , this platform began to take on its final form around AD 100 when the first versions of the three temples 5D @-@ 84 , 5D @-@ 86 and 5D @-@ 88 were built upon the basal platform . In the 5th century AD the platform was remodeled with a huge talud @-@ tablero . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 82 is the northernmost structure adjoining the East Platform . The first version of this building was built in the 4th century AD . This early version was a semicircular platform supporting a building that possessed a single chamber . This building was decorated with an elaborate stucco frieze decorated with anthropomorphic figures and glyphs . The central figure in the frieze is believed by archaeologists to represent the deity Itzamna . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 84 is towards the north end of the east range ; the structure has three rooms and is flanked by Structure 5D @-@ 83 to the north and Structure 5D @-@ 86 to the south . This is one of the earliest three structures to be built upon the east platform towards the end of the Late Preclassic . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 85 is a double platform that provides access to the Plaza of the Seven Temples . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 86 possesses the remains of giant masks on its facade . It has been dated to the Late Classic period . Stela 39 was found in this building . The first version of this building was raised upon the East Platform towards the end of the Late Preclassic period , at around AD 100 . The temple had three rooms arranged one behind the other ; the central chamber is the smallest and is particularly notable for the presence of two giant zoomorphic masks on either side of its doorway . This is the only example known from the Late Preclassic Maya world where such masks were placed inside a building , a practice that would become common in the Late Classic period . <unk> analysis of these two masks suggest that they are an early form of Nu B 'alam Chac , a spirit protector of the city that was closely associated with warfare . The first royal tomb in the Mundo Perdido was installed in this structure during the transition between the Late Preclassic and Early Classic periods . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 87 is also known as the Temple of the Skulls ( Templo de las Calaveras in Spanish ) . It is the third largest temple in the Mundo Perdido complex . A new version of this temple was superimposed upon a preceding version during the 7th century AD . This new version faced away from the Mundo Perdido and possessed a single room with five doorways that faced onto the adjacent Plaza of the Seven Temples to the east . Around AD 700 , this version was sealed and a new version was built on top , at which time it became one of the highest structures in the Mundo Perdido . This version of the structure had a four @-@ level platform with an access stairway interrupted by a vaulted niche , as was the architectural style prevalent at Tikal during this time . The base of the niche was adorned with three sculpted skulls , one facing forwards and the two flanking skulls in profile . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 88 is a structure possessing three rooms . It was one of the first three temples to be built upon the East Platform towards the end of the Late Preclassic period . 
 Structure 5D @-@ 89 is another structure possessing three rooms . 
 = = = Northern sector = = = 
 = = = = Talud @-@ Tablero Temple = = = = 
 The Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( Structure 5C @-@ 49 ) is the second largest building in the Mundo Perdido . It is located on the north side of the west plaza , to the northwest of the Lost World Pyramid and directly north of the 5C @-@ 53 platform . The pyramid has a projecting stairway that rises to a summit shrine that possessed three corbel @-@ vaulted chambers and a roof comb ; the ceilings and roof comb had collapsed into the first two chambers prior to archaeological exploration . The ruined building currently stands over 22 metres ( 72 ft ) high ; with its summit shrine and roof comb intact it would have been taller . The Talud @-@ Tablero Temple was not investigated by the University of Pennsylvania and prior to its exploration by the Proyecto Nacional Tikal the summit shrine had served as the lair of a jaguar and was littered with the remains of its prey . The shrine has been badly damaged by multiple looters ' pits excavated in each of the interior chambers . 
 Three distinct construction phases are evident on the exterior of this pyramid . The first version of this pyramid was built in the latter half of the 3rd century AD ; it was built in a forerunner of the talud @-@ tablero style and had three levels . It stood 7 metres ( 23 ft ) tall with sides that measured 21 metres ( 69 ft ) at the base . It featured vertical unframed tableros that were painted black and a stairway flanked by balustrades . The stairway rose at an angle of 49 ° and projected 3 @.@ 3 metres ( 11 ft ) from the pyramid base . Three more construction phases took place in the Early Classic between AD 300 and 550 ; none of these three phases supported a masonry superstructure . Each of these phases was very similar , consisting mainly in an increase in the size of the building . Phase 2 had a basal surface area of 920 square metres ( 9 @,@ 900 sq ft ) ; the base of the third phase covered an area of 1 @,@ 065 square metres ( 11 @,@ 460 sq ft ) , this increased to 1 @,@ 240 square metres ( 13 @,@ 300 sq ft ) in the fourth construction phase . The second phase of construction took place in the 4th century in a local variation of the talud @-@ tablero style that only included framed tableros on the front of the pyramid , except for the upper level where the tableros extend around all four faces of the structure ; it had four stepped levels . The third phase of construction maintained the previous versions talud @-@ tablero variant and had five stepped levels . The fourth version of the pyramid once again had four stepped levels . The fifth phase of construction of this building took place between AD 550 and 700 and involved the construction of a new stairway on top of the previous version , although the older four @-@ level stepped pyramid with talud @-@ tablero sides was retained . The pyramid base now measured 37 metres ( 121 ft ) on each side . The stairway was widened by covering the balustrades and the pyramid was heightened by 4 @.@ 6 metres ( 15 ft ) by the addition of two more talud @-@ tablero @-@ style levels . This resulted in a base height of 16 @.@ 4 metres ( 54 ft ) ; a new summit shrine was built upon this , possessing three vaulted rooms and an elaborate roof comb . This construction phase took place around the same time that Temple V was built , the first of the major temples of Tikal , or slightly earlier . The shrine , in its final version , had three access doorways to the first chamber , which was 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) wide . 
 After AD 700 the pyramid served an important funerary function . Three elite burials have been excavated from the pyramid , two males and a female , accompanied by extremely high quality funerary offerings . The offerings include polychrome ceramics and objects crafted from shell , conch and mother of pearl that are inscribed with anthropomorphic and zoomorphic imagery . These associated finds are of sufficient quality that it is possible that the deceased were members of the royal family . The burials have been dated to the reign of Yax Nuun Ayiin II , who ruled from AD 769 to 794 . During the Terminal Classic some minor changes were made to the temple chambers and there may have been structural reinforcement of the front of the temple . Although it is poorly preserved , the inside of the temple rooms were inscribed with graffiti that is likely to date to this time . 
 = = = = Palace = = = = 
 A three @-@ range palace complex is laid out in the form of a U in the northern portion of the Mundo Perdido . The three ranges are 5C @-@ 45 on the east side , 5C @-@ 46 on the south side and 5C @-@ 47 on the west side . All three ranges connect at the corners to form a single extended palace around a central courtyard with an area of 600 square metres ( 6 @,@ 500 sq ft ) ; the courtyard was open on the north side . This palace has furnished important information with regard to the Terminal Classic occupation the Mundo Perdido . The palace was built upon a Late Classic platform and gradually developed with the construction of the palace buildings in the 7th and 8th centuries AD . The structures each housed multiple corbel @-@ vaulted chambers . On two of the three structures the decorated facades faced outwards , although the buildings all opened onto the interior courtyard . During the 1500 @-@ year history of the Mundo Perdido complex , the palace was the only group of buildings in the entire complex that did not serve a uniquely ceremonial purpose . 
 Structure 5C @-@ 45 is the east range of a palace complex that also incorporates 5C @-@ 46 ( the south range ) and 5C @-@ 47 ( the west range ) . This structure was remodelled in the Terminal Classic with the closing of some doorways , addition of some benches and the construction of new sections with multiple doorways . Although Tikal was completely abandoned soon afterwards , this continuation in complex construction activity indicated that the elite residents were still inhabiting the palace at this time . 
 = = = Other structures = = = 
 Structure 5C @-@ 51 is on the western border of the complex . It was modelled in the talud @-@ tablero style in the 5th century AD . 
 Structure 5C @-@ 52 delimits the western extreme of the Mundo Perdido . In the 5th century AD it was built using the talud @-@ tablero style . 
 Structure 5C @-@ 53 is a low platform situated 33 metres ( 108 ft ) to the west of the Lost World Pyramid . The platform has access stairways on all four sides and has no sign of ever having supported any superstructure . Details of the sides of the platform suggest that its construction was influenced by Teotihuacan . The platform dates to the beginning of the Late Classic , around AD 600 . 
 Structure 6C @-@ 24 is a part of the south range of the Mundo Perdido . This is another building that was styled with talud @-@ tableros in the 5th century AD . 
 = = Monuments = = 
 Stela 39 is the broken bottom half of a stela that was found inside Temple 5D @-@ 86 , on the east @-@ west axis running through the East Platform from the Lost World Pyramid . The monument is sculpted on the front and back faces and was deliberately broken in ancient times and was moved inside the temple in order to save it . The front of the stela shows the bottom half of a person , who is identified as a ruler by his costume ; the back features two columns of hieroglyphs . The king depicted on the stela is Chak Tok Ich 'aak I , who governed in the 4th century AD . This king is standing over a bound captive ; the bearded captive appears to be a noble since he retains his clothing . The stela celebrates an event in AD 376 and appears to have been moved to the Mundo Perdido in relation to a funerary ceremony . The stela was possibly moved to the temple by king Yax Nuun Ayiin II to celebrate the changing of the 20 @-@ year k 'atun Maya calendrical cycle in AD 771 and thereby link himself to Chak Tok Ich 'aak I. It was placed directly over the most important of the late 4th century elite tombs . The stela continued to be worshipped in the Terminal Classic , as evidenced by the presence of polychrome ceramic offerings and incense burners . 
 = = Burials = = 
 Burial 5 was an elite burial interred in a stucco @-@ coated chamber under the rear chamber of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) . The tomb had already been looted when it was discovered by archaeologists , with a looters trench cutting through the bench and floor of the shrine chamber above . The burial chamber measured 1 @.@ 77 by 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 8 by 2 @.@ 6 ft ) ( NS by EW ) and was 0 @.@ 87 metres ( 2 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The chamber contained the bones of an adult male aged between 36 and 55 years old . Although the bones had been disturbed by the looters , it is likely that he had been laid out on his back with a north @-@ south orientation . A few broken ceramic remains among the looters ' debris dated the tomb to the late 8th century AD . 
 Burial 6 was a cist located under the first chamber of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) . It had been heavily looted , to an extent that it was not possible to determine if the scattered human remains of at least four people belonged to one burial or several . The bones belonged to two children and two young adult females and fragments of ceramic offerings were also identified . 
 Burial 7 was interred in a cist under the central chamber of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) . Although it had already been looted when it was discovered by archaeologists , the prior collapse of the ceiling of the summit shrine of the pyramid protected a section of the tomb from the looters . The remains were those of an adult male with an artificially deformed skull ; he was laid out on his back with a north @-@ south orientation with the head towards the north . The funerary offering included three polychrome ceramics ; a tripod plate , a plate painted with the figure of a dancer and a vessel bearing the images of human figures and a jaguar . Burial 7 was immediately above the cist of Burial 9 . 
 Burial 8 was interred towards the rear of the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) . The deceased was a young adult male aged between 21 and 35 years old with an artificially deformed skull . He was buried near the surface lying on his side in a flexed position ; The remains were oriented north @-@ south and date to the Terminal Classic and were not accompanied by any funerary offering . 
 Burial 9 was interred in a cist immediately beneath Burial 7 in the Talud @-@ Tablero Temple ( 5C @-@ 49 ) . The chamber measured 2 @.@ 34 by 0 @.@ 64 metres ( 7 @.@ 7 by 2 @.@ 1 ft ) ( NS by EW ) . The remains were of an adolescent female lying on her back with her head towards the north . She was lying upon a layer of cinnabar mixed with blue and green pigments and was accompanied by a rich funerary offering . The offering included mother @-@ of @-@ pearl , jade and quartz beads , bone earspools inlaid with shell , shell figurines , glyphs crafted from shell , a jade pectoral crafted in the form of an anthropomorphic face , an alabaster bowl , a polychrome ceramic vessel decorated with human figures and a lengthy hieroglyphic text , a black bowl and a tripod plate decorated with an ajaw glyph . 
 Burial 21 was the first corbel @-@ vaulted tomb to be constructed in the Mundo Perdido ; it was placed within Structure 5D @-@ 86 . The deceased was interred upon the east @-@ west axis running through the centre of the E @-@ Group during the transition between the Late Preclassic and the Early Classic periods . The tomb was elite @-@ status and was perhaps the earliest royal burial in the Mundo Perdido . Any funerary offerings were removed during the 6th century AD during remodelling of the temple , at which time the offerings were redeposited under the third chamber of the shrine . The offerings included three polychrome plates with <unk> legs ; the painted designs on the plates perhaps have astronomical significance . 
 Burial PNT @-@ 001 dates to between 400 and 200 BC . It was inserted in a put among the infill of the upper level of the third version of the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) , 0 @.@ 8 metres ( 2 @.@ 6 ft ) under the summit ( 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) including the summit bench ) . He was laid out upon a large rock lying face downwards . The deceased was a young adult male aged between 21 and 35 years who was aligned north @-@ south with the skull towards the south . Traces of cinnabar were found upon the bones . The body was accompanied by four ceramic vessels , five obsidian blades , a flint chisel , avian bones and some worked bone artefacts , among them an <unk> . Although the burial could be a dedicatory offering due to its location upon the east @-@ west axis of the E @-@ Group , the high status offerings associated with it also open up the possibility that the deceased was a member of Tikal 's elite . 
 Burial PNT @-@ 002 was interred with Burial PNT @-@ 003 in the third stepped platform of the second version of the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) prior to the fourth platform being completed . The deceased was an adult male aged between 36 and 55 years old ; he was found lying extended on his back with a southeast @-@ northwest orientation . Most of the bones were preserved to a certain degree ; although the skull was badly fragmented it was evident that artificial <unk> deformation had taken place . One of the upper canine teeth was fitted with pyrite decoration ; the other canine had a crescent @-@ shaped hollow that had once held its decoration . The deceased had several items of shell jewellery . 
 Burial PNT @-@ 003 was interred at the same time as Burial PNT @-@ 002 . The deceased was an adult male aged between 36 and 55 years old ; he was lying face down with a northwest @-@ southeast orientation . The remains were very poorly preserved but the upper canines were both decorated with pyrite incrustations . The deceased was not accompanied by jewellery or funerary offerings . 
 Burial PNT @-@ 004 was interred under a low platform associated with the third version of the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) . It was deposited near the bedrock 1 @.@ 3 metres ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) under the platform without any funerary offerings . The remains are those of a young adult male between 21 and 35 years old who was laid on his right hand side in a flexed position with an east @-@ west orientation , with the head lying to the west . The remains were associated with three pieces of worked stone that had traces of stucco and red paint . The burial has been dated to around 300 BC . 
 Burial PNT @-@ 032 may have been a dedicatory offering upon construction of the fourth version of the Lost World Pyramid ( 5C @-@ 54 ) . It was buried at a depth of 0 @.@ 75 metres ( 2 @.@ 5 ft ) without associated offerings . The remains were probably those of a female ; she was lying face down and oriented north @-@ south with the head pointing northwards . The remains were very poorly preserved but probably date to the early 1st century AD . 
 = A8 ( Croatia ) = 
 The A8 motorway ( Croatian : Autocesta A8 ) is a 64 @.@ 0 @-@ kilometre ( 39 @.@ 8 mi ) toll motorway in Croatia . It connects the A7 motorway near Rijeka with the road network in the Istrian peninsula via the Učka Tunnel . The road terminates at the Kanfanar interchange with the A9 motorway , which with the A8 motorway forms the Istrian Y road system . The motorway 's national significance is reflected in its positive economic impact on the cities and towns it connects , as well as its importance to tourism in Croatia . The importance of the motorway for tourism is particularly high during the summer tourist season , when its traffic volume increases by about 65 % . 
 The construction of the A8 motorway and the Istrian Y can be traced back to 1968 when the Croatian Parliament decided to build a modern road linking Istria with the rest of Croatia . Subsequently , a bond to fund the construction was issued . The construction work started in 1976 ; in 1981 the Učka Tunnel was finished and a 22 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometre ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) section of the route between Matulji and Lupoglav was completed as a single @-@ carriageway , two @-@ lane expressway . The Lupoglav @-@ Cerovlje portion was the next one to be completed , in 1988 . The route was extended to the Rogovići interchange between 1992 and 1998 , and the remaining section to Kanfanar was completed in 1999 as a two @-@ lane road . In 2011 , the expressway route started to be expanded gradually with the addition of a new carriageway and emergency lanes , eventually making most of it a controlled @-@ access highway ; the expansion of the route 's first section , between Kanfanar and Rogovići , was completed in October 2011 . The route 's full expansion to motorway standards – including six lanes and grade separation of all its interchanges – is scheduled by 2015 , when a second tube for the Učka Tunnel and a new route connecting the tunnel to the A7 motorway are planned . Construction slowed down in the 1990s due to a lack of funding ; therefore , a build @-@ operate @-@ transfer concession for the Istrian Y was granted to the BINA Istra corporation for a period of 32 years . 
 All intersections found along the route are grade separated , except for a single at @-@ grade intersection currently regulated by traffic lights ; a new route is planned to bypass this intersection . As of June 2012 , there were ten exits and two service areas along the route . The motorway is currently toll @-@ free except for the Učka Tunnel and the Kanfanar @-@ Rogovići section . However , most of the motorway is potentially a toll road using a ticket system , with each exit including a toll plaza except those of Veprinac , Opatija , and Matulji . The toll system of the A8 / A9 Istrian Y is integrated : no ticket needs to be turned in , gotten , or exchanged when going from the A8 to the A9 or vice versa . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The A8 motorway is an east – west motorway in Croatia , crossing the eastern and central parts of Istria . It connects the Matulji interchange near Rijeka , the largest city on the northern Adriatic coast of Croatia , to Istria via the Kanfanar interchange situated in the area of the city of Rovinj . The motorway represents a link between the A7 and the A9 motorway — spanning between border of Slovenia and the cities of Rijeka and Pula , respectively . This part of the road network of Croatia is also part of European route E751 , consisting of the Koper – Kanfanar – Pula and Kanfanar – Rijeka sections . The route is economically important to Croatia , especially for tourism and as a cargo transport route . The road carries significant cargo and tourist traffic as the largest @-@ capacity road link between the Istrian and Kvarner Gulf regions and the nation 's capital , Zagreb . Most of the road has a design speed of 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) ; the part meeting full motorway standards has a design speed of 120 kilometres per hour ( 75 mph ) . The final segment of the route – between the Učka tunnel and the Matulji interchange – has a design speed of 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) because of the mountainous terrain crossed and proximity of residential structures . 
 The route originates in the Kanfanar interchange with the A9 motorway and the D303 road in central Istria , east of Rovinj . From that point , the A8 proceeds east towards the <unk> exit ; there it turns north towards the Rogovići interchange with the D48 road . The latter represents the western approach to Pazin , the capital of Istria County . The A8 section between Kanfanar and Rogovići consists of four traffic lanes with a central reservation . Beyond the Rogovići interchange , the A8 changes direction once again , running generally to the northeast ; it acts as a bypass around Pazin . It goes through rough karst terrain that requires three major bridges with a total length of 949 metres ( 3 @,@ 114 ft ) ; the longest bridge is the <unk> viaduct , at 444 metres ( 1 @,@ 457 ft ) . The road then heads toward Cerovlje , running along and near the Pazinčica river valley and the Cerovlje valley ; this includes a 1 @,@ 330 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 360 ft ) bridge over the Pazinčica river . After Cerovlje the road runs for 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) , through hilly terrain requiring bridges for about 10 % of the route , to the Lupoglav exit and an interchange with the D44 road . Past Lupoglav , after going over the Lupoglav – <unk> railway line the A8 heads southeast , until it reaches the <unk> road at the Vranja exit and the western entrance to the 5 @.@ 062 @-@ kilometre ( 3 @.@ 145 mi ) Učka Tunnel ; this is the third @-@ longest road tunnel in Croatia . The tunnel carries the route east , through part of the Učka mountain range . It represents the end of the easternmost section of the Istrian Y system ( comprising the A8 and the A9 motorways ) where a toll is charged ; consequently , there are toll plazas adjacent to both tunnel entrances . East of the tunnel , the route runs northeast to the Matulji interchange with the A7 motorway and the eastern terminus of the A8 motorway . This section contains the Opatija and Veprinac exits , serving Opatija , <unk> , <unk> and other Opatija Riviera resorts . The elevation of the route 's 11 @.@ 4 @-@ kilometre ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) segment east of the tunnel drops from 520 metres ( 1 @,@ 710 feet ) above sea level at the eastern portal of the Učka Tunnel to approximately 180 metres ( 590 feet ) above sea level adjacent to the Matulji interchange . An additional climbing lane is present along parts of this segment . Unlike all the other exits found along the route , the Opatija exit is an at @-@ grade intersection regulated by a traffic light , while the Veprinac exit is executed as a partial cloverleaf interchange . Overall , the A8 is 64 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 39 @.@ 8 miles ) long with 10 exits along the route . A significant portion of the route has no emergency lanes as yet , but lay @-@ bys are available intermittently along the route . The traffic lanes ' width varies along the route , being 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 feet ) wide in all sections except between Cerovlje and Lupoglav , where the traffic lanes are 3 @.@ 25 metres ( 10 @.@ 7 feet ) wide . 
 The bulk of the route runs through forested areas , especially near the Učka range and near Pazin , with agricultural land in between those areas – most of it located between the <unk> and Lupoglav interchanges . The final section of the route , near Opatija and the A7 motorway , runs through coastal areas affected by urbanization . The route crosses no major watercourses , although creeks adjacent to or spanned by the route drain into the Pazinčica and <unk> rivers , or directly into the Adriatic Sea in the case of watercourses flowing down Učka 's eastern slopes . The Učka Tunnel contains a spring discovered during its construction and used for the water supply of Opatija ever since . 
 The route runs through an area subject to significant air temperature variations . The temperature extremes measured in the area of the route range from − 18 to 40 ° C ( 0 to 104 ° F ) , imposing substantial maintenance requirements . The weather patterns prevailing along the route include : an average of three to four days of snow cover , especially in the central parts of Istria ; high winds and gales east of the Učka Tunnel , recorded during , respectively , 15 and 54 days per year on average ; and fog in the areas west of the Učka mountains and around Pazin , respectively occurring 80 and 50 days per year on average . 
 An automatic traffic monitoring and guidance system is installed along the motorway . It consists of measuring ( of both traffic and weather ) , control ( e.g. , variable speed limits ) , and signalling devices located in zones where driving conditions may vary , such as at the interchanges , viaducts , bridges , and zones where fog or strong wind are known to occur . The system uses variable @-@ message signs to communicate changing driving conditions , possible restrictions , and other information to motorway users . In the Učka Tunnel there are 83 security cameras , 538 fire detectors , 39 fire hydrants , 74 emergency stations , and five vehicle emergency lay @-@ bys ; the speed limit is 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 The A8 is a toll road based on the Croatian vehicle classification using a ticket system — charging for use of the motorway based on distance travelled . The system was introduced as a unified toll charge system throughout the Istrian Y motorways in June 2011 . Consequently , vehicles using either the A8 or the A9 or switching between the two at the Kanfanar interchange are charged a toll only when they leave the Istrian Y system , no matter where their toll ticket was issued . Along the A8 motorway , a toll is charged only for using the Učka Tunnel and the Kanfanar – Rogovići section ; the remaining sections of the motorway are toll @-@ free as of June 2012 . Despite this , toll tickets are issued and collected at all exits with toll plazas . For instance , vehicles traveling between Rogovići and Vranja interchanges are issued toll tickets and are required to stop at toll plazas when entering and leaving the A8 , but they are not charged for using the route . The toll charge for travelling the entire length of the motorway ranges from 36 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 4 @.@ 80 ) for passenger cars to 205 @.@ 00 kuna ( € 27 @.@ 33 ) for semi @-@ trailer trucks . The toll can be paid in either Croatian kuna or euros using major credit cards , debit cards and several prepaid toll collection systems , including various types of smart cards issued by the motorway operator and ENC ; the last is an electronic toll collection system that is shared between all motorways in Croatia except the A2 , providing drivers with discounted toll rates and dedicated lanes at toll plazas . 
 In 2010 , BINA Istra ( the operator of the motorway ) collected € 38 million in revenues while its expenditure reached € 230 million . In the first half of 2011 , however , BINA Istra reported 65 @.@ 8 million kuna ( € 8 @.@ 9 million ) of income in the first half of 2011 , without VAT . This income represented a 30 @.@ 8 percent increase compared to the same period in the previous year . ( The figure includes income from the entire Istrian Y system , i.e. , both the A8 and A9 motorways . ) Most of this increase is attributed to the introduction of a closed toll system along the routes , replacing an open toll system in which a toll was charged only at the Mirna Bridge ( along the A9 motorway ) and the Učka Tunnel . In 1999 , the Croatian government negotiated amendments to the BINA Istra concession contract . These amendments allow the government to determine tolls along the A8 and A9 motorways , and the government decided to eliminate tolls on traffic flowing along the two @-@ lane sections of the routes ; to compensate for this loss of income , the government subsidizes BINA Istra – for instance , in 2012 it is expected to receive a 165 million kuna ( c . € 22 million ) subsidy . By the end of 2010 , the subsidy paid to BINA Istra reached a total of 1 @.@ 3 billion kuna ( c . € 173 million ) ; at the time , it was estimated that a further sum of 1 @.@ 9 billion kuna ( c . € 253 million ) may be paid in annual subsidies between 2011 and 2027 , when the concession contract expires . BINA Istra estimates the total investment value of the construction it has carried out or planned on the A8 and A9 routes at one billion euros . 
 = = History = = 
 The construction of the A8 motorway ( and the Istrian Y as a whole ) has its origin in 1968 , when the Croatian Parliament endorsed a petition by Istrian legislators for the construction of a modern road between the peninsula and the rest of Croatia . Subsequently , Istrian municipalities started a public bond to fund the construction of the Učka Tunnel . This construction happened between 1976 and 1981 , including the construction of a 22 @.@ 6 @-@ kilometre ( 14 @.@ 0 mi ) route section between Matulji and Lupoglav . 
 The Y shape formed by the A8 and the A9 routes was originally defined by highway planning documents decided upon in Rijeka and Istria , subsequently incorporated in highway planning documents of the Republic of Croatia in 1988 . Lupoglav – Cerovlje was the next section to be completed , in 1988 . The A8 route was extended to the Rogovići interchange between 1992 and 1998 and the remaining section to Kanfanar was completed in 1999 . 
 As the construction was comparatively slow due to a lack of funding , a motorway concession for the A8 and A9 motorways was granted to BINA Istra for a period of 32 years . The build @-@ operate @-@ transfer concession agreement mandated construction , maintenance and management of the route and its upgrade to motorway standards ; this requirement included the building of dual carriageways when the annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) reached 10 @,@ 000 vehicles per day or when the average summer daily traffic ( ASDT ) reached 16 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The latter was achieved in 2005 and the motorway upgrade started in 2008 , even though the AADT at the time was only 8 @,@ 500 vehicles . The A8 expansion was commenced by the operator , BINA Istra , immediately following a similar expansion of the A9 ; on the latter , the entire route was widened except for the two largest bridges , for which the expansion was postponed . The expansion of the A8 was initially limited to the Kanfanar – Rogovići section because the remainder of the route required additional permits and consequently an extended preparation period . On 29 October 2011 , the Kanfanar – Rogovići section was upgraded to motorway standards , including four traffic lanes , and the route 's designation changed from B8 to A8 ( as required by legislated standards ) . The construction performed along the section entailed deep and long cuts requiring temporary traffic stoppages due to explosive blasting . 
 = = Future = = 
 The government of Croatia and BINA Istra have agreed on a further expansion of the A8 route ; additional carriageway and emergency lanes will be constructed between the Rogovići and Matulji interchanges , including the second Učka Tunnel tube . As of 2010 , this construction was scheduled to finish by late 2014 or early 2015 . The 45 @-@ kilometre ( 28 mi ) section is expected to cost c . 300 million euros . As of October 2011 , it was in the design development stage , while appropriate permits were expected to be issued in the summer of 2012 . In 2003 , the government also proposed to build a new route between the Učka Tunnel and the Matulji interchange in order to bypass the Opatija exit with its at @-@ grade intersection , the only one of the route ; the changes would also limit the longitudinal grade of the route to 4 @.@ 9 % and increase the design speed to 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 miles per hour ) . The new route is planned to intersect with the A7 motorway west of the Matulji interchange ( where the A8 currently ends ) , in a proposed Matulji 2 interchange , with two additional interchanges ( <unk> and <unk> ) planned between Veprinac and the new terminus . The existing Veprinac interchange is scheduled for reconstruction for an additional carriageway . The new section is expected to be 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 miles ) long ; it will be part of the Rijeka transport hub , aimed at improving the road , rail and sea transport facilities in and around Rijeka . 
 = = Traffic volume = = 
 Traffic levels are regularly determined and reported by BINA Istra , operator of the motorway , and published by Hrvatske ceste . In 2010 the traffic volume was only measured in two sections : in the Učka Tunnel and between Lupoglav and Cerovlje . In 2011 , traffic counting was started in each section of the A8 between Kanfanar interchange and the Učka Tunnel using the toll ticket counts . As of June 2012 , only the ASDT figures for 2011 have been published . The largest AADT volume was recorded in the Učka Tunnel ; it represents the only high @-@ performance link between Istria and the rest of the Croatian motorway network . 
 The differences between the AADT and ASDT traffic volumes in 2010 are attributed to the motorway 's carriage of substantial tourist traffic to the Adriatic Sea resorts along the Istrian peninsula . On average , the A8 motorway 's ASDT is at least 65 % more than the AADT . The largest increase of the ASDT relative to the AADT , 68 % , is observed in the Veprinac – Vranja section ( which includes the Učka Tunnel ) . During the summer of 2007 , an ASDT of 14 @,@ 000 was observed in the tunnel , prompting BINA Istra to consider preparing to construct the second tunnel tube . BINA Istra expects the motorways it manages to carry more than 20 @,@ 000 vehicles per day during the peak tourist season periods . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = = Service areas = = 
 As of June 2012 , there were two service areas along the A8 route . Croatian legislation identifies four types of service areas designated " A " through " D " : Type A service areas have a full range of amenities , including a filling station , a restaurant and a hotel or motel ; Type B service areas lack lodgings but are otherwise identical to Type A ; Type C service areas , which are very common , include a filling station and a café ( with waiters serving beverages , sandwiches , and snacks , but not full meals ) , but no restaurants or accommodations ; and Type D service areas only offer parking spaces , restrooms , and possibly picnicking tables and benches ( with an additional Type D1 also having a seasonal eating establishment ) . The service area filling stations frequently have small convenience stores , and some of them offer LPG fuel . 
 BINA Istra , the primary operator of the route , leases the type A , B , and C service areas to various operators through public tenders . As of September 2011 , INA was the rest @-@ area operator on the A8 and the A9 motorways . The service area operators are not permitted to sublease the fuel operations , but can sublease other parts of the service areas . The A8 's service areas are accessible from both sides of the motorway and operate 24 hours a day , 7 days a week . 
 = Lil Freak = 
 " Lil Freak " is a song by American recording artist Usher , taken from his sixth studio album , Raymond v. Raymond . Featuring guest vocals by Trinidadian recording artist Nicki Minaj , the song was written by her , Usher , Ester Dean , Blac Elvis and Polow da Don , the latter two producing the track . Its hook is based on a manipulated sample of American soul musician Stevie Wonder 's 1973 hit , " Living for the City " . " Lil Freak " was released as the second single from the album in the United States and Canada on March 2 , 2010 . 
 Carrying a dark tone , composed of heavy bass beats derived from R & B and hip hop music , the lyrics are about the thrill of orchestrating a ménage à trois in a club . The song received positive reviews from critics who complimented its sensual nature . It peaked at number 40 on the Billboard Hot 100 , and eight on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , becoming Usher 's 16th top ten hit on the latter chart . The song 's accompanying music video has a secret society concept , dealing with an underground club , playing on the storyline of the song . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an interview with MTV News when asked if he was just entertaining , Usher said the song was based on real life , stating , " Yeah , I mean , I wrote about it . It happens in this day and time . Those are the best chicks to be friends with , honestly . " Usher reiterated his statements in another interview with Access Hollywood , and when asked if he thought the racy lyrics would raise eyebrows , he said it would , commenting that that was an objective of the song . Usher also said that the work was like the dichotomy of Raymond v. Raymond , distinguishing one world from another , as in " playing the nice guy " or " showing the other side . " Before official release , the song was leaked onto the Internet in December 2009 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The song is midtempo , with supported by heavy bass beats produced by Polow da Don , which Prefix Magazine called " <unk> Park synths " . Chris Ryan of MTV News said " Usher pairs off with current queen MC Nicki Minaj , and the two glide over Polow Da Don 's minimal bass beat . " Sara D. Anderson of AOL Radio Blog said that the " heavy back @-@ beat tune confirms Usher 's old ways : " Yeah you the business / So What 's the business / Don 't be shy , I 'm just talkin ' to you girl . " Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media called the heavily manipulated " Living for the City " sample , " a monstrous swirl of orchestral exoticism " . Minaj makes several puns in her lines , one of them referring to Santa Claus 's reindeer in a <unk> which Prefix Magazine reviewed negatively . She also refers to P. Diddy and Cassie in her lines , that she 's " plotting on how I can take Cassie away from Diddy " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critics positively received the song , complimenting Minaj 's cameo and the track 's production and lyrics . Andrew Winistorfer of Prefix Magazine thought that Usher should have gone with " Lil Freak " as the album 's first big single , saying , " It ( OMG ) doesn 't come close to matching the filthy heights of " Little Freak [ sic ] ... " He also said the song was " by a wide margin , the best track to be leaked from Usher 's long @-@ delayed Raymond vs. Raymond album " . In his initial reaction , he pointed out flaws of the song , but said that the song " could become unavoidable if it gets traction on radio " . Chris Ryan of MTV News called the song , " slick , sexy hip @-@ hop @-@ infused R & B done to its finest " . He also called the song " nothing short of freak nasty , " and " is so full of sexy sexuality that it 's enough to make Tiger Woods blush " . Vibe magazine commented that " wedding ring is definitely off on this Usher cut " , and that Nicki Minaj stole the scene in the song . Pitchfork Media commented favourably on the songs explicit nature , stating the song " isn 't some R. Kelly @-@ esque devotional hymn to sexual addiction " , and that " The whole towering mess makes a drunken 3 a.m. threesome sound like the most epic endeavor anyone could hope for .. " The review also compared the song to Justin Timberlake 's " Cry Me a River " , stating , " it pushes into " Cry Me a River " territory for the same reason that " Cry Me a River " transcended : the gigantic , operatic backing track " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 On the week ending March 20 , 2010 , " Lil Freak " debuted at number 43 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It then fell to 66 , but rebounded ten spots to 56 , and later peaked at 40 on the chart . The song 's appearance on the Hot Digital Songs and Hot 100 Airplay charts at number 31 and 37 , respectively , helped stabilize its stay on the Hot 100 . " lil Freak " charted at number 28 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs months before its release due to it being leaked on the Internet . It eventually peaked at eight , and was Usher 's third straight top ten hit on the chart , and 16th overall . According to Nielsen SoundScan , it has sold 508 @,@ 000 units in the US as of October 3 , 2010 . Internationally , " Lil Freak " reached 109 on the UK Singles Chart . Usher performed the song in the United Kingdom on The Graham Norton Show on June 7 , 2010 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and concept = = = 
 Usher and Minaj shot the music video on March 9 , 2010 in Los Angeles with director Taj Stansberry , represented by Leah Harmony and Ciarra Pardo . In an interview with Vibe , Stansberry commented on the video 's sex appeal and the pairing of Usher and Minaj , stating , " This probably has the potential to be [ his sexiest video ever ] . Usher ’ s one of the best entertainers in the world , then you have Nicki Minaj who ’ s fresh on the scene . Put them together and there ’ s just sparks , it was real good . " When asked about the music video 's concept would redefine the word " freak " , commenting : 
 " My general idea was to take the word and show its many faceted sides , twisting and turning it to where there ’ s really no distinguishing between one freak and another . Usher went there . When you ’ re engaging in sexual activity , there are many transitions and this is not about what they look like literally , but what they look like metaphorically . It ’ s about luring people into a situation . Because you have your thoughts on a ménage à trois , but then we ’ re doing it in a non @-@ obvious way . " 
 On Minaj and her pairing with Usher , Stansberry said , " [ Nicki ] had a few looks that I really liked . She played the part , but still was her . If you really listen to her words in the song , you can kinda visualize her outfit . " Stansberry also confirmed that R & B singer Ciara and singer @-@ actor Jamie Foxx would make appearances in the video . In an interview with MTV News on the set of her video for " Massive Attack " , Minaj said that " The video is freaky . And it 's a great concept , a great story line , " Minaj told MTV News . " It felt just like one of the sequels to Saw . It was dope . " Stating that the video had a " secret society " concept , Usher told Access Hollywood that the place symbolized locations where people use to get away from pressures , and also said the movie Eyes Wide Shut was some sort of inspiration of the video . On March 22 , 2010 a thirty second preview of the music video was surfaced onto the internet . Two days later on March 24 , 2010 , Usher premiered the full music video on BET 's 106 & Park . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 The video begins with a woman walking in an underground tunnel , and she enters and elevator with Minaj , sporting a Cruella de Vil hairstyle , and other women . The elevator goes to what MTV News calls " Usher 's underground playground , " then soon finds Usher against a wall . A laptop is shown , and the video goes on to show people who are there , including Ciara playing a casino game . Then , girls are performing choreography on poles , as Usher sings his verses on the wall in the tunnel . Nicki Minaj then comes to sing her verse and starts talking to the unknown woman who was in the tunnel with Usher , and then Minaj guides the woman somewhere . Foxx makes appears near the end of the video , with a red light on him . Usher sings the rest of the song on the wall in the tunnel with choreography from the women , until the video fades out . 
 BET Sound Off complimented the video and that it stuck to the storyline of the song , stating " there 's only but so much you can do with a video like this " without the video being banned , being labelled offensive , or " resemble a video we ’ ve already seen . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Usher Raymond , Nicki Minaj , Polow da Don , Blac Elvis , Ester Dean , Stevie Wonder 
 Production - Blac Elvis , Polow da Don 
 Recording - Jay Stevenson 
 Mixing - Jaycen Joshua , assisted by Giancarlo Lino 
 Contains a sample from " Living For The City " , written and performed by Stevie Wonder , courtesy of Motown Records . 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Parks and Recreation ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of Parks and Recreation originally aired in the United States on the NBC television network between April 9 and May 14 , 2009 . Produced by Deedle @-@ Dee Productions and Universal Media Studios , the series was created by Greg Daniels and Michael Schur , who served as executive producers with Howard Klein . 
 The comedy series focuses on Leslie Knope ( Amy Poehler ) , the deputy director of the parks and recreation department of the fictional town of Pawnee , Indiana . The season consisted of six 22 @-@ minute episodes , all of which aired at 8 : 30 p.m. on Thursdays . Daniels and Schur conceived the show when NBC officials asked Daniels to produce a spin @-@ off of his comedy series The Office , on which Schur was a writer . During development , the creators decided the new show would be a stand @-@ alone series , though it would share the mockumentary style of The Office . Like that show , Parks and Recreation encouraged improvisation among its cast members . 
 Early test screenings were poor , and many critics and industry observers were skeptical about the show 's chances of success . The first season received generally mixed reviews , and several commentators found it too similar to The Office . The premiere episode was watched by 6 @.@ 77 million households , but the viewership declined almost every week in the Nielsen ratings . A season low of 4 @.@ 25 million households watched the final episode , " Rock Show " . Despite the low rating , " Rock Show " received the best reviews of the season and convinced some critics that the series had finally found the right tone . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Main = = = 
 Amy Poehler as Leslie Knope , the deputy director of the Pawnee parks department , who has not let politics dampen her sense of optimism ; her ultimate goal is to become President of the United States . She has a strong love for her home town of Pawnee , and desires to use her position to improve it . 
 Rashida Jones as Ann Perkins , a nurse who begins a friendship with Leslie after she and her collaborate to turn an empty pit next to Ann 's house into a park . She slowly becomes more involved in the Pawnee government due to her friendship with Leslie . 
 Paul Schneider as Mark Brendanawicz , a city planner with the Pawnee municipal government . He has long been disillusioned with government after being unable to achieve his career ambitions . Leslie harbors a strong crush on Mark due to a romantic encounter they had several years ago , but Mark does not return her feelings . Mark assists Leslie with her plan to turn the pit next to Ann 's house into a park , despite believing that the plan has no chance of success . 
 Aziz Ansari as Tom Haverford , Leslie 's self @-@ absorbed and underachieving subordinate . While he is an employee at the parks department , he cares little about his job , and is instead more focused on his entrepreneurial ambitions . He takes great pride in his personal appearance and regularly pursues women despite being married . 
 Nick Offerman as Ron Swanson , the cynical director of the parks department and Leslie 's boss . Due to his incredibly negative view of politics , he regularly works to make his department as inefficient as possible . This leads him to butt heads with Leslie on a number of occasions , as her philosophy regarding politics is the polar opposite . Despite that , both he and Leslie have a large amount of respect for one another . 
 Aubrey Plaza as April Ludgate , a young apathetic intern at the parks department . She cares little for her internship , and often shows annoyance at having to complete tasks . Due to her rebellious and emotionless attitude , she is often annoyed by her co @-@ workers , especially Leslie . 
 = = = Recurring = = = 
 Chris Pratt as Andy Dwyer , Ann 's boyfriend and lead singer of a band called " Mouse Rat " . Before the start of the series , Andy falls into the pit next to Ann 's house and breaks both his legs . This leads Ann to advocate for the pit to be filled in , beginning her friendship with Leslie . Andy is shown to be immature and lazy , making Ann pamper him non @-@ stop due to his broken legs . 
 Jim O 'Heir as Jerry Gergich , an incompetent and widely ridiculed employee at the parks department . 
 Retta as Donna Meagle , the no @-@ nonsense office manager at the parks department . 
 Pamela Reed as Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope , Leslie 's mother . Marlene is a successful politician and figure in Pawnee 's school system . Due to her success , Leslie constantly strives to impress her mother , despite the fact that Marlene has low expectations regarding her daughter 's success . 
 = = = Guest stars = = = 
 Alison Becker as Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep , a newspaper journalist for The Pawnee Journal . 
 Brian Huskey as Morgan , a sex offender . 
 Jim Meskimen as Martin <unk> , an MC at many special events around Pawnee . 
 Lennon Parham as Kate Speevak , a mother who opposes the construction of Leslie 's park . 
 Phil Reeves as Paul Iaresco , the Pawnee city manager who supports Leslie 's plan for a new park . 
 Ian Roberts as Ian Winston , an angry citizen who complains about lewd behavior in one of Pawnee 's parks . 
 Cooper Thornton as Dr. Harris , Ann 's boss at Pawnee 's hospital . 
 Jama Williamson as Wendy Haverford , a surgeon and Tom 's attractive wife . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 † denotes an extended episode . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Deedle @-@ Dee Productions and Universal Media Studios produced the first season of Parks and Recreation ; series creators Greg Daniels and Michael Schur were executive producers with Howard Klein . Dana Gould , Morgan Sackett and Amy Poehler produced , and Tucker Cawley and Norm Hiscock served as consulting producers . Daniel J. Goor was the executive story editor for the season , and Rachel Axler was a story editor . Dean Holland , an editor on The Office , also worked as an editor on Parks and Recreation 's first season . Mike Scully , a former executive producer and show runner for The Simpsons , joined Parks and Recreation as a consulting producer starting with the episode " Boys ' Club " . Cawley left the show at the end of the first season to create the short @-@ lived ABC sitcom Hank , starring Kelsey Grammer . Gould left to focus on his stand @-@ up career . The other producers all returned for the second season . Allison Jones , who worked as a casting director for The Office , served in the same capacity for Parks and Recreation , along with Nancy Perkins , for whom the character Ann Perkins was named . 
 The pilot episode was directed by Greg Daniels , and the season finale was directed by Michael Schur , his debut in the position . Other directors included Seth Gordon , director of the documentary The King of Kong : A Fistful of Quarters ; Jeffrey Blitz , who had directed numerous episodes of The Office ; Michael McCullers , co @-@ writer of the first two Austin Powers films , who directed Poehler in the comedy film Baby Mama ; and Beth McCarthy Miller , a longtime television director who worked with Poehler on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . Daniels and Schur wrote the pilot episode , and the rest of the season 's episodes were written by Axler , Goor , Hiscock , Cawley and Alan Yang . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 A principal cast of six actors received star billing in the show 's first season . Poehler portrayed the lead character , Leslie Knope , the naive but well @-@ meaning , eager @-@ to @-@ please deputy director of the parks and recreation department of the fictional town of Pawnee , Indiana . Also among the cast were Aziz Ansari as Tom Haverford , a sarcastic parks department employee , and Rashida Jones as Ann Perkins , a nurse who befriends Leslie and tries to help her turn a giant construction pit into a park . Daniels and Schur intended to cast Ansari and Jones ( who previously appeared in The Office as Karen Filippelli ) from the series ' earliest stages of development , but the ultimate Parks and Recreation concept did not coalesce until they learned Poehler would be available to star . After her recruitment , the general concept of the series was established and the script for the pilot episode was written . 
 Nick Offerman portrayed Ron Swanson , the director of the parks and recreation department , and Aubrey Plaza played April Ludgate , a sarcastic and uninterested college intern . The part was written specifically for Plaza . After meeting her , casting director Allison Jones told Schur , " I just met the weirdest girl I 've ever met in my life . You have to meet her and put her on your show . " Schur of meeting her , " Aubrey came over to my office and made me feel really uncomfortable for like an hour , and immediately I wanted to put her in the show , " although the writers were not immediately sure what direction her character would take . Rounding out the main cast was Paul Schneider , best known for his work in independent films such as Lars and the Real Girl and The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford . He was cast as Mark Brendanawicz , a city planner and Leslie 's unrequited love interest . She still harbors feelings for Mark from a one @-@ night sexual encounter years ago . Schneider said that early in the season he was insecure in the role because he was still trying to figure out the character 's motivations . Chris Pratt played Andy Dwyer , Ann 's well @-@ intentioned but lazy and simple @-@ minded boyfriend . Although Pratt appeared in every episode of season 1 , he was credited as guest star until the second season , when he was promoted to the main cast . Andy was originally supposed to appear only in the first season , but the producers liked Pratt so much that , almost immediately after casting him , they decided to make Andy a regular character if the show was renewed . 
 Jim O 'Heir and Retta made regular appearances as Jerry Gergich and Donna Meagle , two fellow employees at the Pawnee parks and recreation department . The personalities of the two characters did not become developed until the second season , but Schur said the Parks and Recreation staff liked the actors so decided to include them in the show and " figured we 'd work it out later " . Pamela Reed made several appearances as Marlene Griggs @-@ Knope , Leslie 's mother and an important figure in the Pawnee school system . Seth Gordon , who directed Reed in her first episode , " Canvassing " , said she improvised a great deal during her audition , creating many elements that helped define Marlene 's character . Jama Williamson appeared in " Rock Show " as Wendy , the attractive surgeon wife of Tom Haverford . Wendy would make numerous appearances in season 2 , during which it was revealed that the <unk> have a green card marriage . Eric Edelstein guest starred in two season 1 episodes , " Canvassing " and " Boys ' Club " , as Lawrence , a disgruntled neighbor of Andy 's . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Immediately after Ben Silverman was named co @-@ chairman of NBC 's entertainment division in 2007 , he asked Greg Daniels to create a spin @-@ off of The Office , the half @-@ hour comedy Daniels adapted from the British comedy of the same name , created by Ricky Gervais . Daniels co @-@ created Parks and Recreation with Michael Schur , who had been a writer on The Office . Like Daniels , Schur had previously worked on the NBC sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live . The two spent months considering ideas for the new series and debating whether to make it a stand @-@ alone show rather than a spin @-@ off . According to Daniels , they eventually abandoned the original spin @-@ off plan because they " couldn 't find the right fit " . They considered a series about a local government official trying to rebuild a political career following a humiliating public spectacle , but ultimately abandoned the idea . However , it was ultimately incorporated into the backstory for Ben Wyatt , the character played by Adam Scott who was added late in the second season . 
 After Poehler agreed to play the lead , they decided the show would revolve around an optimistic bureaucrat in small @-@ town government . The idea was partly inspired by the portrayal of local politics on the HBO drama series The Wire , as well as the renewed interest in and optimism about politics stemming from the 2008 United States presidential election . The staff was also drawn to the idea of building a show around a female relationship , namely Leslie Knope and Ann Perkins . Reports that Daniels and Schur were developing a show together led to press speculation that it would , in fact , be a spin @-@ off of The Office . The producers insisted their new series would be entirely independent . Nevertheless , their concept for it shared several elements with The Office , particularly the mockumentary approach , which allows the actors to look at and directly address the camera . The new show would also include documentary @-@ style interviews , in which the characters speak one @-@ on @-@ one with the camera crew about the day 's events . Again as with The Office , the new series would be scripted but improvisation would be encouraged among the actors . 
 The series was scheduled as a mid @-@ season replacement and rushed into production to meet the premiere date of April 9 , 2009 . As a result , when the series was featured at a panel during the January 2009 television critics press tour , NBC did not have a finished episode to screen , only a copy of the pilot script available for review . Some of the parts were still not cast and the series , which did not yet have a name , was referred to as The Untitled Amy Poehler Project or <unk> . The name Public Service was considered , but ultimately rejected because network officials did not want to be accused of mocking the idea . In a commercial that aired during NBC 's Super Bowl coverage in February , it was announced that the series would be called Parks and Recreation . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The show 's writers spent time researching local California politics and attending Los Angeles City Council meetings . Schur said they observed that many community hearings were attended only by those opposed , often angrily , to the proposals under consideration . This confirmed his existing impression : " I 've been to some community meetings in my life , and it is often this feeling of utter sparseness . That nobody cares . " The depiction of public hearings in several Parks and Recreation episodes was inspired by this perspective , which was also the basis for the entire " Canvassing " episode . Schur asked urban planners in Claremont , California , whether efforts to turn a construction pit into a park could realistically take several months or longer . They told him that was entirely plausible , and that they had recently broken ground on a park that had been in various planning stages for 18 years . Schur said the pit project was conceived as a device to bring all the characters together , which was partially inspired by the way various characters in The Wire were brought together to work toward a common goal or project . The writers originally envisioned the pit becoming a park only in the series finale , although those plans were later changed and the pit was filled in during the second season . 
 The Pawnee residents vocally opposed to Leslie 's park proposal were based on real @-@ life California residents the show 's producers encountered who fought the construction of parks in their hometowns . One such group , the Committee for a Better Park , was actually opposed to parks in general , and the deceptiveness of their name and mission inspired the producers ' writing for those characters . The Parks and Recreation staff worked with a number of consultants familiar with local government work , including Scott Albright , a California city planner who provided feedback for the Mark Brendanawicz character . Inspiration for Ron Swanson came from an encounter Schur had in Burbank with an elected official , a Libertarian who favored minimal government and admitted , " I don 't really believe in the mission of my job . " 
 Daniels and Schur wrote the script for the pilot episode in mid @-@ 2008 . The original script portrayed Leslie and Mark as slightly less likable than they appeared in the final draft . For example , in the premiere episode , Mark asks Ron to greenlight the park because he is inspired by Leslie 's optimism and wants to help her . In the original script , Mark intervened because he was attracted to Ann and wanted an excuse to keep seeing her . The characters were made more likable in response to feedback the episode received from focus groups and press tour screenings . The first season episodes were written and developed relatively quickly after each other , and Schur said the staff was treating the entire six @-@ episode season as if it was one television pilot . When the season concluded , the writers had not decided what would happen with the developing romantic plotlines between Leslie and Mark , or Mark and Ann . 
 Parks and Recreation involves a mixture of written dialogue and comedic improvisation . In one example from the pilot episode , Aziz Ansari 's character attempts to flirt with Rashida Jones 's when she speaks at a parks and recreation public forum . Ansari continued to improvise long after completing his scripted dialogue . In the season 's final episode , " Rock Show " , Andy goes through a list of the previous names of his rock band . About half the band names used in the episode came directly from the script , but after actor Chris Pratt made up one on the spot , the directors encouraged him to keep improvising . Pratt said he went through about 200 fake band names during the take . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Parks and Recreation faced early production delays because Poehler was pregnant when she signed on ; filming had to be postponed until she gave birth . Principal photography began on February 18 , 2009 . The show was filmed in Southern California , and the construction pit featured throughout the season was dug by the episode 's producers at an undeveloped property in Van Nuys , a district of Los Angeles . The producers went door @-@ to @-@ door in the neighborhood , seeking residents ' permission for the dig . The pit was guarded 24 hours a day , and paparazzi regularly came to the set to take photos of the actors during filming . The exterior of the Pawnee government building , and several of the hallway scenes , were shot at Pasadena City Hall . The parks and recreation department interiors , as well as the Town Hall courtyard , were filmed on a sound stage . The set 's windows were outfitted with water systems to simulate falling rain , and the windowsills included fake pigeons . Scenes set in playgrounds and elsewhere outdoors were filmed on location in Los Angeles , and the public forum scenes in the premiere episode were filmed in one of the city 's middle schools . 
 Schur said the Parks and Recreation producers approach each episode as if they are filming a real documentary . They typically shoot enough for a 35- or 40 @-@ minute episode , then cut it down to 22 minutes , using the best material . Due to the improvisational acting and hand @-@ held camerawork , a great deal of extra footage is shot that must be discarded for the final cut . According to Poehler , " For every show , there could probably be a second show of stuff we 've edited out . " The original cut of the 22 @-@ minute pilot was 48 minutes long . The producers film about nine pages of the script each day , a large amount by U.S. television standards . 
 Although the series shares a mockumentary style with The Office , Daniels and Schur sought to establish a slightly different tone in the camerawork of the pilot episode . The one @-@ on @-@ one interviews , for example , sometimes feature two separate camera angles on the same person ; the footage is intercut to create the final version of the scene . This technique was inspired by The Five Obstructions , a 2003 experimental documentary directed by Lars Von Trier and Jørgen Leth , which Daniels watched at the suggestion of actor Paul Schneider . Parks and Recreation also makes frequent use of the jump cut technique . For instance , one scene in the pilot episode repeatedly jump cuts between brief clips in which Leslie seeks permission from Ron to pursue the pit project . Early in the season , editor Dean Holland developed a technique that would be used throughout the series . During a scene in " The Reporter " in which Leslie reacts to quotes read to her by the journalist , Poehler improvised a number of jokes , many of which were ultimately going to be cut from the episode . Holland thought they were all funny , so he created a brief montage intercutting several of the lines . The producers sought to lend authenticity to the fictional Pawnee setting by incorporating real @-@ life Indiana elements . They contacted the Bloomington – based Upland Brewing Company and asked for empty beer bottles and labels to be used as background props . 
 The six episodes of the first season aired Thursdays at 8 : 30 p.m. The premiere was shown between two season 5 episodes of The Office : " Dream Team " and " Michael Scott Paper Company " . " The Reporter " was originally supposed to be the season 's second episode , but the schedule was changed and " Canvassing " , originally planned as the third episode , was shown second instead . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The first season of Parks and Recreation started to receive criticism before the premiere episode aired . According to a March 18 , 2009 , report that was leaked to television journalist Nikki Finke , focus groups responded poorly to a rough @-@ cut version of the pilot . Many focus group members felt the show was a " carbon copy " of The Office . Some found it predictable , slow paced and lacking in character development , and felt the beginning of the episode needed to better explain the setting and plot . Some viewers said the show lacked strong male characters , particularly a " datable " lead . On the other hand , viewers said the show 's portrayal of government bureaucracy was " very believable " and had the potential to generate amusing situations . While Poehler 's character drew mixed comments , the actress herself was " well liked " . The early feedback left many critics and industry observers skeptical about the show 's chances of success . In response to the leak , Ben Silverman , co @-@ chairman of NBC Entertainment , said the feedback on rough cuts is usually negative , even with ultimately successful shows . Schur said that the pilot had been completely re @-@ edited at least four times since the focus group described in the report were held . 
 The first season received generally mixed to negative reviews . Many critics said the series was too similar to The Office and its mock documentary style . In particular , several commentators said the naive and well @-@ meaning Leslie Knope character too closely resembled The Office protagonist Michael Scott , the well @-@ intentioned but dimwitted manager of a paper company sales office . Maureen Ryan , television reviewer for the Chicago Tribune , said Parks and Recreation surpassed the Friends spin @-@ off Joey as the " worst example of NBC 's tendency to extend its franchises well beyond what is desirable or logical . " Daniels said of the comparisons between Leslie Knope and Michael Scott , " My sense is that if we had built ' Parks and Recreation ' around a 90 @-@ year @-@ old Maasai warrior people would still have said , ' He reminds me of Michael Scott ' . There was just no way to escape it . " Poehler acknowledged that there was some validity to the comparisons , but felt that the series overcame them with the production of " Rock Show " : " I think it was something we had to work through in the beginning , and I ’ m kind of hoping we ’ re on the other side of that and people will start to judge the show on its own , for what it is and realize it ’ s just a completely different world in a similar style . " 
 Salon.com writer Jonah Weiner said of the first season , " Each episode wound up more or less the same way , with the humiliation of Poehler 's quixotic , adorably doofy bureaucrat " . Some critics said the show 's characters and overall tone were too mean @-@ spirited in the early episodes . While reviewers praised various cast members in individual episodes , some said the supporting characters in general needed to be more fully developed and provided with better material . Several wrote that some of the subplots were too predictable and risked becoming stale , such as Leslie 's long @-@ standing crush on Mark and the question of whether Andy and Ann would keep dating . Others said Leslie was too unintelligent and ditzy . Schur said that was not the intention of the writers , and the feedback prompted changes to the character in the second season . Years after the first season ended , Schur said he believed much of the early criticism stemmed from the fact that audiences were not yet familiar with the characters , and he believed viewers who revisited the episodes enjoyed them more because they had gotten to know the characters better as the series progressed . 
 Not all reviews were negative . Several commentators said the show had potential , and pointed out that early episodes of The Office had been flat before the series found its footing . The finale , " Rock Show " , received the best reviews of the season . Several commentators declared that Parks and Recreation had finally found the right tone both generally and for the Leslie Knope character in particular . Several reviewers , even those who did not enjoy the show , applauded Poehler 's comedic abilities and said her talent , timing and likability helped elevate the series above some of its flaws . Reviewers also said they particularly liked Aziz Ansari as Tom Haverford , and Chris Pratt as Andy Dwyer . Some commentators approved of the Pawnee setting as offering a good opportunity to satirize small @-@ town government and politics . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Parks and Recreation 's premiere was seen in 6 @.@ 77 million households . Media outlets described this as a solid result , comparable to the average Nielsen ratings for 30 Rock , another Thursday @-@ night show on NBC . However , viewership declined almost every week over the rest of the season , culminating in a season low of 4 @.@ 25 million households for the final episode . The average first season viewership was 5 @.@ 45 million households per episode . The Office experienced similarly poor ratings during its first season and later became a success . However , the low viewership presented a greater challenge for Parks and Recreation because NBC now trailed CBS , ABC and Fox in the ratings , and the move of comedian Jay Leno from The Tonight Show to a variety show in NBC 's 10 p.m. weeknight slot left less room on the network 's primetime schedule . 
 Retta said acting during the first season was stressful because it was unclear how long the show would stay on the air , due to the poor reviews and ratings . Likewise , Chris Pratt said there was a constant feeling among the Parks staff that the show could be canceled at any time : " At the end of season one Parks and Rec , you hug the people really , really fucking tight because you just don 't know . " 
 = = DVD release = = 
 The first season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on September 8 , 2009 . The DVD included all six episodes , as well as an " Extended Producer 's Cut " of the season finale , " Rock Show " . The disc also included cast and crew commentary tracks for each episode , as well as about 30 minutes of deleted scenes . 
 = Millennium ( season 1 ) = 
 The first season of the serial crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium commenced airing in the United States on October 25 , 1996 , concluding on May 16 , 1997 , and consisting of twenty @-@ two episodes . It tells the story of retired FBI Agent Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) . Black has moved to Seattle , Washington with his family and has begun working with a mysterious organization known only as the Millennium Group . He investigates cases with members of the Group and the Seattle Police Department , contributing his remarkable capability of relating to the monsters responsible for horrific crimes . He finds that his daughter has inherited the same " gift " that he has , while the cases become increasingly more personal . 
 Critics received season one well . Although the show got the highest number of viewers for a pilot episode for the Fox Network at the time , it steadily dropped in the ratings , which led to it losing the Sunday slot to its sister show , The X @-@ Files . The main cast of the show were Henriksen as Frank Black and Megan Gallagher as Catherine Black . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The original idea behind Millennium came from an episode of The X @-@ Files Chris Carter had written about a serial killer . The episode got Carter thinking about the " monsters " who lurked in the shadows . Later , he started to flesh out a character which would become Frank Black , but he was busy working with other projects at the time . In the mid @-@ 1990s , after the success of The X @-@ Files , the Fox Network asked Carter if he could create another show for them . 
 Originally , the show was planned to include a new " murder mystery " each week , at the same time having a comprehensive storyline . So Carter created the idea of the new millennium , which could give the show its own " feel " . He felt he " could capitalise " and at the same time have a new murder mystery every week with a " millennial " twist to it . He also wanted to explore " evil " , not the " scientific approach " which was the psychological explanation of " evil " . Carter wanted to explore evil through an " unscientific approach " , an exploration where " the Bible " played an important role . While clearly stating that the show was not supposed to be heavily grounded in religious text , he felt in many ways that the Bible explained " things on various levels " and " not just in the modern scientific way . " 
 = = = Casting and characters = = = 
 Chris Carter had envisioned Lance Henriksen portraying the character of Frank Black , long before he was ever contacted . Although Carter 's colleagues responded positively to the selection , the Fox Network wanted someone younger to take the lead part . Fox asked William Hurt to play the lead role , but after finding out that Hurt had no interest in acting on television , Henriksen got the part . 
 When Henriksen first got the script , he mistook it for a film because of its " powerful " story . He was not fond of the idea of participating in a television project . Henriksen contacted Carter about the character ; his first question was " How are you going to make this hero a hero ? I mean , it is so dark , how are you going to handle this ? " Carter replied saying that Frank was a hero because he was able to " stand @-@ up " against all of this . Henriksen was also worried about the dark " feel " of the show , saying that all shows needs some glimpse of light at the end of the tunnel . According to Carter " The yellow house " was the light , which Henriksen later agreed upon . 
 Studio executive Ken Horton was very pleased with Megan Gallagher 's acting experiences . After winning the audition , she was given a " secret script " . Reacting positively towards the script , she later met up with Carter and David Nutter . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Peter Wunstorf was nominated for an American Society of Cinematographers award for his work on the pilot episode . Lance Henriksen was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for his portrayal of Frank Black but lost to E.R. performer , Anthony Edwards . Co @-@ star Brittany Tiplady was later nominated for a Young Artist Award but failed to win . The show itself was nominated for a People 's Choice Award in the category " Favorite Television New Dramatic Series " but did not win . Robert McLachlan was nominated and won a Canadian Society of Cinematographers in 1997 . 
 The first season was received well by critics . Keith Uhlich of Salon magazine called the season and series " Carter 's greatest series " , and that , " television work always improves in retrospect ; his seemingly haphazard , on @-@ the @-@ fly narratives become more coherent when taken out of the hellish , commercial break @-@ happy context wherein they spawned " . Paul Katz of Entertainment Weekly said , " Despite the unapologetic bleakness " of the show , it was Lance Henriksen performance that was the " real killer " . Mark <unk> from The Seattle Times said the " X @-@ Files follow @-@ up was uncompromisingly grim , fascinating , cinematically crafted " , and that the show was " years ahead " of such " forensic mysteries " as CSI : Crime Scene Investigation . USA Today writer Matt Roush said " With nightmare visions of bleeding walls , charred bodies , decapitations and a grisly live burial " , the show took a new " grim view " on " drama " . 
 Although the season premiere received good ratings , the series gradually lost viewers as they were reportedly " turned off by the morose and unnerving story lines . " 
 = = Main cast = = 
 = = = Starring = = = 
 Lance Henriksen as Frank Black 
 Megan Gallagher as Catherine Black 
 = = = Recurring = = = 
 Terry O 'Quinn as Peter Watts 
 Brittany Tiplady as Jordan Black 
 Stephen J. Lang as Det . Bob Giebelhouse 
 Bill Smitrovich as Lt. Robert Bletcher 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = Algonquin Hotel = 
 The Algonquin Hotel is a historic hotel located at 59 West 44th Street in Manhattan ( New York , New York ) . The hotel has been designated as a New York City Historic Landmark . 
 The 181 @-@ room hotel , opened in 1902 , was designed by architect Goldwin Starrett . It was originally conceived as a residential hotel but was quickly converted to a traditional lodging establishment . Its first owner @-@ manager , Frank Case ( who bought the hotel in 1927 ) , established many of the hotel 's traditions . Perhaps its best @-@ known tradition is hosting literary and theatrical notables , most prominently the members of the Algonquin Round Table . 
 = = History = = 
 The Algonquin Hotel was originally designed as an apartment hotel , whose owner planned to rent rooms and suites on year @-@ long leases . When few leases sold , the owner decided to turn it into a hotel which he was originally going to name " The Puritan " . Frank Case , upon discovering that Algonquian tribes had been the first residents of the area , persuaded the owner to christen it " The Algonquin " instead . 
 Case took over the lease on the hotel in 1907 and bought the property on which the building sat in 1927 for US $ 1 million . Case remained owner and manager of the hotel until his death in June 1946 . In October that year , The Algonquin was purchased by Ben Bodne of Charleston , South Carolina for just over US $ 1 million . Bodne undertook an extensive restoration and renovation effort . Bodne sold the hotel in 1987 to a group of Japanese investors and the Algonquin changed hands a number of times before ending up with Miller Global Properties in 2002 . Following a two @-@ year , US $ 3 million renovation , the hotel was sold again in 2005 to <unk> Hospitality . 
 <unk> has affiliated it with Marriott International where it is part of Marriott ’ s Autograph Collection brand . 
 = = The Algonquin Round Table = = 
 In June 1919 the hotel became the site of the daily meetings of the Algonquin Round Table , a group of journalists , authors , publicists and actors who gathered to exchange bon mots over lunch in the main dining room . The group met almost daily for the better part of ten years . Some of the core members of the " Vicious Circle " included Franklin P. Adams , Robert Benchley , Heywood Broun , Marc Connelly , Jane Grant , Ruth Hale , George S. Kaufman , Neysa McMein , Dorothy Parker , Harold Ross , Robert E. Sherwood and Alexander Woollcott . 
 The Algonquin Round Table – a group of notorious literary figures ( mostly critics ) who made The Algonquin their daily meeting place – set forth to implement significant literary styles in the early 1900s . 
 At the end of World War I , Vanity Fair writers and Algonquin regulars Dorothy Parker , Robert Benchley , and Robert E. Sherwood started meeting for lunch at The Algonquin . Alexander Woollcott , acerbic critic and war correspondent , received a warm welcome from literary friends in 1919 . They gathered in the Rose Room that afternoon ; one person enjoyed the event enough to request that it become a daily event . That same request prompted a daily exchange of ideas and opinions shared between highly esteemed literary figures . George S. Kaufman , Heywood Broun , and Edna Ferber were also a part of this August assembly ; these individuals influenced writers like F. Scott Fitzgerald and Ernest Hemingway . They founded The New Yorker magazine ; all hotel guests receive free copies to this day . 
 Frank Case , owner of the hotel , ensured a daily luncheon for the talented group of young writers by treating them to free celery and <unk> ; more importantly , they were provided with their own table and waiter . Edna Ferber , Franklin P. Adams , George S. Kaufman , Heywood Broun , and Marc Connelly eventually joined the group , expanding its membership . All members were affiliated with the Algonquin Round Table , although they referred to themselves as the Vicious Circle . 
 Visitors often request to dine at the actual “ round table ” where members originally met for decades . 
 = = The Oak Room = = 
 The Oak Room at the Algonquin was long one of New York City 's premier cabaret nightclubs . Opened in 1939 ( as the Oak Room Supper Club ) , it was soon closed on account of World War II , reopened as a regular venue in 1980 , and closed for good in 2012 . ( Before 1939 , it had been called the Pergola Room and was the first meeting place of what became the Algonquin Round Table ) . 
 Legendary European chanteuse Greta Keller was the room 's first star . When Donald Smith reopened the Oak Room in 1980 , the first regular and star was singer @-@ pianist Steve Ross . Other performers who have appeared at the Oak Room include Julie Wilson , Mary <unk> Haran , Karen Akers , KT Sullivan , Barbara Carroll , Sandy Stewart , Bill Charlap , Diana Krall , Jessica <unk> , and John <unk> . Andrea <unk> performed there over a span of 25 years , sometimes with her mother Helen <unk> ( né Stuart ) , becoming effectively an Algonquin institution . The Oak Room helped launch the careers of Harry Connick Jr. and Michael Feinstein . Sylvia Syms collapsed and died on stage there during a performance in 1992 . 
 With its oak panels and other decor recalling an earlier time , the heyday of cabaret , the Oak Room was small , intimate , and expensive ( at least $ 100 per person , more if one had dinner , except for matinees ) , and was not a big moneymaker for the Algonquin . Part of the space occupied by the former Oak Room was used to enlarge the Blue Bar , the rest was converted into a private breakfast room for Marriott Reward Elite customers . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 The hotel has a tradition of keeping a cat that has the run of the hotel . The practice dates to the 1930s , when Frank Case took in a stray male cat that was initially named " Rusty . " Hotel lore says actor John Barrymore suggested the cat needed a more " dignified " name , so the cat was renamed " Hamlet . " Nowadays , whenever the hotel has a male cat , he 's named Hamlet ; but if the hotel has a female cat , she 's named " Matilda . " The current Algonquin cat , a Matilda , is a <unk> that was named 2006 cat of the year at the Westchester ( New York ) Cat Show . Visitors can spot Matilda on her personal chaise longue in the lobby ; she can also be found in her favorite places : behind the computer on the front desk , or lounging on a baggage cart . The doormen feed her and the general manager 's executive assistant answers Matilda 's e @-@ mail . During 2011 , Matilda was temporarily confined to an upper floor or to the limits of a leash tethered to the check @-@ in desk , due to a directive from the city Department of Health . As of late 2011 , Matilda has been confined to the non @-@ food areas of the lobby by an electronic pet fence . 
 Although the Algonquin was " dry " even before Prohibition ( Case closed the hotel bar in 1917 and had harsh words for those who ran speakeasies ) , the hotel does have an eponymous cocktail , composed of rye whiskey , <unk> Prat and pineapple juice . More recently , a newer drink has hit the Algonquin 's menu , the $ 10 @,@ 000 Martini or " Martini on the Rock , " consisting of a martini of the buyer 's choice with a single piece of " ice , " a diamond , at the bottom of the glass . The martini was developed to mark completion of a major 29 @-@ day renovation that closed the hotel for the first time since its opening . Hoy Wong was a notable bartender at the hotel and was the oldest person to hold such a position in the state , serving at the Algonquin for 30 years until retiring in 2009 , well past the age of 90 . 
 In keeping with Frank Case 's long @-@ standing tradition of sending <unk> and celery to the more impoverished members of the Round Table , the Algonquin offers lunch discounts to struggling writers . Formerly , writers on tour could stay one night at the hotel free in exchange for an autographed copy of their book , although the practice has been amended to include a discount on standard room rates . 
 = = Landmark status = = 
 The Algonquin Round Table , as well as the number of other literary and theatrical greats who lodged there , helped earn the hotel its status as a New York City Historic Landmark . The hotel was so designated in 1987 . In 1996 the hotel was designated a National Literary Landmark by the Friends of Libraries USA . The organization 's bronze plaque is attached to the front of the hotel . 
 = Pilot ( Devious Maids ) = 
 " Pilot " is the series premiere to the Lifetime series Devious Maids . The pilot had been ordered by ABC on January 31 , 2012 and cast during the following two months . Filming began in March . ABC declined to pick up the pilot on May 14 , but Lifetime did so on June 22 , ordering 13 episodes . Although most of the cast had been selected by this time three additional regular supporting characters were added in November 2012 for inclusion in the pilot and the continuing series . The series was once proposed to be a spinoff of Desperate Housewives , but is not one . 
 The episode revolves around the murder of a Latina maid in Beverly Hills and the introduction of her cadre of associates who are also Latina maids . The maids are shown in their employment surroundings with their upper class employers who play supporting roles . The main character is not actually a maid but rather the mother of the primary murder subject who poses as a maid to gain entrance into the world where she might find clues to prove her son 's innocence . 
 The pilot episode was released online in both Spanish and English on June 9 , 2013 , before its television debut on June 23 . The episode , which was written by series creator Marc Cherry and directed by Paul McGuigan , debuted with a 1 @.@ 99 rating . The episode was the first episode of any television series with an all Latina leading cast , but the roles as maids was controversial due to its presentation of Latinas in stereotypical roles . Nonetheless , critical feedback was generally positive . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the opening scene , Evelyn Powell ( Rebecca Wisocky ) gives her maid Flora ( Paula Garces ) the following warning " I think what you people do is heroic ... You wash clothes you can 't afford . You polish silver you will never dine with . ... I am in awe of your determination to succeed in this great country of ours . That said , if you don 't stop screwing my husband , I 'm going to have you deported . " Subsequently a season @-@ long story arc around which the show revolves begins with Flora 's murder . 
 Flora was stabbed by a mysterious figure while scrawling a rape claim that accuses Evelyn 's husband Adrian Powell ( Tom Irwin ) . She manages to drag herself to the pool during a lavish party and falls in . At her funeral , her four maid friends Zoila ( Judy Reyes ) , Valentina ( Edy Ganem ) , Rosie ( Dania Ramirez ) and Carmen ( Roselyn Sanchez ) agree not to divulge their knowledge of the infidelity and its circumstances . 
 The employer of Zoila and her daughter Valentina , Genevieve <unk> ( Susan Lucci ) , is enduring emotional distress . For both personal reasons and out of concern for Genevieve , Valentina comes up with the idea that Genevieve 's son Remi ( Drew Van Acker ) should return to live at home rather than University of Southern California campus housing in order to help stabilize his mother . Zoila eventually recognizes and tries to temper Valentina 's romantic interest in Remi . 
 Meanwhile , Rosie is fighting for her young son to join her from Mexico while working for the self @-@ absorbed Spence ( Grant Show ) and Peri ( Mariana <unk> ) . Along with Sam Alexander ( <unk> Parks ) and Odessa <unk> ( Melinda Page Hamilton ) Carmen is a staff member for Latino music star Alejandro Rubio ( Matt Cedeño ) who she is trying to convince to help her start her music career . Marisol ( Ana Ortiz ) , who is not really a maid , successfully interviews to be the fifth maid for the show as an employee of second wife Taylor ( Brianna Brown ) and Michael ( Brett Cullen ) , who hires her despite objections from Taylor . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 The teleplay and story were written by series creator Marc Cherry , and the episode was directed by Paul McGuigan . Most filming occurred in and around Los Angeles . Cherry created the show with a multiple female lead dynamic that was similar to his previous success , Desperate Housewives . His first job in Hollywood was as a personal assistant , allowing him to relate to the maid characters to some degree . He felt that Devious Maids provided a vehicle to deal with themes that Desperate Housewives did not , while being very different than the similarly themed Downton Abbey , due to Downton 's historic nature . The format of the show that was pitched to ABC was as a spinoff of Desperate Housewives . While Roselyn Sanchez 's character Carmen appeared as a gardener in the final episode of Desperate Housewives , " Finishing the Hat " , the final version that was produced is not strictly a spinoff . 
 ABC ordered the pilot based on the Mexican telenovela <unk> son la Alegría del Hogar ( translation : " They Are the Home 's Joy " , which is sometimes referred to as The Disorderly Maids Of The Neighborhood ) , on January 31 , 2012 . Dania Ramirez was the first lead cast member to be cast , being announced on February 15 . Ana Ortiz joined the cast as the central character on February 17 . On February 23 , both Sanchez and Judy Reyes were added to the cast . When Edy Ganem was announced in the cast on March 2 the show was still described as centering on the other four maids ( Ortiz , Reyes , Sanchez and Ramirez ) . 
 Rebecca Wisocky , who joined the cast on February 23 , had previously guest starred on Desperate Housewives as Bree Van de Kamp 's mother . She had shot the final season episode , " Women and Death " less than a month before testing for Devious Maids . Most of the other supporting roles were filled in in March : Brianna Brown ( March 6 ) ; Susan Lucci , Drew Van Acker and Brett Cullen ( all March 9 ) ; Mariana <unk> and Grant Show ( both March 12 ) ; and Tom Irwin ( March 16 ) ; By March 21 , filming had begun in Beverly Hills . Brown was considered for the show after she impressed executive producer Sabrina Wind with her 2011 season 1 guest appearance on Homeland . 
 Eva Longoria was announced as an executive producer on March 26 . She had worked previously with Cherry on Desperate Housewives , and was hired to add perspective to the Latina roles . ABC Studios gave Cherry permission to start making senior staffing offers for the show on May 1 , which was perceived as an indication that the show would be picked up . 
 On May 14 , 2012 , the pilot was not picked up by ABC for the 2012 – 13 United States network schedule . On June 22 , Lifetime picked up the pilot with a thirteen @-@ episode order . The network stated that they were " thrilled to be getting into business with one of entertainment ’ s true visionaries . This show and Marc Cherry ’ s unique story telling voice perfectly articulate Lifetime ’ s strategy of attracting top @-@ tier creatives with their most original and exciting projects . " <unk> Parks was added to the cast in a regular role on November 21 . Melinda Page Hamilton and Matt Cedeño were added to the cast in recurring roles with the promise of promotion if the show got picked up for a second season on November 26 . Both were expected to appear in the pilot episode . 
 The episode was marketed as an important milestone in television history because it was the debut of the first television show with an all Latina leading cast . However , in the days leading up to the debut , there was controversy surrounding the concept of having Latina actresses glorify the stereotypical roles of maids , nannies and gardeners . On May 3 , Tanisha Ramirez criticized the show in The Huffington Post as a wasted opportunity , but executive producer Longoria countered that the show presents " modern day woman 's view on universal themes . " Cosmopolitan for Latinas editor Michelle Herrera Mulligan responded to Longoria by calling the show an " insulting disgrace " . Cherry defended the show for its substantive themes : " Devious Maids deals with themes of racism , classism and immigration . These women all work in the homes of rich people , but they have goals and dreams that are much greater than the people they work for realize . " 
 The pilot episode was released online in both Spanish and English on June 9 , 2013 , before its television debut on a variety of platforms , including <unk> and the Lifetime video watch app . The first two episodes were available on Lifetime . In the weeks before its June 23 premiere , the cast members were scheduled to host screenings around the country : Ramirez and Sanchez on June 4 in Miami , Reyes and Ganem on June 6 in Dallas , and Ortiz and Lucci on June 11 in Chicago . The show 's premier party was held in Los Angeles on June 17 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The episode first aired on June 23 , 2013 in the United States , debuting with a 1 @.@ 99 rating in the <unk> ( Eastern Time Zone ) time slot . In the adults 18 @-@ 49 viewer demographic , Devious Maids posted a 0 @.@ 65 rating , which lagged the 0 @.@ 74 rating for The Client List 's season finale the week before in the same time slot for Lifetime . Cable television shows in the same time slot included the Mad Men season 6 finale , " In Care Of " , on AMC ( which drew a 2 @.@ 69 rating ) , Falling Skies on TNT ( 3 @.@ 59 rating ) . The shows ratings were modest compared to other Lifetime drama series debuts such as Drop Dead Diva , The Client List and Army Wives , which all had ratings close to 3 million . Approximately one third of the Devious Maids viewership for the pilot ( 662 @,@ 000 ) were from the Lifetime network 's target demographic of women ages 25 – 54 . The pilot attracted higher ratings in subsequent weeks . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The show resembles Desperate Housewives in many ways , including having a " pilot " that revolves around a death , according to Daily News critic David Hinckley . Hinckley states that the pilot presents each of the five main characters in a way that makes them intriguing , while tackling contemporary issues with a mix of comedy and drama . Hinckley lauded the show by saying " ... a Cherry drama rises or falls on the pretty simple test of whether it ’ s fun , and ' Devious Maids ' has the right stuff to get to there . " Alessandra Stanley , the chief television critic for The New York Times , at first described the show as a " landmark " where the rich " Beverly Hills employers are mere foils for the real heroines , who are poor , Hispanic and striving : desperate housekeepers . " Stanley felt that servant heroines are a bit of an overused perspective in 2013 as is the use of tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek humor . After describing the evolution of maid , butler and nanny roles on television , Stanley notes that this was not a show that depicts " how the other half really lives " , but rather " an over @-@ the @-@ top dramedy " . 
 Robert Bianco of USA Today felt the show benefited from not being picked up by ABC , where it would have been in the shadow of Desperate Housewives , and from being scheduled as summer television , where its competition was weak . Bianco believed that the various storylines were gracefully woven together in the scenes of the episode . Rob Owen of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette described the show as a guilty pleasure . Owen stated that although the show was not original for following Desperate Housewives ' path , it was good summer entertainment that managed to slip in a bit of " social satire " . Mary McNamara of the Los Angeles Times panned the show 's pilot , describing it as " a silly , hyperactive version of Downton Abbey " , although she acknowledged that the episode had elements of The Great Gatsby ( the opening murder ) and West Side Story ( the schoolgirl crush ) . San Francisco Chronicle critic David Wiegand said " the pilot episode may not break any new ground , but it 's energetic and funny " . He also noted that " it 's a hoot the first time we see the maids get the better of their shallow , self @-@ absorbed bosses ... " , but he felt that this theme might lack the depth to retain audience interest . 
 = Dassault Rafale = 
 The Dassault Rafale ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> ] , literally meaning " gust of wind " , and " burst of fire " in a more military sense ) is a French twin @-@ engine , canard delta wing , multirole fighter aircraft designed and built by Dassault Aviation . Equipped with a wide range of weapons , the Rafale is intended to perform air supremacy , interdiction , aerial reconnaissance , ground support , in @-@ depth strike , anti @-@ ship strike and nuclear deterrence missions . The Rafale is referred to as an " <unk> " aircraft by Dassault . 
 In the late 1970s , the French Air Force and Navy were seeking to replace and consolidate their current fleets of aircraft . In order to reduce development costs and boost prospective sales , France entered into an arrangement with four other European nations to produce an agile multi @-@ purpose fighter . Subsequent disagreements over <unk> and differing requirements led to France 's pursuit of its own development program . Dassault built a technology demonstrator which first flew in July 1986 as part of an eight @-@ year flight @-@ test programme , paving the way for the go @-@ ahead of the project . The Rafale is distinct from other European fighters of its era in that it is almost entirely built by one country , involving most of France 's major defence contractors , such as Dassault , Thales and Safran . 
 Many of the aircraft 's avionics and features , such as direct voice input , the RBE2 AA active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar and the <unk> <unk> frontal infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) sensor , were domestically developed and produced for the Rafale programme . Originally scheduled to enter service in 1996 , the Rafale suffered significant delays due to post @-@ Cold War budget cuts and changes in priorities . The aircraft is available in three main variants : Rafale C single @-@ seat land @-@ based version , Rafale B twin @-@ seat land @-@ based version , and Rafale M single @-@ seat carrier @-@ based version . 
 Introduced in 2001 , the Rafale is being produced for both the French Air Force and for carrier @-@ based operations in the French Navy . The Rafale has been marketed for export to several countries , and it has been selected for purchase by the Indian Air Force , the Egyptian Air Force , and the Qatar Air Force . The Rafale has been used in combat over Afghanistan , Libya , Mali , Iraq and Syria . Several upgrades to the weapons and avionics of the Rafale are planned to be introduced by 2018 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1970s , both the French Air Force ( Armée de l 'Air ) and Navy ( Marine nationale ) had requirements for a new generation of fighters to replace those in or about to enter service . Because their requirements were similar , and to reduce cost , both departments issued a common request for proposal . In 1975 , the French Ministry of Aviation initiated studies for a new aircraft to complement the upcoming and smaller Dassault Mirage 2000 , with each aircraft optimised for differing roles . 
 In 1979 , the French company Dassault joined the MBB / BAe " European Collaborative Fighter " ( ECA ) project which was renamed the " European Combat Aircraft " . The French company contributed the aerodynamic layout of a prospective twin @-@ engine , single @-@ seat fighter ; however , the project collapsed in 1981 due to differing operational requirements of each partner country . In 1983 , the " Future European Fighter Aircraft " ( <unk> ) programme was initiated , bringing together Italy , Spain , West Germany , France and the United Kingdom to jointly develop a new fighter , although the latter three had their own aircraft developments . 
 A number of factors led to the eventual split between France and the other four countries . Around 1984 France reiterated its requirement for a carrier @-@ capable version and demanded a leading role . It also insisted on a swing @-@ role fighter that was lighter than the design favoured by the other four nations . West Germany , the UK and Italy opted out and established a new EFA programme . In Turin on 2 August 1985 , West Germany , the UK and Italy agreed to go ahead with the Eurofighter , and confirmed that France , along with Spain , had chosen not to proceed as a member of the project . Despite pressure from France , Spain rejoined the Eurofighter project in early September 1985 . The four @-@ nation project eventually resulted in the development of the Eurofighter Typhoon . 
 = = = Design phase and prototype = = = 
 In France , the government proceeded with its own programme . The French Ministry of Defence required an aircraft capable of air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ ground , all @-@ day and adverse weather operations . Unlike other contemporary European fighter projects that required some level of international collaboration and cost @-@ sharing , France was the sole developer of the Rafale 's airframe , avionics , propulsion system and armament , and as such the aircraft was to replace a multitude of aircraft in the French Armed Forces . The Rafale would perform roles previously filled by an assortment of specialised platforms , including the Jaguar , Mirage <unk> / CR / CT , Mirage <unk> / -5 / N in the Armée de l 'air , and the F @-@ 8P Crusader , Étendard <unk> / M and Super Étendard in the Aéronavale . 
 During October – December 1978 , prior to France 's joining of the ECA , Dassault received contracts for the development of project ACT 92 ( Avion de Combat Tactique , meaning " Tactical Combat Airplane " ) . The following year , the National Office for Aviation Studies and Research began studying the possible configurations of the new fighter under the codename Rapace ( meaning " Bird of Prey " ) . By March 1980 , the number of configurations had been narrowed down to four , two of which had a combination of canards , delta wings and a single vertical tail @-@ fin . In October 1982 , the French Ministry of Defence announced that Dassault would build a technology demonstrator named Avion de Combat <unk> ( Experimental Combat Airplane ) , in short ACX . France wanted to collaborate with West Germany and the UK on the project , but was prepared to build the ACX by itself . In 1984 , the government decided to proceed with a combat variant of the ACX due to the conflicting technical criteria of the respective <unk> participant nations . 
 The resultant Rafale A technology demonstrator was a large @-@ delta winged fighter , with all @-@ moving canards , embodying fly @-@ by @-@ wire ( FBW ) flight control system . Construction of the demonstrator commenced in March 1984 , even before a contract was signed with the DGA , France 's defence procurement agency . The technology demonstrator was rolled out in December 1985 in Saint @-@ Cloud , and took its maiden flight on 4 July 1986 from Istres @-@ Le <unk> Air Base in southern France . During the one @-@ hour flight , the project 's chief test pilot Guy <unk> @-@ <unk> took the aircraft to an altitude of 11 @,@ 000 metres ( 36 @,@ 000 ft ) and a speed of Mach 1 @.@ 3 . The 9 @.@ 5 @-@ tonne ( 21 @,@ 000 lb ) demonstrator stopped in 300 metres ( 980 ft ) upon landing . 
 Throughout the flight test programme , the Rafale A performed numerous day and night take @-@ offs and landings aboard the carriers Clemenceau and Foch to investigate the pilot 's field of view during carrier operations . It reached a speed of Mach 2 ( 2 @,@ 450 km / h ; 1 @,@ 522 mph ; 1 @,@ 322 @.@ 9 kn ) and a height of 13 @,@ 000 metres ( 42 @,@ 000 ft ) . The demonstrator was initially powered by General Electric F404 @-@ GE @-@ 400 afterburning turbofans from the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet , instead of the Snecma M88 , to reduce the risk that often comes with a first flight , and since the M88 was not considered sufficiently mature for the initial trials programme . It was not until May 1990 when the M88 replaced the port F404 in the demonstrator to enable the aircraft to reach Mach 1 @.@ 4 and demonstrate supercruise , or sustained supersonic flight without use of afterburners . After 865 flights with four pilots , Rafale A was retired in January 1994 . 
 At the time of the Rafale A 's maiden flight , France entered unsuccessful talks with Belgium , Denmark , the Netherlands and Norway about a possible collaboration on the Rafale as a multinational project ; at the time , Belgium was reportedly interested in the Rafale B. In June 1987 , Prime Minister Jacques Chirac declared that the country would proceed with the US $ 30 billion project . Subsequently , on 21 April 1988 , the French government awarded Dassault a contract for four Rafale prototypes : one Rafale C , two Rafale Ms and one Rafale B. The first out of an expected 330 Rafales was scheduled to enter service in 1996 . However , the fall of the Berlin Wall , which signalled the end of the Cold War , as well as the need to reduce the national deficit , compelled the French government to drastically reduce its defence budget ; the 1994 budget for the Rafale programme was cut by some US $ 340 million . This reduced the size of the Rafale orders , which Dassault and other companies involved claimed impeded production management and led to higher costs , and delayed the entry of the aircraft into service . The French Air Force was reorganised , the Mirage 5F was completely phased out and a total of 55 Mirage <unk> were upgraded to a tactical fighter configuration , redesignated as Mirage <unk> . The budget cuts prolonged the Rafale 's development considerably . 
 During the Rafale A flight test programme , the French government in 1989 looked at the F / A @-@ 18 Hornet as a potential replacement for the rapidly aging F @-@ 8 Crusader , which had been serving since the 1950s . The French Navy entered talks regarding the purchase of second @-@ hand F / A @-@ 18s with Australia , Canada and the US , after the decision was made not to upgrade the Crusaders . The US Navy agreed to supply two F / A @-@ 18s to the French Navy for " interoperability testing " aboard the French aircraft carrier Foch . The French government did not proceed with a purchase of the twin @-@ engine fighter . 
 = = = Testing = = = 
 To meet the various roles expected of the new aircraft , the Air Force required two variants : the single @-@ seat " Rafale C " ( chasseur , meaning " fighter " or literally " hunter " ) and the " Rafale B " ( <unk> , or two @-@ seater ) . The prototype of the C model ( designated C01 ) completed its first flight on 19 May 1991 , signalling the start of a test programme which primarily aimed to test the M88 @-@ 2 engines , man @-@ machine interface and weapons , and expand the flight envelope . Due to budget constraints , the second single @-@ seat prototype was never built . 
 The C01 differed significantly from the Rafale A. Although superficially identical to the technology demonstrator , it was smaller and more stealthy due to the gold @-@ coated canopy , a re @-@ design of the fuselage @-@ fin joint , and the addition of radar @-@ absorbent materials ( RAM ) . This aircraft also saw extensive application of composite and other materials , which both reduced the radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) and weight . Moreover , Dassault opted to reject variable engine inlets and a dedicated air brake , which lessens maintenance loads and saves weight . The B01 , the only prototype of the two @-@ seat B variant , made its maiden flight on 30 April 1993 . It was 350 kilograms ( 770 lb ) heavier than the single @-@ seater , but carried 400 litres ( 110 US gal ) less fuel . The aircraft was used for weapon @-@ systems testing . Later it was tasked with validating weapon separation and , specifically , the carriage of heavy loads . The aircraft 's typical loadout consisted of two 2 @,@ 000 @-@ litre ( 530 US gal ) external tanks , two Apache / Scalp cruise missiles , in addition to four air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . 
 The Navy , meanwhile , sought a carrier @-@ based aircraft to supersede its fleet of ageing Étendard <unk> , F @-@ 8P Crusaders and Super Étendard <unk> . While the Navy initially modernised the Crusaders , in the long term , the requirement was met with the navalised Rafale M. The M01 , the naval prototype , first flew on 12 December 1991 , followed by the second on 8 November 1993 . Since France had no land @-@ based catapult test facility , catapult trials were initially carried out between during July – August 1992 and early the following year , at NAS Lakehurst in New Jersey . The aircraft then carried out trials aboard the carrier Foch in April 1993 . Flown by Dassault 's chief test pilot , Yves <unk> , <unk> made its maiden flight in November that year , while the first prototype completed the third round of testing at Lakehurst in November and December 1993 . 
 The Rafale M features a greatly reinforced undercarriage to cope with the additional stresses of naval landings , an arrestor hook , and " jump strut " nosewheel , which only extends during short takeoffs , including catapult launches . It also features a built @-@ in ladder , carrier @-@ based microwave landing system , and the new fin @-@ tip <unk> system for syncing the inertial navigation system to external equipment . Altogether , the naval modifications of the Rafale M increase its weight by 500 kilograms ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) compared to other variants . The Rafale M retains about 95 percent commonality with Air Force variants including , although unusual for land @-@ based aircraft , being unable to fold its multi @-@ spar wings to reduce storage space . The size constraints were offset by the introduction of Charles de Gaulle , France 's first nuclear @-@ powered carrier , which was considerably larger than previous carriers , Foch and Clemenceau . 
 = = = Production and upgrades = = = 
 Initially , the Rafale B was to be just a trainer , but the Gulf War showed that a second crew member was invaluable on strike and reconnaissance missions . Therefore , in 1991 the Air Force switched its preferences towards the two @-@ seater , announcing that the variant would constitute 60 percent of the Rafale fleet . The service originally envisaged taking delivery of 250 Rafales , but this was initially revised downwards to 234 aircraft , made up of 95 " A " and 139 " B " models " , and later to 212 aircraft . The Navy , meanwhile , had 60 Rafales on order , down from 86 due to budget cuts . Of the 60 , 25 would be M single @-@ seaters and 35 two @-@ seat Ns , though the two @-@ seater was later cancelled . 
 Production of the first aircraft series formally started in December 1992 , but was suspended in November 1995 due to political and economic uncertainty . Production only resumed in January 1997 after the Ministry of Defence and Dassault agreed on a 48 @-@ aircraft ( 28 firm and 20 options ) production run with delivery between 2002 and 2007 . A further order of 59 F3 Rafales was announced in December 2004 . In November 2009 the French government ordered an additional 60 aircraft to take the total order for the French Air Force and Navy to 180 . 
 During the Rafale 's design phase , Dassault took advantage of Dassault <unk> ' CATIA ( Computer Aided Three @-@ dimensional Interactive Application ) , a three @-@ dimensional computer @-@ aided design , manufacture and engineering software suite that would become standard across the industry . CATIA enabled digitisation and efficiency improvements throughout the Rafale programme , as it implemented recently developed processes such as digital mockup and product data management . It consisted of 15 GB databases of each of the Rafale 's components , assisting with various aspects of the design , manufacture and through @-@ life support . 
 According to the French magazine L <unk> nouvelle , apart from several non @-@ sensitive components sourced from the United States , the Rafale is manufactured almost entirely in France . Different elements are produced in numerous factories across the country , and final assembly takes place near Bordeaux – Mérignac Airport . For example , the flight control surfaces are fabricated in Haute @-@ Savoie , the wings and avionics in Gironde , the centre fuselage in Val @-@ d 'Oise , and the engines in Essonne . Roughly 50 percent of the Rafale is produced by Dassault and the other half divided between two major partners , Thales and Safran , who rely on a network of 500 subcontractors . Altogether , the programme employs 7 @,@ 000 workers . As of 2012 , the fabrication process of each fighter took 24 months , with an annual production rate of eleven aircraft . 
 Deliveries of the Rafale 's naval version were a high priority to replace the Navy 's considerably aged F @-@ 8 Crusaders , and so the first production model for the French Navy undertook its first flight on 7 July 1999 . Their first naval deployment was in 2002 on board Charles de Gaulle ; by March 2002 , the aircraft carrier was stationed in the Gulf of Oman , where its complement of Rafales undertook training operations . In December 2004 , the Air Force received its first three F2 standard Rafale Bs at the Centre d <unk> Aériennes Militaires ( <unk> , i.e. the Military Air Experiment Centre ) at Mont @-@ de @-@ Marsan , where they were tasked to undertake operational evaluation and pilot conversion training . 
 The total programme cost , as of FY2013 , was around € 45 @.@ 9 billion , which translated to a unit programme cost of approximately € 160 @.@ 5 million . This figure takes in account improved hardware of the F3 standard , and which includes development costs over a period of 40 years , including inflation . The unit flyaway price as of 2010 was € 101 @.@ 1 million for the F3 + version . 
 In 2008 , French officials were reportedly considering equipping the Rafale to launch miniaturised satellites . In 2011 , upgrades under consideration included a software radio and satellite link , a new laser @-@ targeting pod , smaller bombs and enhancements to the aircraft 's data @-@ fusion capacity . In July 2012 , fleetwide upgrades of the Rafale 's battlefield communications and interoperability capabilities commenced . 
 In January 2014 , Defence Minister Jean @-@ Yves Le <unk> announced that € 1 billion is allocated towards the development of the <unk> standard . The standard will see the integration of the Meteor BVR missile , among other weapons and software updates . The standard is to be validated by 2018 . The Rafale is planned to be the French Air Force 's primary combat aircraft until 2040 or later . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Rafale was developed as a modern jet fighter with a very high level of agility ; Dassault chose to combine a delta wing with active close @-@ coupled canard to maximize manoeuvrability . The aircraft is capable of withstanding from − <unk> to <unk> ( <unk> on Rafale solo display and a maximum of 11g can be reached in case of emergency ) . The Rafale is an aerodynamically unstable aircraft and uses digital fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight controls to artificially enforce and maintain stability . The aircraft 's canards also act to reduce the minimum landing speed to 115 knots ( 213 km / h ; 132 mph ) ; while in flight , airspeeds as low as 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) have been observed during training missions . According to simulations by Dassault , the Rafale has sufficient low speed performance to operate from <unk> @-@ configured aircraft carriers , and can take off using a ski @-@ jump with no modifications . 
 Although not a full @-@ aspect stealth aircraft , the cost of which was viewed as unacceptably excessive , the Rafale was designed for a reduced radar cross @-@ section ( RCS ) and infrared signature . In order to reduce the RCS , changes from the initial technology demonstrator include a reduction in the size of the tail @-@ fin , fuselage reshaping , repositioning of the engine air inlets underneath the aircraft 's wing , and the extensive use of composite materials and serrated patterns for the construction of the trailing edges of the wings and canards . 70 % of the Rafale 's surface area is composite . Many of the features designed to reduce the Rafale 's visibility to threats remain classified . 
 = = = Cockpit = = = 
 The Rafale 's glass cockpit was designed around the principle of data fusion – a central computer intelligently selects and prioritises information to display to pilots for simpler command and control . The primary flight controls are arranged in a hands @-@ on @-@ throttle @-@ and @-@ stick ( HOTAS ) <unk> configuration , with a right @-@ handed side @-@ stick controller and a left @-@ handed throttle . The seat is inclined rearwards at an angle of 29 ° to improve g @-@ force tolerance during manoeuvring and to provide a less restricted external pilot view . An intelligent flight suit worn by the pilot is automatically controlled by the aircraft to counteract in response to calculated g @-@ forces . 
 Great emphasis has been placed on pilot workload minimisation across all operations . Among the features of the highly digitised cockpit is an integrated direct voice input ( DVI ) system , allowing a range of aircraft functions to be controlled by spoken voice commands , simplifying the pilot 's access to many of the controls . Developed by <unk> , the DVI is capable of managing radio communications and countermeasures systems , the selection of armaments and radar modes , and controlling navigational functions . For safety reasons , DVI is deliberately not employed for safety @-@ critical elements of the aircraft 's operation , such as the final release of armaments . 
 For displaying information gathered from a range of sensors across the aircraft , the cockpit features a wide @-@ angle holographic head @-@ up display ( HUD ) system , two head @-@ down flat @-@ panel colour multi @-@ function displays ( MFDs ) as well as a central collimated display . These displays have been strategically placed to minimise pilot distraction from the external environment . Some displays feature a touch interface for ease of Human – computer interaction ( HCI ) . A head @-@ mounted display ( HMD ) for target controlling , while optional according to customer preferences , can also be integrated . The cockpit is fully compatible with night vision goggles ( NVG ) . 
 In the area of life @-@ support , the Rafale is fitted with a Martin @-@ Baker Mark 16F " zero @-@ zero ” ejection seat , capable of operation at zero speed and zero altitude . An on @-@ board oxygen generating system , developed by Air Liquide , eliminates the need to carry bulky oxygen canisters . The Rafale 's flight computer has been programmed to counteract pilot disorientation and to employ automatic recovery of the aircraft during negative flight conditions . The auto @-@ pilot and autothrottle controls are also integrated , and are activated by switches located on the primary flight controls . 
 = = = Avionics and equipment = = = 
 The Rafale core avionics systems employ an integrated modular avionics ( IMA ) , called <unk> ( modular data processing unit ) . This architecture hosts all the main aircraft functions such as the flight management system , data fusion , fire control , and the man @-@ machine interface . The total value of the radar , electronic communications and self @-@ protection equipment is about 30 percent of the cost of the entire aircraft . The IMA has since been installed upon several upgraded Mirage 2000 fighters , and incorporated into the civilian airliner , the Airbus A380 . According to Dassault , the IMA greatly assists combat operations via data fusion , the continuous integration and analysis of the various sensor systems throughout the aircraft , and has been designed for the incorporation of new systems and avionics throughout the Rafale 's service life . 
 The Rafale features an integrated defensive @-@ aids system named SPECTRA , which protects the aircraft against airborne and ground threats , developed as a joint venture between Thales and MBDA . Various methods of detection , jamming , and <unk> have been incorporated , and the system has been designed to be highly re @-@ programmable for addressing new threats and incorporating additional sub @-@ systems in the future . Operations over Libya were greatly assisted by SPECTRA , allowing Rafales to perform missions independently from the support of dedicated Suppression of Enemy Air Defences ( SEAD ) platforms . 
 The Rafale 's ground attack capability is heavily reliant upon sensory targeting pods , such as Thales <unk> 's Reco New Generation / Areos reconnaissance pod and Damocles electro @-@ optical / laser designation pod . Together , these systems provide targeting information , enable tactical reconnaissance missions , and are integrated with the Rafale 's IMA architecture to provide analysed data feeds to friendly units and ground stations , as well as to the pilot . Damocles provides targeting information to the various armaments carried by the Rafale and is directly integrated with the Rafale 's VHF / UHF secure radio to communicate target information with other aircraft . It also performs other key functions such as aerial optical surveillance and is integrated with the navigation system as a FLIR . 
 The Damocles designation pod were described as " lacking competitiveness " when compared to rivals such as the Sniper and LITENING pods ; so work began on an upgraded pod , designated Damocles XF , with additional sensors and added ability to transmit live video feeds . A new Thales targeting pod , the <unk> , was officially unveiled at the 2014 Farnborough Air Show and is expected to be integrated on the Rafale by 2018 . Thales ' Areos reconnaissance pod is an all @-@ weather , night @-@ and @-@ day @-@ capable reconnaissance system employed on the Rafale , and provides a significantly improved reconnaissance capability over preceding platforms . Areos has been designed to perform reconnaissance under various mission profiles and condition , using multiple day / night sensors and its own independent communications <unk> . 
 = = = Radar and sensors = = = 
 The Rafale was first outfitted with the Thales RBE2 passive electronically scanned multi @-@ mode radar . Thales claims to have achieved increased levels of situational awareness as compared to earlier aircraft through the earlier detection and tracking of multiple air targets for close combat and long @-@ range interception , as well as real @-@ time generation of three @-@ dimensional maps for terrain @-@ following and the real @-@ time generation of high resolution ground maps for navigation and targeting . In early 1994 , it was reported that technical difficulties with the radar had delayed the Rafale 's development by six months . In September 2006 , Flight International reported the Rafale 's unit cost had significantly increased due to additional development work to improve the RBE2 's detection range . 
 The RBE2 AA active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) radar now replaces the previous passively scanned RBE2 . The RBE2 AA is reported to deliver a greater detection range of 200 km , improved reliability and reduced maintenance demands over the preceding radar . A Rafale demonstrator began test flights in 2002 and has totaled 100 flight hours as of December 2011 . By December 2009 , production of the pre @-@ series RBE2 AA radars was underway . In early October 2012 , the first Rafale equipped with an RBE2 AA radar arrived at Mont @-@ de @-@ Marsan Air Base for operational service ( the development was described by Thales and Dassault as " on time and on budget " ) . By early 2014 , the first Air Force front @-@ line squadron were supposed to receive Rafales equipped with the AESA radar , following the French Navy which was slated to receive AESA @-@ equipped Rafales starting in 2013 . 
 To enable the Rafale to perform in the air supremacy role , it includes several passive sensor systems . The front @-@ sector electro @-@ optical system or <unk> <unk> Frontal ( OSF ) , developed by Thales , is completely integrated within the aircraft and can operate both in the visible and infrared wavelengths . The OSF enables the deployment of infrared missiles such as the MICA at beyond visual range distances ; it can also be used for detecting and identifying airborne targets , as well as those on the ground and at sea . Dassault describes the OSF as being immune to jamming and capable of providing covert long @-@ range surveillance . In 2012 , an improved version of the OSF was deployed operationally . 
 = = = Armaments and standards = = = 
 Initial deliveries of the Rafale M were to the F1 ( " France 1 " ) standard , these had been equipped for the air @-@ to @-@ air interceptor combat duties , but lacked any armaments for air @-@ to @-@ ground operations . Later deliveries were to the " F2 " standard , which added the capability for conducting both air @-@ to @-@ ground and reconnaissance operations ; the first F2 standard Rafale M was delivered to the French Navy in May 2006 . Starting in 2008 onwards , Rafale deliveries have been to the nuclear @-@ capable F3 standard , and it has been reported that all aircraft built to the earlier F1 and F2 standards are to be upgraded to become <unk> . 
 F3 standard Rafales are capable of undertaking many different mission roles with a range of equipment , namely air defence / superiority missions with Mica IR and EM air @-@ to @-@ air missiles , and precision ground attacks typically using SCALP EG cruise missiles and AASM Hammer air @-@ to @-@ surface armaments . In addition , anti @-@ shipping missions could be carried out using the <unk> Exocet sea skimming missile , while reconnaissance flights would use a combination of onboard and external pod @-@ based sensor equipment . Furthermore , the aircraft could conduct nuclear strikes when armed with ASMP @-@ A missiles . In 2010 , France ordered 200 MBDA Meteor beyond @-@ visual @-@ range missiles which will greatly increase the distance at which the Rafale can engage aerial targets when the missile enters service . 
 For compatibility with armaments of varying types and origins , the Rafale 's onboard store management system is compliant with MIL @-@ STD @-@ 1760 , an electrical interface between an aircraft and its carriage stores , thereby simplifying the incorporation of many of their existing weapons and equipment . The Rafale is typically outfitted with 14 hardpoints ( only 13 on Rafale M version ) , five of which are suitable for heavy armaments or equipment such as auxiliary fuel tanks , and has a maximum external load capacity of nine tons . In addition to the above equipment , the Rafale carries the 30 mm GIAT 30 DEFA cannon and can be outfitted with a range of laser @-@ guided bombs and ground @-@ attack munitions . According to Dassault , the Rafale 's onboard mission systems enable ground attack and air @-@ to @-@ air combat operations to be carried out within a single sortie , with many functions capable of simultaneous execution in conjunction with another , increasing survivability and versatility . 
 = = = Engines = = = 
 The Rafale is fitted with two Snecma M88 engines , each capable of providing up to 50 kN ( 11 @,@ 250 lbf ) of dry thrust and 75 kN ( 16 @,@ 900 lbf ) with afterburners . The engines feature several advances , including a non @-@ polluting combustion chamber , single @-@ crystal turbine blades , powder metallurgy disks , and technology to reduce radar and infrared signatures . The M88 enables the Rafale to supercruise while carrying four missiles and one drop tank . 
 Qualification of the M88 @-@ 2 engine ended in 1996 and the first production engine was delivered by the end of the year . Due to delays in engine production , some of the early Rafales were temporarily powered by the General Electric F404 engine . In May 2010 , a Rafale flew for the first time with the M88 @-@ 4E engine , an upgraded variant with greater thrust and lower maintenance requirements than the preceding M88 @-@ 2 . The engine is of a modular design for ease of construction and maintenance and to enable older engines to be retrofitted with improved subsections upon availability , such as existing M88 @-@ 2s being upgraded to M88 @-@ 4E standard . There has been interest in more powerful M88 engines by potential export customers , such as the United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) . As of 2007 , a thrust vectoring variant of the engine designated as M88 @-@ 3D was also under development . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = France = = = 
 = = = = Aéronavale = = = = 
 In December 2000 , the French Naval Aviation ( Aéronavale ) , the air arm of the French Navy , received its first two Rafale M fighters . On 18 May the following year , the squadron Flottille 12F , which had previously operated the F @-@ 8 Crusader , became the first squadron to operate the Rafale after it was officially re @-@ activated prior to the delivery of the sixth Rafale . Flottille 12F immediately participated in Trident d ’ Or aboard the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle with warships from ten other nations . During the maritime exercise , the Navy tested the Rafale 's avionics during simulated interceptions with various foreign aircraft , in addition to carrier take @-@ offs and landings . After almost four years of training , the Rafale M was declared operational with the French Navy in June 2004 . 
 The Rafale M is fully compatible with US Navy aircraft carriers and some French Navy pilots have qualified to fly the aircraft from US Navy flight decks . On 4 June 2010 , during an exercise on USS Harry S. Truman ( CVN @-@ 75 ) , a French Rafale became the first jet fighter of a foreign navy to have its engine replaced on board an American aircraft carrier . 
 In 2002 , the Rafales were first deployed to a combat zone ; seven Rafale Ms embarked aboard Charles de Gaulle of the French Navy during " Mission <unk> " , the French participation in " Operation Enduring Freedom " . They flew from the aircraft carrier over Afghanistan , but the F1 standard precluded air @-@ to @-@ ground missions and the Rafale did not see any action . In June 2002 , while Charles de Gaulle was in the Arabian Sea , Rafales conducted several patrols near the India @-@ Pakistan border . 
 = = = = French Air Force = = = = 
 Rafales were delivered to the French Air Force several years after the naval variant , initially with the Centre d ’ <unk> Aériennes Militaires ( French Air Force Evaluation Centre ) at Mont @-@ de @-@ Marsan Air Base in the trials and training role . By this time , it was expected that Escadron de Chasse ( Fighter Squadron ) 1 / 7 at Saint @-@ Dizier would receive a nucleus of 8 – 10 Rafale <unk> during the summer of 2006 , in preparation for full operational service ( with robust air @-@ to @-@ air and stand off air @-@ to @-@ ground precision attack capabilities ) starting from mid @-@ 2007 ( when EC 1 / 7 would have about 20 aircraft , 15 two @-@ seaters and five single @-@ seaters ) . 
 In 2007 , after a " crash program " enhancement six Rafales were given the ability to drop laser @-@ guided bombs , in view of engaging them in Afghanistan . Three of these aircraft belonging to the Air Force were deployed to Dushanbe in Tajikistan , while the three others were Rafale Marine of the Navy on board Charles De Gaulle . The first mission occurred on 12 March 2007 , and the first GBU @-@ 12 was launched on 28 March in support of embattled Dutch troops in Southern Afghanistan , marking the operational début of the Rafale . Between January 2009 and December 2011 , a minimum of three Rafales were stationed at Kandahar International Airport to conduct combat operations in support of NATO ground forces . 
 On 19 March 2011 , French Rafales began conducting reconnaissance and strike missions over Libya in Opération Harmattan , in support of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1973 ; initial targets were artillery pieces laying siege around the rebel city of Benghazi . The Rafale could operate in Libya without the support of SEAD aircraft , using the onboard SPECTRA self @-@ defence system instead . On 24 March 2011 , it was reported that a Rafale had destroyed a Libyan Air Force G @-@ 2 / Galeb light attack / trainer aircraft on the runway . 
 During the conflict , Rafales typically conducted six @-@ hour sorties over Libyan airspace , carrying an armament of four MICA air @-@ to @-@ air missiles , four or six AASM " Hammer " bombs , a Thales <unk> targeting pod and two drop tanks ; these patrols required multiple aerial refuelling operations per sortie from coalition tanker aircraft . The AASM precision @-@ guidance weapon system , using bombs weighing between 125 kilograms ( 280 lb ) and 1 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 200 lb ) , allowed the Rafale to conduct high @-@ altitude bombing missions . Reportedly , Rafale crews preferred to use GPS @-@ guided munitions due to greater reliability and range . Storm Shadow SCALP weapons were deployed on only one or two sorties , including one against a Libyan airbase at Al @-@ <unk> . In 2011 , aviation journalist Craig Hoyle speculated that the Rafale 's performance in Libya is likely to be pivotal to its export future , reporting that the Rafale had maintained a high operational rate throughout the deployment . Hoyle also noted that the Libyan combat experience had caused several urgent operational requirements to present themselves , such as the need for a lighter ground @-@ attack munition and to modify the AASM weapon to be more effective in the close air support role . 
 In January 2013 , the Rafale took part in " Opération Serval " , the French military intervention in support to the government of Mali against the Movement for Oneness and Jihad in West Africa . The first mission was carried out on 13 January , when four Rafales took off from an airbase in France to strike rebel training camps , depots and facilities in the city of Gao , eastern Mali . Subsequent airstrikes in the following days by Rafale and Mirage fighters were reportedly instrumental in the withdrawal of Islamist militant forces from Timbuktu and <unk> . Both Rafale and Mirage <unk> aircraft used in the conflict have been based outside of North Africa , making use of aerial refuelling tanker aircraft to fly long range sorties across Algerian airspace and into Mali . 
 In August 2013 , it was proposed that France may halve the number of Rafales to be delivered over the next six years for a total of 26 aircraft to be delivered during this period ; foreign export procurements have been viewed as critical to maintain production under this proposal . While production would be slowed , France would still receive the same number of Rafales overall . 
 In September 2014 , Rafales began flying reconnaissance missions over Iraq as part of Opération <unk> , France 's contribution to the international effort to combat Islamic State ( IS ) militants . Six ( later nine ) Rafales were initially tasked with identifying IS positions in support of US airstrikes , flying from Al Dhafra Air Base , UAE . On 18 September , Rafales joined American operations in conducting attacks , launching four strikes near the Northern Iraqi town of <unk> that destroyed a logistics depot and killed dozens of IS fighters . 
 In December 2015 , American and French military officials reportedly discussed the possibility of French naval Rafale Ms flying combat missions from a US Navy Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carrier as soon as January 2017 . This would enable continued French Navy operations against ISIL while Charles de Gaulle undergoes its year and a half @-@ long major refit , scheduled to begin in early 2017 . Although Rafales have launched and landed on U.S. carriers to demonstrate interoperability , it would be the first time they would fly combat missions from one . As many as 18 Rafale Ms could be deployed on a carrier , although some room would have to be made for French Navy support crews familiar with maintaining the Rafale , as well as for spare parts and munitions . 
 = = = Egypt = = = 
 In November 2014 , it was reported by several sources , including the French newspaper La Tribune that Egypt was in negotiations with France to purchase 24 to 36 Rafales , subject to the financing agreement . By February 2015 , the two countries were negotiating a loan from France 's export credit agency to reach an export agreement for up to 24 Rafale fighters . Egypt hoped to complete deal quickly to have aircraft on display at the inauguration of the Suez Canal expansion in August 2015 . 
 On 16 February 2015 , Egypt became the Rafale 's first international customer when it officially ordered 24 Rafales , as part of a larger deal ( including a <unk> multipurpose frigate and a supply of missiles ) worth US $ 5 @.@ 9 billion ( € 5 @.@ 2 billion ) . In July 2015 , the official ceremony , marking the acceptance by Egypt of its first 3 Rafales , was held at the Dassault Aviation flight test center in Istres . In January 2016 , Egypt received three more Rafales for a total of six fighters . All six aircraft are two @-@ seat models and were diverted from delivery to the French Air Force ; Egypt 's order has 8 single @-@ seat models and 16 two @-@ seaters . In June 2016 , it was reported that Egypt is in negotiations with Dassault to acquire 12 additional Rafales for a total of 36 . 
 = = = Qatar = = = 
 From January 2011 the Qatar Emiri Air Force evaluated the Rafale alongside the Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , the Boeing F @-@ 15E , the Eurofighter Typhoon , and the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II to replace its then inventory of Dassault Mirage 2000 @-@ 5s . By June 2014 , Dassault had claimed it was close to signing a contract with Qatar for 72 Rafales . On 30 April 2015 , Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani announced to French President François Hollande that Qatar will order 24 Rafale with an option to buy additional 12 more aircraft . The € 6 @.@ 3 billion ( $ 7 @.@ 02 billion ) deal for 24 Rafales was signed on 4 May . 
 = = = India = = = 
 The Rafale was one of the six aircraft competing in the Indian MRCA competition for 126 multirole fighters . Originally , the Mirage 2000 had been considered for the competition , but Dassault withdrew it in favour of the Rafale . In February 2011 , French Rafales flew demonstrations in India , including air @-@ to @-@ air combat against Su @-@ <unk> . In April 2011 , the Indian Air Force ( IAF ) shortlisted the Rafale and Eurofighter Typhoon for the US $ 10 @.@ 4 billion contract . On 31 January 2012 , the IAF announced the Rafale as the preferred bidder . It was proposed that 18 Rafales would be supplied to the IAF by 2015 in fly @-@ away condition , while the remaining 108 would be manufactured by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited ( HAL ) in India under transfer of technology agreements . The contract for 126 Rafales , services , and parts may have been worth up to US $ 20 billion . 
 The deal stalled due to disagreements over production in India . Dassault refused to take responsibility for the 108 HAL @-@ manufactured Rafales , as it had reservations about the ability of HAL to accommodate the complex manufacturing and technology transfers of the aircraft . Instead , Dassault said it would have to negotiate two separate production contracts by both companies . The Indian Defence Ministry instead wanted Dassault to be solely responsible for the sale and delivery of all 126 aircraft . In May 2013 , The Times of India reported that negotiations were " back on track " , with plans for the first 18 Rafales to be delivered in 2017 . Another point of contention was a provision where Dassault was to reinvest 50 percent of the deal 's earnings into India 's defence sectors , either through purchases or technological expertise . In March 2014 , the two sides were reported to have agreed that the first 18 aircraft would be delivered to India in flying condition and that the remaining 108 would be 70 percent built by HAL . In December 2014 , it was reported that India and France expect to sign a contract by March 2015 . 
 In April 2015 , during Prime Minister Narendra Modi 's visit to Paris , India requested the rapid delivery of 36 Rafales in fly @-@ away condition . Indian Defence Minister Manohar <unk> stated that these will be inducted into the IAF within two years . India officially withdrew the 126 @-@ aircraft <unk> tender on 30 July 2015 . Shortly after , India and France missed the July target of finalizing the 36 @-@ aircraft agreement . The previously @-@ agreed @-@ upon terms in April totaled US $ 8 billion for 36 aircraft costing $ 200 million each , with an offset requirement of 30 percent of the deal 's value for France to reinvest in India 's defense sector and create infrastructure in India for the Rafale to operate . India is insisting on a 50 percent offset and two bases , which France says will increase price and require separate infrastructure and two sets of maintenance , training , and armament storage facilities . 
 In January 2016 , the Indian government directed the Indian Navy to undertake detailed briefings with Dassault regarding the Rafale , in a potential start to procurement of the naval version for its aircraft carriers . The government wants commonalities between logistics and spares for fighters with the Navy and Air Force , which could lead to a buy of 54 naval fighters . As of June 2016 , negotiations were ongoing . 
 = = = Potential operators = = = 
 Analysts view the relatively quick series of 84 orders from Egypt , India and Qatar as being influenced by the Arab Spring and uncertainty of US involvement in the Middle East . 
 = = = = Canada = = = = 
 The Rafale has been amongst various aircraft proposed to meet Canada 's need for a modern jet fighter to replace the aging McDonnell Douglas CF @-@ 18 Hornet of the Royal Canadian Air Force . In 2005 , according to Canada.com , a report compiled by Canada 's Defence Department reviewing several competing aircraft had noted concerns over the Rafale 's interoperability with US forces ; Dassault had also then been unable to confirm engine performance during cold weather conditions . In July 2010 , the Canadian government announced the replacement for the CF @-@ 18 was to be the F @-@ 35 Lightning II , as the country has been a partner in the Joint Strike Fighter program since 1997 and a Tier 3 partner for the F @-@ 35 since 2002 . 
 Then in December 2012 , the Canadian government announced that the purchase of the F @-@ 35 had been abandoned due to greatly escalating costs , and that a fresh procurement process would begin . In January 2013 , Dassault responded to a request for information from the Canadian government and announced its readiness to enter a future competition for a future fighter procurement . Various aircraft are to be considered to meet the requirement , including the F @-@ 35 . In January 2014 , it was reported that Dassault offered a contract with full transfer of technology to allow Canada to perform its own support and upgrades , thereby lowering long @-@ term service costs . 
 = = = = Finland = = = = 
 In June 2015 , a working group set up by the Finnish MoD proposed starting the so @-@ called HX program to replace the Finnish Air Force 's current fleet of F / A @-@ 18 Hornets . The group recognises five potential types : Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , Dassault Rafale , Eurofighter Typhoon , Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 Lightning II and Saab JAS 39 Gripen . 
 In December 2015 Finnish MoD sent a letter to Great Britain , France , Sweden and the United States where it informed that the fighter project was launched in the Defence Forces . The goal of the project is to replace the Hornet fleet , which will be decommissioned as of 2025 , with multi @-@ role fighters . The project has been named as HX Fighter Program . Dassault Rafale is mentioned in the letter as a potential fighter for the program . The request for information concerning the HX Fighter Program will be sent at the latest in March 2016 . A call for tender will be sent in spring 2018 and the buying decision is scheduled to take place in 2021 . 
 = = = = Malaysia = = = = 
 The Rafale is one of contenders for the replacement of the Royal Malaysian Air Force 's ( RMAF ) Mikoyan MiG @-@ 29 . The RMAF is looking to equip three squadrons with 36 to 40 new fighter aircraft with an estimated budget of <unk> billion to <unk> billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 84 billion to US $ 2 @.@ 46 billion ) . The other competitors for the program are the Eurofighter Typhoon , Boeing F / A @-@ 18 / F Super Hornet and Saab JAS 39 Gripen . 
 = = = = United Arab Emirates = = = = 
 In 2009 , the United Arab Emirates Air Force was interested in an upgraded version of the Rafale with more powerful engines and radar , and advanced air @-@ to @-@ air missiles . In October 2011 , Dassault was confident that a US $ 10 @-@ billion deal for up to 60 Rafale aircraft would be signed . However , Deputy Supreme Commander of the Union Defence Force , Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan , in November 2011 called the French offer " uncompetitive and unworkable " ; France had in 2010 asked the UAE to pay US $ 2 @.@ 6 billion of the total cost to upgrade the Rafale . Consequently , the UAE started to explore a purchase of the Eurofighter Typhoon or the F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet . 
 The newspaper La Tribune reported in February 2012 , that the UAE was still considering the US $ 10 @-@ billion deal for 60 Rafales . <unk> among the Gulf air forces has led to renewed interest in the Rafale from Qatar and Kuwait . In January 2013 , President Hollande stated that he would be discussing the potential sale of Rafale to the UAE during an official visit . In December 2013 , it was announced that UAE had decided not to proceed with a deal for the supply of defence and security services , including the supply of Typhoon aircraft . In September 2014 it was announced that the UAE could acquire 40 Rafales in addition to upgrades to its existing Mirage 2000s . In November 2015 , Reuters reported that Major General Ibrahim Nasser Al Alawi , commander of the UAE Air Force and Air Defence , had confirmed that the UAE was in final negotiations to purchase 60 Rafales . 
 = = = Failed bids = = = 
 The Rafale has been marketed for export to various countries . Various commentators and industry sources have highlighted the high cost of the aircraft as detrimental to the Rafale 's sales prospects . Its acquisition cost is roughly US $ 100 million ( 2010 ) , while its operational cost hovers around US $ 16 @,@ 500 ( 2012 ) for every flight @-@ hour . The Saab JAS Gripen , in comparison , costs only US $ 4 @,@ 700 per flight @-@ hour to operate . According to a 2009 article by the Institute for Defense Studies and Analysis , unlike the American government and its relationship with Boeing and Lockheed Martin , the lack of communication between the French government and Dassault has hampered a worldwide cooperative sales effort , as demonstrated by the case with Morocco in 2007 . 
 = = = = Brazil = = = = 
 In June 2008 , the Brazilian Air Force issued a request for information on the following aircraft : F / A @-@ 18E / F Super Hornet , F @-@ 16 Fighting Falcon , Rafale , Su @-@ 35 , Gripen NG and Eurofighter Typhoon . In October 2008 , the Brazilian Air Force selected three finalists for F @-@ X2 – Dassault Rafale , Gripen NG and Boeing F / A @-@ 18E / F. On 5 January 2010 , media reports stated that the final evaluation report by the Brazilian Air Force placed the Gripen ahead of the other two contenders based on unit and operating costs . In February 2011 , the press announced that the new president of Brazil , Dilma Rousseff , had decided in favour of the American F @-@ 18 . After much delay due to budget constraints , in December 2013 the Brazilian government selected the Gripen NG in a US $ 5 billion deal to equip the country 's air force . 
 = = = = Singapore = = = = 
 In 2005 , the Republic of Singapore Air Force embarked on its Next Generation Fighter ( NGF ) programme to replace its fleet of ageing A @-@ <unk> Super Skyhawks . A number of options were considered and the Defence Science & Technology Agency ( <unk> ) conducted a detailed technical assessment , as well as simulations and other tests to determine the final selection . Following this , the original list of competitors was reduced to the final two – Dassault Rafale and the F @-@ <unk> Strike Eagle . In December 2005 , Singapore ordered 12 F @-@ <unk> aircraft . According to Defense Industry Daily , one major reason for the selection was that , while the Rafale had superior aerodynamics , it lacked the range and a capable radar , and had insufficient weapons and sensor integration . 
 = = = = Switzerland = = = = 
 In February 2007 , it was reported that Switzerland was considering the Rafale and other fighters to replace its Northrop F @-@ 5 Tiger IIs . The one @-@ month evaluation started in October 2008 at Emmen Airforce Base consisting of approximately 30 evaluation flights . The Rafale along with the JAS 39 Gripen and the Typhoon were to be evaluated . Although a leaked Swiss Air Force evaluation report revealed that the Rafale won the competition on technical grounds , on 30 November 2011 , the Swiss Federal Council announced that it was planning to buy 22 Gripen <unk> due to the aircraft 's lower acquisition and maintenance costs . Due to a referendum , this purchase never happened . 
 = = = = Libya = = = = 
 In January 2007 , the French newspaper Journal du Dimanche reported that Libya sought 13 – 18 Rafales " in a deal worth as much as US $ 3 @.@ 24 billion " . In December 2007 , Saif al @-@ Islam Gaddafi declared Libya 's interest in the Rafale , but no order was placed . French Rafales later came to Libya as part of the international military intervention during the 2011 Libyan civil war . 
 = = = = Kuwait = = = = 
 In February 2009 , French President Nicolas Sarkozy announced that Kuwait was considering buying up to 28 Rafales . In October 2009 , during a visit to Paris , the Kuwaiti Defence Minister expressed his interest in the Rafale and said that he was awaiting terms from Dassault . Islamist lawmakers in the Kuwaiti national assembly threatened to block such a purchase , accusing the Defence Minister of lack of transparency and being manipulated by business interests . In January 2012 , the French Defence Minister said that both Kuwait and Qatar were waiting to see if the UAE first purchased the Rafale and that Kuwait would look to buy 18 – 22 Rafales . However , on 11 September 2015 , Eurofighter announced that an agreement had been reached with Kuwait for the supply of 28 Eurofighter Typhoons . 
 = = = = Others = = = = 
 In 2002 , the Republic of Korea Air Force chose the F @-@ 15K Slam Eagle over the Dassault Rafale , Eurofighter Typhoon and Sukhoi Su @-@ 35 for its 40 aircraft F @-@ X Phase 1 fighter competition . 
 During 2006 , while there was potentially trouble with Anglo @-@ American negotiations over the F @-@ 35 Lightning II , there was talk of purchasing the Rafale M for the British Royal Navy . However , in May 2012 , after having abandoned the F @-@ 35B STOVL version in favour of the F @-@ 35C CATOBAR variant in October 2010 , the UK reverted to purchasing the F @-@ 35B . 
 In late 2007 , La Tribune reported that a prospective US $ 2 @.@ 85 billion sale to Morocco had fallen through , the government selecting the F @-@ 16C / D instead . While French Defense Minister Herve Morin labelled the aircraft as overly sophisticated and too costly , defense <unk> have said that miscalculations of the offer price by the DGA and hesitations about financing were detrimental to the negotiations . 
 In February 2009 , France offered Rafales to Oman to replace its ageing fleet of SEPECAT Jaguars . In December 2012 , Oman placed an order for 12 Typhoons , after reports surfaced that the country had preference for the fighter in 2010 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Rafale A 
 Technology demonstrator , first flying in 1986 . 
 Rafale D 
 Dassault used this designation ( D for <unk> ) in the early 1990s to emphasise the new semi @-@ stealthy design features . 
 Rafale B 
 Two @-@ seater version for the French Air Force . 
 Rafale C 
 Single @-@ seat version for the French Air Force . 
 Rafale M 
 Carrier @-@ borne version for the French Naval Aviation , which entered service in 2001 . For carrier operations , the M model has a strengthened airframe , longer nose gear leg to provide a more nose @-@ up attitude , larger tailhook between the engines , and a built @-@ in boarding ladder . Consequently , the Rafale M weighs about 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) more than the Rafale C. It is the only non @-@ US fighter type cleared to operate from the decks of US carriers , using catapults and their arresting gear , as demonstrated in 2008 when six Rafales from Flottille 12F integrated into the USS Theodore Roosevelt Carrier Air Wing interoperability exercise . 
 Rafale N 
 Originally called the Rafale BM , was a planned missile @-@ only two @-@ seater version for the Aéronavale . Budgetary and technical constraints have been cited as grounds for its cancellation . 
 Rafale R 
 Proposed reconnaissance @-@ oriented variant . 
 Rafale DM 
 Two @-@ seater version for the Egyptian Air Force . 
 Rafale EM 
 Single @-@ seat version for the Egyptian Air Force . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Egypt 
 Egyptian Air Force – 6 Rafale DMs are in service in January 2016 . ( 24 on order ) 
 France 
 A total of 180 have been ordered out of a planned 286 , with an option for another 9 . Approximately 150 are confirmed to be delivered by 2019 . As of 2015 , 135 had been delivered . 
 French Air Force – <unk> @-@ Dizier – Robinson Air Base 
 Escadron de Chasse 01 @-@ 007 " Provence " ( 2006 – present ) multirole fighter 
 Escadron de Chasse 01 @-@ 091 " Gascogne " ( 2009 – present ) nuclear strike 
 Escadron de Transformation Rafale 02 @-@ 092 " Aquitaine " ( October 2010 – present , French Air Force Operational Conversion Unit ( OCU ) jointly operated by French Air Force and French naval Aviation ) 
 Mont @-@ de @-@ Marsan Air Base 
 Escadron de Chasse 02 @-@ 030 " Normandie @-@ Niemen " ( 2012 – present ) multirole fighter 
 Escadron de Chasse et d <unk> 05 @-@ 330 " Côte d 'Argent " ( 2004 – present ) tactics development and evaluation 
 Al Dhafra Air Base , UAE 
 Escadron de Chasse 03 @-@ 030 " Lorraine " ( 2010 – present ) multirole fighter 
 French Navy – <unk> Air Base Landivisiau 
 Flottille 11F ( 2011 – present ) multirole carrier fighter 
 Flottille 12F ( 2001 – present ) multirole carrier fighter 
 Flottille 17F ( to convert in mid @-@ 2016 ) multirole carrier fighter 
 India 
 Indian Air Force – 36 to be ordered . Final contract to be signed . 
 Qatar 
 Qatar Air Force – 24 on order 
 = = Accidents = = 
 On 6 December 2007 , a French Air Force twin @-@ seat Rafale crashed during a training flight . The pilot , who suffered from spatial disorientation , was killed in the accident . 
 On 24 September 2009 , after unarmed test flights , two French Navy Rafales returning to the aircraft carrier Charles de Gaulle , collided in mid @-@ air about 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from the town of Perpignan in southwest France . One test pilot , identified as François <unk> , was killed in the accident , while the other was rescued . 
 On 28 November 2010 , a Rafale from the carrier Charles de Gaulle crashed in the Arabian Sea . This aircraft was supporting Allied operations in Afghanistan . The pilot ejected safely and was recovered by a rescue helicopter from the carrier . Later reports said the engine stopped after being starved of fuel due to confusion by the pilot in switching fuel tanks . 
 On 2 July 2012 , during a joint exercise , a Rafale from the carrier Charles de Gaulle plunged into the Mediterranean Sea . The pilot ejected safely and was recovered by an American search and rescue helicopter from the carrier USS Dwight D. Eisenhower . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 Data from Dassault Aviation , <unk> , French Navy , International Directory of Military Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 – 2 
 Length : 15 @.@ 27 m ( 50 @.@ 1 ft ) 
 Wingspan : 10 @.@ 80 m ( 35 @.@ 4 ft ) 
 Height : 5 @.@ 34 m ( 17 @.@ 5 ft ) 
 Wing area : 45 @.@ 7 m ² ( 492 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 
 10 @,@ 300 kilograms ( 22 @,@ 700 lb ) ( B ) 
 9 @,@ 850 kilograms ( 21 @,@ 720 lb ) ( C ) ( ) 
 Loaded weight : 15 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 33 @,@ 000 lb ) ( ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 24 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 54 @,@ 000 lb ) ( B / C / D ) ( ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Snecma M88 @-@ 2 turbofans 
 Dry thrust : 50 @.@ 04 kN ( 11 @,@ 250 lbf ) each 
 Thrust with afterburner : 75 @.@ 62 kN ( 17 @,@ 000 lbf ) each 
 Fuel capacity : 4 @,@ 700 kg ( 10 @,@ 360 lb ) internal 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : High altitude : Mach 1 @.@ 8 ( 1 @,@ 912 km / h , 1 @,@ 032 knots ) 
 Low altitude : Mach 1 @.@ 1 ( 1 @,@ 390 km / h , 750 knots ) 
 Supercruise : Up to Mach 1 @.@ 4 
 Range : 3 @,@ 700 + km ( 2 @,@ 000 + nmi ) with 3 drop tanks 
 Combat radius : 1 @,@ 852 + km ( 1 @,@ 000 + nmi ) on penetration mission 
 Service ceiling : 15 @,@ 235 m ( 50 @,@ 000 ft ) 
 Rate of climb : 304 @.@ 8 + m / s ( 60 @,@ 000 + ft / min ) 
 Wing loading : 328 kg / m ² ( 67 @.@ 1 lb / ft ² ) 
 Thrust / weight : 0 @.@ 988 ( 100 % fuel , 2 EM <unk> missile , 2 IR <unk> missile ) version B 
 Maximum g @-@ load : + 9 / – 3 @.@ 6 g 
 Armament 
 Guns : 1 × 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 18 in ) GIAT 30 / <unk> autocannon with 125 rounds 
 Hardpoints : 14 for Air Force versions ( Rafale B / C ) , 13 for Navy version ( Rafale M ) with a capacity of 9 @,@ 500 kg ( 20 @,@ 900 lb ) external fuel and ordnance and provisions to carry combinations of : 
 Missiles : 
 Air @-@ to @-@ air : 
 Magic II 
 MBDA MICA IR or EM 
 MBDA Meteor in the future 
 Air @-@ to @-@ ground : 
 MBDA Apache 
 MBDA Storm Shadow / SCALP @-@ EG 
 AASM @-@ Hammer ( SBU @-@ 38 / 54 / 64 ) 
 GBU @-@ 12 Paveway II , GBU @-@ 22 Paveway III , GBU @-@ 24 Paveway III , GBU @-@ 49 Enhanced Paveway II 
 AS @-@ <unk> 
 Air @-@ to @-@ surface : 
 MBDA AM 39 @-@ Exocet anti @-@ ship missile 
 MBDA <unk> @-@ Perseus in the future 
 Nuclear Deterrence : 
 ASMP @-@ A nuclear missile 
 Other : Thales Damocles targeting pod 
 Thales <unk> ( Airborne Recce Observation System ) reconnaissance pod 
 Thales <unk> multi @-@ function targeting pod in the future ( <unk> Standard ) 
 Up to 5 drop tanks 
 Buddy @-@ buddy refuelling pod 
 Avionics 
 Thales RBE2 @-@ AA AESA radar 
 Thales SPECTRA Electronic Warfare system . 
 Thales / SAGEM @-@ OSF <unk> <unk> Frontal infra @-@ red search and track ( IRST ) system . 
 = A Journey = 
 A Journey is a memoir by Tony Blair of his tenure as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . Published in the UK on 1 September 2010 , it covers events from when he became leader of the Labour Party in 1994 and transformed it into " New Labour " , holding power for a party record three successive terms , to his resignation and replacement as Prime Minister by his Chancellor of the Exchequer , Gordon Brown . Blair donated his £ 4 @.@ 6 million advance , and all subsequent royalties , to the British Armed Forces charity The Royal British Legion . It became the fastest @-@ selling autobiography of all time at the bookstore chain Waterstones . Promotional events were marked by antiwar protests . 
 Two of the book 's major topics are the strains in Blair 's relationship with Brown after Blair allegedly reneged on the pair 's 1994 agreement to step down as Prime Minister much earlier , and his controversial decision to participate in the 2003 invasion of Iraq . Blair discusses Labour 's future after the 2010 general election , his relations with the Royal Family , and how he came to respect President George W. Bush . Reviews were mixed ; some criticised Blair 's writing style , but others called it candid . 
 Gordon Brown was reportedly unhappy over Blair 's comments about him , while David Runciman of The London Review of Books suggested there were episodes from Blair 's troubled relationship with his Chancellor that were absent from A Journey . Labour politician Alistair Darling said the book demonstrates how the country can be changed for the better when a government has a clear purpose , while the New Zealand Listener suggested Blair and his contemporaries had helped to write New Labour 's epitaph . Some families of servicemen and women who were killed in Iraq reacted angrily , with one antiwar commentator dismissing Blair 's regrets over the loss of life . Shortly after the release of A Journey , the screenwriter of the 2006 film The Queen , which depicts Blair 's first months in office , accused Blair of plagiarising a conversation with Elizabeth II from him . 
 = = History = = 
 In March 2010 , it was reported that Blair 's memoirs , under the title The Journey , would be published in September . Gail <unk> , chairman and chief executive of Random House , announced that the memoirs would be published by Hutchinson in the United Kingdom . She predicted that the book would " break new ground in prime ministerial memoirs just as Blair himself broke the mould of British politics . " Preliminary images of the book 's cover , showing Blair in an open @-@ neck shirt , were released . In July , the memoir was retitled as A Journey ; one publishing expert speculated that it was changed to make Blair appear " less messianic " . The publisher did not give any reason . It was announced the book would be published by Knopf in the United States and Canada under the title A Journey : My Political Life ; and in Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , and India by Random House . It was also released as an audiobook , read by Blair available for download and on 13 compact discs with a playing time of 16 hours . The book was published in the United Kingdom on 1 September . 
 Before the launch , Blair announced that he would give the £ <unk> advance and all royalties from his memoirs to a sports centre for injured soldiers . In an interview with Jonathon Gatehouse , he conceded , " You wouldn 't be human if you didn 't feel both a sense of responsibility and a deep sadness for those who have lost their lives . That responsibility stays with me now , and will stay with me for the rest of my life . You know , I came to office as prime minister in 1997 , focusing on domestic policy and ended up in four conflicts – Sierra Leone , Kosovo , Afghanistan and Iraq . And it does change you , and so it should . " BBC political correspondent Norman Smith said Blair 's severest critics would see the donation as " guilt money " for taking the UK to war against Iraq in 2003 . The father of a soldier killed there decried the donation as " blood money " , while the father of another serviceman who died said Blair had a " guilty conscience . " A spokesperson for the Stop the War Coalition supported with the donation , but added , " No proportion of Tony Blair 's massive and ill @-@ gotten fortune can buy him innocence or forgiveness . He took this country to war on a series of lies against the best legal advice and in defiance of majority opinion . " A spokesman for Blair said that it had long been his intention to give the money to a charity ; he added aiding soldiers undergoing rehabilitation at the Battle Back Challenge Centre was " his way of honouring their courage and sacrifice . " The announcement was welcomed by Chris Simpkins , director general of The Royal British Legion , who said , " Mr Blair 's generosity is much appreciated and will help us to make a real and lasting difference to the lives of hundreds of injured personnel . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A Journey covers Blair 's time as leader of the Labour Party and then British Prime Minister following his party 's victory at the 1997 general election . His tenure as Labour leader begins in 1994 following the death of his predecessor , John Smith , an event Blair claims to have had a premonition about a month before Smith died . Blair believes he will succeed Smith as Labour leader rather than Gordon Brown , who is a strong contender for the job . Blair and Brown subsequently reach an agreement whereby Brown will not run against Blair for the position , and will succeed him later . But it leads to a difficult working relationship , which is discussed at length . He likens them both to " a couple who loved each other , arguing over whose career should come first . " To him , Brown is a " strange guy " with " zero " emotional intelligence . 
 Having been elected as leader Blair moves the Labour Party to the political centre ground , repackaging it as " New Labour " , and goes on to win the 1997 general election . At his first meeting with Elizabeth II following his election as Prime Minister Blair recalls the Queen telling him , " You are my tenth prime minister . The first was Winston . That was before you were born . " Within a few months his government must deal with the aftermath of the death of Diana , Princess of Wales , and following the Princess 's funeral , Elizabeth II tells Blair that lessons must be learned from the way things have been handled . Social occasions with the Queen are also recalled , including a gathering at Balmoral Castle where Prince Philip is described manning the barbecue while Elizabeth II dons a pair of rubber gloves to wash up afterwards . 
 From the outset Blair 's government plays a significant role in the Northern Ireland peace process , during which Blair admits to using " a certain amount of creative ambiguity " to secure an agreement , claiming the process would not have succeeded otherwise . He says that he stretched the truth " on occasions past breaking point " in the run @-@ up to the 2007 power @-@ sharing deal which enabled the return of devolved legislative powers from Westminster to the Northern Ireland Executive . Both Gerry Adams and Martin McGuinness of Sinn Féin are praised for the part they played in the peace process . 
 One of the themes that dominates the latter part of Blair 's time in office is his decision to join US President George W. Bush in committing troops to the 2003 invasion of Iraq , the aftermath of which he describes as a " nightmare " , but that he believes to have been necessary because Saddam Hussein " had not abandoned the strategy of WMD [ weapons of mass destruction ] , merely made a tactical decision to put it into abeyance " . He would make the same decision again with regard to Iran , warning that if that country develops nuclear weapons it will change the balance of power of the Middle East , to the region 's detriment . Blair believes some problems in Iraq still require a " resolution " and will fester if left unattended . Of the war dead he says , " I feel desperately sorry for them , sorry for the lives cut short , sorry for the families whose bereavement is made worse by the controversy over why their loved ones died , sorry for the utterly unfair selection that the loss should be theirs . " A year on from the invasion he hopes Bush will win a second term as US President : " I had come to like and admire George , " he writes . 
 In 2003 , Blair promises his Chancellor , Gordon Brown that he will resign before the next general election , but later changes his mind . Brown subsequently attempts to blackmail him , threatened to call for a Labour Party inquiry into the 2005 Cash for Honours affair during an argument over pension policy . Brown succeeds Blair as Labour Party leader and Prime Minister in 2007 . But while Blair praises Brown as a good Chancellor and a committed public servant , he believes his decision to abandon the New Labour policies of the Blair years leads to the party 's 2010 election defeat . However , Brown is right to restructure British banks and introduce an economic stimulus after the financial crisis . 
 The book closes with a final chapter offering a critique of Labour Party policy , and discusses its future . Blair warns Brown 's successor that if Labour is to remain electable they should continue with the policies of New Labour and not return to the left @-@ wing policies of the 1980s : " I won three elections . Up to then , Labour had never even won two successive full terms . The longest Labour government had lasted six years . This lasted 13 . It could have gone on longer , had it not abandoned New Labour . " 
 = = Publication = = 
 Within hours of its launch A Journey became the fastest @-@ selling autobiography of all time at bookseller Waterstones , where it sold more copies in one day than Peter Mandelson 's The Third Man : Life at the Heart of New Labour had done in its first three weeks earlier that year . It debuted at the top of Amazon.co.uk 's British best @-@ seller list . Within a week , Nielsen BookScan said that 92 @,@ 000 copies of A Journey had been sold in the United Kingdom , the best opening week for an autobiography since the company began keeping figures in 1998 . The New York Times reported that in the United States , an initial print run of 50 @,@ 000 copies had been extended by another 25 @,@ 000 , with the book set to debut at Number 3 on The New York Times hardcover best @-@ seller list . Andrew Lake , Waterstones ' political buyer , said , " Nothing can compare to the level of interest shown in this book . You have to look at hugely successful fiction authors such as Dan Brown or JK Rowling to find books that have sold more quickly on their first day . Mandelson may remain the prince but Blair has reclaimed his title as king , certainly in terms of book sales . 
