 = = = = Autumn / Winter 480 / 479 BC = = = = 
 The Allied victory at Salamis ended the immediate threat to Greece , and Xerxes now returned to Asia with part of the army , leaving his general Mardonius to attempt to complete the conquest . Mardonius wintered in Boeotia and Thessaly , and the Athenians were thus able to return to their city , which had been burnt and razed by the Persians , for the winter . For the Athenians , and Themistocles personally , the winter would be a testing one . The Peloponnesians refused to countenance marching north of the Isthmus to fight the Persian army ; the Athenians tried to shame them into doing so , with no success . 
 During the winter , the Allies held a meeting at Corinth to celebrate their success , and award prizes for achievement . However , perhaps tired of the Athenians pointing out their role at Salamis , and of their demands for the Allies to march north , the Allies awarded the prize for civic achievement to Aegina . Furthermore , although the admirals all voted for Themistocles in second place , they all voted for themselves in first place , so that no @-@ one won the prize for individual achievement . In response , realising the importance of the Athenian fleet to their security , and probably seeking to massage Themistocles 's ego , the Spartans brought Themistocles to Sparta . There , he was awarded a special prize " for his wisdom and cleverness " , and won high praise from all . Furthermore , Plutarch reports that at the next Olympic Games : 
 " [ when ] Themistocles entered the stadium , the audience neglected the contestants all day long to gaze on him , and pointed him out with admiring applause to visiting strangers , so that he too was delighted , and confessed to his friends that he was now reaping in full measure the harvest of his toils in behalf of Hellas . " 
 After returning to Athens in the winter , Plutarch reports that Themistocles made a proposal to the city while the Greek fleet was wintering at <unk> : 
 " Themistocles once declared to the people [ of Athens ] that he had devised a certain measure which could not be revealed to them , though it would be helpful and salutary for the city , and they ordered that Aristides alone should hear what it was and pass judgment on it . So Themistocles told Aristides that his purpose was to burn the naval station of the confederate Hellenes , for that in this way the Athenians would be greatest , and lords of all . Then Aristides came before the people and said of the deed which Themistocles purposed to do , that none other could be more advantageous , and none more unjust . On hearing this , the Athenians ordained that Themistocles cease from his purpose . " 
 = = = = Spring / Summer 479 BC = = = = 
 However , as happened to many prominent individuals in the Athenian democracy , Themistocles 's fellow citizens grew jealous of his success , and possibly tired of his boasting . It is probable that in early 479 BC , Themistocles was stripped of his command ; instead , Xanthippus was to command the Athenian fleet , and Aristides the land forces . Though Themistocles was no doubt politically and militarily active for the rest of the campaign , no mention of his activities in 479 BC is made in the ancient sources . In the summer of that year , after receiving an Athenian ultimatum , the Peloponnesians finally agreed to assemble an army and march to confront Mardonius , who had reoccupied Athens in June . At the decisive Battle of Plataea , the Allies destroyed the Persian army , while apparently on the same day , the Allied navy destroyed the remnants of the Persian fleet at the Battle of Mycale . These twin victories completed the Allied triumph , and ended the Persian threat to Greece . 
 = = = Aftermath of the Persian invasion = = = 
 Whatever the cause of Themistocles 's unpopularity in 479 BC , it obviously did not last long . Both Diodorus and Plutarch suggest he was quickly restored to the favour of the Athenians . Indeed , after 479 BC , he seems to have enjoyed a relatively long period of popularity . 
 In the aftermath of the invasion , the Athenians began rebuilding their city under the guidance of Themistocles . They wished to restore the fortifications of Athens , but the Spartans objected on the grounds that no place north of the Isthmus should be left that the Persians could use as a fortress . Themistocles urged the citizens to build the fortifications as quickly as possible , then went to Sparta as an ambassador to answer the charges levelled by the Spartans . There , he assured them that no building work was on @-@ going , and urged them to send emissaries to Athens to see for themselves . By the time the ambassadors arrived , the Athenians had finished building , and then detained the Spartan ambassadors when they complained about the presence of the fortifications . By delaying in this manner , Themistocles gave the Athenians enough time to fortify the city , and thus ward off any Spartan attack aimed at preventing the re @-@ fortification of Athens . Furthermore , the Spartans were obliged to repatriate Themistocles in order to free their own ambassadors . However , this episode may be seen as the beginning of the Spartan mistrust of Themistocles , which would return to haunt him . 
 Themistocles also now returned to his naval policy , and more ambitious undertakings that would increase the dominant position of his native state . He further extended and fortified the port complex at Piraeus , and " fastened the city [ Athens ] to the Piraeus , and the land to the sea " . Themistocles probably aimed to make Athens the dominant naval power in the Aegean . Indeed , Athens would create the Delian League in 478 BC , uniting the naval power of the Aegean Islands and Ionia under Athenian leadership . Themistocles introduced tax breaks for merchants and artisans , to attract both people and trade to the city to make Athens a great mercantile centre . He also instructed the Athenians to build 20 triremes per year , to ensure that their dominance in naval matters continued . Plutarch reports that Themistocles also secretly proposed to destroy the beached ships of the other Allied navies to ensure complete naval dominance — but was overruled by Aristides and the council of Athens . 
 = = = Fall and exile = = = 
 It seems clear that , towards the end of the decade , Themistocles had begun to accrue enemies , and had become arrogant ; moreover his fellow citizens had become jealous of his prestige and power . The Rhodian poet <unk> was among his most eloquent enemies , composing slanderous drinking songs . Meanwhile , the Spartans actively worked against him , trying to promote Cimon ( son of Miltiades ) as a rival to Themistocles . Furthermore , after the treason and disgrace of the Spartan general Pausanias , the Spartans tried to implicate Themistocles in the plot ; he was , however , acquitted of these charges . In Athens itself , he lost favour by building a sanctuary of Artemis , with the epithet <unk> ( " of good counsel " ) near his home , a blatant reference to his own role in delivering Greece from the Persian invasion . Eventually , in either 472 or 471 BC , he was ostracised . In itself , this did not mean that Themistocles had done anything wrong ; ostracism , in the words of Plutarch , 
 " was not a penalty , but a way of pacifying and alleviating that jealousy which delights to humble the eminent , breathing out its malice into this disfranchisement . " 
 Themistocles first went to live in exile in Argos . However , perceiving that they now had a prime opportunity to bring Themistocles down for good , the Spartans again levelled accusations of Themistocles 's complicity in Pausanias 's treason . They demanded that he be tried by the ' Congress of Greeks ' , rather than in Athens , although it seems that in the end he was actually summoned to Athens to stand trial . Perhaps realising he had little hope of surviving this trial , Themistocles fled , first to Kerkyra , and thence to Admetus , king of <unk> . Themistocles 's flight probably only served to convince his accusers of his guilt , and he was declared a traitor in Athens , his property to be confiscated . It should be noted that both Diodorus and Plutarch considered that the charges were false , and made solely for the purposes of destroying Themistocles . The Spartans sent ambassadors to Admetus , threatening that the whole of Greece would go to war with the Molossians unless they surrendered Themistocles . Admetus , however , allowed Themistocles to escape , giving him a large sum of gold to aid him on his way . Themistocles then fled from Greece , apparently never to return , thus effectively bringing his political career to an end . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 From <unk> , Themistocles apparently fled to Pydna , from where he took a ship for Asia Minor . This ship was blown off course by a storm , and ended up at Naxos , which an Athenian fleet was in the process of besieging . Desperate to avoid identification , Themistocles pestered the captain of the ship to continue the journey immediately . According to Thucydides , who wrote within living memory of the events , the ship eventually landed safely at Ephesus , where Themistocles disembarked . Plutarch has the ship docking at Cyme in Aeolia , and Diodorus has Themistocles making his way to Asia in an undefined manner . Diodorus and Plutarch next recount a similar tale , namely that Themistocles stayed briefly with an acquaintance ( <unk> or <unk> ) who was also acquainted with the Persian king , Artaxerxes I. Since there was a bounty on Themistocles 's head , this acquaintance devised a plan to safely convey Themistocles to the Persian king in the type of covered wagon that the King 's concubines travelled in . All three chroniclers agree that Themistocles 's next move was to contact the Persian king ; in Thucydides , this is by letter , while Plutarch and Diodorus have a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting with the king . The spirit is , however , the same in all three : Themistocles introduces himself to the king and seeks to enter his service : 
 " I , Themistocles , am come to you , who did your house more harm than any of the Hellenes , when I was compelled to defend myself against your father 's invasion — harm , however , far surpassed by the good that I did him during his retreat , which brought no danger for me but much for him . " ( Thucydides ) 
 Thucydides and Plutarch say that Themistocles asked for a year 's grace to learn the Persian language and customs , after which he would serve the king , and Artaxerxes granted this . Plutarch reports that , as might be imagined , Artaxerxes was elated that such a dangerous and illustrious foe had come to serve him . 
 At some point in his travels , Themistocles 's wife and children were extricated from Athens by a friend , and joined him in exile . His friends also managed to send him many of his belongings , although up to 100 talents worth of his goods were confiscated by the Athenians . When , after a year , Themistocles returned to the king 's court , he appears to have made an immediate impact , and " he attained ... very high consideration there , such as no Hellene has ever possessed before or since " . Plutarch recounts that " honors he enjoyed were far beyond those paid to other foreigners ; nay , he actually took part in the King 's hunts and in his household diversions " . Themistocles advised the king on his dealings with the Greeks , although it seems that for a long period , the king was distracted by events elsewhere in the empire , and thus Themistocles " lived on for a long time without concern " . He was made governor of the district of Magnesia on the Maeander River in Asia Minor , and assigned the revenues of three cities : Magnesia ( about 50 talents per year — " for bread " ) ; Myus ( " for <unk> " ) ; and Lampsacus ( " for wine " ) . <unk> of Cyzicus and <unk> add two more , the city of <unk> ( " for clothes " ) and the city of <unk> with bedding and furniture for his house . 
 Themistocles died at Magnesia in 459 BC , at the age of 65 , according to Thucydides , from natural causes . However , perhaps inevitably , there were also rumours surrounding his death ; that finding that he could not keep the promises that he had made to the king , he committed suicide by taking poison , or drinking bull 's blood . Plutarch provides the most evocative version of this story : 
 " But when Egypt revolted with Athenian aid ... and Cimon 's mastery of the sea forced the King to resist the efforts of the Hellenes and to hinder their hostile growth ... messages came down to Themistocles saying that the King commanded him to make good his promises by applying himself to the Hellenic problem ; then , neither embittered by anything like anger against his former fellow @-@ citizens , nor lifted up by the great honor and power he was to have in the war , but possibly thinking his task not even approachable , both because Hellas had other great generals at the time , and especially because Cimon was so marvelously successful in his campaigns ; yet most of all out of regard for the reputation of his own achievements and the trophies of those early days ; having decided that his best course was to put a fitting end to his life , he made a sacrifice to the gods , then called his friends together , gave them a farewell clasp of his hand , and , as the current story goes , drank bull 's blood , or as some say , took a quick poison , and so died in Magnesia , in the sixty @-@ fifth year of his life ... They say that the King , on learning the cause and the manner of his death , admired the man yet more , and continued to treat his friends and kindred with kindness . " 
 After his death , Themistocles 's bones were transported to Attica on his request , and buried in his native soil in secret , it being illegal to bury an Athenian traitor in Attica . The Magnesians built a " splendid tomb " in their market place for Themistocles , which still stood during the time of Plutarch , and continued to dedicate part of their revenues to the family of Themistocles . Plutarch indicates that he met in Athens a lineal descendant of Themistocles ( also called Themistocles ) who was still being paid these revenues , 600 years after the events in question . 
 = = Assessments = = 
 = = = Character = = = 
 It is possible to draw some conclusions about Themistocles 's character . Perhaps his most evident trait was his massive ambition ; " In his ambition he surpassed all men " ; " he hankered after public office rather as a man in delirium might crave a cure " . He was proud and vain , and anxious for recognition of his deeds . His relationship with power was of a particularly personal nature ; while he undoubtedly desired the best for Athens , many of his actions also seem to have been made in self @-@ interest . He also appears to have been corrupt ( at least by modern standards ) , and was known for his fondness of bribes . 
 Yet , set against these negative traits , was an apparently natural brilliance and talent for leadership : 
 " Themistocles was a man who exhibited the most indubitable signs of genius ; indeed , in this particular he has a claim on our admiration quite extraordinary and unparalleled . By his own native capacity , alike unformed and <unk> by study , he was at once the best judge in those sudden crises which admit of little or of no deliberation , and the best prophet of the future , even to its most distant possibilities . An able theoretical expositor of all that came within the sphere of his practice , he was not without the power of passing an adequate judgment in matters in which he had no experience . He could also excellently divine the good and evil which lay hid in the unseen future . In fine , whether we consider the extent of his natural powers , or the slightness of his application , this extraordinary man must be allowed to have surpassed all others in the faculty of intuitively meeting an emergency . " 
 Both Herodotus and Plato record variations of an anecdote in which Themistocles responded with subtle sarcasm to an undistinguished man who complained that the great politician owed his fame merely to the fact that he came from Athens . As Herodotus tells it : 
 " <unk> of <unk> , who was one of Themistocles ' enemies but not a man of note , was crazed with envy and spoke bitterly to Themistocles of his visit to Lacedaemon , saying that the honors he had from the Lacedaemonians were paid him for Athens ' sake and not for his own . This he kept saying until Themistocles replied , ' This is the truth of the matter : if I had been a man of Belbina I would not have been honored in this way by the Spartans , nor would you , sir , for all you are a man of Athens . ' Such was the end of that business . " 
 As Plato tells it , the heckler hails from the small island of <unk> ; Themistocles retorts that it is true that he would not have been famous if he had come from that small island , but that the heckler would not have been famous either if he had been born in Athens . 
 Themistocles was undoubtedly intelligent , but also possessed natural cunning ; " the workings of his mind [ were ] infinitely mobile and serpentine " . Themistocles was evidently sociable and appears to have enjoyed strong personal loyalty from his friends . At any rate , it seems to have been Themistocles 's particular mix of virtues and vices that made him such an effective politician . 
 = = = Historical reputation = = = 
 Themistocles died with his reputation in tatters , a traitor to the Athenian people ; the " saviour of Greece " had turned into the enemy of liberty . However , his reputation in Athens was rehabilitated by Pericles in the 450s BC , and by the time Herodotus wrote his history , Themistocles was once again seen as a hero . Thucydides evidently held Themistocles in some esteem , and is uncharacteristically flattering in his praise for him ( see above ) . Diodorus also extensively praises Themistocles , going as far as to offer a rationale for the length at which he discusses him : " Now on the subject of the high merits of Themistocles , even if we have dwelt over @-@ long on the subject in this digression , we believed it not <unk> that we should leave his great ability unrecorded . " Indeed , Diodorus goes so far as to say that 
 " But if any man , putting envy aside , will estimate closely not only the man 's natural gifts but also his achievements , he will find that on both counts Themistocles holds first place among all of whom we have record . Therefore one may well be amazed that the Athenians were willing to rid themselves of a man of such genius . " 
 Since Diodorus 's history includes such luminaries as Alexander the Great and Hannibal , this is high praise indeed . Plutarch offers a more nuanced view of Themistocles , with more of a critique of Themistocles 's character . He does not detract from Themistocles 's achievements , but also highlights his failings . 
 = = = Political and military legacy = = = 
 Undoubtedly the greatest achievement of Themistocles 's career was his role in the defeat of Xerxes 's invasion of Greece . Against overwhelming odds , Greece survived , and classical Greek culture , so influential in Western civilization , was able to develop unabated . Moreover , Themistocles 's doctrine of Athenian naval power , and the establishment of Athens as a major power in the Greek world were of enormous consequence during the 5th century BC . In 478 BC , the Hellenic alliance was reconstituted without the Peloponnesian states , into the Delian League , in which Athens was the dominant power . This was essentially a maritime alliance of Athens and her colonies , the Aegean islands , and the Ionian cities . The Delian league took the war to Persia , eventually invading Persian territory and dominating the Aegean . Under the guidance of Pericles , the Delian league gradually evolved into the Athenian Empire , the zenith of Athenian power and influence . Themistocles seems to have deliberately set Athens up as a rival to Sparta in the aftermath of Xerxes 's invasion , basing this strategy on Athenian naval power ( contrasted with the power of the Spartan army ) . Tension grew throughout the century between Athens and Sparta , as they competed to be the leading state in Greece . Finally , in 431 BC , this tension erupted into the Peloponnesian War , the first of a series of conflicts that tore Greece apart for the next century ; an unforeseen , if indirect , legacy of Themistocles 's . 
 Diodorus provides a rhetorical summary that reflects on Themistocles 's achievements : 
 " What other man , while Sparta still had the superior strength and the Spartan Eurybiades held the supreme command of the fleet , could by his single @-@ handed efforts have deprived Sparta of that glory ? Of what other man have we learned from history that by a single act he caused himself to surpass all the commanders , his city all the other Greek states , and the Greeks the barbarians ? In whose term as general have the resources been more inferior and the dangers they faced greater ? Who , facing the united might of all Asia , has found himself at the side of his city when its inhabitants had been driven from their homes , and still won the victory ? " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The historical novel Farewell Great King by Jill Paton Walsh follows the life , until death , of Themistocles . It is based primarily upon the Life of Themistocles and Life of Aristides from Plutarch . 
 Themistocles appears as a major character in The Ionia Sanction , by Gary Corby . 
 The historical novel A victor of Salamis ; a tale of the days of Xerxes , Leonidas and Themistocles by William Stearns Davis follows the life , until death , of Themistocles . 
 <unk> ( 1772 ) , opera by Johann Christian Bach 
 Themistocles serves as the protagonist of the 2014 film 300 : Rise of an Empire , played by Australian actor Sullivan Stapleton . The film presents a highly fictionalized biography of Themistocles , who leads the Athenian fleet at the Battle of Salamis , by virtue of his status as the hero of Marathon , having devised the Athenians ' winning offensive strategy in that battle , and personally loosing the arrow that fatally wounded Darius ( neither of which historically occurred ) . The film also portrays him as having a brief liaison with Artemisia , who is fictitiously portrayed as the supreme commander of the Persian fleet . 
 Themistocles is one of the main characters of the 1962 film The 300 Spartans , which presents the Battle of Thermopylae . In this movie , he is portrayed by Ralph Richardson . 
 Peter O 'Toole as T.E. Lawrence quotes Themistocles in Lawrence of Arabia : ' I cannot fiddle , but I can make a great state from a little <unk> 
 = Alpha ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Alpha " is the sixteenth episode of the sixth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on March 28 , 1999 in the United States . The episode was written by Jeffrey Bell , and directed by Peter Markle . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Alpha " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 1 , being watched by 17 @.@ 7 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly negative reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate several killings blamed on an Asian dog called the Wanshang Dhole , thought to be extinct . Mulder and Scully join an obstinate Sheriff , a seemingly eccentric hunter , and a reclusive canine expert to find it . However , there is more mystery to the expert than meets the eye . 
 " Alpha " was based on a single motif — " Scary dogs in the City " — written by Jeffrey Bell onto a <unk> . The episode went through several drafts before being readied right before filming began . Several of the scenes featuring the Chinese freighter were created either through digital technology or through the combination of matte paintings and actual filmed footage . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On a freighter in the South Pacific , two Chinese men inspect a crate with an animal inside . When the ship reaches the Port of Los Angeles , the authorities find the two men in the crate and the animal missing . After Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) receives word of the attack from the mysterious Karin Berquist ( Melinda Culea ) , an expert on canine behavior , he and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) investigate the incident on the ship with the help of San Pedro officer Jeffrey Cahn ( Thomas F. Duffy ) . Meanwhile , in Bellflower , California , a man hears his dog barking in the backyard and lets it in the house . He hears another dog in his backyard and chases it off . After returning to his house he finds his pet dead and is attacked by the mystery dog , who is seen to have glowing red eyes . 
 Mulder and Scully arrive at the port and talk to the owner of the dog Dr. Ian Detweiler ( Andrew Robinson ) , a cryptozoologist . Detweiler says the dog is a Wanshang Dhole , a species thought to be extinct . The two agents soon receive news of the other attack and , after investigating , Mulder believes the Dhole has near @-@ human intelligence . Mulder and Scully visit Berquist , who tells them that the breed they are looking for is extinct . Meanwhile a dog catcher is chasing a stray through a warehouse when a man enters the building . He promptly transforms into the murderous dhole and attacks the catcher . Mulder and Scully soon arrive at the scene , followed by Berquist . She finds a paw print with five toes , one more than regular canines . 
 Later that night , Detweiler arrives at a vet 's office to get tranquilizers and leaves . The vet goes to the back and is attacked by the Dhole but he locks the room before it can cause any harm . The dog catchers arrive and open fire on the wrong dog . While the vet tries to operate on the hurt dog Scully enters the building and begins to hear screaming in the back room . She discovers that the vet has been attacked . After Scully leaves , the hurt animal transforms into the dhole , revealing that the dog can mimic any shape . 
 Scully begins to question Berquist 's motives , noting that she was the reason Mulder decided to look into this investigation . Mulder , however , begins to suspect Detweiler after learning that he had been at the vet 's office ; Mulder believes that he is the dhole and is <unk> himself in an attempt to stop murdering . Mulder asks Cahn to confront Detweiler , but Cahn is attacked and severely injured by the Dhole and placed in the hospital . Mulder then visits Berquist and says he thinks she has not been honest with him . Berquist reveals that she first suspected Detweiler when she saw him and that he will try to kill her . Mulder worriedly tells Scully , who remains skeptical . 
 Later Berquist , while locking one of the outside kennels at her house , hears something in the woods . She goes upstairs and gets a tranquilizer gun , although when Detweiler , in the guise of a dhole , enters Berquist 's bedroom and attacks her , she sets it aside and challenges the dhole . He attacks , causing them to both fall out the window behind her . Mulder and Scully arrive and find Detweiler 's and Berquist 's bodies , the former impaled on a fence spike . Back at the office , Mulder receives a package from Berquist ; it is her " I Want to Believe " poster , a replacement for the one he lost in a fire and last seen hanging on her home office wall . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Alpha " was based on a <unk> , penned by first year writer Jeffrey Bell , that read " Scary dogs in the City . " Bell explained that he got the inspiration for the story after seeing a pack of wild dogs : " Nobody owns [ wild ] dogs , " he noted , " yet these dogs are somehow surviving . " After pitching the idea , it was later chosen as the sixteenth episode of The X @-@ Files sixth season . Bell had several discarded ideas before he settled on the Dhole storyline . Initially , the story was going to be a " reversal " of 1963 movie The Incredible Journey , featuring " a desperate family [ that ] moves three thousand miles to get away from their killer pet — who 's waiting for them at their new house , really pissed . " The second story idea would feature a child who released his anger through the dogs at a local animal shelter . In this version , the dogs functioned as a manifestation of the child 's id . Bell scrapped both of these ideas because they lacked " really cool visuals . " 
 After discarding two drafts , Bell approached producer Frank Spotnitz for help . Spotnitz suggested that the dog could escape from a ship and go on a killing spree . In addition , Spotnitz also came up with the idea for Mulder and Berquist to develop a quasi @-@ romance before the latter is killed at the end of the episode . Bell began to write the script on January 2 , 1999 , a mere three weeks before pre @-@ production was scheduled to begin . The episode ended up being re @-@ written right up to the start of shooting on February 2 . 
 = = = Casting and filming = = = 
 In order to successfully bring the episode to life , dozens of trained dogs were auditioned to play the part of the Wanshang Dhole , a process executive producer Michael Watkins later called " a nightmare . " Casting director Rick Millikan noted that he auditioned " many , many women " for the part of Karin Berquist . Melinda Culea , the wife of Peter Markle — who happened to direct the episode — was later cast in the role . Although Culea was chosen because she was affiliated with Markle , a majority of the cast and crew " deemed [ her ] to have done a fine job . " Two Cantonese Chinese @-@ speaking immigrant actors were cast to play the parts of Woo and Yee , the sailors who are killed by the Wanshang Dhole in the beginning of the episode . 
 Due to the fact that the show was operating on a strict budget , shots of the Chinese freighter were almost entirely created by digital technology or other special effects . For the opening scene of the ship at sea , a matte painting of a boat based on a toy model was superimposed onto a film strip of an empty ocean . Several scenes featuring the boat in port were created by filming an empty harbor and then superimposing a ship via digital technology . Special effects makeup supervisor John Vulich created a latex appliance that enabled the veterinarian to have his throat bitten out . 
 = = = Alternate ending = = = 
 On the season six DVD , an alternate ending to " Alpha " is included . In this version , Mulder receives Berquist 's " I Want to Believe " poster and hangs it on his wall . The scene then cuts to Officer Cahn who is recuperating in a hospital bed . When the attending nurse closes the curtains around him , his eyes flash red , insinuating that he now possesses the Wanshang Dhole 's morphing abilities . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 " Alpha " first aired in the United States on March 28 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 1 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on June 20 , 1999 and received 1 @.@ 02 million viewers , making it the most watched episode that week . Fox promoted the episode with the tagline " Sit . Stay . Kill . " 
 Critical reception to the episode was mostly negative . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C " and called it a " muddled , tepid bit of television that never really seems to know what story it ’ s trying to tell " . He noted , that while the episode is built around a distinctly " old structure " that harkens back to the show 's earlier seasons , the plot becomes predictable quickly . Ultimately , however , he concluded that the episode is compromised by its story which " would ’ ve been a dud even if it had aired back in 1993 " . He did , however , compliment the character of Karin Berquist , but wished the episode would have focused more on her and Mulder 's relationship . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five , and noted that " no matter how good the effects , there 's a limit to the number of times a dog with glowing red eyes pouncing on a human can be interesting . " The two also were critical of the romantic connection between Mulder and Karin Berquist , calling the sub @-@ plot " an attempt to instill a bit of emotion into this repetitive and formulaic tale [ that ] fails utterly . " 
 Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris called the episode a " run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episode " and noted that David Duchovny and Gillian Anderson had " very little energy " . Furthermore , she noted that several of the secondary characters were only in the plot " to be killed , nothing more " . Cyriaque Lamar from i09 sarcastically labeled the dhole as the " The Were @-@ St. Bernard " and called the episode one of " The 10 Most Ridiculous X @-@ Files Monsters " . 
 Not all reviews were negative , however . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examination : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files gave the episode a more positive review , writing " Perhaps I am alone in sensing the off @-@ beat love story I found to be at the heart of ' Alpha ' . But it reached out and grabbed me and I found it to be touching , interesting and worthy of analysis . " 
 = Bardas = 
 Bardas ( Greek : <unk> ; died 21 April 866 ) was a Byzantine noble and high @-@ ranking minister . As the brother of Empress Theodora , he rose to high office under Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) . Although sidelined after Theophilos 's death by Theodora and Theoktistos , in 855 he engineered Theoktistos 's murder and became the de facto regent for his nephew , Michael III ( r . 842 – 867 ) . Rising to the rank of Caesar , he was the effective ruler of the Byzantine Empire for ten years , a period which saw military success , renewed diplomatic and missionary activity , and an intellectual revival that heralded the Macedonian Renaissance . He was assassinated in 866 at the instigation of Michael III 's new favourite , Basil the Macedonian , who a year later would usurp the throne for himself and install his own dynasty on the Byzantine throne . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Bardas was born to the droungarios Marinos and <unk> , and was the elder brother of Empress Theodora , the wife of Emperor Theophilos , and of Petronas . Three other sisters , Maria , Sophia , and Irene , are recorded by Theophanes Continuatus . The family was of Armenian origin and had settled in Paphlagonia . Some modern genealogists , including Cyril Toumanoff and Nicholas Adontz , have suggested a link of Bardas ' family with the Armenian noble clan of the Mamikonian . According to Nina <unk> in the Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium , however , " [ a ] <unk> though it is , this thesis cannot be proven for want of sources . " 
 In 837 , Theophilos raised him to the rank of patrikios and sent him together with the general Theophobos in a campaign against the Abasgians , but the Byzantines were defeated . With the death of Theophilos , the young Michael III ( r . 842 – 867 ) ascended the throne . As he was only two years old , a regency council was set up headed by Theodora . Bardas and his brother Petronas , as well as their relative Sergios Niketiates , were also members , but it was the logothete Theoktistos who quickly established himself as Theodora 's chief advisor . Bardas still played an active role in the early days of the regency , encouraging Theodora to abandon Iconoclasm for good and taking part in the investigations that led to the deposition of the pro @-@ iconoclast patriarch John the Grammarian and the restoration of the veneration of icons in 843 . In 844 , however , Theoktistos blamed Bardas for the desertions that led to the Byzantine defeat in the Battle of Mauropotamos against the Abbasids , even though the logothete himself led the Byzantine army , and had him exiled from Constantinople . 
 Following Bardas 's exile and the death of Sergios , Theoktistos ruled supreme alongside Theodora for a decade . In 855 , Michael III turned fifteen and thus came nominally of age . His mother and Theoktistos arranged a bride show and selected Eudokia <unk> as his bride , disregarding Michael 's attachment to his mistress , Eudokia Ingerina . Bardas used Michael 's resentment for the high @-@ handed manner in which he was treated and began to turn him against the regency . With Michael 's backing , Bardas was allowed to return to the capital , and on 20 November 855 , Theoktistos was murdered . This was possibly done at the emperor 's behest , for Bardas is said to have favoured a more " elegant " removal of his rival . 
 = = = Ascendancy and fall = = = 
 With the death of Theoktistos , the regency was at an end ; in early 856 , Michael proclaimed his assumption of full imperial power , and in 857 Theodora was forced to retire to the <unk> Monastery . Nevertheless , as Michael was more interested in his pleasures and his continuing affair with Eudokia Ingerina , Bardas now became the de facto regent of the Empire . By ca . 858 he was promoted to the highest state offices ( magistros and chartoularios tou kanikleiou ) , followed by his promotion to kouropalates — according to Symeon Logothetes , this happened after a failed assassination attempt masterminded by Theodora — and finally , on 22 ( or 26 ) April 862 , to Caesar . Petronas also emerged from obscurity at the same time , becoming strategos of the Thracesian Theme and leading a series of successful raids against the Arabs . 
 Although later sources are critical of his character , describing him as vain , avaricious and power @-@ hungry , his capabilities as an administrator are widely acknowledged . Thus Bardas founded the <unk> School with seats for philosophy , grammar , astronomy and mathematics , supported scholars like Leo the Mathematician and promoted the missionary activities of Cyril and Methodius to Greater Moravia . He also scored a number of successes against the Arabs in the East , culminating in the decisive Battle of Lalakaon in 863 , and enforced the Christianization of Bulgaria by Byzantine missionaries . The Patria of Constantinople praise him also for his building activity , but aside from a church dedicated to Saint Demetrius outside the city itself , most of the buildings attributed to him were probably the work of Basil I the Macedonian ( r . 867 – 886 ) . 
 In 858 , Bardas deposed patriarch Ignatios and appointed Photios , well @-@ educated but a layman , in his stead . Later chronicles report that Ignatios had excluded Bardas from communion because he maintained an incestuous relationship with one of his daughters @-@ in @-@ law , but the real reason for Ignatios 's deposition was probably the patriarch 's staunch refusal to tonsure Empress Theodora against her will , as demanded by Bardas . The irregular elevation of Photios , however , riled with Pope Nicholas I , who refused to recognize it . Coupled with competition between Rome and Constantinople over their missionary activities in and jurisdiction over Moravia and Bulgaria , relations with the papacy remained tense . 
 Despite his great authority , Bardas 's control over his nephew was not absolute : after he managed to persuade him to dismiss his old chamberlain ( parakoimomenos ) , Damian , Michael appointed to the post not one of Bardas 's own protégés , but his favourite companion , the ruthlessly ambitious Basil the Macedonian . Bardas 's own position was further weakened in early 866 , when Michael learned that Eudokia Ingerina was pregnant to the future Leo VI : hitherto Bardas stood to succeed to the throne if anything should happen to the emperor , but now Michael had a direct heir . Instead of divorcing his wife and marrying his long @-@ time mistress , however , Michael married off Ingerina to Basil instead , who divorced his own wife first . In spring of the same year , Bardas began assembling a large @-@ scale expedition against the Saracen stronghold of Crete . Accompanied by Michael , Basil and the court , Bardas made for Miletus , where the army was assembling . There , on 21 April 866 , he was murdered by Basil , ostensibly for plotting against the emperor . 
 The campaign was abandoned while Michael and Basil returned to Constantinople , where Michael adopted his friend and made him co @-@ emperor . In September 867 , Basil had Michael III assassinated as well , ending the Amorian Dynasty and inaugurating the Macedonian period of Byzantine history . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Bardas was married twice . From his unknown first wife , who must have died before 855 , he had a son named <unk> , a daughter named Irene , an unnamed son and another daughter who married the logothete Symbatios ( although she may be identical with Irene ) . Some time around 855 , Bardas married for a second time , but divorced this wife , by the name of Theodosia , in 862 . Of Bardas 's sons , <unk> was appointed Domestic of the Schools while still a boy and still held the post at the time of his father 's murder , while little is known about the other son , except that in 858 he was given the hand of his father 's mistress , whom Bardas had discarded in order to marry Theodosia , and was appointed monostrategos ( " single @-@ general " ) of the Empire 's European themes . Bardas 's second daughter was married to the patrikios and logothete Symbatios . Symbatios participated in the plot to assassinate Bardas , hoping to succeed him . He rose in revolt when Basil became co @-@ emperor , but was defeated , mutilated , and exiled . 
 = Thomas Traherne = 
 Thomas Traherne MA ( / <unk> / ; 1636 or 1637 – ca . 27 September 1674 ) was an English poet , clergyman , theologian , and religious writer . Little information is known about his life . The intense , scholarly spirituality in his writings has led to his being commemorated by some parts of the Anglican Communion on 10 October ( the anniversary of his burial in 1674 ) or on September 27 . 
 The work for which Traherne is best known today is the Centuries of Meditations , a collection of short paragraphs in which he reflects on Christian life and ministry , philosophy , happiness , desire and childhood . This was first published in 1908 after having been rediscovered in manuscript ten years earlier . His poetry likewise was first published in 1903 and 1910 ( The Poetical Works of Thomas Traherne , B.D. and Poems of Felicity ) . His prose works include Roman Forgeries ( 1673 ) , Christian Ethics ( 1675 ) , and A Serious and <unk> Contemplation of the Mercies of God ( 1699 ) . 
 Traherne 's poetry is often associated with the metaphysical poets , even though his poetry was unknown for two centuries after his death . His manuscripts were kept among the private papers of the <unk> family of Ledbury , Herefordshire , until 1888 . Then , in the winter of 1896 – 97 , two manuscript volumes containing his poems and meditations were discovered by chance for sale in a street bookstall . The poems were initially thought to be the work of Traherne 's contemporary Henry Vaughan ( 1621 – 95 ) . Only through research was his identity uncovered and his work prepared for publication under his name . As a result , much of his work was not published until the first decade of the 20th century . 
 Traherne 's writings frequently explore the glory of creation and what he perceived as his intimate relationship with God . His writing conveys an ardent , almost childlike love of God , and is compared to similar themes in the works of later poets William Blake , Walt Whitman , and Gerard Manley Hopkins . His love for the natural world is frequently expressed in his works by a treatment of nature that evokes Romanticism — two centuries before the Romantic movement . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Very little information is known about Thomas Traherne 's life . According to antiquarian Anthony à Wood ( 1632 – 1695 ) , Traherne was a " shoemaker 's son of Hereford " born in either 1636 or 1637 . Bertram Dobell identifies this shoemaker as John Traherne ( b . 1566 ) . However , other sources indicate that Thomas was the son of Philipp Traherne ( or <unk> ) ( 1568 – 1645 ) , a local innkeeper and twice Mayor of Hereford , and his third wife , Mary Lane . His birth or baptism is not recorded in parish registers . 
 Traherne was educated at Hereford Cathedral School and matriculated in Brasenose College , Oxford , on 2 April 1652 , receiving his baccalaureate degree on 13 October 1656 . Five years later he was promoted to the degree of Master of Arts ( Oxon . ) on 6 November 1661 , and he received a Bachelor of Divinity ( B.D. ) on 11 December 1669 . 
 After receiving his baccalaureate degree from Oxford in 1656 , he took holy orders . The following year he was installed as the rector at Saint Mary 's Church in Credenhill near Hereford . He was appointed to the post at Credenhill on 30 December 1657 by the Commissioners for the Approbation of Public Preachers although at the time , he was not an ordained priest . A curious note appended to the record of his appointment is that Traherne counted upon the patronage of <unk> , Countess Dowager of Kent . Traherne served in this post for ten years although he was not ordained priest until after the restoration of the monarchy and the return of King Charles II . He was ordained at <unk> near Bicester by Robert Skinner ( 1591 – 1670 ) , the Bishop of Oxford , on 20 October 1660 . 
 In 1667 he became the private chaplain to Sir Orlando Bridgeman , 1st Baronet , of Great Lever , the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal to King Charles II , at Teddington ( near Hampton Court ) in Middlesex . Traherne died of smallpox at Bridgeman 's house at Teddington on 27 September 1674 and was buried in St Mary 's Church , Teddington on 10 October 1674 . He was interred under the church 's reading desk . According to Anthony à Wood , Traherne " always led a simple and devout life ; his will shows that he possessed little beyond his books , and thought it worth while to bequeath his ' old hat . ' " 
 It is assumed , although largely unsubstantiated , that Traherne 's studies at Oxford may identify his Royalist leanings at a time when the Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell had deposed the monarchy after the English Civil War . The city of Oxford had been the centre of the Cavalier cause and the headquarters of the King 's forces before its surrender in May 1646 and the university was regarded as a focus of Royalist sentiment during the Interregnum . The claim that Traherne may have been a Royalist may be bolstered by an inscription on the tombstone of Philipp Traherne , thought to be his father , which eulogises Philipp 's fidelity to , and zeal for , the Royalist cause . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Much of Traherne 's work remains unpublished . He was not known during his lifetime , and only one of his works was published before his death in 1674 and two others were published shortly thereafter . Of his published work , almost all appeared posthumously , and most of it in the 20th century . Several unpublished manuscripts are held in museums , private collections and university archives , including the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford , the British Library in London and the Beinecke Library at Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut . 
 Traherne was an inconsequential literary figure during his lifetime and his works were not known or appreciated until long after his death . As a country priest he led a devout , humble life and did not participate in literary circles . Only one of his works , Roman Forgeries ( 1673 ) , was published in his lifetime . Christian Ethicks ( 1675 ) followed soon after his death , and later A Serious and <unk> Contemplation of the Mercies of God ( 1699 ) , which was published as the work of an anonymous author whose character and background were discussed in a brief introduction by the publisher . From 1699 until the re @-@ emergence of his work with Bertram Dobell 's editions in 1903 , Traherne 's work fell into obscurity . If not for the chance discovery of an anonymous manuscript , his work and reputation might have been lost . 
 = = = Publication history and posthumous success = = = 
 At Traherne 's death in 1674 most of his manuscripts were bequeathed to his brother Philipp . After Philipp 's death they apparently passed into the possession of the <unk> family of Ledbury in Herefordshire , where they languished for almost 200 years . In 1888 the family 's assets were dissolved , yet the manuscripts did not re @-@ emerge until 10 years later . 
 In the winter of 1896 – 97 , William T. Brooke of London discovered some anonymous manuscripts in a " barrow of books about to be trashed " or a " street bookstall " . Brooke thought that they might be lost works by Henry Vaughan and showed them to Alexander Grosart ( 1827 – 99 ) , a Scottish clergyman and expert on Elizabethan and Jacobean literature who reprinted rare works . Grosart agreed that the manuscripts were by Vaughan and planned to include them in an edition of Vaughan 's works that he was preparing for publication . Grosart died in 1899 and the proposed edition was never completed . Grosart 's collection , including the manuscripts , was purchased by Charles Higham , a London bookseller , who asked his friend Bertram Dobell ( 1842 – 1914 ) to examine them . Dobell was convinced that they were not by Vaughan and soon discovered that they were by Traherne . The manuscripts , which included poetry as well as a collection of contemplative paragraphs " embodying <unk> on religion and morals " , were published as Centuries of Meditations . 
 More Traherne manuscripts have since been discovered that have yet to be catalogued . In 1997 Jeremy Maule , a Fellow of Trinity College , Cambridge , discovered more works by Traherne among 4 @,@ 000 manuscripts in the library of Lambeth Palace , the London residence of the Archbishop of Canterbury . The Lambeth manuscripts , mostly prose , encompass four complete works and a fragment of a fifth : Inducements to <unk> , A Sober View of Dr Twisse , Seeds of Eternity , The Kingdom of God and the fragmentary Love . The manuscript of Commentaries of Heaven was found burning on a rubbish heap in Lancashire . A manuscript discovered in 1996 in the Folger Library in Washington , DC , by Julia Smith and Laetitia <unk> was later identified as an unfinished 1 @,@ 800 @-@ line epic poem by Traherne entitled " The Ceremonial Law . " 
 = = Analysis and interpretation = = 
 = = = As a metaphysical poet = = = 
 Traherne was among about twelve Anglican lyricists labelled by Samuel Johnson as " the Metaphysical Poets . " While Johnson did not favour their work , and implied that their poetry was pretentious and obscure , the label has endured and has become respected as that of a school of poets . Their poetry " combined passionate feeling with intellectual rigor , " and " sought to express deeply felt religious and secular experiences in the form of highly intellectual poems . " The metaphysical poets , Traherne included , exhibited an " avid interest in science " drawing upon " imagery from all the new and exciting areas of scientific learning : astronomy , mathematics , geography , medicine " in their works . 
 Traherne 's poetry and prose works have been described in oxymoronic terms as " <unk> simple . " Traherne delves into issues such as the origins of faith , the nature of divinity and the faith , divinity , and the innocence of childhood and his style seems to enforce with verse that takes on the form of an incantation . At the core of his work is the concept of " felicity " , that highest state of bliss in which he describes the essence of God as a source of " Delights of inestimable value . " It is a quest for this divine and essential truth that Traherne is said to exemplify a " playful but passionate exposition , denoting both a profoundly enlivening experience and a practical set of interrelated abstract principles . " Traherne mixes mystical elements and seeks to explain issues of truth , knowledge , and the faculties of the mind and heart by methods of theological and rational examination . He seeks to explain the " Principle of Nature " in which through his inclination to love truth ( " Light " ) and beauty seek him to identify felicity as its source and a natural experience . Traherne argues that man can only experience this felicity by understanding the will of God and divine love and he describes the beauty of this in childlike terms . In a poem called " The Recovery " , Traherne claims : 
 = = = Theology and ethics = = = 
 Traherne was also concerned with the stability of the Christian church in England during the period of the Restoration . In some of his theological writings , Traherne exhibits a passion for the Anglican faith and the national church that is evident in his confrontations with Roman Catholicism and Nonconformism during this time of political and religious upheaval . The recent discoveries of previously unknown manuscripts further establish Traherne 's reputation as an Anglican divine and his works offer fresh and comprehensive arguments on ongoing theological arguments regarding the nature of divinity , ethics and morality , and the nature of sin . 
 For instance , Traherne passionately critiques Roman Catholicism in Roman Forgeries ( 1673 ) — the only work published during his lifetime . It is a polemical treatise in the form of a dialogue between two men — a Protestant and a Roman Catholic . Relying on the Scriptures and the pronouncements of the First Council of Nicaea to formulate the idea of a legitimate church authority , Traherne criticises the state of the contemporary Catholic Church and claims through a conspiracy theory that because the Vatican has had control over the manuscripts that the Catholic Church was in a position to corrupt , misuse or suppress documents to support its claim to authority . The abusive nature of the narrator 's critique of the Church of Rome is in sharp contrast to the tenor of Traherne 's poetry or his other writings on theological topics . However , Traherne takes a less polemic tone in the posthumously published Christian Ethicks ( 1675 ) in which he explores theological implications of Calvinist thought on freedom and necessity . In this work , Traherne refuses to define ethics as a secular phenomenon — instead pointing to a firm reliance on the will of God . Because of human limitations and failings , one cannot build a suitable and coherent moral system of beliefs — those virtues must derive from a divine source and their reward from perceiving the infinite love of God at the root of all things . 
 Given some of the autobiographical and confessional material in his works ( notably in Centuries of Meditations ) , Traherne must have suffered from a lack of faith in his formative years at Oxford . He describes this as a period of Apostasy and that he later found his way back to faith : 
 " I knew by intuition those things which since my Apostasy , I collected again by the highest reason . My very ignorance was advantageous . I seemed as one brought into the Estate of Innocence . All things were spotless and pure and glorious : yea , and infinitely mine , and joyful and precious , I knew not that there were any sins or complaints or laws . " 
 Traherne dedicated considerable examination to the subject of sin and its place vis @-@ a @-@ vis the church doctrines . In the recently discovered work , A Sober View of Dr Twisse , Traherne discusses sin and salvation within the frame of a larger discussion of questions of election and reprobation . Traherne writes : 
 " He was excluded the Kingdom of Heaven , where nothing can enter that hates God , and whence nothing can be excluded that loves him . The loss of that Love is Hell : the Sight and Possession of that Love is Heaven . Thus did sin exclude him Heaven . " 
 = = = Mysticism and divine union = = = 
 Traherne 's works are inherently mystical in that they seek to understand and embrace the nature of God within his creation and within man 's soul . Traherne seems to describe his own journey of faith in Centuries of Meditation , which was likely written when Traherne was at Credenhill — a work that is noted for its " spiritual intensity , " and " the wide scope of the writer 's survey " which includes " all heaven and earth he takes for the province of the pious soul " . Traherne 's work is said to look " upon the hidden things of the soul , and , in them , he sees the image of the glory and love of God " and " the eternal theme of the goodness and the splendour of God . " 
 In the spirit of the gospels , Traherne 's " great theme is the visionary innocence of childhood , " and his writings suggest " that adults have lost the joy of childhood , and with it an understanding of the divine nature of creation . " Traherne seems to convey the idea that paradise can only be rediscovered and regained through reacquiring this childlike innocence — a state which " precedes the knowledge of good and evil " and seems to be composed of a boundless love and wonder . 
 In this respect , Traherne 's work is often compared to the abounding joy and mysticism found in the works of William Blake , Walt Whitman , and Gerard Manley Hopkins . According to Traherne scholar Denise Inge , Traherne 's introduction of a child 's viewpoint to narrate his theological and moral premises was unknown or certainly unappreciated in the literature of this time . His poems frequently explore the glory of creation and what he perceived as his intimate relationship with God . He drew deeply on the writings of Aristotle and on the early Church Fathers for his concept of Man and human nature . Little mention is made of sin and suffering in the works that have dominated 20th @-@ century criticism , and some critics have seen his verse as bordering upon pantheism ( or perhaps panentheism ) . 
 Traherne is heavily influenced by the works of Neoplatonist philosophers and several of his contemporaries who were called the Cambridge Platonists . The Cambridge Platonists were <unk> in that they argued for moderation and dialogue between the factions of Puritans and High Churchmen in the Anglican church . They believed that religion and reason could be in harmony with one another based on a mystical understanding of reason — believing that reason rose beyond mere sense perception but was " the candle of the Lord " and an echo of the divine residing within the human soul . Reason was both God @-@ given and of God . Indeed , critic K. W. Salter notes that Traherne " writes of the senses as if they were spiritual and of the spirit as if it were sensuous . " 
 However , according to Gladys Wade 's 1946 biography of Traherne , she distinguished that the Cambridge Platonists " wasted their energies on Hermetic and <unk> and Rosicrucian lore , and on incredible experiments in magic and necromancy , " and remarked that Traherne 's mysticism was " perfectly free from any taint of this . " 
 Another great passion that is depicted in Traherne 's work is his love of nature and the natural world , frequently displayed in a very Romantic treatment of nature that has been described as characteristically pantheist or <unk> . While Traherne credits a divine source for its creation , his praise of nature seems nothing less than what one would expect to find in Thoreau . Many scholars consider Traherne a writer of the sublime , and in his writing he seems to have tried to reclaim the lost appreciation for the natural world , as well as paying tribute to what he knew of in nature that was more powerful than he was . In this sense Traherne seems to have anticipated the Romantic movement more than 130 years before it actually occurred . There is frequent discussion of man 's almost symbiotic relationship with nature , as well as frequent use of " literal setting " , that is , an attempt to faithfully reproduce a sense experience from a given moment , a technique later used frequently by William Wordsworth . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Because Traherne 's works were lost for 200 years after his death they did not influence other writers until the 20th century . Indeed , while Samuel Johnson included him in his criticism of what he termed " metaphysical " poetry , many of Johnson 's contemporaries did not know of Traherne . Since their rediscovery , however , they have influenced the thought and writings of Trappist monk , social activist , and author Thomas Merton , crime writer and Christian humanist Dorothy L. Sayers , poet Elizabeth Jennings and Christian apologist C. S. Lewis . Lewis called Centuries of Meditations " almost the most beautiful book in English . " 
 In 1939 the English composer Gerald Finzi ( 1901 – 1956 ) completed writing a cantata for solo voice ( typically a soprano or tenor soloist ) and string orchestra entitled Dies natalis ( his Opus number 8 ) of which four movements are settings of writings by Thomas Traherne : " The Rapture " , " Wonder " , " The <unk> " and ( the only prose piece among the four ) an extract from Centuries of Meditations . In each of these pieces , the text chosen by Finzi reflects the joy and wonder of a newborn child 's innocent perspective on the world and the wonderment in being born into a world of such beauty . The first performance of the cantata was delayed until 1946 because of the Second World War . 
 = = Veneration by the Anglican Church = = 
 In commemoration of his poems and spiritual writings , Thomas Traherne is venerated as a saint within Anglicanism and is included in the Calendar of Saints in many national churches within the Anglican Communion . The Anglican Communion does not have a formal process of sainthood and canonisation as is found in the Roman Catholic tradition , but has frequently " recognised or ' canonised ’ people of great holiness , sometimes by a formal process and sometimes by popular acclamation or local custom . The commemoration of Traherne is held on either 27 September ( the date of his death ) or 10 October ( the date of his burial ) . In 2009 the General Convention of the Episcopal Church in the United States approved the following Collect for the observation of Traherne 's feast day : 
 " Creator of wonder and majesty , who didst inspire thy poet Thomas Traherne with mystical insight to see thy glory in the natural world and in the faces of men and women around us : Help us to know thee in thy creation and in our neighbors , and to understand our obligations to both , that we may ever grow into the people thou hast created us to be ; through our Savior Jesus Christ , who with thee and the Holy Spirit liveth and <unk> , one God , in everlasting light . Amen . " 
 Observed on 27 September 
 Episcopal Church in the United States 
 Observed on 10 October 
 Church of England 
 Anglican Church of Korea 
 Hong Kong Sheng Kung Hui ( also known as the Hong Kong Anglican Church ) 
 = = Works and publications = = 
 = = = Published during Traherne 's life and times = = = 
 1673 : Roman Forgeries , Or , A True Account of False Records Discovering the <unk> and Counterfeit Antiquities of the Church of Rome ( London : Printed by S. & B. Griffin for Jonathan Edwin , 1673 ) . 
 1675 : Christian Ethicks : Or , Divine Morality . Opening the Way to <unk> , By the Rules of Vertue and Reason ( London : Printed for Jonathan Edwin , 1675 ) . 
 1699 : A Serious and Pathetical Contemplation of the Mercies of God , In Several Most Devout and Sublime Thanksgivings for the same ( London : Printed for Samuel Keble , 1699 ) . 
 1717 : Meditations on the Creation , in A Collection of Meditations and Devotions , in Three Parts . ( London : Published by Nathaniel <unk> . Printed for D. Midwinter , 1717 ) . 
 = = = Later compilations and editions = = = 
 1903 : The Poetical Works of Thomas Traherne 1636 ? – 1674 ( edited by Bertram Dobell ) ( London : Dobell , 1903 ) . 
 1908 : Centuries of Meditations ( edited by Dobell ) ( London : Dobell , 1908 ; Cosimo Inc . , 2007 ) ISBN <unk> 
 1910 : Traherne 's Poems of Felicity ( edited by H. I. Bell ) ( Oxford : Clarendon Press , 1910 ) . 
 1932 : The Poetical Works of Thomas Traherne , faithfully reprinted from the Author 's Original Manuscript , together with Poems of Felicity , reprinted from the Burney manuscript , and Poems from Various Sources ( edited by Gladys I. Wade ) ( London : P. J. & A. E. Dobell , 1932 ) . 
 1941 : A Serious and Pathetical Contemplation of the Mercies of God , In Several most Devout and Sublime Thanksgivings for the same ( edited by Roy <unk> ) ( Toronto : University of Toronto Press , 1941 ) . 
 1958 : Centuries , Poems , and Thanksgivings 2 volumes ( edited by H. M. <unk> ) ( Oxford : Clarendon Press , 1958 ) . 
 1966 : Meditations on the Six Days of the Creation ( edited by George Robert Guffey ) ( Los Angeles : William Andrews Clark Memorial Library , University of California , 1966 ) . 
 1966 : Poems , Centuries , and Three Thanksgivings ( edited by Anne Ridler ) ( London : Oxford University Press , 1966 ) . 
 1968 : Christian Ethicks ( edited by Carol L. Marks and Guffey ) ( Ithaca : Cornell University Press , 1968 ) . 
 1989 : Commentaries of Heaven : The Poems ( edited by D. D. C. Chambers ) ( Salzburg : Institut für <unk> und <unk> Universitat Salzburg , 1989 ) . ISBN <unk> 
 2005 – 2017 : The Works of Thomas Traherne ( series edited by Jan Ross ) ( Melton , Suffolk , UK : <unk> ) in 9 volumes . ISBN <unk> ( complete set ) Volume I : Inducements to <unk> , A Sober View of Dr <unk> his Considerations , Seeds of Eternity or the Nature of the Soul , The Kingdom of God ( 2005 ) . ISBN <unk> 
 Volume II : Commentaries of Heaven , part 1 : <unk> to Alone ( 2007 ) ISBN <unk> 
 Volume III : Commentaries of Heaven , part 2 : Al @-@ Sufficient to Bastard ( 2007 ) ISBN <unk> 
 Volume IV : Church 's Year @-@ Book , A Serious and Pathetical Contemplation of the Mercies of GOD , [ Meditations on the Six Days of the Creation ] ( 2009 ) ISBN <unk> 
 Volume V : Centuries of Meditations and Select Meditations ( 2013 ) ISBN <unk> 
 Volume VI : Verse : from the Dobell Folio , Poems of Felicity , The Ceremonial Law ( not yet published ) 
 Volume VII : Roman Forgeries , Christian Ethicks : or , Divine Morality ( not yet published ) 
 Volume . VIII : Commentary and Index ( not yet published ) 
 Volume IX : Notebooks ( not yet published ) 
 = Akutan Zero = 
 The Akutan Zero , also known as Koga 's Zero and the Aleutian Zero , was a type 0 model 21 Mitsubishi A6M Zero Japanese fighter plane that crash @-@ landed on Akutan Island , Alaska Territory , during World War II . It was found intact by the Americans in July 1942 and became the first flyable Zero acquired by the United States during the war . It was repaired and flown by American test pilots . As a result of information gained from these tests , American tacticians were able to devise ways to defeat the Zero , which was the Imperial Japanese Navy 's primary fighter plane throughout the war . 
 The Akutan Zero has been described as " a prize almost beyond value to the United States " , and " probably one of the greatest prizes of the Pacific war " . Japanese historian Masatake Okumiya stated that the acquisition of the Akutan Zero " was no less serious " than the Japanese defeat at the Battle of Midway , and that it " did much to hasten Japan 's final defeat " . On the other hand , John <unk> is among those who challenge " the contention that it took dissection of Koga 's Zero to create tactics that beat the fabled airplane " . 
 The Akutan Zero was destroyed in a training accident in 1945 . Parts of it are preserved in several museums in the United States . 
 = = Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter = = 
 The Second Sino @-@ Japanese War began in 1937 . Attacks by Chinese fighter planes on Japanese bombers caused the Japanese to develop the concept of fighter escorts . The limited range of the Mitsubishi A5M " Claude " fighter used to escort the bombers caused the Japanese Navy Air staff to commission the Mitsubishi A6M Zero as a long @-@ range land- and carrier @-@ based fighter . 
 The Zero , which first flew in 1939 , was exceedingly agile and lightweight , with maneuverability and range superior to any other fighter in the world at that time . The Zero was superior to any Allied fighter it would encounter for the first two years of the war . To achieve this , however , Japanese engineers had traded off durability . The Zero was very lightly built ; it had no armor and no self @-@ sealing fuel tanks . According to American author Jim Rearden , " The Zero was probably the easiest fighter of any in World War II to bring down when hit ... The Japanese ... were not prepared to or weren 't capable of building more advanced fighters in the numbers needed to cope with increasing numbers and quality of American fighters " . The Zero was the primary Japanese Navy fighter throughout the war . During the war , the Japanese manufactured roughly 10 @,@ 500 Zeros . 
 In 1940 Claire Lee Chennault , leader of the Flying Tigers , wrote a report on the Zero 's performance . However , United States Department of War analysts rejected it as " arrant nonsense " and concluded the performance attributed to the Zero was an aerodynamic impossibility . Early in the war , the Zero outclassed any Allied fighter it encountered . According to American flying ace William N. Leonard , " In these early encounters and on our own we were learning the folly of dogfighting with [ the Zero ] " . 
 During the attack on Pearl Harbor , nine Zeros were shot down . From these wrecks , the Allies learned that the Zero lacked armor and self @-@ sealing fuel tanks , but little else about its capabilities . The Zero 's flight performance characteristics — crucial to devising tactics and machinery to combat it — remained a mystery . 
 Prior to recovery of the Akutan Zero , technical information from three other downed Zeros was available to the Allies . One Zero ( serial number <unk> ) , piloted by Hajime Toyoshima , crashed on Melville Island in Australia following the bombing of Darwin . The Zero was heavily damaged , and Toyoshima became Australia 's first Japanese prisoner of the Pacific war . Another Zero , piloted by Yoshimitsu Maeda , crashed near Cape Rodney , New Guinea . The team sent to recover the plane erred when they chopped off the wings , severing the wing spars and rendering the hulk unflyable . The third came from China , where Gerhard Neumann was able to reconstruct a working Zero . He used a partly intact Zero ( serial number <unk> ) that had landed in Chinese territory , repaired with salvaged pieces from other downed Zeros . However , bad conditions and the long delivery time from China prevented Neumann 's Zero from reaching the United States for testing until after the recovery of the Akutan Zero . 
 = = Petty Officer Koga 's final mission = = 
 In June 1942 , as part of the Japanese Midway operation , the Japanese attacked the Aleutian islands , off the south coast of Alaska . A Japanese task force led by Admiral Kakuji Kakuta bombed Dutch Harbor on Unalaska Island twice , once on June 3 and again the following day . 
 Tadayoshi Koga , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old flight petty officer first class , was launched from the Japanese aircraft carrier Ryūjō as part of the June 4 raid . Koga was part of a three @-@ plane section ; his wingmen were Chief Petty Officer Makoto Endo and Petty Officer Tsuguo Shikada . Koga and his comrades attacked Dutch Harbor , shooting down an American PBY @-@ 5A Catalina flying boat piloted by Bud Mitchell and strafing its survivors in the water . In the process , Koga 's plane ( serial number <unk> ) was damaged by small arms fire . 
 Tsuguo Shikada , one of Koga 's wingmen , published an account in 1984 in which he claimed the damage to Koga 's plane occurred while his section was making an attack against two American Catalinas anchored in the bay . This account omits any mention of shooting down Mitchell 's PBY . Both American and Japanese records contradict his claims ; there were no PBYs in the bay that day . However , his claims do match American records from the attack against Dutch Harbor the previous day ( June 3 ) . Rearden noted , " It seems likely that in the near half @-@ century after the event Shikada 's memory confused the raids of June 3 and June 4 ... It also seems likely that in his interview , Shikada employed selective memory in not mentioning shooting down Mitchell 's PBY and then machine gunning the crew on the water " . 
 It is not known who fired the shot that brought down Koga 's plane , though numerous individuals have claimed credit . Photographic evidence strongly suggests it was hit by ground fire . Members of the 206th Coast Artillery Regiment , which had both 3 @-@ inch anti @-@ aircraft guns and .50 caliber machine guns in position defending Dutch Harbor , claimed credit , in addition to claims made by United States Navy ships that were present . Physical inspection of the plane revealed it was hit with small arms fire — .50 caliber bullet holes and smaller , from both above and below . 
 = = = Crash = = = 
 The fatal shot severed the return oil line , and Koga 's plane immediately began trailing oil . Koga reduced speed to prevent the engine 's seizing for as long as possible . 
 The three Zeros flew to Akutan Island , 25 miles east of Dutch Harbor , which had been designated for emergency landings . Waiting near the island was a Japanese submarine assigned to pick up downed pilots . At Akutan , the three Zeros circled a grassy flat half a mile inland from Broad Bight . Shikada thought the ground was firm beneath the grass , but in his second pass he noticed water glistening . He suddenly realized Koga should make a belly landing . But by then Koga had lowered his landing gear and was almost down . 
 The plane 's landing gear mired in the water and mud , causing the plane to flip upside down and skid to a stop . Although the aircraft survived the landing nearly intact , Petty Officer Koga died instantly on impact , probably from a broken neck or a blunt @-@ force blow to his head . Koga 's wingmen , circling above , had orders to destroy any Zeros that crash @-@ landed in enemy territory , but as they did not know if Koga was still alive , they could not bring themselves to strafe his plane . They decided to leave without firing on it . The Japanese submarine stationed off Akutan Island to pick up pilots searched for Koga in vain before being driven off by the destroyer USS Williamson . 
 = = Recovery = = 
 The crash site , which was out of sight of standard flight lanes and not visible by ship , remained undetected and undisturbed for over a month . On July 10 , 1942 , an American PBY Catalina piloted by Lieutenant William " Bill " Thies spotted the wreckage . Thies 's Catalina had been patrolling by dead reckoning and had become lost . On spotting the <unk> Islands , he reoriented his plane and began to return to Dutch Harbor by the most direct course — over Akutan Island . The plane 's captain , Albert Knack , spotted Koga 's wreck . Thies 's plane circled the crash site for several minutes , noted its position on the map , and returned to Dutch Harbor to report it . Thies convinced his commanding officer , Paul Foley , to let him return with a salvage team . The next day ( July 11 ) , the team flew out to inspect the wreck . Navy photographer 's mate Arthur W. Bauman took pictures as they worked . 
 Thies 's team extracted Koga 's body from the plane by having Knack ( the smallest crew member ) crawl up inside the plane and cut his safety harness with a knife . They searched it for anything with intelligence value , and buried Koga in a shallow grave near the crash site . Thies returned with his team to Dutch Harbor , where he reported the plane as salvageable . The next day ( July 12 ) , a salvage team under Lieutenant Robert <unk> was dispatched to Akutan . This team gave Koga a Christian burial in a nearby knoll and set about recovering the plane , but the lack of heavy equipment ( which they had been unable to unload after the delivery ship lost two anchors ) meant their efforts failed . On July 15 , a third recovery team was dispatched . This time , with proper heavy equipment , the team was able to free the Zero from the mud and hauled it overland to a nearby barge , without further damaging it . The Zero was taken to Dutch Harbor , turned right @-@ side up , and cleaned . 
 The Akutan Zero was loaded into the USS St. Mihiel and transported to Seattle , arriving on August 1 . From there , it was transported by barge to Naval Air Station North Island near San Diego where repairs were carefully carried out . These repairs " consisted mostly of straightening the vertical stabilizer , rudder , wing tips , flaps , and canopy . The sheared off landing struts needed more extensive work . The three @-@ blade Sumitomo propeller was dressed and re @-@ used . " The Zero 's red Hinomaru roundel was repainted with the American blue circle @-@ white star insignia . The whole time , the plane was kept under 24 @-@ hour military police guard in order to deter would @-@ be souvenir hunters from damaging the plane . The Zero was fit to fly again on September 20 . 
 = = Analysis of the Zero = = 
 Data from the captured Zero had been transmitted to the Bureau of Aeronautics and Grumman Aircraft . After careful study , Roy Grumman decided that he could match or surpass the Zero in most respects , except in range , without sacrificing pilot armor , self @-@ sealing tanks and fuselage structure . The new F6F Hellcat would compensate for the extra weight with additional power . 
 On September 20 , 1942 ( 2 months after the Zero 's capture ) , Lieutenant Commander Eddie R. Sanders took the Akutan Zero up for its first test flight . He would make 24 test flights between September 20 and October 15 . According to Sanders ' report : 
 These flights covered performance tests such as we do on planes undergoing Navy tests . The very first flight exposed weaknesses of the Zero which our pilots could exploit with proper tactics ... immediately apparent was the fact that the ailerons froze up at speeds above 200 knots so that rolling maneuvers at those speeds were slow and required much force on the control stick . It rolled to the left much easier than to the right . Also , its engine cut out under negative acceleration due to its float @-@ type carburetor . We now had the answer for our pilots who were being outmaneuvered and unable to escape a pursuing Zero : Go into a vertical power dive , using negative acceleration if possible to open the range while the Zero 's engine was stopped by the acceleration . At about 200 knots , roll hard right before the Zero pilot could get his sights lined up . 
 In later test flights , Anacostia Naval Air Station director of flight testing Frederick M. Trapnell flew the Akutan Zero in performance while Sanders simultaneously flew American planes performing identical maneuvers , simulating aerial combat . Following these , USN test pilot Lieutenant Melvin C. " <unk> " Hoffman conducted more dogfighting tests between himself flying the Akutan Zero and recently commissioned USN pilots flying newer Navy aircraft . 
 Following its tests by the Navy , the Zero was transferred from Naval Air Station North Island to Anacostia Naval Air Station in 1943 . The aircraft painted in U.S. Navy blue with star insignia was displayed at Washington National Airport as a war prize . In 1944 , it was recalled to North Island for use as a training plane for rookie pilots being sent to the Pacific . A model 52 Zero , captured during the liberation of Guam , was later used as well . 
 Data and conclusions from these tests were published in Informational Intelligence Summary 59 , Technical Aviation Intelligence Brief # 3 , Tactical and Technical Trends # 5 ( published prior to the first test flight ) , and Informational Intelligence Summary 85 . These results tend to somewhat understate the Zero 's capabilities . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 Data from the captured aircraft was submitted to BuAer and Grumman Aircraft for study in 1942 . The U.S. carrier @-@ borne fighter plane that succeeded the F4F Wildcat , the F6F , would be tested in its first experimental mode as the XF6F @-@ 1 prototype with an under @-@ powered Wright R @-@ 2600 Twin Cyclone 14 @-@ cylinder , two @-@ row radial engine on 26 June 1942 . Shortly before the XF6F @-@ 1 's first flight , and based on combat accounts of encounters between the F4F Wildcat and A6M Zero , on 26 April 1942 , BuAer directed Grumman to install the more powerful 18 @-@ cylinder Pratt & Whitney R @-@ 2800 Double Wasp radial engine — already powering Chance Vought 's Corsair design since its own beginnings in 1940 — in the second XF6F @-@ 1 prototype . Grumman complied by redesigning and strengthening the F6F airframe to incorporate the 2 @,@ 000 hp ( 1 @,@ 500 kW ) R @-@ 2800 @-@ 10 , driving a three @-@ bladed Hamilton Standard propeller . With this combination Grumman estimated the XF6F @-@ 3s performance would increase by 25 % over that of the XF6F @-@ 1 . This first Double Wasp @-@ equipped Hellcat airframe , bearing BuAer serial number <unk> , first flew on 30 July 1942 . The F6F @-@ 3 subtype had been designed with specific " Wildcat vs Zero " input from Battle of the Coral Sea and Battle of Midway veteran F4F pilots such as Jim Flatley and Jimmy Thach , respectively , among several others , obtained during a meeting with Grumman Vice President Jake <unk> at Pearl Harbor on 23 June 1942 , with the first production F6F @-@ 3 making its own first flight just over three months later , on October 3 , 1942 . While the captured Zero 's tests did not drastically influence the Hellcat 's design , they did give knowledge of the Zero 's handling characteristics , including its limitations in rolling right and diving . That information , together with the improved capabilities of the Hellcat , were credited with helping American pilots " tip the balance in the Pacific " . American aces Kenneth A. Walsh and R. Robert Porter , among others , credited tactics derived from this knowledge with saving their lives . James Sargent Russell , who commanded the PBY Catalina squadron that discovered the Zero and later rose to the rank of admiral , noted that Koga 's Zero was " of tremendous historical significance . " William N. Leonard concurred , describing it thus : " The captured Zero was a treasure . To my knowledge , no other captured machine has ever unlocked so many secrets at a time when the need was so great . " 
 Some historians dispute the degree to which the Akutan Zero influenced the outcome of the air war in the Pacific . For example , the Thach Weave , a tactic created by John Thach and used with great success by American airmen against the Zero , was devised by Thach prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor , based on intelligence reports on the Zero 's performance in China . 
 The capture and flight tests of Koga 's Zero is usually described as a tremendous coup for the Allies as it revealed the secrets of that mysterious aircraft and led directly to its downfall . According to this viewpoint , only then did Allied pilots learn how to deal with their nimble opponents . The Japanese could not agree more ... Yet those naval pilots who fought the Zero at Coral Sea , Midway , and Guadalcanal without the benefit of test reports would beg to differ with the contention that it took dissection of Koga 's Zero to create tactics that beat the fabled airplane . To them the Zero did not long remain a mystery plane . Word quickly circulated among the combat pilots as to its particular attributes . Indeed on 6 October while testing the Zero , [ Akutan Zero test pilot Frederick M. ] Trapnell made a highly revealing statement : ' The general impression of the airplane is exactly as originally created by intelligence — including the performance ' . 
 However , 9 wrecked Mitsubishi A6M Zeros were recovered from Pearl Harbor shortly after the attack in December 1941 , and United States Naval Intelligence , along with the Navy 's Bureau of Aeronautics had them studied , and then shipped to the Experimental Engineering Department at Dayton , Ohio in 1942 . It was noted that the experimental Grumman XF6F @-@ 1s then under @-@ going testing in June 1942 and the Zero had " wings integrated with the fuselage , " a design feature not normally practiced in American aircraft production at that time . 
 The Akutan Zero was destroyed during a training accident in February 1945 . While the Zero was taxiing for a take @-@ off , a SB2C Helldiver lost control and rammed into it . The Helldiver 's propeller sliced the Zero into pieces . From the wreckage , William N. Leonard salvaged several gauges , which he donated to the National Museum of the United States Navy . The Alaska Heritage Museum and the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum also have small pieces of the Zero . 
 In an attempt to repatriate Koga 's body , American author Jim Rearden led a search on Akutan in 1988 . He located Koga 's grave , but found it empty . Rearden and Japanese businessman Minoru Kawamoto conducted a records search . They found that in 1947 Koga 's body was exhumed by an American Graves Registration Service team and re @-@ buried on Adak Island , further down the Aleutian chain . The team , unaware of Koga 's identity , marked his body as unidentified . The Adak cemetery was excavated in 1953 , and 236 bodies were returned to Japan . The body buried next to Koga ( Shigeyoshi Shindo ) was one of 13 identified ; the remaining 223 unidentified remains were re @-@ interred in <unk> National Cemetery in Japan . It is probable that Koga was one of them . Rearden later wrote the definitive account of the Akutan Zero . 
 = Laurence of Canterbury = 
 Laurence ( sometimes Lawrence or Laurentius ; died 2 February 619 ) was the second Archbishop of Canterbury from about 604 to 619 . He was a member of the Gregorian mission sent from Italy to England to Christianise the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism , although the date of his arrival is disputed . He was consecrated archbishop by his predecessor , Augustine of Canterbury , during Augustine 's lifetime , to ensure continuity in the office . While archbishop , he attempted unsuccessfully to resolve differences with the native British bishops by corresponding with them about points of dispute . Laurence faced a crisis following the death of King Æthelberht of Kent , when the king 's successor abandoned Christianity ; he eventually reconverted . Laurence was revered as a saint after his death in 619 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Laurence was part of the Gregorian mission originally dispatched from Rome in 595 to convert the Anglo @-@ Saxons from their native paganism to Christianity ; he landed at Thanet , Kent , with Augustine in 597 , or , as some sources state , first arrived in 601 and was not a part of the first group of missionaries . He had been a monk in Rome before his travels to England , but nothing else is known of his history or background . The medieval chronicler Bede says that Augustine sent Laurence back to Pope Gregory I to report on the success of converting King Æthelberht of Kent and to carry a letter with questions for the pope . Accompanied by Peter of Canterbury , another missionary , he set off some time after July 598 , and had returned by June 601 . He brought back with him Gregory 's replies to Augustine 's questions , a document commonly known as the Libellus responsionum , that Bede incorporated in his Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum . Laurence is probably the Laurence referred to in the letter from Gregory to Bertha , queen of Kent . In that letter , Gregory praises Bertha for her part in the conversion of her husband , details of which Gregory says he received from Laurence the priest . It is known that Laurence returned to England with Mellitus and others of the second group of missionaries in the summer of 601 , but there is no record of Peter being with them . 
 = = Archbishop = = 
 Laurence succeeded Augustine to the see of Canterbury in about 604 , and ruled until his death on 2 February 619 . To secure the succession , Augustine had consecrated Laurence before he died , even though that was prohibited by canon law . Augustine was afraid though that if someone did not step into the office immediately , it would damage the missionary efforts in Britain . However , Laurence never received a pallium from Rome , so he may have been considered uncanonical by the papacy . Bede makes a point of comparing Augustine 's action in consecrating Laurence to Saint Peter 's action of consecrating Clement as Bishop of Rome during Peter 's lifetime , which the theologian J. Robert Wright believes may be Bede 's way of criticising the practices of the church in his day . 
 In 610 Laurence received letters from Pope Boniface IV , addressed to him as archbishop and Augustine 's successor . The correspondence was in response to Laurence having sent Mellitus to Rome earlier in 610 , to solicit advice from the papacy on matters concerning the English Church . While in Rome Mellitus attended a synod , and brought the synodical decrees back with him to Laurence . 
 In 613 Laurence consecrated the monastery church built by Augustine in Canterbury , and dedicated it to saints Peter and Paul ; it was later re @-@ consecrated as St Augustine 's Abbey , Canterbury . Laurence also wrote to the bishops in the lands held by the Scots and by the Britons , urging them to hold Easter on the day that the Roman church celebrated it , instead of their traditional date , part of the Easter controversy . The letter is also preserved in Bede 's history . Laurence in 609 stated that Dagan , a native bishop , would not eat with Laurence or share a roof with the archbishop , due to the differences between the two Churches . 
 = = Pagan reaction = = 
 Æthelberht died in 616 , during Laurence 's tenure ; his son Eadbald abandoned Christianity in favour of Anglo @-@ Saxon paganism , forcing many of the Gregorian missionaries to flee the pagan backlash that followed Æthelberht 's death . Among them in Gaul were Mellitus , who was Bishop of London , and Justus , who was Bishop of Rochester . Remaining in Britain , Laurence succeeded in reconverting Eadbald to Christianity . Bede relates the story that Laurence had been prepared to give up when he was visited by St Peter in a dream or vision . St Peter chastised Laurence and whipped him , and the marks of the whipping remained after the vision or dream ended . Laurence then displayed them to Eadbald , and the king was converted on the spot . Bede , however , hints that it was the death of some of the leaders of the pagan party in battle that really persuaded Laurence to stay . According to Benedicta Ward , a historian of Christianity , Bede uses the story of the whipping as an example of how suffering was a reminder of Christ 's suffering for humans , and how that example could lead to conversion . Wright argues that another point Bede is making is that it is because of the intercession of St Peter himself that the mission continued . David Farmer , in the Oxford Dictionary of Saints , suggests that the whipping story may have been a blending of the Quo Vadis story with some information given by Jerome in a letter . 
 Modern historians have seen political overtones in the pagan reaction . The historian D. P. Kirby sees Eadbald 's actions as a repudiation of his father 's pro @-@ Frankish policies . Alcuin , a later medieval writer , wrote that Laurence was " censured by apostolic authority " . This may have been a letter from Pope <unk> I , commanding Laurence to stay in Kent . Kirby goes on to argue that it was Justus , not Laurence , who converted Eadbald , and this while Justus was archbishop , sometime around 624 . Not all historians agree with this argument , however . Nicholas Brooks states that the king was converted during Laurence 's archiepiscopate , within a year of him succeeding his father . The historian Barbara Yorke argues that there were two co @-@ rulers of Kent after Æthelberht 's death , Eadbald and a Æthelwald , and that Eadbald was converted by Laurence while Æthelwald was converted by Justus after his return to Rochester . Another factor in the pagan reaction was Laurence 's objection to Eadbald 's marriage to his father 's widow , something that Christians considered to be unlawful . 
 All efforts to extend the church beyond Kent encountered difficulties due to the attitude of King Rædwald of East Anglia , who had become the leading king in the south after Æthelberht 's death . Rædwald was converted before the death of Æthelberht , perhaps at the urging of Æthelberht , but his kingdom was not , and Rædwald seems to have converted only to the extent of placing a Christian altar in his pagan temple . It proved impossible for Mellitus to return to London as bishop , although Justus did resume his duties at Rochester . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Laurence died on 2 February 619 , and was buried in the abbey of St Peter and Paul in Canterbury , later renamed St Augustine 's ; his relics , or remains , were moved , or translated , to the new church of St Augustine 's in 1091 . His shrine was in the axial chapel of the abbey church , flanking the shrine of Augustine , his predecessor . Laurence came to be regarded as a saint , and was given the feast day of 3 February . The ninth century Stowe Missal commemorates his feast day , along with Mellitus and Justus . A Vita ( or Life ) was written about the time of his translation , by Goscelin , but it is mainly based on information in Bede . His tomb was opened in 1915 . Besides his feast day , the date of his translation , 13 September , was also celebrated after his death . Laurence 's tenure as archbishop is mainly remembered for his failure to secure a settlement with the Celtic church , and for his reconversion of Eadbald following Æthelbert 's death . He was succeeded as archbishop by Mellitus , the Bishop of London . 
 = Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity = 
 Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity is a visual novel video game developed by KID . It was originally released on March 18 , 2004 for the PlayStation 2 , and has later been ported to Microsoft Windows , PlayStation Portable , iOS , and Android . The game is the third entry in the Infinity series ; it is preceded by Never 7 : The End of Infinity and Ever 17 : The Out of Infinity , and followed by 12Riven : The Psi @-@ Climinal of Integral and Code _ 18 . 
 The game follows Cocoro Fuyukawa and Satoru Yukidoh , who frequently experience a phenomenon that makes their minds switch place with each other , putting them in the other person 's body . Cocoro is stuck in a blizzard in an emergency cabin on a mountain together with three other people , while Satoru is in an institute for the treatment of mentally ill criminals , having lost his memory . The player takes the role of Cocoro , and reads the story while occasionally making choices that affect the course of the story , attempting to keep her alive for seven days ; after doing so , they are able to play through the seven days from Satoru 's perspective as well . 
 The development team included director Takumi Nakazawa , scenario writer Kotaro Uchikoshi , music composers Takeshi Abo and <unk> Shikura , and character designer <unk> . The game was originally planned to be titled Parasite and be unrelated to the Infinity series , but when production started it was given the project name Project Infinity 3 . Nakazawa and Uchikoshi had creative differences regarding the game 's ending , each having their own idea for how the game should end ; because of this and time constraints , the ending was left in an unfinished state , with the development team planning to develop a sequel that would conclude the game 's story . The game was positively received by reviewers at Famitsu and RPGFan , with the former complimenting the game system and plot , and the latter liking the character design and music . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Remember 11 is a visual novel in which the player makes progress by reading the game 's story . At certain points , they are able to pick one of a number of options , which affects the course of the game 's story , leading to different endings . The game takes place over the course of seven days , and the goal is to make choices that keep the player characters alive . At first , the player can only play through the game as the character Cocoro Fuyukawa ( <unk> , Fuyukawa Kokoro ) ; after surviving a week as her , they also get to play as Satoru Yukidoh ( <unk> , <unk> Satoru ) . The game includes a " Back Jump " function which causes the game to start over from the beginning of the current scene . Various terms used throughout the game are explained in a glossary , referred to as the " TIPS " system . 
 Throughout the course of the game , a " personality transfer " phenomenon frequently causes Cocoro 's and Satoru 's minds to switch places with each other , leaving them in the other person 's body . As the player only learns what their current character experiences , they need to play the game as both characters in order to access all information . Choices the player makes as one of the characters also affect what happens in a playthrough as the other ; for instance , if the player chooses to drink water as Satoru , there will be no water left if they play through the game as Cocoro , and if they get into an argument with a character as Cocoro , their relationship to that character becomes strained when they play the game as Satoru . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Remember 11 takes place in 2011 and 2012 concurrently , from January 11 to January 17 , in two places in Japan : an emergency cabin on Mount Akakura in the <unk> mountain range , and the Specified Psychiatric Hospital for Isolation and Aegis ( SPHIA ) institution on the fictional island of <unk> , in which mentally ill criminals are treated . The player takes the roles of Cocoro Fuyukawa , a third @-@ year sociology major who is stranded on Akakura after surviving a plane crash , and Satoru Yukidoh , a graduate student in the field of quantum physics engineering who lives in SPHIA and has lost his memory . Yuni <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> Yuni ) , a young boy who survived the plane crash , appears in both the cabin and at SPHIA . 
 Among other survivors of the plane crash are : Lin Mayuzumi ( <unk> , Mayuzumi Rin ) , a lawyer and the girlfriend of Satoru ; and Seiji Yomogi ( <unk> , Yomogi Seiji ) , a professional mountain hiker . The player also encounters two characters at SPHIA : Kali Utsumi ( <unk> , Utsumi <unk> ) , an elementary school teacher who is employed at SPHIA as a psychologist ; and a girl assumed to suffer from dissociative identity disorder , who has been confined at SPHIA since being acquitted of murder charges on grounds of insanity . Her birth records identify her as Keiko Inubushi ( <unk> , Inubushi Keiko ) , but she claims that she does not recognize the name " Keiko Inubushi " and that her name is Hotori <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> Hotori ) ; this is the name of one of the passengers on the crashed plane . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 The game begins in 2011 with Cocoro traveling to SPHIA to interview Inubushi , when her plane experiences turbulence and crashes on Mount Akakura . Yuni and Yomogi get the unconscious Cocoro and Mayuzumi to an emergency cabin to take shelter from the blizzard . In 2012 , Satoru falls from the SPHIA facility 's clock tower and loses consciousness . Cocoro wakes up in a room and is relieved to find that Yuni is safe . Yuni does not recognize her ; when looking at herself in a mirror , she sees a man 's body . Similarly , Satoru wakes up in a woman 's body . Both eventually switch back to their respective bodies , but the phenomenon continues , with their minds moving between their bodies ; they conclude that their consciousnesses are transcending time and space . In the cabin , a news article dated July 4 , 2011 is found , which says that Yuni was the only survivor , with the other three having died in an avalanche on January 17 . Satoru finds a key in his room , but does not know what it unlocks . 
 As the week goes on , the people in the cabin are running out of food , while Satoru is subjected to multiple attempts on his life by an unknown assailant . As days pass , Satoru notices that he can see the same lunar phase at SPHIA and at the cabin and that both areas are surrounded by a body of water . It is revealed that the Yuni in the cabin is from the year 2012 , while the Yuni at SPHIA is from 2011 . Satoru finds a locked room in the basement of SPHIA , where he encounters a man named Enomoto , monitoring the facility through cameras . Enomoto tells Satoru that it is not consciousnesses that are transferred but the entire area within a 110 @-@ metre radius that is transported across time and space , with their consciousnesses left behind . Satoru attempts to destroy the facility , and Enomoto tries to stop him . A set of transfers occur , and Enomoto is killed by someone using Satoru 's body . 
 Reviewing the camera footage , Satoru concludes that a third personality and location are part of the transfers . He leaves SPHIA and waits ; the transfer occurs , and the third transfer point appears , in which there is a large cubical structure . The player can enter using the key from Satoru 's room , or wait outside . If Satoru enters , he finds it empty except for a bed and a black sphere . The Enomoto of 2011 enters the structure , asking Satoru for his name ; Satoru answers , after which Enomoto panics , saying that " the project " is ruined . He says that Satoru 's memory has been transplanted from someone called " That Guy " , that the sphere is the transfer device , and that the third transfer point is a relay between the mountain and the island , to level air pressure during transfers ; he also reveals that this was where Utsumi was when she was hospitalized in 2011 . Another person , who is identical to Satoru , enters and stabs Satoru . While Satoru dies , the killer calls the person thought to be Enomoto " Satoru " , who in turn calls the killer " Enomoto " . 
 If the player instead waits , the cabin gets transported to <unk> Island . Yomogi , Mayuzumi , and Cocoro avoid the avalanche that was mentioned in the newspaper . The Yuni from 2011 is left at Akakura to be rescued by the rescue team in 2011 , and to go to SPHIA in 2012 to repeat the loop , making sure that Cocoro , Yomogi , and Mayuzumi survive the week . Satoru reviews his theory regarding Inubushi ; he thinks that she , too , was experiencing the transfer phenomenon , and that her consciousness ended up at Mount Akakura in the dying body of Hotori . He thinks the consciousness of Hotori inhabited Inubushi 's body , rendering it free of homicidal tendencies , but realizes that since both his and Inubushi 's consciousnesses remain at the island , Hotori cannot occupy Inubushi 's body when he occupies his ; Cocoro runs towards Inubushi , who is holding Utsumi 's infant child over the edge of a cliff while singing . The game ends with Satoru meeting Mayuzumi , who says she does not recognize him . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game was directed by Takumi Nakazawa , while Kotaro Uchikoshi was in charge of the scenario writing , and <unk> designed the characters . The game was originally conceived by Nakazawa in May 2002 , at the end of the development of Ever 17 : The Out of Infinity ; he planned the plot together with Uchikoshi in January 2003 . The first game in the Infinity series , Never 7 : The End of Infinity , had a focus on dating , with light science fiction elements , but as the science fiction elements were positively received by reviewers , the series gradually moved away from the dating aspects ; with Remember 11 , the focus was entirely on science fiction , with no dating elements at all . At first , the game was titled Parasite , and was meant to be unrelated to the Infinity series , but when development began in May 2003 , it was codenamed Project Infinity 3 . In September of the same year , they added the subtitle The Age of Infinity . Several characters in the game were based on Jungian archetypes : Cocoro and Satoru represent the anima and animus , respectively ; Mayuzumi represents the persona ; Yomogi represents the wise old man ; Utsumi represents the great mother ; Inubushi represents the shadow ; and Yuni represents the trickster . 
 Development was troubled by creative differences between Nakazawa and Uchikoshi ; Nakazawa was unhappy with Uchikoshi 's idea for the game 's ending , and had a different ending in mind , which they were having disagreements over . They also did not have the time to write everything that they had wanted , so they ended up with an ending that Uchikoshi described as only being half @-@ finished . At the time of the game 's release , a sequel was planned , which would have included a conclusion to the game 's story . In 2013 , Uchikoshi looked back on the game , saying that while he would have liked to rewrite some portions of the scenario that he felt were boring or that did not advance the story much , he would not have changed or added anything in terms of the content of the game ; he felt that his ending was still in the story , and still felt happy with it . 
 The game 's soundtrack was composed by Takeshi Abo , and features " geometric music " because of the game 's theoretical and science fiction elements . Prior to composing the music , he read through the game 's story , to understand the setting and each character 's personality as much as possible . He would write his impressions of the plot , with a focus on the " emotional flow " and the events that occur throughout the story ; he valued his first impressions as very important for this . According to Abo , this method takes longer time , but allows him to make better music with a stronger relation to the game 's world than if he had just designated different songs to different points of the game . Because he enjoyed the story , the music strongly reflects Abo 's own musical tastes . The opening and ending themes , titled " Little Prophet " and " Darkness of Chaos " , were composed by <unk> Shikura ; the opening was performed by Kaori . The PlayStation Portable version features new opening and ending themes , performed by Ui Miyazaki . They are titled " Uchū no Stencil " ( <unk> , Uchū no <unk> ) and " <unk> Knife " ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , respectively . 
 = = Release = = 
 Remember 11 was originally released for the PlayStation 2 on March 18 , 2004 , in both a standard and a limited edition ; the latter included a booklet with material related to the game , and a " special voice CD " . An updated version of the game , with seven new CG sequences added , was released by Success in 2005 as part of their budget series <unk> 2000 . The game was later released for Microsoft Windows as a part of the Infinity Plus box set on April 4 , 2008 . It was also released for the PlayStation Portable on April 16 , 2009 , and for iOS in 2012 . 
 Other media based on the game has been released . A novelization was published by Enterbrain in two parts : Remember 11 <unk> Cocoro @-@ hen on April 1 , 2004 , and Remember 11 Shita Satoru @-@ hen on June 1 , 2004 . A music album with the game 's soundtrack was released on March 24 , 2004 , by Scitron , with the title Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity - Sound Collection . Another album , which features songs with vocals about or inspired by the game , was released with the title Remember 11 : The Age of Infinity - Vocal Collection on September 23 , 2004 , also by Scitron . Scitron also released a drama CD based on the game on May 19 , 2004 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Remember 11 was the 16th best selling video game in Japan during its debut week . By the end of 2004 , the game was the 393rd best selling game of the year in Japan , with 24 @,@ 508 copies sold . By 2009 , more than 40 @,@ 000 copies had been sold across Microsoft Windows and PlayStation 2 . At the end of 2009 , the PlayStation Portable version was the <unk> best selling game of the year in Japan , with 4 @,@ 325 copies sold . 
 Reviewers at Famitsu commented on the user @-@ friendliness of the game system , with its quick save function and shortcuts , and said that the game has enough to pull the player in until the end . Neal Chandran at RPGFan said that the Infinity series had become more and more interesting with each game . He called the character designs " excellent " and distinct from those in previous games in the series ; he found it interesting that the character designs in previous games , which took place in " watery " settings , had brighter and less earthy colors , while Remember 11 , which takes place in the mountains , makes more use of earthy colors . 
 Chandran also liked the game 's soundtrack , calling it Abo 's best work to date . He said that it is unmistakably the work of Abo , but improved over his previous soundtracks , and having " enough layers of experimentation to showcase musical growth " for it to not feel formulaic or like a rehash . He felt that the change in the series ' setting was also reflected in the music , with the music 's rhythm section being more noticeable and making the music feel more grounded , and with more use of " earthy sonic textures " compared to previous Infinity soundtracks ' " watery " ones . 
 = 1920 Akron Pros season = 
 The 1920 Akron Pros season was the franchise 's inaugural season with the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) and twelfth total season as a team . The Pros entered the season coming off a 5 – 5 record in 1919 as the Akron Indians in the Ohio League . The Indians were sold to Art Ranney and Frank Nied , two businessmen , to help achieve a better record and crowd . Several representatives from the Ohio League wanted to form a new professional league ; thus , the APFA was created . 
 Returning to the team for the 1920 season would be most of last year 's team , including quarterback Fritz Pollard . The Pros also added end Bob Nash , who previously played for the Tigers , Al Garrett , and end Al Nesser of the famous Nesser brothers . They opened their regular season with a win over the Wheeling Stogies , en route to an 8 – 0 – 3 record . In week 11 , the Pros traded Bob Nash — the first trade in APFA history . A meeting was held by the APFA to determine a winner , and the Pros ' season concluded with the team winning the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup for finishing first place in the APFA . The Decatur Staleys and the Buffalo All @-@ Americans demanded the title because of the amount of wins each team had . 
 Rip King and Fritz Pollard were named first @-@ team all APFA and Alf Cobb was named second @-@ team all APFA by the Rock Island Argus . The Pros only allowed 7 points all season , which was the lowest among all APFA teams . The 1920 Akron Pros are considered the first team in the history of the APFA to have an undefeated record . This changed with the 1972 rule change , however . In 2005 , Pollard became the only player from the 1920 Akron Pros to be elected into the Professional Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 The Akron Pros , who were named the Akron Indians , finished 5 – 5 in their 1919 season in the Ohio League . The Indians lost money because of the constant poor performance ; the team did not win an Ohio League Championship since 1914 . The Indians was sold to Art Ranney and Frank Nied . The two changed the team name to the Akron Pros , as they hoped to achieve a better record and crowd . 
 Representatives of four Ohio League teams — the Canton Bulldogs , the Cleveland Tigers , the Dayton Triangles , and Ranney and Reid for the Pros — called a meeting on August 20 , 1920 to discuss the formation of a new league . At the meeting , they tentatively agreed on a salary cap and pledged not to sign college players or players already under contract with other teams . They also agreed on a name for the circuit : the American Professional Football Conference . They then contacted other major professional teams and invited them to a meeting for September 17 . 
 At that meeting , held at Bulldogs owner Ralph Hay 's Hupmobile showroom in Canton , representatives of the Rock Island Independents , the Muncie Flyers , the Decatur Staleys , the Racine Cardinals , the Massillon Tigers , the Chicago Cardinals , and the Hammond Pros agreed to join the league . Representatives of the Buffalo All @-@ Americans and Rochester Jeffersons could not attend the meeting , but sent letters to Hay asking to be included in the league . Team representatives changed the league 's name slightly to the American Professional Football Association and elected officers , installing Jim Thorpe as president . Under the new league structure , teams created their schedules dynamically as the season progressed , and representatives of each team voted to determine the winner of the APFA trophy . Ranney wrote all the information from these meetings on stationary and thus was promoted to secretary of the league . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 Returning to the team for the 1920 season would be most of last year 's team including quarterback and future Hall of Famer Fritz Pollard . The Pros also added end Bob Nash , who previously played for the Tigers , Al Garrett , and end Al Nesser of the famous Nesser brothers . 
 The Pros played all their home games at League Park in Akron . The regular season schedule was not a fixed schedule but was created dynamically by each team as the season progressed . The first week of the season opened up on September 26 , but the Pros did not have a game scheduled that week , and their season is denoted as beginning in week 2 . The Pros played nine games against APFA teams and two against non @-@ APFA teams ; they played a total of six games at home . The two non @-@ APFA teams the Pros would play in week two and four when the Pros played against the Wheeling Stogies and the Cincinnati Celts , respectively . In week seven , a game was scheduled to play at home against the Detroit Heralds , but the game was cancelled due to rain . 
 During the season , Pollard was treated with disrespect because of being African American . He stated , " The white players were trying to hurt me . " By the end of the season , Pollard would be one of the highest paid players in the APFA . The main reasons were because of his skin color as well as being a great player . 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The table below was compiled using the information from the Pro Football Archives and The Coffin Corner , both of which used contemporary newspapers . A dagger ( ) by a team means that team was not affiliated with the APFA . For the results column , the winning team 's score is posted first followed by the result for the Pros . The green @-@ colored rows indicates a win ; and the yellow @-@ colored rows indicate a tie . 
 = = Game summaries = = 
 = = = Week 2 : vs Wheeling Stogies = = = 
 October 3 , 1920 at League Park 
 The Pros made their AFPA debut against the Wheeling Stogies . Playing in front of 4 @,@ 000 fans , the Pros ' defense started the game off with a safety in the first quarter . Throughout the game , Nesser scored three touchdowns — two fumble recoveries and one blocked field goal . Pollard also scored two rushing touchdowns to help lead Akron to a 43 – 0 victory over the Stogies . Blocking back Harry Harris also contributed by adding one rushing touchdown in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Week 3 : vs Columbus Panhandles = = = 
 October 10 , 1920 at League Park 
 The Pros ' next game was against the Columbus Panhandles . Running back Frank McCormick rushed for two touchdowns to give Akron a 14 – 0 lead in the second quarter . Bob Nash later recovered a fumble in the end zone . Harris and fullback Fred Sweetland also contributed , scoring one rushing touchdown each . Sweetland was hired by coach Elgie Tobin to be a backup , but the coach decided to play Sweetland this game . The defense added another safety in the fourth quarter to give the Akron Pros a 37 – 0 victory . 
 = = = Week 4 : vs Cincinnati Celts = = = 
 October 17 , 1920 at League Park 
 In week four , the Pros played against the Cincinnati Celts . The Celts were not directly affiliated with the APFA and would not join the league until the following year . Fullback Rip King scored the first touchdown by a five @-@ yard rush in the first quarter . Pollard also scored a touchdown in the fourth quarter en route to a 13 – 0 Akron victory . The Pro 's kicker for that game , Charlie Copley , made one extra point and missed the other . The Pros ' defense was so dominant that the Celts did not get a single first down all game long . 
 = = = Week 5 : vs Cleveland Tigers = = = 
 October 24 , 1920 at League Park 
 The Cleveland Tigers were the Pros next opponent . Playing in front of 6 @,@ 000 fans , the game was called a " punting duel " by the Youngstown Vindicator . The only score came from a punt block by Bob Nash in the first quarter . Nash grabbed the ball from the Tigers ' punter , Stan Cofall on the 8 @-@ yard line and ran in for the score . With an extra point from Charlie Copley , the Pros defeated the Tigers 7 – 0 to keep their undefeated season alive . During the game , injuries for both teams occurred . Pollard dislocated his right shoulder , and <unk> Conn for the Tigers injured his right leg in the fourth quarter . 
 = = = Week 6 : at Canton Bulldogs = = = 
 October 31 , 1920 at Lakeside Park , Canton , Ohio 
 " With four games under their belt " , the Pros were starting to gain attention around the league . Their next game was against the Bulldogs . This game , according to the Youngstown Vindicator , was the first of a two @-@ game series for the " national professional football championship " . Playing under a crowd of 10 @,@ 000 , the Pros defeated the Bulldogs 10 to 0 . In the first quarter , after an exchange in punts and a long pass which resulted in 13 @-@ yards , Charlie Copley of the Pros kicked a 38 @-@ yard field goal . On a Bulldog possession at midfield , Gilroy attempted to pass the ball , but it was tipped by the Pros ' Copley and Bob Nash . Pike Johnson caught the ball before it landed and ran it back 55 yards for a touchdown . The Youngstown Vindicator called it the " most sensational play of the contest " . In the third quarter , Jim Thorpe came into the game , but could not help the Bulldogs score . 
 = = = Week 8 : at Cleveland Tigers = = = 
 November 14 , 1920 at Dunn Park , Cleveland , Ohio 
 In week eight , the Pros played against the Tigers . Playing in front of 8 @,@ 000 fans , the Pros allowed their first and only points of the year from a 50 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Mark Devlin to Tuffy Conn and an extra point by Al Pierotti in the third quarter . Pollard had a 20 @-@ yard rushing touchdown in the second quarter and Copley made an extra point to tie the game at 7 – 7 , making the first tie for the Pros of the season . 
 = = = Week 9 : vs Dayton Triangles = = = 
 November 21 , 1920 at League Park 
 The Triangles came into this game as one of the few teams left undefeated . The game started out with three scoreless quarters until King threw a 15 @-@ yard passing touchdown in the fourth quarter to McCormick . Pollard also rushed for a 17 @-@ yard touchdown and Copley made one extra point and missed another one to beat the Triangles 13 – 0 . This brought one of only two loses the Triangles had this season . 
 = = = Week 10 : vs Canton Bulldogs = = = 
 November 25 , 1920 at League Park 
 In their first game of week ten , the Pros played against the Canton for the second time this season , and the Bulldogs were still upset from their loss earlier in the season against the Pros . A fumbled punt by the Bulldogs gave the Pros the ball at the 32 @-@ yard line . On their next drive , the Pros ' passing game gave them the lone score , a passing touchdown from King to Nash in the first quarter . Once again , the Pros shutout the Bulldogs , winning 7 – 0 . This was the first game played on Thanksgiving Day , which launched a yearly tradition . 
 = = = Week 10 : at Dayton Triangles = = = 
 November 28 , 1920 at Triangle Park , Dayton , Ohio 
 The Pros were now recognized as the top team in Ohio , and in their second game of week ten , the Pros played against the Triangles . The game could have been classified as a World Championship because of both teams ' records , but the APFA had widened its battlefield with Buffalo and Decatur still with a high winning percentage . Pollard returned a punt for a touchdown early in the first quarter and also had one receiving touchdown in the third quarter from King . 
 = = = Week 11 : at Buffalo All @-@ Americans = = = 
 December 5 , 1920 at Buffalo Baseball Park , Buffalo , New York 
 Pros had the Buffalo All @-@ Americans as their next opponent . The All @-@ Americans were tired from their 7 to 3 victory against the Canton Bulldogs the day before . Before the start of the game , Nash was sold to the All @-@ Americans for $ 300 and 5 % of the Akron @-@ Buffalo gate , making the first deal in APFA history . The reason for the trade was because rain caused a low amount of fans . However , Nash did not appear in the game for either team , and Scotty Bierce replaced Nash for the Pros . The rain caused sloppy game play as well as a small crowd of 3 @,@ 000 people . It resulted in a 0 – 0 tie . 
 = = = Week 12 : at Decatur Staleys = = = 
 December 12 , 1920 at Cubs Park , Chicago , Illinois 
 The Pros would end their season in week twelve against the Staleys . Prior to the game , the Staleys ' coach , George Halas , moved their home field to the much larger Cubs Park in Chicago and hired Paddy Driscoll from the Cardinals to play on his team in order to help defeat the Pros , which was against league rules at the time . Twelve thousand fans , which was the largest recorded crowd of the season , showed up to watch the game . Of the crowd , about 2 @,@ 000 were from Pollard 's hometown . 
 The Pros almost scored twice , but failed once because of ineligible receiver penalties . On the other hand , Pollard made a touchdown @-@ saving tackle against <unk> in the third quarter . On the same drive , the Staleys missed a 30 @-@ yard field goal . The Staleys ' Chamberlin attempted to injure Pollard twice in an attempt to remove him from the game . The final score ended in a 0 – 0 tie ; however , the Chicago Defender reported that the refereeing was biased towards Decatur . 
 = = = Standings = = = 
 Awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup and named APFA Champions.Note : Tie games were not officially counted in the standings until 1972 . 
 = = Post season = = 
 Since there were no playoff system in the APFA until 1932 , a meeting was held to determine the 1920 NFL Champions . Each team that showed up had a vote to determine the champions . Since the Akron Pros had a 1 @.@ 000 winning percentage , the Pros were awarded the Brunswick @-@ Balke Collender Cup on April 30 , 1921 . The trophy was a " silver @-@ loving cup " , donated by the Brunswick @-@ Balke @-@ Collender Company . This decision , however , would arise with controversy . The Staleys and the All @-@ Americans each stated that they should win the award because they had more wins and were not beaten by the Akron Pros . Each player from the Pros was also awarded with a golden fob . It was of a football and " 1920 " , " WORLD CHAMPIONS " , and each players ' first initial and last name was inscribed on the fob . 
 Five players from the Pros received awards . On December 2 , King and Pollard were named 1st Team , Alf Cobb was named 2nd Team , and Nash as well as Brad Tomlin were named 3rd Team all AFPA by the Rock Island Argus . The Pros did not officially celebrate their championship season until the following year . In October 1921 , most of the team was invited to the Elks Club of Akron , which was labeled as " a grand homecoming celebration for the world 's champions " . Pollard was congratulated during an Akron Merchants Association of Colored Business Men 's meeting . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In their inaugural AFPA season , the Pros posted an undefeated , 8 – 0 – 3 season . As a result , they were the first team in the history to complete a non @-@ modern " perfect season " . Only four other teams has accomplished this feat : the 1922 Canton Bulldogs at 10 – 0 – 2 , the 1923 Canton Bulldogs at 11 – 0 – 1 , the 1929 Green Bay Packers at 12 – 0 – 1 , and the 1972 Miami Dolphins at 17 – 0 . Prior to 1972 , the NFL did not count ties into winning percentage ; however , in that year the NFL retrospectively altered its standings to treat tied games as being worth half of a win . With that being said , the 1972 Miami Dolphins are the only team to have a modern perfect season . Three other teams accumulated a perfect regular season record , but lost in the post season . The 1934 Chicago Bears posted a 13 – 0 record but lost in the 1934 NFL Championship Game to the New York Giants . The 1942 Chicago Bears posted an 11 – 0 record but lost in the 1942 NFL Championship Game to the Washington Redskins . Lastly , the 2007 New England Patriots posted a 16 – 0 record but lost in Super Bowl XLII to the New York Giants . 
 The 1920 Akron Pros had one of only two African American players in the AFPA , Fritz Pollard . He later went on to be in the Pro Football Hall of Fame 's class of 2005 . Even though the Pros were given the trophy in 1920 , the league lost track of the event and for a long time published in its own record books that the 1920 championship was undecided . It was not until the 1970s that the NFL remembered its early vote on awarding the Akron Pros the championship . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Scores by quarter = = 
 = Alloxylon flammeum = 
 Alloxylon flammeum , commonly known as the Queensland tree waratah or red silky oak , is a medium @-@ sized tree of the family Proteaceae found in the Queensland tropical rain forests of northeastern Australia . It has shiny green elliptical leaves up to 18 cm ( 7 @.@ 2 in ) long , and prominent orange @-@ red inflorescences that appear from August to October , followed by rectangular woody seed pods that ripen in February and March . Juvenile plants have large ( up to 25 cm ( 10 in ) long ) deeply lobed pinnate leaves . Previously known as Oreocallis wickhamii , the initial specimen turned out to be a different species to the one cultivated and hence a new scientific name was required . Described formally by Peter Weston and Mike Crisp in 1991 , A. flammeum was designated the type species of the genus Alloxylon . This genus contains the four species previously classified in Oreocallis that are found in Australasia . 
 Alloxylon flammeum is a canopy or emergent tree of the Mabi rainforest community of north Queensland . Its terminal tubular flowers indicate that the species is pollinated by birds . <unk> adaptable to cultivation , Alloxylon flammeum prefers a site with good drainage and responds well to extra moisture and fertilisers low in phosphorus . It is listed nationally as vulnerable under the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ( EPBC Act ) as most of its habitat has been cleared for agriculture and logging . 
 = = Description = = 
 In nature , this is a rainforest tree that can reach 33 m ( 108 ft ) in height with a diameter at breast height ( dbh ) of 0 @.@ 6 m ( 24 in ) , although in cultivation 10 m ( 35 ft ) is more likely . The trunk has light grey bark with brown lenticels . New branchlets and leaves are hairy . The green foliage consists of several distinct juvenile and adult leaf forms , which are arranged alternately along the stems . Very young plants begin with their first two to four leaves having two or three lobes , but then have narrow elliptic leaves with entire margins , measuring 6 @.@ 5 to 18 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 2 in ) long and 1 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) wide . These are then succeeded by pinnate juvenile leaves that have two to nine lobes arising at 30 to 40 degrees forwards , and reach 50 cm ( 20 in ) long . They have prominent <unk> along the midline of the main leaf and the lobes . The elliptic or obovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) adult leaves are 8 – 25 cm ( 3 @.@ 2 – 10 in ) long and up to 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) wide , and sit on 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 @-@ cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 1 in ) long petioles . 
 Occurring in spring ( August to October ) , the bright red or orange @-@ red inflorescences are terminal and well displayed , and consist of anywhere from 10 to 52 individual flowers split into smaller groups of 2 to 20 flowers , arranged in a corymb . The flowers sit atop stalks ( known as pedicels ) up to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) in length , which arise in pairs off main horizontal stalks within the inflorescence . Each flower consists of a tubular perianth up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long , which partly splits along one side at anthesis to release the thick style . The stigma is contained within a slanting disc @-@ like structure at the tip of the style . The tubular perianth splits into four segments at its tip , and the anther lies in the concave parts within each of these segments . The pedicel and the outer surface of the perianth are pubescent ( covered in short fine fur ) . Flowers are followed by woody rectangular seed pods that sit on long stalks , and are 7 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 4 in ) long . Each pod contains 8 to 10 seeds , and is ripe in February and March . Each seed is separated from the others by a membranous separator , and has a long rectangular wing , which is much longer than the seed itself . The seedlings have obovate cotyledons that are 0 @.@ 8 – 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide by 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long . 
 Alloxylon flammeum can be distinguished from the co @-@ occurring Alloxylon wickhamii by its hairy stems and petioles . It also has brighter flowers than the latter species . The New Guinean species A. brachycarpum resembles A. flammeum but has duller flowers , leaves that are shorter and wider , and fewer hairs on its perianth . A. pinnatum has pinnate ( lobed ) adult leaves and larger inflorescences made up of 50 to 140 individual flowers . It also has crimson pollen rather than the yellow of A. flammeum . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 For many years Alloxylon flammeum was mistakenly known as Embothrium ( and later Oreocallis ) wickhamii — Queensland botanist Frederick Manson Bailey had illustrated it using Embothrium wickhamii in the Queensland Agricultural Journal in 1899 . Ferdinand von Mueller had described what is now known as Alloxylon wickhamii but also collected material of A. flammeum at Trinity Bay in 1881 , not realising it was a separate species . It was only in the 1980s that botanists realised there were two species in the region — Oreocallis wickhamii and what became known as Oreocallis sp. nova . Peter Weston and Mike Crisp of the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney reviewed and recognised the Australian members of the genus Oreocallis as distinct from their South American counterparts , and hence reallocated them to the new genus Alloxylon in 1991 . They coined the binomial name of Alloxylon flammeum , the type material having been collected by Garry <unk> and Peter Radke from Tolga Scrub in August 1987 . Weston and Crisp designated it the type species of the genus Alloxylon . Aside from tree waratah , it has also been called the satin oak , pink silky oak , satin silky oak , red silky oak , red oak , lowland bull oak , and Queensland waratah . The genus name is derived from Ancient Greek <unk> " other " or " strange " and <unk> " wood " and refers to their unusual cell architecture compared with the related genera Telopea and Oreocallis . The species name flammeum is Latin for " flame @-@ coloured " . 
 Alloxylon flammeum and the other three tree waratah species lie in the subtribe Embothriinae , along with the true waratahs ( Telopea ) , South American Oreocallis , and Chilean firetree ( Embothrium coccineum ) from South America . Almost all these species have red terminal flowers , and hence the subtribe 's origin and floral appearance most likely predate the splitting of Gondwana into Australia , Antarctica , and South America over 60 million years ago . The position , colour and tubular shape of the flowers suggest they are bird @-@ pollinated , and have been so since the Eocene radiation of nectar @-@ feeding birds such as honeyeaters . Cladistic analysis of morphological features within the Embothriinae showed A. flammeum and A. brachycarpum to be sister species , with A. wickhamii as their next closest relative . A. flammeum has yellow pollen grains , like A. brachycarpum and A. wickhamii but unlike all other members of the Embothriinae . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A plant of the Wet Tropics bioregion , Alloxylon flammeum is found on the Atherton Tablelands in Far North Queensland at altitudes of 700 to 820 m ( 2 @,@ 300 to 2 @,@ 700 ft ) above sea level . Its range is from <unk> to the upper Barron River , though most of its rainforest habitat has been cleared for agriculture , and it is found in protected remnants such as Mount <unk> National Park , <unk> National Park , Crater Lakes National Park , Curtain Fig Tree National Park , and <unk> Hill Conservation Park . Found on <unk> or granite @-@ based soil , it is a component of complex <unk> vine forest or rainforest , where it is a canopy or emergent tree . This forest , also known as Mabi forest , has an uneven canopy layer to around 45 m ( 100 ft ) and significant scrub understory . Here Alloxylon flammeum is found with such species as <unk> ( Aleurites <unk> ) , <unk> spp . , fishtail lawyer cane ( Calamus <unk> ) , rose maple ( <unk> <unk> ) , shining @-@ leaved stinging tree ( <unk> <unk> ) , fig trees ( Ficus spp . ) , Queensland maple ( <unk> <unk> ) , cabbage <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , northern brush mahogany ( <unk> <unk> ) , Atherton turkey bush ( <unk> <unk> ) , and red cedar ( <unk> ciliata ) . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 Alloxylon flammeum is listed nationally as vulnerable under the Australian Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ( EPBC Act ) , which indicates that there is a high risk it will become extinct in the wild in the mid @-@ term future . Before the establishment of the EPBC Act , it was , and currently remains , listed as vulnerable under the state @-@ based Nature Conservation Act 1992 . Furthermore , it was listed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) in 1997 . Most of its habitat has been cleared for agriculture and development . Remaining stands in protected areas are highly fragmented . Furthermore , plants in cultivation are likely to come from a limited genetic pool . With under 2 % of its original extent remaining , the rainforest is threatened by invasive plants and grazing by feral and domestic animals . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Although it is not widely cultivated , Alloxylon flammeum has proven to be by far the most hardy and adaptable ( as well as the showiest ) member of the genus Alloxylon , and has been grown successfully in as cool a climate as Victoria . It does best in a well @-@ drained soil rich in organic material but low in phosphorus with some shelter when young . Applying mulch to the soil around the plant and extra water in dry spells is beneficial . <unk> high in phosphorus content can damage the plant , though fertilisers specifically for Australian native plants can be used . <unk> of new leaves may indicate chlorosis from iron deficiency and can be remedied with iron chelate or iron sulphate . Its flowers attract birds to gardens . A large tree grows in the Royal Botanic Gardens in Sydney . It is thought that there are more plants in cultivation than there are in the wild . 
 Propagation is generally by seed although semi @-@ hardened cuttings have also been successful . Cuttings can be slow to strike , and the resulting plants may have weak root systems early on and need to be supported with stakes . Semi @-@ hardened cuttings have been most successful in experiments applying the rooting hormone indole @-@ 3 @-@ butyric acid at 8000 milligrams per litre concentration , intermittent <unk> , and a warmer root temperature of 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) . Plants grown from seed may take seven or eight years to flower , with flowering occurring soon after the foliage changes from juvenile to adult leaves . An alternative method used has been to graft mature scions onto young stock to combine a strong root system with material capable of flowering quickly . The species has also been considered as a rootstock for the considerably harder to grow A. pinnatum . Alloxylon flammeum has potential as a cut flower crop . Its soft silky timber resembles that of oak and is highly regarded . 
 = J. Paul Getty Trust = 
 The J. Paul Getty Trust is the world 's wealthiest art institution with an estimated endowment in 2011 of $ US 5 @.@ 6 billion . Based in Los Angeles , California , it operates the J. Paul Getty Museum , which has two locations , the Getty Center in Los Angeles and the Getty Villa in Pacific Palisades district of Los Angeles , California . Its other programs are the Getty Foundation , the Getty Research Institute , and the Getty Conservation Institute . 
 With an estimated 1 @.@ 6 million visitors per year , the trust operates one of the most visited museums in the United States . The trust also provides grants and training to other museums and cultural institutions . The trust has a library , publications program and visiting scholar program . The trust 's conservation program is dedicated to advancing conservation practice through the creation and delivery of knowledge . However , since 2008 , the trust has scaled back the scope of its activities in response to financial challenges . 
 = = History = = 
 The J. Paul Getty Museum Trust was established by oilman J. Paul Getty in 1953 . Getty founded the Getty Oil Company , and in 1957 Fortune magazine named him the richest living American . At his death , he was worth more than $ 2 billion . Getty died in 1976 and left the bulk of his estate , including nearly $ 660 million worth of stock in Getty Oil , to the J. Paul Getty Museum Trust . Legal conflicts over the will took years to resolve , but in 1982 the trust finally received Getty 's full bequest . The trust began to add a number of new programs in 1982 , and in February 1983 , it petitioned the court to change its name to the J. Paul Getty Trust . 
 In 1997 Barry Munitz was named the president and CEO of the trust . He began work in January 1998 , succeeding Harold M. Williams , the first president of the Getty Trust , who oversaw construction of the $ 1 billion Getty Center designed by architect Richard Meier . With an endowment of $ 4 @.@ 2 billion , the Getty Trust is the wealthiest art institution in the world . Early in his tenure , Munitz reorganized the Getty Trust , closing two of the institution 's six programs — the Getty Information Institute and the Getty Education Institute . To deal with long @-@ run financial issues , he sought to cultivate relationships with donors and corporate partners . His leadership became increasingly controversial as the Getty Trust was embroiled in numerous controversies relating to the provenance of various antiquities in the Getty Museum 's collections and Munitz ' expense account . In the midst of an investigation by the California Attorney General , Munitz resigned in 2006 and was forced to " forgo his severance package of more than $ 2 million , and reimburse the Getty Trust for $ 250 @,@ 000 after alleged improprieties including lavish expense account spending . " 
 On December 4 , 2006 , the trust announced the hiring of art historian James N. Wood , the former Director of the Art Institute of Chicago , as the trust 's new president and CEO , replacing Barry Munitz , who was forced to step down earlier in the year . In 2009 , after a substantial drop in the trust 's assets , Wood cut nearly 100 employees at the trust 's various operations , most at the Getty Museum . Fees for parking at the museum and the Getty Villa were raised by 50 % to $ 15 . Wood died suddenly of natural causes on June 12 , 2010 . In May 2011 James Cuno , director of the Art Institute of Chicago , was named president and chief executive of the Getty Trust , to take office in August . 
 = = Programs = = 
 The J. Paul Getty Museum is an art museum . It has two locations , one at the Getty Center in Los Angeles , California , and one at the Getty Villa in Pacific Palisades , Los Angeles , California . The museum at the Getty Center contains " Western art from the Middle Ages to the present ; " its estimated 1 @.@ 3 million visitors annually makes it one of the most visited museums in the United States . The museum at the Getty Villa contains art from " ancient Greece , Rome , and Etruria " . The museum started as J. Paul Getty 's personal art collection . 
 The Getty Foundation was originally called the " Getty Grant Program , " which began in 1984 under the direction of Deborah Marrow . The J. Paul Getty Trust can spend up to 0 @.@ 75 % of its endowment on gifts and grants ; by 1990 the Getty Grant Program ( then based in Santa Monica ) had made 530 grants totaling $ 20 million to " art historians , conservators and art museums in 18 countries " . For example , a foundation grant funded the restoration of the <unk> Pavement in the floor of Westminster Abbey . For many years , the foundation conducted the Getty Leadership Institute ( GLI ) . The major GLI program is the Museum Leadership Institute ( MLI ) , formerly known as the Museum Management Institute , which " has served close to 1 @,@ 000 museum professionals from the United States and 30 countries worldwide " . However , effective on January 2 , 2010 , the GLI was transferred to the Claremont Graduate University in Claremont , California and was renamed " The Getty Leadership Institute at Claremont Graduate University " . 
 The Getty Research Institute ( GRI ) , located at the Getty Center in Los Angeles , California , is " dedicated to furthering knowledge and advancing understanding of the visual arts " . GRI maintains a research library , organizes exhibitions and other events , sponsors a residential scholars program , publishes books , and maintains electronic databases including a Semantic Web service . The GRI was originally called the " Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities " , and was conceived as early as 1983 . Among other holdings , GRI 's research library contains about 900 @,@ 000 volumes of books , periodicals , and auction catalogs ; special collections ; and two million photographs of art and architecture . The library also includes the trust 's " Institutional Archives " which document the activities of the trust 's various programs . 
 The Getty Conservation Institute ( GCI ) , located in Los Angeles , California , is headquartered at the Getty Center but also has facilities at the Getty Villa , and commenced operation in 1985 . The GCI is a private international research institution dedicated to advancing conservation practice through the creation and delivery of knowledge . It " serves the conservation community through scientific research , education and training , model field projects , and the dissemination of the results of both its own work and the work of others in the field " and " adheres to the principles that guide the work of the Getty Trust : service , philanthropy , teaching , and access " . GCI has activities in both art conservation and architectural conservation . GCI scientists study the deterioration of objects and buildings , and how to prevent or stop such deterioration . GCI has also been involved with long @-@ term education programs , such as establishing a master 's degree program in Archaeological and Ethnographic Conservation in collaboration with the University of California , Los Angeles . 
 From 1983 to June 1999 , the Trust ran the Getty Information Institute ( GII ) which sought to collect electronic information to serve cultural heritage institution and researchers . Together with the American Council of Learned Societies GII sought to build a broad coalition of non @-@ profits to establish a National Initiative for a Networked Cultural Heritage . Upon the dissolution of the GII , its data bases were transferred to the Getty Research Institute . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The trust was established by a Trust <unk> dated December 2 , 1953 that created a California charitable trust was " the diffusion of artistic and general knowledge . " The trust is governed by a 13 @-@ member board of trustees . Trustees are elected to serve four @-@ year terms , with a maximum limit of three terms . The board is self @-@ perpetuating with the board electing or re @-@ electing the trustees . The board holds an annual meeting in May or June of each year . Although the board conducts most of its work through committees , a number of important decisions are reserved for the entire board including approval of any art acquisition costing more than $ 1 million . 
 On October 2 , 2006 , the California Attorney General issued a report following an investigation of the trust and its operations . At the close of the investigation an independent monitor was hired to assure proper governance and expenditures of the trust . On May 7 , 2008 , the Attorney General closed the monitoring process . 
 The trust was hurt by the economic downturn following 2007 and has reduced its annual budget by 14 % . In 2007 , the trust had $ 6 @.@ 4 billion in endowment , but this amount dropped to $ 4 @.@ 5 billion in 2009 . In 2009 , the trust had $ 300 million in expenses down from $ 349 million in 2008 . For example , GRI co @-@ produced the Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals with the Avery Architectural and Fine Arts Library , but transferred that activity to Columbia University on July 1 , 2009 . 
 With the recovery of the post @-@ recession economy , the trust has risen to $ 6 @.@ 7 billion by 2014 . 
 = = J. Paul Getty Medal = = 
 The J. Paul Getty Medal was established in 2013 by the Trustees of the J. Paul Getty Trust to honor extraordinary contributions to the practice , understanding and support of the arts . 
 The first recipients of the Getty Medal , which was presented in December 2013 , were Harold M. Williams and Nancy Englander , who were honored for their leadership in creating the Getty as it exists today . In November 2014 , the Getty Medal was presented to Jacob Rothschild , 4th Baron Rothschild , a volunteer cultural leader known for his dedication to the preservation and public interpretation of Waddesdon Manor . 
 In September 2015 , the Getty Medal was awarded to architect Frank Gehry , who has built an architectural career over five decades and produced public and private buildings in America , Europe , and Asia . His work has earned Mr. Gehry several of the most significant awards in the architectural field , including the Pritzker Architecture Prize . 
 The 2016 Getty Medal will be awarded to musician Yo @-@ Yo Ma and , posthumously , to artist Ellsworth Kelly at a celebratory dinner in October . In addition to his accomplished career as a master cellist , Ma founded the Silk Road Ensemble and the nonprofit <unk> to promote the creation of new music , cross @-@ cultural partnerships , education programs , and cross @-@ disciplinary collaborations to create meaningful change at the intersection of the arts , education , and business . Accomplished painter and sculptor Ellsworth Kelly has supported the conservation of historical and contemporary art at museums and heritage sites in the U.S. and around the world , as well as the preservation of natural environment , through the Ellsworth Kelly Foundation . 
 = First and Second Battles of Wonju = 
 The First and Second Battles of Wonju ( French : Bataille de Wonju ) , also known as the Wonju Campaign or the Third Phase Campaign Eastern Sector ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Dì <unk> Cì Zhàn Yì Dōng Xiàn ) , was a series of engagements between North Korean and United Nations ( UN ) forces during the Korean War . The battle took place from December 31 , 1950 to January 20 , 1951 around the South Korean town of Wonju . In coordination with the Chinese capture of Seoul on the western front , the North Korean People 's Army attempted to capture Wonju in an effort to destabilize the UN defenses along the central and the eastern fronts . 
 After a joint Chinese and North Korean assault breached the UN defenses at Chuncheon on New Year 's Eve of 1951 , the North Korean V Corps attacked the US X Corps at Wonju while the North Korean II Corps harassed US X Corps ' rear by engaging in guerrilla warfare . In response , the US X Corps under the command of Major General Edward Almond managed to cripple the North Korean forces at Wonju , and the UN forces later carried out a number of anti @-@ guerrilla operations against the North Korean infiltrators . In the aftermath of the battle , the North Korean forces on the central and the eastern fronts were decimated , allowing the UN front to be stabilized at the 37th parallel . 
 = = Background = = 
 After launching a surprise invasion of South Korea in June 1950 , the North Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) was shattered by the United Nations ( UN ) forces following the landing at Incheon in September 1950 , with the remnants of the KPA fleeing northward while seeking sanctuaries in the mountainous region along the Sino @-@ Korean border . The destruction of the KPA prompted China to intervene in the Korean War , and Chinese forces launched a series of surprise attacks against the UN forces near the border during November 1950 . The resulting battles in the Ch 'ongch 'on River valley and at Chosin Reservoir forced the UN forces to retreat back to the 38th parallel by December 1950 . On the eastern front , the US X Corps was trapped at the port of Hungnam near the Chosin Reservoir during the surprise Chinese offensive , and was forced to evacuate North Korea by sea on December 24 , 1950 . In its absence , the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) Army was forced to take over the defenses of the central and the eastern fronts along the 38th parallel , including the important road junction of Wonju located near the central front . The sudden defeat of the UN forces offered the decimated KPA a brief respite , and the shattered North Korean forces soon rebuilt their strength at the end of 1950 . 
 In the aftermath of the Chinese successes , China 's Chairman Mao Zedong immediately ordered another offensive against the UN forces on the urging of North Korean Premier Kim Il @-@ sung . The offensive , dubbed the " Third Phase Campaign " , was a border intrusion into South Korea that envisioned the total destruction of South Korean forces along the 38th parallel , and was aimed at pressuring the UN forces to withdraw from the Korean Peninsula . The western sector of the offensive was under the control of the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army ( PVA ) 13th Army , and the 13th Army 's action would later result in capture of Seoul on January 4 . With the PVA 9th Army decimated at the Chosin Reservoir , however , the eastern sector of the offensive was handed over to the rehabilitated KPA , under the overall command of Lieutenant General Kim Ung and Commissar Pak Il @-@ u . On December 23 , 1950 , General Walton Walker , commander of the US Eighth Army , died in a traffic accident , and Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway assumed command of the Eighth Army on December 26 , 1950 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Locations , terrain and weather = = = 
 The battle 's main focus was around a road dubbed " Route 29 " , a strategically important line of communication to the UN forces in central Korea . Wonju was a critical crossroad village on Route 29 which ran north to south and connects Chuncheon on the 38th parallel with Daegu on the Pusan Perimeter . Another road , which ran from the northwest , connected Route 29 and the South Korean capital of Seoul at Wonju . Between Chuncheon and Wonju stood the town of <unk> , and from Wonju to Daegu were a series of towns such as <unk> , Tanyang , <unk> and Andong . The entire road network was situated within the rough hilly terrains of the Taebaek Mountain Range . The fighting around Wonju occurred during some of the worst Korean winter conditions , with temperatures as low as − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) and snow as thick as 14 in ( 36 cm ) on the ground . Indeed , the weather was so cold that metal on artillery pieces would crack , while water could take an hour @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half to boil . At times the cold weather alone was enough to stall all military activities , while frostbite caused more casualties than combat during the course of the battle . 
 = = = Forces and strategy = = = 
 Just days before his death , Walker had tried to bolster the defences of the central and eastern sections of the 38th parallel by stretching the South Korean forces from Chuncheon to the Korean east coast . Following his instructions , the ROK III Corps was placed around Chuncheon while the ROK I Corps was deployed on the east coast . Meanwhile , the ROK II Corps , with its strength reduced to a single infantry division in the aftermath of the Ch 'ongch 'on River battle , filled the gap between the ROK I and III Corps . However , with the absence of the US X Corps , the UN defenses on the central and eastern fronts were stretched thin , and there were gaps between the understrength South Korean units . Because the South Korean forces had suffered nearly 45 @,@ 000 casualties by the end of 1950 , most of their units were composed of raw recruits with little training , and out of the four South Korean divisions that defended Chuncheon , only one was deemed battle worthy . Taking advantage of the situation , the North Korean forces had been probing the South Korean lines since mid @-@ December , while thousands of North Korean guerrillas harassed the UN rear area from their mountain hideouts . On December 27 , 1950 , the KPA II Corps managed to move behind the UN defenses by mauling the ROK 9th Infantry Division on the ROK I Corps ' left flank at Hyon @-@ ri . This development threatened to destabilize the entire UN eastern front . 
 In order to defend against the North Korean penetration , Ridgway immediately ordered the US X Corps to reinforce the South Korean defenses . However , with most of the US X Corps still assembling at Pusan , the only unit that was available in the Eighth Army 's reserve was the US 2nd Infantry Division , which was still recovering from its earlier losses in the Ch 'ongch 'on River valley . On December 28 , Ridgway ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to defend Wonju while placing the division under US X Corps control . After the US 7th Infantry Division of the US X Corps finished reorganization on December 30 , Ridgway ordered Major General Edward Almond , commander of the US X Corps , to develop Route 29 as its main supply route , and the 7th Infantry Division was subsequently tasked with defending it . 
 In coordination with the Chinese assaults against Seoul in the western sector of the Third Phase Campaign , the North Koreans deployed the KPA II , III and V Corps — an estimated total of 61 @,@ 500 soldiers — against the UN forces on the central front . The North Korean plan was a frontal attack at Wonju by Major General Pang Ho San 's KPA V Corps , while Major General Ch 'oe Hyon 's KPA II Corps would infiltrate the US X Corps rear as guerrillas and block Route 29 . The aim of the offensive was to push the US X Corps back in concert with the Chinese attacks on Seoul , thereby isolating the South Korean forces in the Taebaek Mountains . As part of the Chinese attacks against Seoul , the Chinese 42nd and 66th Corps were deployed near Chuncheon in support of the KPA V Corps during the opening phase of the battle . Meanwhile , the KPA III Corps would act as reinforcements for the KPA II and V Corps . However , like the South Koreans they were facing , the North Korean forces were also badly depleted and understrength . Although the North Koreans fielded more than 10 infantry divisions for the battle , most were only equivalent in strength to an infantry regiment . In contrast with the professional mechanized army that had existed at the start of the Korean War , the newly rebuilt North Korean formations were poorly trained and armed . Nevertheless , the start date of the Third Phase Campaign was set for New Year 's Eve in order to take advantage of the full moon and the low alertness of the UN soldiers during the holiday . 
 = = First Battle of Wonju = = 
 = = = Opening moves = = = 
 On the central front , the ROK III Corps defended the 38th parallel north of Gapyeong ( Kapyong ) and Chuncheon . Composed of the ROK 2nd , 5th , 7th and 8th Infantry Divisions , the ROK III Corps placed the ROK 2nd Infantry Division on the corps ' left flank in the hills north of Gapyeong , while the ROK 5th Infantry Division defended the corps ' center at Chuncheon . The winter conditions created great difficulties for the South Korean defenders , with the heavy snow hindering construction and icy roads limiting food and ammunition resupply . North Korean guerrillas were also active in the region , and caused serious disruption in the rear of the ROK III Corps . 
 As part of the Chinese plan to capture Seoul , the PVA 42nd and the 66th Corps were tasked with protecting the Chinese left flank by eliminating the ROK 2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions , while cutting the road between Chuncheon and Seoul . Following instructions , the two Chinese corps struck quickly after midnight on New Year 's Eve . The PVA 124th Division first penetrated the flanks of the ROK 2nd Infantry Division , then blocked the division 's withdrawal route . The trapped ROK 17th and 32nd Regiments of the ROK 2nd Infantry Division were then forced to retreat in disarray . With the PVA 66th Corps pressuring the ROK 5th Infantry Division 's front , the PVA 124th Division then advanced eastward in the South Korean rear and blocked the ROK 5th Infantry Division 's retreat route as well . The maneuver soon left the ROK 36th Regiment of the ROK 5th Infantry Division surrounded by Chinese , and the ROK 36th Regiment had to escape by infiltrating the Chinese lines using mountain trails . By January 1 , the ROK III Corps was in full retreat , while the corps ' headquarters had lost contact with the 2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions . Responding to the crisis on the central front , the ROK III Corps sector 's defense was handed over the US X Corps . 
 While the Chinese were making a concentrated attack against the South Korean front , the North Korean forces that had infiltrated the UN rear were cutting the South Korean withdrawal route . In the days before the Chinese Third Phase Campaign , the KPA II Corps established a major roadblock to the north of <unk> with an estimated strength of 10 @,@ 000 soldiers , which blocked the retreat of the ROK III Corps . In response , the ROK II Corps and the US 2nd Infantry Division conducted a siege operation against the roadblock from both the north and the south , and the roadblock was forced open by January 2 . Although the UN forces managed to eliminate a North Korean division at the roadblock , the ROK II Corps was nearly destroyed during the fighting , and it was disbanded on January 10 . 
 The success of the initial Chinese and North Korean attacks forced the ROK I Corps to abandon its attempts to restore its original defensive position at Hyon @-@ ri , and a large number of North Korean forces soon streamed into the gap between the US 2nd Infantry Division at Wonju and the ROK I Corps on the east coast . Ridgway interpreted the Sino @-@ Korean attack on the central front as an attempt to surround the UN defenders at Seoul , and he immediately ordered their evacuation on January 3 . On January 5 , Ridgway ordered all UN forces to withdraw to the 37th parallel to set up a new defensive line , dubbed " Line D " , with the UN forces on central and eastern fronts setting up defenses between Wonju and the coastal city of <unk> ( Chumunjin ) . At the same time , the Chinese troops halted their offensive operations with the KPA II and V Corps relieving the PVA 42nd and 66th Corps . 
 = = = Wonju falls = = = 
 In the aftermath of the South Korean collapse , the KPA V Corps proceeded to launch frontal attacks against US X Corps while the KPA II Corps infiltrated the UN rear through the area to the east of Wonju . The US 2nd Infantry Division 's position had now become an exposed northern salient , and its defenses were further hampered by the flat terrain surrounding Wonju . However , given the strategic importance of Wonju in controlling central Korea , Ridgway declared that the village was " only second to Seoul " in importance , and therefore must be defended at all cost . In accordance with Ridgway 's instructions , Almond ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to defend the hills north of Wonju , yet Major General Robert B. McClure of the US 2nd Infantry Division believed that the salient was untenable due to the terrain and the low morale of his division . On January 7 , two infantry battalions from the KPA V Corps launched an attack against the US 2nd Infantry Division . One North Korean battalion managed to infiltrate the American positions disguised as refugees while another battalion launched a frontal assault . Yet the weak attack was soon repulsed due to the lack of coordination between the North Korean units , and about 114 infiltrators were later captured . Although the North Korean attack inflicted little damage on the Americans , the disruption caused by infiltrators in US 2nd Infantry Division 's rear convinced McClure to abandon Wonju on January 7 . Almond concurred with McClure 's decision on the condition that the US 2nd Infantry Division would only retreat 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) so that Wonju could be controlled by UN artillery fire . Regardless , McClure ordered the division to retreat more than 8 miles ( 13 km ) south , putting the village out of artillery range . With Wonju under North Korean control , the Chinese declared that the Third Phase Campaign had reached a successful conclusion . 
 = = Second Battle of Wonju = = 
 = = = Hill 247 = = = 
 Hill 247 was located among the hill mass 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Wonju , and was a critical height that commanded the streets of Wonju . With the loss of Wonju on January 7 , Almond was furious at McClure for disobeying the order to hold it , and this later resulted in Major General Clark Ruffner replacing McClure on January 13 . On January 8 , Almond ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to retake Wonju . Following his orders , the US 23rd Infantry Regiment , under the command of Colonel Paul L. Freeman , attacked towards Wonju on January 8 . The 23rd Infantry Regiment managed to reach within 3 @,@ 000 yd ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) at the south of Wonju and caught a sleeping North Korea regiment by surprise at Hill 247 . About 200 North Korean soldiers were killed in the ensuing battle , however the alerted North Korean forces soon counterattacked by outflanking the 23rd Infantry Regiment to the east , and the 23rd Infantry Regiment was forced to retreat to avoid encirclement . 
 Encouraged by the heavy North Korean losses during the initial UN attacks , Almond again ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to recapture Wonju on January 9 . About four infantry battalions from the US 23rd and 38th Infantry Regiment supported by French and Dutch troops advanced toward Wonju on January 9 , yet the attack was stalled at Hill 247 due to the cold weather and the lack of air support . As the UN forces tried to dislodge the North Koreans the next day , they were met by six defending North Korean battalions with an estimated strength of 7 @,@ 000 soldiers . Under a heavy snowstorm and with no air support , the battle for Hill 247 continued for most of January 10 , and the fighting around the French Battalion of the 23rd Infantry Regiment became particularly fierce . At one point , the French Battalion was forced to fend off several North Korean counterattacks with bayonet charges after running out of ammunition . The French Battalion 's action at Wonju impressed Ridgway , who later encouraged all American units in Korea to utilize bayonets in battle . The North Koreans tried to encircle the attacking UN forces as the latter began to gain the upper hand , however artillery fire broke up the North Korean formations , and they had suffered an estimated 2 @,@ 000 casualties in the aftermath of the battle . When air support returned on January 11 , the attacking UN forces inflicted another 1 @,@ 100 North Korean casualties and captured Hill 247 by January 12 . Although the cold weather and the stubborn North Korean defenses prevented the UN forces from entering Wonju , the capture of Hill 247 had put all of Wonju within UN artillery range , and the village soon became a no man 's land under the devastating bombardment . 
 = = = Anti @-@ guerrilla operations = = = 
 Although the capture of Hill 247 had forced the KPA V Corps to abandon Wonju with heavy losses on January 17 , the KPA II Corps ' infiltration in the UN rear area had become so serious that it threatened to outflank the entire UN front and force a complete evacuation of Korea by mid @-@ January . With the bulk of the US X Corps tied up to the south of Wonju while the ROK III Corps was in disarray , the front between Wonju and the east coast was undefended , and about 16 @,@ 000 North Korean soldiers entered the gap while establishing guerrilla bases from Tanyang to Andong . The battles along the central front soon degenerated into irregular warfare between company @-@ sized UN patrols and North Korean guerrilla bands . In an effort to stabilize the front , Ridgway ordered the US 2nd Infantry Division to withdraw from Wonju while pulling the central and eastern fronts back to the area between Wonju and <unk> 'ok , and this resulted in another 40 mi ( 64 km ) retreat . Ridgway also sent the US 187th Regimental Combat Team , the US 5th Cavalry Regiment , the US 1st Marine Division and the Greek Battalion to contain North Korean guerrillas east of Route 29 and north of Andong and <unk> . About 30 @,@ 000 American infantry were deployed to the central front by mid @-@ January , and the North Korean guerrillas were blocked in a narrow salient along the hills at the east of Route 29 . 
 To eliminate the North Korean threat in the UN rear , Almond ordered all X Corps units on Route 29 to launch aggressive patrols to destroy the North Korean supply bases and guerrilla bands . Specially trained irregular forces , such as X Corps ' Special Action Group , also hunted North Korean units by operating as guerrillas themselves . The constant UN pressure slowly depleted the ammunition and the manpower of the KPA II Corps , while Major General Yu Jai Hung rallied the ROK III Corps and sealed the gap between Wonju and the east coast by January 22 . On January 20 , a patrol carried out by the US 9th Infantry Regiment of the US 2nd Infantry Division managed to reoccupy Wonju without much resistance . Lacking reinforcements and supplies , the KPA II Corps was scattered by the end of January , and only 8 @,@ 600 soldiers from the KPA II Corps managed to survive and retreat back to North Korea . The KPA 10th Division , vanguard of the KPA II Corps , was also annihilated during the UN anti @-@ guerrilla operations . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of January , the KPA II Corps was decimated during its guerrilla operations , and its estimated strength was reduced from 16 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 . The KPA V Corps ' attempt to capture Wonju had also resulted in crippling casualties , and its estimated strength was reduced from 32 @,@ 000 to 22 @,@ 000 by the end of January . In contrast , the UN losses were relatively moderate during the same period . The defeat of the North Korean army enabled the UN forces to consolidate their positions along the Korean central and eastern front , and the retreating US Eighth Army on the Korean western front could finally return to the offensive after its rear and eastern flank were secured . As soon as the US X Corps regained full control of the central front at the end of January , Ridgway immediately ordered the US Eighth Army to launch Operation Thunderbolt against Chinese and North Korean forces on January 25 , 1951 . 
 = 3 Splash = 
 3 Splash ( stylized as 3 SPLASH ) is an EP by Japanese recording artist and songwriter Kumi Koda . It was released on 8 July 2009 , by Kumi 's record label , Rhythm Zone . Her fourth extended play consists of three recordings ; Lick me ♥ , ECSTASY , and Hashire ! , with three additional interludes . It was released in two different formats : stand @-@ alone CD , and a CD + DVD bundle - the latter bundle was re @-@ released with a pink @-@ transparent CD holder . The three artworks for the EP depicts Kumi posing with the title of the work superimposed over her . The CD + DVD bundle artwork features her holding a basketball , this artwork was also used for the digital release of the EP . 
 3 Splash contains predominantly pop rock and dance music . Kumi contributed by writing the lyrics to Lick me ♥ and Hashire ! , while Japanese songwriter and producer Hum created Ecstasy . Hiroto Suzuki and Shinjiro Inoue were credited as the EP 's producers . 3 Splash received favourable reviews from music critics who commended the EP 's production and commercial appeal . 3 Splash reached number two on the Oricon Singles Chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . Lick me ♥ , Ecstasy , and Hashire ! served as promotional singles , while Lick me ♥ was certified platinum for 250 @,@ 000 digital shipments and nominated for a Japan Record Award at the 51st Japan Record Awards . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 2009 , Kumi released two compilation albums : Out Works & Collaboration Best and Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's . Following this , along with the release of a collaborative single with her younger sister , <unk> , Kumi announced plans of releasing a double album . The double album was to promote both her third greatest hits album , and a new studio album that consisted of unreleased material from recording sessions for her 2008 album , Trick . It 's all Love ! was later served as the studio album 's lead single . Kumi announced that she would release a new extended play , marketed as a single , entitled 3 Splash , which would consist of three recordings : Lick me ♥ , Ecstasy and Hashire ! with three additional interludes . 
 3 Splash opens with the first interlude , 09 : 00AM , which is an instrumental piece with " groovy " DJ spins and scratches . Lick me ♥ , the first tracks to include vocals , is an uptempo " cute summer number " with suggestive lyrics . Ecstasy is an electronic song with Kumi 's " cool husky " vocals being heavily processed with autotune and vocoder effects . According to Adam Greenberg from AllMusic , Ecstasy " share [ s ] some ideation with Lady Gaga concepts , mixing sultriness with oddity and playing with the instrumentation and voicing along the way . " The albums second interlude , " 12 : <unk> " , is another instrumental piece with " slow @-@ paced " handclaps , and subtle urban undertones . Hashire ! is a " distorted " midtempo dance song with influences of rock and pop music , and the EP is closed with a final instrumental interlude , 12 : 00AM . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 3 Splash was released on July 8 , 2003 , through Rhythm Zone . There are three official versions : a stand @-@ alone CD version , a CD + DVD version and a CD + DVD version which features an accessory pouch for the physical single . Each version featured a different cover sleeve , all with Kumi standing in front of a grey background : the CD version features Kumi in a black outfit ( which she wore in her Ecstasy music video ) , the CD + DVD and digital EP version features Kumi in urban street gear ( which she wore in the video for Hashire ! ) and the CD + DVD version , which includes a pink @-@ transparent CD holder , features Kher in a 60s @-@ influence dress ( which was worn in her Lick me ♥ video ) . The CD + DVD bundle artwork features Kumi holding a basketball . This artwork was also used for the digital release of the EP . All three recorded songs were promoted through advertisement deals in Japan . Ecstasy was used for <unk> , Lick me ♥ was used for the televised commercial of her Fever Live in Hall II concert , and Hashire ! was used for the NTT communications advert <unk> . 
 All three tracks served as the EP 's promotional singles , released on July 8 , 2009 . Lick me ♥ reached # 2 on the Japan Hot 100 chart on the week end of July 20 , 2009 , which is her highest chart entry to date . Lick me ♥ was certified platinum for 250 @,@ 000 downloads in January 2014 . Ecstasy and Hashire ! did not chart in any Japanese music charts , but were marketed as promotional singles by Rhythm Zone . All three songs featured an accompanying music video , which were included on the DVD version of 3 Splash . 
 All three songs have appeared on several live albums and compilations released by Kumi respectively . Lick me ♥ and Ecstasy were performed during her Live Tour 2009 : Trick , her 2009 Taiwan Live , Live Tour 2010 : Universe , 10th Anniversary : Fantasia in Tokyo Dome , and Live Tour 2011 : <unk> . Hashire ! has only been performed on her Live Tour 2009 : Trick . Lick me ♥ and Ecstasy both appeared on her 2013 digital compilation , Summer Single Collection 2013 , while Lick me ♥ was included on both Kumi 's concept compilations : Happy Love Song Collection ( 2014 ) and Summer of Love ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 3 Splash received favourable reviews from music critics . Chris True from AllMusic highlighted Hashire ! as a career stand out track from Kumi 's discography . Ian Martin from the same publication reviewed Lick me ♥ and Ecstacy from the Universe album and was divided . For Lick me ♥ , he said , " She wears her sexuality on her sleeve , with song titles like Lick me ♥ laying their erotic playing cards on the table from the get @-@ go , and her lack of any recognizable singing ability compensated for by an awful lot of gumption . " For Ecstasy , he commended her " hard working ethic " in many songs , highlighting the song and concluded that , " All of this reveals a desperate need to achieve success no matter what , but also the humanity of the effort underpinning it . " Greenberg commended the production of Ecstasy , and said that Lick me ♥ was " slightly off @-@ tempo " that " brings Kumi back to more standard territory . " A reviewer from CD Journal complimented the production of each song , and described the EP as " catchy " and " danceable " . Hiraga Tetsuo from Hot Express was positive , who commended Kumi 's song writing and the " summer " theme throughout the EP . 
 On the Japanese Oricon Singles Chart , 3 Splash debuted at # 2 , Kumi 's third consecutive EP to have peaked at this position . The EP lasted twelve weeks in the top 100 , selling 93 @,@ 000 units , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units ; this became her fourth consecutive EP to have shipped over 100 @,@ 000 units , after Love & Honey ( 2004 ) , 4 Hot Wave ( 2006 ) , and Moon ( 2008 ) . 3 Splash reached number eight on the Taiwanese East Asian chart . Lick me ♥ reached # 2 on the Billboard Japan Hot 100 chart , and reached # 8 and # 15 on the Japan Billboard Adult Contemporary and Radio Songs chart , respectively . Lick me ♥ was nominated for the Japan Record Award at the 51st Japan Record Awards , but lost to Exile 's Someday . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Kumi Koda – vocals , backing vocals , song writing , executive producer 
 Hum – producer , song writing , composer , arranger 
 Yu – producer , composer , arranger 
 Hiroto Suzuki – producer , composer , arranger 
 <unk> Inoue – producer , composer , arranger 
 Rhythm Zone – record label 
 Avex Trax – parent label , management 
 Credits adapted from the EP 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Alternate Versions = = 
 ECSTASY 
 ECSTASY : Found on the single ( 2009 ) and corresponding album <unk> ( 2010 ) 
 ECSTASY [ Caramel Pod E Remix ] : Found on the single ( 2009 ) 
 ECSTASY [ Caramel Pod Remix ] : Found on Koda Kumi Driving Hit 's 2 ( 2010 ) 
 Lick me ♥ 
 Lick me ♥ : Found on the single ( 2009 ) and corresponding album <unk> ( 2010 ) 
 Lick me ♥ [ Yusuke Tanaka Remix ] : Found on the single ( 2009 ) 
 Lick me ♥ [ <unk> remix ] : Found on Beach Mix ( 2012 ) 
 = Yellow @-@ faced honeyeater = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ( Caligavis chrysops ) is a medium @-@ small bird in the honeyeater family Meliphagidae . It takes both its common name and scientific name from the distinctive yellow stripes on the sides of its head . It has a loud clear call , and is one of the first birds heard in the morning . It is widespread across eastern and south eastern Australia , in open sclerophyll forests from coastal dunes to high @-@ altitude subalpine areas , and woodlands along creeks and rivers . Comparatively short @-@ billed for a honeyeater , it is thought to have adapted for a diet of flies , spiders and beetles , as well as nectar and pollen from the flowers of plants such as Banksia and Grevillea , and soft fruits . It catches insects in flight as well as gleaning them from the foliage of trees and shrubs . 
 While some yellow @-@ faced honeyeaters are sedentary , hundreds of thousands of them migrate northwards between March and May to spend the winter in southern Queensland and return in July and August to breed in southern New South Wales and Victoria . They form socially monogamous pairs and lay two or three eggs in a delicate cup @-@ shaped nest . While the success rate can be low , the pairs nest several times during the breeding season . 
 Honeyeaters ’ preferred woodland habitat is vulnerable to the effects of land clearing , grazing and weeds . However , as it is common and widespread , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is considered by the IUCN to be of least concern for conservation . It is considered a pest in orchards in some areas . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater was first described , and placed in the genus Sylvia , by ornithologist John Latham in his 1801 work Supplementum Indicis Ornithologici , sive Systematis Ornithologiae . The generic name Lichenostomus comes from the Ancient Greek words meaning " lichen @-@ like eruption of the mouth " referring to the bare skin at the gape flange thought to look like lichen , and the specific name chrysops is from the Greek words meaning " gold " and " face " in reference to the stripe of yellow feathers . It is also known as the yellow @-@ gaped honeyeater , or the <unk> in reference to its call . 
 <unk> the genus Lichenostomus has been systematically contentious , and evaluations of relationships among honeyeaters in the genus using dense taxon and nucleotide sampling confirmed previous findings that Lichenostomus is not monophyletic . While five species have previously been described as comprising the Caligavis subgroup , studies using the mitochondrial <unk> and nuclear β @-@ fibrinogen @-@ 7 genes identified the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater as closely related to the black @-@ throated honeyeater ( C. <unk> ) , and the obscure honeyeater ( C. obscurus ) , and they were therefore able to be grouped in the genus Caligavis . The bridled honeyeater ( B. frenatus ) and the Eungella honeyeater ( B. <unk> ) were sufficiently different to be a separate genus as <unk> . 
 Three subspecies have been described ( Matthews , 1912 ) but are not universally recognised . There are only very slight differences between the nominate race and <unk> samueli found in the Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia and L. c. <unk> from Clarke Range and the Atherton Tableland in Queensland . The latter race is described as " poorly differentiated " and " possibly not worthy of recognition " by the Handbook of the Birds of the World . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is a medium @-@ small , greyish @-@ brown bird that takes its common name from distinctive yellow stripes on the sides of the head . Yellow feathers form a narrow stripe above the gape , then broaden and curve below the eye to end in a small white patch of feathers on the ear @-@ coverts . Above the yellow stripe is a black eye stripe which is broken by a small yellow to off @-@ white patch behind the eye , and below is another distinct black stripe running the length of the yellow line . The chin and throat are a pale greyish @-@ brown , streaked with slightly darker grey , and the upper body is a dark greyish @-@ brown to olive @-@ brown . Olive green outer edges on the remiges combine to form an olive panel on the folded wing . The bill is black and slightly down @-@ curved , and the gape is cream . The iris is a dusky blue in adult birds , and brown in juveniles . Juveniles are very similar to the adult , with slightly less streaking on the breast , an orange @-@ brown tip on the bill and a yellower gape ; male and female birds are also similar , with the male being slightly larger ; and in the field there are no visible differences between the subspecies . The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater averages 15 – 17 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 – 6 @.@ 9 in ) in length , with a wingspan of 21 @.@ 5 – 26 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 5 – 10 @.@ 2 in ) and a weight of between 12 @.@ 5 – 20 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 44 – 0 @.@ 72 oz ) ( average 17 grams ( 0 @.@ 60 oz ) ) . 
 = = = Vocalizations = = = 
 One of the first birds heard in the morning , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater utters calls that are full and loud , and extremely varied . The male sings from a roost for up to an hour , beginning twenty or thirty minutes before dawn . The song is a running series of cheerful notes sounding like chick @-@ up , chick @-@ up , from which its common name of <unk> is derived . Counter @-@ singing by neighbouring birds is common . The territorial call , also given by opponents during fights , is a long <unk> with an upward inflection . The alarm call is a loud trilling whistle . Common calls , thought to be contact calls , are animated two @-@ note calls variously described as <unk> , <unk> , cr @-@ rook , cr @-@ rook or put @-@ put , put @-@ put . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is widespread across eastern and south eastern Australia , in open sclerophyll forests from coastal dunes to high @-@ altitude subalpine areas , and often in riparian woodlands . It is usually found in open forests dominated by spotted gum with <unk> and <unk> such as Eucalyptus <unk> and E. <unk> , with a light shrubby understorey , and less often in dry open forests and woodlands dominated by Angophora , Acacia , Banksia , Casuarina or Callitris . It occurs in high @-@ altitude , tall , open forests of alpine ash and woodlands dominated by snow gum or white box . It has been recorded in coastal heath when banksias are flowering , and amongst flowering mangroves . It occupies areas infested with weeds such as Scotch broom and blackberries , and developed areas including orchards and parks and gardens , where it feeds on cultivated fruit and flowers . It can be found in forests regenerating after fire or logging , though it is more common in mature forests . 
 While the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater tends to nest away from the edge of forest remnants , experiments with natural and artificial nests at varying distances from the open areas showed no increase in the number of avian predators at the forest edge . The experiment results do not support the " ecological trap " and " predator influx " theories and contribute to a belief that fragmented habitats may not be as problematic as previously thought . 
 = = = Range = = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ranges across a broad arc from near Cooktown in north Queensland , south west between a line from Charters Towers to Albury and the coast , and then west to the Fleurieu Peninsula and Mount Lofty Ranges in South Australia . Population densities have been recorded from 0 @.@ 01 birds per hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) near Armidale in New South Wales to 7 @.@ 8 birds per hectare at <unk> , Victoria . During the winter months of June and July , numbers are generally decreased in Victoria and increased in Queensland , following northward migration . 
 = = = Migration = = = 
 While there are resident populations of the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater throughout its range , it is for the most part a seasonal , latitudinal , daytime migrant . During the autumn ( March to May ) it migrates north along the highlands and coastal fringe of eastern Australia to southern Queensland , to return in the spring ( August to October ) of the same year . The birds commonly move in flocks of 10 to 100 birds , but occasionally in larger groups of up to 1 @,@ 000 or more birds . The groups can include other species such as the white @-@ naped honeyeater , fuscous honeyeater , noisy friarbird and silvereye . They move in successive flocks at a rate of up to several thousand birds an hour . Near Hastings Point in New South Wales over 100 @,@ 000 passed through in a single day . The species is able to detect geomagnetic fields and uses them to navigate while migrating . Experiments where the vertical component of the magnetic field was reversed indicate that the magnetic compass of the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is based on the inclination of the field lines and not on polarity , distinguishing between the direction of the equator and the poles , rather than north and south . While their flight is in one general direction , it is not in a straight line as the flocks stay in vegetated areas , negotiate gaps in the mountain ranges and detour around cities . 
 The migration of many birds in Australia , including honeyeaters , has generally been described as occurring mainly in response to external environmental stimuli , such as food availability or an influx of water . However , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater has been found to have a broad range of characteristics which are consistent with the adaptations of Northern Hemisphere migrants to their mobile lifestyle : an annual cycle of migratory restlessness ; seasonally appropriate orientation based on magnetic , solar and polarised light cues ; and a migration program based on the magnetic inclination compass . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is usually seen singly , in pairs or in small family groups when not migrating . While it is generally active , in the early morning it will often sit still on high perches for long periods of time . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Comparatively short @-@ billed for a honeyeater , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is thought to have adapted for a mixed diet . Its diet consists of nectar , pollen , fruit , seeds , honeydew and insects . It is arboreal , foraging primarily amongst the foliage and flowers of trees , shrubs and mistletoes , less often on branches and tree trunk , and rarely on the ground . A study of the pollen on the bills and foreheads of captured birds found that 70 % carried pollen from silver banksia ( Banksia marginata ) , 61 % from heath @-@ leaved banksia ( Banksia ericifolia ) , and 22 % carried pollen from other plants in the area including fern @-@ leaved banksia ( Banksia oblongifolia ) , mountain devil ( Lambertia formosa ) and green spider flower ( Grevillea <unk> ) . Of 545 observations of yellow @-@ faced honeyeaters feeding , around 40 % were feeding on nectar with 60 % feeding on insects . The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater feeds on insects by gleaning , and by sallying or catching insects in flight or probing in bark crevices . The insects eaten are primarily Diptera ( flies , mosquitoes , maggots , gnats and midges ) , beetles and spiders . They feed as individuals , as pairs or as small groups of up to ten birds , and during migration in larger groups . They sometimes feed in large mixed @-@ species foraging flocks composed predominately of insectivorous birds . 
 In April and May , before the autumn migration , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater increases its nectar consumption , which increases its body mass . The average body mass in late autumn of 17 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 62 oz ) is 13 % higher than the average recorded between January and April , and the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater begins the migration with good fat reserves . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater breeds in monogamous pairs in a breeding season that extends from July to March . Migrating birds begin nesting later than sedentary birds . They nest solitarily in all @-@ purpose territories that both parents defend against conspecifics and other species including thornbills , <unk> and silvereyes , although the male is involved in more aggressive interactions than the female . Within a breeding season females lay two or three clutches of eggs , re @-@ nesting with the same partner in the same territory . Banded birds have been identified in the same territory for periods of up to five years . 
 The nest is built in the understorey shrubs , relatively close to the ground . Nests have been recorded in prickly <unk> ( Coprosma <unk> ) , <unk> , tea @-@ trees ( Melaleuca ) , eucalypts , and acacias , as well as in garden shrubs . The nest is a fragile , transparent structure , cup @-@ shaped , but swollen at the sides and narrower at the rim . The female builds the nest , but is often accompanied by the male as she gathers nesting material . Most nests are built of greenish material which varies with the location ; in coastal areas grass is the primary material , while in mountain forests the nest is often covered with moss . One bird was recorded repeatedly flying between the nest and a koala 36 metres ( 118 ft ) away and plucking the long hair near its ears to incorporate in the nest . The nests are very fine , with the eggs visible through the gauze @-@ like walls , and they sometimes fall apart . They have been known to disintegrate with eggs and nestlings falling through the bottom . 
 The female undertakes the incubation alone . Eggs are oval , approximately 21 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 83 in ) long and 14 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 55 in ) wide , and pinkish @-@ white in colour with spots and blotches of dark reddish @-@ brown . The clutch size varies from one to three eggs , and eggs take around two weeks to hatch . Upon hatching , both parents feed the nestlings and remove faecal pellets . The chicks fledge after thirteen days , and leave the parental territory after a further two weeks . The success rate can be as low as 16 % of eggs developing into fledged young , with nest failure , hot weather , heavy rain , human activity ( including fungicide spraying and nest damage ) , egg destruction by brood parasites , and predation by brown snakes , cats and currawongs all recorded as contributing to brood failure . ( Among the species that parasitize the nests of yellow @-@ faced honeyeaters are fan @-@ tailed cuckoos , brush cuckoos , pallid cuckoos , shining bronze cuckoos and Horsfield 's bronze cuckoos . ) The yellow @-@ faced honeyeater rapidly nests again after both successful and failed breeding attempts . 
 A paternity analysis of yellow @-@ faced honeyeater nestlings found that 10 of 18 nestlings were fathered by the male of the nesting pair , with clear evidence for extra @-@ pair paternity in the case of the remaining 44 % . This conflicts with the usual pattern , where genetic monogamy is linked to the characteristics of strong social pairing , essential paternal contributions to brood rearing , and to sexual monomorphism ; characteristics exhibited by the yellow honeyeater . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Several ectoparasites which can affect both survival and reproductive fitness have been found on the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater ; the mites Ptilonyssus <unk> and Ptilonyssus <unk> and Ixodes species ticks . 
 In general , honeyeaters require extensive corridors of mature trees along their migratory routes , and flowering woodlands for nesting , so they are vulnerable to the effects of land clearing , grazing and weed infestations . The woodland habitat they prefer is considered an endangered ecological community . However , as it is common and widespread , the yellow @-@ faced honeyeater is considered by the IUCN to be of least concern for conservation . In some areas it is considered a pest because of its intrusion into orchards and urban gardens where it damages fruit . 
 = Jack @-@ Tor = 
 " Jack @-@ Tor " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American situation comedy 30 Rock , which aired on November 16 , 2006 on the NBC network in the United States , and on November 8 , 2007 in the United Kingdom . The episode was written by Robert Carlock and was directed by Don Scardino . Guest stars in this episode include Katrina Bowden , Lonny Ross , Keith Powell , Maulik Pancholy , Teddy Coluca , James Murtaugh , Donald Glover , Doug Moe , Joey La <unk> and Matthew <unk> . 
 The episode focuses on Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) pressure on the writers of TGS with Tracy Jordan to integrate General Electric products into the show , which forces Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to integrate Jack himself into a self @-@ referential sketch about product placement . Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) and James " Toofer " Spurlock ( Keith Powell ) trick Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) into thinking that her job is in danger , and Liz wonders if Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) might be illiterate when he refuses to read cue cards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack tells Liz and the writers of TGS Tracy Jordan that he wants them to insert General Electric ( GE ) products into the show . The writers express their reluctance in doing product placements for GE ( even though during the scene the cast talk about how great Snapple 's White Green Tea tastes ) , but Liz agrees on the condition that Jack appears in the sketch . The next day , Liz watches a video containing outtakes from Jack 's product placement video , where she discovers that he repeatedly forgot his lines after 142 takes . After realizing that he needs help , Liz encourages Jack to go through with the sketch , which he ultimately is able to shoot . 
 Tracy decides that he is going to take a break from rehearsals after he is called back on stage to read his cue cards . When Tracy appears to be ignoring his cue cards , Jenna informs Liz of the situation , and realizes that Tracy might be illiterate , citing an earlier promo cue card mishap ( " The Aftermath " ) as an example . Liz confronts Tracy about the problem ; he admits that he is illiterate and agrees to get help . Liz later notices Tracy reading a newspaper , and learns that he was using the ploy to get out of work . Liz tells Tracy that she is not going to take it anymore , and forces him to go through with the sketch . 
 Jenna tells Pete that she wishes to insert a music number called " Muffin Top " into the show , which she claims is a big hit overseas . As a prank , Frank and Toofer tell her that several people are going to be fired . Believing them , Jenna tries to seduce a NBC executive whom she sees talking to Jack . Liz later notifies Jenna that no one is going to be fired , and that the executive is actually an extra on the show . Jenna aims to get back at the pair , and although Toofer admits that he was too smart for Jenna 's tactics , Frank is seen running around naked outside Jack 's balcony . Jenna finally gets her chance to perform " Muffin Top " , unaware that the show has already ended and the number was scratched at the last moment , thanks to Liz . 
 = = Production = = 
 In an effort to improve ratings , " Jack @-@ Tor " was the first episode of 30 Rock to air on a Thursday night , which is advertised by NBC as " Comedy Night Done Right " . 30 Rock was also one of several sitcoms to have a " super @-@ sized " episode , which NBC employed as a sweeps stunt , and to initiate a mostly comedy lineup . Instead of the usual 30 @-@ minute episodes , " Jack @-@ Tor " was increased to 40 minutes . Despite the increased length of the episode , Jack McBrayer , who plays Kenneth Parcell , received credits but did not appear in the show , except for a brief non @-@ speaking cameo at the very end when Jenna is singing " Muffin Top " . Fey said that there was " such a big ensemble " in the episode that he was crowded out . Fey said that she thought " McBrayer is fantastic " , and that she is " planning to use him lots and lots " . Executive producer Lorne Michaels also praised McBrayer , saying " we 're very high on him . He 's obviously the breakout performer on the series . We like him , the network likes him , viewers like him , everybody likes him . " 
 Star Wars is frequently referenced in 30 Rock , beginning with the pilot episode where Tracy Jordan is seen shouting that he is a Jedi . Liz Lemon admits to being a huge fan of Star Wars , saying that she had watched it many times with Pete Hornberger , and saying she dressed up as the Star Wars character Princess Leia during four Halloweens . Fey , a fan of Star Wars herself , said that the weekly Star Wars joke or reference " started happening organically " when the crew realized that they had a Star Wars reference " in almost every show " . Fey said that from then on " it became a thing where [ they ] tried to keep it going " , and that even though they could not include one in every episode , they still had a " pretty high batting average " . Fey attributed most of the references to Robert Carlock , who she described as " the resident expert " . In this episode , Star Wars is referenced when Frank mentions a " friend in accounting " named Lando Calrissian , a prominent Star Wars character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Jack @-@ Tor " brought in an average of 5 @.@ 2 million American viewers upon its original broadcast in the United States , achieving a 2 @.@ 4 / 6 in the key 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . The 2 @.@ 4 refers to 2 @.@ 4 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old , and the 6 refers to 6 % of all people of ages 18 – 49 years old watching television at the time of the broadcast . 30 Rock 's timeslot change , from Wednesday to Thursday , which was aimed at improving ratings , was a success compared to the previous episode , " Jack the Writer " ; it was watched by approximately 4 @.@ 61 million American viewers , and only received a rating of 1 @.@ 7 / 5 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic . Overall , however , the move was thought to be a failure . Joal Ryan of E ! reported that the " sparse crowd " of 5 @.@ 2 million viewers was a large decrease from the ratings 30 Rock achieved on Wednesdays , where it averaged 6 @.@ 3 million viewers per episode . 
 Matt Webb Mitovich of TV Guide said that while the storyline of Liz being forced to integrate GE products into the show was a " good idea " , it " missed the bull 's @-@ eye " . He also felt that the storyline of putting Jack on TGS with Tracy Jordan was " fun " , but thought " that for some reason fell a bit flat " . Tom Shales of The Washington Post felt that " 30 Rock had " consistently and considerably improved since its premiere " . He praised Alec Baldwin , whose performance he described as " rare and rich [ ... ] perilously close to perfect , beyond improving " . Shales said that it was " painful to report " that Jack McBrayer was absent in the episode , saying he was " the show 's brightest discovery " , and his " performance has been a bittersweet beauty " . Rob Canning of IGN said that 30 Rock 's was " one new comedy we do not want to see taken off the air " . He said that " Jack @-@ Tor " had him " laughing from every angle " , and may have " begun a debate as to which character is more fun to watch – Jack Donaghy or Tracy Jordan ? " . He said that the outtakes of Jack 's sketch were " one of the best parts of the episode " , and that Tracy was evolving into his own " uniquely hilarious character " . Overall , he felt that Jack was winning the " comedy showdown " . 
 Robert Carlock , the writer of the episode , was nominated for his work for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series . 
 = Horrible Histories ( 2009 TV series ) = 
 Horrible Histories is a British children 's sketch comedy television series , part of the children 's history franchise of the same name based on the books written by Terry Deary . The show was produced for CBBC by Lion Television with Citrus Television and ran from 2009 to 2013 for five series of thirteen half @-@ hour episodes , with additional one @-@ off seasonal and Olympic specials , before a return in 2015 with a sixth series under a new format with cast . The show is still running with Series 7 continuing in 2016 Horrible Histories Revival . 
 The TV show carries over the graphic style and much of the content of the Horrible Histories book series . It maintains the franchise 's overall irreverent but accurate focus on the dark , gruesome or scatological aspects of British and other Western world history , spanning from the Stone Age to the post @-@ World War II era . Individual historical eras or civilisations are defined and named as in the books , with sketches from several different time periods combined within a single episode . Live @-@ action sketches — which often parody other UK media or celebrities — and music videos are intercut with animations and quizzes . The starring troupe are Mathew Baynton , Simon Farnaby , Martha Howe @-@ Douglas , Jim Howick , Laurence Rickard and Ben Willbond , alongside a large supporting cast headed by Sarah Hadland , Lawry Lewin and Dominique Moore . The black rat puppet " host " , Rattus Rattus , appears in short bridging segments , explaining the factual basis for each sketch . 
 The creative team was largely recruited from the mainstream adult UK comedy scene . They took inspiration from such quintessentially British historical @-@ comedy classics as Blackadder and the Monty Python films . The series was a critical and ratings success , eventually gaining a wide all ages audience through its non @-@ condescending and inclusive approach . It has won numerous domestic and international awards and has been named among the greatest British children 's television series of all time . 
 In 2011 , a spin @-@ off game show , Horrible Histories : Gory Games , was launched on CBBC . In the same year , the original show was repackaged for main channel BBC One as Horrible Histories with Stephen Fry , with Fry replacing the puppet rat as presenter . 
 = = Background = = 
 Horrible Histories is based on the British children 's historical @-@ comedy book series by Terry Deary , first published by Scholastic UK in 1993 and since expanded into a multimedia franchise . The books and subsequent spin @-@ off materials are intended to pique young children 's interest in history via short , factually based but humorously told anecdotes highlighting aspects of the subject not usually covered in more traditional educational sources . 
 LionTV executive producer Richard Bradley , whose company had previously produced several adult history @-@ themed programmes and whose son was a fan of the Horrible Histories books , was the initial driving force behind a new TV adaptation . Deary was initially sceptical , having had a negative experience with the 2001 animated series , which had only loosely incorporated his concept . He finally agreed to the new project on the condition that it be explicitly " horrible , funny and true " . While disclaiming any active role in developing the subsequent series , he would eventually contribute to the writing as well as appearing in several small roles . 
 The producers were determined that the show be respectful of audience expectations for the Horrible Histories brand , maintaining its familiar visual style and content as far as possible . Early concepts for bringing it to the screen involved framing or interpretive devices , including a ghostly train carrying children into the past , or a wizard storyteller to act as their guide . Eventually Bradley with producer / director Dominic Brigstocke concluded that the material was strong enough to stand on its own , so they developed , in consultation with CBBC executives , a live @-@ action sketch @-@ comedy showcase . Once the writing was underway , the producers further discovered that sticking as closely as possible to the historical truth made it easier for them to find the humour within it . They then introduced a comedy style relying on parodies of familiar modern media conventions as a means of making these historical details more immediately accessible . 
 To do the material full justice , Brigstocke and series producer Caroline Norris used their industry contacts to put together a creative team consisting mostly of veterans of the adult UK comedy community . The BBC readily agreed to this cross @-@ demographic experiment . They also approved the adoption — insofar as was possible in a programme aimed at young children — of the core franchise precept of " history with the nasty bits left in " , which frequently involved " gross @-@ out " -style bodily function humour and comic violence . 
 The new creative team , while avoiding references aimed specifically at adults , was determined not to adapt the humour to children or otherwise patronise their audience . Instead , they sought to make the best use possible of the material . Norris said that her goal was " to make a show that people would say was too good for children ... we started out with really high ambitions . " To that end , adult historical satires such as Blackadder and the Monty Python films were shown at the first writers ' meeting to demonstrate the proposed tone , and these influences would be visible throughout the show 's run . Once the first series had aired and it was realised that the overall approach was working well , the creative team built on and significantly expanded the scope of the comedy elements for the second . This trend continued through each subsequent series . The net result was a show that immediately appealed to young children while also gaining the increasing respect — and viewership — of older audiences . 
 = = Format = = 
 The divisions by historical era or civilisation in the book series are carried over in the TV show , focusing on events in or directly affecting Great Britain and ( to a lesser extent ) the larger Western world . The Inca and Aztec empires are also featured in later series . Sketches are grouped under these divisions , named as in the books , beginning with the Savage Stone Age and including among others the Cut @-@ throat Celts , Awful Egyptians , Groovy Greeks , Rotten Romans , Vicious Vikings , <unk> Middle Ages , Terrible Tudors , Gorgeous Georgians and Vile Victorians . The timeline for the most part ended at the <unk> Second World War . During the fifth and final series the show featured a handful of significant post @-@ WWII ( or " Troublesome Twentieth Century " ) events , including the civil rights movement and the Space Race between the US and the USSR . The most recent event referenced was the 1969 Apollo 11 Moon landing . 
 Each named division has its own title card that appears before each sketch ( or group of sketches ) set in that era or civilisation , along with a short introductory animation featuring a period @-@ appropriate character . Throughout each sketch , small pop @-@ up signs are used to affirm the truth ( or otherwise ) of any particularly implausible @-@ seeming concepts mentioned onscreen . The live @-@ action material is intercut with short animated sketches , quizzes and interludes with puppet " host " Rattus Rattus ( performed by John Eccleston ) , who addresses the viewer directly as a presenter , commenting on and clarifying the factual basis behind the humour . 
 Sketches were filmed en masse and then cut into episodes by the producers based on creative rather than chronological or other educational considerations , in the manner of a more traditional sketch @-@ comedy series . They often fall under a recurring banner — usually with its own short title sequence — but otherwise vary widely in length , visual style and approach . Many are recognisable parodies of other popular media or celebrities , in formats ranging from spoof commercials to mock TV shows , newscasts , magazines , video games and film trailers . Notable parody inspirations included Masterchef , Wife Swap , Come Dine with Me and The Apprentice . " Horrible Histories Movie Pitch " , in which historical figures pitch their life stories to a panel of Hollywood producers played by League of Gentlemen actors Mark Gatiss , Steve Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , used the format of a commercial campaign for Orange mobile reminders . 
 The show also created several popular recurring characters and concepts , notably " Stupid Deaths " , in which a skeletal , platinum @-@ blond Grim Reaper amuses himself while processing souls for admittance to the afterlife by forcing candidates from throughout history to relate the embarrassing details of their demise . <unk> News ' Bob Hale and his eccentric @-@ but @-@ erudite in @-@ studio reports provide a broader picture on historical events ( such as the Wars of the Roses and the French Revolution ) , in a style reminiscent of presenter Peter Snow . The " <unk> Man " , a parody of a typically ebullient infomercial host ( like Barry Scott ) , pitches unusual historical products . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Original music plays a significant role in the show and its popularity ; " Music from Horrible Histories " was chosen as the 2011 theme of the BBC Proms ' annual children 's concert . Alongside various short intro themes and commercial jingles , each episode and each special contains at least one longer comedy song centred around a particular historical figure or theme and performed by the cast in appropriate character . 
 In the first series , the songs generally had no particular satirical slant , and were often intercut with sketches from the same era . However , after the creative team noted the critical and popular success of the major exception ( " Born 2 Rule " , which featured King Georges I – IV performing in the style of a boyband ) the decision was taken from the second series onwards to continue in that vein . Historical concepts were matched to a diverse range of modern musical references , and the results were showcased as self @-@ contained music video parodies . The thirteenth episode of the second and each subsequent series was retooled as a " Savage Songs " special , featuring a compilation of that series ' outstanding videos . 
 The songs have since become among the most critically and popularly acclaimed elements of the show , especially among its adult audience . Commentators cite the apt cleverness of the various historical / musical parody match @-@ ups , and the complexity and skill with which the musical elements are executed . Principal composer Richie Webb confirms that the songs became more sophisticated as a result of the show 's increasing popularity with older viewers , as well as the demands of increased visibility online . Many of the videos have earned standalone popularity on YouTube . 
 The videos tend to run about three minutes , with two significant exceptions . " The English Kings and Queens " , from the third series , lists all of the British monarchs since William the Conqueror , using a Chas & Dave @-@ inspired cumulative format . The creative team wrote the song to challenge the show 's young audience , after noting that the same youngsters had been inspired to memorise lyrics to previous songs . " We 're History " , styled as a grand finale for the show 's final episode , uses stock footage from across the show 's run to revisit every major era it ever featured in turn . 
 = = Content and educational value = = 
 No formal educational method was applied to the production , and no attempt was made to follow the official UK National Curriculum for primary school history . The show 's creators were acutely aware of educational possibilities , but — in line with Deary 's overall mandate for the franchise — saw their basic role as popularising history , inspiring further curiosity about the academic subject rather than attempting to teach it seriously . The show 's effectiveness in this respect was endorsed by historical scholars , including presenter Dan Snow . Writing in The Independent , Gerard Gilbert notes that Horrible Histories is part of an extensive British black @-@ comedy tradition not only in adult but also in children 's programming . In later series , as usable material from the books began to run out , there was a progression towards more sophisticated , adult sketches in terms of both creativity and educational content , as the show began relying on material that their younger viewers would be less familiar with . 
 Throughout , emphasis was placed on meshing comedy with the demands of historical accuracy , as defined by the mainstream scholarly consensus on the topic . This stance sometimes encompassed traditionally accepted if not actually well @-@ documented anecdotes , such as those involving Caligula . All the material used on the show was vetted by production assistant and self @-@ described " tyrannical pedant " Greg Jenner during both writing and filming ; he says that he has counted only eight errors out of more than 4 @,@ 000 facts presented over the course of the show 's run . Costuming and makeup were likewise painstakingly recreated based on primary historical sources where available . 
 When an error was discovered , the effort was made to correct it whenever possible . This process is perhaps most noticeable in the evolution of a song featuring the four Hanoverian King Georges : lyrics in the original 2009 video incorrectly saying that George I had " died on the loo " were correctly reassigned to George II for the song 's reprise at the show 's 2011 BBC Prom concert . 
 Taking cues from what Deary describes as his " seriously subversive " attitude towards the mainstream British history education model meant that the show inevitably incorporated sociopolitical comment . Perhaps most explicitly , Scots @-@ Jamaican nurse Mary Seacole was deliberately championed in both a sketch and later song as a forgotten heroine in the shadow of Florence Nightingale . The activities of African @-@ American activists Harriet Tubman and Rosa Parks were also showcased , as was ex @-@ slave boxer Bill Richmond . According to Norris , a desire to include more women 's stories was hampered by the traditionally male @-@ dominated viewpoint of historical records . The show did make an attempt to counteract this by giving showcase songs to the British women 's suffrage movement and women 's work on the British <unk> during WWII , and wherever possible highlighting strong @-@ willed , dynamic female figures , including Queen Victoria , Elizabeth I and Boudicca . Religious controversies , class divisions , the ethics of conquest , and labour conditions were likewise touched on . 
 The association with a proven and popular children 's brand focusing on potentially sensitive subjects enabled the TV series to deflect any serious controversy regarding the same subjects , as they had demonstrably already been presented to children without any ill effects . Senior writer Steve Punt said that there were in fact very few complaints regarding the initial series ' content , adding that " everyone was very relieved " . The producers did consider some topics intrinsically unsuited for an irreverent comic treatment , as for instance the Holocaust or the harsher details of slavery , and avoided them accordingly . Norris has described her personal criteria for age suitability as whether she would be nervous watching it with a ten @-@ year @-@ old . While BBC executives in large part were willing to concede the requirements of reflecting historical realities , some topics , notably suicide , needed careful handling to avoid potentially negative impact on younger viewers . The show sometimes acknowledged particularly emotive subject matter ( the WWI Christmas truce , for example ) by following up the sketch not with a joke , but a more sombre elaboration of the less comedic details . 
 = = Production = = 
 The TV series used the Horrible Histories brand , logo and associated trademarks under licence from publisher Scholastic Books . It was produced for the BBC by LionTV and Citrus Television , with post @-@ production being handled by Platform Post Production . Under series producer Norris and directors Brigstocke , Steve Connelly and Chloe Thomas , each series of thirteen episodes took approximately one year to produce . The process included several months of research into the historical facts , two to three months of writing , eight weeks of filming both on location and at London 's Twickenham Studios , and three to four months of post @-@ production . 
 At first the sketches were derived almost exclusively from the books , whose multimedia approach , consisting of short anecdotes interspersed with cartoons , diaries , newspaper articles and recipes , proved easily adaptable to the screen either as raw material or creative inspiration . In later series , as usable material from the books and other obvious sources began to run out , concepts were drawn from more standard historical texts under Jenner 's supervision . He and fellow researchers read through many different studies and picked out suitably quirky , intriguing snippets , which were then pitched to the writers for development . 
 Inspiration for the music videos came from many different sources , and input from all members of the show 's creative team was encouraged . With the exception of " A Gorgeous Georgian Lady " , adapted by Deary from his book Gorgeous Georgians , all songs were original to the series . Once Jenner and Norris had finalised the subject matter and music genre , lyrics were commissioned from the writing team , usually Dave Cohen . These were rewritten as needed under Norris ' supervision to ensure as much factual information as possible was included . Webb then composed and recorded each song 's instrumental track at Noisegate Studios , hewing as closely as possible to the style of the genre or artist in question . The finished vocal and backing tracks were later returned to Noisegate for post @-@ production by Webb and colleague Matt Katz . 
 The 2D animated sequences were directed by Tim Searle of Baby Cow Animation , based on Martin Brown 's illustrations for the books . They were voiced by Jon Culshaw and Jess Robinson along with various regular cast members . Video game @-@ styled sketches were achieved using a mix of 3D animation and live @-@ action green @-@ screen footage . Properties frequently were modified foodstuffs , with melted chocolate bars standing in for excrement and soup for vomit . 
 Each series debuted in the UK in April or May from 2009 to 2013 , and on international channels including Canada 's BBC Kids , Malaysia 's NTV7 , The Philippines GMA Network , and Australia 's ABC3 . Six special episodes , comprising a mix of new and existing material around a single theme , were broadcast in the UK . " Horrible Christmas " ( aired in 2010 ) was followed by a " Sport Special " ( July 2012 , to coincide with the 2012 London Olympic Games ) and a " Scary Special " ( autumn 2012 , themed around Halloween ) . " Ridiculous Romance " ( themed around Valentine 's Day ) aired in February 2014 ; the " Frightful First World War Special " aired later the same year , as part of the BBC 's commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the outbreak of WWI . 
 In autumn 2011 , the BBC edited footage from the show 's summer Prom concert into an hour @-@ long TV special ( " Horrible Histories ' Big Prom Party " ) , featuring specially shot linking sketches . In addition , standalone sketches hosted by Stephen Fry , as well as a special " Bob Hale Report " , were produced as part of the 2012 Sport Relief benefit programme . In the same year , several sketches were commissioned as part of the BBC 's live television coverage of the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II , to be performed on Tower Bridge , but due to time constraints only one was aired . 
 The producers decided to cease full @-@ time production after the fifth series , citing concerns around the increasing difficulty in finding suitable historical material . However , the possibility of further specials marking important historical or holiday milestones has been discussed . 
 In 2015 , the BBC announced that the Horrible Histories concept would be revived in a new format , focussing on the life and times of a single historical figure per episode . The rebooted series was again developed by LionTV and will involve a largely all @-@ new production team and cast , while still retaining Jenner as lead historical consultant and many of the original series 's writers . In addition , original stars Farnaby and Howick will return in limited roles . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 The cast members were recruited from sketch and character comedy , having previously had roles in Gavin & Stacey , Peep Show , The Thick of It and The Mighty Boosh TV series among others . Several of the writers and researchers also occasionally appeared in front of the camera , including Punt , Jenner , George Sawyer and Susie Donkin , while actors Mathew Baynton and Ben Willbond sometimes contributed to the writing . Laurence Rickard was recruited solely as a writer , but found himself part of both the senior writing staff and starring cast after creating the character of Bob Hale , whose extended , convoluted monologues proved impossible to hand over to anyone else . 
 Individual sketches and songs were cast by the production team , sometimes acting on input from the show 's stable of performers themselves . While certain roles naturally lent themselves to a particular actor , Norris said that confidence in the entire cast 's ability was such that the producers also experimented with casting against type . The demands of filming thirteen episodes ' worth of material in the same timeframe as a standard six @-@ episode sketch show , while coping with the many complex makeup and wardrobe changes required , resulted in casting also being partially dependent on the logistics of moving a performer from one character to another . Recurring characters were if at all possible played by the actor who had originated the part , leading to the development of several signature roles , as for example Baynton 's Charles II , Jim Howick 's <unk> Man , Rickard 's Bob Hale , Willbond 's Henry VIII , Martha Howe @-@ Douglas ' Elizabeth I and Simon Farnaby 's Death . 
 The performers were allowed to improvise provided that they maintained factual accuracy . Howick said that improvisation was actually often necessary due to the rapid @-@ fire pace of filming , which left very little time to prepare for individual roles . On the other hand , both Rickard and Baynton suggest this enforced spontaneity may have ultimately worked to enhance the comedy , not least by preventing the jokes from becoming over @-@ rehearsed . 
 Six performers ( Baynton , Howick , Rickard , Willbond , Howe @-@ Douglas and Farnaby ) were credited as main or starring cast throughout the show 's run ; a seventh , Sarah Hadland , left after the second series but returned with an " also starring " credit for the fourth and fifth . The initial sextet appeared from Series 2 onwards as the standard face of the show at premieres and other press opportunities , and performed as a troupe for such peripheral events as the show 's BBC Prom concert . They became a particularly close @-@ knit group both personally and professionally . Eventually this led them to continue working together after Horrible Histories ceased full @-@ time production , creating , writing and starring in the TV series <unk> and feature film comedy Bill . 
 The supporting cast varied considerably by series . Those performers with additional speaking parts are listed below : 
 The show has attracted several special guest stars . In the fourth series , Gatiss , Shearsmith and Pemberton of The League of Gentlemen joined the show , playing the panel of Hollywood producers for the " Movie Pitch " sketches . Shearsmith said , " Mark and I independently thought it was just a brilliant show that works on a number of levels ... There 's not a weak link in the team here and it 's an honour to be asked to be part of it " . Other featured guests included : 
 Alexei Sayle ( Series 2 , Arabic healer , " Historical Hospital " ) 
 Tanni Grey @-@ Thompson ( Series 2 , herself , field reporter for " <unk> Sport " ) 
 David Baddiel ( Series 2 & 3 , storyteller Vincenzo <unk> , " Scary Stories " ) 
 Chris Addison ( Series 4 , two different " Historical Apprentice " candidates ) 
 Amir Khan and Jermain Defoe ( Series 4 , as themselves in Sport Relief sketches ) 
 Al Murray ( Series 5 , various roles , notably the drummer for the Smiths @-@ inspired Charles Dickens music video ) 
 = = Reception = = 
 Horrible Histories was immediately , and almost universally , greeted with critical enthusiasm . On its debut , Alice @-@ Azania Jarvis of The Independent described the show as " fun , filthy and genuinely engaging , in a peer @-@ to @-@ peer way . " Harry Venning in The Stage approved the " seriously funny , beautifully performed and endlessly inventive sketches " along with " plenty of crowd @-@ pleasing fart and poo gags . " By the second series , the show 's cross @-@ generational appeal was beginning to attract significant attention from adult media . Naomi West of The Daily Telegraph characterised the first series as " boundary @-@ pushing " , suggesting that " the bold decision to approach the series in the same way as an adult show has been the key to its success ... [ it ] delivers more laughs than most post @-@ watershed comedies . " James Delingpole in The Spectator likewise recommended the show to viewers of all ages , saying that " Even though there are vast quantities of entirely gratuitous fart , bottom and wee wee jokes , the cumulative effect — bizarrely — is one of dumbing up rather than down . " Discussing the first two series in the The Guardian , television writer Jesse Armstrong said that " Hit shows are very difficult to achieve . You need to have everything just right — that 's what 's so terrifying . But Horrible Histories has a great cast and brilliant writers . They 're also blessed with great source material . The tone is perfect and it is done in a non @-@ patronising , engaging way " . 
 Clare Heal of the Daily Express , in her review of the third series , praised the show 's " spot @-@ on spoofs of modern telly " and agreed that " There 's no particular target audience but pretty much anyone of any age will find something in there for them " . Kerrie Mills of PopMatters rated the first three series 9 / 10 , opining that the show " does also provide evidence , <unk> between the falling bodily fluids , of a sharp comic intelligence ... in fact , it might just be one of the most successful original comedy shows to appear in years . " Stephen Kelly of The Guardian argued that the fourth series had definitively transcended its roots to become not just " the best show on children 's television — it 's one of the smartest comedies on TV " , performed by an " astonishing cast ... so superb that even special guest stars such as Chris Addison can look slightly out of their depth . " In an article discussing the League of Gentlemen troupe 's appearance in the same series , the Radio Times ' Gareth McLean agreed that " despite nominally being a children 's programme , Horrible Histories is one of the best sketch comedies on TV " , adding that " ultimately , comedy performers relish [ the ] madcap , sometimes deliciously silly exuberance , which , thanks to the show 's <unk> writing , educates as well as entertains . " Graeme Virtue of The Scotsman called the League 's reunion a " coup " for the series : " While Gatiss 's American accent was pretty duff , the bickering spark between the three Gentlemen remained . " 
 In her review of the fifth series , Deborah Ross of the Daily Mail wrote of her sheer pleasure in watching the show without her children , calling it " still unfailingly brilliant and funny and silly , without ever losing its sense of purpose ... There just isn 't anything else on TV that can match it for ideas , writing and performance . " Sarah Dempster of The Guardian agreed , adding that " Four years into its ingenious ' making history look less crap ' operation ... HH remains true to its aim , with meticulously harvested historical data + roaringly well @-@ observed pop culture pastiches = seemingly infinite heritage <unk> . " Writing in The Independent , Grace Dent commended the cast in particular , saying that the show " has the distinct feel of a group of bright , young , erudite , <unk> @-@ <unk> sparks having a tremendously good time . " Venning of The Stage reiterated his praise of the show , adding that " it also has the courage to tackle potentially controversial events head on " , specifically citing the song featuring African @-@ American civil rights activist Rosa Parks as retelling her story in a " clever , concise and accessible way without trivialising it . " 
 = = = Historical accuracy = = = 
 Most criticism of the show revolves around the accuracy and presentation of its factual content . The TV series , like the books , has been used by educators as a classroom aid and was endorsed by UK Education Secretary Michael Gove as useful for spotlighting " neglected periods of history . " However , writing after the final episode , Simon Hoggart in The Spectator noted that " There has been some whipped @-@ up controversy about Horrible Histories " , adding that " where the books make a rudimentary attempt to teach history as a series of interconnected events , the television show is basically gags , chiefly about defecation , gluttony , murder and torture . It 's quite amusing , though whether it will pique an interest in the subject , or — as some say — merely encourage children to learn more about defecation , gluttony , murder and torture , we cannot know . " 
 More specifically , in September 2014 , responding to a complaint from the Nightingale Society , the BBC Trust determined that the show had breached editorial guidelines in the sketch highlighting the controversy surrounding Mary Seacole 's role in nursing history . In this sketch , Florence Nightingale says that she rejected the Jamaican @-@ born Seacole 's application to Nightingale 's Crimean nursing corps because it was open to " British girls " only . This was held to be imputing racially discriminatory motives to Nightingale — and thus implying them to be historical fact — without sufficient proof . In response , the BBC pulled the offending sketch from their website and announced it would be removed from future showings of the episode . 
 In a 20th @-@ anniversary retrospective of the franchise in The Telegraph , David <unk> , the history editor of the Times Literary Supplement , defended the show 's overall viewpoint , saying , " There 's no particular reason why grown @-@ up historians shouldn 't like Horrible Histories too ... They simplify , and they have a definite point of view , but all historians are guilty of that to some degree . " He further said that " Getting children interested in the past isn 't necessarily easy , and Horrible Histories does it extremely effectively — and those who come to history because it 's fun seem far more likely to stay with it in the long run . " Writing for entertainment website <unk> , Anna Lowman added that " Terry Deary had the fine idea of getting kids into history by giving the facts a human face and a joke or two ... The producers of the CBBC show have perfectly transferred Deary 's ethos to television . " 
 The recut for BBC1 with Fry as host drew particular criticism as to whether its educational methods were suited to an adult demographic . History Today editor Paul Lay called the idea " frightening " . Historian and Labour Party MP Tristram Hunt , while admitting that he had not yet actually seen the programme , voiced his concerns that the show 's content was not " challenging and stimulating " enough for the BBC , adding that " For children , Horrible Histories is an exciting aid to engage with the guts and gore of the past , but there are more sophisticated , populist ways of getting people involved in history than this . I 'm in favour of populism , but there has to be a bit of depth to it . " 
 Other critics have taken a more lenient view . Historian and television presenter Dan Snow described the show 's modus operandi as " one step above Blackadder , but that 's fine ... it plays to stereotypes , but it 's fantastic as entry @-@ level history . " Writing in The Independent , Tom Sutcliffe noted that " As a grown @-@ up you might quibble with the fact that they don 't always distinguish between things that genuinely are true and the things that people would like to be ( sadly , there 's no hard evidence that Aeschylus was brained by a tortoise dropped by an overflying eagle ) " , but added that " children and adults alike should enjoy the gleefully anachronistic way in which the information is presented . " Dent in The Guardian , while conceding what she called the show 's " frankly slapdash , dumbed @-@ down approach to history " , also argued that " in Horrible Histories there are always serious messages lurking amid the silliness . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its debut week of 15 June 2009 , the show topped the UK children 's TV viewing figures with 191 @,@ 000 viewers . The first series reached a viewing peak of 50 % of UK children aged 6 – 12 , while the second was watched by 34 % of UK children aged 6 – 12 , or 1 @.@ 6 million total . Throughout its run , the show routinely ranked at or near the top of the CBBC ratings , reaching a peak of 548 @,@ 000 viewers for Episode 10 of Series 5 . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Horrible Histories received numerous domestic and international awards and nominations , including several BAFTA Children 's Awards , two British Comedy Awards and a Rose d 'Or Award for Best Children 's Programme . It is the first children 's programme to win a British Comedy Award and four successive children 's BAFTAs , for Best Comedy . In 2013 the show was also named in a Radio Times poll of all @-@ time greatest British children 's TV series , and was cited at No. 8 in a similar Top 50 list presented later the same year by Channel Five . 
 = = DVD and online releases = = 
 All five series of the original show , plus the " Scary ( Halloween ) Special " , " Ridiculous Romance " & the " Frightful First World War Special " and " Horrible Christmas " have been released on Region 2 DVD by 2entertain for the BBC , both individually and as boxed sets . 
 Each series , as well as the " Scary Special " and " Sport Special " , are also available for download from the UK iTunes store . As of February 2014 , all episodes from Series 1 – 3 were available for download to American audiences on Amazon.com " Instant Video " service . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs = = 
 In 2011 , a spinoff game show , Horrible Histories : Gory Games , was launched on CBBC . Likewise coproduced by Lion TV and Citrus , the show is co @-@ hosted by Dave Lamb with puppet Rattus Rattus and includes cameos from many of the parent show 's cast . As of 2013 , the show had aired three full series . For summer 2011 , the show was repackaged for adult Sunday @-@ night audiences as Horrible Histories with Stephen Fry , a six @-@ part " best of " compilation for main channel BBC One . The show featured a selection of sketches and songs from the first two series as chosen by the producers of the parent show , with Fry replacing the puppet rat as presenter . 
 = La Sombra ( wrestler ) = 
 Manuel Alfonso " Manny " Andrade <unk> ( born November 3 , 1989 ) , is a Mexican luchador or professional wrestler currently signed to WWE under the ring name Andrade " Cien " Almas . He is best known for his work in Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( CMLL ) from 2007 until 2015 under the ring name La Sombra ( Spanish for " The Shadow " ) . Andrade is the son of Jose Andrade <unk> , who is better known as the wrestler " Brillante " . 
 Andrade made his professional wrestling debut a month before his 14th birthday and worked initially as Brillante Jr . In 2007 he began working for CMLL as La Sombra and was met with in ring success as he won the 2007 Torneo Gran Alternativa tournament , the 2011 Universal Championship and at one point he was a triple champion ; holding the Mexican National Trios Championship , NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship and CMLL World Tag Team Championship at the same time . He also made appearances for New Japan Pro Wrestling , where he is a former IWGP Intercontinental <unk> <unk> d Andrade , while working as " La Sombra " was one of the founding members of the Los Ingobernables ( " the Unruly " ) wrestling group along with Rush , La Máscara and Marco Corleone . The Ingobernables group straddles the traditional roles of the " good guys " and " bad guys " in lucha libre as are positioned to be against anyone who is not a part of Los Ingobernables group . During his career he has won the masks of El Felino , Olímpico and Volador Jr. by defeating them in Lucha de Apuestas , or bet matches , to force them to unmask and has only lost one Lucha de Apuestas match , losing his own mask to Atlantis . 
 In November , 2015 , it was reported that Andrade had signed a developmental contract with WWE . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Andrade was born on November 3 , 1989 in Gómez Palacio , Durango , Mexico , the son of Jose Andrade Salas . He became part of the third generation of the Andrade family to compete in lucha libre . His grandfather , Jose Andrade , wrestled under the ring name " El Moro " , his father works as Brillante , his uncles wrestle or wrestled under the names Diamante / Moro III ( Sergio Andrade ) , Zafiro / <unk> ( real name unrevealed ) , Kevin ( Juan Andrade ) , Espanto Jr . / Pentagón ( Jesus Andrade ) , Espiritu <unk> ( Juan Andrade ) and one of his cousins works as the current Espanto Jr . ( real name unrevealed ) Due to the secretive nature of lucha libre , where they often do not reveal the real names of masked wrestlers , it is possible that some more of Andrade 's siblings or cousins are also professional wrestlers . With his father , uncles and grandfather being involved in running a local lucha libre promotion and school in Durango Andrade began training for a professional career from an early age , initially by playing around with his father and uncles , but later began to train seriously for a career in the wrestling ring . He made his professional wrestling debut on October 3 , 2003 , a month before his 14th birthday , but only after his father signing a waiver for the local boxing and wrestling commission to issue him a license . He began working under the ring name Brillante Jr. in honor of his father . Andrade was previously in a relationship with fellow professional wrestler Sarah Stock while Stock worked in Mexico for a number of years . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 Working for his family 's wrestling promotion Andrade used the name " Brillante Jr . " from 2003 through early 2007 . During that period of time he got involved in a storyline rivalry with his uncle who wrestled as " <unk> " , leading to his first ever Lucha de Apuestas , or bet match . By defeating Zafiro he won his first headline match , forcing Zafiro to have all his hair shaved off after the match per lucha libre traditions . He would later win another Lucha de Apuestas match , forcing the masked wrestler Camorra to unmask in the middle of the ring and reveal his real name . During this time period Andrade also competed as the enmascarado ( masked ) characters " Guerrero Azteca " ( " Aztec Warrior " ) and " Rey Azteca " ( " Aztec King " ) on occasion . 
 = = = Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre = = = 
 In 2007 he signed with Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre ( " World Wrestling Council " ; CMLL ) , and began training under CMLL head trainer El Satánico . He made his CMLL in ring debut on February 27 , working as " Brillante " just like his father had . In June CMLL changed his name , <unk> him La Sombra ( " The Shadow " ) . CMLL previously had other people work under the name " La Sombra " in the 1980s and 1990s ; CMLL did not promote the most recent La Sombra as having any relation to the previous incarnations at all , although it was later subtly acknowledged relationship was acknowledged when La Sombra began wrestling in a black and silver version of his father 's mask . 
 La Sombra quickly moved up the ranks of CMLL in the months after his debut . The first sign of CMLL putting their faith in La Sombra came when the promoters him teamed up with CMLL 's main good guy ( known as a " técnico " in Spanish ) Místico for their annual Torneo Gran Alternativa ( " Great Alternative Tournament " ) where a rookie and a veteran team up . La Sombra and Místico defeated Heavy Metal and Super Nova in the first round , Dr. Wagner Jr. and Mascara Purpura in the semi @-@ final and the team of Último Guerrero and Euforia in the finals to win the 2007 <unk> Gran Alternativa . The following month , La Sombra teamed up with El Sagrado and Volador Jr. to defeat Mr. Águila , Damián 666 , and Halloween , collectively known as Los Perros del Mal ( " The Bad Dogs " ) , to win the Mexican National Trios Championship . On November 27 , 2007 , La Sombra added the NWA World Welterweight Championship to his collection when he defeated Hajime Ohara to win the title ; his victory made him the youngest wrestler to hold the championship , winning it at the age of 18 . Throughout 2008 La Sombra was busy defending both championships on several occasions . On January 16 , 2009 , La Sombra became a triple champion as he teamed up with Volador Jr. to defeat Averno and Mephisto , winning the CMLL World Tag Team Championship . La Sombra 's time as a triple champion lasted just over two weeks , until February 3 , when Sangre Azteca , Black Warrior , and Dragón Rojo Jr . , collectively known as Poder Mexica ( " Mexican Power " ) defeated La Sombra , Volador , and Sagrado to win the Mexican National Trios Championship . On May 27 , 2009 La Sombra lost the NWA World Welterweight Championship to Mephisto . 
 In early 2010 La Sombra began a storyline feud with El Felino . The feud began on February 2 , 2010 , during a singles match between El Felino and La Sombra ; when tied at one fall each , Puma King , El Felino 's son , showed up wearing an El Felino outfit and mask , distracting both the referee and La Sombra long enough for El Felino to land a low blow on La Sombra to win the match . The two met in a Lighting match ( a one fall , 10 minute time limit match ) on the February 19 CMLL Super Viernes show . Once again Puma King tried to help his uncle , but this time the referee disqualified El Felino for the transgression . La Sombra and El Felino continued to feud , both interfering in a match between Volador Jr. and Místico . The storyline led to Místico , Volador Jr . , La Sombra and El Felino being booked in a four @-@ way Lucha de Apuestas match as the main event of the 2010 2010 Homenaje a Dos Leyendas ( " Homage to Two Legends " ) show . La Sombra was the first man pinned at Dos Leyendas and El Felino was the second , forcing the two to compete with their masks on the line . La Sombra pinned El Felino , forcing him to unmask and reveal his real name . 
 On May 14 , 2010 , La Sombra teamed up with Máscara Dorada and La Máscara to defeat the then CMLL World Trios Champions La Ola Amarilla ( " The Yellow Wave " ; Hiroshi Tanahashi , Okumura , and Taichi ) in a non @-@ title match to earn a shot at the Championship the following week . One week later the trio defeated Ola Amarilla again , ending the Japanese trios title reign after just two weeks . On July 12 , 2010 , at the <unk> Gutiérrez 1st Anniversary Show La Sombra participated in a match where 10 men put their mask on the line in a match that featured five <unk> <unk> ( " Incredible Pairs " ) teams , with the losing team being forced to wrestle each other with their mask on the line . His partner in the match was Histeria , facing off against the teams of Atlantis and Olímpico , Místico and El Oriental , El Alebrije and Volador Jr . , Último Guerrero and Averno . La Sombra and Histeria were the first team to escape the match and retain their masks . While La Sombra had travelled to Japan to participate in the 2010 Best of the Super Juniors ( <unk> ) tournament Volador Jr. had begun showing rudo signs , but when La Sombra returned the two teamed back up without any signs of problems between the two 
 Sombra and Volador Jr. lost the CMLL World Tag Team Championship to the Los <unk> team of Mr. Águila and Héctor Garza on July 23 , 2010 , again without any signs of dissension between the two . During a later show Volador Jr. finally turned fully rudo when he attacked La Sombra and tore La Sombra 's mask off , provoking a feud between the two long time partners . La Sombra entered the 2010 Universal Championship tournament and qualified for the finals when he won " Block A " on the July 30 , 2010 Super Viernes show by defeating Mephisto , El Texano Jr . , and Último Guerrero . In the finals Jushin Thunder Liger , with help from Okumura at ringside , defeated La Sombra to claim the tournament trophy . The unresolved issues between La Sombra and Volador Jr . , as well as the storyline between La Sombra and Jushin Thunder Liger , led to all three wrestlers being booked in the main event of the CMLL 77th Anniversary Show , a 14 @-@ man steel cage Lucha de Apuestas , mask vs. mask match . The match came down to Olímpico and La Sombra after the other 12 men had escaped the cage ; La Sombra pinned Olímpico to force him to unmask . 
 On March 13 , 2011 , La Sombra defeated Mephisto to win the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship . On July 15 , La Generación Dorada lost the CMLL World Trios Championship to Los Hijos del Averno ( Averno , Ephesto and Mephisto ) . On September 2 , La Sombra entered CMLL 's annual tournament of champions , the Universal Championship tournament . After defeating Mexican National Trios Champions Ángel de Oro and Diamante in his first two matches , La Sombra defeated NWA World Historic Light Heavyweight Champion Rey Bucanero in his block 's finals to advance to the tournament finals . On September 16 , La Sombra defeated Averno to become the 2011 Universal Champion . On February 13 , 2012 , La Sombra lost the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship to Negro Casas , ending his reign at 337 days . On November 28 , 2012 La Sombra won the advanced category in CMLL 's annual bodybuilding contest . On December 14 , La Sombra defeated Tama Tonga to win the 2012 La Copa Junior Tournament in the main event of CMLL 's 2012 Sin <unk> ( " No Mercy " ) show . 
 On February 15 , 2013 , La Sombra defeated Volador Jr. to win the 2013 Reyes del Aire tournament . Following their clash over the Reyes del Aire trophy Volador Jr. and La Sombra were teamed up for the 2013 Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles tournament , the same tournament that in 2010 was the impetus for Volador Jr . ' s rudo turn . The rivals put their issues aside for the tournament , defeating the teams of Guerrero Maya Jr. and Negro Casas , La Máscara and Averno , and Shocker and Mr. Niebla to qualify for the finals of the tournament . On March 15 , at the 2013 Homenaje a Dos Leyendas show , Volador Jr. and La Sombra defeated <unk> and Último Guerrero to win the Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles . The truce between La Sombra and Volador Jr. that allowed them to win the tag team tournament only lasted until the next time the two rivals were in the same ring . On February 17 , 2013 La Sombra teamed up with Marco Corleone and Místico II against Volador Jr . , Euforia and Último Guerrero . During the match Volador Jr. attacked both La Sombra and the referee , causing a disqualification before leaving the ring and his confused partners behind . On September 13 at CMLL 's 80th Anniversary Show , La Sombra and Volador Jr. defeated Atlantis and Último Guerrero in a <unk> <unk> match and thus advanced to a Mask vs. Mask Lucha de Apuestas against each other . In the end , La Sombra was victorious , forcing his rival to unmask . 
 = = = = Los Ingobernables ( 2014 – 2015 ) = = = = 
 The main event of the 80th Anniversary show was not well received by the fans as they had been expecting a match between Atlantis and Último Guerrero , loudly chanting " fraud " during the main event . After the match the fans rallied behind Volador Jr . , giving him the crowd support that made CMLL return him to <unk> tecnico side . Conversely the fans began to boo and heckle La Sombra , the supposed tecnico , leading to a change in how La Sombra was booked and presented by CMLL . La Sombra formed a partnership with Rush and effectively began working as a rudo , though the two refused to acknowledge themselves as such , instead referring to themselves as " técnicos <unk> " ( " a different kind of good guy " ) . On June 6 , La Sombra defeated Volador Jr. with help from Rush and La Máscara to win the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship in a match , where La Sombra 's Historic Middleweight Championship was also on the line . The trio of Sombra , Rush and La Máscara was eventually named Los Ingobernables ( " The Unruly " ) . On August 1 at El Juicio Final , La Sombra lost the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship back to Volador Jr . Later in August , La Sombra made it to the finals of the 2014 Universal Championship tournament , before losing to Último Guerrero . On May 1 , 2015 , La Sombra won the 2015 Reyes del Aire tournament ( " Kings of the Air " ) . 
 On July 21 , La Sombra and Rush were involved in an incident in Guadalajara , where the two attacked fans who were throwing beers at them . The following day , Jalisco 's Boxing and Wrestling Commission suspended the two from wrestling in the state for three months . While the commission only suspended them from wrestling in Jalisco , CMLL decided to pull both La Sombra and Rush from their Super Viernes show three days later . CMLL did not offer an official explanation for the change . Over the summer of 2015 Los Ingobernables started to wrestle against tecnico teams instead of generally facing rudo teams as they had been up to that point . By August , 2015 Los Ingobernables found themselves facing off against Atlantis on multiple occasions , often with La Sombra going out of his way to attack Atlantis , tearing Atlantis ' mask apart during matches to show his disdain for the veteran tecnico . On August 19 , 2015 CMLL held a press conference where they announced that the winner of the main event of the 80th Anniversary , La Sombra , would put his mask on the line against the winner of the main event of the 81st Anniversary Show , Atlantis , in the main event of the CMLL 82nd Anniversary Show on September 18 , 2015 . On August 31 , La Sombra lost the NWA World Historic Middleweight Championship to Último Guerrero , ending his two and a half year reign . La Sombra lost the Lucha de Apuestas match to Atlantis . As a result , La Sombra was forced to unmask and reveal his real name . In early November , La Sombra and Rush began having issues with each other , which led to a singles match between the two on November 13 , where Rush was victorious . After the match , which turned out to be La Sombra 's final with CMLL , the two founding members of Los Ingobernables made peace with each other . 
 = = = New Japan Pro Wrestling ( 2010 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In 2010 La Sombra was selected to be the CMLL representative for New Japan Pro Wrestling 's ( NJPW ) Best of the Super Juniors XVII ( <unk> ) tournament that took place from May 30 to June 16 , 2010 in Japan . The tournament marked the first time that La Sombra toured Japan . On May 30 , 2010 La Sombra wrestled his first match in the tournament , defeating Tiger Mask . On the final day of the tournament he defeated the junior heavyweight wrestling innovator , Jushin Thunder Liger . With just three wins in the tournament and a total of six points he did not advance to the semi @-@ finals . In November 2010 La Sombra and Máscara Dorada took part in New Japan 's five @-@ day @-@ long Super J Tag League . After winning two out of their four matches in the group stage , La Sombra and Dorada finished third in their block , missing the finals of the tournament . 
 La Sombra and Dorada returned to New Japan on January 4 , 2011 , at Wrestle Kingdom V in Tokyo Dome , where they defeated Jushin Thunder Liger and Héctor Garza in a tag team match , when Sombra pinned Liger . As a result of his victory he was granted a match for Liger 's CMLL World Middleweight Championship in the process . La Sombra received his match for the championship on January 22 , 2011 , at Fantastica Mania 2011 , but lost to Liger . La Sombra returned to NJPW in August 2011 to take part in the 2011 G1 Climax . La Sombra started the tournament by picking up wins over Wataru Inoue and fellow CMLL worker Strong Man , but then went on to lose his remaining seven matches in the tournament , finishing eighth out of the ten wrestlers in his block . La Sombra returned to Japan in January 2012 to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2012 events . In the main event of the second night of the tour , La Sombra successfully defended the NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship against Volador Jr . La Sombra returned to New Japan in April 2012 to take part in the 2012 New Japan Cup . After defeating Yoshi @-@ Hashi in his first round match , he was eliminated from the tournament in the second round by Hirooki Goto . 
 In January 2013 , La Sombra took part in the three @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2013 event . During the second night of the tour , La Sombra unsuccessfully challenged Nakamura for the IWGP Intercontinental Championship . During the third and final night , La Sombra defeated Dragón Rojo Jr. to win the NWA World Historic Middleweight Championship . On May 31 , 2013 , La Sombra defeated Nakamura in a rematch in Mexico City to win the IWGP Intercontinental Champion , becoming the first Mexican to hold that championship . On July 20 , he lost the IWGP Intercontinental Championship back to Nakamura during a tour of Japan . From November 23 to December 6 , La Sombra took part in the 2013 World Tag League , where he and Tetsuya Naito finished with a record of three wins and three losses , failing to advance to the semifinals . In January 2014 , La Sombra took part in the five @-@ day Fantastica Mania 2014 tour . La Sombra returned to New Japan in November to take part in the 2014 World Tag League , teaming with Tetsuya Naito once more . The team finished in the middle of their block with four wins and three losses . In January 2015 , La Sombra returned to Japan to take part in the Fantastica Mania 2015 tour , during which he feuded with Máscara Dorada , culminating in a singles match between the two on January 19 , where La Sombra was victorious . 
 = = = WWE = = = 
 = = = = NXT ( 2015 – present ) = = = = 
 On November 19 , 2015 , it was announced that Andrade had signed a developmental contract with WWE . He would later report to the WWE Performance Center to begin his WWE career , focusing initially on improving his English language skills with the help of Sarah Stock , a WWE trainer who worked for CMLL for almost a decade . He made his WWE in @-@ ring debut at an NXT house show in Tampa , Florida on January 8 , 2016 , wrestling as " Manny Andrade " and defeating Riddick Moss . At NXT TakeOver : Dallas on April 1 , Andrade defeated Christopher Girard during a dark match . The following month , Andrade was given the new ring name Andrade " Cien " Almas . At NXT TakeOver : The End on June 8 , Almas made his official debut defeating Tye Dillinger . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 As La Sombra 
 Brillante Driver / Shadow Driver / Sombra Driver ( Schoolboy suplex ) 
 Split @-@ legged corkscrew senton , sometimes preceded by a forward fireman 's carry slam 
 As Andrade Almas 
 Running double knee smash to the corner 
 Signature moves 
 Feint springboard moonsault into a standing moonsault 
 Moonsault 
 Rope @-@ assisted enzuigiri 
 Springboard <unk> 
 Nicknames 
 As La Sombra 
 " El Centinela del <unk> " ( Spanish for " The Space Sentinel " ) 
 " El <unk> " ( Spanish for " The Idol " ) 
 " CMLL no Prince " ( Japanese for " Prince of CMLL " ) ( NJPW ) 
 As Andrade Almas 
 " Cien " ( " One Hundred " ) 
 Entrance themes 
 " Making a Difference " by CFO $ ( NXT ; June 8 , 2016 - present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre 
 CMLL Universal Championship ( 2011 ) 
 CMLL World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Volador Jr . 
 CMLL World Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with Máscara Dorada and La Máscara 
 Mexican National Trios Championship ( 1 time ) – with El Sagrado and Volador Jr . 
 NWA World Welterweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Historic Middleweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA World Historic Welterweight Championship ( 2 time ) 
 La Copa Junior ( 2012 ) 
 <unk> de Parejas ( 2014 ) – with Omar Brunetti 
 Reyes del Aire ( 2013 , 2015 ) 
 Torneo Corona - with Metalik 
 Torneo Gran Alternativa : 2007 – with Místico 
 Torneo Nacional de Parejas Increibles ( 2013 ) – with Volador Jr . 
 CMLL Bodybuilding Contest ( 2012 – Advanced ) 
 CMLL Tag Team of the Year ( 2009 ) – with Volador Jr . 
 CMLL <unk> of the Year ( 2010 ) 
 CMLL Trio of the Year ( 2010 ) – with Máscara Dorada and La Máscara 
 Lucha Libre Azteca 
 <unk> Azteca Championship ( 1 time ) 
 New Japan Pro Wrestling 
 IWGP Intercontinental Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 52 of the top 500 singles wrestlers in the PWI 500 in 2013 
 = = = Luchas de Apuestas record = = = 
 = David Suzuki : The Autobiography = 
 David Suzuki : The Autobiography is the 2006 autobiography of Canadian science writer and broadcaster David Suzuki . The book focuses mostly on his life since the 1987 publication of his first autobiography , Metamorphosis : Stages in a Life . It begins with a chronological account of his childhood , academic years , and broadcasting career . In later chapters , Suzuki adopts a memoir style , writing about themes such as his relationship with Australia , his experiences in Brazil and Papua New Guinea , the founding of the David Suzuki Foundation , and his thoughts on climate change , celebrity status , technology , and death . Throughout , Suzuki highlights the continuing impact of events from his childhood . 
 This is Suzuki 's forty @-@ third book and , he says , his last . Critics have called the book candid , sincere , and charming , with insightful commentary if occasionally flat stories . Suzuki 's scientific background is reflected in the writing 's rational and analytic style . 
 Suzuki 's autobiography spent four weeks at No. 1 on the Maclean 's list of non @-@ fiction best @-@ sellers and six weeks at No. 6 on the Globe and Mail 's list . The book won two awards in 2007 : the Canadian Booksellers ' Association 's Libris Award for Non @-@ Fiction Book of the Year and the British Columbia Booksellers ' Choice Award . The publishers , Greystone Books and Douglas & McIntyre , won the CBA Libris Award for Marketing Achievement of the Year . 
 = = Background = = 
 Vancouver @-@ based David Suzuki , 70 years old at the time of this book 's publication , is best known as an environmental activist and host of the television show The Nature of Things . He has also worked as a geneticist , nature writer , and university professor . His previous book , written in 2002 , was Good News for a Change . His 1987 book , Metamorphosis : Stages in a Life , unintentionally became his first autobiography . Metamorphosis was originally drafted as a collection of essays , but following the prompting of his publisher , Suzuki rewrote it in a more autobiographical style . 
 Suzuki 's working title for this second autobiography was The Outsider , a title intended to express the author 's view of his own role in society . The origin of this outsider feeling comes from isolation suffered at a Japanese Canadian internment camp during World War II . He was imprisoned there for being Japanese but shunned by other Japanese for being a third generation Canadian , speaking only English . His feeling of isolation continued during his early school years when the only other student of Japanese heritage was his twin sister . Suzuki 's daughters acknowledged this perception of himself as an outsider but insist that the public views him very differently , as one of their own , leading to the simple The Autobiography title . 
 Suzuki 's objective in writing the book was to document his experiences of personal rewards gained from the environmental movement and to illustrate , specifically for young people , opportunities in environmentalism . Suzuki believes that he has been unfairly labelled as " the master of doom and gloom " by conservative media outlets and that this book will help balance that view . He intends this autobiography to be his final book . Following its publication he planned to reduce his work week from seven to four days to spend more time with family and personal pursuits . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The book has eighteen chapters with a two @-@ page preface , which explains his experience with Metamorphosis and how this book complements it . The thesis of this book is identified by one reviewer as : " the importance of childhood 's formative years for the development of the person . In Suzuki 's case , it is the effects of racism , notably time spent in BC 's internment camps during the Second World War , that still haunt him . " In an interview , Suzuki said , " my drive to do well has been motivated by the desire to demonstrate to my fellow Canadians that my family and I had not deserved to be treated as we were " . Suzuki identifies a turning point of his life as winning his high school 's student presidential election . He initially refused to run believing he was not popular enough . His father encouraged him , saying : " There 's no disgrace in losing ... The important thing is trying . " Suzuki ran and unexpectedly won with an " outsider " platform . 
 Suzuki recounts his youth and academic years as a student , professor , and genetics researcher . On his broadcasting career , Suzuki recalls early interviews that demonstrated an affinity for public speaking and the jobs that allowed him to travel the world . Regarding his personal life , he describes his relationships with his five children and the development of his two marriages . In a review in the New Zealand Listener , David Larsen observes : " Step by step , you see him thinking his way into full @-@ fledged environmentalism : not because he 's a natural zealot , but because he 's an intellectually honest man brought face to face with evidence that our current economic and energy policies are digging our grandchildren 's graves . " 
 Later chapters tell of events since Metamorphosis . In British Columbia , Suzuki spends time on the Queen Charlotte Islands and in Stein Valley advocating against logging . He describes his travels in Brazil while shooting an episode of The Nature of Things in 1988 and the relationship he developed with the Kayapo people . One of their leaders returned to Canada with him to advocate the protection of his homeland in the Amazon . His tour of Papua New Guinea and how Australia became his second home are explained . He describes the founding and early years of the David Suzuki Foundation , a non @-@ profit organization based on environmental protection and developing sustainability . In the final four chapters Suzuki elaborates on his thoughts about climate change , celebrity status , technology , and death . He laments the lack of global action on climate change , scientific illiteracy on the part of politicians , and the lack of media attention to science . In the final chapter he accepts death as an inevitability and expects his works to be forgotten quickly , leaving his grandchildren as his only true legacy . 
 = = Style and genre = = 
 Suzuki 's tone is relaxed and understated . Robert Wiersema notes that Suzuki 's style has " an analytic quality ... probably rooted in his scientific training " . Suzuki shows a humble , dry humour and instances of blurting out surprising statements . One reviewer describes the style as a " fusion of by @-@ the @-@ numbers personal narrative and passionate , insightful commentary " . 
 The book begins as a chronological narrative of Suzuki 's life with photographs of his family and friends . The first five chapters cover the same time period as the first autobiography , from childhood to age fifty . Later chapters use a memoir style with personal thoughts developed around themes . Suzuki recounts his experiences with indigenous groups and his personal relationships with individual members . A travelogue of his journeys in Brazil , Papua New Guinea , Australia , and some places in Canada is presented . Scientific concepts and explanations occur throughout the book . 
 = = Publication and marketing = = 
 Two weeks before its release on April 22 , 2006 , an excerpt was printed in the national daily newspaper The Globe and Mail . Greystone Books , the Vancouver division of Douglas & McIntyre , published the book . The book tour included more than 35 stops over two months throughout Canada . Promoted by the publishers as his " final book tour " and labelled by Suzuki as his " thank @-@ you book tour " , it began in Victoria , British Columbia , and included stops from coast @-@ to @-@ coast , from Whitehorse , Yukon , to New Glasgow , Nova Scotia . Attended by nearly 500 people at each event , a multimedia slideshow with personal photos and videos was presented by Suzuki . The publishers estimated that Suzuki signed 5000 books and conducted 137 media interviews . For their efforts Douglas & McIntyre and Greystone Books were awarded the 2007 Canadian Booksellers Association 's Libris Award for Marketing Achievement of the Year . In July , the book was published by Allen & Unwin in Australia . Suzuki conducted a promotional tour of both Australia and New Zealand in October and November . The same publishers released paperback editions in April 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Autobiography was No. 1 on Maclean 's list of nonfiction bestsellers in Canada for four weeks and spent fifteen weeks in the top ten . The book was on The Globe and Mail 's non @-@ fiction bestsellers ' list for five weeks and peaked at No. 6 . The book won the 2007 Canadian Booksellers Association 's Libris Award for Non @-@ Fiction Book of the Year and the 2007 British Columbia Booksellers ' Choice Award . 
 Critics variously described his writing as " forthright , " " chatty " , and " charming " . In a review in The Globe and Mail Brian Brett admires " Suzuki 's disarming candour " and labels it " a strange , fascinating book " . While Brett 's review is positive , he calls it " clunkily written " and sometimes repetitive . The Edmonton Journal review notes that Suzuki could " charm the socks off the most hardened soul " , but that many of his stories fall flat . The review in the Quill & Quire notes Suzuki " has not written an indulgent autobiography " and that he " is too polite to dish on his enemies " . Writing for The Vancouver Sun , Robert Wiersema states that while " his life is an open book ... [ y ] ou get the sense of meeting the real Suzuki for the first time . " Wiersema calls him " a natural storyteller " . The New Zealand Listener review states , " as a writer , he has the charm of a high @-@ school geek desperately trying to get a date ... but ultimately it 's what allows his story to convince " . Several critics find Suzuki 's writing on death to be particularly well @-@ done . 
 A number of reviewers compared this book with the earlier one , Metamorphosis . The Edmonton Journal considers David Suzuki : The Autobiography to be more candid and insightful than the previous book . On the other hand , Peter Desbarats , writing in Literary Review of Canada , suggests that Metamorphosis had more personal charm . Desbarats is disappointed that The Autobiography does not provide a better reflection on the themes of Metamorphosis . He points out that the best parts , Suzuki 's early years , are condensed from one third of Metamorphosis to a single chapter in The Autobiography . Desbarats states that neither book ends with a " satisfying final word " and concludes that Suzuki " is his own worst and most frustrating biographer " . 
 = Interstate 380 ( Iowa ) = 
 Interstate 380 ( I @-@ 380 ) is a 73 @-@ mile ( 117 km ) auxiliary Interstate Highway located in eastern Iowa . The route extends from Interstate 80 near Coralville to Waterloo . I @-@ 380 connects the cities of Cedar Rapids and Waterloo , the second- and sixth @-@ largest cities in the state , respectively , to the Interstate Highway System . Except for its last 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) north of U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) , I @-@ 380 runs concurrent with Iowa Highway 27 , which represents Iowa 's portion of the 560 @-@ mile ( 900 km ) Avenue of the Saints Highway connecting St. Louis , Missouri , with St. Paul , Minnesota . 
 Construction of I @-@ 380 took 12 years to complete , ending in 1985 . After the interstate opened , US 218 was moved onto the new freeway . In the 1990s , the I @-@ 380 corridor was selected as part of the Avenue of the Saints corridor , which Iowa designated as Iowa Highway 27 in 2001 . I @-@ 380 has been affected by two major floods , the Great Flood of 1993 and the Iowa flood of 2008 , both of which closed the road at the Iowa River for two weeks . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Interstate 380 begins at a cloverleaf interchange where US 218 and Iowa 27 cross Interstate 80 in Coralville in Johnson County . From the interchange , I @-@ 380 , US 218 , and Iowa 27 , the route assigned to the Avenue of the Saints Highway in Iowa , run together towards Cedar Rapids . The interstate heads north and serves North Liberty . North of North Liberty , the freeway runs parallel to the former routing of US 218 and Iowa 965 ; here the two highways cross the Iowa River . After crossing into Linn County , the three routes enter the Cedar Rapids city limits near The Eastern Iowa Airport . Three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the airport , I @-@ 380 intersects US 30 and US 151 at a cloverstack interchange . At this interchange , US 218 splits away from I @-@ 380 and Iowa 27 . 
 Through Cedar Rapids , the I @-@ 380 freeway is elevated relative to the nearby streets and residential neighborhoods . As it approaches downtown and the Cedar River , the freeway takes a tight , 90 @-@ degree turn to the east , crosses the river , squeezes between a Quaker Oats plant and the U.S. Cellular Center before turning back 90 degrees to the north . Between downtown and the Coldstream – 29th Street interchange , I @-@ 380 serves as a dividing line between residential areas to the east and industry to the west . Towards the north end of Cedar Rapids , industry is replaced with commerce as I @-@ 380 / Iowa 27 meet Iowa 100 , locally known as Collins Road , at a volleyball interchange . The collector / distributor ramps for Collins Road also serve the same function for Blairs Ferry Road , the next overpass to the north . 
 The freeway leaves Cedar Rapids and enters Hiawatha , where there is only one interchange , a diamond with <unk> Road . Quickly escaping the Cedar Rapids area , I @-@ 380 turns to the northwest and passes through predominantly rural areas with small communities and farms dotting the way . Because of its northwestern angle , I @-@ 380 enters four counties within 30 miles ( 48 km ) , as counties in Iowa are generally rectangular in shape . It passes Center Point in northwestern Linn County , Urbana in northeastern Benton County , where it meets Iowa 150 , and Brandon in southwestern Buchanan County . The interstate travels into Black Hawk County heading northwest for 7 miles ( 11 km ) before turning north for 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) until a directional T interchange with US 20 . 
 Together with US 20 , I @-@ 380 and Iowa 27 travel west towards Waterloo and Cedar Falls . The three routes pass the eastern Waterloo suburbs of Raymond , <unk> , and Elk Run Heights . Almost immediately after crossing the Cedar River again , I @-@ 380 splits away from US 20 and Iowa 27 and rejoins US 218 at a three @-@ level stack interchange . I @-@ 380 and US 218 head north to the east of the Crossroads Center shopping mall . One half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) north of the interchange which serves the Crossroads Center , I @-@ 380 ends at the traffic light at Mitchell Avenue . US 218 continues to the north at this point . 
 = = History = = 
 The first section of I @-@ 380 opened to traffic on September 19 , 1973 . That section connected The Eastern Iowa Airport to I @-@ 80 at Coralville . Within three years , the interstate had been extended into Cedar Rapids at the Cedar River . The bridge which crossed the river would not open until June 1979 . By the end of 1981 , I @-@ 380 was a continuous road to the Coldstream Avenue / Glass Road interchange . The interstate was originally scheduled to be open by Christmas 1984 , but weather delays pushed back the construction timetable . The last section of I @-@ 380 to be completed opened on September 12 , 1985 . 
 In 1985 , US 218 was bypassed around Iowa City and Coralville , joining I @-@ 380 at the I @-@ 80 interchange . US 218 to Cedar Rapids was replaced by Iowa 965 . In the early 1990s , most of I @-@ 380 was designated as part of the Avenue of the Saints corridor , which connects St. Louis , Missouri , to St. Paul , Minnesota . Avenue of the Saints route markers were erected along the route the next year . In August 2001 , the Avenue of the Saints in Iowa was given a single designation , Iowa 27 , to facilitate following the route through the state . 
 I @-@ 380 crosses two of Iowa 's major rivers , the Iowa and the Cedar . Both rivers have affected the interstate during major floods , as the case was in 1993 and in 2008 . During the Great Flood of 1993 , I @-@ 380 and Iowa 965 were both closed at the Iowa River 's Coralville Lake reservoir between July 13 and July 28 . The roads reopened after the lake 's waters receded enough to allow Department of Transportation inspectors to check the three bridges over the water . 
 The great Iowa flood of 2008 affected the same section of I @-@ 380 at the Iowa River in much the same fashion as in 1993 . I @-@ 380 and former Iowa 965 were closed at the Iowa River on June 13 until July 3 . In Cedar Rapids , flooding did not close I @-@ 380 , the only bridge not to close , though traffic was restricted through the city . The flooding damage was much more severe in Cedar Rapids than in Iowa City . The Cedar River crested at over 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) on June 13 , causing hundreds of millions of dollars in damage . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Mary Rose = 
 The Mary Rose is a carrack @-@ type warship of the English Tudor navy of King Henry VIII . After serving for 33 years in several wars against France , Scotland , and Brittany and after being substantially rebuilt in 1536 , she saw her last action on 19 July 1545 . While leading the attack on the galleys of a French invasion fleet , she sank in the Solent , the straits north of the Isle of Wight . 
 The wreck of the Mary Rose was rediscovered in 1971 . It was salvaged in 1982 by the Mary Rose Trust , in one of the most complex and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology . The surviving section of the ship and thousands of recovered artefacts are of immeasurable value as a Tudor @-@ era time capsule . The excavation and salvage of the Mary Rose was a milestone in the field of maritime archaeology , comparable in complexity and cost only to the raising of the Swedish 17th @-@ century warship Vasa in 1961 . 
 The finds include weapons , sailing equipment , naval supplies and a wide array of objects used by the crew . Many of the artefacts are unique to the Mary Rose and have provided insights into topics ranging from naval warfare to the history of musical instruments . Since the mid @-@ 1980s , while undergoing conservation , the remains of the hull have been on display at the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard . An extensive collection of well @-@ preserved artefacts is on display at the nearby Mary Rose Museum , built to display the reconstructed ship and its artefacts . 
 The Mary Rose was one of the largest ships in the English navy through more than three decades of intermittent war and was one of the earliest examples of a purpose @-@ built sailing warship . She was armed with new types of heavy guns that could fire through the recently invented gun @-@ ports . After being substantially rebuilt in 1536 , she was also one of the earliest ships that could fire a broadside , although the line of battle tactics that employed it had not yet been developed . Several theories have sought to explain the demise of the Mary Rose , based on historical records , knowledge of 16th @-@ century shipbuilding , and modern experiments . The precise cause of her sinking is still unclear , because of conflicting testimonies and a lack of conclusive physical evidence . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 By the late 15th century , England was a relatively insignificant state on the periphery of Europe . The great victories against France in the Hundred Years ' War were in the past ; only the small enclave of Calais in northern France remained as a remnant of the vast continental holdings of the English kings . The War of the Roses — the civil war between the houses of York and Lancaster — had ended with Henry VII 's establishment of the House of Tudor , the new ruling dynasty of England . The ambitious naval policies of Henry V were not continued by his successors , and from 1422 to 1509 only six ships were built for the crown . The marriage alliance between Anne of Brittany and Charles VIII of France in 1491 , and his successor Louis XII in 1499 , left England with a weakened strategic position on its southern flank . Despite this , Henry VII managed to maintain a comparatively long period of peace and a small but powerful core of a navy . 
 At the onset of the early modern period , the great European powers were France , the Holy Roman Empire and Spain . All three became involved in the War of the League of Cambrai in 1508 . The conflict was initially aimed at the Republic of Venice but eventually turned against France . Through the Spanish possessions in the Low Countries , England had close economic ties with the Spanish Habsburgs , and it was the young Henry VIII 's ambition to repeat the glorious martial endeavours of his predecessors . In 1509 , six weeks into his reign , Henry married the Spanish princess Catherine of Aragon and joined the League , intent on certifying his historical claim as king of both England and France . By 1511 Henry was part of an anti @-@ French alliance that included Ferdinand II of Aragon , Pope Julius II and Holy Roman emperor Maximilian . 
 The small navy that Henry VIII inherited from his father had only two sizeable ships , the carracks Regent and Sovereign . Just months after his accession , two large ships were ordered : the Mary Rose and the Peter Pomegranate ( later known as the Peter after being rebuilt in 1536 ) of about 500 and 450 tons respectively . Which king ordered the building of the Mary Rose is unclear ; although construction began during Henry VIII 's reign , the plans for naval expansion could have been in the making earlier . Henry VIII oversaw the project and he ordered additional large ships to be built , most notably the Henry Grace à Dieu ( " Henry Thanks to God " ) , or Great Harry at more than 1000 tons burthen . By the 1520s the English state had established a de facto permanent " Navy Royal " , the organizational ancestor of the modern Royal Navy . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The construction of the Mary Rose began in 1510 in Portsmouth and she was launched in July 1511 . She was then towed to London and fitted with rigging and decking , and supplied with armaments . Other than the structural details needed to sail , stock and arm the Mary Rose , she was also equipped with flags , banners and streamers ( extremely elongated flags that were flown from the top of the masts ) that were either painted or gilded . 
 Constructing a warship of the size of the Mary Rose was a major undertaking , requiring vast quantities of high @-@ quality material . In the case of building a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art warship , these materials were primarily oak . The total amount of timber needed for the construction can only be roughly calculated since only about one third of the ship still exists . One estimate for the number of trees is around 600 mostly large oaks , representing about 16 hectares ( 40 acres ) of woodland . The huge trees that had been common in Europe and the British Isles in previous centuries were by the 16th century quite rare , which meant that timbers were brought in from all over southern England . The largest timbers used in the construction were of roughly the same size as those used in the roofs of the largest cathedrals in the high Middle Ages . An unworked hull plank would have weighed over 300 kg ( 660 lb ) , and one of the main deck beams would have weighed close to three @-@ quarters of a tonne . 
 = = = Naming = = = 
 The common explanation for the ship 's name was that it was inspired by Henry VIII 's favourite sister , Mary Tudor , and the rose as the emblem of the Tudors . According to historians David Childs , David Loades and Peter Marsden , no direct evidence of naming the ship after the King 's sister exists . It was far more common at the time to give ships pious Christian names , a long @-@ standing tradition in Western Europe , or to associate them with their royal patrons . Names like Grace Dieu ( Thank God ) and <unk> ( Holy Spirit ) had been common since the 15th century and other Tudor navy ships had names like the Regent and Three Ostrich Feathers ( referring to the crest of the Prince of Wales ) . The Virgin Mary is a more likely candidate for a namesake , and she was also associated with the mystic rose . The name of the sister ship of the Mary Rose , the Peter Pomegranate , is believed to have been named in honour of Saint Peter , and the badge of the Queen Catharine of Aragon , a pomegranate . According to Childs , Loades and Marsden , the two ships , which were built around the same time , were named in honour of the king and queen , respectively . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Mary Rose was substantially rebuilt in 1536 . The 1536 rebuilding turned a ship of 500 tons into one of 700 tons , and added an entire extra tier of broadside guns to the old carrack @-@ style structure . By consequence , modern research is based mostly on interpretations of the concrete physical evidence of this version of the Mary Rose . The construction of the original design from 1509 is less known . 
 The Mary Rose was built according to the carrack @-@ style with high " castles " in the bow and stern with a low waist of open decking in the middle . The shape of the hull has a so @-@ called tumblehome form and reflected the use of the ship as a platform for heavy guns . Above the waterline , the hull gradually narrows to compensate for the weight of the guns and to make boarding more difficult . Since only part of the hull has survived , it is not possible to determine many of the basic dimensions with any great accuracy . The moulded breadth , the widest point of the ship roughly above the waterline , was about 12 metres ( 39 ft ) and the keel about 32 metres ( 105 ft ) , although the ship 's overall length is uncertain . 
 The hull had four levels separated by three decks . The terminology for these in the 16th century was still not standardised so the terms used here are those that were applied by the Mary Rose Trust . The hold lay furthest down in the ship , right above the bottom planking below the waterline . This is where the kitchen , or galley , was situated and the food was cooked . Directly aft of the galley was the mast step , a rebate in the centre @-@ most timber of the keelson , right above the keel , which supported the main mast , and next to it the main bilge pump . To increase the stability of the ship , the hold was where the ballast was placed and much of the supplies were kept . Right above the hold was the orlop , the lowest deck . Like the hold it was partitioned and was also used as a storage area for everything from food to spare sails . 
 Above the orlop lay the main deck which housed the heaviest guns . The side of the hull on the main deck level had seven gunports on each side fitted with heavy lids that would have been watertight when closed . This was also the highest deck that was caulked and waterproof . Along the sides of the main deck there were cabins under the forecastle and sterncastle which have been identified as belonging to the carpenter , barber @-@ surgeon , pilot and possibly also the master gunner and some of the officers . The top deck in the hull structure was the upper deck ( or weather deck ) which was exposed to the elements in the waist . It was a dedicated fighting deck without any known partitions and a mix of heavy and light guns . Over the open waist the upper deck was entirely covered with a coarse netting as a defence measure against boarding . Though very little of the upper deck has survived , it has been suggested that it housed the main living quarters of the crew underneath the sterncastle . A drainage located in this area has been identified as a possible " piss @-@ dale " , a general urinal to complement the regular toilets that would probably have been located in the bow . 
 The castles of the Mary Rose had additional decks , but since virtually nothing of them survives , their design has had to be reconstructed from historical records . Contemporary ships of equal size were consistently listed as having three decks in both castles . Although speculative , this layout is supported by the illustration in the Anthony Roll and the gun inventories . 
 During the early stages of excavation of the wreck , it was believed that the ship had originally been built with clinker ( or clench ) planking , a technique where the hull consisted of overlapping planks that bore the structural strength of the ship . Cutting gunports into a clinker @-@ built hull would have meant weakening the ship 's structural integrity , and it was assumed that she was later rebuilt to accommodate a hull with carvel edge @-@ to @-@ edge planking with a skeletal structure to support a hull perforated with gunports . Later examination indicates that the clinker planking is not present throughout the ship ; only the outer structure of the sterncastle is built with overlapping planking , though not with a true clinker technique . 
 = = = Sails and rigging = = = 
 Although only the lower fittings of the rigging survives , a 1514 inventory and the only known contemporary depiction of the ship from the Anthony Roll have been used to determine how the propulsion system of the Mary Rose was designed . Nine , or possibly ten , sails were flown from four masts and a bowsprit : the foremast and mainmast had two and three square sails respectively ; the mizzen mast had a lateen sail and a small square sail and the <unk> mizzen had at least one lateen sail , and possibly also a square sail , and the bowsprit flew a small square spritsail . According to the Anthony Roll illustration ( see top of this section ) , the yards ( the spars from which the sails were set ) on the foremast and mainmast were also equipped with <unk> , twin curved blades sharpened on the inside , that were intended to cut an enemy ship 's rigging during boarding actions . 
 The sailing capabilities of the Mary Rose were commented on by her contemporaries and were once even put to the test . In March 1513 a contest was arranged off The Downs , west of Kent , in which she raced against nine other ships . She won the contest , and Admiral Edward Howard described her enthusiastically as " the noblest ship of <unk> [ of any ] <unk> ship , at this <unk> , that I trow [ believe ] be in <unk> " . Several years later , while sailing between Dover and The Downs , Vice @-@ Admiral William Fitzwilliam noted that both the Henry Grace à Dieu and the Mary Rose performed very well , riding steadily in rough seas and that it would have been a " hard chose " between the two . Modern experts have been more sceptical to her sailing qualities , believing that ships at this time were almost incapable of sailing close against the wind , and describing the handling of the Mary Rose as being like " a wet haystack " . 
