 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Mary Rose represented a transitional ship design in naval warfare . Since ancient times , war at sea had been fought much like that on land : with melee weapons and bows and arrows , but on floating wooden platforms rather than battlefields . Though the introduction of guns was a significant change , it only slowly changed the dynamics of ship @-@ to @-@ ship combat . As guns became heavier and able to take more powerful gunpowder charges , they needed to be placed lower in the ship , closer to the water line . Gunports cut in the hull of ships had been introduced as early as 1501 , only about a decade before the Mary Rose was built . This made broadsides , coordinated volleys from all the guns on one side of a ship , possible for the first time in history , at least in theory . Naval tactics throughout the 16th century and well into the 17th century focused on countering the oar @-@ powered galleys that were armed with heavy guns in the bow , facing forwards , which were aimed by turning the entire ship against its target . Combined with inefficient gunpowder and the difficulties inherent in firing accurately from moving platforms , this meant that boarding remained the primary tactic for decisive victory throughout the 16th century . 
 = = = = Bronze and iron guns = = = = 
 As the Mary Rose was built and served during a period of rapid development of heavy artillery , her armament was a mix of old designs and innovations . The heavy armament was a mix of older @-@ type wrought iron and cast bronze guns , which differed considerably in size , range and design . The large iron guns were made up of staves or bars welded into cylinders and then reinforced by shrinking iron hoops and breech loaded , from the back , and equipped with simpler gun @-@ carriages made from hollowed @-@ out elm logs with only one pair of wheels , or without wheels entirely . The bronze guns were cast in one piece and rested on four @-@ wheel carriages which were essentially the same as those used until the 19th century . The breech @-@ loaders were cheaper to produce and both easier and faster to reload , but could take less powerful charges than cast bronze guns . Generally , the bronze guns used cast iron shot and were more suited to penetrate hull sides while the iron guns used stone shot that would shatter on impact and leave large , jagged holes , but both could also fire a variety of ammunition intended to destroy rigging and light structure or injure enemy personnel . 
 The majority of the guns were small iron guns with short range that could be aimed and fired by a single person . The two most common are the bases , breech @-@ loading swivel guns , most likely placed in the castles , and <unk> pieces , small muzzle @-@ loaders with rectangular bores and fin @-@ like protrusions that were used to support the guns against the railing and allow the ship structure to take the force of the recoil . Though the design is unknown , there were two top pieces in a 1546 inventory ( finished after the sinking ) which was probably similar to a base , but placed in one or more of the fighting tops . 
 The ship went through several changes in her armament throughout her career , most significantly accompanying her " rebuilding " in 1536 ( see below ) , when the number of anti @-@ personnel guns was reduced and a second tier of carriage @-@ mounted long guns fitted . There are three inventories that list her guns , dating to 1514 , 1540 and 1546 . Together with records from the armoury at the Tower of London , these show how the configuration of guns changed as gun @-@ making technology evolved and new classifications were invented . In 1514 , the armament consisted mostly of anti @-@ personnel guns like the larger breech @-@ loading iron murderers and the small serpentines , demi @-@ slings and stone guns . Only a handful of guns in the first inventory were powerful enough to hole enemy ships , and most would have been supported by the ship 's structure rather than resting on carriages . The inventories of both the Mary Rose and the Tower had changed radically by 1540 . There were now the new cast bronze cannons , demi @-@ cannons , culverins and sakers and the wrought iron port pieces ( a name that indicated they fired through ports ) , all of which required carriages , had longer range and were capable of doing serious damage to other ships . The analysis of the 1514 inventory combined with hints of structural changes in the ship both indicate that the gunports on the main deck were indeed a later addition . 
 Various types of ammunition could be used for different purposes : plain spherical shot of stone or iron smashed hulls , spiked bar shot and shot linked with chains would tear sails or damage rigging , and canister shot packed with sharp flints produced a devastating shotgun effect . Trials made with replicas of culverins and port pieces showed that they could penetrate wood the same thickness of the Mary Rose 's hull planking , indicating a stand @-@ off range of at least 90 m ( 295 ft ) . The port pieces proved particularly efficient at smashing large holes in wood when firing stone shot and were a devastating anti @-@ personnel weapon when loaded with flakes or pebbles . 
 = = = = Hand @-@ held weapons = = = = 
 To defend against being boarded , Mary Rose carried large stocks of melee weapons , including pikes and bills ; 150 of each kind were stocked on the ship according to the Anthony Roll , a figure confirmed roughly by the excavations . Swords and daggers were personal possessions and not listed in the inventories , but the remains of both have been found in great quantities , including the earliest dated example of a British basket @-@ hilted sword . 
 A total of 250 longbows were carried on board , and 172 of these have so far been found , as well as almost 4 @,@ 000 arrows , bracers ( arm guards ) and other archery @-@ related equipment . Longbow archery in Tudor England was mandatory for all able adult men , and despite the introduction of field artillery and handguns , they were used alongside new missile weapons in great quantities . On the Mary Rose , the longbows could only have been drawn and shot properly from behind protective panels in the open waist or from the top of the castles as the lower decks lacked sufficient headroom . There were several types of bows of various size and range . Lighter bows would have been used as " sniper " bows , while the heavier design could possibly have been used to shoot fire arrows . 
 The inventories of both 1514 and 1546 also list several hundred heavy darts and lime pots that were designed to be thrown onto the deck of enemy ships from the fighting tops , although no physical evidence of either of these weapon types has been identified . Of the 50 handguns listed in the Anthony Roll , the complete stocks of five matchlock muskets and fragments of another eleven have been found . They had been manufactured mainly in Italy , with some originating from Germany . Found in storage were several <unk> , a rare type of firearm consisting of a wooden shield with a small gun fixed in the middle . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Throughout her 33 @-@ year career , the crew of the Mary Rose changed several times and varied considerably in size . It would have a minimal skeleton crew of 17 men or fewer in peace time and when she was " laid up in ordinary " ( in reserve ) . The average wartime manning would have been about 185 soldiers , 200 sailors , 20 – 30 gunners and an assortment of other specialists such as surgeons , trumpeters and members of the admiral 's staff , for a total of 400 – 450 men . When taking part in land invasions or raids , such as in the summer of 1512 , the number of soldiers could have swelled to just over 400 for a combined total of more than 700 . Even with the normal crew size of around 400 , the ship was quite crowded , and with additional soldiers would have been extremely cramped . 
 Little is known of the identities of the men who served on the Mary Rose , even when it comes to the names of the officers , who would have belonged to the gentry . Two admirals and four captains ( including Edward and Thomas Howard , who served both positions ) are known through records , as well as a few ship masters , <unk> , master gunners and other specialists . Forensic science has been used by artists to create reconstructions of faces of eight crew members , and the results were publicized in May 2013 . In addition , researchers have extracted DNA from remains in the hopes of identifying origins of crew , and potentially living descendants . 
 Of the vast majority of the crewmen , soldiers , sailors and gunners alike , nothing has been recorded . The only source of information for these men has been through osteological analysis of the human bones found at the wrecksite . An approximate composition of some of the crew has been conjectured based on contemporary records . The Mary Rose would have carried a captain , a master responsible for navigation , and deck crew . There would also have been a purser responsible for handling payments , a boatswain , the captain 's second in command , at least one carpenter , a pilot in charge of navigation , and a cook , all of whom had one or more assistants ( mates ) . The ship was also staffed by a barber @-@ surgeon who tended to the sick and wounded , along with an apprentice or mate and possibly also a junior surgeon . The only positively identified person who went down with the ship was Vice @-@ Admiral George Carew . McKee , <unk> and several other authors have also named Roger Grenville , father of Richard Grenville of the Elizabethan @-@ era Revenge , captain during the final battle , although the accuracy of the sourcing for this has been disputed by maritime archaeologist Peter Marsden . 
 The bones of a total of 179 people were found during the excavations of the Mary Rose , including 92 " fairly complete skeletons " , more or less complete collections of bones associated with specific individuals . Analysis of these has shown that crew members were all male , most of them young adults . Some were no more than 11 – 13 years old , and the majority ( 81 % ) under 30 . They were mainly of English origin and , according to archaeologist Julie Gardiner , they most likely came from the West Country ; many following their aristocratic masters into maritime service . There were also a few people from continental Europe . An eyewitness testimony right after the sinking refers to a survivor who was a Fleming , and the pilot may very well have been French . Analysis of oxygen isotopes in teeth indicates that some were also of southern European origin . In general they were strong , well @-@ fed men , but many of the bones also reveal tell @-@ tale signs of childhood diseases and a life of grinding toil . The bones also showed traces of numerous healed fractures , probably the result of on @-@ board accidents . 
 There are no extant written records of the make @-@ up of the broader categories of soldiers and sailors , but since the Mary Rose carried some 300 longbows and several thousand arrows there had to be a considerable proportion of longbow archers . Examination of the skeletal remains has found that there was a disproportionate number of men with a condition known as os <unk> , affecting their shoulder blades . This condition is known among modern elite archery athletes and is caused by placing considerable stress on the arm and shoulder muscles , particularly of the left arm that is used to hold the bow to brace against the pull on the bowstring . Among the men who died on the ship it was likely that some had practised using the longbow since childhood , and served on board as specialist archers . 
 A group of six skeletons were found grouped close to one of the 2 @-@ tonne bronze culverins on the main deck near the bow . All but one of these crewmen ( possibly a " powder monkey " not involved in heavy work ) were strong , well @-@ muscled men . They had all engaged in heavy pulling and pushing , indicated by fusing of parts of the spine and ossification , the growth of new bone , on several vertebrae . These have been tentatively classified as members of a complete gun crew , and all died at their battle station . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = First French war = = = 
 The Mary Rose first saw battle in 1512 , in a joint naval operation with the Spanish against the French . The English were to meet the French and Breton fleets in the English Channel while the Spanish attacked them in the Bay of Biscay and then attack Gascony . The 35 @-@ year @-@ old Sir Edward Howard was appointed Lord High Admiral in April and chose the Mary Rose as his flagship . His first mission was to clear the seas of French naval forces between England to the northern coast of Spain to allow for the landing of supporting troops near the French border at Fuenterrabia . The fleet consisted of 18 ships , among them the large ships the Regent and the Peter Pomegranate , carrying over 5 @,@ 000 men . Howard 's expedition led to the capture of twelve Breton ships and a four @-@ day raiding tour of Brittany where English forces successfully fought against local forces and burned numerous settlements . 
 The fleet returned to Southampton in June where it was visited by King Henry . In August the fleet sailed for Brest where it encountered a joint , but ill @-@ coordinated , French @-@ Breton fleet at the battle of St. Mathieu . The English with one of the great ships in the lead ( according to Marsden the Mary Rose ) battered the French ships with heavy gunfire and forced them to retreat . The Breton flagship <unk> put up a fight and was boarded by the 1 @,@ 000 @-@ ton Regent . By accident or through the unwillingness of the Breton crew to surrender , the powder magazine of the <unk> caught fire and blew up in a violent explosion , setting fire to the Regent and eventually sinking her . About 180 English crew members saved themselves by throwing themselves into the sea and only a handful of Bretons survived , only to be captured . The captain of the Regent , 600 soldiers and sailors , the High Admiral of France and the steward of the town of Morlaix were killed in the incident , making it the focal point of several contemporary chronicles and reports . On 11 August , the English burnt 27 French ships , captured another five and landed forces near Brest to raid and take prisoners , but storms forced the fleet back to Dartmouth in Devon and then to Southampton for repairs . 
 In the spring of 1513 , the Mary Rose was once more chosen by Howard as the flagship for an expedition against the French . Before seeing action , she took part in a race against other ships where she was deemed to be one of the most nimble and the fastest of the great ships in the fleet ( see details under " Sails and rigging " ) . On 11 April , Howard 's force arrived off Brest only to see a small enemy force join with the larger force in the safety of Brest harbour and its fortifications . The French had recently been reinforced by a force of galleys from the Mediterranean , which sank one English ship and seriously damaged another . Howard landed forces near Brest , but made no headway against the town and was by now getting low on supplies . Attempting to force a victory , he took a small force of small oared vessels on a daring frontal attack on the French galleys on 25 April . Howard himself managed to reach the ship of French admiral , <unk> de <unk> , and led a small party to board it . The French fought back fiercely and cut the cables that attached the two ships , separating Howard from his men . It left him at the mercy of the soldiers aboard the galley , who instantly killed him . 
 Demoralised by the loss of its admiral and seriously short of food , the fleet returned to Plymouth . Thomas Howard , elder brother of Edward , was assigned the new Lord Admiral , and was set to the task of arranging another attack on Brittany . The fleet was not able to mount the planned attack because of adverse winds and great difficulties in supplying the ships adequately and the Mary Rose took up winter quarters in Southampton . In August the Scots joined France in war against England , but were dealt a crushing defeat at the Battle of Flodden on 9 September 1513 . A follow @-@ up attack in early 1514 was supported by a naval force that included the Mary Rose , but without any known engagements . The French and English mounted raids on each other throughout that summer , but achieved little , and both sides were by then exhausted . By autumn the war was over and a peace treaty was sealed by the marriage of Henry 's sister , Mary , to French king Louis XII . 
 After the peace Mary Rose was placed in the reserves , " in ordinary " . She was laid up for maintenance along with her sister ship the Peter Pomegranate in July 1514 . In 1518 she received a routine repair and caulking , waterproofing with tar and oakum ( old rope fibres ) and was then assigned a small skeleton crew who lived on board the ship until 1522 . She served briefly on a mission with other warships to " scour the seas " in preparation for Henry VIII 's journey across the Channel to the summit with the French king Francis I at the Field of the Cloth of Gold in June 1520 . 
 = = = Second French war = = = 
 In 1522 , England was once again at war with France because of a treaty with the Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. The plan was for an attack on two fronts with an English thrust in northern France . The Mary Rose participated in the escort transport of troops in June 1522 , and by 1 July the Breton port of Morlaix was captured . The fleet sailed home and the Mary Rose berthed for the winter in Dartmouth . The war raged on until 1525 and saw the Scots join the French side . Though Charles Brandon came close to capturing Paris in 1523 , there was little gained either against France or Scotland throughout the war . With the defeat of the French army and capture of Francis I by Charles V 's forces at the Battle of Pavia on 24 February 1525 , the war was effectively over without any major gains or major victories for the English side . 
 = = = Maintenance and " in ordinary " = = = 
 The Mary Rose was kept in reserve from 1522 to 1545 . She was once more caulked and repaired in 1527 in a newly dug dock at Portsmouth and her longboat was repaired and trimmed . Little documentation about the Mary Rose between 1528 and 1539 exists . A document written by Thomas Cromwell in 1536 specifies that the Mary Rose and six other ships were " made new " during his service under the king , though it is unclear which years he was referring to and what " made new " actually meant . A later document from January 1536 by an anonymous author states that the Mary Rose and other ships were " new made " , and dating of timbers from the ship confirms some type of repair being done in 1535 or 1536 . This would have coincided with the controversial dissolution of the monasteries that resulted in a major influx of funds into the royal treasury . The nature and extent of this repair is unknown . Many experts , including Margaret Rule , the project leader for the raising of the Mary Rose , have assumed that it meant a complete rebuilding from clinker planking to carvel planking , and that it was only after 1536 that the ship took on the form that it had when it sank and that was eventually recovered in the 20th century . Marsden has speculated that it could even mean that the Mary Rose was originally built in a style that was closer to 15th @-@ century ships , with a rounded , rather than square , stern and without the main deck gunports . 
 = = = Third French war = = = 
 Henry 's complicated marital situation and his high @-@ handed dissolution of the monasteries angered the Pope and Catholic rulers throughout Europe , which increased England 's diplomatic isolation . In 1544 Henry had agreed to attack France together with Emperor Charles V , and English forces captured Boulogne at great cost in September , but soon England was left in the lurch after Charles had achieved his objectives and brokered a separate peace . 
 In May 1545 , the French had assembled a large fleet in the estuary of the Seine with the intent to land troops on English soil . The estimates of the size of the fleet varied considerably ; between 123 and 300 vessels according to French sources ; and up to 226 sailing ships and galleys according to the chronicler Edward Hall . In addition to the massive fleet , 50 @,@ 000 troops were assembled at Havre de Grâce ( modern @-@ day Le Havre ) . An English force of 160 ships and 12 @,@ 000 troops under Viscount Lisle was ready at Portsmouth by early June , before the French were ready to set sail , and an ineffective pre @-@ emptive strike was made in the middle of the month . In early July the huge French force under the command of Admiral Claude d 'Annebault set sail for England and entered the Solent unopposed with 128 ships on 16 July . The English had around 80 ships with which to oppose the French , including the flagship Mary Rose . But since they had virtually no heavy galleys , the vessels that were at their best in sheltered waters like the Solent , the English fleet promptly retreated into Portsmouth harbour . 
 = = = Battle of the Solent = = = 
 The English were becalmed in port and unable to manoeuvre . On 19 July 1545 , the French galleys advanced on the immobilised English fleet , and initially threatened to destroy a force of 13 small galleys , or " rowbarges " , the only ships that were able to move against them without a wind . The wind picked up and the sailing ships were able to go on the offensive before the oared vessels were overwhelmed . Two of the largest ships , the Henry Grace à Dieu and the Mary Rose , led the attack on the French galleys in the Solent . 
 Early in the battle something went wrong . While engaging the French galleys the Mary Rose suddenly heeled ( leaned ) heavily over to her starboard ( right ) side and water rushed in through the open gunports . The crew was powerless to correct the sudden imbalance , and could only scramble for the safety of the upper deck as the ship began to sink rapidly . As she leaned over , equipment , ammunition , supplies and storage containers shifted and came loose , adding to the general chaos . The massive port side brick oven in the galley collapsed completely and the huge 360 @-@ litre ( 90 gallon ) copper cauldron was thrown onto the orlop deck above . Heavy guns came free and slammed into the opposite side , impeding escape or crushing men beneath them . 
 For those who were not injured or killed outright by moving objects , there was little time to reach safety , especially for the men who were manning the guns on the main deck or fetching ammunition and supplies in the hold . The <unk> that connected the decks with one another would have become bottlenecks for fleeing men , something indicated by the positioning of many of the skeletons recovered from the wreck . What turned the sinking into a major tragedy in terms of lives lost was the anti @-@ boarding netting that covered the upper decks in the waist ( the midsection of the ship ) and the sterncastle . With the exception of the men who were stationed in the tops in the masts , most of those who managed to get up from below deck were trapped under the netting ; they would have been in view of the surface , and their colleagues above , but with little or no chance to break through , and were dragged down with the ship . Out of a crew of at least 400 , fewer than 35 escaped , a catastrophic casualty rate of over 90 % . 
 = = Causes of sinking = = 
 = = = Contemporary accounts = = = 
 Several accounts of the sinking have been preserved that describe the incident , but the only confirmed eyewitness account is the testimony of a surviving Flemish crewman written down by the Holy Roman Emperor 's ambassador François van der Delft in a letter dated 24 July . According to the unnamed Fleming , the ship had fired all of its guns of one side and was turning to present the guns on the other side to the enemy ship , when she was caught in a strong gust of wind , heeled and took in water through the open gunports . In a letter to William Paget dated 23 July , former Lord High Admiral John Russel claimed that the ship had been lost because of " <unk> and great negligence " . Three years after the sinking , the Hall 's Chronicle gave the reason for the sinking as being caused by " to [ o ] much <unk> ... for she was laden with much <unk> , and the portes left open , which were low , & the great <unk> <unk> , so that when the ship should <unk> , the water entered , and <unk> she <unk> . " 
 Later accounts repeat the explanation that the ship heeled over while going about and that the ship was brought down because of the open gunports . A biography of Peter Carew , brother of George Carew , written by John Hooker sometime after 1575 , gives the same reason for the sinking , but adds that insubordination among the crew was to blame . The biography claims that George Carew noted that the Mary Rose showed signs of instability as soon as her sails were raised . George 's uncle <unk> Carew had passed by with his own ship the Matthew Gonson during the battle to inquire about the situation of his nephew 's ship . In reply he was told " that he had a sorte of knaves whom he could not rule " . Contrary to all other accounts , Martin du Bellay , a French cavalry officer who was present at the battle , stated that the Mary Rose had been sunk by French guns . 
 = = = Modern theories = = = 
 The most common explanation for the sinking among modern historians is that the ship was unstable for a number of reasons . When a strong gust of wind hit the sails at a critical moment , the open gunports proved fatal , the ship flooded and quickly foundered . Coates offered a variant of this hypothesis , which explains why a ship which served for several decades without sinking , and which even fought in actions in the rough seas off Brittany , unexpectedly foundered : the ship had accumulated additional weight over the years in service and finally become unseaworthy . That the ship was turning after firing all the cannons on one side has been questioned by Marsden after examination of guns recovered in both the 19th and 20th centuries ; guns from both sides were found still loaded . This has been interpreted to mean that something else could have gone wrong since it is assumed that an experienced crew would not have failed to secure the gunports before making a potentially risky turn . 
 The most recent surveys of the ship indicate that the ship was modified late in her career and have lent support to the idea that the Mary Rose was altered too much to be properly seaworthy . Marsden has suggested that the weight of additional heavy guns would have increased her draught so much that the waterline was less than one metre ( c . 3 feet ) from the gunports on the main deck . 
 Peter Carew 's claim of insubordination has been given support by James Watt , former Medical Director @-@ General of the Royal Navy , based on records of an epidemic of dysentery in Portsmouth which could have rendered the crew incapable of handling the ship properly , while historian Richard Barker has suggested that the crew actually knew that the ship was an accident waiting to happen , at which they balked and refused to follow orders . Marsden has noted that the Carew biography is in some details inconsistent with the sequence of events reported by both French and English eyewitnesses . It also reports that there were 700 men on board , an unusually high number . The distance in time to the event it describes may mean that it was embellished to add a dramatic touch . The report of French galleys sinking the Mary Rose as stated by Martin du Bellay has been described as " the account of a courtesan " by naval historian Maurice de Brossard . Du Bellay and his two brothers were close to king Francis I and du Bellay had much to gain from portraying the sinking as a French victory . English sources , even if biased , would have nothing to gain from portraying the sinking as the result of crew incompetence rather than conceding to a victory to the much @-@ feared gun galleys . 
 Dominic Fontana , a geographer at the University of Portsmouth , has voiced support for du Bellay 's version of the sinking based on the battle as it is depicted in the Cowdray Engraving , and modern GIS analysis of the modern scene of the battle . By plotting the fleets and calculating the conjectured final manoeuvres of the Mary Rose , Fontana reached the conclusion that the ship had been hit low in the hull by the galleys and was destabilised after taking in water . He has interpreted the final heading of the ship straight due north as a failed attempt to reach the shallows at <unk> only a few hundred metres away . This theory has been given partial support by <unk> <unk> , one of the experts who has worked with the Mary Rose , though she has suggested that the close proximity to <unk> could also indicate that the sinking occurred while trying to make a hard turn to avoid running aground . 
 = = = Experiments = = = 
 In 2000 , the Channel 4 television programme What Sank the Mary Rose ? attempted to investigate the causes suggested for her sinking by means of experiments with scale models of the ship and metal weights to simulate the presence of troops on the upper decks . Initial tests showed that the ship was able to make the turn described by eyewitnesses without capsizing . In later tests , a fan was used to create a breeze similar to the one reported to have suddenly sprung up on the day of the sinking as the real Mary Rose went to make the turn . As the model made the turn , the breeze in the upper works forced it to heel more than at calm , forcing the main deck gun ports below the waterline and foundering the model within a few seconds . The sequence of events closely followed what eyewitnesses had reported , particularly the suddenness with which the ship sank . 
 = = History as a shipwreck = = 
 A salvage attempt was ordered by Secretary of State William Paget only days after the sinking , and Charles Brandon , the king 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , took charge of practical details . The operation followed the standard procedure for raising ships in shallow waters : strong cables were attached to the sunken ship and fastened to two empty ships , or hulks . At low tide , the ropes were pulled taut with capstans . When the high tide came in , the hulks rose and with them the wreck . It would then be towed into shallower water and the procedure repeated until the whole ship could be raised completely . 
 A list of necessary equipment was compiled by 1 August and included , among other things , massive cables , capstans , pulleys , and 40 pounds of tallow for lubrication . The proposed salvage team comprised 30 Venetian mariners and a Venetian carpenter with 60 English sailors to serve them . The two ships to be used as hulks were Jesus of Lübeck and Samson , each of 700 tons burthen and similar in size to the Mary Rose . Brandon was so confident of success that he reassured the king that it would only be a matter of days before they could raise the Mary Rose . The optimism proved unfounded . Since the ship had settled at a 60 @-@ degree angle to starboard much of it was stuck deep into the clay of the seabed . This made it virtually impossible to pass cables under the hull and required far more lifting power than if the ship had settled on a hard seabed . An attempt to secure cables to the main mast appears only to have resulted in its being snapped off . 
 The project was only successful in raising rigging , some guns and other items . At least two other salvage teams in 1547 and 1549 received payment for raising more guns from the wreck . Despite the failure of the first salvage operation , there was still lingering belief in the possibility of retrieving the Mary Rose at least until 1546 , when she was presented as part of the illustrated list of English warships called the Anthony Roll . When all hope of raising the complete ship was finally abandoned is not known . It could have been after Henry VIII 's death in January 1547 or even as late as 1549 , when the last guns were brought up . The Mary Rose was remembered well into the reign of Elizabeth I , and according to one of the queen 's admirals , William Monson ( 1569 – 1643 ) , the wreck was visible from the surface at low tide in the late 16th century . 
 = = = Deterioration = = = 
 After the sinking , the partially buried wreck created a barrier at a right angle against the currents of the Solent . Two scour pits , large underwater ditches , formed on either side of the wreck while silt and seaweed was deposited inside the ship . A deep but narrow pit formed on the upward tilting port side , while a shallower , broader pit formed on the starboard side , which had mostly been buried by the force of the impact . The abrasive actions of sand and silt carried by the currents and the activity of fungi , bacteria and wood @-@ boring crustaceans and molluscs , such as the <unk> " shipworm " , began to break down the structure of the ship . Eventually the exposed wooden structure was weakened and gradually collapsed . The timbers and contents of the port side were deposited in the scour pits and the remaining ship structure , or carried off by the currents . Following the collapse of the exposed parts of the ship the site was levelled with the seabed and was gradually covered by layers of sediment , concealing most of the remaining structure . During the 16th century a hard layer of compacted clay and crushed shells formed over the ship , stabilising the site and sealing the Tudor @-@ era deposits . Further layers of soft silt covered the site during the 18th and 19th centuries , but frequent changes in the tidal patterns and currents in the Solent occasionally exposed some of the timbers , leading to its accidental rediscovery in 1836 and aided in locating the wreck in 1971 . After the ship had been salvaged it was determined that about 40 % of the original structure had survived . 
 = = = Rediscovery in 19th century = = = 
 In the summer of 1836 , a group of five fishermen caught their nets on timbers protruding from the bottom of the Solent . They contacted a diver to help them remove the hindrance , and on 10 June , Henry Abbinett became the first person to see the Mary Rose in almost 300 years . Later , two other professional divers , John Deane and William Edwards , were employed . Using a recently invented rubber suit and metal diving helmet , Deane and Edwards began to examine the wreck and salvage items from it . Along with an assortment of timbers and wooden objects , including several longbows , they brought up several bronze and iron guns , which were sold to the Board of Ordnance for over £ 220 . Initially , this caused a dispute between Deane ( who had also brought in his brother Charles into the project ) , Abbinett and the fishermen who had hired them . The matter was eventually settled by allowing the fishermen a share of the proceeds from the sale of the first salvaged guns , while Deane received exclusive salvage rights at the expense of Abbinett . The wreck was soon identified as the Mary Rose from the inscriptions of one of the bronze guns manufactured in 1537 . 
 The identification of the ship led to significant public interest in the salvage operation , and caused a great demand for the objects which were brought up . Though many of the objects could not be properly conserved at the time and subsequently deteriorated , many were documented with pencil sketches and watercolour drawings which survive to this day . John Deane ceased working on the wreck in 1836 , but returned in 1840 with new , more destructive methods . With the help of condemned bomb shells filled with gunpowder acquired from the Ordnance Board he blasted his way into parts of the wreck . Fragments of bombs and traces of blasting craters were found during the modern excavations , but there was no evidence that Deane managed to penetrate the hard layer that had sealed off the Tudor levels . Deane reported retrieving a bilge pump and the lower part of the main mast , both of which would have been located inside the ship . The recovery of small wooden objects like longbows , suggest that Deane did manage to penetrate the Tudor levels at some point , though this has been disputed by the excavation project leader Margaret Rule . Newspaper reports on Deane 's diving operations in October 1840 report that the ship was clinker built , but since the sterncastle is the only part of the ship with this feature , an alternative explanation has been suggested : Deane did not penetrate the hard shelly layer that covered most of the ship , but only managed to get into remains of the sterncastle that today no longer exist . Despite the rough handling by Deane the Mary Rose escaped the wholesale destruction by giant rakes and explosives that was the fate of other wrecks in the Solent . 
 = = = Modern rediscovery = = = 
 The modern search for the Mary Rose was initiated by the Southsea branch of the British Sub @-@ Aqua Club in 1965 as part of a project to locate shipwrecks in the Solent . The project was under the leadership of historian , journalist and amateur diver Alexander McKee . Another group led by Lieutenant @-@ Commander Alan Bax of the Royal Navy , sponsored by the Committee for Nautical Archaeology in London , also formed a search team . Initially the two teams had differing views on where to find the wreck , but eventually joined forces . In February 1966 a chart from 1841 was found that marked the positions of the Mary Rose and several other wrecks . The charted position coincided with a trench ( one of the scour pits ) that had already been located by McKee 's team , and a definite location was finally established at a position 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) south of the entrance to Portsmouth Harbour ( 50 ° 46 ′ N 1 ° 06 ′ W ) in water with a depth of 11 m ( 36 feet ) at low tide . Diving on the site began in 1966 and a sonar scan by Harold Edgerton in 1967 – 68 revealed some type of buried feature . In 1970 a loose timber was located and on 5 May 1971 , the first structural details of the buried hull were identified after they were partially uncovered by winter storms . 
 A major problem for the team from the start was that <unk> in the UK lacked any legal protection from plunderers and treasure hunters . Sunken ships , once being moving objects , were legally treated as chattel and were awarded to those who could first raise them . The Merchant Shipping Act of 1894 also stipulated that any objects raised from a wreck should be auctioned off to finance the salvage operations , and there was nothing preventing anyone from " stealing " the wreck and making a profit . The problem was handled by forming an organisation , the Mary Rose Committee , aiming " to find , excavate , raise and preserve for all time such remains of the ship Mary Rose as may be of historical or archaeological interest " . 
 To keep intruders at bay , the Committee arranged a lease of the seabed where the wreck lay from the Portsmouth authorities , thereby discouraging anyone from trespassing on the underwater property . In hindsight this was only a legalistic charade which had little chance of holding up in a court of law . In combination with secrecy as to the exact location of the wreck , it saved the project from interference . It was not until the passing of the Protection of Wrecks Act on 5 February 1973 that the Mary Rose was declared to be of national historic interest that enjoyed full legal protection from any disturbance by commercial salvage teams . Despite this , years after the passing of the 1973 act and the excavation of the ship , lingering conflicts with salvage legislation remained a threat to the Mary Rose project as " personal " finds such as chests , clothing and cooking utensils risked being confiscated and auctioned off . 
 = = = = Survey and excavation = = = = 
 Following the discovery of the wreck in 1971 , the project became known to the general public and received increasing media attention . This helped bring in more donations and equipment , primarily from private sources . By 1974 the Committee had representatives from the National Maritime Museum , the Royal Navy , the BBC and local organisations . In 1974 the project received royal patronage from Prince Charles , who participated in dives on the site . This attracted yet more publicity , and also more funding and assistance . The initial aims of the Mary Rose Committee were now more officially and definitely confirmed . The Committee had become a registered charity in 1974 , which made it easier to raise funds , and the application for excavation and salvage had been officially approved by the UK government . 
 By 1978 the initial excavation work had uncovered a complete and coherent site with an intact ship structure and the orientation of the hull had been positively identified as being on an almost straight northerly heading with a 60 @-@ degree heel to starboard and a slight downward tilt towards the bow . As no records of English shipbuilding techniques used in vessels like the Mary Rose survive , excavation of the ship would allow for a detailed survey of her design and shed new light on the construction of ships of the era . A full excavation also meant removing the protective layers of silt that prevented the remaining ship structure from being destroyed through biological decay and the scouring of the currents ; the operation had to be completed within a predetermined timespan of a few years or it risked irreversible damage . It was also considered desirable to recover and preserve the remains of the hull if possible . For the first time , the project was faced with the practical difficulties of actually raising , conserving and preparing the hull for public display . 
 To handle this new , considerably more complex and expensive task , it was decided that a new organisation was needed . The Mary Rose Trust , a limited charitable trust , with representatives from many organisations would handle the need for a larger operation and a large infusion of funds . In 1979 a new diving vessel was purchased to replace the previous 12 m ( 40 ft ) catamaran Roger Greenville which had been used from 1971 . The choice fell on the salvage vessel Sleipner , the same craft that had been used as a platform for diving operations on the Vasa . The project went from a team of only twelve volunteers working four months a year to over 50 individuals working almost around the clock nine months a year . In addition there were over 500 volunteer divers and a laboratory staff of about 70 that ran the shore base and conservation facilities . During the four diving seasons from 1979 to 1982 over 22 @,@ 000 diving hours was spent on the site , an effort that amounted to 11 @.@ 8 man @-@ years . 
 = = = = Salvage = = = = 
 Raising the Mary Rose meant overcoming a number of delicate problems that had never been encountered before . The salvage of the Swedish warship Vasa 1959 – 61 was the only comparable precedent , but it had been a relatively straightforward operation since the hull was completely intact and rested upright on the seabed . It had been raised with basically the same methods as were in use in Tudor England : cables were slung under the hull and attached to two pontoons on either side of the ship which was then gradually raised and towed into shallower waters . Only one third of the Mary Rose was intact and she lay deeply embedded in mud . If the hull were raised in the traditional way , there was no guarantee that it would have enough structural strength to hold together out of water . Many suggestions for salvage were discarded , including the construction of a cofferdam around the wreck site , filling the ship with small buoyant objects ( such as ping pong balls ) or even pumping brine into the seabed and freezing it so that it would float and take the hull with it . After lengthy discussions it was decided in February 1980 that the hull would first be emptied of all its contents and strengthened with steel braces and frames . It would then be lifted to the surface with floating <unk> attached to nylon strops passing under the hull and transferred to a cradle . It was also decided that the ship would be recovered before the end of the diving season in 1982 . If the wreck stayed uncovered any longer it risked irreversible damage from biological decay and tidal scouring . 
 During the last year of the operation , the massive scope of full excavation and salvage was beginning to take its toll on those closely involved in the project . In May 1981 , Alexander McKee voiced concerns about the method chosen for the salvage and openly questioned Margaret Rule 's position as excavation leader . McKee felt ignored in what he viewed as a project where he had always played a central role , both as the initiator of the search for the Mary Rose and other ships in the Solent , and as an active member throughout the diving operations . He had several supporters who all pointed to the risk of the project 's turning into an embarrassing failure if the ship were damaged during salvage . To address these concerns it was suggested that the hull should be placed on top of a supporting steel cradle underwater . This would avoid the inherent risks of damaging the wooden structure if it were lifted out of the water without appropriate support . The idea of using nylon strops was also discarded in favour of drilling holes through the hull at 170 points and passing iron bolts through them to allow the attachment of wires connected to a lifting frame . 
 In the spring of 1982 , after three intense seasons of archaeological underwater work , preparations began for the salvage . The operation soon ran into problems : early on there were difficulties with the custom @-@ made lifting equipment ; divers on the project belonging to the Royal Engineers had to be pulled because of the outbreak of the Falklands War ; and the method of lifting the hull had to be considerably altered as late as June . After the frame was properly attached to the hull it was slowly jacked up on four legs straddling the wreck site to pull the ship off the seabed . The massive crane of the barge <unk> Mor was then used to lift the frame and hull on to the specially designed cradle which was padded with water @-@ filled bags . On the morning of 11 October 1982 , the final lift of the entire package of cradle , hull and lifting frame began . At 9 : 03 the first timbers of the Mary Rose broke the surface in the presence of the salvaging team , Prince Charles and curious spectators on boats circling the site . A second set of bags under the hull was inflated with air to cushion the waterlogged wood and finally the whole package was transferred to the barge that would take the hull ashore . Though eventually successful , the salvage operation was close to floundering on two occasions ; first when one of the supporting legs of the lifting frame was bent and had to be removed and later when a corner of the frame , with " an unforgettable crunch " , slipped more than a metre ( 3 feet ) and came close to crushing part of the hull . 
 = = Archaeology = = 
 As one of the most ambitious and expensive projects in the history of maritime archaeology , the Mary Rose project broke new ground within this field in the UK . Besides becoming one of the first wrecks to be protected under the new Protection of Wrecks Act in 1973 it also created several new precedents . It was the first time that a British privately funded project was able to apply modern scientific standards fully and without having to auction off part of the findings to finance its activities ; where previous projects often had to settle for just a partial recovery of finds , everything found in connection with the Mary Rose was recovered and recorded . The salvage made it possible to establish the first historic shipwreck museum in the UK to receive government accreditation and funding . The excavation of the Mary Rose wrecksite proved that it was possible to achieve a level of exactness in underwater excavations comparable to those on dry land . 
 Throughout the 1970s , the Mary Rose was meticulously surveyed , excavated and recorded with the latest methods within the field of maritime archaeology . Working in an underwater environment meant that principles of land @-@ based archaeology did not always apply . Mechanical excavators , airlifts and suction dredges were used in the process of locating the wreck , but as soon as it began to be uncovered in earnest , more delicate techniques were employed . Many objects from the Mary Rose had been well preserved in form and shape , but many were quite delicate , requiring careful handling . Artefacts of all sizes were supported with soft packing material , such as old plastic ice cream containers , and some of the arrows that were " soft like cream cheese " had to be brought up in special styrofoam containers . The airlifts that sucked up clay , sand and dirt off @-@ site or to the surface were still used , but with much greater precision since they could potentially disrupt the site . The many layers of sediment that had accumulated on the site could be used to date artefacts in which they were found , and had to be recorded properly . The various types of accretions and remnants of chemicals with artefacts were essential clues to objects that had long since broken down and disappeared , and needed to be treated with considerable care . 
 The excavation and salvage in the 1970s and early ' 80s meant that diving operations ceased , even though modern scaffolding and part of the bow were left on the seabed . The pressure on conservators to treat tens of thousands of artefacts and the high costs of conserving , storing and displaying the finds and the ship meant that there were no funds available for diving . In 2002 , the UK Ministry of Defence announced plans to build two new aircraft carriers . Because of the massive size of the new vessels , the outlet from Portsmouth needed to be surveyed to make sure that they could sail no matter the tide . The planned route for the underwater channel ran close to the Mary Rose wrecksite , which meant that funding was supplied to survey and excavate the site once more . Even though the planned carriers were down @-@ sized enough to not require alteration of Portsmouth outlet , the excavations had already exposed timbers and were completed in 2005 . Among the most important finds was the ten @-@ metre ( 32 feet ) stem , the forward continuation of the keel , which provided more exact details about the original profile of the ship . 
 = = = Finds = = = 
 Over 26 @,@ 000 artefacts and pieces of timber were salvaged along with remains of about half the crew members , The faces of some crew members have been reconstructed . Analysis of the crew skeletons shows many had suffered malnutrition , and had evidence of rickets , scurvy , and other deficiency diseases was found . Crew members also developed arthritis through the stresses on their joints from heavy lifting and maritime life generally , and suffered bone fractures . As the ship was intended to function as a floating , self @-@ contained community , it was stocked with victuals ( food and drink ) that could sustain its inhabitants for extended periods of time . The casks used for storage on the Mary Rose have been compared with those from a wreck of a trade vessel from the 1560s and have revealed that they were of better quality , more robust and reliable , an indication that supplies for the Tudor navy were given high priority , and their requirements set a high standard for cask manufacturing at the time . As a miniature society at sea , the wreck of the Mary Rose held personal objects belonging to individual crew members . This included clothing , games , various items for spiritual or recreation use , or objects related to mundane everyday tasks such as personal hygiene , fishing and sewing . The master carpenter 's chest , for example , contained a backgammon set , a book , three plates , a sundial , and a tankard , goods suggesting he was relatively wealthy . 
 The ship carried several skilled craftsmen and was equipped for handling both routine maintenance and repairing extensive battle damage . In and around one of the cabins on the main deck under the sterncastle , archaeologists found a " collection of woodworking tools ... unprecedented in its range and size " , consisting of eight chests of carpentry tools . Along with loose mallets and tar pots used for caulking , this variety of tools belonged to one or several of the carpenters employed on the Mary Rose . 
 Many of the cannons and other weapons from the Mary Rose have provided invaluable physical evidence about 16th @-@ century weapon technology . The surviving <unk> are almost all from the Mary Rose , and the four small cast iron <unk> pieces are the only known examples of this type of weapon . 
 Animal remains have been found in the wreck of the Mary Rose . These include the skeletons of a rat , a frog and a dog . The dog , a mongrel between eighteen months and two years in age , was found near the hatch to the ship 's carpenter 's cabin and is thought to have been brought aboard as a <unk> . Nine barrels have been found to contain bones of cattle , indicating that they contained pieces of beef butchered and stored as ship 's rations . In addition , the bones of pigs and fish , stored in baskets , have also been found . 
 = = = = Musical instruments = = = = 
 Two fiddles , a bow , a still shawm or <unk> , three three @-@ hole pipes , and a tabor drum with a drumstick were found throughout the wreck . These would have been used for the personal enjoyment of the crew and to provide a rhythm to work on the rigging and turning the capstans on the upper decks . The tabor drum is the earliest known example of its kind and the drumstick of a previously unknown design . The tabor pipes are considerably longer than any known examples from the period . Their discovery proved that contemporary illustrations , previously viewed with some suspicion , were in fact accurate depictions of the instruments . Before the discovery of the Mary Rose shawm , an early predecessor to the oboe , instrument historians had been puzzled by reference to " still shawms " , or " soft " shawms , that were said to have a sound that was less shrill than earlier shawms . The still shawm disappeared from the musical scene some time in the 16th century , and the instrument found on the Mary Rose is the only surviving example . A reproduction has been made and played . Combined with a pipe and tabor , it provides a " very effective bass part " that would have produced " rich and full sound , which would have provided excellent music for dancing on board ship " . Only a few other fiddle @-@ type instruments from the 16th century exist , but none of them of the type found on the Mary Rose . Reproductions of both fiddles have been made , though less is known of their design than the shawm since the neck and strings were missing . 
 = = = = Navigation tools = = = = 
 In the remains of a small cabin in the bow of the ship and in a few other locations around the wreck was found the earliest dated set of navigation instruments in Europe found so far : compasses , divider calipers , a stick used for charting , <unk> , sounding leads , tide calculators and a <unk> , an instrument for calculating speed . Several of these objects are not only unique in having such an early , definite dating , but also because they pre @-@ date written records of their use ; <unk> would have reasonably been used to measure distance on maps , but sea charts are not known to have been used by English navigators during the first half of the 16th century , compasses were not depicted on English ships until the 1560s , and the first mention of a <unk> is from 1574 . 
 = = = = Barber @-@ surgeon 's cabin = = = = 
 The cabin located on the main deck underneath the sterncastle is thought to have belonged to the barber @-@ surgeon . He was a trained professional who saw to the health and welfare of the crew and acted as the medical expert on board . The most important of these finds were found in an intact wooden chest which contained over 60 objects relating to the barber @-@ surgeon 's medical practice : the wooden handles of a complete set of surgical tools and several shaving razors ( although none of the steel blades had survived ) , a copper syringe for wound irrigation and treatment of gonorrhoea , and even a skilfully crafted feeding bottle for feeding incapacitated patients . More objects were found around the cabin , such as <unk> , shaving bowls and combs . With this wide selection of tools and medicaments the barber @-@ surgeon , along with one or more assistants , could set bone fractures , perform amputations and deal with other acute injuries , treat a number of diseases and provide crew members with a minimal standard of personal hygiene . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Preservation of the Mary Rose and her contents was an essential part of the project from the start . Though many artefacts , especially those that were buried in silt , had been preserved , the long exposure to an underwater environment had rendered most of them sensitive to exposure to air after recovery . Archaeologists and conservators had to work in tandem from the start to prevent deterioration of the artefacts . After recovery , finds were placed in so @-@ called passive storage , which would prevent any immediate deterioration before the active conservation which would allow them to be stored in an open @-@ air environment . Passive storage depended on the type of material that the object was made of , and could vary considerably . Smaller objects from the most common material , wood , were sealed in polyethylene bags to preserve moisture . Timbers and other objects that were too large to be wrapped were stored in unsealed water tanks . Growth of fungi and microbes that could degrade wood were controlled by various techniques , including low @-@ temperature storage , chemicals , and in the case of large objects , common pond snails that consumed wood @-@ degrading organisms but not the wood itself . 
 Other organic materials such as leather , skin and textiles were treated similarly , by keeping them moist in tanks or sealed plastic containers . Bone and ivory was desalinated to prevent damage from salt crystallisation , as was glass , ceramic and stone . Iron , copper and copper alloy objects were kept moist in a sodium <unk> solution to prevent <unk> and reaction with the chlorides that had penetrated the surface . Alloys of lead and pewter are inherently stable in the atmosphere and generally require no special treatment . Silver and gold were the only materials that required no special passive storage . 
 Conserving the hull of the Mary Rose was the most complicated and expensive task for the project . In 2002 a donation of £ 4 @.@ 8 million from the Heritage Lottery Fund and equivalent monetary support from the Portsmouth City and Hampshire County Councils was needed to keep the work with conservation on schedule . During passive conservation , the ship structure could for practical reasons not be completely sealed , so instead it was regularly sprayed with filtered , recycled water that was kept at a temperature of 2 to 5 ° C ( 35 to 41 ° F ) to keep it from drying out . Drying waterlogged wood that has been submerged for several centuries without appropriate conservation causes considerable shrinkage ( 20 – 50 % ) and leads to severe warping and cracking as water evaporates from the cellular structure of the wood . The substance polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) had been used before on archaeological wood , and was during the 1980s being used to conserve the Vasa . After almost ten years of small @-@ scale trials on timbers , an active three @-@ phase conservation programme of the hull of the Mary Rose began in 1994 . During the first phase , which lasted from 1994 to 2003 , the wood was sprayed with low @-@ molecular @-@ weight PEG to replace the water in the cellular structure of the wood . From 2003 to 2010 , a higher @-@ molecular @-@ weight PEG was used to strengthen the mechanical properties of the outer surface layers . The third phase consisted of a controlled air drying ending in 2016 . 
 = = Display = = 
 After the decision to salvage the Mary Rose , discussions ensued as to where she would eventually go on permanent display . The east end of Portsea Island at <unk> emerged as an early alternative , but was rejected because of parking problems and the distance from the dockyard where she was originally built . Placing the ship next to the famous flagship of Horatio Nelson , HMS Victory , at Portsmouth Historic Dockyard was proposed in July 1981 . A group called the Maritime Preservation Society even suggested Southsea Castle , where Henry VIII had witnessed the sinking , as a final resting place and there was widespread scepticism to the dockyard location . At one point a county councillor even threatened to withdraw promised funds if the dockyard site became more than an interim solution . As costs for the salvage project mounted , there was a debate in the Council chamber and in the local paper The News as to whether the money could be spent more appropriately . Although author David Childs writes that in the early 1980s " the debate was as a fiery one " , the project was never seriously threatened because of the great symbolic importance of the Mary Rose to the naval history of both Portsmouth and England . 
 Since the mid @-@ 1980s , the hull of the Mary Rose has been kept in a covered dry dock while undergoing conservation . Although the hull has been open to the public for viewing , the need for keeping the ship saturated first with water and later a polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) solution has meant that visitors have been separated from the hull by a glass barrier . The specially built ship hall had been visited by over seven million visitors as of 2007 , since it first opened on 4 October 1983 , just under a year after it was successfully salvaged . 
 A separate Mary Rose Museum was housed in a structure called No. 5 Boathouse near the ship hall and was opened to the public on 9 July 1984 @.@ containing displays explaining the history of the ship and a small number of conserved artefacts , from entire bronze cannons to household items . In September 2009 the temporary Mary Rose display hall was closed to visitors to facilitate construction of the new £ 35 million museum building , which opened to the public on 31 May 2013 . 
 The new Mary Rose Museum was designed by architects Wilkinson Eyre , Perkins + Will and built by construction firm <unk> . The construction has been challenging because the museum has been built over the ship in the dry dock which is a listed monument . During construction of the museum , conservation of the hull continued inside a sealed " <unk> " . In April 2013 the polyethylene glycol sprays were turned off and the process of controlled <unk> began . By 2016 the " <unk> " will be removed and for the first time since 1545 , the ship will be revealed dry . This new museum displays most of the artefacts recovered from within the ship in context with the conserved hull . Since opening it has been visited by over 500 @,@ 000 people . 
 = Battle of Bicocca = 
 The Battle of Bicocca or La Bicocca ( Italian : Battaglia della Bicocca ) was fought on 27 April 1522 , during the Italian War of 1521 – 26 . A combined French and Venetian force under Odet de Foix , Vicomte de Lautrec , was decisively defeated by a Imperial – Spanish and Papal army under the overall command of Prospero Colonna . Lautrec then withdrew from Lombardy , leaving the Duchy of Milan in Imperial hands . 
 Having been driven from Milan by an Imperial advance in late 1521 , Lautrec had regrouped , attempting to strike at Colonna 's lines of communication . When the Swiss mercenaries in French service did not receive their pay , however , they demanded an immediate battle , and Lautrec was forced to attack Colonna 's fortified position in the park of the <unk> Villa Bicocca , north of Milan . The Swiss pikemen advanced over open fields under heavy artillery fire to assault the Imperial positions , but were halted at a sunken road backed by earthworks . Having suffered massive casualties from the fire of Spanish arquebusiers , the Swiss retreated . Meanwhile , an attempt by French cavalry to flank Colonna 's position proved equally ineffective . The Swiss , unwilling to fight further , marched off to their cantons a few days later , and Lautrec retreated into Venetian territory with the remnants of his army . 
 The battle is noted chiefly for marking the end of the Swiss dominance among the infantry of the Italian Wars , and of the Swiss method of assaults by massed columns of pikemen without support from other troops . It was also one of the first engagements in which firearms played a decisive role on the battlefield . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 At the start of the war in 1521 , Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and Pope Leo X moved jointly against the Duchy of Milan , the principal French possession in Lombardy . A large Papal force under Federico II Gonzaga , Duke of Mantua , together with Spanish troops from Naples and some smaller Italian contingents , concentrated near Mantua . The German forces which Charles sent south to aid this venture passed through Venetian territory near <unk> unmolested ; the combined Papal , Spanish , and Imperial army then proceeded into French territory under the command of Prospero Colonna . For the next several months , Colonna fought an evasive war of maneuver against Odet de Foix , Vicomte de Lautrec , the French commander , besieging cities but refusing to give battle . 
 By the autumn of 1521 , Lautrec , who was holding a line along the Adda river to Cremona , began to suffer massive losses from desertion , particularly among his Swiss mercenaries . Colonna took the opportunity this offered and , advancing close to the Alps , crossed the Adda at <unk> ; Lautrec , lacking infantry and assuming the year 's campaign to be over , withdrew to Milan . Colonna had no intention of stopping his advance , however . On the night of November 23 , he launched a surprise attack on the city , overwhelming the Venetian troops defending one of the walls . Following some abortive street @-@ fighting , Lautrec withdrew to Cremona with about 12 @,@ 000 men . 
 By January 1522 , the French had lost Alessandria , Pavia , and Como ; and Francesco II Sforza , bringing further German reinforcements , had slipped past a Venetian force at Bergamo to join Colonna in Milan . Lautrec had meanwhile been reinforced by the arrival of 16 @,@ 000 fresh Swiss pikemen and some further Venetian forces , as well as additional companies of French troops under the command of Thomas de Foix @-@ Lescun and Pedro Navarro ; he had also secured the services of the condottiere Giovanni de ' Medici , who brought his Black Bands into the French service . The French proceeded to attack Novara and Pavia , hoping to draw Colonna into a decisive battle . Colonna , leaving Milan , fortified himself in the monastery of Certosa south of the city . Considering this position to be too strong to be easily assaulted , Lautrec attempted instead to threaten Colonna 's lines of communication by sweeping around Milan to Monza , cutting the roads from the city into the Alps . 
 Lautrec was suddenly confronted , however , with the intransigence of the Swiss , who formed the largest contingent of the French army . They complained that they had not received any of the pay promised them since their arrival in Lombardy . The Swiss captains , led by Albert von Stein , demanded that Lautrec attack the Imperial army immediately — else the mercenaries would abandon the French and return to their cantons . Lautrec reluctantly acquiesced and marched south towards Milan . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Dispositions = = = 
 Colonna had meanwhile relocated to a formidable new position : the manor park of Bicocca , about four miles ( 6 km ) north of Milan . The park was situated between a large expanse of marshy ground to the west and the main road into Milan to the east ; along this road ran a deep wet ditch , which was crossed by a narrow stone bridge some distance south of the park . The north side of the park was bordered by a sunken road ; Colonna deepened this and constructed an earthen rampart on the southern bank . The Imperial artillery , placed on several platforms jutting forward from the earthworks , was able to sweep the fields north of the park as well as parts of the sunken road itself . The entire length of the north side of the park was less than 600 yards ( 550 m ) , which permitted Colonna to place his troops quite densely . Immediately behind the rampart were four ranks of Spanish arquebusiers , commanded by Fernando d 'Avalos , Marquess of Pescara ; they were backed by Spanish pikemen and German landsknechts under Georg Frundsberg . Most of the Imperial cavalry was placed at the south end of the park , far behind the infantry ; a separate force of cavalry was positioned to the south , guarding the bridge . 
 On the evening of 26 April , Lautrec sent a force of about 400 cavalry under the Sieur de <unk> to reconnoiter the Imperial positions . The patrol reported that the ground was cut by irrigation ditches and ill @-@ suited for maneuvering , but this failed to dissuade the Swiss . Colonna , having observed the French presence , sent messengers to Milan to request reinforcements ; Francesco Sforza arrived the next morning with 6 @,@ 400 additional troops , joining the cavalry near the bridge to the south of Colonna 's camp . 
 At dawn on 27 April , Lautrec began his attack . The Black Bands brushed aside the Spanish pickets , clearing the ground before the Imperial positions . The French advance was headed by two columns of Swiss , each comprising about 4 @,@ 000 to 7 @,@ 000 men , accompanied by some artillery ; this party was to assault the entrenched front of the Imperial camp directly . Lescun , meanwhile , led a body of cavalry south along the Milan road , intending to flank the camp and strike at the bridge to the rear . The remainder of the French army , including the French infantry , the bulk of the heavy cavalry , and the remnants of the Swiss , formed up in a broad line some distance behind the two Swiss columns ; behind this was a third line , composed of the Venetian forces under Francesco Maria della Rovere , the Duke of Urbino . 
 = = = The Swiss attack = = = 
 The overall command of the Swiss assault was given to Anne de Montmorency . As the Swiss columns advanced towards the park , he ordered them to pause and wait for the French artillery to bombard the Imperial defences , but the Swiss refused to obey . Perhaps the Swiss captains doubted that the artillery would have any effect on the earthworks ; historian Charles Oman suggests that it is more likely they were " inspired by blind pugnacity and self @-@ confidence " . In any case , the Swiss moved rapidly towards Colonna 's position , leaving the artillery behind . There was apparently some rivalry between the two columns , as one , commanded by Arnold <unk> of Unterwalden , was composed of men from the rural cantons , while the other , under Albert von Stein , consisted of the contingents from Bern and the urban cantons . The advancing Swiss quickly came into range of the Imperial artillery . Unable to take cover on the level fields , they began to take substantial casualties ; as many as a thousand Swiss may have been killed by the time the columns reached the Imperial lines . 
 The Swiss came to a sudden halt as the columns reached the sunken road in front of the park ; the depth of the road and the height of the rampart behind it — together higher than the length of the Swiss pikes — effectively blocked their advance . Moving down into the road , the Swiss suffered massive casualties from the fire of d 'Avalos 's arquebusiers . Nevertheless , the Swiss made a series of desperate attempts to breach the Imperial line . Some parties managed to reach the top of the rampart , only to be met by the landsknechts , who had come up from behind the arquebusiers . One of the Swiss captains was apparently killed by Frundsberg in single combat ; and the Swiss , unable to form up atop the earthworks , were pushed back down into the sunken road . After attempting to move forward for about half an hour , the remnants of the Swiss columns retreated back towards the main French line . In the fields which they had crossed and before the rampart , they left more than 3 @,@ 000 dead ; among these were twenty @-@ two captains , including both <unk> and Albert von Stein . Of the French nobles who had accompanied the Swiss assault , only Montmorency survived . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Lescun , with about 400 heavy cavalry under his command , had meanwhile reached the bridge south of the park and fought his way across it and into the Imperial camp beyond . Colonna responded by detaching some cavalry under Antonio de Leyva to halt the French advance , while Francesco Sforza came up the road towards the bridge , aiming to surround Lescun . <unk> held off the Milanese , allowing Lescun to extricate himself from the camp ; the French cavalry then retraced its path and rejoined the main body of the army . 
 Despite the urging of d 'Avalos and several other Imperial commanders , Colonna refused to order a general attack on the French , pointing out that much of Lautrec 's army — including the bulk of his cavalry — was still intact . Colonna suggested that the French were already beaten , and would soon withdraw ; this assessment was shared by Frundsberg . Nevertheless , some small groups of Spanish arquebusiers and light cavalry attempted to pursue the withdrawing Swiss , only to be beaten back by the Black Bands , which were covering the removal of the French artillery from the field . 
 Colonna 's judgement proved to be accurate . The Swiss were unwilling to make another assault , and marched for home on 30 April . Lautrec , believing that his resulting weakness in infantry made a further campaign impossible , retreated to the east , crossing the Adda into Venetian territory at Trezzo . Having reached Cremona , Lautrec left Lescun in command of the remnants of the French army and rode unescorted to Lyon , to make his report to Francis I. 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Lautrec 's departure heralded a complete collapse of the French position in northern Italy . No longer menaced by the French army , Colonna and d 'Avalos marched on Genoa , capturing it after a brief siege . Lescun , learning of the loss of Genoa , arranged an agreement with Francesco Sforza by which the Castello <unk> in Milan , which still remained in French hands , surrendered , and the remainder of the French forces withdrew over the Alps . The Venetians , under the newly elected Doge Andrea Gritti , were no longer interested in continuing the war ; in July 1523 , Gritti concluded the Treaty of Worms with Charles V , removing the Republic from the fighting . The French would make two further attempts to regain Lombardy before the end of the war , but neither would be successful ; the terms of the Treaty of Madrid , which Francis was forced to sign after his defeat at the Battle of Pavia , would leave Italy in Imperial hands . 
 Another effect of the battle was the changed attitude of the Swiss . Francesco Guicciardini wrote of the aftermath of Bicocca : 
 They went back to their mountains diminished in numbers , but much more diminished in audacity ; for it is certain that the losses which they suffered at Bicocca so affected them that in the coming years they no longer displayed their <unk> vigour . 
 While Swiss mercenaries would continue to take part in the Italian Wars , they no longer possessed the willingness to make headlong attacks that they had at Novara in 1513 or Marignano in 1515 ; their performance at the Battle of Pavia in 1525 would surprise observers by its lack of initiative . 
 More generally , the battle made apparent the decisive role of small arms on the battlefield . Although the full capabilities of the arquebus would not be demonstrated until the Battle of the <unk> ( where arquebusiers would prevail against heavy cavalry on open ground ) two years later , the weapon nevertheless became a sine qua non for any army which did not wish to grant a massive advantage to its opponents . While the <unk> would continue to play a vital role in warfare , it would be equal to that of the <unk> ; together , the two types of infantry would be combined into the so @-@ called " pike and shot " units that would endure until the development of the bayonet at the end of the seventeenth century . The offensive doctrine of the Swiss — a " push of pike " unsupported by firearms — had become obsolete . Indeed , offensive doctrines in general were increasingly replaced with defensive ones ; the combination of the arquebus and effective field fortification had made frontal assaults on entrenched positions too costly to be practical , and they were not attempted again for the duration of the Italian Wars . 
 As a result of the battle , the word " <unk> " — meaning a bargain , or something acquired at little cost — entered the Spanish language . 
 = Ivan Shishman of Bulgaria = 
 Ivan Shishman ( Bulgarian : Иван Шишман ) ruled as emperor ( tsar ) of Bulgaria in Tarnovo from 1371 to 3 June 1395 . The authority of Ivan Shishman was limited to the central parts of the Bulgarian Empire . His indecisive and inconsistent policy did little to prevent the fall of his country under Ottoman rule . In 1393 the Ottoman Turks seized the capital Tarnovo . Two years later , they captured Ivan Shishman 's last strongholds and executed him . 
 Despite the military and political weakness , during his rule Bulgaria remained a major cultural center and the ideas of Hesychasm dominated the Bulgarian Orthodox Church . Patriarch Evtimiy of Tarnovo became the most prominent cultural figure of the country . A number of texts were written or translated and an orthographic reform of the Bulgarian language was issued with synchronised rules . After the fall of Bulgaria , a number of scholars found refuge in the other Orthodox countries and brought the achievements of the Bulgarian culture to them . 
 His reign was inextricably connected to the fall of Bulgaria under Ottoman domination . Although there exist no historical sources which prove that he took active role in the defence of the country , in Bulgarian folklore Ivan Shishman is portrayed as a legendary and heroic ruler who desperately fought against the overwhelming Ottoman forces . There are numerous sites , geographical features and fortresses named after him throughout Bulgaria . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Born in 1350 or 1351 , Ivan Shishman was the eldest son of emperor Ivan Alexander ( r . 1331 – 1371 ) and his second wife Sarah – Theodora , a Jewess converted to the Eastern Orthodox Church . His birth brought up the issue of the succession to the Bulgarian throne . Ivan Shishman had two elder brothers by the Ivan Alexander 's first wife , Theodora of Wallachia . The eldest one , Michael Asen , was proclaimed successor to the throne and co @-@ emperor shortly after Ivan Alexander 's accession to the throne . However , Michael Asen 's early death in battle against the Ottomans in 1355 put forward the question of succession once more . It is likely that Sarah – Theodora pressured Ivan Alexander to select her own son as his successor , although Ivan Sratsimir would have come next under the <unk> system . The issue was decided in Ivan Shishman 's favour because the latter was born in the purple ( after his father was crowned ) , thus making him eligible as successor . By the end of 1355 , Ivan Shishman had been proclaimed heir to the throne and co @-@ emperor . 
 These events led to a conflict with Ivan Sratsimir , who was in turn given the rule of Vidin , probably as a compensation . Another indirect piece of evidence for the feud is the fact that Ivan Sratsimir 's portrait not included in the Tetraevangelia of Ivan Alexander , where the whole family of the emperor was otherwise presented . In 1356 Ivan Sratsimir proclaimed himself emperor of Vidin . Together with his father and younger brother Ivan Asen V , Ivan Shishman presided over the church synods at Tarnovo in the late 1360s . 
 = = = Emperor of Bulgaria = = = 
 = = = = Reign before 1388 = = = = 
 In his early twenties , Ivan Shishman was proclaimed emperor after the death of his father on 17 February . Ivan Shishman inherited only parts of his father 's realm : he ruled the lands between the Iskar River and Silistra , the valley of Sofia , parts of the Rhodope mountains and northern Thrace . To the west , the areas centred around Vidin recognised Ivan Sratsimir as emperor of Bulgaria , while to the east , the Principality of Karvuna , encompassing the coastal strip between the Danube Delta and Cape <unk> and under the rule of despot Dobrotitsa , did not recognise the authority of the emperor of Tarnovo either . Contemporary chroniclers such as Johann <unk> speak of three regions , all of which were called Bulgaria . Thus , the country was divided on the eve of the Ottoman invasion , despite Ivan Shishman 's claims in his royal charters . In these , he styled himself as a primary emperor in an attempt to emphasise the existence of a hierarchy among the rulers of the three <unk> . However , that hierarchy remained only in paper ; to further assert their independence from Tarnovo , both Ivan Sratsimir and Dobrotitsa separated their dioceses from the Bulgarian Patriarchate in Tarnovo . According to Fine , immediately after the death of Ivan Alexander , Ivan Sratsimir tried to conquer the whole of Bulgaria . He was able to capture Sofia and managed to hold the city for one or two years . The rivalry between the two brothers for Sofia had a strong tradition in the Bulgarian historiography since the time of Konstantin Jireček , but it has been dismissed by many modern Bulgarian historians . 
 Only a few months after the ascension of Ivan Shishman to the throne , on 26 September 1371 , the Ottoman Turks defeated a large Christian army led by the Serbian brothers Vukašin Mrnjavčević and Jovan Uglješa in the Battle of Chernomen . Although Uglješa had tried to create a broad coalition that would include Bulgaria , Ivan Shishman , who had to strengthen his own authority , did not join . After their victory at Chernomen , the Turks immediately turned on Bulgaria . Ottoman sultan Murad I forced Ivan Shishman to retreat to the north of the Balkan Mountains and conquered northern Thrace , the Rhodopes , Kostenets , Ihtiman and Samokov . Unable to resist the attacks , Ivan Shishman had to negotiate with the Ottomans in 1373 . He was forced to become an Ottoman vassal and to allow his sister Kera Tamara , who was known for her beauty , to become a wife of Murad I. Under this agreement , Bulgaria regained some of the conquered territories such as Ihtiman and Samokov , and began nearly ten years of uneasy peace with the Turks . Despite the vassalage and the peace treaty , Ottoman raids were renewed in the beginning of the 1380s and culminated in 1385 with the fall of Sofia , the last stronghold of Ivan Shishman to the south of the Balkan Mountains . 
 In the meantime , Ivan Shishman was engaged in a war against the voivode of Wallachia , Dan I , between 1384 and 1386 . There are few details about that war , only a brief note in the Anonymous Bulgarian Chronicle that Dan I died 23 September 1386 after being poisoned . The war was linked to the hostilities between Ivan Shishman and Ivan Sratsimir ( Dan I 's uncle ) , who had the support of the Wallachian rulers and was married to Anna of the House of Basarab . 
 = = = = Fall of Bulgaria = = = = 
 In 1387 , the united forces of the Principality of Serbia and the Kingdom of Bosnia managed to defeat the Ottomans in the Battle of <unk> . Encouraged by the Christian success , Ivan Shishman immediately invalidated his vassalage to Murad I and refused to send troops in his support in 1388 . The Ottomans reacted by sending a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army , under the command of the grand vizier Ali Pasha , to the north of the Balkan Mountains . The Ottoman troops seized the fortresses of Shumen , Madara , <unk> and <unk> . Ivan Shishman left Tarnovo and headed to Nikopol , where he was besieged and forced to ask for peace . The Ottomans requested that he reconfirm his vassalage in addition to surrendering Silistra , at the time the most populous Bulgarian city along the Danube . However , Ivan Shishman , reassured by his neighbours that he would receive support and the preparations of Serbia for war , not only refused to let the Ottomans in the city , but also strengthened its walls . Ali Pasha crossed the Balkan Mountains for a second time to consecutively capture Shumen , <unk> , Svishtov and once again besiege Ivan Shishman in Nikopol . Surprised by the swift Ottoman response and having not received the promised assistance , the Bulgarian emperor had to ask for peace . His pleas were accepted , but the terms were harsher than the original : not only Silistra was to be surrendered , but Ottoman garrisons were to be stationed in other Bulgarian cities , most notably Shumen and <unk> . 
 After the defeat of the Serbs and Bosniaks in the Battle of Kosovo on 15 June 1389 , Ivan Shishman had to seek help from Hungary . During the winter of 1391 – 1392 , he entered into secret negotiations with the King of Hungary Sigismund , who was planning a campaign against the Turks . The new Ottoman sultan Bayezid I pretended to have peaceful intentions in order to cut off Ivan Shishman from his alliance with the Hungarians . However , in the spring of 1393 Bayezid gathered a large army from his dominions in the Balkans and Asia Minor and attacked Bulgaria . The Ottomans marched to the capital Tarnovo and besieged it . The defence of the capital was led by Patriarch Evtimiy because Ivan Shishman was located in Nikopol , presumably for better communication with Sigismund . After a three @-@ month siege , Tarnovo fell on 17 July . According to the contemporary Bulgarian scholar and cleric Gregory Tsamblak , the city was not captured because of the Ottoman military strength but due to treason . The Ottoman campaign of 1393 devastated Bulgaria ; in the wake of that invasion , the lands of Ivan Shishman were limited to Nikopol and several towns along the Danube . Upon his return from Wallachia after the Battle of Rovine in 1395 , Bayezid I attacked and captured Nikopol and , according to the Anonymous Bulgarian Chronicle , murdered Ivan Shishman on 3 June 1395 . A Byzantine chronicle gives the date as 29 October . However , some sources suggest that the Bulgarian ruler was captured and died in prison . 
 = = = Culture and religion = = = 
 The cultural revival that made the historians call the reign of Ivan Alexander a " Second Golden Age of Bulgarian culture " continued under his son . The most prominent figure in that field during the last quarter of the 14th century was Patriarch Evtimiy of Tarnovo ( r . 1375 @-@ 1393 ) , a disciple of Theodosius of Tarnovo . In 1371 he established the Monastery of the Holy Trinity , a few kilometres to the north of Tarnovo , and turned it into an important cultural center and a major hub of the Tarnovo Literary School . Evtimiy wrote a number of religious works , including hagiographies , praises and letters , but is most famous with the orthographic reform and the standardization of the Bulgarian language , which had an impact in Serbia , Wallachia and the Russian principalities . Evtimiy thought that many of the scholars were not sufficiently prepared , and that the translations of Greek texts in local dialects and peculiarities could lead to misinterpretation of the original and eventually to <unk> . The texts regarding the reform did not survive , although its character has been partly recreated by the historians and linguists by analyzing the works of Evtimiy himself and his disciples . The orthography was inspired by the original Old Church Slavonic during the heyday of the First Bulgarian Empire ; the reform also included syntax changes and enrichment of the lexicon with a number of synonyms to avoid repetition . To ensure the success of the reform , all texts had to receive approval before publishing , a move that was supported by Ivan Shishman in his edicts . The capital Tarnovo was the main cultural center at that time . Patriarch Evtimiy wrote about it : 
 Hesychasm remained the main movement in the Bulgarian Orthodox Church during the reign of Ivan Shishman and the Patriarch was its supporter . Bulgaria was a major center of hesychast ideas along with the Byzantine Empire . Evtimiy was an active opponent to heresies , but it appears that since the mid 14th century the influence of the <unk> , the most prominent heretic movement in the Balkans at the time , had been greatly reduced in Bulgaria and no document mentions them after 1360 . Other sects , such as the <unk> , were also persecuted and repressed . Evtimiy had strict views on moral and took firm positions against divorce and third or fourth marriages for widowers and widows . After the collapse of the Bulgarian Empire , many scholars emigrated to Serbia , Wallachia , Moldavia and the Russian principalities ; they brought Bulgarian cultural achievements , books , and hesychastic ideas to these lands . The Bulgarian influence was so great that is often referred to as a " Second South Slavic influence on Russia " . Some of the most prominent Bulgarian émigrés included Constantine of Kostenets , who worked in Serbia and Cyprian , and Gregory Tsamblak in the Russian lands . The economy was in decline since the loss of the major ports of <unk> and Anchialus to the Savoyard crusade a few years before Ivan Shishman was crowned . After the death of Ivan Alexander and the breakaway of Dobrotitsa 's Principality of Karvuna , Tarnovo also lost its most important port Varna , leading to a reduction in commerce and tax revenues . The persistent Ottoman raids brought devastation , hunger and depopulation which led to a sharp decline in the cultivated lands . 
 = = = Assessment and legacy = = = 
 Bulgarian historians have had mostly negative assessments of Ivan Shishman . He is often viewed as having intruded onto the throne due to the intrigues of his mother and thus taking the place of the rightful successor , his elder brother Ivan Sratsimir . This eventually resulted in the division of the country on the eve of the Ottoman invasion . There are no direct historical sources to suggest any significant attempts by Ivan Shishman to fight off the Turks . The inconsistent policy of Ivan Shishman has been described as revealing his weakness and inability to cope with the situation . His rule , however , was still remembered in the 16th century . In a treaty signed in 1519 between the Ottoman sultan Selim I and Louis II of Hungary , some of the lands in question were referred to as terra <unk> <unk> , “ the land of emperor Shishman ” . 
 The memory of Ivan Shishman remained during the first centuries of the Ottoman rule . During the First Tarnovo Uprising in 1598 , the one of the rebels ' leaders , whose name is unknown , claimed to have been a descendent of Ivan Shishman and was proclaimed emperor under the name Shishman III . Almost a century later , in 1686 , a second uprising in Tarnovo was headed by Rostislav <unk> , who also claimed to have belonged to the Shishman dynasty and styled himself as Prince of Bulgaria . 
 Ivan Shishman is now among the most popular and well known rulers in the Third Bulgarian State . There are a number of works dedicated to him or his rule , including the 1969 film Tsar Ivan Shishman by Yuri <unk> and the song " Tsar Ivan Shishman " by the heavy metal band <unk> in the 2004 album " Saint Patriarch Evtimiy " . Shishman Peak on Livingston Island in the South Shetland Islands , Antarctica is also named after him . 
 = = Legends = = 
 Ivan Shishman is the most prominent medieval ruler in Bulgarian folklore . His name is heard in a number of legends , myths , tales and songs . He is represented as a heroic ruler who fought and died for his country , facing overwhelming enemy forces . There are a number of places throughout Bulgaria named after the him , ranging from castles and ruins to rocks , caves and localities . That legendary “ geography ” is mainly concentrated in the region of Sofia , Ihtiman and Samokov , though it extends to the Rhodope Mountains , Sredna Gora , Vratsa , Pleven , Prilep , Varna , etc . Near Samokov are the ruins of “ Shishman 's Fortress ” with the emperor 's wells , which reputedly spouted from the ruler 's seven wounds . Further north , along the cliffs and heights of the Iskar Gorge , are “ Shishman 's Holes ” , the caves where he hid while fighting the Ottomans for seven years . Other related toponyms usually associated with the emperor 's last stand are <unk> ( derived from <unk> , meaning “ bone ” ) , <unk> ( from <unk> , “ skull ” ) and <unk> ( “ Fierce Ford ” ) , all thought to be hinting at the fate of the perished Bulgarian troops . 
 One of the most famous legends is about Shishman 's final battle . The Ottomans camped at Kostenets , near the origins of the Maritsa river , while the Bulgarians were near Samokov , on a hill . After a fierce battle , Ivan Shishman was wounded seven times and retreated to the fortress , where he died ; on the battlefield seven springs appeared , one for each of the emperor 's wounds . He is also said to have fought in the Balkan mountains at <unk> grad ( " Shishman 's town " ) , between Sliven and Kazanlak , where he killed 10 @,@ 000 janissaries in a huge battle . The 18th century Bulgarian <unk> Paisius of <unk> wrote in his <unk> <unk> that during the siege of Tarnovo Ivan Shishman managed to reach Sofia with his boyars . He hid his treasury in the Iskar gorge and fought against the Turks for seven years before dying in battle . Some versions suggest that <unk> <unk> remained the last fortress to fall and before Shishman died he buried treasure under the castle and tried to escape by cutting a passage through the mountain . The repeating motif of the treasure is a sacral symbol of the Bulgarian statehood and the usual locations of the imperial jewellery are monasteries , lakes or hideouts under rivers . Being undiscovered by the invaders , the treasure symbolises the sovereignty and power of the Bulgarian Empire and its inevitable resurrection . There are also a number of parallels between the legends about Ivan Shishman and the hagiography of saints , especially John of Rila , including the almost identical route of the emperor , Tarnovo @-@ Sofia @-@ Samokov in Rila , and the route of the return of the relics of Saint John of Rila to the Rila Monastery in 15th century – Tarnovo @-@ Sofia @-@ Rila , and also the motif of the immortal rulers who foresees the restoration of the country . 
 Extract of a folklore song , collected by the <unk> Brothers . 
 Ivan Shishman is one of the few rulers to be mentioned in the Bulgarian folklore songs and , as in the legends , is a subject of mystification . His figure can even be seen in Christmas carols , where he is presented either as a saint in the role of protector or as a hero fighting dragons and oppressors , usually presented as Tatars because of the resemblance with the Tartarus . The songs about Ivan Shishman contain many parallels with nature and <unk> which are typical of Bulgarian folklore . In a song from the region of Sliven , the death of the emperor brings chaos to nature and rivers of " black blood " ( typical folklore collocation ) start flowing . 
 The place of Ivan Shishman in the Bulgarian legends and folklore is most likely attributed to the fact that he was the last Bulgarian emperor in Tarnovo . There are many similarities with his contemporary King Marko , the ruler of Prilep , who did little to resist the Ottoman invasion but later became the most popular character in the Bulgarian folklore . The people desired to <unk> the image of the " ideal emperor " , a defender and protector , whose strength they needed to survive under Ottoman domination , and not the actual historical personality . As time passed the mystification deepened and the legends became more distant from the actual events during his rule . During the Bulgarian National Revival the tales about Ivan Shishman began to increasingly include patriotic elements . 
 = = Family = = 
 Ivan Shishman was married first to a Bulgarian named Kira Maria , who died in the early 1380s . His second wife was <unk> Lazarević , a daughter of Prince Lazar of Serbia and Milica Nemanjić and kin to the previous Serbian dynasty . His eldest son Alexander converted to Islam under the name Iskender , and died as governor of Smyrna in 1418 , while his second son <unk> participated in revolts and campaigns against the Ottomans , trying to liberate his father 's realm , and died in Hungary after 1444 . It has been speculated by historians , such as Plamen Pavlov , that Patriarch Joseph II of Constantinople was an illegitimate son of Ivan Shishman . The claim is based on a Byzantine text which says " They said that he [ <unk> II ] was an illegitimate son of the emperor Shishman . " 
 = = Timeline = = 
 1350 or 1351 — Ivan Shishman was born 
 By 1355 — Proclaimed heir to the throne and co @-@ emperor 
 17 February 1371 — <unk> his father as Emperor of Bulgaria in Tarnovo 
 1373 — Becomes Ottoman vassal in return for some previously conquered lands 
 1378 — Issues the Rila Charter 
 1385 — Fall of Sofia 
 1384 to 1386 — War against Wallachia 
 1388 — The Ottomans invade eastern Bulgaria and conquer a number of towns 
 17 July 1393 — Fall of Tarnovo 
 3 June 1395 — The Ottomans capture Nikopol and Ivan Shishman is executed 
 = Selena Live ! = 
 Live ! or Selena Live ! is a live album by American Tejano pop singer Selena , which was released on May 4 , 1993 by EMI Latin . The album was re @-@ released on September 22 , 2002 as being part of the Selena : 20 Years of Music collection ; which included spoken liner notes by her family , friends and her former band members Selena y Los Dinos . Live ! includes three cumbia @-@ influenced studio tracks , while the rest of the album consists of live versions of previously released songs . The album was recorded during a free concert at the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi , Texas , on February 7 , 1993 . It was certified gold ( Latin type ) by the Recording Industry Association of America in its first year , double platinum ( Latin type ) in 1995 , and gold ( standard ) in 2002 . 
 Live ! led Selena to win a Grammy Award for Best Mexican / American Album at the 36th Grammy Awards , the first Tejano musician to do so . It had won two awards from the 1994 Billboard Latin Music Awards , and three awards at the 1994 Tejano Music Awards . Live ! peaked at number one on the US Regional Mexican Albums , number two on the Top Latin Albums and number 79 on the Billboard 200 . Soon after the release of Live ! , the album received mostly positive reviews from music critics who claimed the album was " foreshadowing " Amor Prohibido ( 1994 ) , and that Selena was the Mexican equivalent of Madonna . The album spawned three singles , which were simultaneously in the top five positions on the Hot Latin Tracks chart . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 On February 7 , 1993 , Selena held a free concert in front of 3 @,@ 000 at the Memorial Coliseum in Corpus Christi . The set list performed during the concert was released as a live album on May 4 , 1993 . Pete Astudillo , who was a former backup singer for Selena y Los Dinos , remained touring with Selena on the Live ! Tour . The song " <unk> " , which is included in the track listing of the album , is performed as an original song by Astudillo . The song was later released on his second studio album Como nadie ( 1993 ) . Another original song performed by Astudillo , " ¿ Porque le <unk> <unk> cumbia ? " , is included in the track listing of Live ! and was released on Como nadie . The three cumbia @-@ influence tracks , " No debes jugar " , " La llamada " and " Tú robaste mi corazón " , are the only studio tracks on the album . 
 = = Song structure and lyrical content = = 
 " No debes jugar " , the lead single from Live ! , was written and produced by A.B. Quintanilla , Selena 's brother and the producer of her music , lead keyboardist for the band Ricky Vela , and Bebu Silvetti , an Argentine music producer . " No debes jugar " is a Mexican cumbia rock song that centers the organ as its musical instrument foundation . Ramiro Burr of the Houston Chronicle stated that Selena blended Mexican polka rhythms with melodic , synth @-@ driven pop hooks in " No debes jugar " and " La llamada " . " No debes jugar " received a Song of the Year nomination at the 1994 Tejano Music Awards . " No debes jugar " is performed on F major with 89 beats per minute . Lyrically the song describes a woman whose life is centered on being unappreciated by her boyfriend . Tired and ready to do anything , she finally stands up for herself announcing that she is done playing around and threatens to leave . It peaked at number three on the US Hot Latin Tracks , Latin Regional Mexican Airplay and the Latin Pop Airplay charts simultaneously . 
 " La llamada " , the first promotional single released from Live ! , was written and produced by Quintanilla III and Astudillo . Howard Blumenthal wrote in his book The world music CD listener 's guide that " La llamada " is an " energetic " song . It is set in A major with 90 beats per minute . " La llamada " describes a woman telling her boyfriend over the phone that she saw him kissing another girl , while her boyfriend tries to persuade to her that it was not him . It peaked at number five on the Hot Latin Tracks , number six on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay and number eight on the Latin Pop Airplay chart . " Tú robaste mi corazón " is a duet with " The King of Tejano music " singer Emilio Navaira . It was released as the second promotional single from Live ! and was written and produced by Quintanilla III , Vela and Silvetti . Blumenthal wrote in his book that the song is a " great love duet " . Paul Verna wrote that Selena 's fans were " not growing weary " of " Como <unk> " ( Preciosa ) and " Tú robaste mi corazón " . He also noted that the two songs were " slow @-@ paced love songs " and were potential singles from the posthumous album Siempre Selena ( 1996 ) . " Tú robaste mi corazón " is composed in the key F major with 130 beats per minute . The song describes a woman and a man finding harmony and love in each other while also feeling emotions never felt before in their lives . " Tú robaste mi corazón " peaked at number five on the Hot Latin Tracks , number eight on the Latin Regional Mexican Airplay and number six on the Latin Pop Airplay charts . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Sarah M. <unk> wrote in her book Secular saints : performing Frida Kahlo , Carlos Gardel , Eva Perón , and Selena that Live ! and Amor <unk> ( 1994 ) were the two most successful albums of Selena 's career . Joey Guerra of Amazon.com wrote that Live ! is a " sizzling reminder of [ Selena 's ] electric stage charisma and blossoming talent as a performer " . Guerra also stated that the songs performed live had showcased Selena 's " uncanny ability to infuse a love song with both girlish innocence and a heated sexuality " . He noted that " Como la <unk> " , " Baila esta cumbia " and " La <unk> " were examples of his claims . He also states that any listener can feel the " heat seeping through your speakers " . Guerra ended his review stating that Live ! " foreshadows " Amor <unk> ( 1994 ) . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic wrote that Live ! had offered proof of Selena being an " energetic [ and ] exciting performer " . Erlewine noted that Selena performed live versions of her " most popular numbers " in front of an " enthusiastic audience " . Erlewine ended his review stating that Live ! had " capture [ d ] some of that energy and shows why she was so popular " . Shortly after the album 's release music critics began calling Selena the Mexican equivalent of Madonna . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Live ! was the first Tejano album to have won a Grammy Award . The album won the Best Mexican / American Album at the 1994 ceremony . EMI Latin 's president believed Selena was ready to record and release a crossover album that would have catapulted her career into the English @-@ language market . Selena was then signed with SBK Records in November 1993 , however , recording for the album would not begin until a year later . In May 1994 , Live ! was named Album of the Year by the Billboard Latin Music Awards . The album also led Selena to win Regional Mexican Vocalist of the Year . At the 1994 Tejano Music Awards , Selena won Female Vocalist of the Year , Album of the Year – Orchestra and was named Female Entertainer of The Year , while the album was nominated for Record of the Year . At the 1994 Lo Nuestro Awards , it was nominated Regional Mexican Album of the Year . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Live ! was released on May 4 , 1993 . It was certified gold ( Latin type ) by the Recording Industry Association of America for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 copies in the United States its first year . The album debuted at number 146 on the US Billboard 200 chart following Selena 's murder on April 22 , 1995 . The album peaked at number 79 on May 13 , 1995 before it slipped off the chart on June 3 , 1995 . Live ! debuted at number four on the Top Latin Albums chart , it then peaked at number three within three months of its release . The album remained on the chart , taking the top 20 spots . Live ! temporarily slipped off the charts and re @-@ entered at number 47 in January 1995 , before it went off the chart again . The album took the third spot on the chart following Selena 's murder . A week later , the album peaked at number two before it hovered the top ten spots and then slipped off the charts a year later . In 1997 , Live ! was then certified double platinum ( Latin type ) for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . Live ! debuted at number eight on the Latin Regional Mexican Albums chart , then slipped off the charts for nearly a month . It reentered and peaked at number one for seven consecutive weeks . The album remained in the top 10 for two years . The album went to number two following Selena 's murder . Live ! sold more than 250 @,@ 000 copies in Mexico . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Track listing were adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Managerial 
 Performance credits 
 Vocals – Selena Quintanilla @-@ Pérez 
 Visuals and imagery 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Boletus auripes = 
 Boletus auripes , commonly known as the butter @-@ foot bolete , is a species of bolete fungus in the family Boletaceae . First described from New York in 1898 , the fungus is found in eastern Asia , Central America , and eastern North America from Canada to Florida . It is a mycorrhizal species and typically grows in association with oak and beech trees . 
 The fruit bodies ( mushrooms ) formed by the fungus have convex to nearly flat caps that are up to 13 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) wide . The stems are up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , and feature reticulations ( net @-@ like ridges ) on the upper portion . Other than the brownish upper cap , the entire surface of the mushroom is yellow . B. auripes is edible . It can be distinguished from other similar yellow boletes by differences in color , degree of stem reticulation , and distribution . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1898 . Peck collected the type specimen in Port Jefferson , New York . In 1945 , Rolf Singer proposed the variety Boletus auripes var. aureissimus as a new combination of the name Ceriomyces aureissimus described by William Alphonso Murrill in 1938 ; this taxon is now regarded as a distinct species under the name Boletus aureissimus . In 1936 , Wally Snell reported finding a specimen of Boletus crassipes , another species described by Peck from Mount Gretna , Pennsylvania . Snell suggested that although B. crassipes might be a valid species distinguished from B. auripes by a deeper brown cap color , yellow flesh that does not fade to white , and a stem with a more orange @-@ yellow color and more extensive reticulation , he conceded that it was not clear that the morphological characteristics between the two did not overlap , and that further collections would be needed to clarify any differences between them . A couple of years later , he was more convinced of his stance and considered the two conspecific . The taxonomic authorities Index Fungorum and MycoBank , however , do not recognize this putative synonymy . 
 In the genus Boletus , B. auripes is classified in section <unk> . Species in this section are characterized by having a dry cap with a surface texture ranging from smooth to somewhat tomentose , yellow flesh , a reticulate stem , and a mild taste . Other North American boletes in this section include Boletus speciosus and Boletus <unk> . 
 The specific epithet auripes means " golden yellow foot " . It is commonly known as the " butter @-@ foot bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of B. auripes has a convex shape before flattening somewhat in maturity , and attains a diameter of 4 – 13 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 5 @.@ 1 in ) . The cap surface is dry , with a texture ranging from finely tomentose ( hairy ) to nearly smooth , and colored yellowish @-@ brown to chestnut brown or grayish @-@ brown . The cap color fades with age . Similarly , the flesh — initially yellow — fades to whitish in maturity . Unlike some other Boletus species , in B. auripes neither the surfaces nor the internal tissue turns blue when injured or exposed to air . The odor and taste of the mushroom are not distinctive . 
 Initially pale yellow to yellow , the pore surface develops olive tinges as it matures , and often becomes depressed near the stem <unk> . Pores are circular to angular , and minute — typically less than 1 mm wide ; the tubes are 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 0 in ) deep . The golden @-@ yellow stem is 7 – 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) long by 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . Young stems are typically bulbous to club @-@ shaped , but this evens out somewhat as the mushroom grows , and mature stems are club @-@ shaped to nearly equal in width throughout . The stem is dry , solid ( i.e. , not hollow ) , and features yellow reticulation , at least on the upper portion . Mycelia at the base of the stem have a buff color . The fruit body does not have a partial veil or a ring on the stem . Boletus auripes is edible . 
 Mushrooms produce a spore prints that is yellow brown ( especially in fresh prints ) to olive brown . The smooth , yellowish spores measure 10 – 14 by 3 – 5 μm , and range in shape from roughly elliptic to cylindric to <unk> ( somewhat spindle @-@ shaped ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 27 @.@ 2 – 35 @.@ 2 by 9 @.@ 6 – 10 @.@ 4 μm . The cellular arrangement of the cap cuticle is a trichodermium ( whereby the outermost hyphae emerge roughly parallel , like hairs , perpendicular to the surface of the cap ) consisting of erect hyphae with a diameter of 3 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 4 μm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Field characteristics used to distinguish Boletus auripes from potential lookalike species include the yellowish brown to chestnut @-@ brown cap surface that becomes paler with age , yellow flesh that does not stain blue , and a reticulate stem . B. aureissimus has a similar appearance , but has a honey @-@ yellow to bright yellow or yellow @-@ ochre cap , less conspicuous stem reticulation , and a more limited range covering Florida west to Texas . B. aureissimus var. castaneus has a purplish @-@ brown cap with a texture like velvet . 
 Boletus auripes somewhat resembles B. <unk> , but the latter species has a more variably colored cap that can be orange , brownish @-@ orange , or yellowish , and variable degrees of stem reticulation . B. <unk> has a similar color scheme but lacks reticulation on the stem . B. auripes bears a superficial resemblance in coloration to the Costa Rican species B. <unk> , known only from a limited area in the northern Cordillera de Talamanca . The latter species may be distinguished by the lack of reticulations on the upper half of the stem , a brown or salmon @-@ pink staining reaction on the stem in response to handling , and microscopically by a conspicuously sterile margin and prominent pseudocystidia . <unk> <unk> is set apart from B. auripes by a darker cap , tubes that lack an olive tinge , and a stem that has more prominent reticulation extending down to the base . In contrast to B. auripes , B. <unk> has a floccose ( wooly ) or tomentose cap surface , and lacks an olive tinge on the tubes . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Boletus auripes is mycorrhizal , and fruits singly , scattered , or in groups on the ground under broadleaf trees , especially oak and beech , but it has also been recorded associating with mountain laurel ( Kalmia latifolia ) . Boletus auripes typically forms fruit bodies between June and November . 
 Boletus auripes has a disjunct distribution , and is one of several fungi found in both eastern Asia and eastern North America . In North America , where it is relatively common , the range of the fungus extends from Alaska south to Mexico , and east to New York . In Central America , it has been recorded in Belize . The mushroom has also been recorded from Taiwan , China ( including Yunnan , Sichuan , Guangdong , <unk> , and Hunan ) , and Japan . It was reported for the first time from the Russian Far East in 2008 . 
 = Lina Leandersson = 
 Lina Leandersson ( born 27 September 1995 ) is a Swedish actress . She played the lead role of Eli in the 2008 Swedish romantic vampire film Let the Right One In , based on the novel by the same name . Born in Falun , Leandersson started performing at an early age . She acted in local amateur theatre performances , and had a few brief television appearances in 2006 . At the age of eleven , Leandersson was cast to play one of the two leads in Tomas Alfredson 's film , Let the Right One In , after applying for the role through a web @-@ based casting service . The film was an international success , and Leandersson 's performance as the vampire Eli brought her widespread critical acclaim as well as several awards and nominations . She has stated that she wants to continue acting . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Lina Leandersson was born in Falun , Sweden . She took an interest in performing from an early age , acting in amateur theatre performances , attending drama courses , and performing <unk> and jazz dance . One of her first roles was in amateur theatre performance , playing the mother of a spoiled girl wanting new jeans . In 2006 she appeared as a jury member in the Swedish song competition Lilla Melodifestivalen . The same year , she was selected as one out of five , from a total of five hundred applicants , to participate in Nickelodeon 's <unk> , which was televised in October 2006 . 
 = = Let the Right One In = = 
 Leandersson applied for the role in Let the Right One In through a web @-@ based casting service . After being contacted by child casting director Maggie Widstrand , she auditioned for the role three times before finally being cast . She was unaware that the role she was auditioning for was that of a vampire . " I was shocked " , she later told Expressen ; " I thought it was a more usual role . " But as soon as she grew accustomed to the idea , " it became even more fun . I wanted to be a vampire when I was little " , she said . 
 In the film , she plays Eli , a child vampire who develops a friendship with the main character , 12 @-@ year @-@ old Oskar ( played by Kåre Hedebrant ) . Oskar is frequently tormented by bullies . Eli initially tells Oskar to fight back , and rescues him in the end , killing three of the bullies in process . Because Eli is supposed to be an androgynous character in the film , director Tomas Alfredson decided to overdub Leandersson 's voice with a less feminine one . " Lina 's voice is beautiful , but I thought it was too high in pitch " , he said . Eli 's voice throughout the whole film was provided by Elif Ceylan . In an interview with Dagens Nyheter , Leandersson laughingly commented that " it was actually nice to be dubbed , my voice sounds weird " . 
 Leandersson and Hedebrant were never allowed to read the script . Instead , the director would read their lines aloud to them before every scene . According to Leandersson , " Tomas is a good teller . I listened very carefully . " She identified the most difficult parts as the ones where she was supposed to be angry , and the transitioning between being normal and " crazy " . In an interview , Leandersson recalled how she went totally into her role , to the point of " becoming " the character Eli , but affirmed that there are few similarities between herself and her character , describing Eli as more mature and contemplative . While she found it uncomfortable to film outdoor scenes in temperatures down to − 30 ° C , she described her experience as " the most fun [ she ] has ever had . " 
 When asked about the biggest challenge in making the film , Alfredson mentioned the fact that people already would have a perception of the characters and the surroundings from the novel . He especially felt that the depiction of Eli was difficult , but stated that he was " very happy about Lina " . On another occasion , he again commented positively on Leandersson 's appearance , stating that " [ w ] e hardly used makeup or anything in post @-@ production to make her like this , she is simply damn good . She 's also a very special girl , which I think shows in the film . " He has frequently commended Leandersson for her intelligence , often comparing her to " an 80 @-@ year @-@ old woman , very wise and very quiet . " 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Let the Right One In was an international success . Critics lauded the performances of the young leads , often highlighting Leandersson for particular acclaim . According to Karen Durbin of Elle , she " evokes Eli 's radical <unk> with an air of watchful caution and a contained stillness of body that not only belies her childish appearance ( ... ) " , and " In a performance devoid of sentimentality she perfectly captures the awful solitude of a creature who exists outside time " . James Berardinelli also praised Leandersson for " crafting an individual who is both mysterious and compelling " , while Justin Lowe of The Hollywood Reporter wrote : " The youthful actors imbue even the most emotional and disturbing scenes with remarkable complexity . Leandersson is particularly impressive as the conflicted young vampire who wants nothing more than to be an ordinary girl again " . Luke Y. Thompson of LA Weekly compared her performance favorably to that of Kirsten Dunst as the child vampire Claudia in Interview with the Vampire . He concluded that , while Dunst " used to be the gold standard ; in Leandersson , I think we have a new champion . " The Oregonian called Leandersson 's performance " incredible " , and expressed doubt that any actress in the American remake could top it . While Swedish reviewers generally made positive comments about the two leads , Emma Engström of Göteborgs @-@ Posten felt that Leandersson 's character was lacking in depth . 
 Leandersson received several awards and award nominations for her performance in the film . 
 = = Future projects = = 
 In 2012 , Lina filmed for Estonian director Kadri <unk> 's movie The Arbiter and Swedish director Sofia <unk> 's feature debut Tenderness . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Leandersson lives in Falun with her mother , stepfather , and two younger sisters . She is of Swedish and Iranian descent . Leandersson has always liked to dance and play theatre . Though there are several athletes in her family , she is not particularly fond of sports . " I was on a football team when I was in third grade . But I was so bad that I wasn 't allowed to play in a match " , she recalled . She has stated on several occasions that she wants to continue acting , and has indicated that she would like to try different types of roles to challenge herself . Leandersson was a student at <unk> . In an interview , she identified history as her favorite subject , because she finds it " interesting to know how people lived and died in the past " . She does not see school as a hindrance to continue acting , saying that she " will just have to work harder than everyone else . But school isn 't that difficult , it 's quite easy . " She is a fan of the Twilight film series She is studying theatre at <unk> , a school for performing arts in Stockholm , Sweden . 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Burger 's Daughter = 
 Burger 's Daughter is a political and historical novel by the South African Nobel Prize in Literature @-@ winner Nadine Gordimer , first published in the United Kingdom in June 1979 by Jonathan Cape . The book was expected to be banned in South Africa , and a month after publication in London the import and sale of the book in South Africa was prohibited by the Publications Control Board . Three months later , the Publications Appeal Board overturned the banning and the restrictions were lifted . 
 Burger 's Daughter details a group of white anti @-@ apartheid activists in South Africa seeking to overthrow the South African government . It is set in the mid @-@ 1970s , and follows the life of Rosa , the title character , as she comes to terms with her father Lionel Burger 's legacy as an activist in the South African Communist Party ( SACP ) . The perspective shifts between Rosa 's internal monologue ( often directed towards her father or her lover Conrad ) , and the omniscient narrator . The novel is rooted in the history of the anti @-@ apartheid struggle and references to actual events and people from that period , including Nelson Mandela and the 1976 Soweto uprising . 
 Gordimer herself was involved in South African struggle politics , and she knew many of the activists , including Bram Fischer , Mandela 's treason trial defence lawyer . She modelled the Burger family in the novel loosely on Fischer 's family , and described Burger 's Daughter as " a coded homage " to Fischer . While banned in South Africa , a copy of the book was smuggled into Mandela 's prison cell on Robben Island , and he reported that he " thought well of it " . 
 The novel was generally well @-@ received by critics . A reviewer for The New York Times said that Burger 's Daughter is Gordimer 's " most political and most moving novel " , and a review in The New York Review of Books described the style of writing as " elegant " , " fastidious " and belonging to a " cultivated upper class " . A critic in The Hudson Review had mixed feelings about the book , saying that it " gives scarcely any pleasure in the reading but which one is pleased to have read nonetheless " . Burger 's Daughter won the Central News Agency Literary Award in 1980 . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel begins in Johannesburg , South Africa in 1974 during apartheid . Rosa is 26 , and her father , Lionel Burger , a white Afrikaner anti @-@ apartheid activist , has died in prison after serving three years of a life sentence for treason . When she was 14 , her mother , Cathy Burger , also died in prison . Rosa had grown up in a family that actively supported the overthrow of the apartheid government , and the house they lived in opened its doors to anyone supporting the struggle , regardless of colour . Living with them was " Baasie " ( little boss ) , a black boy Rosa 's age the Burgers had " adopted " when his father had died in prison . Baasie and Rosa grew up as brother and sister . Rosa 's parents were members of the outlawed South African Communist Party ( SACP ) , and had been arrested several times when she was a child . When Rosa was nine , she was sent to stay with her father 's family ; Baasie was sent elsewhere , and she lost contact with him . 
 With the Burger 's house now empty , Rosa sells it and moves in with Conrad , a student who had befriended her during her father 's trial . Conrad questions her about her role in the Burger family and asks why she always did what she was told . Later Rosa leaves Conrad and moves into a flat on her own and works as a physiotherapist . In 1975 Rosa attends a party of a friend in Soweto , and it is there that she hears a black university student dismissing all whites ' help as irrelevant , saying that whites cannot know what blacks want , and that blacks will liberate themselves . Despite being labelled a Communist and under surveillance by the authorities , Rosa manages to get a passport , and flies to Nice in France to spend several months with Katya , her father 's first wife . There she meets Bernard <unk> , a visiting academic from Paris . They become lovers and he persuades her to return with him to Paris . 
 Before joining Bernard in Paris , Rosa stays in a flat in London for several weeks . Now that she has no intention of honouring the agreement of her passport , which was to return to South Africa within a year , she openly introduces herself as Burger 's daughter . This attracts the attention of the media and she attends several political events . At one such event , Rosa sees Baasie , but when she tries to talk to him , he starts criticising her for not knowing his real name ( <unk> <unk> ) . He says that there is nothing special about her father having died in prison as many black fathers have also died there , and adds that he does not need her help . Rosa is devastated by her childhood friend 's hurtful remarks , and overcome with guilt , she abandons her plans of going into exile in France and returns to South Africa . 
 Back home she resumes her job as a physiotherapist in Soweto . Then in June 1976 Soweto school children start protesting about their inferior education and being taught in Afrikaans . They go on a rampage , which includes killing white welfare workers . The police brutally put down the uprising , resulting in hundreds of deaths . In October 1977 , many organisations and people critical of the white government are banned , and in November 1977 Rosa Burger is detained . Her lawyer , who also represented her father , expects charges to be brought against her of furthering the aims of the banned SACP and African National Congress ( ANC ) , and of aiding and abetting the students ' revolt . 
 = = Background = = 
 In a 1980 interview , Gordimer stated that she was fascinated by the role of " white hard @-@ core <unk> " in South Africa , and that she had long envisaged the idea for Burger 's Daughter . Inspired by the work of Bram Fischer , she published an essay about him in 1961 entitled " Why Did Bram Fischer Choose to Go to Jail ? " Fischer was the Afrikaner advocate and Communist who was Nelson Mandela 's defence lawyer during his 1956 Treason Trial and his 1965 Rivonia Trial . As a friend of many of the activist families , including Fischer 's , Gordimer knew these families ' children were " politically groomed " for the struggle , and were taught that " the struggle came first " and they came second . She modelled the Burger family in the novel loosely on Fischer 's family , and Lionel Burger on Fischer himself . While Gordimer never said the book was about Fischer , she did describe it as " a coded homage " to him . Before submitting the manuscript to her publisher , Gordimer gave it to Fischer 's daughter , Ilse Wilson ( née Fischer ) to read , saying that , because of connections people might make to her family , she wanted her to see it first . When Wilson returned the manuscript to Gordimer , she told the writer , " You have captured the life that was ours . " After Gordimer 's death in July 2014 , Wilson wrote that Gordimer " had the extraordinary ability to describe a situation and capture the lives of people she was not necessarily a part of . " 
 Gordimer 's homage to Fischer extends to using excerpts from his writings and public statements in the book . Lionel Burger 's treason trial speech from the dock is taken from the speech Fischer gave at his own trial in 1966 . Fischer was the leader of the banned SACP who was given a life sentence for furthering the aims of communism and conspiracy to overthrow the government . Quoting people like Fischer was not permitted in South Africa . All Gordimer 's quotes from banned sources in Burger 's Daughter are unattributed , and also include writings of Joe Slovo , a member of the SACP and the outlawed ANC , and a pamphlet written and distributed by the Soweto Students Representative Council during the Soweto uprising . 
 Gordimer herself became involved in South African struggle politics after the arrest of a friend , Bettie du Toit , in 1960 for trade unionist activities and being a member of the SACP . Just as Rosa Burger in the novel visits family in prison , so Gordimer visited her friend . Later in 1986 , Gordimer gave evidence at the Delmas Treason Trial in support of 22 ANC members accused of treason . She was a member of the ANC while it was still an illegal organization in South Africa , and hid several ANC leaders in her own home to help them evade arrest by the security forces . 
 The inspiration for Burger 's Daughter came when Gordimer was waiting to visit a political detainee in prison , and amongst the other visitors she saw a school girl , the daughter of an activist she knew . She wondered what this child was thinking and what family obligations were making her stand there . The novel opens with the same scene : a 14 @-@ year @-@ old Rosa Burger waiting outside a prison to visit her detained mother . Gordimer said that children like these , whose activist parents were frequently arrested and detained , periodically had to manage entire households on their own , and it must have changed their lives completely . She stated that it was these children who encouraged her to write the book . 
 Burger 's Daughter took Gordimer four years to write , starting from a handful of what she called " very scrappy notes " , " half sentences " and " little snatches of dialogue " . Once she got going , she said , the writing became an " organic process " . The Soweto riots in 1976 happened while she was working on the book , and she changed the plot to incorporate the uprising . Gordimer explained that " Rosa would have come back to South Africa ; that was inevitable " , but " [ t ] here would have been a different ending " . During those four years she also wrote two non @-@ fiction articles to take breaks from working on the novel . 
 Gordimer remarked that , more than just a story about white communists in South Africa , Burger 's Daughter is about " commitment " and what she as a writer does to " make sense of life " . After Mandela and Fischer were sentenced in the mid @-@ 1960s , Gordimer considered going into exile , but she changed her mind and later recalled " I wouldn 't be accepted as I was here , even in the worst times and even though I 'm white " . Just as Rosa struggles to find her place as a white in the anti @-@ apartheid liberation movement , so did Gordimer . In an interview in 1980 , she said that " when we have got beyond the apartheid situation — there 's a tremendous problem for whites , unless whites are allowed in by blacks , and unless we can make out a case for our being accepted and we can forge a common culture together , whites are going to be marginal " . 
 = = Publication and banning = = 
 Gordimer knew that Burger 's Daughter would be banned in South Africa . After the book was published in London by Jonathan Cape in June 1979 , copies were dispatched to South Africa , and on 5 July 1979 the book was banned from import and sale in South Africa . The reasons given by the Publications Control Board included " propagating Communist opinions " , " creating a psychosis of revolution and rebellion " , and " making several unbridled attacks against the authority entrusted with the maintenance of law and order and the safety of the state " . 
 In October 1979 the Publications Appeal Board , on the recommendation of a panel of literary experts and a state security specialist , overruled the banning of Burger 's Daughter . The state security specialist reported the book posed no threat to the security of South Africa , and the literary experts had accused the censorship board " of bias , prejudice , and literary incompetence " , and that " [ i ] t has not read accurately , it has severely distorted by quoting extensively out of context , it has not considered the work as a literary work deserves to be considered , and it has directly , and by implication , smeared the authoress [ sic ] . " Notwithstanding the unbanning , the chairman of the Appeal Board told a press reporter , " Don 't buy [ the book ] — it is not worth buying . Very badly written ... This is also why we eventually passed it . " The Appeal Board described the book as " one @-@ sided " in its attack on whites and the South African Government , and concluded , " As a result ... the effect of the book will be counterproductive rather than subversive . " 
 Gordimer 's response to the novel 's unbanning was , " I was indifferent to the opinions of the original censorship committee who neither read nor understood the book properly in the first place , and to those of the committee of literary experts who made this discovery , since both are part of the censorship system . " She attributed the unbanning to her international stature and the " serious attention " the book had received abroad . A number of prominent authors and literary organisations had protested the banning , including Iris Murdoch , Heinrich Böll , Paul Theroux , John Fowles , Frank Kermode , The Association of American Publishers and International PEN . Gordimer objected to the unbanning of the book because she felt the government was trying placate her with " special treatment " , and said that the same thing would not have happened had she been black . But she did describe the action as " something of a precedent for other writers " because in the book she had published a copy of an actual pamphlet written and distributed by students in the 1976 Soweto uprising , which the authorities had banned . She said that similar " transgressions " in the future would be difficult for the censors to clamp down on . 
 While Burger 's Daughter was still banned in South Africa , a copy was smuggled into Nelson Mandela 's prison cell on Robben Island , and later a message was sent out saying that he had " thought well of it " . Gordimer said , " That means more to me than any other opinion it could have gained . " Mandela also requested a meeting with her , and she applied several times to visit him on the Island , but was declined each time . She was , however , at the prison gates waiting for him when he was released in 1990 , and she was amongst the first he wanted to talk to . In 2007 Gordimer sent Mandela an inscribed copy of Burger 's Daughter to " replace the ' imprisoned ' copy " , and in it she thanked him for his opinion of the book , and for " <unk> leading the struggle " . 
 = = = What Happened to Burger 's Daughter = = = 
 To voice her disapproval of the banning and unbanning of the book , Gordimer published What Happened to Burger 's Daughter or How South African Censorship Works , a book of essays written by her and others . It was published in Johannesburg in 1980 by Taurus , a small underground publishing house established in the late @-@ 1970s to print anti @-@ apartheid literature and other material South African publishers would avoid for fear of censorship . Its publications were generally distributed privately or sent to bookshops to be given to customers free to avoid attracting the attention of the South African authorities . 
 What Happened to Burger 's Daughter has two essays by Gordimer and one by University of the Witwatersrand law professor John Dugard . Gordimer 's essays document the publication history and fate of Burger 's Daughter , and respond to the Publications Control Board 's reasons for banning the book . Dugard 's essay examines censorship in South Africa within the country 's legal framework . Also included in the book is the Director of Publications 's communiqué stating its reasons for banning the book , and the reasons for lifting the ban three months later by the Publications Appeal Board . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Burger 's Daughter was first published in the United Kingdom , in hardcover , in June 1979 by Jonathan Cape , and October that year in the United States , also in hardcover , by Viking Press . The first paperback edition was published in the United Kingdom in November 1980 by Penguin Books . A unabridged 12 @-@ hour @-@ 51 @-@ minute audio cassette edition , narrated by Nadia May , was released in the United States in July 1993 by Blackstone Audio . 
 Burger 's Daughter has been translated into several other languages since its first publication in English in 1979 : 
 = = Style = = 
 The narrative mode of Burger 's Daughter alternates between Rosa Burger 's internal monologues and the anonymous narrator , whom Gordimer calls " Rosa 's conscious analysis , her reasoning approach to her life and to this country , and ... my exploration as a writer of what she doesn 't know even when she thinks she 's finding out " . Abdul R. JanMohamed , professor of English and African American Literature at Emory University , calls this change of perspective a " stylistic bifurcation " , which allows the reader to see Rosa from different points of view , rendering her a complex character who is full of contradictions . The two narratives , the subjective and the objective viewpoints , complement each other . JanMohamed explains that while the objective , third @-@ person narrative is factual and neutral , the subjective first @-@ person narrative , Rosa 's voice , is intense and personal . Rosa 's monologues are directed towards Conrad , her lover , in the first part of the story , her father 's former wife , Katya , while Rosa is in France , and her father after she returns to South Africa . Because her imagined audience is always sympathetic and never questions her , Rosa 's confessions are honest and open . 
 According to academic Robin Ellen Visel , Rosa is a complicated person , with roles thrust on her by her parents , which suppresses her own goals and desires . Gordimer explained how she constructed the book 's narrative structure to convey this struggle and explain Rosa : " [ T ] he idea came to me of Rosa questioning herself as others see her and whether what they see is what she really is . And that developed into another stylistic question — if you 're going to tell the book in the first person , to whom are you talking ? " This led to Gordimer creating Conrad and Katya for Rosa to use as sounding boards to question and explain herself . 
 Irene Kacandes , professor of German Studies and Comparative Literature at Dartmouth College , calls Rosa 's internal monologues <unk> , or " <unk> witnessing " , in which " a character witnesses to the self about the character 's own experience " . Kacandes points out that Rosa believes she would not be able to <unk> anything if she knew someone was listening . In an apostrophe addressed to Conrad , Rosa remarks , " If you knew I was talking to you I wouldn 't be able to talk " . But because Rosa is not vocalising her monologues , no one can hear her , and she is able to proceed with her self @-@ analysis unhindered . Kacandes says " Rosa imagines an interlocutor and then occupies that place herself . " 
 Gordimer uses quotation dashes to punctuate her dialogue in Burger 's Daughter instead of traditional quotation marks . She told an interviewer in 1980 that readers have complained that this sometimes makes it difficult to identify the speaker , but she added " I don 't care . I simply cannot stand he @-@ said / she @-@ said anymore . And if I can 't make readers know who ’ s speaking from the tone of voice , the turns of phrase , well , then I 've failed . " 
 Visel says that the use of dashes for dialogue " conveys the sense of conversation set within the flow of memory " and " is congruent with the sense of Rosa speaking essentially to herself , speakers and listeners in her conversations being dead or unreachable . " 
 = = Genre = = 
 Some commentators have classified Burger 's Daughter as a political and historical novel . In their book Socialist Cultures East and West : A Post @-@ Cold War Reassessment , M. Keith Booker and <unk> <unk> call Gordimer 's work one of the " representative examples of African historical novels " , saying that it is an " intense engagement with the history of apartheid in South Africa " . Academic Robert Boyers calls it " one of the best political novels of our period " , and an historical novel because of its " retrospective homage to generations past " . Gordimer herself described Burger 's Daughter as " an historical critique " , and a political novel , which she defines as a work that " explicates the effects of politics on human lives and , unlike a political tract , does not propagate an ideology " . 
 Visel calls the novel " fictionalised history " that shadows the history of anti @-@ apartheid activism in South Africa , from 1946 and the African Mine Workers ' Strike ( Lionel and Cathy 's marriage ) , to 1977 and the clampdown on dissidents ( Rosa 's detention ) . Other notable events include the coming to power of the National Party in 1948 ( Rosa 's year of birth ) , the Treason Trial of Nelson Mandela and others in 1956 , the Sharpeville massacre in 1960 , and the Soweto uprising in 1976 ( Rosa 's return to South Africa ) . Dominic Head writes in his book Nadine Gordimer that in Burger 's Daughter " the life of ... Rosa ... runs in parallel with the history of modern South Africa " . 
 Several critics have called Burger 's Daughter a Bildungsroman , or coming @-@ of @-@ age story , although not the traditional ones which , according to Susan Gardner in her essay " Still Waiting for the Great Feminist Novel " , are dominated by male protagonists . While Gordimer was not a feminist author and Burger 's Daughter is not a feminist novel , Gardner suggests that the book has " a discernible woman @-@ concerned subtext " , making it " impossible for feminists to dismiss or ignore " . She says it has " a potential feminist awareness " that is " obscured by more conventional patriarchal writing codes " . Yelin writes that after the death of Rosa 's mother , the statement " Already she had taken on her mother 's role in the household , giving loving support to her father " illustrates " the continuing hegemony of bourgeois @-@ patriarchal ideology " in the novel . Yelin suggests that this inconsistency is responsible for Rosa 's struggle , the " contradiction between feminism ( Rosa 's liberation as a woman ) and the struggle for justice in South Africa " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Gordimer says Rosa 's role in society is imprinted on her from a young age by her activist parents , and she grows up in the shadow of her father 's political legacy . Scholar Carol P. Marsh @-@ Lockett writes that everyone sees Rosa as Lionel Burger 's daughter with duties and responsibilities to her father , and not Rosa the individual . In fulfilling these expectations , she denies herself an identity of her own . JanMohamed says it is only when Conrad encourages her to look beyond her self @-@ sacrifices that Rosa starts examining the conflicts in her life , namely her commitment to help others versus her desire for a private life . In an attempt to resolve these conflicts , Rosa contemplates turning to blacks , but she is wary of this because , according to the book 's anonymous narrator , white South Africans tend to use blacks as a way " of perceiving sensual redemption , as romantics do , or of perceiving fears , as racialists do " . JanMohamed notes that Rosa 's father was a romantic who established genuine friendships with blacks to overcome his " sensual redemption " , but she is unsure of where she stands . Visel says that Rosa 's only way to free herself from these commitments to her family and the revolution is to " defect " and go to France . John Cooke , in his essay " Leaving the Mother 's House " , notes that " By putting her defection in such stark terms , Gordimer makes her strongest statement of the need , whatever the consequence , of a child to claim a life of her own " . 
 Many of Gordimer 's works have explored the impact of apartheid on individuals in South Africa . Journalist and novelist George Packer writes that , as in several of her novels , a theme in Burger 's Daughter is of racially divided societies in which well @-@ meaning whites unexpectedly encounter a side of black life they did not know about . Literary critic Carolyn Turgeon says that while Lionel was able to work with black activists in the ANC , Rosa discovers that with the rise of the Black Consciousness Movement , many young blacks tend to view white liberals as irrelevant in their struggle for liberation . Rosa witnesses this first hand listening to the black university student in Soweto ( Duma <unk> ) and , later , in London , her childhood friend " Baasie " ( <unk> <unk> ) , who both dismiss her father as unimportant . 
 Author and academic Louise Yelin says that Gordimer 's novels often feature white South Africans opposed to apartheid and racism who try to find their place in a multiracial society . Gordimer suggested options for whites in a 1959 essay " Where Do Whites Fit In ? " , but the rise of Black Consciousness in the 1970s questioned whites ' involvement in the liberation struggle . Stephen Clingman has suggested in The Novels of Nadine Gordimer : History from the Inside that Burger 's Daughter is Gordimer 's response to the Black Consciousness Movement and an investigation into a " role for whites in the context of Soweto and after " . 
 Gordimer wrote in an essay in What Happened to Burger 's Daughter that " The theme of my novel is human conflict between the desire to live a personal , private life , and the rival claim of social responsibility to one 's fellow men " . Dominic Head says that Gordimer 's novels often experiment with the relation of " public and private realms " , and that Burger 's Daughter " represents one of the peaks in this experimentation " . Boyers notes that the theme of " public and private " , and the relation between them , is balanced in the book " so as to privilege neither one not the other " . 
 According to Packer , another common theme in Gordimer 's novels is the choices ordinary people who live in oppressive regimes are forced to make . Literary critics Turgeon and Carli Coetzee explain that when she realises that whites are not always welcome in the anti @-@ apartheid liberation movements , Rosa repudiates her father 's struggle and leaves the country . Marsh @-@ Lockett says that part of Rosa 's struggle is forging her own identity , and this decision to rebel against her dead father is a bold step , although she does return later to South Africa to become a committed activist and ultimately a political prisoner . But , according to Coetzee , what Rosa achieves is what her father never could : to have a life of her own while still remaining politically committed . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Burger 's Daughter was generally well @-@ received by critics . Anthony Sampson , a British writer , journalist and former editor of Drum , a magazine in Johannesburg in the 1950s , wrote in The New York Times that this is Gordimer 's " most political and most moving novel " . He said that its " political authenticity " set in the " historical background of real people " makes it " harshly realistic " , and added that the blending of people , landscapes and politics remind one of the great Russian pre @-@ revolutionary novels . In The New York Review of Books , Irish politician , writer and historian Conor Cruise O 'Brien compared Gordimer 's writing to that of Russian novelist Ivan Turgenev , and described Burger 's Daughter as " elegant " and " fastidious " and belonging to a " cultivated upper class " . He said this style is not at odds with the subject matter of the story because Rosa Burger , daughter of a revolutionary , believes herself to be an " aristocrat of the revolution " . 
 Tess Lemmon writing in the New Internationalist magazine called Burger 's Daughter " arguably [ Gordimer 's ] best novel " , and complimented her on her characterisation , attention to detail , and ability to blend " the personal and the political " . Lemmon noted that the book 's " subtle , lyrical writing " brings the reader into the characters ' minds , which " is an enlivening but uncomfortable place to be " . In an essay published in The New York Times Book Review , American novelist and critic A. G. <unk> stated that despite the troubled times Gordimer was living through at the time , in Burger 's Daughter she remains " subdued " and " sober " , and even though she " scarcely raises her voice " , it still " reverberates over a full range of emotion " . 
 In a review of the book in World Literature Today , Sheila Roberts said that Gordimer 's mixture of first- and third @-@ person narrative is " an interesting device " which is " superbly handled " by the author . She commented that it allows the reader to get inside Rosa , and then step back and observe her from a distance . Roberts described Gordimer 's handling of Rosa 's predicament , continuing the role her father had given her versus abandoning the struggle and finding herself , as " extremely moving and memorable " . In The Sewanee Review Bruce King wrote that Burger 's Daughter is a " large , richly complex , densely textured novel " . He said that it " fill [ s ] with unresolvable ironies and complications " as Gordimer explores the dilemmas faced by her characters in the South African political landscape . 
 American writer Joseph Epstein had mixed feelings about the book . He wrote in The Hudson Review that it is a novel that " gives scarcely any pleasure in the reading but which one is pleased to have read nonetheless " . Epstein complained about it being " a mighty slow read " with " off the mark " descriptions and " stylistic infelicities " . He felt that big subjects sometimes " relieve a novelist of the burdens of nicety of style " . Epstein said that reading the book is like " looking at a mosaic very close up , tile by tile " , and that the big picture only emerges near the end . But he complimented Gordimer on the way in which she unravels Rosa 's fate , saying that it is " a tribute to her art " . 
 = = Honours and awards = = 
 Despite being banned in South Africa , Burger 's Daughter won the 1980 Central News Agency ( CNA ) Literary Award , a prominent literary award in that country . In 1991 Gordimer was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature for her works of " intense immediacy " and " extremely complicated personal and social relationships in her environment " . During the award ceremony speech by Sture <unk> , Permanent Secretary of the Swedish Academy , Burger 's Daughter was cited as one of Gordimer 's novels in which " artistry and morality fuse " . 
 In 2001 the novel was named one of South Africa 's top 10 books in The Guardian in the United Kingdom by author Gillian Slovo , daughter of South African anti @-@ apartheid activists Joe Slovo and Ruth First . Following Gordimer 's death in 2014 , The Guardian and Time magazine put Burger 's Daughter in their list of the top five Gordimer books . Indian writer Neel Mukherjee included Burger 's Daughter in his 2015 " top 10 books about revolutionaries " , also published in The Guardian . 
 = AP Statistics = 
 Advanced Placement Statistics ( AP Statistics , AP Stat or AP Stats ) is a college @-@ level high school statistics course offered in the United States through the College Board 's Advanced Placement program . This course is equivalent to a one semester , non @-@ calculus @-@ based introductory college statistics course and is normally offered to juniors and seniors in high school . 
 One of the College Board 's more recent additions , the AP Statistics exam was first administered in May 1996 to supplement the AP program 's math offerings , which had previously consisted of only AP Calculus AB and BC . In the United States , enrollment in AP Statistics classes has increased at a higher rate than in any other AP class . 
 Students may receive college credit or upper @-@ level college course placement upon the successful completion of a three @-@ hour exam ordinarily administered in May . The exam consists of a multiple choice section and a free response section that are both 90 minutes long . Each section is weighted equally in determining the students ' composite scores . 
 = = History = = 
 The Advanced Placement program has offered students the opportunity to pursue college @-@ level courses while in high school . Along with the Educational Testing Service , the College Board administered the first AP Statistics exam in May 1997 . The course was first taught to students in the 1996 @-@ 1997 academic year . Prior to that , the only mathematics courses offered in the AP program included AP Calculus AB and BC . Students who didn 't have a strong background in college @-@ level math , however , found the AP Calculus program inaccessible and sometimes declined to take a math course in their senior year . Since the number of students required to take statistics in college is almost as large as the number of students required to take calculus , the College Board decided to add an introductory statistics course to the AP program . Since the prerequisites for such a program doesn 't require mathematical concepts beyond those typically taught in a second @-@ year algebra course , the AP program 's math offerings became accessible to a much wider audience of high school students . The AP Statistics program addressed a practical need as well , since the number of students enrolling in majors that use statistics has grown . A total of 7 @,@ 667 students took the exam during the first administration , which is the highest number of students to take an AP exam in its first year . Since then , the number of students taking the exam rapidly grew to 98 @,@ 033 in 2007 , making it one of the 10 largest AP exams . 
 = = Course = = 
 If the course is provided by their school , students normally take AP Statistics in their junior or senior year and may decide to take it concurrently with a pre @-@ calculus course . This offering is intended to imitate a one @-@ semester , non @-@ calculus based college statistics course , but high schools can decide to offer the course over one semester , two trimesters , or a full academic year . 
 The six @-@ member AP Statistics Test Development Committee is responsible for developing the curriculum . Appointed by the College Board , the committee consists of three college statistics teachers and three high school statistics teachers who are typically asked to serve for terms of three years . 
 = = = Curriculum = = = 
 Emphasis is placed not on actual arithmetic computation , but rather on conceptual understanding and interpretation . The course curriculum is organized around four basic themes ; the first involves exploring data and covers 20 – 30 % of the exam . Students are expected to use graphical and numerical techniques to analyze distributions of data , including univariate , bivariate , and categorical data . The second theme involves planning and conducting a study and covers 10 – 15 % of the exam . Students must be aware of the various methods of data collection through sampling or experimentation and the sorts of conclusions that can be drawn from the results . The third theme involves probability and its role in anticipating patterns in distributions of data . This theme covers 20 – 30 % of the exam . The fourth theme , which covers 30 – 40 % of the exam , involves statistical inference using point estimation , confidence intervals , and significance tests . 
 = = Exam = = 
 Along with the course curriculum , the exam is developed by the AP Statistics Test Development Committee as well . With the help of other college professors , the committee creates a large pool of possible questions that is pre @-@ tested with college students taking statistics courses . The test is then refined to an appropriate level of difficulty and clarity . Afterwards , the Educational Testing Service is responsible for printing and administering the exam . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The exam is offered every year in May . Students are not expected to memorize any formulas ; rather , a list of common statistical formulas related to descriptive statistics , probability , and inferential statistics is provided . Moreover , tables for the normal , Student 's t and chi @-@ squared distributions are given as well . Students are also expected to use graphing calculators with statistical capabilities . The exam is three hours long with ninety minutes allotted to complete each of its two sections : multiple choice and free @-@ response . The multiple choice portion of the exam consists of forty questions with five possible answers each . The free response section contains six open @-@ ended questions that are often long and divided into multiple parts . The first five of these questions may require twelve minutes each to answer and normally relate to one topic or category . The sixth question consists of a broad @-@ ranging investigative task and may require approximately twenty @-@ five minutes to answer . 
 = = = Grading = = = 
 The multiple choice section is scored immediately after the exam by computer . One point is awarded for each correct answer , no points are credited or deducted for unanswered questions , and points are no longer deducted for having an incorrect answer . 
 Students ' answers to the free @-@ response section are reviewed in early June by readers that include high school and college statistics teachers gathered in a designated location . The readers use a pre @-@ made rubric to assess the answers and normally grade only one question in a given exam . Each question is graded on a scale from 0 to 4 , with a 4 representing the most complete response . Communication and clarity in the answers receive a lot of emphasis in the grading . 
 Both sections are weighted equally when the composite score is calculated . The composite score is reported on a scale from 1 to 5 , with a score of 5 being the highest possible . 
 = = = Textbooks = = = 
 Yates , Daniel S. ; Moore , David S. ; McCabe , George P. ( 1998 ) . The practice of statistics : TI @-@ 83 graphing calculator enhanced . Macmillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 7167 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 08 @-@ 04 . 
 Bock , David E. ; Paul F. <unk> ; Richard D. De Veaux ( 2010 ) . Stats : Modeling the World ( 3rd ed . ) . Pearson / Addison @-@ Wesley / Prentice @-@ Hall . ISBN 0 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . Retrieved 2010 @-@ 02 @-@ 18 . 
 Peck , Roxy ; Chris Olsen ; Jay L. Devore ( 2008 ) . Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis ( 3rd ed . ) . <unk> Learning . ISBN 0 @-@ 495 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Retrieved 2009 @-@ 08 @-@ 04 . 
 Watkins , Ann E. ; Richard L. <unk> ; George W. Cobb ( 2004 ) . Statistics in Action : Understanding a World of Data . Key Curriculum Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 313 @-@ 7 . 
 Diez , David M. ; Christopher D. Barr ; Mine <unk> @-@ <unk> ; Leah <unk> ( 2015 ) . Advanced High School Statistics . <unk> , Inc . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 000 @-@ 5 . 
 = = = Teaching guides = = = 
 Cobb , George ( 1992 ) . In Steen , Lynn Arthur , ed . Teaching Statistics : More Data , Less Lecturing . Washington , D.C. : Mathematical Association of America . 
 Gordon , Florence and Sheldon , ed . ( 1992 ) . " Statistics for the Twenty @-@ First Century " . MAA Notes ( Washington , D.C. : Mathematical Association of America ) 26 . 
 Moore , Thomas , ed . ( 2000 ) . " Teaching Statistics : Resources for Undergraduate Instructors " . MAA Notes ( Washington , D.C. : Mathematical Association of America ) 52 . 
 National Council of Teachers of Mathematics ( 2003 ) . Principles and Standards for School Mathematics ( 3 ed . ) . Reston , VA : National Council of Teachers of Mathematics . 
 = Lo Mejor de Mí ( song ) = 
 " Lo Mejor de Mí " ( " All My Best " ) is a song written and produced by Rudy Pérez and first recorded by Spanish singer Juan Ramon for his second studio album Por <unk> Amado Tanto ( 1990 ) . In the song , the protagonist tells his lover how he gave his best despite not meeting his lover 's expectation . In 1997 , Mexican recording artist Cristian Castro covered the song for his fifth studio album Lo Mejor de Mí which Pérez also produced and arranged . Castro 's version peaked at number @-@ one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and the Billboard Latin Pop Songs charts in the United States . The song received a Billboard Latin Music Awards and a Lo Nuestro nomination for Pop Song of the Year . Pérez earned the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers award in the Pop / Ballad field . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1990 , Spanish recording artist Juan Ramon released his second studio album Por <unk> Amado Tanto which was arranged and produced by Cuban @-@ American musician Rudy Pérez . Pérez composed three songs for the album including the track " Lo Mejor de Mí " . The song speaks of a failed relationship between the protagonist and the lover where the protagonist gave the best they could despite not meeting the lover 's expectation . One year later , Argentine musician María Martha Serra Lima covered the song on her studio album of the same name which was also arranged and produced by Pérez . Pérez also proposed the song to be covered by Mexican singer Luis Miguel for his album Segundo Romance ( 1994 ) . However Miguel rejected the song because he felt it was more of a ballad than a bolero . 
 In 1997 , Mexican recording artist Cristian Castro covered the song for his Grammy @-@ nominated album of the same name with Pérez 's involvement with the production and arrangement . It was released as the lead single from the album and the first single under his new record label BMG U.S. Latin following his departure from Fonovisa Records a year earlier . The song is performed in the bolero style . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Castro performed the song live in Mexico City , Mexico on October 28 , 1997 as part of the promotion for the album . In addition , a music video was released 1998 which was directed by Willie Souza and was filmed in a near Cuernavaca . The song was remixed by DJ Sugar Kid which was included in Castro 's album Remixes ( 2000 ) . It also has been featured in his compilations album Grandes Hits ( 2002 ) and Nunca Voy a Olvidarte ... Los Exitos ( 2005 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Lo Mejor de Mí " debuted on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart at number 24 on the week of September 13 , 1997 , climbing to the top ten one week later . The song peaked atop of the chart on the week of November 22 , 1997 succeeding " Si Tu Supieras " by Alejandro Fernández and was replaced by " Y Hubo Alguien " by Marc Anthony a week later . On the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , the song debuted at number ten on the chart . It reached number one on the chart on the week of October 4 , 1997 where it spent a total a five nonconsecutive weeks on top . It was second best @-@ performing Latin pop song of 1998 after " Vuelve " by Ricky Martin . 
 On the review of the album , an editor for Billboard felt that the song " highlights the much @-@ anticipated label by this Mexican singing star " . " Lo Mejor de Mí " was awarded Pop Song of the Year at the 1998 Billboard Latin Music Awards and was nominated at the same category the following year . It was also nominated Pop Song of the Year at the 9th Lo Nuestro Awards but lost to " Si Tu Supieras " by Alejandro Fernández . Pérez earned the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers award for Pop / <unk> Song of 1998 for the song and was awarded 1999 in the same category . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = <unk> = 
 A diaphoneme is an abstract phonological unit that identifies a correspondence between related sounds of two or more varieties of a language or language cluster . For example , the vowel that constitutes the English word eye is pronounced differently depending on dialect ( [ aɪ ̯ ] or [ <unk> ̯ ] in RP and General American , [ ae ̯ ] or [ əi ̯ ] in Scottish English , [ <unk> ̯ ] in Australian English , [ <unk> ̯ ] in Irish English , [ aː ] in South African English , and [ aː ] or [ əi ̯ ] in Southern American English , etc . ) but , in the appropriate context , all of these variants are perceived by speakers as equivalent , and thus constitute a single diaphoneme . The word diaphone was originally used with the same meaning , but was later repurposed to refer to any of the particular variants , making the relationship between diaphoneme and diaphone analogous to that between phoneme and allophone . 
 <unk> studies the realization of diaphones across dialects , and is important if an orthography is to be adequate for more than one dialect of a language . In historical linguistics , it is concerned with the reflexes of an ancestral phoneme as a language splits into dialects , such as the modern realizations of Old English / oː / . 
 = = Usage = = 
 The term diaphone first appeared in usage by <unk> like Daniel Jones and Harold E. Palmer . Jones , who was more interested in transcription and coping with dialectal variation than with how cognitively real the phenomenon is , originally used diaphone to refer to the family of sounds that are realized differently depending on dialect but that speakers consider to be the same ; an individual dialect or speaker 's realization of this diaphone was called a diaphonic variant . Because of confusion related to usage , Jones later coined the term diaphoneme to refer to his earlier sense of diaphone ( the class of sounds ) and used diaphone to refer to the variants . 
 A diaphonemic inventory is a specific diasystem ( a term popularized by Uriel Weinreich ) that superimposes dialectal contrasts to access all contrasts in all dialects that are included . This consists of a shared core inventory and , when accounting for contrasts not made by all dialects ( whether they are historical contrasts that have been lost or innovative ones not made in all varieties ) , only as many contrasts as are needed . The diaphonemic approach gets away from the assumption that linguistic communities are homogeneous , allows multiple varieties to be described in the same terms ( something important for situations where people have abilities in more than one variety ) , and helps in ascertaining where speakers make diaphonic identifications as a result of similarities and differences between the varieties involved . 
 The linguistic variable , a similar concept presented by William Labov , refers to features with variations that are referentially identical but carry social and stylistic meaning . This could include phonological , as well as morphological and syntactic phenomena . Labov also developed variable rules analysis , with variable rules being those that all members of a speech community ( presumably ) possess but vary in the frequency of use . The latter concept met resistance from scholars for a number of reasons including the argument from critics that knowledge of rule probabilities was too far from speakers ' competence . Because of these problems , use of variable rules analysis died down by the end of the 1980s . Nevertheless , the linguistic variable is still used in sociolinguistics . For Labov , grouping variants together was justified by their tendency to fluctuate between each other within the same set of words . For example , Labov presented the variants ( among New York speakers ) of the vowel of bad or dance : 
 The different phonetic values were assigned numerical values that were then used in an overall score index . 
 <unk> is when phonemic distinctions from one 's primary language are imposed on the sounds of the second system where they are not required ; <unk> of phonemes occurs when two sounds of the second system are not maintained because they are not present in the primary system . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Inspired by <unk> ( 1931 ) , Uriel Weinreich first advocated the use of diasystems in structural dialectology , and suggested that such a system would represent a higher level of abstraction that can unite related dialects into a single description and transcription . While phonemic systems describe the speech of a single variety , diaphonemic systems can reflect the contrasts that aren 't made by all varieties being represented . The way these differ can be shown in the name New York . This word may be transcribed phonemically as / <unk> <unk> / in American English , which does not allow the cluster / <unk> / as a syllable onset ; in Received Pronunciation , syllable @-@ final / r / doesn 't occur so this name would be transcribed / njuː <unk> / to reflect that pronunciation . A diaphonemic transcription such as / njuː <unk> / ( with both the / j / and the / r / ) would thus cover both dialects . Neither is described exactly , but both are derivable from the diaphonemic transcription . 
 The desire of building a diasystem to accommodate all English dialects , combined with a blossoming generative phonology , prompted American dialectologists to attempt the construction of an " overall system " of English phonology by analyzing dialectal distinctions as differences in the ordering of phonological rules as well as in the presence or absence of such rules . Bickerton ( 1973 : 641 ) even went so far as to claim that principled description of <unk> code @-@ switching would be impossible without such rules . 
 An example of this concept is presented in Saporta ( 1965 : 223 ) with a phonological difference between Castilian and Uruguayan Spanish : 
 Without the use of ordered rules , Uruguayan Spanish could be interpreted as having two additional phonemes and <unk> vowel alternation with its plural marker . Attempting to construct a diasystem that encodes such a variety would thus represent all Spanish varieties as having seven vowel phonemes ( with contrasts only in final position ) . Due to both varieties having closed allophones of mid vowels in open syllables and open allophones in closed syllables , using ordered rules minimizes the differences so that the underlying form for both varieties is the same and Uruguayan Spanish simply has a subsequent rule that deletes / s / at the end of a syllable ; constructing a diaphonemic system thus becomes a relatively straightforward process . Saporta ( 1965 : 220 ) suggests that the rules needed to account for dialectal differences , even if not psychologically real , may be historically accurate . 
 The nature of an overall system for English was controversial : the analysis in Trager & Smith ( 1951 ) was popular amongst American linguists for a time ( in the face of criticism , particularly from Hans Kurath ) ; James Sledd put forth his own diaphonemic system that accommodated Southern American English ; both <unk> ( 1971 ) and Reed ( 1972 ) modified the scheme of The Sound Pattern of English by focusing on the diaphoneme , believing that it could address <unk> better than structuralist approaches ; and The Pronunciation of English in the Atlantic States ( <unk> ) by Kurath and McDavid combined several dialects into one system transcribed in the IPA . More recently , The Cambridge Grammar of the English Language makes use of a diaphonemic transcription of Standard English so that examples can be expressed concisely without favoring any particular accent . 
 Weinreich ( 1954 ) argued that Trager & Smith ( 1951 ) fell short in accurately representing dialects because their methodology involved attempting to create a diasystem before establishing the relevant component phonemic systems . Voegelin ( 1956 : 122 ) argues a similar problem occurs in the study of Hopi where transfer of training leads <unk> to fit features of a dialect under study into the system of dialects already studied . 
 Beginning with <unk> ( 1931 ) linguists attempting to account for dialectal differences have generally distinguished between three types : 
 Phonological : the phonemic inventories and phonotactic restrictions 
 Phonetic : how a given phoneme is realized phonetically ( RP and Australian English , for example , have almost the same exact phoneme system but with notably different realizations of the vowels ) . This distinction covers differences in the range of allophonic variation . 
 Incidence : one phoneme rather than another occurs in a given word or group of words ( such as grass , which has the same vowel of farce in RP but not in GA . ) 
 Wells expanded on this by splitting up the phonological category into " systemic " differences ( those of inventory ) and " structural " differences ( those of phonotactics ) . 
 In addition , Both Wells and Weinreich mention <unk> overlap , wherein the same phone ( or a nearly identical one ) corresponds to different phonemes , depending on accent . Some examples : 
 Autistic in Canadian English overlaps with the way speakers of Received Pronunciation say artistic : [ <unk> ] 
 Impossible in General American overlaps with RP impassable : [ <unk> ̩ ] 
 Hankey ( 1965 : 229 ) notes a similar phenomenon in Western Pennsylvania , where [ <unk> ] occurs either as the vowel of ashes or as the vowel of tiger but no speaker merges the two vowels ( i.e. a speaker who says [ <unk> ] will not say [ <unk> ] ) . 
 <unk> overlap occurs between the three dialects of <unk> , which have the same phonological system even though cognate words often do not have the same reflexes of this system . For example , while the Central and <unk> dialects both have ch and ts @-@ type sounds , the words they are found in are reversed : 
 Yuen Ren Chao created a diaphonemic transcription of major Chinese varieties , in both Latin and Chinese character versions , called " General Chinese " . It originally ( 1927 ) covered the various Wu dialects , but by 1983 had expanded to cover the major dialects of Mandarin , Yue , Hakka , and Min as well . Apart from a few irregularities , GC can be read equally well in any of those dialects , and several others besides . 
 Qur 'anic Arabic uses a diaphonemic writing system that indicates both the pronunciation in Mecca , the western dialect the Qur 'an was written in , and that of eastern Arabia , the prestige dialect of pre @-@ Islamic poetry . For example , final * aj was pronounced something like [ eː ] in Mecca , and written <unk> / j / , while it had merged with [ aː ] in eastern Arabia and was written as <unk> / ʔ / . In order to accommodate both pronunciations , the basic letter of Meccan Arabic was used , but the diacritic was dropped : <unk> . Similarly , the glottal stop had been lost in Meccan Arabic in all positions but initially , so the Meccan letters were retained with the eastern glottal stop indicated with a diacritic <unk> . 
 = = Bilingualism = = 
 Einar Haugen expanded the diaphonic approach to the study of bilingualism , believing diaphones represented the process of interlingual identification wherein sounds from different languages are <unk> linked into a single category . Because interlingual identifications may happen between unrelated varieties , it is possible to construct a diasystem for many different language contact situations , with the appropriateness of such a construction depending on its purpose and its simplicity depending on how isomorphic the phonology of the systems are . For example , the Spanish of Los Ojos ( a small village in Rio Arriba County , New Mexico ) and the local variety of Southwestern English are fairly isomorphic with each other so a diaphonic approach for such a language contact situation would be relatively straightforward . Nagara ( 1972 ) makes use of a diaphonic approach in discussing the phonology of the pidgin English used by Japanese immigrants on Hawaiian plantations . 
 Both Haugen and Weinreich considered the use of phonemes beyond a single language to be inappropriate when phonemic systems between languages were incommensurable with each other . Similarly , Shen ( 1952 ) , argues that phonemic representations may lead to confusion when dealing with phonological interference and Nagara ( 1972 : 56 ) remarks that narrow phonetic transcription can be cumbersome , especially when discussing other grammatical features like syntax and morphology . <unk> , which phonemic systems don 't account for , may be important in the process of interference and interlingual identifications . 
 = = = Borrowing = = = 
 Similarly , the term diaphone can be used in discussions of cognates that occur in different languages due to borrowing . Specifically , Haugen ( 1956 : 46 , 67 ) used the term to refer to phonemes that are equated by speakers cross @-@ linguistically because of similarities in shape and / or distribution . For example , loanwords in Huave having " diaphonic identification " with Spanish include <unk> ( ' oil ' , from Spanish <unk> ) and <unk> ( ' horse ' , from Spanish caballo ) . This perception of sameness with native phonology means that speakers of the borrower language ( in this case , Huave ) will hear new features from the loaner language ( in this case , Spanish ) as equivalent to features of their own and substitute in their own when reproducing them . In these <unk> transfers , when phonemes or phonotactic constraints are too different , more extreme compromises may occur ; for example , the English phrase Merry Christmas , when borrowed into Hawaiian , becomes <unk> <unk> . 
 = = <unk> and creoles = = 
 The process of diaphonic identification occurs when pidgins are fashioned ; although lexical and morphosyntactic patterns are shared , speakers often use the phonological systems of their native language , meaning they must learn to recognize such diaphonic correspondences in the speech of others to facilitate the mutual intelligibility of a working pidgin . Bailey ( 1971 ) proposes that rule differences can be used to determine the distance a particular utterance has between a post @-@ creole continuum 's <unk> and <unk> forms . Bickerton ( 1973 : 641 – 642 ) points out that <unk> varieties often have features not derivable from such rules . 
 = = Cognitive reality = = 
 The status of panlectal and polylectal grammars has been subject to debate amongst generative phonologists since the 1970s ; one of the foremost areas of contention in regards to diaphonemes and diasystems is whether they reflect the actual linguistic competence of speakers . William Labov , although warm to the construction of a panlectal grammar , argued that it should be based in speakers ' linguistic competence . Peter Trudgill argues against the formation of diasystems that are not cognitively real and implies that polylectal grammars that are not part of native speakers ' competence are illegitimate . Similarly , Wolfram ( 1982 : 16 ) cautions that polylectal grammars are only appropriate when they " result in claims about speaker @-@ hearer 's capabilities ... " 
 Although no linguists claim that panlectal grammars have psychological validity , and polylectal diasystems are much more likely to be cognitively real for bilingual and <unk> speakers , speakers of only one dialect or language may still be aware of the differences between their own speech and that of other varieties . Take , for example , the word house , which is pronounced : 
 [ <unk> ̯ s ] in Buffalo 
 [ <unk> ̯ s ] in Toronto and Washington , D.C. 
 [ <unk> ̯ s ] in Philadelphia 
 [ <unk> ̯ s ] in Charlottesville . 
 Native speakers are able to calibrate the differences and interpret them as being the same . A similar issue occurs in Chinese . When a " general word , " is shared across multiple mutually unintelligible dialects , it is regarded as the same word even though it is pronounced differently depending on a speaker 's region . Thus a speaker from Beijing and Nanking may pronounce <unk> ( ' throughout ' ) differently , ( [ <unk> ˥ ˩ ] and [ <unk> ̃ ˥ ˩ ] , respectively ) , though they still regard the differences as minor and due to unimportant accentual differences . Because speakers aren 't normally able to hear distinctions not made in their own dialect ( for example , a speaker from the Southern United States who does not distinguish between pin and pen won 't hear the distinction when it 's produced by speakers of other dialects ) , speakers who can hear such a contrast but don 't produce it may still possess the contrast as part of their linguistic repertoire . 
 In discussing contextual cues to vowel identifications in English , Rosner & Pickering ( 1994 ) note that controlling for dialect is largely unimportant for eliciting identifications when vowels are placed between consonants , possibly because the / CVC / structure often forms lexical items that can aid in identification ; identifying vowels in isolation , which don 't often carry such lexical information , must be matched to the listener 's set of vowel prototypes with less deviation than in consonantal contexts . In the first chapter of Trudgill ( 1983 ) , Peter Trudgill makes the case that these semantic contexts form the basis of intelligibility across varieties and that the process is irregular and ad hoc rather than the result of any sort of rule @-@ governed passive polylectal competence . 
 De Camp ( 1971 ) argues that a child 's language acquisition process includes developing the ability to accommodate for the different varieties they are exposed to ( including ones they would not actually employ ) and the social significance of their use . Wilson & Henry ( 1998 : 17 – 18 ) point out that there may be critical periods for this similar to those for language learning . This competence in multiple varieties is arguably the primary vehicle of linguistic change . 
 John Wells argues that going past the common core creates difficulties that add greater complexity and falsely assume a shared underlying form in all accents : 
 " Only by making the diaphonemic representation a rather remote , underlying form , linked to actual surface representations in given accents by a long chain of rules – only in this way could we resolve the obvious difficulties of the taxonomic diaphoneme . " 
 Wells gives the example of straight , late and wait , which rhyme in most English varieties but , because some dialects make phonemic contrasts with the vowels of these words ( specifically , in regions north of England ) , a panlectal transcription would have to encode this contrast despite it being absent for most speakers , making such a system " a linguist 's construct " and not part of the grammar present in any native speaker 's mind ( which is what adherents of such a system attempt to achieve ) . Hall ( 1965 : 337 ) argues that such constructs are appropriate but only when they are removed before the final formulation of grammatical analysis . Wells puts even more weight on the phonotactic difference between rhotic and non @-@ rhotic accents — the former have an underlying / r / in words like derby and star while the latter , arguably , do not — and to the unstressed vowel of happy , which aligns phonetically with the vowel of kit in some varieties and that of fleece in others . 
 Hans Kurath , particularly prominent in comparative analysis of British and American regional features , makes the case that the systematic features of British and American English largely agree but for a handful of divergences , for example : 
 <unk> / r / 
 <unk> and <unk> varieties of / e / 
 New England short / ɵ / 
 coalescence of / ɑ / and / ɔ / 
 variation of / ʊ / and / u / in a few lexical items 
 the vowel of poor , door , and sure 
 variations in / aɪ / and / <unk> / 
 Despite downplaying the divergences , Kurath argued that there is no " total pattern " ( a term from Trager & Smith ( 1951 ) ) that can be imposed on all English dialects , nor of even American ones : 
 " The linguist must analyze the system of each dialect separately before he can know what systematic features are shared by all dialects , or by groups of dialects . He must distinguish between the systematic features and sporadic <unk> features of each dialect , since every dialect has elements that are not built into the system . To regard <unk> features as part of a ' system ' and to impose an ' over @-@ all pattern ' are spurious notions that must be rejected . 
 The description of a cognitively real polylectal grammar came with Trudgill ( 1974 ) ' s set of rules for the speech of Norwich that , presumably , could generate any possible output for a specific population of speakers and was psychologically real for such speakers such that native residents who normally exhibited sound mergers ( e.g. between the vowels of days and daze ) could accurately and consistently make the distinction if called upon to imitate older Norwich speakers . 
 Berdan ( 1977 ) argues that comprehension across varieties , when it is found , isn 't sufficient enough evidence for the claim that polylectal grammars are part of speakers ' linguistic competence . Ballard ( 1971 ) argues that an extrapolated panlectal ( or even broadly polylectal ) grammar from " idiosyncratic " grammars , such as those found in Trudgill ( 1974 ) , would still not be part of speakers ' linguistic competence ; Moulton ( 1985 : 566 ) argues that attempting a polylectal grammar that encodes for a large number of dialects becomes too bizarre and that the traditional reconstructed proto @-@ language is more appropriate for the stated benefits of polylectal grammars . Bailey ( 1973 : 27 , 65 ) , notable for advocating the construction of polylectal grammars , says that the generative rules of such grammars should be panlectal in the sense that they are potentially learned in the acquisition process , though no speaker should be expected to learn all of them . 
 Although question remains to their psychological reality , the usefulness of diaphonemes is shown in Newton ( 1972 : 19 – 23 ) with the loss of the front rounded vowel phoneme / y / in Greek words like <unk> and <unk> ; this vowel merged with / i / in most words and / u / in the rest , though the distribution varies with dialect . A diasystem would thus have to present an additional underlying diaphoneme / y / with generative rules that account for the dialectal distribution . Similarly , the diaphonemic system in Geraghty ( 1983 ) goes beyond the common core , marking contrasts that only appear in some varieties ; Geraghty argues that , because of Fijian marriage customs that prompt exposure to other dialects , speakers may possess a diasystem that represents multiple dialects as part of their communicative competence . 
 = = Representation = = 
 There are a number of ways diaphones are represented in literature . One way is through the IPA , this can be done with slashes , as if they are phonemes , or with other types of brackets : 
 double slashes : / / bɪt / / 
 exclamation points : ! bɪt ! 
 vertical bars : | bɪt | 
 curved brackets : { <unk> } 
 The concept does not necessitate the formation of a transcription system . <unk> can instead be represented with double slashes . This is the case , for example in Orten ( 1991 ) and Weinreich ( 1954 ) where diaphonemes are represented with bracketing : 
 <formula> 
 In this scheme , Scottish Standard English and the accent of Kirkwall are shown to make a phonemic contrast between / k / and / x / while RP and GA are shown to possess only the former so that lock and loch are pronounced differently in the former group and identically in the latter . 
 <unk> systems don 't necessarily even have to utilize the IPA . <unk> are useful in constructing a writing system that accommodates multiple dialects with different <unk> . Even in dialectology , diaphonemic transcriptions may instead be based on the language 's orthography , as is the case with Lee Pederson 's Automated Book Code designed for information from the Linguistic Atlas of the Gulf States. and the diaphonemic transcription system used by Paul Geraghty for related Fijian languages uses a modified Roman script . 
 = Interstate 470 ( Ohio – West Virginia ) = 
 Interstate 470 ( I @-@ 470 ) is a 10 @.@ 63 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 17 @.@ 11 @-@ kilometer ) auxiliary Interstate Highway of I @-@ 70 that bypasses the city of Wheeling , West Virginia , in the United States . I @-@ 470 is one of 13 auxiliary Interstate Highways in Ohio and the only auxiliary Interstate Highway in West Virginia . The western terminus of I @-@ 470 is an interchange with I @-@ 70 in Richland Township , Ohio . Traveling southeast through rural Belmont County , I @-@ 470 approaches the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge , which spans the Ohio River . After crossing the river into Ohio County , West Virginia , the highway turns east towards the Wheeling communities of Bethlehem and Elm Grove and its eastern terminus at I @-@ 70 near Elm Grove . The portion of the highway in West Virginia is named the USS West Virginia Memorial Highway , by proclamation of then Governor Cecil Underwood on the 59th anniversary of the Pearl Harbor attack . 
 Construction of the freeway began in 1975 in the two states . Due to a chronic lack of funding , construction in Ohio was stalled between 1976 and 1981 . After a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ gallon ( 0 @.@ 87 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ liter ) fuel tax increase , Ohio was able to restart construction , and by 1983 , both states had completed construction on the freeway . The three @-@ level diamond interchange with concurrent highways U.S. Route 250 ( US 250 ) and West Virginia Route 2 ( WV 2 ) on the eastern banks of the Ohio River was thought to be the most complex interchange in West Virginia 's Interstate Highway System at the time of construction . On average , between 25 @,@ 500 and 37 @,@ 840 vehicles use the highway daily . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The freeway begins at a partial interchange with I @-@ 70 in Richland Township , Belmont County , Ohio . An exit for County Road 28 ( CR 28 ) , the second @-@ last exit for westbound traffic , provides motorists access to US 40 . The highway curves to the southeast , passing near the Belmont Memorial Park and through woodlands . I @-@ 70 forms part of the northeastern border of <unk> , Pease Township , and briefly parallels High Ridge Road ( CR 214 ) then meets it at a diamond interchange in Pultney Township . High Ridge Road to the north connects back to I @-@ 70 , and to the south links Bellaire to the bypass . I @-@ 470 continues easterly into a valley before intersecting a trumpet interchange with State Route 7 ( SR 7 ) along the western banks of the Ohio River . The Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge carries I @-@ 470 over three rail lines and the Ohio River ( the state line between Ohio and West Virginia ) . The rail lines on the western banks of the river belong to the Norfolk Southern Railway and the Wheeling and Lake Erie Railway 's River Subdivision . The American Automobile Association considers the stretch of I @-@ 470 though Ohio to be a scenic highway due to its natural beauty . 
 I @-@ 470 enters the city limits of Wheeling and Ohio County , West Virginia ; the Greater Wheeling Trail , a rail trail , passes under the freeway as I @-@ 470 approaches a three @-@ level diamond interchange with US 250 and WV 2 . The concurrent highways connect to downtown Wheeling in the north and <unk> to the south . I @-@ 70 climbs from the banks of the river into more woodlands before an interchange with West Bethlehem Boulevard , which provides access to the village of the same name to the south . Continuing easterly , I @-@ 470 comes to its end at an incomplete interchange with its parent , I @-@ 70 , over Wheeling Creek near Elm Grove and to the north of the J.B. Chambers Youth Sports Complex and Wheeling Skate Park . Traffic from I @-@ 470 can only access eastbound I @-@ 70 , and only traffic traveling westbound on I @-@ 70 can access I @-@ 470 . The eastern branch of the Greater Wheeling Trail , which parallels the creek , passes underneath I @-@ 470 as it merges into I @-@ 70 . 
 I @-@ 470 is one of 13 auxiliary Interstate Highways in Ohio and the only auxiliary Interstate Highway in West Virginia . The Ohio Department of Transportation and West Virginia Division of Highways ( ODOT and <unk> ) conduct surveys on their highways to measure traffic volume . This is expressed in terms of average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of average traffic volume for any day of the year . In 2012 , they calculated that 26 @,@ 500 vehicles traveled along the highway at the eastern terminus in West Virginia , and 37 @,@ 840 vehicles used I @-@ 470 across the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge . As part of the Interstate Highway System , the entire route is listed on the National Highway System — a system of roads that are important to the nation 's economy , defense and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans for a southern bypass of Wheeling were first published in 1955 in Bureau of Public Roads document titled General Location of National System of Interstate Highways Including All Additional Routes at Urban Areas . An environmental impact statement was filed in 1972 by West Virginia , detailing the I @-@ 470 interchange with US 250 / WV 2 along the eastern banks of the Ohio River . Tunnels used by the nearby LaBelle Nail Plant , LaBelle being the original French word for the Ohio River , were unearthed during construction of this interchange . A 2 @.@ 5 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) segment in West Virginia was bid out at just over $ 16 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 107 million in 2015 ) in 1976 . 
 Ohio had completed the stretch of highway between I @-@ 70 to just before the SR 7 interchange by 1976 , but due to budget deficiencies work did not resume in Ohio until 1981 . Construction of the bridge linking the two portions of highway was scheduled to be completed by 1981 , but construction did not begin until that year . After a 3 @.@ 3 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ gallon ( 0 @.@ 87 @-@ cent @-@ per @-@ liter ) fuel tax increase , Ohio was able to fund the project again . Bids for construction work on the remainder of the Ohio portion of the freeway were solicited in 1981 , with an estimated construction time of 37 months for the stretch between I @-@ 70 and the bridge . 
 The West Virginia portion was under construction by 1976 , and work in both states was completed by 1983 . The three @-@ level diamond interchange on the eastern banks of the Ohio River was said to be the most complex interchange in West Virginia at the time of construction by the <unk> spokesman Gary Chernenko . The opening of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge , along with another bridge in nearby Moundsville was thought to have reduced the amount of traffic , and thus tolls collected by the nearby Bellaire Bridge by up to 50 per cent in 1987 . 
 Between September 12 and December 22 , 1996 , about 1 @,@ 700 ft ( 518 m ) of I @-@ 470 in Ohio was closed so ODOT could stabilize and repave the roadway , as the rocks forming the top of an abandoned mine underneath the freeway had become overstressed . The Fort Henry Bridge ( which carries I @-@ 70 ) , the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Bridge and the Wheeling Suspension Bridge were all closed in January 2005 , stopping any traffic from Ohio or Wheeling Island from entering mainland West Virginia for a few days because barges broke loose during heavy flooding along the Ohio River . The Wheeling Tunnel was closed for reconstruction work in 2007 , 2008 , and 2010 , causing motorists who wished to travel through on I @-@ 70 to detour . The two detour routes were city streets in downtown Wheeling and the I @-@ 470 loop . 
 Then West Virginia governor , Cecil Underwood , issued a proclamation on December 7 , 2000 , the 59th anniversary of the Attack on Pearl Harbor , naming I @-@ 470 in West Virginia the USS West Virginia Memorial Highway . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Bridget Moynahan = 
 Bridget Moynahan ( born Kathryn Bridget Moynahan , April 28 , 1971 or September 21 , 1972 ) is an American actress and model . She graduated from Longmeadow High School , in Massachusetts , in 1989 and began pursuing a career in modeling . She appeared in department store catalogs and magazines , and , after doing television commercials , she began taking acting lessons . Moynahan made her television debut in a guest appearance in the comedy series Sex and the City in 1999 , where she would later have a recurring role as " Natasha . " 
 She made her feature film debut in Coyote Ugly ( 2000 ) . She was cast in a supporting role in Serendipity ( 2001 ) . Moynahan was also featured in the action film The Sum of All Fears ( 2002 ) , spy thriller The Recruit ( 2003 ) , the science @-@ fiction movie I , Robot ( 2004 ) , and the political thriller Lord of War ( 2005 ) . 
 She starred in the ABC television series Six Degrees , which premiered in September 2006 but was canceled after one season . Moynahan completed work in Elizabeth Allen 's Ramona and <unk> , which was released in July , 2010 , and has starred in the CBS drama Blue Bloods since September 2010 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Moynahan was born in Binghamton , New York , the daughter of Irish American parents Mary Bridget ( née Moriarty ) , a former school teacher , and Edward Bradley Moynahan , a scientist and former administrator at the University of Massachusetts Amherst . She has two brothers , Andy and Sean . Her family moved to Longmeadow , Massachusetts when Moynahan was around seven years old , where she later attended Longmeadow High School and was captain of the girls ' soccer , basketball , and lacrosse teams , graduating in 1989 . She has said that during her childhood , she was a tomboy . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 After graduating from high school , Moynahan pursued a modeling career despite admitting she had never read fashion magazines growing up . She had accompanied a friend to a modeling audition in Springfield , Massachusetts , and was signed by the modeling agency instead of her friend . She began her career appearing in department store catalogs in Springfield , during which time she attended the University of Massachusetts Amherst . 
 Moynahan moved to New York at age 18 and , a year later , began appearing in magazines such as Vogue and Elle , and on covers of other widely known magazines . Her cover highlights include Vogue Paris ( May 1993 ) , Elle ( October 1993 ) and Glamour ( 6 times ) . In an interview given in July 2004 , Moynahan , discussing her early work , said : " It was a crazy world that paid a lot of money . I liked being a model , but I knew it would never last , so I looked into acting . " 
 During that time , she began doing soap and shampoo commercials , in addition to taking acting and art classes . She studied acting at the <unk> Patten Studio in New York and , in 1999 , made her television debut as Natasha in HBO 's romantic comedy Sex and the City . She would later have a recurring role in the show , until the divorce of her character from Mr. Big ( Chris Noth ) . The following year , she appeared in smaller film roles , including parts in In the Weeds and <unk> . 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 Moynahan made her feature film debut in the 2000 comedy @-@ drama Coyote Ugly as Rachel , a bartender / dancer in a wild New York bar , a role that is considered Moynahan 's breakthrough . She had accepted the role because she " thought it was interesting that the whole movie revolved around five women ... and my character was so strong and independent " . The film garnered generally unfavorable critical reviews but was a box office success , earning $ 133 million worldwide . Her next role was a supporting role in 2001 film Serendipity as Hally , the fiancée of John Cusack 's character . 
 Moynahan was then cast opposite Ben Affleck and Morgan Freeman in the action film The Sum of All Fears , based on Tom Clancy 's book of the same name . Moynahan plays Dr. Catherine Muller , a strong , independent woman , and love interest for Affleck 's Jack Ryan . Dave Larsen of the Dayton Daily News reported that the subplot involving Moynahan and Affleck was " the film 's weakest point " . The Sum of All Fears received ambivalent reviews , but was a commercial success , earning $ 193 million at the box office . Her next role was as a CIA trainee in The Recruit ( 2003 ) . The movie was not well received , with Mike Clark of USA Today commenting that The Recruit is " less @-@ than @-@ middling melodrama whose subject matter and talent never click as much as its credits portend " . 
 In 2004 , Moynahan starred alongside Will Smith in Alex Proyas ' science fiction movie I , Robot , loosely based on Isaac Asimov 's short story collection of the same name . Moynahan portrays Dr. Susan Calvin , as a specialist in robot psychology . Upon release , I , Robot received mixed reviews , though critics enjoyed Moynahan 's performance . Daniel Neman of Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch , who disliked the film , concluded that she " turns in an able performance as Dr. Calvin , the convenient character . " With revenue of $ 347 million worldwide , the film remains Moynahan 's most commercially successful picture to date . Her next movie was in 2005 's Lord of War , a political crime thriller , as Ava Fontaine Orlov , the wife of Nicolas Cage 's character . In 2006 , Maxim magazine named her number 96 on its annual " Hot 100 " list . 
 In September 2006 , away from film , Moynahan starred as Whitney Crane in the ABC television drama series Six Degrees , co @-@ starring alongside Jay Hernandez , Erika Christensen , Hope Davis , Dorian <unk> , and Campbell Scott . The series centered on six residents of New York City and their respective relationships and connections with one another , based on the idea of six degrees of separation . It debuted on September 20 , 2006 , and was watched by almost 13 @.@ 3 million viewers . Six Degrees debuted to varied reception , with David Hinckley of the New York Daily News writing , " In theory , it 's an intriguing concept for a series . But in practice , Six Degrees doesn 't work at all in drawing you in at the start . " The series was canceled after one season in May 2007 . 
 Moynahan 's next film role was in the November 2006 thriller Unknown , about a group of individuals kidnapped , and trying to work together how to escape from their captors . She was next seen in 2007 , in Gray Matters , co @-@ starring alongside Heather Graham and Tom Cavanagh , before being cast in Henry Bean 's comedy @-@ drama Noise , as Helen Owen , the wife of David Owen ( Tim Robbins ) . The movie was screened at a special presentation at the 2007 Rome Film Festival and was released in theaters in 2008 . 
 In December 2008 , Moynahan guest starred in two episodes of the ABC television comedy @-@ drama Eli Stone , playing the titular character 's ( Jonny Lee Miller ) former girlfriend . Returning to film , as the last feature she starred in was 2007 's Noise , Moynahan appeared in Ramona and <unk> , playing the mother to Joey King and Selena Gomez 's characters . The film was directed by Elizabeth Allen and released in July 2010 . The following year , Moynahan starred alongside Aaron Eckhart , Michelle Rodriguez , and Michael Peña in the action science fiction feature Battle : Los Angeles ( 2011 ) . Away from film , Moynahan stars in the CBS television drama Blue Bloods , playing Assistant District Attorney , Erin Reagan . 
 In November 2009 , she signed a deal with Garnier to appear in television and print advertising promoting their Skincare products ( Ultra @-@ Lift ) . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Moynahan was in a three @-@ year relationship with screenwriter Scott Rosenberg . She dated NFL quarterback Tom Brady from 2004 until December 14 , 2006 . Her representative confirmed their split to People in December 2006 , stating that they had " amicably ended their three @-@ year relationship " . 
 On February 18 , 2007 , Moynahan 's representative confirmed to People that she was more than three months pregnant and that Brady is the father . In August , 2007 , she gave birth to a baby boy . In a July , 2008 interview in Harper 's Bazaar , Moynahan discussed her willingness to raise her son as a single mother . Despite media reports that Moynahan and Brady have an acrimonious relationship , it was revealed that the two have maintained a civil relationship since the birth of their son , John Edward Thomas Moynahan . 
 Moynahan resides in Pacific Palisades , California . She and director McG began dating in late 2010 but they since broke up . On October 17 , 2015 she married businessman Andrew Frankel at a ceremony in The Hamptons . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Books = = 
 The Blue Bloods Cookbook : 120 Recipes That Will Bring Your Family to the Table , St. Martin 's Press , 2015 . 
 = Burns , Oregon = 
 Burns is a city in and the county seat of Harney County , in the U.S. state of Oregon . According to the 2010 census , the population was 2 @,@ 806 . Burns and the nearby city of Hines are home to about 60 percent of the people in the sparsely populated county , the largest in Oregon and the ninth largest in the United States . 
 The Burns – Hines region has a high @-@ desert climate but was much wetter in the recent geologic past . The Harney Basin was the largest of many depressions in which lakes formed in southeastern Oregon during the late Pleistocene . Remnants of an ancient lake that reached as far north as Burns are at the center of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge , south of the city . 
 Northern Paiutes or their ancestors , who were hunter @-@ gatherers , have lived in the region for thousands of years . Since the arrival of Euro @-@ Americans in the 19th century , cattle ranching and other forms of agriculture have dominated land use in the area . In 1930 , logging in the mountains north of Burns led to the creation of Hines , a lumber company town , and the timber industry remained important to the local economy until the 1990s . In addition to ranching , a variety of private and public enterprises support the Burns – Hines economy in the 21st century . Annual events include a migratory bird festival , the county fair , and a country music jamboree . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Tribal = = = 
 Archeologists have found evidence of human habitation in the general vicinity of Burns from as early as 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Members of the contemporary Burns Paiute Tribe of Harney County , descended mainly from the <unk> band of Paiutes , were hunter @-@ gatherers throughout central and southern Oregon . The <unk> were named after the <unk> seeds collected as food from near Malheur Lake . Their territory covered about 5 @,@ 300 square miles ( 14 @,@ 000 km2 ) from the Cascade Range to near Boise and from the southern Blue Mountains to south of Steens Mountain . Scattered in the 19th century by clashes with white settlers and soldiers and through forced removal to distant reservations , some of the Paiutes eventually returned to Harney County . 
 In the 1930s , the Burns Paiute Tribe began buying land near Burns and holding tribal elections . By the late 1960s , the tribe had adopted a constitution and tribal bylaws , and in 1972 the Burns Paiute formally became an independent tribe , eligible to enter into contracts with other governments and legal entities . The tribe owns the Burns Paiute Reservation , 770 acres ( 310 ha ) north of Burns , and individual members of the tribe own more than 11 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 500 ha ) of land elsewhere in the county . In 1991 , the tribe had about 350 members , and about 200 lived on the reservation . 
 = = = Cities and ranches = = = 
 After the arrival of Euro @-@ American settlers in the 19th century , Burns was established in the 1880s . It was formally incorporated after Harney County 's creation in 1889 through the splitting of Grant County into two counties . Early settler , merchant , and county commissioner George McGowan named the city after the Scottish poet Robert Burns . By 1891 , the community had stores , a post office , hotels , and other businesses . McGowan was the town 's first postmaster . 
 In the 1920s , timber cutting and milling brought many newcomers to the region . In 1928 , the Edward Hines Lumber Company acquired from the U.S. Forest Service the rights to cut timber in the Blue Mountains near Seneca , north of Burns . After winning the timber contract , the Hines Company built the 52 @-@ mile ( 84 km ) Oregon and Northwestern Railroad between Burns and Seneca . Edward Hines , the company owner , built a lumber mill and company town , incorporated as the City of Hines in 1930 . Timber and logging remained important to the local economy until the 1990s , when the area 's last lumber mill closed for lack of timber . 
 Cattle ranching in the region began as early as the 1860s and expanded after passage of the Desert Land Act of 1877 . The act promoted development of arid and semi @-@ arid public land in the western United States by making 320 @-@ acre ( 130 ha ) plots available to individuals willing to " reclaim , irrigate , and cultivate " the land . Some of the Harney County ranches established in the 19th century still exist in the 21st . Agricultural revenue for Harney County in 2011 totaled about $ 84 million . Of this , about 65 percent came from cattle sales , 29 percent from the sale of alfalfa hay , and most of the rest from other crops and the sale of horses . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Harney County is the largest county in Oregon and the ninth largest in the United States . It covers about 10 @,@ 000 square miles ( 26 @,@ 000 km2 ) but has a total population of only about 7 @,@ 600 . Most of that population lives in Burns or Hines , about 2 miles ( 3 km ) southwest of Burns . Burns had about 2 @,@ 800 residents in 2010 and Hines about 1 @,@ 600 , for a total of 4 @,@ 400 , nearly 60 percent of the county population . 
 The city is 132 miles ( 212 km ) east of Bend , and 132 miles ( 212 km ) west of Ontario , Oregon , on U.S. Route 20 at its intersection with U.S. Route 395 . Burns is about 200 miles ( 322 km ) south of Pendleton . Oregon Route 78 runs between Burns and communities to the southeast including Crane , Princeton , and Burns Junction , about 100 miles ( 161 km ) away . A fourth highway , Oregon Route 205 , links the city to the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge , 36 miles ( 58 km ) to the south , and to <unk> , further south near Steens Mountain . 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 3 @.@ 55 square miles ( 9 @.@ 19 km2 ) , all land . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Burns is in southeastern Oregon near the northern edge of the arid Harney Basin . The basin is part of the High Lava Plains , a region dominated by erupting volcanoes in the late Miocene , five to ten million years ago . Centered on the Brothers Fault Zone , which runs southeast – northwest between Steens Mountain and Bend , the High Lava Plains merge with the Blue Mountains to the north and the Basin and Range Province to the south . 
 Shallow basins formed by crustal stretching in the Basin and Range province were much wetter during the late Pleistocene , up to 11 @,@ 000 years ago , than they are in the 21st century . Lakes formed in these basins , including those in the southern part of the High Lava Plains . Among these , the largest depression was the Harney Basin , covering 5 @,@ 300 square miles ( 14 @,@ 000 km2 ) . Within the Harney Basin , ancient Malheur Lake — the 21st @-@ century remnants of which include Malheur Lake , Harney Lake , and Mud Lake — covered 900 square miles ( 2 @,@ 300 km2 ) and extended as far north as Burns . These remnant wetlands have become the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Burns has a semi @-@ arid continental climate ( Köppen BSk ) bordering upon a continental Mediterranean climate ( Dsb ) that averages 99 days with precipitation each year . Cloud cover varies from an average of 25 percent in July to 76 percent in January . Normal annual precipitation amounts to about 11 inches or 279 millimetres , including 34 inches or 86 centimetres of snow . The average relative humidity , measured at 4 p.m. daily , is 42 percent , varying from 21 percent in July to 68 percent in December and January . The normal monthly daily average temperature ranges from about 24 ° F ( − 4 ° C ) in December to 67 ° F ( 19 ° C ) in July . On average , highs reach 90 ° F ( 32 ° C ) on 24 days annually and stay at or below the freezing mark on 31 days , while lows fall to or below 0 ° F ( − 18 ° C ) on an average of 11 nights . The average first and last occurrences of freezing temperatures are September 2 and June 21 , respectively , allowing a growing season of 72 days . 
 In January 1950 , during a series of snowstorms the National Weather Service has identified as one of Oregon 's top 10 weather events of the 20th century , about 32 inches ( 81 cm ) of snow fell on Burns . During another top @-@ 10 event , which occurred in February 1933 , the temperature at Seneca reached − 54 ° F ( − 48 ° C ) , the lowest ever recorded in Oregon . By highway , Seneca is about 45 miles ( 72 km ) north of Burns in the Blue Mountains . At Burns itself , record temperatures range from − 30 ° F ( − 34 ° C ) on December 8 , 2013 , up to 107 ° F ( 42 ° C ) on July 12 , 2002 ; the record low maximum is − 3 ° F ( − 19 ° C ) on January 6 , 1982 , and December 21 , 1990 , while the record high minimum is 73 ° F ( 23 ° C ) on July 27 and 30 , 1939 . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 2 @,@ 806 people , 1 @,@ 280 households , and 720 families residing in the city . The population density was 790 @.@ 4 inhabitants per square mile ( 305 @.@ 2 / km2 ) . There were 1 @,@ 490 housing units at an average density of 419 @.@ 7 per square mile ( 162 @.@ 0 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the city was 92 @.@ 2 % White , 0 @.@ 3 % African American , 2 @.@ 6 % Native American , 0 @.@ 7 % Asian , 0 @.@ 7 % from other races , and 3 @.@ 3 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 4 @.@ 7 % of the population . 
 There were 1 @,@ 280 households out of which 24 @.@ 4 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 40 @.@ 6 % were married couples living together , 11 @.@ 5 % had a female householder with no husband present , 4 @.@ 1 % had a male householder with no wife present , and 43 @.@ 8 % were non @-@ families . 36 @.@ 9 % of all households were made up of individuals and 13 @.@ 9 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 13 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 77 . 
 The median age in the city was 44 @.@ 5 years . 21 @.@ 5 % of residents were under the age of 18 ; 8 @.@ 7 % were between the ages of 18 and 24 ; 20 @.@ 3 % were from 25 to 44 ; 30 @.@ 7 % were from 45 to 64 ; and 18 @.@ 9 % were 65 years of age or older . The gender makeup of the city was 51 @.@ 2 % male and 48 @.@ 8 % female . 
 The median income for a household in the city was $ 32 @,@ 877 , and the median income for a family was $ 42 @,@ 885 . The per capita income for the city was $ 19 @,@ 567 . About 19 @.@ 6 % of families and 20 % of the population had incomes below the poverty line . 
 = = Arts and culture = = 
 The Harney County Arts in Education Foundation ( HCAEF ) exists to support music education and the performing , visual , and theater arts in Burns and the region . The HCAEF is raising funds in hopes of creating a performing arts and education center with a 600 @-@ seat auditorium , art gallery , film studio , and other facilities for students and the community . The Portland Youth Philharmonic , which originated in Burns as the Sagebrush Symphony Orchestra , has performed in Burns in support of the HCAEF . 
 Each April , Burns hosts the John Scharff Migratory Bird Festival and Art Show during the annual spring migration of waterfowl and other birds through the area . Pelicans , ducks , and raptors are among the birds frequenting the Harney Basin wetlands , a stopping place on the Pacific Flyway . Named for a former manager of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge , the festival includes tours of the wetlands and nearby ranches as well as classes in topics such as birdhouse building , Harney County archeology , and bird sketching . 
 In June , the High Desert Fiddlers host the Country Music Jamboree at the Harney County Fairgrounds on the edge of Burns . Players of all skill levels take part in the jamboree , with stages in three fairground buildings . Admission is free ; donations are accepted . Concessions , dinners by reservation , camping in tents or recreational vehicles , and dancing are part of the entertainment . At other times of the year , the High Desert Fiddlers gather on Fridays at various locations around the city to hold public jam sessions including folk , country , bluegrass , and other music played on instruments such as the guitar , mandolin , fiddle , and hammered dulcimer . 
 The Harney County Fair is held annually in September at the Harney County Fairgrounds . The fair , which lasts about a week , includes a rodeo , carnival , talent show , horse races , parade , and other events , including those sponsored by 4 @-@ H and Future Farmers of America . 
 The Harney County Historical Museum in Burns offers displays of relics , documents , and photographs from the region 's past . Established in 1960 at the site of a former brewery , laundry , and wrecking yard , the museum is open five days a week ( Tuesday through Saturday ) from April through September and at other times by appointment . 
 = = Government = = 
 Burns has a mayor – council government . Craig LaFollette , one of seven elected members of the council , is the mayor . The city 's public works department , consisting of a director and four full @-@ time workers , maintains the water lines , sewers , and streets of Burns . The police department includes a chief of police , an office assistant , and three full @-@ time officers who work for Hines as well as Burns . City officers and employees include a city manager , city clerk , municipal judge doubling as the utilities clerk , and an office assistant . 
 A tribal council governs the Burns Paiute Tribe , immediately northwest of Burns . The tribe has its own police , court , and health and other services , including a tribal community center . 
 The Harney County Courthouse is in Burns . County officials include a judge and two commissioners , a clerk , treasurer , assessor , district attorney , justice of the peace , sheriff , and circuit court judge . 
 Harney County voters in 2012 voted heavily Republican . In the general election in November , Republican Mitt Romney won about 73 percent of the votes for U.S. President to about 23 percent for Democrat Barack Obama , while other candidates and parties shared the remaining 4 percent . In the contest for the U.S. Congressional 2nd District Representative , Republican Greg Walden garnered about 83 percent of the vote . In races for state offices , Republican candidates won between 63 and 69 percent of the vote in Harney County . 
 = = Education = = 
 Harney District No. 3 provides public education in Burns and Hines at Henry L. Slater Grade School in Burns , Hines Middle School , and Burns High School . The district sponsors the <unk> River Charter School , which offers a home @-@ school program for kindergarten through second grade and an online curriculum for older students . 
 Formed in 1903 by the Ladies Afternoon Club , the Harney County Library in Burns has grown from an initial collection of 12 books to more than 30 @,@ 000 items in 2013 . Library offerings include public computers , wireless Internet , video conferencing equipment , meeting spaces , and public programs , as well as books , magazines , newspapers , audio books , videos , DVDs , and access to <unk> Loan . 
 = = Media = = 
 The weekly Burns Times @-@ Herald is the only newspaper in the city . In 2006 , five members of the Times @-@ Herald staff formed Survival Media LLC , which bought the newspaper from its former out @-@ of @-@ state owners . According to Survival Media , this was the first staff buyout of a newspaper in Oregon . Two commercial radio stations , <unk> ( 92 @.@ 7 FM ) and <unk> ( 1230 AM ) , are licensed to broadcast from Burns . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Burns Municipal Airport provides general aviation services . The airport , with 5 @,@ 100 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) of lighted runway , is 6 miles ( 10 km ) east of the city . Pony Express provides air freight service . 
 Public Oregon Intercity Transit ( <unk> ) is an intercity bus system that includes service between Bend and Ontario , Oregon . It departs from Burns once daily in each direction . The buses are wheelchair accessible , can seat up to 20 passengers , and can be used for package delivery as well as public transport . 
 = = = Health care = = = 
 Harney District Hospital in Burns is a general medical and surgical hospital with 20 patient beds . <unk> Family Care and Mountain Sage Medical operate medical clinics in the city . The Burns – Hines VA Clinic in Burns provides general medical services to military veterans . Emergency medical services include <unk> Critical Care Transport via helicopter or airplane to the nearest appropriate treatment center . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Kellen Clemens – NFL quarterback 
 Norma Paulus – former Oregon politician 
 Robert Smith – Congressman / Speaker of the Oregon House 
 Gene Timms - former Oregon politician and businessman 
 = Tropical Depression One ( 1979 ) = 
 Tropical Depression One brought severe flooding to Jamaica in June 1979 . The second tropical cyclone of the Atlantic hurricane season , the depression developed from a tropical wave to the south of Grand Cayman on June 11 . Tracking generally northward , the depression passed west of Jamaica . On June 12 , the depression peaked with maximum sustained winds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) , never having reached tropical storm status . The following day , it made landfall in Cuba , where minimal impact was recorded . Early on June 14 , the depression emerged into the western Atlantic Ocean and then moved parallel to the east coast of Florida for a few days . The depression made another landfall in South Carolina on June 16 and dissipated shortly thereafter . 
 The slow movement of the depression to the west of Jamaica resulted in torrential rainfall , peaking at 32 in ( 810 mm ) in Friendship , a city in Westmoreland Parish . Throughout western Jamaica , about 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed or severely damage , while up to 40 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . The city of New Market was submerged for at least six months . Crops , electricity , telephones , buildings , and railways also suffered damage during the disaster . There were 40 deaths and approximately $ 27 million ( 1979 USD ) in damage . The depression also brought heavy precipitation to Cuba and the Bahamas , while farther north , light rainfall and rough seas plagued the East Coast of the United States . One individual in South Carolina went missing and was later presumed to have died after their boat was torn loose from its mooring . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on May 30 . Minimal development occurred as the wave tracked westward across much of the Atlantic and Caribbean Sea . However , by June 11 , the system began to interact with a stationary trough of low pressure in the western Caribbean Sea . Based on ship and land observations , a tropical depression developed at 12 : 00 UTC that day while located about 230 miles ( 370 km ) south of Grand Cayman . Initially the depression was forecast to move northwestward at about 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) ; instead , it drifted to the northeast . Minimal intensification occurred , as satellite imagery , weather stations , and a reconnaissance aircraft indicated the depression remained below tropical storm status . Around 18 : 00 UTC on June 12 , the depression attained its maximum sustained wind speeds of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . 
 Early on June 13 , satellite and weather radar showed heavy rainbands moving across Jamaica and eastern Cuba . Due its interaction with the two islands , the depression weakened slightly . Later on June 13 , the storm made landfall near Venezuela , Cuba with winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) . Moving northward , it emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Cayo Santa María early the next day . Around 12 : 00 UTC on June 14 , the system re @-@ strengthened and again attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Despite moving back over open waters , the depression failed to intensify further . Operationally , the system was thought to have made landfall in east @-@ central Florida , but later analysis revealed that the center remained over water . The depression continued northward until striking near Charleston , South Carolina late on June 16 , still with the same intensity . It degenerated into a remnant low pressure area about six hours later . Its remnants continued northeastward across the Southeastern United States , the Mid @-@ Atlantic , and New England until dissipating fully on June 18 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The depression 's slow movement resulted in torrential rainfall on the island of Jamaica . Precipitation peaked at 32 inches ( 810 mm ) in Friendship , located in Westmoreland Parish . As the flooding began , several shelters were open in the parish . Residents in the Savanna @-@ la @-@ Mar area were forced to evacuate by boats or makeshift rafts . The flooding also ruined crops . Sugar cane , which was already 70 – 80 percent harvested , suffered about $ 2 @.@ 25 million ( 1979 USD ) in damage . It was estimated that 4 million lb ( 1 @.@ 8 million kg ) of bananas were lost , worth nearly $ 1 million . In total , agricultural interests incurred $ 5 @.@ 89 million in damage , chiefly f which was in Westmoreland Parish . The storm affected an estimated 300 mi ( 480 km ) of roadways impacted , with about 2 @,@ 000 ft ( 610 m ) of highway completely washed out . Three bridges collapsed , while 10 others sustained damage . 
 The increasing height and volume of the Bluefields River led to debris flow and created a colluvium – an unconsolidated deposit of sediments – near the mouth of the river . In the valley areas , temporary lakes were formed and small dams were overtopped . The cities of Chigwell , Enfield , Exeter , Leamington , and New Market were all submerged during the flooding . New Market was inundated with as much as 80 ft ( 24 m ) of water during the disaster , which did not completely recede until more than six months later . This resulted in extreme damage to or complete loss of crops , livestock , and household possessions . Extensive impact to property was reported , including to electricity , telephones , buildings , and railways , with a " conservative " estimate of $ 39 @.@ 3 million in damage . At least 1 @,@ 000 homes were severely damaged or destroyed . As many as 40 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . Overall , there were 40 deaths and approximately $ 27 million in damage . 
 Following the storm , Hanover , Saint Elizabeth , Saint James , and Westmoreland parishes were considered disaster areas . A task force was established by the Prime Minister Michael Manley for reconstruction efforts . About 7 @,@ 758 families , a total of 36 @,@ 391 people , required assistance with food supplies for over 13 weeks . The Housing Task Force called for the construction of 582 new houses , 300 of which for those left homeless . The houses constructed for the people rendered homeless were prefabricated by the Ministry of Housing and then erected by the local authorities , under the guidance of the Ministry of Local Government . In response to the disaster , the Government of Jamaica established the Office of Disaster Preparedness and Emergency Management in July 1980 . 
 The depression and its remnants also brought rainfall and high tides to the eastern United States . In South Carolina , precipitation peaked at 6 @.@ 89 in ( 175 mm ) in Cheraw . Along the coast , waves reached 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) in height , strong enough to tear a boat from its mooring at Surfside Beach . One person was listed as missing and later presumed to have died . 
 = Royal intermarriage = 
 Royal intermarriage is the practice of members of ruling dynasties marrying into other reigning families . It was more commonly done in the past as part of strategic diplomacy for national interest . Although sometimes enforced by legal requirement on persons of royal birth , more often it has been a matter of political policy and / or tradition in monarchies . 
 In Europe , the practice was most prevalent from the medieval era until the outbreak of World War I , but evidence of intermarriage between royal dynasties in other parts of the world can be found as far back as the Late Bronze Age . Monarchs were often in pursuit of national and international aggrandisement on behalf of themselves and their dynasties , thus bonds of kinship tended to promote or restrain aggression . Marriage between dynasties could serve to initiate , reinforce or guarantee peace between nations . Alternatively , kinship by marriage could secure an alliance between two dynasties which sought to reduce the sense of threat from or to initiate aggression against the realm of a third dynasty . It could also enhance the prospect of territorial acquisition for a dynasty by procuring legal claim to a foreign throne , or portions of its realm ( e.g. , colonies ) , through inheritance from an heiress whenever a monarch failed to leave an undisputed male heir . 
 In parts of Europe , royalty continued to regularly marry into the families of their greatest vassals as late as the 16th century , thenceforth , tending to marry internationally . In other parts of the world royal intermarriage was less prevalent and the number of instances waxed and waned over time , depending on the culture and foreign policy of the era . 
 = = Royal marriage as international policy = = 
 While the contemporary Western ideal sees marriage as a unique bond between two people who are in love , families in which heredity is central to power or inheritance ( such as royal families ) have often seen marriage in a different light . There are often political or other non @-@ romantic functions that must be served , and the relative wealth and power of the potential spouses may be considered . Marriage for political , economic , or diplomatic reasons , the marriage of state , was a pattern seen for centuries among European rulers . 
 = = = Africa = = = 
 At times , marriage between members of the same dynasty has been common in Central Africa . Marriages between the Swazi , Zulu and Thembu royal houses of southern Africa are common . For example , the daughter of former South African president and Thembu royal Nelson Mandela , Zenani Mandela , in 1977 married Prince <unk> Dlamini , a brother of <unk> III , King of Swaziland . 
 Examples of historical , mythical and contemporary royal intermarriages throughout Africa include : 
 <unk> Dlamini , sister of <unk> III of Swaziland , and Goodwill <unk> , King of the Zulus , as his Great Royal Wife ( 1977 ) 
 The <unk> emperor Umar Tall and the daughter of the sultan Muhammed Bello of Sokoto 
 = = = Asia = = = 
 = = = = Thailand = = = = 
 The Chakri Dynasty of Thailand has included marriages between royal relatives , but marriages between dynasts and foreigners , including foreign royals , are rare . This is in part due to Section 11 of 1924 Palace Law of Succession which excludes members of the royal family from the line of succession if they marry a non @-@ Thai national . 
 The current king , Bhumibol Adulyadej is a first @-@ cousin once removed of his wife , Sirikit , the two being , respectively , a grandson and a great @-@ granddaughter of Chulalongkorn . Chulalongkorn married a number of his half @-@ sisters , including <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; all shared the same father , Mongkut . 
 = = = = Vietnam = = = = 
 The Lý dynasty which ruled Dai Viet ( Vietnam ) married its princesses off to regional rivals to establish alliances with them . One of these marriages was between a Lý princess ( Lý <unk> Hoàng ) and a member of the Chinese Trần ( Chen ) clan ( Trần Thái Tông ) , which enabled the Trần to then topple the Lý and established their own Trần dynasty . 
 A Lý princess also married into the Hồ family , which was also of Chinese origin and later established the Hồ dynasty which also took power after having a Tran princess marry one of their members , Hồ <unk> Ly . 
 = = = = Cambodia = = = = 
 The Cambodian King Chey <unk> II married the Vietnamese Nguyễn lord Princess Nguyễn Thị Ngọc <unk> , a daughter of Lord Nguyễn Phúc Nguyên , in 1618 . In return , the king granted the Vietnamese the right to establish settlements in <unk> Xoài ( now Bà Rịa ) , in the region of Prey <unk> — which they colloquially referred to as <unk> <unk> , and which later became Ho Chi Minh City . 
 = = = = China = = = = 
 Marriage policy in imperial China differed from dynasty to dynasty . Several dynasties practiced <unk> , which involved marrying off princesses to other royal families . 
 The Xiongnu practiced marriage alliances with Han dynasty officers and officials who defected to their side . The older sister of the Chanyu ( the Xiongnu ruler ) was married to the Xiongnu General Zhao Xin , the Marquis of Xi who was serving the Han dynasty . The daughter of the Chanyu was married to the Han Chinese General Li Ling after he surrendered and defected . The Yenisei <unk> <unk> claimed descent from Li Ling . Another Han Chinese General who defected to the Xiongnu was Li <unk> who also married a daughter of the Chanyu . 
 The Xianbei <unk> royal family of Northern Wei started to arrange for Han Chinese elites to marry daughters of the royal family in the 480s . Some Han Chinese exiled royalty fled from southern China and defected to the Xianbei . Several daughters of the Xianbei Emperor <unk> of Northern Wei were married to Han Chinese elites , the Han Chinese Liu Song royal Liu Hui <unk> , married Princess <unk> <unk> of the Northern Wei , Princess <unk> <unk> to Sima Fei <unk> , a descendant of Jin dynasty ( 265 – 420 ) royalty , Princess Jinan <unk> to Lu <unk> <unk> , Princess Nanyang <unk> to Xiao <unk> <unk> , a member of Southern Qi royalty . Emperor Xiaozhuang of Northern Wei 's sister the <unk> Princess was wedded to The Liang dynasty ruler Emperor Wu of Liang 's son Xiao Zong <unk> . 
 When the Eastern Jin dynasty ended Northern Wei received the Jin prince Sima <unk> <unk> as a refugee . A Northern Wei Princess married Sima <unk> , giving birth to Sima Jinlong <unk> . Northern Liang King <unk> <unk> 's daughter married Sima Jinlong . 
 The Rouran Khaganate arranged for one of their princesses , Khagan <unk> <unk> 's daughter Princess Ruru <unk> to be married to the Han Chinese ruler Gao Huan of the Eastern Wei . 
 The Kingdom of Gaochang was made out of Han Chinese colonists and ruled by the Han Chinese Qu family which originated from Gansu . <unk> commandery <unk> ( Lanzhou ) , district of <unk> <unk> was the home of the Qu Jia . The Qu family was linked by marriage alliances to the Turks , with a Turk being the grandmother of King Qu Boya . 
 Tang dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) emperors gave princesses in marriage to rulers of the Uyghur Khaganate to consolidate the special trade and military relationship that developed after the Khaganate supported the Chinese during the An Lushan Rebellion . At least three Tang imperial princesses are known to have married khagans between 758 and 821 . These unions temporarily stopped in 788 , which is believed in part to be because stability within the Chinese empire meant that they were politically unnecessary ; however , threats from Tibet in the west , and a renewed need for Uyghur support , precipitated the marriage of Princess Taihe to Bilge Khagan . 
 The ethnically Chinese Cao family ruling <unk> Circuit established marriage alliances with the Uighurs of the Ganzhou Kingdom , with both the Cao rulers marrying Uighur princesses and with Cao princesses marrying Uighur rulers . The Ganzhou Uighur Khagan 's daughter was married to Cao <unk> in 916 . 
 The Chinese Cao family ruling <unk> Circuit established marriage alliances with the Saka Kingdom of Khotan , with both the Cao rulers marrying Khotanese princesses and with Cao princesses marrying Khotanese rulers . A Khotanese princess who was the daughter of the King of Khotan married Cao <unk> . 
 The Khitan Liao dynasty arranged for women from the Khitan royal consort Xiao clan to marry members of the Han Chinese Han 韓 clan , which originated in Jizhou <unk> before being abducted by the Khitan and becoming part of the Han Chinese elite of the Liao . 
 Han Chinese Geng family intermarried with the Khitan and the Han 韓 clan provided two of their women as wives to Geng Yanyi and the second one was the mother of Geng <unk> . Empress <unk> 's sister , a member of the Xiao clan , was the mother of Han Chinese General Geng Yanyi . 
 Han Durang ( <unk> <unk> ) was the father of Queen dowager of State Chen , who was the wife of General Geng Yanyi and buried with him in his tomb in <unk> in Liaoning . His wife was also known as " Madame Han " . The Geng 's tomb is located in Liaoning at <unk> in <unk> . 
 Emperors of the proceeding Song dynasty ( 960 – 1279 ) tended to marry from within their own borders . Tang emperors , mainly took their wives from high @-@ ranking bureaucratic families , but the Song dynasty did not consider rank important when it came to selecting their consorts . It has been estimated that only a quarter of Song consorts were from such families , with the rest being from lower status backgrounds . For example , Liu , consort of Emperor Zhenzong , had been a street performer and consort Miao , wife of Emperor Renzong was the daughter of his own wet nurse . 
 During the Qing dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) , emperors chose their consorts primarily from one of the eight Banner families , administrative divisions that divide all native Manchu families . To maintain the ethnic purity of the ruling dynasty , after the Kangxi Period ( 1662 – 1722 ) , emperors and princes were forbidden to marry non @-@ Manchu wives . Imperial daughters however were not covered by this ban , however , and as with their preceding dynasties , were often married to Mongol princes to gain political or military support , especially in the early years of the Qing dynasty ; three of the nine daughters of Emperor Nurhaci and twelve of Emperor <unk> 's daughters were married to Mongol Princes . 
 The Manchu Imperial Aisin Gioro clan practiced marriage alliances with Han Chinese Ming Generals and Mongol princes . Aisin Gioro women were married to Han Chinese Generals who defected to the Manchu side during the Manchu conquest of China . The Manchu leader Nurhaci married one of his granddaughters to the Ming General Li Yongfang <unk> after he surrendered Fushun in Liaoning to the Manchu in 1618 and a mass marriage of Han Chinese officers and officials to Manchu women numbering 1 @,@ 000 couples was arranged by Prince <unk> <unk> ( Prince <unk> ) and <unk> in 1632 to promote harmony between the two ethnic groups . Aisin Gioro women were married to the sons of the Han Chinese Generals Sun Sike ( Sun Ssu @-@ k 'o ) <unk> , Geng <unk> ( Keng Chi @-@ <unk> ) , Shang <unk> ( Shang K 'o @-@ <unk> ) , and Wu Sangui ( Wu San @-@ <unk> ) . 
 Nurhaci 's son <unk> 's daughter was married to Li Yongfang . The offspring of Li received the " Third Class Viscount " ( <unk> ; sān <unk> <unk> ) title . Li Yongfang was the great great great grandfather of Li <unk> <unk> . 
 The " Dolo <unk> " <unk> rank was given to husbands of Qing princesses . Geng <unk> , a Han bannerman , was awarded the title of Prince <unk> , and his son Geng <unk> managed to have both his sons Geng <unk> and Geng Zhaozhong <unk> become court attendants under the Shunzhi Emperor and get married to Aisin Gioro women , with Prince <unk> 's granddaughter marrying Geng Zhaozhong <unk> and <unk> 's ( a son of Hong Taiji ) daughter marrying Geng <unk> . A daughter <unk> of the Manchu Aisin Gioro Prince Yolo <unk> ( Prince An ) was wedded to Geng <unk> <unk> who was another son of Geng <unk> . 
 The 4th daughter of Kangxi ( <unk> ) was wedded to the son ( <unk> ) of the Han Chinese Sun Sike ( Sun Ssu @-@ k 'o ) <unk> . 
 = = = = Japan and Korea = = = = 
 The Silla Kingdom had a practice that limited the succession to the throne to members of the <unk> , or " sacred bone " , rank . To maintain their " sacred bone " rank , members of this caste often intermarried with one another in the same fashion that European royals intermarried to maintain a " pure " royal pedigree . 
 After the Second Manchu invasion of Korea , Joseon Korea was forced to give several of their royal princesses as concubines to the Qing Manchu regent Prince Dorgon . In 1650 , Dorgon married the Korean Princess I @-@ shun ( <unk> ) . The Princess ' name in Korean was <unk> and she was Prince Yi <unk> 's ( <unk> ) daughter . Dorgon married two Korean princesses at <unk> . 
 The Japanese may not have seen intermarriage between them and the royal dynasties of the Korean Empire damaging to their prestige either . According to the <unk> Nihongi , an imperially commissioned record of Japanese history completed in 797 , Emperor Kanmu who ruled from 781 to 806 was the son of a Korean concubine , Takano no <unk> , who was descended from King <unk> of Baekje , one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea . 
 In 1920 , Crown Prince Yi Un of Korea married Princess Masako of <unk> and , in May 1931 , Yi <unk> , grandson of <unk> of Korea , was married to Matsudaira <unk> , a cousin of Princess Masako . The Japanese saw these marriages as a way to secure their colonial rule of Korea and introduce Japanese blood in to the Korean royal House of Yi . 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 = = = = Medieval and Early Modern Europe = = = = 
 Careful selection of a spouse was important to maintain the royal status of a family : depending on the law of the land in question , if a prince or king was to marry a commoner who had no royal blood , even if the first @-@ born was acknowledged as a son of a sovereign , he might not be able to claim any of the royal status of his father . 
 Traditionally , many factors were important in arranging royal marriages . One such factor was the amount of territory that the other royal family governed or controlled . Another , related factor was the stability of the control exerted over that territory : when there was territorial instability in a royal family , other royalty would be less inclined to marry into that family . Another factor was political alliance : marriage was an important way to bind together royal families and their countries during peace and war and could justify many important political decisions . 
 The increase in royal intermarriage often meant that lands passed into the hands of foreign houses , when the nearest heir was the son of a native dynast and a foreign royal . The Habsburgs , for example , expanded their influence through arranged marriages and by gaining political privileges in what would become Switzerland , and in the 13th century the house aimed its marriage policy at families in Upper Alsace and Swabia . Given the success of the Habsburgs ' territorial acquisition @-@ via @-@ inheritance policy , a motto came to be associated with their dynasty : Bella <unk> alii , tu , felix Austria , nube ! ( " Let others wage war . You , happy Austria , marry ! " ) 
 Monarchs sometimes went to great lengths to prevent this . On her marriage to Louis XIV of France , Maria Theresa , daughter of Philip IV of Spain , was forced to renounce her claim to the Spanish throne . When monarchs or heirs apparent wed other monarchs or heirs , special agreements , sometimes in the form of treaties , were negotiated to determine inheritance rights . The marriage contract of Philip II of Spain and Mary I of England , for example , stipulated that the maternal possessions , as well as Burgundy and the Low Countries , were to pass to any future children of the couple , whereas the remaining paternal possessions ( including Spain , Naples , Sicily , Milan ) would first of all go to Philip 's son Don Carlos , from his previous marriage to Maria Manuela of Portugal . If Carlos were to die without any descendants , only then would they pass to the children of his second marriage . On the other hand , the Franco @-@ Scottish treaty that arranged the 1558 marriage of Mary , Queen of Scots and Francis , the son and heir of Henry II of France , had it that if the queen died without descendants , Scotland would fall to the throne of France . 
 Religion has always been closely tied to European political affairs , and as such it played an important role during marriage negotiations . The 1572 wedding in Paris of the French princess Margaret of Valois to the leader of France 's Huguenots , Henry III of Navarre , was ostensibly arranged to effect a rapprochement between the nation 's Catholics and Protestants , but proved a ruse for the St. Bartholomew 's Day massacre . After the English Reformation , matches between English monarchs and Roman Catholic princesses were often unpopular , especially so when the prospective queen consort was unwilling to convert , or at least practice her faith discreetly . Passage of the Act of Settlement 1701 disinherited any heir to the throne who married a Catholic . Other ruling houses , such as the Romanovs and Habsburgs , have at times also insisted on dynastic marriages only being contracted with people of a certain faith or those willing to convert . When in 1926 Astrid of Sweden married Leopold III of Belgium , it was agreed that her children would be raised as Catholics but she was not required to give up Lutheranism , although she chose to convert in 1930 . Some potential matches were abandoned due to irreconcilable religious differences . For example , plans for the marriage of the Catholic Władysław IV Vasa and the Lutheran Elisabeth of Bohemia , Princess Palatine proved unpopular with Poland 's largely Catholic nobility and were quietly dropped . 
 Marriages among ruling dynasties and their subjects have at times been common , with the marriages such as that of Edward the Confessor , King of England with Edith of Wessex and Władysław II Jagiełło , King of Poland with Elizabeth <unk> being far from unheard of in medieval Europe . However , as dynasties approached absolutism and sought to preserve loyalty among competing members of the nobility , most eventually distanced themselves from kinship ties to local nobles by marrying abroad . Marriages with subjects brought the king back down to the level of those he ruled , often stimulating the ambition of his consort 's family and evoking jealousy — or disdain — from the nobility . The notion that monarchs should marry into the dynasties of other monarchs to end or prevent war was , at first , a policy driven by pragmatism . During the era of absolutism , this practice contributed to the notion that it was socially , as well as politically , disadvantageous for members of ruling families to intermarry with their subjects and pass over the opportunity for marriage into a foreign dynasty . 
 = = = = Ancient Rome = = = = 
 While Roman emperors almost always married wives who were also Roman citizens , the ruling families of the empire 's client kingdoms in the Near East and North Africa often contracted marriages with other royal houses to consolidate their position . These marriages were often contracted with the approval , or even at the behest , of the Roman emperors themselves . Rome thought that such marriages promoted stability among their client states and prevented petty local wars that would disturb the Pax Romana . <unk> of Cappadocia was known to have contracted three such royal intermarriages : with Juba II & I , King of Numidia and Mauretania , Alexander of Judea and Herod Archelaus , <unk> of Samaria . 
 Other examples from the Ancient Roman era include : 
 Polemon II , King of Pontus and Berenice of Judea 
 Aristobulus IV of Judea and Berenice of Judea 
 Aristobulus Minor of Judea and Iotapa of Emesa 
 = = = = Byzantine Empire = = = = 
 Though some emperors , such as Justin I and Justinian I , took low @-@ born wives , dynastic intermarriages in imperial families were not unusual in the Byzantine Empire . Following the fall of Constantinople in 1204 , the ruling families , the <unk> and then the Palaiologoi , thought it prudent to marry into foreign dynasties . One early example is the marriage of John Doukas Vatatzes with Constance , the daughter of Emperor Frederick II of the Holy Roman Empire to seal their alliance . After establishing an alliance with the Mongols in 1263 , Michael VIII Palaiologos married two of his daughters to Mongol khans to cement their agreement : his daughter Euphrosyne Palaiologina was married to Nogai Khan of the Golden Horde , and his daughter Maria Palaiologina , was married to Abaqa Khan of the Ilkhanate . Later in the century , Andronikos II Palaiologos agreed martial alliances with Ghazan of the Ilkhanate and <unk> and <unk> of the Golden Horde , which were quickly followed by weddings with his daughters . 
 The Grand Komnenoi of the Empire of Trebizond were famed for marrying their daughters to their neighbours as acts of diplomacy . Theodora <unk> Komnene , daughter of John IV , was married to Uzun Hassan , lord of the <unk> <unk> , to seal an alliance between the Empire and the so @-@ called White Sheep . Although the alliance failed to save Trebizond from its eventual defeat , and despite being a devout Christian in a Muslim state , Theodora did manage to exercise a pervasive influence both in the domestic and foreign actions of her husband . 
 Though usually made to strengthen the position of the empire , there are examples of <unk> marriages destabilising the emperor 's authority . When Emperor Andronikos II Palaiologos married his second wife , Eirene of Montferrat , in 1284 she caused a division in the Empire over her demand that her own sons share in imperial territory with , Michael , his son from his first marriage . She resorted to leaving Constantinople , the capital of the Byzantine Empire , and setting up her own court in the second city of the Empire , Thessalonica . 
 = = = = Post World War I era = = = = 
 In modern times , among European royalty at least , marriages between royal dynasties have become much rarer than they once were . Members of Europe 's dynasties increasingly married members of the titled nobility , including George VI of the United Kingdom , Charles , Prince of Wales , Albert II of Belgium , Hans @-@ Adam II of Liechtenstein , or untitled nobility as Philippe of Belgium and Beatrix of the Netherlands , and very often commoners , as Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden , Harald V of Norway , Henri of Luxembourg , Felipe VI of Spain , Willem @-@ Alexander of the Netherlands , Prince William , Duke of Cambridge and Albert II of Monaco have done . 
 In Europe , only Juan Carlos I of Spain , Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and Alois , Hereditary Prince of Liechtenstein married members of a foreign dynasty . 
 This being said , royal intermarriage still occurs . For example : 
 = = = = = Members of two reigning houses = = = = = 
 Prince Nikolaus of Liechtenstein and Princess Margaretha of Luxembourg ( 1982 , most recent example of intermarriage between two European dynasties reigning at the time of the wedding ) 
 Constantine II of Greece and Princess Anne Marie of Denmark ( 1964 ) 
 Jean , Grand Duke of Luxembourg and Princess Joséphine Charlotte of Belgium ( 1953 ) 
 Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom and Philip Mountbatten ( born a Prince of Greece and Denmark ) ( 1947 ) 
 Peter II of Yugoslavia and Princess Alexandra of Greece and Denmark ( 1944 ) 
 Frederick IX of Denmark and Princess Ingrid of Sweden ( 1935 ) 
 Prince George , Duke of Kent and Princess Marina of Greece and Denmark ( 1934 ) 
 Umberto II of Italy and Princess Marie José of Belgium ( 1930 ) 
 Boris III of Bulgaria and Princess Giovanna of Italy ( 1930 ) 
 Olav V of Norway and Princess Märtha of Sweden ( 1929 ) 
 Leopold III of Belgium and Princess Astrid of Sweden ( 1926 ) 
 Gustaf VI Adolf of Sweden and Lady Louise Mountbatten ( born as Princess Louise of Battenberg ) ( 1923 ) 
 Alexander I of Yugoslavia and Princess Maria of Romania ( 1922 ) 
 = = = = = Members of one reigning house and one non @-@ reigning house = = = = = 
 Princess Caroline of Monaco and Ernst August , Prince of Hanover ( 1999 ) 
 Princess Doña María of Bourbon and Archduke Simeon of Austria ( 1996 ) 
 Alois , Hereditary Prince of Liechtenstein and Duchess Sophie in Bavaria ( 1993 ) 
 Princess Astrid of Belgium and Archduke Lorenz of Austria @-@ Este ( 1984 ) 
 Princess Marie @-@ Astrid of Luxembourg and Archduke Carl Christian of Austria ( 1982 ) 
 Princess Barbara of Liechtenstein and Prince Alexander of Yugoslavia ( 1973 ) 
 Princess Benedikte of Denmark and Richard , 6th Prince of Sayn @-@ Wittgenstein @-@ <unk> ( 1968 ) 
 Princess Irene of the Netherlands and Carlos Hugo , Duke of Parma ( 1964 ) 
 Princess Sophia of Greece and Denmark and Juan Carlos I of Spain ( 1962 ) 
 Princess Birgitta of Sweden and Prince Johann Georg of Hohenzollern ( 1961 ) 
 Princess Alix of Luxembourg and Antoine , 13th Prince de Ligne ( 1950 ) 
 = = = = = Modern examples of dynastic intra @-@ marriage = = = = = 
 Knud , Hereditary Prince of Denmark and Princess Caroline @-@ Mathilde of Denmark ( 1933 ) 
 = = = Muslim World = = = 
 = = = = Al @-@ Andalus = = = = 
 From the time of the Umayyad conquest of Hispania and throughout the Reconquista , marriage between Spanish and Umayyad royals was not uncommon . Early marriages , such as that of Abd al @-@ Aziz ibn Musa and <unk> at the turn of the 8th century , was thought to help establish the legitimacy of Muslim rule on the Iberian Peninsula . Later instances of intermarriage were often made to seal trade treaties between Christian kings and Muslim caliphs . 
 = = = = Ottoman Empire = = = = 
 The marriages of Ottoman sultans and their sons in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries tended to be with members of the ruling dynasties of neighbouring powers . With little regard for religion , the sultans contracted marriages with both Christians and Muslims ; the purpose of these royal intermarriages were purely tactical . The Christian Byzantines and Serbians , as well as the Muslim beyliks of <unk> , Saruhan , <unk> and <unk> were all potential enemies and marriage was seen as a way of securing alliances with them . Marriage with foreign dynasties seems to have ceased in 1504 , with the last marriage of a sultan to a foreign princess being that of Murad II and Mara Branković , daughter of the Serbian ruler Đurađ Branković , in 1435 . By this time , the Ottomans had consolidated their power in the area and absorbed or subjugated many of their former rivals , and so marriage alliances were no longer seen as important to their foreign policy . 
 The Islamic principle of <unk> 'a discourages the marriages of women to men of differing religion or of inferior status . Neighbouring Muslim powers did not start to give their daughters in marriage to Ottoman princes until the fifteenth century , when they were seen to have grown in importance . This same principle meant that , while Ottoman men were free to marry Christian women , Muslim princesses were prevented from marrying Christian princes . 
 = = = = Post World War I era = = = = 
 There are several modern instances of intermarriage between members of the royal families and former royal families of Islamic states ( i.e. , Jordan , Morocco , Saudi Arabia , the constituent states of the United Arab Emirates , etc . ) . 
 Examples include : 
 Muhammad Ali , Prince of the Sa 'id , son of Fuad II of Egypt and Princess <unk> <unk> Shah , granddaughter Zahir Shah of Afghanistan ( 2013 ) 
 Sheik Khalid bin Hamad Al Khalifa , son of Hamad Al Khalifa , King of Bahrain and Princess <unk> bint Abdullah , daughter of Abdullah , King of Saudi Arabia ( 2011 ) 
 Sheik Mansour bin Zayed Al Nahyan , half @-@ brother of Khalifa bin Zayed Al Nahyan , Emir of Abu Dhabi and President of the United Arab Emirates ( UAE ) , and <unk> Manal bint Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum , daughter of Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum , Emir of Dubai and Prime Minister of UAE ( 2005 ) 
 Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum of Dubai and Princess Haya bint Hussein of Jordan ( 2004 ) 
 Ibrahim Ismail , Sultan of Johor and Raja <unk> Sofia of Perak ( 1982 ) 
 Mohammed Reza Pahlavi of Iran and Princess <unk> Fuad of Egypt ( 1939 – 1948 ) 
 <unk> <unk> , sister of <unk> I of Albania , and Mehmet Abid , son of Abdul Hamid II . 
 Princess <unk> <unk> , daughter of Ottoman Emperor Abdülmecid II , and Azam Jah , son of Nizam of Hyderabad Asaf Jah VII ( 1931 ) 
 = = <unk> marriage = = 
 At one time , some dynasties adhered strictly to the concept of royal intermarriage . The <unk> , Habsburgs , Sicilian and Spanish Bourbons and Romanovs , among others , introduced house laws which governed dynastic marriages ; it was considered important that dynasts marry social equals ( i.e. , other royalty ) , thereby ruling out even the highest @-@ born non @-@ royal nobles . Those dynasts who contracted undesirable marriages often did so morganatically . Generally , this is a marriage between a man of high birth and a woman of lesser status ( such as a daughter of a low @-@ ranked noble family or a commoner ) . Usually , neither the bride nor any children of the marriage has a claim on the bridegroom 's succession rights , titles , precedence , or entailed property . The children are considered legitimate for all other purposes and the prohibition against bigamy applies . 
 Examples of morganatic marriages include : 
 Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine and Countess Julia Hauke ( 1851 ) 
 Duke Alexander of Württemberg and Countess Claudine <unk> von Kis @-@ <unk> ( 1835 ) 
 Grand Duke Constantine Pavlovich and Countess Joanna <unk> @-@ <unk> ( 1796 ) 
 Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria and Countess Sophie <unk> von <unk> und <unk> ( 1900 ) 
 = = Inbreeding = = 
 Over time , because of the relatively limited number of potential consorts , the gene pool of many ruling families grew progressively smaller , until all European royalty was related . This also resulted in many being descended from a certain person through many lines of descent , such as the numerous European royalty and nobility descended from Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom or King Christian IX of Denmark . The House of Habsburg was infamous for inbreeding , with the Habsburg lip cited as an ill effect , although no genetic evidence has proved the allegation . The closely related houses of Habsburg , Bourbon , Braganza and Wittelsbach also engaged in first @-@ cousin unions frequently and in double @-@ cousin and uncle @-@ niece marriages occasionally . 
 Examples of incestuous marriages and the impact of inbreeding on royal families include : 
 All rulers of the Ptolemaic dynasty from Ptolemy II were married to their brothers and sisters , so as to keep the Ptolemaic blood " pure " and to strengthen the line of succession . Cleopatra VII ( also called Cleopatra VI ) and Ptolemy XIII , who married and became co @-@ rulers of ancient Egypt following their father 's death , are the most widely known example . 
 Jean V of Armagnac was said to have formed a rare brother @-@ sister liaison , left descendants and claimed to be married . There is no evidence that this " marriage " was contracted for dynastic rather than personal reasons . 
 One of the most famous examples of a genetic trait aggravated by royal family intermarriage was the House of Habsburg , which <unk> particularly often and is known for the mandibular <unk> of the <unk> ( Unter ) Lippe ( otherwise known as the ' Habsburg jaw ' , ' Habsburg lip ' or ' Austrian lip ' " ) . This was typical for many Habsburg relatives over a period of six centuries . 
 = Missouri Route 126 = 
 Route 126 is a highway located entirely within Barton County in the U.S. state of Missouri . Its western terminus is at the Kansas state line , where K @-@ 126 ends . The route goes in a straight line for most of its length , and intersects Interstate 49 ( I @-@ 49 ) and U.S. Route 71 ( US 71 ) . Its eastern terminus is at US 160 and Route 37 in Golden City . The route was designated in 1942 , and formerly consisted of two supplemental routes . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 126 starts at the Kansas state line , where K @-@ 126 ends . The road travels east for around seven miles in a straight line , intersecting Route M and Route 43 . Route 126 continues eastward , crossing through farmland and a few trees . After the route intersects Route J , it meets a frontage road parallel to I @-@ 49 / US 71 . The road crosses over North Fork Spring River and continues east . Soon , Route 126 intersects I @-@ 49 / US 71 at a diamond interchange , and intersects a frontage road again . The route crosses a railroad owned by Missouri and Northern Arkansas Railroad , and intersects Routes JJ and T. Four miles later , the route enters Golden City and becomes Main Street . It becomes concurrent with Route 37 . The routes goes through downtown Golden City , and turn slightly northeast . The two routes end at US 160 at a T @-@ intersection . US 160 continues eastward toward Lockwood . In 2012 , Missouri Department of Transportation ( MoDOT ) calculated as many as 840 vehicles traveling east of I @-@ 49 / US 71 , and as few as 480 vehicles traveling west of I @-@ 49 / US 71 . This is expressed in terms of annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) , a measure of traffic volume for any average day of the year . 
 = = History = = 
 The road that became Route 126 was built and designated , as supplemental Route D around 1935 . It connected from US 71 to US 160 in Golden City . By 1940 , supplemental Route H was designated , connected from Route 43 , to a dead end east of it . A year later , Route H was extended west to the Kansas state line . In 1942 , Route 126 was designated , replacing Route H from the state line to Route 43 . Around 1945 @-@ 1949 , Route H was extended east to Route Z , and the same route was extended east for a few miles east of Route Z in 1954 . Around 1955 , Route H and D were removed in the supplemental route system , and was replaced by Route 126 , as the two sections became connected . Later , Route 126 was repaved in concrete , from the state line to Route 43 . The whole route was repaved by 1957 . In 1979 , US 71 was moved to a freeway alignment , but an interchange wasn 't built until 2010 @-@ 2013 . I @-@ 49 became co @-@ signed with US 71 in December 2012 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Barton County . 
 = <unk> = 
 The olm or proteus ( Proteus anguinus ) is an aquatic salamander in the family <unk> , the only exclusively cave @-@ dwelling chordate species found in Europe . In contrast to most amphibians , it is entirely aquatic ; it eats , sleeps , and breeds underwater . Living in caves found in the Dinaric Alps , it is endemic to the waters that flow underground through the extensive limestone of the karst of Central and Southeastern Europe , specifically southern Slovenia , the basin of the Soča River ( Italian : Isonzo ) near Trieste , Italy , southwestern Croatia , and Bosnia and Herzegovina . 
 It is also occasionally called the " human fish " by locals because of its skin color , similar to that of Caucasian people ( translated literally from Slovene : <unk> ribica , Bosnian : <unk> ribica and Croatian : <unk> ribica ) , as well as " cave salamander " or " white salamander " . In Slovenia , it is also known by the name <unk> , which translates as " the one that burrows into wetness " . It was first mentioned in 1689 by the local naturalist Valvasor in his Glory of the Duchy of Carniola , who reported that , after heavy rains , the olms were washed up from the underground waters and were believed by local people to be a cave dragon 's offspring . 
 This animal is most notable for its adaptations to a life of complete darkness in its underground habitat . The olm 's eyes are undeveloped , leaving it blind , while its other senses , particularly those of smell and hearing , are acutely developed . It also lacks any pigmentation in its skin . It has three toes on its forelimbs , but only two toes on its hind feet . It also exhibits neoteny , retaining larval characteristics like external gills into adulthood , like some American amphibians , the axolotl and the <unk> ( Necturus ) . The olm is the only species in the genus Proteus and the only European species of the family <unk> , whose other extant genus is Necturus . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word olm is a German loanword that was incorporated into English in the late 19th century . The origin of the German original , <unk> or <unk> ' cave olm ' , is unclear . It may be a variant of the word <unk> ' salamander ' . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 = = = External appearance = = = 
 The olm 's body is snakelike , 20 – 30 cm ( 8 – 12 in ) long , with some specimens reaching up to 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) . The trunk is cylindrical , uniformly thick , and segmented with regularly spaced furrows at the <unk> borders . The tail is relatively short , laterally flattened , and surrounded by a thin fin . The limbs are small and thin , with a reduced number of digits compared to other amphibians : the front legs have three digits instead of the normal four , and the rear have two digits instead of five . Its body is covered by a thin layer of skin , which contains very little of the pigment riboflavin , making it yellowish @-@ white or pink in color . The internal organs can be seen shining through on the abdominal part of the body . The resemblance in color to that of white humans is the reason why the Proteus is called human fish in some languages . However , the olm 's skin retains the ability to produce melanin . When exposed to light , it will gradually turn dark , and in some cases the larvae are also colored . Its pear @-@ shaped head ends with a short , dorsoventrally flattened snout . The mouth opening is small , with tiny teeth forming a sieve to keep larger particles inside the mouth . The nostrils are so small as to be imperceptible , but are placed somewhat laterally near the end of the snout . The regressed eyes are covered by a layer of skin . The olm breathes with external gills that form two branched tufts at the back of the head . They are red in color because the oxygen @-@ rich blood shows through the non @-@ pigmented skin . The olm also has rudimentary lungs , but their role in respiration is only accessory . The sexes are very similar in appearance , with males having a somewhat thicker cloaca than females . 
 = = = Sensory organs = = = 
 Cave @-@ dwelling animals have been prompted , among other adaptations , to develop and improve non @-@ visual sensory systems in order to orient in and adapt to permanently dark habitats . The olm 's sensory system is also adapted to life in the subterranean aquatic environment . Unable to use vision for orientation , the olm compensates with other senses , which are better developed than in amphibians living on the surface . It retains larval proportions , like a long , slender body and a large , flattened head , and is thus able to carry a larger number of sensory receptors . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The eyes are regressed , but retain sensitivity to light . They lie deep below the dermis of the skin and are rarely visible except in some younger adults . Larvae have normal eyes , but development soon stops and they start regressing , finally <unk> after four months of development . The pineal body also has photoreceptive cells which , though regressed , retain visual pigment like the photoreceptive cells of the regressed eye . The pineal gland in Proteus probably possesses some control over the physiological processes . Behavioral experiments revealed that the skin itself is also sensitive to light . <unk> of the integument is due to the pigment <unk> inside specialized cells called melanophores . Preliminary <unk> analyses support the existence of photosensitive pigment also in the animal 's integument . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The olm is capable of sensing very low concentrations of organic compounds in the water . They are better at sensing both the quantity and quality of prey by smell than related amphibians . The nasal epithelium , located on the inner surface of the nasal cavity and in the Jacobson 's organ , is thicker than in other amphibians . The taste buds are in the mucous epithelium of the mouth , most of them on the upper side of the tongue and on the entrance to the gill cavities . Those in the oral cavity are used for tasting food , where those near the gills probably sense chemicals in the surrounding water . 
 = = = = <unk> and electroreceptors = = = = 
 The sensory epithelia of the inner ear are very specifically differentiated , enabling the olm to receive sound waves in the water , as well as vibrations from the ground . The complex functional @-@ morphological orientation of the sensory cells enables the animal to register the sound sources . As this animal stays neotenic throughout its long life span , it is only occasionally exposed to normal adult hearing in air , which is probably also possible for Proteus as in most salamanders . Hence , it would be of adaptive value in caves , with no vision available , to profit from underwater hearing by recognizing particular sounds and eventual localization of prey or other sound sources , i.e. acoustical orientation in general . The ethological experiments indicate that the best hearing sensitivity of Proteus is between 10 Hz and up to 15 @,@ 000 Hz . The lateral line supplements inner ear sensitivity by registering low @-@ frequency nearby water displacements . 
 A new type of sensory organ has been analyzed on the head of Proteus , utilizing light and electron microscopy . These new organs have been described as <unk> organs . 
 Like some other lower vertebrates , the olm has the ability to register weak electric fields . Some behavioral experiments suggest that the olm may be able to use Earth 's magnetic field to orient itself . In 2002 , Proteus anguinus was found to align itself with natural and artificially modified magnetic fields . 
 = = Ecology and life history = = 
 The olm 's embryonic development takes 140 days , after which it takes another 14 years to reach sexual maturity . The larvae gain adult appearance after nearly four months , with the duration of development strongly correlating with water temperature . Unconfirmed historical observations of vivipary exist , but it has been shown that the females possess a gland that produces the egg casing , similar to those of fish and egg @-@ laying amphibians . It was long thought that female olm gave birth to live young at lower temperatures and laid eggs at higher , but rigorous observations have not confirmed that . The olm appears to be oviparous . 
 The female lays up to 70 eggs , each about 12 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , and places them between rocks , where they remain under her protection . The tadpoles are 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) long when they hatch and live on yolk stored in the cells of the digestive tract for a month . 
 Development of the olm and other <unk> amphibians is characterized by heterochrony – the animal does not undergo metamorphosis and instead retains larval features . The form of heterochrony in the olm is neoteny – delayed somatic maturity with precocious reproductive maturity , i.e. reproductive maturity is reached while retaining the larval external morphology . In other amphibians , the metamorphosis is regulated by the hormone thyroxine , secreted by the thyroid gland . The thyroid is normally developed and functioning in the olm , so the lack of metamorphosis is due to the unresponsiveness of key tissues to thyroxine . 
 The olm swims by eel @-@ like twisting of its body , assisted only slightly by its poorly developed legs . It is a predatory animal , feeding on small crabs , snails and occasionally insects . It does not chew its food , instead swallowing it whole . The olm is resistant to long @-@ term starvation , an adaptation to its underground habitat . It can consume large amounts of food at once , and store nutrients as large deposits of lipids and glycogen in the liver . When food is scarce , it reduces its activity and metabolic rate , and can also reabsorb its own tissues in severe cases . Controlled experiments have shown that an olm can survive up to 10 years without food . 
