 Olms are gregarious , and usually aggregate either under stones or in fissures . Sexually active males are an exception , establishing and defending territories where they attract females . The scarcity of food makes fighting energetically costly , so encounters between males usually only involve display . This is a behavioral adaptation to life underground . 
 Reproduction has only been observed in captivity so far . Sexually mature males have swollen cloacas , brighter skin color , two lines at the side of the tail , and slightly curled fins . No such changes have been observed in the females . The male can start courtship even without the presence of a female . He chases other males away from the chosen area , and may then secrete a female @-@ attracting pheromone . When the female approaches , he starts to circle around her and fan her with his tail . Then he starts to touch the female 's body with his snout , and the female touches his cloaca with her snout . At that point , he starts to move forward with a twitching motion , and the female follows . He then deposits the spermatophore , and the animals keep moving forward until the female hits it with her cloaca , after which she stops and stands still . The spermatophore sticks to her and the sperm cells swim inside her cloaca where they attempt to fertilize her eggs . The courtship ritual can be repeated several times over a couple of hours . 
 Longevity is estimated at up to 58 years . A study published in Biology Letters estimated that they have a maximum lifespan of over 100 years and that the lifespan of an average adult is around 68 @.@ 5 years . When compared to the longevity and body mass of other amphibians , olms are outliers , living longer than would be predicted from their size . 
 = = Taxonomic history = = 
 Olms from different cave systems differ substantially in body measurements , color and some microscopic characters . Earlier researchers used these differences to support the division into five species , while modern herpetologists understand that external morphology is not reliable for amphibian systematics and can be extremely variable , depending on nourishment , illness , and other factors ; even varying among individuals in a single population . Proteus anguinus is now considered a single species . The length of the head is the most obvious difference between the various populations – individuals from <unk> , Slovenia , have shorter heads on average than those from <unk> , Slovenia , and the Istrian peninsula , for example . 
 = = = Black olm = = = 
 The black olm ( Proteus anguinus <unk> <unk> & Arntzen , 1994 ) is the only other recognized subspecies of the olm . It is endemic to the underground waters near <unk> , Slovenia , an area smaller than 100 square kilometres ( 39 sq mi ) . It was first found in 1986 by members of the Slovenian Karst Research Institute , who were exploring the water from <unk> karst spring in the White Carniola region . 
 It has several features separating it from the type subspecies : 
 These features suggest that the black olm has probably colonized underground habitats more recently and still retains some <unk> characteristics . 
 = = Research history = = 
 The first written mention of the olm is in Janez <unk> Valvasor 's The Glory of the Duchy of Carniola ( 1689 ) as a baby dragon . Heavy rains of Slovenia would wash the olms up from their subterranean habitat , giving rise to the folklore belief that great dragons lived beneath the Earth 's crust , and the olms were the undeveloped offspring of these mythical beasts . In The Glory of the Duchy of Carniola , Valvasor compiled the local Slovenian folk stories and pieced together the rich mythology of the creature and documented observations of the olm as " Barely a span long , akin to a lizard , in short , a worm and vermin of which there are many <unk> " . 
 The first researcher to retrieve a live olm was a physician and researcher from Idrija , G.A. Scopoli ; he sent dead specimens and drawings to colleagues and collectors . Josephus Nicolaus Laurenti , though , was the first to briefly describe the olm in 1768 and give it the scientific name Proteus anguinus . It was not until the end of the century that Carl Franz Anton Ritter von <unk> from the Naturhistorisches Museum of Vienna started to look into this animal 's anatomy . The specimens were sent to him by <unk> <unk> . <unk> presented his findings in 1801 to The Royal Society in London , and later also in Paris . Soon , the olm started to gain wide recognition and attract significant attention , resulting in thousands of animals being sent to researchers and collectors worldwide . The basis of functional morphological investigations in Slovenia was set up by Lili <unk> in the 1980s . More than twenty years later , the Research Group for functional morphological Studies of the Vertebrates in the Department of Biology ( <unk> Faculty , University of Ljubljana ) , is one of the leading groups studying the olm under the guidance of Boris <unk> . There are also several cave laboratories in Europe in which olms have been introduced and are being studied . These are <unk> , Ariège ( France ) , Kent 's Cavern ( England ) , Han @-@ sur @-@ <unk> ( Belgium ) and <unk> ( Hungary ) . They were also introduced into the <unk> ( Germany ) and <unk> ( Italy ) caves , where they still live today . 
 The olm was used by Charles Darwin in his famous On the Origin of Species as an example for the reduction of structures through disuse : 
 Far from feeling surprise that some of the cave @-@ animals should be very anomalous ... as is the case with blind Proteus with reference to the reptiles of Europe , I am only surprised that more wrecks of ancient life have not been preserved , owing to the less severe competition to which the scanty inhabitants of these dark abodes will have been exposed . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The olm is extremely vulnerable to changes in its environment , on account of its adaptation to the specific conditions in caves . Water resources in the karst are extremely sensitive to all kinds of pollution . The contamination of the karst underground waters is due to the large number of waste disposal sites leached by rainwater , as well as to the accidental overflow of various liquids . The reflection of such pollution in the karst underground waters depends on the type and quantity of pollutants , and on the rock structure through which the waters penetrate . Self @-@ purification processes in the underground waters are not completely understood , but they are quite different from those in surface waters . 
 Among the most serious chemical pollutants are chlorinated hydrocarbon pesticides , fertilizers , polychlorinated biphenyls ( PCBs ) , which are or were used in a variety of industrial processes and in the manufacture of many kinds of materials ; and metals such as mercury , lead , cadmium , and arsenic . All of these substances persist in the environment , being slowly , if at all , degraded by natural processes . In addition , all are toxic to life if they accumulate in any appreciable quantity . Slovenian caves became famous for the animals they contained and which could not be found elsewhere . The olm is illegally taken by collectors . 
 The olm is included in Appendices II and IV of the EU Habitats Directive ( 92 / 43 / EEC ) . Appendix II seeks to preserve favorable conservation status in animal and plant species along with their habitats by protecting the species or defining special areas of conservation . These areas of conservation form the Natura 2000 network . Appendix IV further defines " animal and plant species of community interest in need of strict protection " . Hunting or keeping a limited number of olm is allowed only under strictly controlled circumstances , determined by local authorities . 
 The olm was first protected in Slovenia in 1922 along with all cave fauna , but the protection was not effective and a substantial black market came into existence . In 1982 it was placed on a list of rare and endangered species . This list also had the effect of prohibiting trade of the species . After joining the European Union , Slovenia had to establish mechanisms for protection of the species included in the EU Habitats Directive . The olm is included in a Slovenian Red list of endangered species . Postojna Cave and other caves inhabited by the olm were also included in the Slovenian part of the Natura 2000 network . 
 In Croatia , the olm is protected by the legislation designed to protect amphibians – collecting is possible only for research purposes by permission of the National Administration for Nature and Environment Protection . Conservation status in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro has not yet been defined . 
 On the IUCN Red List , the olm is listed as vulnerable because of its fragmented and limited distribution and ever @-@ decreasing population . 
 = = Cultural significance = = 
 The olm is a symbol of Slovenian natural heritage . The enthusiasm of scientists and the broader public about this inhabitant of Slovenian caves is still strong 300 years after its discovery . Postojna Cave is one of the birthplaces of <unk> due to the olm and other rare cave inhabitants , such as the blind cave beetle . The image of the olm contributes significantly to the fame of Postojna Cave , which Slovenia successfully utilizes for the promotion of ecotourism in Postojna and other parts of Slovenian karst . Tours of Postojna Cave also include a tour around the <unk> station – the Proteus vivarium , showing different aspects of the cave environment . 
 The olm was also depicted on one of the Slovenian <unk> coins , and was the namesake of Proteus , the oldest Slovenian popular science magazine , first published in 1933 . 
 = Snakes on a Plane = 
 Snakes on a Plane is a 2006 American action thriller film directed by David R. Ellis and starring Samuel L. Jackson . It was released by New Line Cinema on August 18 , 2006 , in North America . The film was written by David Dalessandro , John Heffernan , and Sheldon Turner and follows the events of hundreds of snakes being released on a passenger plane in an attempt to kill a trial witness . 
 The film gained a considerable amount of attention before its release , forming large fanbases online and becoming an Internet phenomenon , due to the film 's title , casting , and premise . In response to the Internet fan base , New Line Cinema incorporated feedback from online users into its production , and added five days of reshooting . Before and after the film was released , it was parodied and alluded to on television shows and films , fan @-@ made videos , video games , and various forms of literature . 
 Released in the United States and United Kingdom on August 18 , 2006 , the film received mixed to positive reviews with 68 % of reviews positive and an average normalized score of 58 % , according to the review aggregation websites Rotten Tomatoes and Metacritic , respectively . 
 Despite the immense Internet buzz , the film 's gross revenue did not live up to expectations , earning US $ 15 @.@ 25 million in its opening weekend . The film grossed US $ 62 million worldwide before its release on home video on January 2 , 2007 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After witnessing gangster Eddie Kim brutally beat U.S. Prosecutor Daniel Hayes to death in Hawaii , Sean Jones is escorted by FBI agents Neville Flynn and John Sanders on a Boeing 747 @-@ 400 to testify in a trial in Los Angeles . Despite increased security for the flight , Kim arranges for a time @-@ release crate full of venomous snakes to be placed in the cargo hold in an attempt to bring down the plane before it reaches Los Angeles International Airport ( LAX ) . To ensure the snakes attack the passengers without being provoked , he has one of his henchmen disguised as an airport ground employee spray the passengers ' <unk> with a special pheromone which makes the snakes highly aggressive . The crate opens midway through the flight and the snakes make their way through the cabin . A couple having sex in the bathroom , and a man using the bathroom are the first killed . The plane 's captain , Sam McKeon , investigates and fixes an electrical short , but is killed by the viper that caused it . Co @-@ pilot Rick , unaware of the snake , believes Sam has suffered a heart attack and continues toward LAX . 
 Some of the snakes attack Rick , and while fending them off he accidentally releases the oxygen masks throughout the plane , causing several snakes to drop into the cabin with them . Numerous passengers , including Agent Sanders , are killed when the snakes invade the cabin . The surviving passengers , who have made their way to the front of the plane , put up blockades of luggage in a desperate attempt to stop the snakes . Rick is attacked and the plane starts to dip downwards , causing a food trolley to crash through the luggage blockade . The passengers flee to the upstairs first class cabin before blocking the stairwell with an inflatable liferaft . Agent Flynn and Flight Attendant Claire regain control of the plane . Rick retakes the controls and has Flynn go into the cargo hold to restore the air conditioning / ventilation system . Agent Flynn contacts FBI Special Agent Hank Harris on the ground , who gets in touch with <unk> Dr. Steven Price ( Louiso ) , Customs ' main source for animal smuggling cases . Based on pictures of the reptiles emailed to him via a passenger 's mobile phone , Price believes a Los Angeles snake dealer known for illegally importing exotic and highly dangerous snakes to be responsible . After a shootout , the dealer is bitten by one of his snakes and Harris withholds the antivenom if he does not give them details . The dealer finally reveals that Kim hired him to obtain the snakes and adds how the latter managed to smuggle them on board the plane . Price injects antivenom to the injured dealer and he commandeers the dealer 's supply of antivenom for the plane 's victims based on the list given to him , while Harris gives orders to have Eddie Kim arrested on multiple counts of murder and attempted murder . 
 Harris contacts Flynn , telling him that anti @-@ venom will be ready for the passengers when they land . However , Flynn discovers that the cockpit is filled with snakes and Rick is dead . After a brief discussion , Troy , Three Gs ' bodyguard , agrees to land the plane based on prior experience . After everyone gets prepared , Flynn shoots out two windows with his pistol , causing the plane to <unk> . The snakes are blown out of the cockpit and the lower floor of the plane . Flynn and Troy take the controls of the plane and Troy reveals that his flight experience was from a video game flight simulator . Despite his lack of real @-@ world experience , after Troy makes an emergency landing , the plane makes it to the terminal . The passengers leave the plane and anti @-@ venom is given to those who need it . Just as Flynn and Sean are about to disembark the plane , a final snake jumps out and bites Sean in the chest . Flynn draws his gun and shoots the snake , and paramedics rush to Sean , who is unharmed due to a bulletproof vest . As a token of gratitude , Sean later takes Flynn to Bali and teaches him how to surf . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Agent Neville Flynn , an FBI agent assigned to protect Sean Jones on his flight to Los Angeles . 
 Julianna Margulies as Claire Miller , a flight attendant . 
 Nathan Phillips as Sean Jones , a surfer and <unk> racer who witnesses a brutal murder committed by Eddie Kim . 
 Bobby Cannavale as Special Agent Henry " Hank " Harris , Flynn 's contact in Los Angeles . 
 Flex Alexander as Clarence " Three Gs " , a famous rapper who is <unk> , keeps a bottle of hand sanitizer with him , and refuses to be touched by others . 
 Todd Louiso as Dr. Steven Price , a snake venom expert assigned by the FBI to communicate with Flynn . 
 Sunny <unk> as Tiffany , a flight attendant who develops a crush on Sean . 
 Kenan Thompson as Troy , Clarence 's bodyguard . 
 Rachel Blanchard as Mercedes , a socialite passenger who brings her pet Chihuahua Mary @-@ Kate aboard . 
 Lin Shaye as Grace , the senior flight attendant who acts as the flight 's purser . 
 David Koechner as Richard " Rick " , Captain McKeon 's co @-@ pilot . 
 Elsa Pataky as Maria , a female passenger who brings her infant son aboard . 
 Keith Dallas as Big Leroy , Clarence 's bodyguard . 
 Tom Butler as Captain Samuel " Sam " McKeon , the captain of the plane . 
 Byron Lawson as Eddie Kim , a crime syndicate leader . 
 Taylor Kitsch as Kyle , a young man who boards the plane with his girlfriend . 
 Samantha McLeod as Kelly , a young woman who boards the plane with her boyfriend . 
 Kevin McNulty as Emmett Bradley , an air traffic tower controller . 
 = = Development = = 
 The story is credited to David Dalessandro , a University of Pittsburgh administrator and first @-@ time Hollywood writer . He developed the concept in 1992 after reading a nature magazine article about Indonesian brown tree snakes climbing onto planes in cargo during World War II . He originally wrote the screenplay about the brown tree snake loose on a plane , titling the film Venom . He soon revised it , expanding upon the premise to include a plague of assorted venomous snakes , then — crediting the film Aliens — revised it once again to include " lots of them loose in the fuselage of a plane . " Dalessandro 's third draft of Venom was turned down by more than 30 Hollywood studios in 1995 . In 1999 , a producer for MTV / Paramount showed interest in the script , followed up by New Line Studios , which took over the rights for production . 
 Originally , the film , under the working title " Snakes on a Plane " , was going to be directed by Hong Kong action director Ronny Yu . Jackson , who had previously worked with Yu on The 51st State , learned about the announced project in the Hollywood trade newspapers and , after talking to Yu , agreed to sign on without reading the script based on the director , storyline , and the title . 
 The film 's B movie @-@ esque title generated a lot of pre @-@ release interest on the Internet . One journalist wrote that Snakes on a Plane is " perhaps the most internet @-@ hyped film of all time " . Much of the initial publicity came from a blog entry made by screenwriter Josh Friedman , who had been offered a chance to work on the script . The casting of Samuel L. Jackson further increased anticipation . At one point , the film was given the title Pacific Air Flight 121 , only to have it changed back to the working title at Samuel Jackson 's request . In August 2005 , Samuel Jackson told an interviewer , " We 're totally changing that back . That 's the only reason I took the job : I read the title . " On March 2 , 2006 , the studio reverted the title to Snakes on a Plane . New Line hired two additional writers to smooth out the screenplay . 
 Taking advantage of the Internet buzz for what had been a minor film in their 2006 line @-@ up , New Line Cinema ordered five days of additional shooting in early March 2006 ( principal photography had wrapped in September 2005 ) . While re @-@ shoots normally imply problems with a film , the producers opted to add new scenes to the film to change the MPAA rating from PG @-@ 13 to R and bring it in line with growing fan expectations . The most notable addition was a revision of a catchphrase from the film that was parodied on the Internet by fans of the film , capitalizing on Samuel L. Jackson 's typically foul @-@ mouthed and violent film persona : " Enough is enough ! I have had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane ! " . Subsequently , the public responded favorably to this creative change and marketing strategy , leading some members of the press to speculate that " the movie has grown from something of a joke into a phenomenon " . 
 More than 450 snakes were used for filming to represent thirty different species of snakes . The different species include a 19 @-@ foot <unk> python named Kitty ( which the crew called Kong for film purposes ) , a scarlet kingsnake ( the non @-@ venomous double for the coral snake ) , a milk snake to fill in for the <unk> ( which attacks the couple having sex ) , corn snakes , rattlesnakes , and mangrove snakes . About two @-@ thirds of the snakes seen throughout the film were either animatronic or CGI . The snakes that were real were mostly the non @-@ venomous ones that are never seen attacking anyone . The scenes where someone is clearly bitten were often done with animation . According to the DVD , all the snakes had production names , but only Scarface ( an animated pit viper ) , Peanut ( a cobra ) , and Kong are mentioned by name in the audio commentary . During filming , Samuel Jackson did not come into contact with any live snakes , due to a contract clause preventing snakes from being within 8 m ( 25 ft ) of the actor . When the film was released in theaters , rumors circulated that two live western diamondback rattlesnakes had been released at a showing of the film on August 22 , 2006 , in Phoenix , Arizona . It was later revealed that one snake had made its way into the lobby of the theater on its own , and another had been found in the parking lot in a separate incident . The snakes were later released back into the desert . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 = = = Print = = = 
 An illustrated book from Thunder 's Mouth Press , Snakes on a Plane : The Guide to the Internet <unk> by David Waldon , details the Internet phenomenon and was published July 28 , 2006 . Waldon details various viral videos relating to the film 's craze , and interviewed their producers to find out what about the film captured their attention . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 On March 16 , 2006 , New Line Cinema announced a contest on <unk> and a website promoting the film . The contest allowed artists on <unk> to have their music featured in the film . A flood of <unk> @-@ themed songs were submitted by artists such as Captain Ahab ( who ultimately won the contest ) , Louden Swain , the Former Fat Boys , <unk> , and others . In addition , a music video for the film , " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " by Cobra Starship , was released on July 10 , 2006 on MTV2 's Unleashed . The music video appeared on the film 's soundtrack as well as during the film 's closing credits . 
 In October 2005 , Nathanial Perry and Chris Rohan recorded an audio trailer spoof , which helped fuel the Internet buzz . Perry and Rohan recorded the " motherfucking snakes " line in the audio trailer which was added to the film during the week of re @-@ shoots . In July 2006 , New Line Cinema signed a worldwide licensing agreement with the Cutting Corporation to produce an audiobook of the film . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Beginning in May 2006 , episodes of The Daily Show with Jon Stewart and its sister show The Colbert Report contained references to Snakes on a Plane 's title , the catchphrase , and general premise . On August 15 , 2006 , Samuel L. Jackson guest featured on The Daily Show , opening with the film 's catchphrase . Keith Olbermann featured stories about the film and Internet buzz several times on his MSNBC news program Countdown . In addition , G4 's Attack of the Show ! featured a semi @-@ regular segment entitled " Snakes on a Plane : An Attack of the Show Investigation " , and had a week dedicated to the film which included interviews and the appearance of hundreds of snakes on set . 
 = = = Internet = = = 
 Snakes on a Plane generated considerable buzz on the Internet after Josh Friedman 's blog entry and mentions on several Internet portals . The title inspired bloggers to create songs , apparel , poster art , pages of fan fiction , parody films , mock movie trailers , and short film parody competitions . On July 6 , 2006 , the official Snakes on a Plane website started a promotional sweepstakes called " The # 1 Fan King Cobra Sweepstakes " . The contest made innovative use of the publicity @-@ generating potential of the Internet , requiring contestants to post links on forums , blogs , and websites and collecting votes from the users of those sites . 
 Many of the early fan @-@ made trailers and later other viral videos and commercials circulated via YouTube , and captured media attention there with such titles as : Cats on a Plane ( which was featured in Joel Siegel 's review of Snakes on a Plane on Good Morning America ) , Snakes Who Missed the Plane , All Your Snakes Are Belong To Us ( a spoof of the All your base are belong to us phenomenon ) , Steaks on a Train , and Badgers on a Plane ( a spoof of " Badger Badger Badger " ) . Several websites also held contests about the film in fan @-@ submitted short films and posters . 
 In August 2006 , <unk> launched an advertising campaign in which fans could send a semi @-@ personalized message in Samuel Jackson 's voice to telephone numbers of their choosing . Within the first week , over 1 @.@ 5 million calls were sent to participants . 
 = = = Previews = = = 
 In June 2006 , New Line commissioned famed UK audio @-@ visual film remixers and chop @-@ up artists Addictive TV to cut and sample Snakes on a Plane to create trailers for the U.S. television networks . The official teaser trailer premiered before X @-@ Men : The Last Stand , and the first official trailer appeared online on June 26 , 2006 . Another trailer circulated in July 2006 , showing several of the snake attacks and a missing pilot and co @-@ pilot . Rotten Tomatoes had video clips of the official trailers , as well as fan @-@ made trailers . 
 During a July 21 , 2006 panel discussion at the Comic @-@ Con Convention in San Diego , California , a preview clip from the film was shown to a crowd of more than 6 @,@ 500 people . The panel included actors Samuel L. Jackson and Kenan Thompson , director David R. Ellis , and snake @-@ handler Jules Sylvester . 
 = = Release = = 
 Snakes on a Plane debuted on August 18 , 2006 . The film opened in 3 @,@ 555 theaters and had some late @-@ night screenings on August 17 . In a move meant to exploit the attention from the film , a straight @-@ to @-@ DVD Z @-@ movie horror film with a supernatural twist , Snakes on a Train , was released on August 15 , 2006 , three days before the film 's theatrical release . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 In mid @-@ July 2006 , New Line Cinema revealed that it would not be showing any advance screenings for critics . After the film opened , the review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 68 % based reviews from 171 critics , with the consensus : " Snakes on a Plane lives up to its title , featuring snakes on a plane . It isn 't perfect , but then again , it doesn 't need to be . " reviews , with an average score of 6 @.@ 2 / 10 . At the website Metacritic , which uses a normalized rating system , the film earned a mixed rating of 58 % based on 31 reviews by mainstream critics . Reviewers reported audiences cheering , applauding , and engaging in " call and response " , noting that audience participation was an important part of the film 's appeal . 
 The Arizona Republic 's Randy Cordova gave the film a positive review , calling the film " ... an exploitation flick that knows what it wants to do , and it gets the job done expertly . " and a " ... Mecca for B @-@ movie lovers . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle enjoyed the film , asking his readers " ... if you can find a better time at the movies this year than this wild comic thriller , let me in on it . " Boston Globe reviewer Ty Burr reacted to Samuel L. Jackson 's performance by saying he " ... <unk> this film with the authority of someone who knows the value of honest bilge . He 's as much the auteur of this baby as the director and screenwriters , and that fierce glimmer in his eye is partly joy . " 
 Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film one and a half stars out of four , saying that " after all the Internet hype about those motherfuckin ' snakes on that motherfuckin ' plane , the flick itself is a murky stew of shock effects repeated so often that the suspense quickly droops along with your eyelids . " David Denby of The New Yorker claimed that the film " ... may mark a new participatory style in marketing , but it still gulls an allegedly knowing audience with the pseudo @-@ morality of yesteryear . " 
 Film critic and radio host Michael Medved criticized New Line Cinema for agreeing to re @-@ shoot scenes so that the film would receive an R rating from the Motion Picture Association of America to match fan expectations . He argued that the film would have grossed more revenue at the box office with a PG @-@ 13 rating , stating that the demographic most likely to be drawn to a movie titled Snakes on a Plane is males between the ages of 12 and 15 . " My fourteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Danny , for instance , felt a powerful inclination to go out and see the movie with his two sleep @-@ over friends this Sunday night , " he explained , " but I wouldn 't permit it . It 's rated R for good reason . " Medved ultimately awarded the film 2 1 / 2 stars out of 4 in a radio review , but said that he did so " grudgingly . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Due to the Internet hype surrounding the film , industry analysts estimated the film 's opening box office to be between US $ 20 @-@ 30 million . While Snakes on a Plane did narrowly beat Talladega Nights : The Ballad of Ricky Bobby for the number one position during its opening weekend , it did not meet these estimates and grossed only $ 15 @.@ 25 million in its opening days , a disappointment for New Line Cinema . In its second weekend , the film fell to sixth place with $ 6 @.@ 4 million , a more than fifty percent drop from its opening weekend revenue . By the end of its theatrical run , the film grossed $ 62 @,@ 022 @,@ 014 worldwide . 
 Robert K. Shaye , the founder of New Line , stated that he was " disappointed " that Snakes on a Plane was a " dud " despite " higher expectations " . The press declared that Snakes on a Plane was a " box office disappointment " , with The New York Times reporting that after all the " hype online , Snakes on a Plane is letdown at box office " and Entertainment Weekly reporting that the film was an " internet @-@ only phenomenon . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Snakes on a Plane released on DVD December 26 , 2006 in Region 2 ; December 28 , 2006 in Region 4 ; and January 2 , 2007 in Region 1 . The DVD features commentaries , deleted and extended scenes , several featurettes , Cobra Starship 's music video , and trailers . The U.S. Blu @-@ ray was released on September 29 , 2009 . 
 = = = TV version = = = 
 The film received further attention when fans noticed the U.S. TV edit of the film purposely dubbed over foul language , replacing it with nonsense words , for family audiences . An example is Samuel L. Jackson 's line toward the end of the film , " I have had it with these motherfucking snakes on this motherfucking plane " , which is replaced with " I have had it with these monkey @-@ fighting snakes on this Monday @-@ to @-@ Friday plane " . 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 Black Flame published the novelization of the film , written by Christa Faust . The 405 – page novel contains significant backstories for the characters and introduces other characters that were not featured in the film . Comic book writer Chuck Dixon wrote a comic book adaptation of the film . DC Comics released the two @-@ issue miniseries on August 16 , 2006 and September 27 , 2006 under their Wildstorm imprint . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The soundtrack for the film was released on August 15 , 2006 . The enhanced portion of the CD contains what was considered the " best of the best " of the amateur Internet creations inspired by the film , including the songs " Snakes on the Brain " by Captain Ahab and " Here Come the Snakes ( Seeing Is Believing ) " by Louden Swain . The single " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " peaked at the 32nd position of Billboard 's Hot Modern Rock Tracks in 2006 . 
 " Snakes on a Plane ( Bring It ) " by Cobra Starship , William Beckett , Maja Ivarsson , Travie McCoy 
 " The Only Difference Between Martyrdom and Suicide Is Press Coverage " ( Tommie Sunshine Brooklyn Fire Remix ) by Panic ! at the Disco 
 " Black <unk> " ( Teddybears Remix ) by The Academy Is ... 
 " <unk> " by Cee @-@ Lo Green 
 " Can 't Take It " ( The Baldwin Brothers " El Camino Prom Wagon " Remix ) by The All @-@ American Rejects 
 " Queen of Apology " ( Patrick Stump Remix ) by The Sounds 
 " Of All the Gin Joints in All the World " ( Tommie Sunshine 's Brooklyn Fire <unk> ) by Fall Out Boy 
 " New Friend Request " ( Hi @-@ Tek Remix ) by Gym Class Heroes 
 " Around the Horn " ( Louis XIV Remix ) by The Bronx 
 " Remember to Feel Real " ( Machine Shop Remix ) by Armor for Sleep 
 " Wine Red " ( Tommie Sunshine 's Brooklyn Fire <unk> ) by The Hush Sound 
 " Bruised " ( Remix ) by Jack 's Mannequin 
 " Final Snakes " by <unk> Drank 
 " Wake Up " ( Acoustic ) by Coheed and Cambria 
 " Lovely Day " by <unk> <unk> 
 " Hey Now Now " by Michael <unk> & Spearhead 
 " Snakes on a Plane - The Theme " ( Score ) by Trevor Rabin 
 = Charles Carroll the Settler = 
 Charles Carroll ( 1661 – 1720 ) , sometimes called Charles Carroll the Settler to differentiate him from his son and grandson , was a wealthy lawyer and planter in colonial Maryland . Carroll , a Catholic , is best known because his efforts to hold office in the Protestant @-@ dominated colony ( of Maryland ) resulting in the disfranchisement of the colony 's Catholics . 
 The second son of Irish Catholic parents , Carroll was educated in France as a lawyer before returning to England , where he pursued the first steps in a legal career . Before that career developed , he secured a position as Attorney General of the young colony of Maryland . Its founder George Calvert and his descendants intended it as a refuge for Catholics . 
 Carroll supported Charles Calvert , the colony 's Catholic proprietor , in an unsuccessful effort to prevent the Protestant majority from gaining political control over Maryland . Following the overthrow of the Calvert proprietorship and the subsequent exclusion of Catholics from colonial government , Carroll turned his attention to planting , law , business , and various offices in the proprietor 's remnant organization . He was the wealthiest man in the colony by the time of his death . In the last years of his life , Carroll attempted to regain some vestige of political power for Catholics in the colony , but the Protestant colonial assembly and Governor John Hart disfranchised them . His son , Charles Carroll of Annapolis , became a wealthy planter and his grandson , Charles Carroll of Carrollton , also wealthy , was the only Catholic signer of the United States Declaration of Independence . 
 = = Early life and emigration = = 
 Carroll was the second of four sons born to Daniel Carroll of Aghagurty and <unk> ( c . 1642 – 1688 ) , a Catholic Irishman whose family lost much of their land and wealth in the English Civil War . The exact place of his birth is unclear , though it likely occurred near the small town of Aghagurty that Carroll 's father took as part of his name . Some of the family property near Aghagurty was obtained by a friend , Richard Grace , who made Daniel Carroll the head tenant . This action gave the family a livelihood , but the family continued to have limited means compared to their former status . It is likely that Charles Carroll was fostered by the wealthier Grace , who had no son ; his greater resources could provide for the child 's education . 
 With Grace 's support , Carroll was able to attend school in France — at Lille and at the University of Douai — where he studied the humanities , philosophy , and civil and canon law . By May 1685 , Carroll had moved to London , where he registered to study English common law and was accepted into the Inner Temple , one of the four Inns of Court that are able to call members to the bar and enable them to practice law . According to family tradition , Carroll secured a position as clerk to William Herbert , 1st Marquess of Powis , an Englishman who was one of two Catholic peers in the court of James II . 
 According to Carroll family tradition , Powis told his new clerk that he believed King James was receiving bad advice related to the religious turmoil in England . Powis was concerned about the consequences for English Catholics . He supposedly spoke on Carroll 's behalf to an associate of his , Charles Calvert , proprietor of the Maryland colony . Charles Calvert 's grandfather , George Calvert , 1st Baron Baltimore , was a former member of Parliament and Secretary of State to James I , whose Catholicism had effectively ended his political career . Intense lobbying by George Calvert had led to the granting of a hereditary charter to the Calvert family . The Maryland colony was established in the 1630s on land granted by this charter . It was intended as a haven for English Catholics and other religious minorities . Powis may have encouraged Carroll to emigrate to Maryland with the hope that the younger man 's career would come to greater fulfillment in a place with less religious conflict than England at the time . 
 Carroll received a commission from Calvert as the colony 's Attorney General on July 18 , 1688 , and arrived in the colony in October 1688 . En route , Carroll changed his family motto from In fide et in bello forte ( strong in faith and war ) to <unk> cum <unk> ( anywhere so long as there be freedom ) . Soon after he left , the Protestant William of Orange invaded England , James II fled , and Parliament — which had been leery of James ' Catholicism — recognized William and his wife Mary as the new King and Queen two weeks after Carroll 's arrival in Maryland . This event , known as the Glorious Revolution , had profound implications for the future of the Maryland colony and for Carroll . 
 = = Career and rise to wealth in Maryland = = 
 Soon after his arrival in Maryland , Carroll presented his commission to the colony 's council and was recognized as the new Attorney General of the colony . He arrived in a place already riven by religious and class differences . Carroll and nearly the entire governing structure of the colony , with the exception of the lower house of the proprietary assembly , were appointed by Calvert . Most of the appointees were Catholic and wealthy , whereas the majority of the population and the lower house of the assembly were Protestant and less wealthy . Carroll arrived in Maryland just as long @-@ standing economic , religious , and political tensions between the poorer Protestant majority and the wealthier and more powerful Catholic minority were reaching a head . 
 By the late 17th century , Maryland 's economy was suffering from the effects of price fluctuations on the world market of its main cash crop , tobacco . Often in those years , the price on world markets was barely above the cost of production , leaving planters with little to show for their efforts . This affected small Protestant planters disproportionately , as many of the larger Catholic landowners had diversified economically . This growing socioeconomic inequality exacerbated underlying religious tensions . Furthermore , the new Governor , William Joseph , who arrived in the colony just before Carroll , immediately entered into an adversarial relationship with the Protestant @-@ dominated lower house of the assembly . Into this powder keg came the news that England 's Glorious Revolution had taken place ; the Catholic King James II had been deposed and replaced with the Protestant William of Orange . In an attempt to maintain control in the colony , Governor Joseph quickly canceled the session of the colonial assembly scheduled for April 1689 . 
 In response to this cancellation and rumors of an anti @-@ Protestant alliance between Catholics and Native Americans , Protestant settlers formed an association to defend themselves . In July 1689 , they marched on the colonial capital , St. Mary 's City . Led by John Coode , the Protestant <unk> were quickly able to capture St. Mary 's and the other major towns of the colony . The Governor and a number of other Calvert allies fled to Virginia . Charles Calvert turned for relief to the Lords of Trade and eventually to the Privy Council , but these groups sided with the Protestants and took away the power of the Calvert family to govern the colony . Soon thereafter , the new leaders of the colony barred Catholics from holding office , bearing arms , or serving on juries . 
 During the rebellion , Carroll was recovering from the " hard seasoning " often experienced by immigrants whose bodies were <unk> to local conditions . Perhaps due to illness , he chose not to flee the colony . Instead , Carroll offered support and legal advice to Calvert and became an outspoken critic of the Protestant government . He was jailed twice for insulting the new colonial leaders , including Governor Lionel Copley , who accused Carroll of , " uttering several mutinous and seditious speeches " . Losing his position in the colonial government and the £ 50 annual salary it entailed was a blow to Carroll . His support for Calvert earned him various positions in the private Calvert family organization , which would benefit him throughout his life . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 Carroll improved his fortunes through a judicious marriage . In November 1689 , he wed Martha Ridgely Underwood , a widow whose two former husbands had left her a small fortune . Carroll inherited a portion of this fortune after Martha 's death in 1690 in childbirth . The child , named Anthony in honor of Carroll 's brother , also died . Restricted in his law practice by the new Protestant government , Carroll used the inheritance to begin importing goods to the colony . He also purchased a store in the town of Annapolis . 
 In February 1693 or 1694 , Carroll remarried , this time to the 15 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of Colonel Henry Darnall , Charles Calvert 's chief agent in the colony . The marriage to Mary Darnall secured Carroll a tract of land in Prince George 's County , a position in the colony 's land office with a £ 100 annual salary , and a lifelong alliance with Henry Darnall . This tract of land was the first part of what would become a vast empire of nearly 50 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 @,@ 000 ha ) by the time of Carroll 's death , worth approximately £ 20 @,@ 000 . Some of these lands were worked by the 112 slaves he acquired during his lifetime . This was a very large number of slaves for a Maryland planter in the early colonial period . After 1706 , Carroll and his family resided on two properties , a town house built in the new colonial capital of Annapolis and the plantation called <unk> in modern @-@ day Howard County . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 As successful as Carroll was in business , however , he and his wife experienced many personal losses throughout this period . Of the ten children born to Charles and Mary Carroll , five died within a year of their birth . Henry , their eldest son , died the year before his father in 1719 , at the age of 21 or 22 . Only the third child , named Charles and later known as Charles Carroll of Annapolis , and their next son Daniel would marry and have children of their own . 
 Henry Darnall died in 1711 . Carroll took over Darnall 's positions as agent and receiver general for the Calvert family in the colony , both posts with significant additional salaries . Among the many uses to which he put this money was lending . After 1713 , he became the largest mortgage lender in the colony , and made a number of large personal loans to other planters . Carroll continued to practice law , making a small income from cases argued in the two courts where Catholics were still allowed to practice law , the chancery and prerogative courts . His speculation in mercantile enterprises also continued . Together , these made Carroll the wealthiest man in the colony by 1715 , and its most prominent Catholic . 
 = = Final attempt at political power and death = = 
 In 1715 , political power over the Maryland colony was restored to the Calvert family after the conversion of Benedict Calvert to Protestantism . Emboldened by this turn of events , and with support from a number of prominent Maryland Catholic families , Carroll attempted to gain government office in the state . This would have been a profound departure from the policy of excluding Catholics from government , which had existed since the Protestant takeover in 1689 . Carroll 's chief antagonist in this effort was the Governor , John Hart . In 1716 , Hart discovered that Carroll was planning to travel to England to lobby Calvert 's officials for restoration of office @-@ holding rights for Catholics , something Hart vehemently opposed . Hart described Carroll as : 
 " a professed Papist , and the first <unk> of our late Disturbances , who having acquired a large estate in the Province by the offices he formerly employed , and his practice in Law ... must needs add the Ambition of Rule to his former Felicity " . 
 Carroll travelled to England to press his case , although Hart later claimed that he had been promised no such lobbying would take place . Carroll convinced the proprietor 's officials to appoint him as the proprietor 's chief agent in the colony . He was further appointed to the positions of receiver general , escheator , and naval officer . These positions together effectively gave Carroll the power to oversee all money in the colony that was collected by the government or by Calvert 's private organization . 
 Upon Carroll 's return to Maryland , Hart was incensed both at the threat to his own power and the idea of a Catholic officeholder in the colony . Hart demanded that Carroll take the oath of allegiance , which he was willing to do , and the oath of abjuration confirming the Protestant succession to the English throne , which Carroll was not willing to do . Carroll began to act in the capacity authorized by the proprietor 's commission , and Hart turned to the upper house of the colonial legislature for relief . Rejecting Carroll 's arguments in support of his right to hold government offices , the assembly resisted his attempts to exercise the commission and , near the end of 1716 , passed a series of laws confirming and restricting the oath requirements for officeholders , which were anti @-@ Catholic by intent . Carroll 's case may have been undermined when he came to the defense of his nephew , who had raised a toast to the Catholic James Stuart . Stuart had tried to take the British throne during a rebellion in 1715 and was extremely unpopular with Protestants in the colony . The proprietor , whose position had been so recently restored and who did not want to risk the loss of the colony , confirmed the decision of the assembly . Carroll 's commission was formally revoked on February 20 , 1717 . According to a later account Hart gave to the assembly , Carroll began a campaign to undermine the Governor . There is no evidence that Hart was accurate , but the assembly passed stricter anti @-@ Catholic laws in 1718 , including disfranchisement , stripping Catholic males of the right to vote . 
 Carroll died only two years later , with his wealth intact but having failed to regain any political rights for Catholics in Maryland . Carroll 's eldest son Henry had died a year before ; the family fortune and burden of heading a Catholic family in Protestant @-@ dominated Maryland were passed on to his younger sons Charles and Daniel . 
 Carroll 's descendants continued to play a prominent role in the colony . His son Charles , known as Charles Carroll of Annapolis , maintained and expanded the family fortune . His grandson , Charles Carroll of Carrollton , achieved the restoration of political rights his grandfather had desired . He became the only Catholic to sign the Declaration of Independence . 
 = Paul Henderson = 
 Paul Garnet Henderson CM <unk> ( born January 28 , 1943 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player . A left winger , Henderson played 13 seasons in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) for the Detroit Red Wings , Toronto Maple Leafs and Atlanta Flames and five in the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) for the Toronto Toros and Birmingham Bulls . He played over 1 @,@ 000 games between the two major leagues , scoring 376 goals and 758 points . Henderson played in two NHL All @-@ Star Games and was a member of the Memorial Cup @-@ winning Hamilton Red Wings team as a junior . 
 Henderson is best known for leading Team Canada to victory at the 1972 Summit Series against the Soviet Union . Played during the Cold War , the series was viewed as a battle for both hockey and cultural supremacy . Henderson scored the game @-@ winning goal in the sixth , seventh and eighth games , the last of which has become legendary in Canada and made him a national hero : it was voted the " sports moment of the century " by The Canadian Press and earned him numerous accolades . Henderson has twice been inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame : in 1995 individually and in 2005 along with all players of the Summit Series team . He was inducted into the International Ice Hockey Federation Hall of Fame in 2013 . 
 A born @-@ again Christian , Henderson became a minister , motivational speaker and author following his playing career . He has co @-@ written three books related to hockey or his life . Henderson was made a Member of the Order of Canada in 2012 and of the Order of Ontario in 2014 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Henderson was born January 28 , 1943 , near Kincardine , Ontario . His mother , Evelyn , went into labour while staying at his father 's parents ' farm in the nearby community of Amberley during a snowstorm . She gave birth to Paul while the family was crossing Lake Huron via horse @-@ drawn sleigh attempting to reach the hospital in Kincardine . His father , Garnet , was fighting for Canada during the Second World War at the time and did not meet his son until Paul was nearly three years old . Garnet worked for the Canadian National Railway following his return and the family – Paul was the eldest to brother Bruce and sisters Marilyn , <unk> and Sandra – moved frequently to different posts in Ontario before settling in Lucknow . 
 The family often struggled financially , though Garnet was always able to provide the basic life necessities . Paul 's first experiences with hockey came at a young age in the basement of a Chinese restaurant operated by Charlie Chin , an immigrant who settled in Lucknow . Henderson played with Chin 's sons using a ball instead of a puck . The Chin family bought Henderson his first set of hockey equipment ; he had been using old catalogues as shin pads . His father coached his youth teams , and at one minor hockey tournament , told his teammates simply to " just give the puck to Paul and get out of his way " . That incident remained with Henderson throughout his life : while it embarrassed him at the time to be singled out in front of his friends and teammates , he later realized it stood as an affirmation and expression of his father 's pride in him and his abilities . 
 It was in Lucknow where Henderson met his future wife , Eleanor , at the age of 15 while he was working at a grocery store . They married in 1962 and , wanting to ensure he could provide for his wife , he considered giving up the game to become a history and physical education teacher . His father convinced him to remain in hockey , warning him that he would regret it for the rest of his life if he never tried to make the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . After considering his father 's advice and talking with Eleanor , Henderson decided to play two additional years , and if he had not reached the NHL by 1964 , he would quit the game and focus on his education . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Henderson attracted the attention of NHL scouts at the age of 15 when he scored 18 goals and 2 assists in a 21 – 6 victory in a juvenile playoff game . The junior affiliates of both the Boston Bruins and Detroit Red Wings offered him tryouts . He chose to sign with the Red Wings as their junior teams were based in Hamilton , which was closest to his home . He played the 1959 – 60 season with the Junior B Goderich Sailors and was the youngest player on the team . Henderson moved up to the Junior A Hamilton Red Wings in 1960 – 61 where he was an extra forward for much of the season . Returning to Hamilton in 1961 – 62 , he became a regular player on the team , and recorded 24 goals and 43 points in 50 games . 
 Hamilton won the Ontario championship that season , then defeated the Quebec Citadelles in four consecutive games to win the eastern Canadian championship . Henderson scored a goal in the clinching game , a 9 – 3 win , that propelled the Red Wings to their first Memorial Cup final in the team 's history . They faced the Edmonton Oil Kings in the 1962 Memorial Cup final series . The Red Wings won the best @-@ of @-@ seven set 4 – 1 to capture the national championship . Henderson scored a goal in the deciding game , a 7 – 4 victory before over 7 @,@ 000 fans at Kitchener , Ontario . He finished with seven goals and seven assists in 14 Memorial Cup playoff games . 
 Returning for a third season with Hamilton in 1962 – 63 , Henderson led the Ontario Hockey Association in scoring with 49 goals in 48 games . He added 27 assists to finish the season with 76 points . A bout of strep throat resulted in his missing Hamilton 's playoff games , but he was called up to the Detroit Red Wings late in their season when they were short of players . Henderson played his first two NHL games against the Toronto Maple Leafs , with only one shift in each game . In his first game , Henderson elbowed Dick Duff in the head , sparking a fight . He spent the rest of the game on the bench after several Toronto players threatened retaliation against him . In his second , he incurred a slashing penalty during his only time on the ice . Henderson estimated that he was on the ice for only 20 seconds over the two games , but drew nine penalties in minutes . 
 = = = Detroit and Toronto = = = 
 After failing to make the Detroit roster out of training camp , Henderson was assigned to their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Pittsburgh Hornets , to begin the 1963 – 64 season . He appeared in 38 games for the Hornets and his speed and aggressive nature helped him score 10 goals and 24 points . Henderson earned a brief recall to Detroit in November , then joined the NHL team permanently early in the new year . He scored his first NHL goal on January 29 , 1964 , against the Chicago Black Hawks . It came late in the game against goaltender Glenn Hall and resulted in a 2 – 2 tie . In 32 regular season NHL games , Henderson recorded three goals and three assists in 32 games , then appeared in 14 playoff games where he added five points . The Red Wings reached the 1964 Stanley Cup Final , but lost in seven games to Toronto . 
 Henderson established himself as a full @-@ time NHL player in 1964 – 65 , though with limited ice time . He was used primarily in a defensive role and to kill penalties , scoring 8 goals and 21 points , while appearing in 70 games . Switching to the left wing in 1965 – 66 , Henderson played a more offensive role and scored 22 goals . He added three more in 12 playoff games as the Red Wings reached the 1966 Stanley Cup Final versus the Montreal Canadiens . Henderson scored the game @-@ winning goal in the first game of the finals . After winning the first two games in Montreal , Detroit lost four straight and the series . 
 Seeking to double his $ 7 @,@ 000 salary from the previous season , Henderson became embroiled in a contract dispute with the Red Wings prior to the 1966 – 67 NHL season , before the team acceded to his demands . He then spent the year attempting to overcome injuries ; a case of tracheitis forced him to miss several early season games and led the team to consider having him play wearing a surgical mask to protect against the cold air of the arena . Henderson eventually spent time in the dry air of Arizona to cure the ailment , but he also suffered from torn chest muscles and ultimately missed a third of the season . On the ice , Henderson scored 21 goals and 40 points in 49 games . 
 The Red Wings were in last place of the NHL 's East Division late in the 1967 – 68 season when , on March 3 , 1968 , they completed one of the biggest trades in league history up to that time : Henderson was sent to the Toronto Maple Leafs as part of a six @-@ player deal , along with Norm Ullman and Floyd Smith , in exchange for Frank Mahovlich , Garry Unger and Pete <unk> . Henderson finished the season with 11 points in 13 games for Toronto , then scored 27 goals and 59 points in 1968 – 69 . 
 A groin injury plagued Henderson throughout much of the 1969 – 70 season , but he continued to play at the team 's request . He finished with 20 goals despite playing the entire season with pain . The Maple Leafs offered Henderson only a small raise , arguing that he did not deserve more because his offensive production had declined . The contract offer and the team 's indifference towards his injury left Henderson disillusioned with management 's attitude towards its players . Healthy in 1970 – 71 , he scored 30 goals and a NHL career @-@ high 60 points . 
 = = = Summit Series = = = 
 Canada had long been at a disadvantage in international ice hockey tournaments as its best players were professionals in the NHL and therefore ineligible to play at the ostensibly amateur World Championship and Olympic Games . The Soviets masked the status of their best players by having them serve in the military or hold other jobs affiliated with the teams , so they retained amateur status , even though playing hockey was their only occupational responsibility . The International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) promised to allow Canada to use a limited number of professional players at the 1970 tournament but later reneged , causing the nation to withdraw from all international competition . Officials in Canada and the Soviet Union subsequently negotiated an arrangement that would see the top players of each nation – amateur or professional – play in an eight @-@ game " Summit Series " in September 1972 between the world 's two greatest hockey nations . Canadian fans and media approached the series with confidence ; many predicted that the Canadian professionals would win all eight games . 
 Henderson 's 38 @-@ goal season in 1971 – 72 , a career high , earned him a place on Team Canada 's roster . He scored a goal early in the first game , in Montreal , that gave Canada a 2 – 0 lead . The Soviet team then humbled the Canadians by scoring the next four goals and winning 7 – 3 . A 4 – 1 Canadian win followed in the second game , but the Soviets overcame a 4 – 2 deficit , the fourth goal scored by Henderson , to tie the third game . Canada lost the fourth game , 5 – 3 , and were jeered by the fans in Vancouver as they headed to Moscow for the final four games with a 1 – 2 – 1 series deficit . Henderson , like most of his teammates , was frustrated by his team 's play and the negative reaction they received from the crowd . 
 In the first game in Moscow , Henderson scored a goal to help Canada establish a 4 – 1 lead , but also suffered a concussion when he was tripped into the boards and knocked unconscious . He returned to finish the game , but the Soviets came back to win , 5 – 4 , and were one victory shy of winning the series . In game six , Canada overcame what coach Harry Sinden called " the worst officials I have ever seen in my life " to take game six by a 3 – 2 score , with Henderson scoring the game @-@ winning goal . The game was also notable for Bobby Clarke using his stick in a two @-@ handed slash that broke Valeri Kharlamov 's ankle . Henderson later called the event " the low point of the series " during the 30th anniversary celebration , but apologized for his comments after Clarke took umbrage . Canada drew even in the series at three wins apiece , plus one tie , with a 4 – 3 victory in game seven . Henderson again scored the winner despite being tripped as he took the shot . 
 By the eighth game , the competition had become more than a battle for hockey supremacy : it was also viewed as a battle between contrasting ways of life , particularly in the Soviet Union , where success in sport was used to promote the superiority of communism over western capitalism . An estimated 50 million Soviets watched the final contest , while in Canada , offices were closed and schools suspended classes to allow students to watch the game on television in gymnasium assemblies . The two teams ended the first period tied at two goals apiece , but Canada trailed at the second intermission , 5 – 3 , and Soviet officials stated they would claim the overall victory if the game ended in a draw as a result of scoring more goals throughout the series . Canada rallied in the third period to tie the game with seven minutes remaining . 
 Sitting on the bench as the game entered the final minute of play , Henderson " had a feeling " that he could score . He convinced coach Sinden to send him out when Peter Mahovlich left the ice . Rushing into the Soviet zone , Henderson missed a pass from Yvan Cournoyer in front of the net and was tripped by a Soviet defenceman . As he got to his feet , Phil Esposito recovered the puck and sent it towards Henderson in front of the net . The first shot was stopped by Vladislav Tretiak , but Henderson recovered the rebound and slid it past the fallen goaltender to give Canada a 6 – 5 lead with only 34 seconds left to play . It was his seventh goal of the tournament , tying him for the series lead with Esposito and Alexander Yakushev . The goal won the game , and the series , for Canada . The team returned home to massive crowds in Montreal and Toronto , and Paul Henderson had become a national hero . 
 = = = World Hockey Association = = = 
 Henderson struggled to adjust to his new @-@ found popularity . While he appreciated the support from fans and the business opportunities it created , he grew increasingly frustrated over time as the attention intruded on his private life . In his autobiography , Shooting for Glory , Henderson stated that the fame left him less satisfied than he had ever been . His frustrations with Maple Leafs owner Harold Ballard , who Henderson felt was destroying the team , contributed to his developing an ulcer . ( Henderson later admitted he was not mature enough at the time to deal with the acerbic Ballard ) . He briefly turned to alcohol as he struggled to deal with his situation . Henderson 's professional career reached its lowest point during the 1972 – 73 NHL season . He had become depressed , and by December , had scored only six goals . He struggled with a groin injury and played only 40 games for the Maple Leafs , who missed the playoffs . 
 Prior to the 1973 – 74 NHL season , Henderson spoke to John Bassett , owner of the World Hockey Association ( WHA ) ' s Toronto Toros . Bassett offered Henderson a five @-@ year contract worth twice his annual $ 75 @,@ 000 salary from the Maple Leafs . The deal included a $ 50 @,@ 000 signing bonus and performance bonuses based on how he played in his final year with the Maple Leafs . Henderson signed the contract , though he said in his autobiography that he regretted doing so before completing his term with his NHL club . A bitter opponent of the WHA , Ballard had vowed not to lose more players to the rival league . When he found out about the deal , he offered Henderson the same contract terms , but without a signing bonus . Upset at how stingy Ballard had been with his teammates , Henderson told Ballard to " take this contract and shove it " . An angered Ballard never forgave Henderson , and never spoke to him again . 
 Following a 24 @-@ goal campaign in his final season with the Maple Leafs , Henderson officially moved to the WHA where he played in another tournament against the Soviets . While the original series was restricted to players from the NHL , the 1974 Summit Series featured a Canadian team made up of WHA players . The series lacked the intensity of the original , yet Henderson felt that he played well : he scored two goals and an assist , and though Canada finished with one win , four losses and three ties , he felt the WHA had proven itself . Henderson scored 33 goals and 63 points in the 1974 – 75 WHA season for the Toros while playing 58 games . He missed the playoffs after tearing his knee ligaments in a game against the Phoenix Roadrunners when colliding with Bob Mowat , an opposing player during a line change . 
 Henderson scored 24 goals and 55 points in 1975 – 76 , his last in Toronto . Following that season , the Toros relocated to Alabama where they became the Birmingham Bulls . While his contract stipulated he did not have to relocate with the team , Henderson appreciated the chance to move to a city where he could play in relative anonymity . He played the final three years of his contract in Birmingham , scoring 23 , 37 and 24 goals , but made only one playoff appearance during his five WHA seasons , in 1978 . 
 = = = Atlanta Flames = = = 
 The WHA merged with the NHL following the 1978 – 79 season . Birmingham was not invited to join the NHL ; the team instead joined the Central Hockey League for the 1979 – 80 season and became a minor league affiliate of the Atlanta Flames . Henderson considered retiring , but his family had settled in Birmingham and he knew they could remain in the United States only as long as he was employed . The Flames offered him a spot on their roster , but he preferred to remain with his family . He signed a two @-@ year contract with the Flames on the promise that he would stay in Birmingham unless the team needed his services as a result of injury to other players . He spent the majority of the season in Birmingham , but when Atlanta did struggle with injuries , they recalled him for 30 games where he scored seven goals and six assists . Henderson also appeared in four playoff games . In his final game at Toronto 's Maple Leaf Gardens , Henderson led the Flames to a 5 – 1 win over the Maple Leafs with a two @-@ goal effort , resulting in his being named the game 's first star . 
 Henderson intended the 1980 – 81 season to be his last as a player . He was again offered a spot on the Flames , in part to help develop the team 's young players , but the franchise had relocated to Canada to become the Calgary Flames and Henderson chose to remain with Birmingham , as a player and assistant coach . He missed several games due to injuries but scored six goals in 33 games . However , the Bulls fell into financial difficulty and on February 23 , 1981 , the team ceased operations mid @-@ season . Choosing not to leave his Birmingham home , Henderson retired as a player and spent the remainder of the season as a scout for the Flames . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Though he was not considered a good puck handler , Henderson was a fast skater and was known for his skills at shooting the puck . His career spanned 19 professional seasons during which he played over 1 @,@ 000 major league games in the NHL and WHA . He scored 376 goals and 760 points between the two leagues and was a two @-@ time NHL all @-@ star , playing in the 1972 and 1973 All @-@ Star Games . His career , however , was defined by the goal he scored on September 28 , 1972 , to win the Summit Series for Canada . It is the most famous goal in Canadian hockey history and was the defining moment for a generation of Canadians . Decades later , Henderson remains a national hero . The Canadian Press named Henderson 's goal the " sports moment of the century " in 2000 . The jersey worn by Henderson when he scored the goal was sold at auction for over $ 1 million in 2010 , thought to be the highest price ever paid for a hockey sweater . 
 Frank Lennon 's photograph , taken moments after the goal and showing a jubilant Henderson being embraced by Yvan Cournoyer , has been " etched into the visual cortex of every Canadian " . The photo won a National Newspaper Award and has been reproduced by the Royal Canadian Mint on coins . It was also named Canadian Press photograph of the year . 
 Sportswriters and fans have frequently called for Henderson to be inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on the strength of his performance . Commentator and former NHL coach Don Cherry argued that Henderson 's status as hero of the " greatest series in hockey history " was enough to qualify him . Henderson himself does not believe he belongs : " So many Canadians get upset that I ’ m not in the Hall of Fame , and I tell them all the time if I was on the committee , I wouldn ’ t vote for me . Quite frankly , I didn ’ t have a Hall of Fame career . " Henderson has been honoured by Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame on two occasions : he was first inducted as an individual in 1995 , and again ten years later along with his 1972 teammates . The Summit Series team has also been honoured with a star on Canada 's Walk of Fame . Henderson has been inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame ( 1997 ) , the IIHF Hall of Fame ( 2013 ) and has been honoured by Hockey Canada with the Order of Hockey in Canada as part of its 2013 class . He was named a Member of the Order of Canada in December 2012 in recognition of " his engagement in support of a range of social and charitable causes " along with his achievements on the ice . In 2014 , he was named to the Order of Ontario . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Henderson and his wife Eleanor have three daughters : Heather , Jennifer and Jill . The family remained in Birmingham for a time following his retirement as a player . He had an opportunity to become a colour commentator for Maple Leafs broadcasts in 1981 but Ballard , still upset that Henderson had defected to the WHA , prevented his hiring . In Birmingham , he became a stockbroker , briefly joining brokerage firm E. F. Hutton . However , he was unable to get a work permit in the United States despite a petition signed by thousands of Birmingham residents who fought for him to stay . 
 Following the high of the 1972 Summit Series and the personal lows that came after , Henderson struggled with a sense of discontentment . He turned to religion , becoming a born @-@ again Christian in 1975 . Unable to work as a broker , Henderson entered the seminary and studied to become a minister . When he finally gave up his efforts to acquire an American work visa in 1984 , he returned to Toronto . Under the auspices of Power to Change Ministries , formerly Campus Crusade for Christ Canada , he founded a men ’ s ministry in Ontario called <unk> and travels across Canada giving talks and speeches , particularly to businessmen . He has received an honorary doctorate from <unk> College and Seminary and an honorary degree from Tyndale University College and Seminary . 
 Henderson is also a published author . His autobiography , Shooting for Glory , was released in 1992 . With Jim Prime , he co @-@ authored the 2011 book How Hockey Explains Canada , an exploration of the relationship between the sport and Canadian culture . He released a memoir in 2012 called The Goal of My Life with Roger Lajoie . 
 The death of his father due to heart problems at the age of 49 had a lasting effect on Henderson . He was conscious of his own health , and survived a blockage in his own heart that was discovered in 2004 . He was diagnosed with chronic lymphocytic leukemia in 2009 . The disease prevented him from attending 40th anniversary celebrations of the Summit Series in Moscow , but he was responding well to experimental treatment as part of a clinical trial he participated in into 2013 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = 1985 European Cup Final = 
 The 1985 European Cup Final was a football match between Liverpool of England and Juventus of Italy on 29 May 1985 at the Heysel Stadium , Brussels , Belgium . It was the final match of the 1984 – 85 season of the European Cup , Europe 's premier cup competition . Liverpool were the reigning champions and were appearing in their fifth final , having won the competition in 1977 , 1978 , 1981 and 1984 . Juventus were appearing in their third European Cup final ; they had lost their two previous appearances in 1973 and 1983 . 
 Each club needed to progress through four rounds to reach the final . Matches were contested over two legs , with a match at each team 's home ground . All but one of Juventus ' matches were won by two goals or more ; in the semi @-@ finals , they beat French team Bordeaux 3 – 2 on aggregate . Liverpool also won the majority of their matches by more than two goals , except in the second round when they beat Portuguese team Benfica 3 – 2 on aggregate . 
 The match is largely remembered for the disaster that occurred before the kick @-@ off . Liverpool fans breached a fence separating the two groups of supporters and charged the Juventus fans . The resulting weight of people caused a retaining wall to collapse , killing 39 people and injuring hundreds . Despite calls for an abandonment , the match went ahead because it was felt that further trouble would otherwise occur . The disaster prompted UEFA to ban English clubs from European football for five years . 
 Watched by a crowd of 59 @,@ 000 , the first half was goalless . Juventus took the lead in the 56th minute when Michel Platini scored from a penalty after Gary Gillespie was adjudged to have brought down Zbigniew Boniek in the penalty area , although the foul was actually committed nearly a yard outside the area and the referee was far from the action . The score remained the same throughout the remainder of the match and Juventus won 1 – 0 , achieving their first European Cup win . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Juventus = = = 
 Juventus gained entry to the competition by winning the 1983 – 84 Serie A , entering as Italian champions . Their opponents in the first round were Ilves of Finland . The first leg in Finland was held at the <unk> Stadion was won 4 – 0 by Juventus with a hat @-@ trick by Paolo Rossi and a goal from Michel Platini . They won the second leg 2 – 1 at their home ground , Stadio Comunale , to win the tie 6 – 1 on aggregate . 
 In the second round , Juventus were drawn against Swiss team Grasshopper . Juventus won the first leg 2 – 0 in Italy , and achieved a 4 – 2 victory in the second leg in Switzerland , which meant that they won the tie 6 – 2 on aggregate . Juventus ' opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were Sparta Prague of Czechoslovakia . Goals from Marco Tardelli , Paolo Rossi and Massimo Briaschi ensured a 3 – 0 victory for Juventus in the first leg in Italy . They lost the second leg at Sparta 's home ground , <unk> stadium 1 – 0 , but progressed to the semi @-@ finals due to a 3 – 1 aggregate victory . 
 In the semi @-@ finals , Juventus played French team Bordeaux and won the first leg 3 – 0 in Italy with goals from Zbigniew Boniek , Briaschi and Platini . The second leg was held at Bordeaux 's home ground , the Stade Chaban @-@ Delmas . Despite winning the match 2 – 0 , Bordeaux lost 3 – 2 on aggregate . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Liverpool were the reigning European champions ; they defeated Roma to win the 1983 – 84 European Cup , and were also the reigning English champions , having won the English league during the same season . They were drawn against Polish team Lech Poznań in the first round , and won the first leg at Poznań 's home ground , Stadion <unk> , 1 – 0 . Liverpool won the second leg 4 – 0 with a hat @-@ trick from John Wark and a goal from Paul Walsh at their home ground , Anfield , to win the tie 5 – 0 on aggregate . 
 Liverpool played Portuguese team Benfica in the second round . Liverpool won the first leg 3 – 1 in England with a hat @-@ trick by Ian Rush . They lost the second leg 1 – 0 at Benfica 's home ground , Estádio da Luz , but still progressed to the quarter @-@ finals due to a 3 – 2 aggregate victory . Liverpool 's opponents in the quarter @-@ finals were Austria Wien of Austria . The first leg at Wien 's home ground , the Gerhard <unk> Stadium , was drawn 1 – 1 , but a 4 – 1 victory in the second leg in England meant that Liverpool qualified for the semi @-@ finals with a 5 – 2 aggregate win . 
 Panathinaikos of Greece were the opposition in the semi @-@ finals . The first leg at Anfield was won 4 – 0 by Liverpool ; Rush scored twice , and Wark and Jim <unk> each scored one goal . The second leg was held at the Olympic Stadium and was won 1 – 0 by Liverpool . Thus , Liverpool won the tie 5 – 0 on aggregate to progress to their fifth European Cup final and their second in succession . 
 = = Background = = 
 Juventus were appearing in their third European Cup final , having lost their previous appearances in 1973 and 1983 . Liverpool were appearing in their fifth final , they were the reigning champions after beating Italian team Roma 4 – 2 in a penalty shoot @-@ out after the 1984 final finished 1 – 1 . Liverpool had won in 1977 , 1978 and 1981 . After to Juventus won the 1983 – 84 European Cup Winners ' Cup , both teams had faced each other during the season in the 1984 European Super Cup at Juventus ' home ground , the Stadio Comunale , due to both clubs experiencing fixture congestion , and was won 2 – 0 by the Torinese team with two goals from Zbigniew Boniek . 
 Juventus finished the 1984 – 85 Serie A in fifth position , which was outside of the European qualification positions . In order to participate in European competition in 1985 – 86 , they needed to win the European Cup . Liverpool had finished second behind Everton in the 1984 – 85 Football League , and thus qualified for the UEFA Cup , but victory in the final would enable them to compete in the European Cup the following season . 
 The final was to be played at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels , Belgium . Liverpool had objected to the choice of venue as they were concerned about the condition of the stadium , which was crumbling , and the decision to allocate a neutral section for Belgian fans . 
 = = Disaster = = 
 The neutral zone that had been allocated to Belgian fans was largely occupied by Juventus supporters , many of whom were from the local Italian community . The neutral zone was in section Z , on the same side of the ground as the Liverpool fans . The two groups thus stood yards apart , separated only by chicken wire . At approximately 7 p.m. , missiles began to be thrown between the two sets of fans ; because the stadium was crumbling , fans could pick stones up and throw them across the divide . 
 The throwing became more intense as kick @-@ off approached . Moments later , a group of Liverpool fans charged into section Z , causing the fans there to retreat . As they had nowhere to go , they moved towards the side perimeter wall . As more people moved up against the wall , it collapsed , which resulted in 39 deaths and injuries to 600 people . At the other end of the ground , Juventus fans began to riot in retaliation for the events in section Z. They advanced down the pitch towards the Liverpool fans and were stopped by the police . The resulting confrontation lasted two hours and was still ongoing when the match kicked @-@ off . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The match was delayed for over an hour as a result of the disaster , but was played because officials felt that abandoning the match would result in further violence . Two minutes into the match , Liverpool defender Mark Lawrenson was substituted for Gary Gillespie after Lawrenson suffered a recurrence of a shoulder injury . Juventus deployed Zbigniew Boniek on the right @-@ hand side of the pitch and Massimo Briaschi on the left . Juventus ' plan was to use the pace of Briaschi to threaten Liverpool full @-@ back Phil Neal . Juventus ' first chance came in the 30th minute when Antonio Cabrini , who advanced from the left @-@ back position and his shot was saved by Liverpool goalkeeper Bruce Grobbelaar . Liverpool immediately countered – John Wark ran onto Ronnie Whelan 's chipped pass , but his shot was saved by Juventus goalkeeper Stefano Tacconi . Minutes later , Liverpool had another chance , but Whelan 's shot was pushed over the Juventus goal by Tacconi . 
 Five minutes before half @-@ time , Juventus were awarded a free @-@ kick . Boniek , who had beaten three Liverpool players with a run , was brought down outside the Liverpool penalty area by Wark , who received a yellow card for the foul . The resulting free @-@ kick came to nothing , and at half @-@ time the score was 0 – 0 . Almost immediately after the restart , Liverpool suffered another injury . Paul Walsh stretched to reach a pass from Neal , aggravated a stomach strain and was replaced by Craig Johnston . Juventus were gaining an ascendancy in the match , and in the 56th minute they were awarded a penalty kick . Boniek again went on a run through the centre of the Liverpool defence and was brought down by Gillespie . Liverpool believed that the foul was outside the area , but the Swiss referee , from some 25 yards ( 22 @.@ 86 m . ) behind the ball , awarded the penalty . Michel Platini scored the subsequent penalty to give Juventus a 1 – 0 lead . 
 Liverpool tried to find a way back into the match . With 16 minutes left , Whelan was brought down in the Juventus penalty area by Massimo Bonini , but the referee decided that it was not a foul . Liverpool created more chances near the end of the match ; Tacconi saved a shot from Whelan . Wark and Steve Nicol saw headers go wide of the Juventus goal . No further goals were scored and at full @-@ time the score was 1 – 0 to Juventus , who had won their first European Cup and became the first club to win all three seasonal UEFA competitions . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Despite being considered , from a sporting point of view , as one of the better European finals played until then , after the match , much discussion centred on the disaster that occurred before kick @-@ off . UEFA was adamant that the Liverpool fans were responsible ; UEFA official Gunter Schneider stated , " Only the English fans were responsible . Of that there is no doubt . " British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher put pressure on The Football Association to withdraw English clubs from European competition and two days later , UEFA banned English clubs for " an indeterminate period of time " . On 6 June , FIFA extended the ban to worldwide matches , but this was modified a week later to exclude friendly matches and did not affect the English national team . 
 English clubs were banned indefinitely from European competition , with a condition that when the ban was lifted , Liverpool would serve an extra three @-@ year ban . The ban eventually lasted for five years , clubs returning to European competition in the 1990 – 91 season . Liverpool returned to European competition a season later in the 1991 – 92 UEFA Cup . 
 = Borobudur = 
 Borobudur , or <unk> , is a 9th @-@ century Mahayana Buddhist Temple in Magelang , Central Java , Indonesia . The monument consists of nine stacked platforms , six square and three circular , topped by a central dome . The temple is decorated with 2 @,@ 672 relief panels and 504 Buddha statues . The central dome is surrounded by 72 Buddha statues , each seated inside a perforated stupa . It is the world 's largest Buddhist temple , as well as one of the greatest Buddhist monuments in the world . 
 Built in the 9th century during the reign of the Sailendra Dynasty , the temple was designed in Javanese Buddhist architecture , which blends the Indonesian indigenous cult of ancestor worship and the Buddhist concept of attaining Nirvana . The temple also demonstrates the influences of Gupta art that reflects India 's influence on the region , yet there are enough indigenous scenes and elements incorporated to make Borobudur uniquely Indonesian . The monument is both a shrine to the Lord Buddha and a place for Buddhist pilgrimage . The journey for pilgrims begins at the base of the monument and follows a path around the monument and ascends to the top through three levels symbolic of Buddhist cosmology : Kāmadhātu ( the world of desire ) , Rupadhatu ( the world of forms ) and Arupadhatu ( the world of formlessness ) . The monument guides pilgrims through an extensive system of stairways and corridors with 1 @,@ 460 narrative relief panels on the walls and the balustrades . Borobudur has the largest and most complete ensemble of Buddhist reliefs in the world . 
 Evidence suggests Borobudur was constructed in the 9th century and abandoned following the 14th @-@ century decline of Hindu kingdoms in Java and the Javanese conversion to Islam . Worldwide knowledge of its existence was sparked in 1814 by Sir Thomas Stamford Raffles , then the British ruler of Java , who was advised of its location by native Indonesians . Borobudur has since been preserved through several restorations . The largest restoration project was undertaken between 1975 and 1982 by the Indonesian government and UNESCO , following which the monument was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 Borobudur is still used for pilgrimage ; once a year , Buddhists in Indonesia celebrate Vesak at the monument , and Borobudur is Indonesia 's single most visited tourist attraction . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In Indonesian , ancient temples are referred to as candi ; thus locals refer to " Borobudur Temple " as Candi Borobudur . The term candi also loosely describes ancient structures , for example gates and baths . The origins of the name Borobudur , however , are unclear , although the original names of most ancient Indonesian temples are no longer known . The name Borobudur was first written in Sir Thomas Raffles 's book on Javan history . Raffles wrote about a monument called Borobudur , but there are no older documents suggesting the same name . The only old Javanese manuscript that hints the monument called Budur as a holy Buddhist sanctuary is Nagarakretagama , written by Mpu <unk> , a Buddhist scholar of Majapahit court , in 1365 . 
 Most candi are named after a nearby village . If it followed Javanese language conventions and was named after the nearby village of Bore , the monument should have been named " <unk> " . Raffles thought that Budur might correspond to the modern Javanese word Buda ( " ancient " ) — i.e. , " ancient Boro " . He also suggested that the name might derive from <unk> , meaning " great " or " honourable " and Budur for Buddha . However , another archaeologist suggests the second component of the name ( Budur ) comes from Javanese term <unk> ( " mountain " ) . 
 Another possible etymology suggests that Borobudur is a corrupted simplified local Javanese pronunciation of <unk> <unk> written in Sanskrit as Vihara Buddha Uhr . The term Buddha @-@ Uhr could mean " the city of Buddhas " , while another possible term <unk> is probably an Old Javanese term , still survived today in Balinese vocabulary , which means " a high place " , constructed from the stem word <unk> or <unk> ( high ) . This suggests that Borobudur means vihara of Buddha located on a high place or on a hill . 
 The construction and inauguration of a sacred Buddhist building — possibly a reference to Borobudur — was mentioned in two inscriptions , both discovered in Kedu , Temanggung Regency . The <unk> inscription , dated 824 , mentioned a sacred building named <unk> ( the realm of those who have conquered worldly desire and reached enlightenment ) , inaugurated by <unk> , daughter of <unk> . The Tri <unk> inscription , dated 842 , is mentioned in the sima , the ( tax @-@ free ) lands awarded by <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) to ensure the funding and maintenance of a <unk> called <unk> . <unk> is from the word <unk> , which means " the place of origin " , a sacred building to honor the ancestors , probably those of the <unk> . Casparis suggested that <unk> <unk> <unk> , which in Sanskrit means " the mountain of combined virtues of the ten stages of <unk> " , was the original name of Borobudur . 
 = = Location = = 
 = = = The three temples = = = 
 Approximately 40 kilometres ( 25 mi ) northwest of Yogyakarta and 86 kilometres ( 53 mi ) west of Surakarta , Borobudur is located in an elevated area between two twin volcanoes , <unk> @-@ <unk> and Merbabu @-@ Merapi , and two rivers , the Progo and the Elo . According to local myth , the area known as Kedu Plain is a Javanese " sacred " place and has been dubbed " the garden of Java " due to its high agricultural fertility . During the restoration in the early 20th century , it was discovered that three Buddhist temples in the region , Borobudur , Pawon and Mendut , are positioned along a straight line . A ritual relationship between the three temples must have existed , although the exact ritual process is unknown . 
 = = = Ancient lake = = = 
 Speculation about the lake 's existence was the subject of intense discussion among archaeologists in the 20th century . In 1931 , a Dutch artist and scholar of Hindu and Buddhist architecture , <unk> <unk> , developed a theory that the Kedu Plain was once a lake and Borobudur initially represented a lotus flower floating on the lake . It has been claimed that Borobudur was built on a bedrock hill , 265 m ( 869 ft ) above sea level and 15 m ( 49 ft ) above the floor of a dried @-@ out <unk> . 
 <unk> together with Professor <unk> had taken soil samples in 1974 and again in 1977 from trial trenches that had been dug into the hill , as well as from the plain immediately to the south . These samples were later analysed by Professor <unk> , who examined their pollen and spore content in order to identify the type of vegetation that had grown in the area around the time of Borobudur 's construction . They were unable to discover any pollen or spore samples that were characteristic of any vegetation known to grow in an aquatic environment such as a lake , pond or marsh . The area surrounding Borobudur appears to have been surrounded by agricultural land and palm trees at the time of the monument 's construction , as is still the case today . Caesar <unk> and the <unk> Dr J.J. <unk> in 1985 – 86 field studies re @-@ examined the Borobudur lake hypothesis and concluded the absence of a lake around Borobudur at the time of its construction and active use as a sanctuary . These findings A New Perspective on Some Old Questions Pertaining to Borobudur were published in the 2005 UNESCO publication titled " The Restoration of Borobudur " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 There is no written record of who built the Borobudur or of its intended purpose . The construction time has been estimated by comparison between carved reliefs on the temple 's hidden foot and the inscriptions commonly used in royal charters during the 8th and 9th centuries . Borobudur was likely founded around 800 CE . This corresponds to the period between 760 and 830 CE , the peak of the Sailendra dynasty rule of Mataram kingdom in central Java , when it was under the influence of the <unk> Empire . The construction has been estimated to have taken 75 years and was completed during the reign of <unk> in 825 . 
 There is confusion between Hindu and Buddhist rulers in Java around that time . The <unk> were known as ardent followers of Buddhism , though stone inscriptions found at <unk> suggest they may have been Hindus . It was during this time that many Hindu and Buddhist monuments were built on the plains and mountains around the Kedu Plain . The Buddhist monuments , including Borobudur , were erected around the same period as the Hindu Shiva Prambanan temple compound . In 732 CE , the <unk> King Sanjaya commissioned a Shivalinga sanctuary to be built on the <unk> hill , only 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) east of Borobudur . 
 Construction of Buddhist temples , including Borobudur , at that time was possible because Sanjaya 's immediate successor , <unk> <unk> , granted his permission to the Buddhist followers to build such temples . In fact , to show his respect , <unk> gave the village of Kalasan to the Buddhist community , as is written in the Kalasan Charter dated 778 CE . This has led some archaeologists to believe that there was never serious conflict concerning religion in Java as it was possible for a Hindu king to patronize the establishment of a Buddhist monument ; or for a Buddhist king to act likewise . However , it is likely that there were two rival royal dynasties in Java at the time — the Buddhist Sailendra and the Saivite Sanjaya — in which the latter triumphed over their rival in the 856 battle on the <unk> plateau . This confusion also exists regarding the Lara <unk> temple at the Prambanan complex , which was believed to have been erected by the victor <unk> <unk> as the Sanjaya dynasty 's reply to Borobudur , but others suggest that there was a climate of peaceful coexistence where Sailendra involvement exists in Lara <unk> . 
 = = = Abandonment = = = 
 Borobudur lay hidden for centuries under layers of volcanic ash and jungle growth . The facts behind its abandonment remain a mystery . It is not known when active use of the monument and Buddhist pilgrimage to it ceased . Sometime between 928 and 1006 , King Mpu <unk> moved the capital of the <unk> Kingdom to the region of East Java after a series of volcanic eruptions ; it is not certain whether this influenced the abandonment , but several sources mention this as the most likely period of abandonment . The monument is mentioned vaguely as late as c . 1365 , in Mpu <unk> 's Nagarakretagama , written during the Majapahit era and mentioning " the vihara in Budur " . <unk> ( 1976 ) also mentions the popular belief that the temples were disbanded when the population converted to Islam in the 15th century . 
 The monument was not forgotten completely , though folk stories gradually shifted from its past glory into more superstitious beliefs associated with bad luck and misery . Two old Javanese chronicles ( <unk> ) from the 18th century mention cases of bad luck associated with the monument . According to the Babad Tanah Jawi ( or the History of Java ) , the monument was a fatal factor for Mas Dana , a rebel who revolted against Pakubuwono I , the king of Mataram in 1709 . It was mentioned that the " Redi Borobudur " hill was besieged and the insurgents were defeated and sentenced to death by the king . In the Babad Mataram ( or the History of the Mataram Kingdom ) , the monument was associated with the misfortune of Prince <unk> , the crown prince of the Yogyakarta Sultanate in 1757 . In spite of a taboo against visiting the monument , " he took what is written as the knight who was captured in a cage ( a statue in one of the perforated stupas ) " . Upon returning to his palace , he fell ill and died one day later . 
 = = = Rediscovery = = = 
 Following its capture , Java was under British administration from 1811 to 1816 . The appointed governor was Lieutenant Governor @-@ General Thomas Stamford Raffles , who took great interest in the history of Java . He collected Javanese antiques and made notes through contacts with local inhabitants during his tour throughout the island . On an inspection tour to Semarang in 1814 , he was informed about a big monument deep in a jungle near the village of <unk> . He was not able to make the discovery himself and sent H.C. Cornelius , a Dutch engineer , to investigate . In two months , Cornelius and his 200 men cut down trees , burned down vegetation and dug away the earth to reveal the monument . Due to the danger of collapse , he could not unearth all galleries . He reported his findings to Raffles , including various drawings . Although the discovery is only mentioned by a few sentences , Raffles has been credited with the monument 's recovery , as one who had brought it to the world 's attention . 
 Hartmann , a Dutch administrator of the Kedu region , continued Cornelius 's work , and in 1835 , the whole complex was finally unearthed . His interest in Borobudur was more personal than official . Hartmann did not write any reports of his activities , in particular , the alleged story that he discovered the large statue of Buddha in the main stupa . In 1842 , Hartmann investigated the main dome , although what he discovered is unknown and the main stupa remains empty . 
 The Dutch East Indies government then commissioned F.C. Wilsen , a Dutch engineering official , who studied the monument and drew hundreds of relief sketches . <unk> Brumund was also appointed to make a detailed study of the monument , which was completed in 1859 . The government intended to publish an article based on Brumund 's study supplemented by Wilsen 's drawings , but Brumund refused to cooperate . The government then commissioned another scholar , C. Leemans , who compiled a monograph based on Brumund 's and Wilsen 's sources . In 1873 , the first monograph of the detailed study of Borobudur was published , followed by its French translation a year later . The first photograph of the monument was taken in 1872 by a Dutch @-@ Flemish engraver , Isidore van Kinsbergen . 
 Appreciation of the site developed slowly , and it served for some time largely as a source of souvenirs and income for " souvenir hunters " and thieves . In 1882 , the chief inspector of cultural artifacts recommended that Borobudur be entirely disassembled with the relocation of reliefs into museums due to the unstable condition of the monument . As a result , the government appointed <unk> , an archeologist , to undertake a thorough investigation of the site and to assess the actual condition of the complex ; his report found that these fears were unjustified and recommended it be left intact . 
 Borobudur was considered as the source of souvenirs , and parts of its sculptures were looted , some even with colonial @-@ government consent . In 1896 King Chulalongkorn of Siam visited Java and requested and was allowed to take home eight cartloads of sculptures taken from Borobudur . These include thirty pieces taken from a number of relief panels , five buddha images , two lions , one gargoyle , several kala motifs from the stairs and gateways , and a guardian statue ( <unk> ) . Several of these artifacts , most notably the lions , <unk> , kala , makara and giant waterspouts are now on display in the Java Art room in The National Museum in Bangkok . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Borobudur attracted attention in 1885 , when Yzerman , the Chairman of the Archaeological Society in Yogyakarta , made a discovery about the hidden foot . Photographs that reveal reliefs on the hidden foot were made in 1890 – 1891 . The discovery led the Dutch East Indies government to take steps to safeguard the monument . In 1900 , the government set up a commission consisting of three officials to assess the monument : Brandes , an art historian , <unk> van Erp , a Dutch army engineer officer , and Van de Kamer , a construction engineer from the Department of Public Works . 
 In 1902 , the commission submitted a threefold plan of proposal to the government . First , the immediate dangers should be avoided by resetting the corners , removing stones that endangered the adjacent parts , strengthening the first balustrades and restoring several niches , archways , stupas and the main dome . Second , after fencing off the courtyards , proper maintenance should be provided and drainage should be improved by restoring floors and spouts . Third , all loose stones should be removed , the monument cleared up to the first balustrades , disfigured stones removed and the main dome restored . The total cost was estimated at that time around 48 @,@ 800 Dutch guilders . 
 The restoration then was carried out between 1907 and 1911 , using the principles of <unk> and led by Theodor van Erp . The first seven months of restoration were occupied with excavating the grounds around the monument to find missing Buddha heads and panel stones . Van Erp dismantled and rebuilt the upper three circular platforms and stupas . Along the way , Van Erp discovered more things he could do to improve the monument ; he submitted another proposal , which was approved with the additional cost of 34 @,@ 600 guilders . At first glance , Borobudur had been restored to its old glory . Van Erp went further by carefully reconstructing the chhatra ( three @-@ tiered parasol ) pinnacle on top of the main stupa . However , he later dismantled the chhatra , citing that there were not enough original stones used in reconstructing the pinnacle , which means that the original design of Borobudur 's pinnacle is actually unknown . The dismantled chhatra now is stored in Karmawibhangga Museum , a few hundred meters north from Borobudur . 
 Due to the limited budget , the restoration had been primarily focused on cleaning the sculptures , and Van Erp did not solve the drainage problem . Within fifteen years , the gallery walls were sagging , and the reliefs showed signs of new cracks and deterioration . Van Erp used concrete from which alkali salts and calcium hydroxide leached and were transported into the rest of the construction . This caused some problems , so that a further thorough renovation was urgently needed . 
 Small restorations have been performed since then , but not sufficient for complete protection . During World War II and Indonesian National Revolution in 1945 to 1949 , Borobudur restoration efforts were halted . The monument suffered further from the weather and drainage problems , which caused the earth core inside the temple to expand , pushing the stone structure and tilting the walls . By 1950s some parts of Borobudur were facing imminent danger of collapsing . In 1965 , Indonesia asked the UNESCO for advice on ways to counteract the problem of weathering at Borobudur and other monuments . In 1968 Professor <unk> , then head of the Archeological Service of Indonesia , launched his " Save Borobudur " campaign , in an effort to organize a massive restoration project . 
 In the late 1960s , the Indonesian government had requested from the international community a major renovation to protect the monument . In 1973 , a master plan to restore Borobudur was created . The Indonesian government and UNESCO then undertook the complete overhaul of the monument in a big restoration project between 1975 and 1982 . In 1975 , the actual work began . Over one million stones were dismantled and removed during the restoration , and set aside like pieces of a massive jig @-@ saw puzzle to be individually identified , catalogued , cleaned and treated for preservation . Borobudur became a testing ground for new conservation techniques , including new procedures to battle the microorganisms attacking the stone . The foundation was stabilized , and all 1 @,@ 460 panels were cleaned . The restoration involved the dismantling of the five square platforms and the improvement of drainage by embedding water channels into the monument . Both impermeable and filter layers were added . This colossal project involved around 600 people to restore the monument and cost a total of US $ 6 @,@ 901 @,@ 243 . 
 After the renovation was finished , UNESCO listed Borobudur as a World Heritage Site in 1991 . It is listed under Cultural criteria ( i ) " to represent a masterpiece of human creative genius " , ( ii ) " to exhibit an important interchange of human values , over a span of time or within a cultural area of the world , on developments in architecture or technology , monumental arts , town @-@ planning or landscape design " , and ( vi ) " to be directly or tangibly associated with events or living traditions , with ideas , or with beliefs , with artistic and literary works of outstanding universal significance " . 
 = = = Contemporary events = = = 
 = = = = Religious ceremony = = = = 
 Following the major 1973 renovation funded by UNESCO , Borobudur is once again used as a place of worship and pilgrimage . Once a year , during the full moon in May or June , Buddhists in Indonesia observe Vesak ( Indonesian : <unk> ) day commemorating the birth , death , and the time when <unk> Gautama attained the highest wisdom to become the Buddha Shakyamuni . Vesak is an official national holiday in Indonesia , and the ceremony is centered at the three Buddhist temples by walking from Mendut to Pawon and ending at Borobudur . 
 = = = = Tourism = = = = 
 The monument is the single most visited tourist attraction in Indonesia . In 1974 , 260 @,@ 000 tourists , of whom 36 @,@ 000 were foreigners , visited the monument . The figure climbed to 2 @.@ 5 million visitors annually ( 80 % were domestic tourists ) in the mid @-@ 1990s , before the country 's economic crisis . Tourism development , however , has been criticized for not including the local community , giving rise to occasional conflicts . In 2003 , residents and small businesses around Borobudur organized several meetings and poetry protests , objecting to a provincial government plan to build a three @-@ story mall complex , dubbed the " Java World " . 
 International tourism awards were given to Borobudur archaeological park , such as PATA Grand Pacific Award 2004 , PATA Gold Award Winner 2011 , and PATA Gold Award Winner 2012 . In June 2012 , Borobudur was recorded in the Guinness Book of World Records as the world 's largest Buddhist archaeological site . 
 = = = = Conservation = = = = 
 UNESCO identified three specific areas of concern under the present state of conservation : ( i ) vandalism by visitors ; ( ii ) soil erosion in the south @-@ eastern part of the site ; and ( iii ) analysis and restoration of missing elements . The soft soil , the numerous earthquakes and heavy rains lead to the destabilization of the structure . Earthquakes are by far the most important contributing factors , since not only do stones fall down and arches crumble , but the earth itself can move in waves , further destroying the structure . The increasing popularity of the stupa brings in many visitors , most of whom are from Indonesia . Despite warning signs on all levels not to touch anything , the regular transmission of warnings over loudspeakers and the presence of guards , vandalism on reliefs and statues is a common occurrence and problem , leading to further deterioration . As of 2009 , there is no system in place to limit the number of visitors allowed per day or to introduce mandatory guided tours only . 
 In August 2014 , the Conservation Authority of Borobudur reported some severe abrasion of the stone stairs caused by the scraping of visitors ' footwear . The conservation authority planned to install wooden stairs to cover and protect the original stone stairs , just like those installed in Angkor Wat . 
 = = = = Rehabilitation = = = = 
 Borobudur was heavily affected by the eruption of Mount Merapi in October and November 2010 . Volcanic ash from Merapi fell on the temple complex , which is approximately 28 kilometres ( 17 mi ) west @-@ southwest of the crater . A layer of ash up to 2 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 1 in ) thick fell on the temple statues during the eruption of 3 – 5 November , also killing nearby vegetation , with experts fearing that the acidic ash might damage the historic site . The temple complex was closed from 5 to 9 November to clean up the ashfall . 
 UNESCO donated US $ 3 million as a part of the costs towards the rehabilitation of Borobudur after Mount Merapi 's 2010 eruption . More than 55 @,@ 000 stone blocks comprising the temple 's structure were dismantled to restore the drainage system , which had been clogged by slurry after the rain . The restoration was finished in November . 
 In January 2012 , two German stone @-@ conservation experts spent ten days at the site analyzing the temples and making recommendations to ensure their long @-@ term preservation . In June , Germany agreed to contribute $ 130 @,@ 000 to UNESCO for the second phase of rehabilitation , in which six experts in stone conservation , microbiology , structural engineering and chemical engineering would spend a week in Borobudur in June , then return for another visit in September or October . These missions would launch the preservation activities recommended in the January report and would include capacity building activities to enhance the preservation capabilities of governmental staff and young conservation experts . 
 On 14 February 2014 , major tourist attractions in Yogyakarta and Central Java , including Borobudur , Prambanan and Ratu Boko , were closed to visitors , after being severely affected by the volcanic ash from the eruption of Kelud volcano in East Java , located around 200 kilometers east from Yogyakarta . Workers covered the iconic stupas and statues of Borobudur temple to protect the structure from volcanic ash . The Kelud volcano erupted on 13 February 2014 with an explosion heard as far away as Yogyakarta . 
 = = = = Security threats = = = = 
 On 21 January 1985 , nine stupas were badly damaged by nine bombs . In 1991 , a blind Muslim preacher , Husein Ali Al <unk> , was sentenced to life imprisonment for masterminding a series of bombings in the mid @-@ 1980s , including the temple attack . Two other members of the right @-@ wing extremist group that carried out the bombings were each sentenced to 20 years in 1986 , and another man received a 13 @-@ year prison term . 
 On 27 May 2006 , an earthquake of 6 @.@ 2 magnitude struck the south coast of Central Java . The event caused severe damage around the region and casualties to the nearby city of Yogyakarta , but Borobudur remained intact . 
 In August 2014 , Indonesian police and security forces tightened the security in and around Borobudur temple compound , as a precaution to a threat posted in the social media by a self @-@ proclaimed Indonesian branch of ISIS , citing that the terrorists planned to destroy Borobudur and other statues project in Indonesia . The security improvements included the repair and increased deployment of CCTV monitors and the implementation of a night patrol in and around the temple compound . The jihadist group follows a strict interpretation of Islam that condemns any anthropomorphic representations such as sculptures as idolatry . 
 = = = = Visitor overload problem = = = = 
 The high volume of visitors ascending the Borobudur 's narrow stairs , has caused a severe wear out on the stone of the stairs , eroding the stones surface and made them thinner and smoother . Overall , Borobudur has 2 @,@ 033 surfaces of stone stairs , spread over four cardinal directions ; including the west side , the east , south and north . There are around 1 @,@ 028 surfaces of them , or about 49 @.@ 15 percent are severely worn out . 
 To avoid further wear of stairs ' stones , since November 2014 , two main sections of Borobudur stairs — the eastern ( ascending route ) and northern ( descending route ) sides — are covered with wooden structures . The similar technique has been applied in Angkor Wat in Cambodia and Egyptian Pyramids . In March 2015 , Borobudur Conservation Center proposed further to seal the stairs with rubber cover . Proposals have also been made that visitors be issued special sandals . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The archeological excavation into Borobudur during reconstruction suggests that adherents of Hinduism or a pre @-@ Indic faith had already begun to erect a large structure on Borobudur 's hill before the site was appropriated by Buddhists . The foundations are unlike any Hindu or Buddhist shrine structures , and therefore , the initial structure is considered more indigenous Javanese than Hindu or Buddhist . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Borobudur is built as a single large stupa and , when viewed from above , takes the form of a giant tantric Buddhist mandala , simultaneously representing the Buddhist cosmology and the nature of mind . The original foundation is a square , approximately 118 metres ( 387 ft ) on each side . It has nine platforms , of which the lower six are square and the upper three are circular . The upper platform features seventy @-@ two small stupas surrounding one large central stupa . Each stupa is bell @-@ shaped and pierced by numerous decorative openings . Statues of the Buddha sit inside the pierced enclosures . 
 The design of Borobudur took the form of a step pyramid . Previously , the prehistoric Austronesian megalithic culture in Indonesia had constructed several earth mounds and stone step pyramid structures called <unk> <unk> as discovered in <unk> , <unk> and Gunung Padang , West Java . The construction of stone pyramids is based on native beliefs that mountains and high places are the abode of ancestral spirits or <unk> . The <unk> <unk> step pyramid is the basic design in Borobudur , believed to be the continuation of older megalithic tradition incorporated with Mahayana Buddhist ideas and symbolism . 
 The monument 's three divisions symbolize the three " realms " of Buddhist cosmology , namely <unk> ( the world of desires ) , Rupadhatu ( the world of forms ) , and finally Arupadhatu ( the formless world ) . Ordinary sentient beings live out their lives on the lowest level , the realm of desire . Those who have burnt out all desire for continued existence leave the world of desire and live in the world on the level of form alone : they see forms but are not drawn to them . Finally , full Buddhas go beyond even form and experience reality at its purest , most fundamental level , the formless ocean of nirvana . The liberation from the cycle of Saṃsāra where the enlightened soul had no longer attached to worldly form corresponds to the concept of <unk> , the complete <unk> or the nonexistence of the self . Kāmadhātu is represented by the base , Rupadhatu by the five square platforms ( the body ) , and Arupadhatu by the three circular platforms and the large topmost stupa . The architectural features between the three stages have metaphorical differences . For instance , square and detailed decorations in the Rupadhatu disappear into plain circular platforms in the Arupadhatu to represent how the world of forms — where men are still attached with forms and names — changes into the world of the formless . 
 Congregational worship in Borobudur is performed in a walking pilgrimage . Pilgrims are guided by the system of staircases and corridors ascending to the top platform . Each platform represents one stage of enlightenment . The path that guides pilgrims was designed to symbolize Buddhist cosmology . 
 In 1885 , a hidden structure under the base was accidentally discovered . The " hidden footing " contains reliefs , 160 of which are narratives describing the real Kāmadhātu . The remaining reliefs are panels with short inscriptions that apparently provide instructions for the sculptors , illustrating the scenes to be carved . The real base is hidden by an encasement base , the purpose of which remains a mystery . It was first thought that the real base had to be covered to prevent a disastrous subsidence of the monument into the hill . There is another theory that the encasement base was added because the original hidden footing was incorrectly designed , according to Vastu Shastra , the Indian ancient book about architecture and town planning . Regardless of why it was commissioned , the encasement base was built with detailed and meticulous design and with aesthetic and religious consideration . 
 = = = Building structure = = = 
 Approximately 55 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 72 @,@ 000 cu yd ) of andesite stones were taken from neighbouring stone quarries to build the monument . The stone was cut to size , transported to the site and laid without mortar . Knobs , indentations and dovetails were used to form joints between stones . Reliefs were created in situ after the building had been completed . 
 The monument is equipped with a good drainage system to cater to the area 's high stormwater run @-@ off . To prevent flooding , 100 spouts are installed at each corner , each with a unique carved gargoyle in the shape of a giant or makara . 
 Borobudur differs markedly from the general design of other structures built for this purpose . Instead of being built on a flat surface , Borobudur is built on a natural hill . However , construction technique is similar to other temples in Java . Without the inner spaces seen in other temples , and with a general design similar to the shape of pyramid , Borobudur was first thought more likely to have served as a stupa , instead of a temple . A stupa is intended as a shrine for the Buddha . Sometimes stupas were built only as devotional symbols of Buddhism . A temple , on the other hand , is used as a house of worship . The meticulous complexity of the monument 's design suggests that Borobudur is in fact a temple . 
 Little is known about <unk> , the architect of the complex . His name is recounted from Javanese folk tales rather than from written inscriptions . 
 The basic unit of measurement used during construction was the tala , defined as the length of a human face from the forehead 's hairline to the tip of the chin or the distance from the tip of the thumb to the tip of the middle finger when both fingers are stretched at their maximum distance . The unit is thus relative from one individual to the next , but the monument has exact measurements . A survey conducted in 1977 revealed frequent findings of a ratio of 4 : 6 : 9 around the monument . The architect had used the formula to lay out the precise dimensions of the fractal and self @-@ similar geometry in Borobudur 's design . This ratio is also found in the designs of Pawon and Mendut , nearby Buddhist temples . Archeologists have conjectured that the 4 : 6 : 9 ratio and the tala have calendrical , astronomical and cosmological significance , as is the case with the temple of Angkor Wat in Cambodia . 
 The main structure can be divided into three components : base , body , and top . The base is 123 m × 123 m ( 404 ft × 404 ft ) in size with 4 metres ( 13 ft ) walls . The body is composed of five square platforms , each of diminishing height . The first terrace is set back 7 metres ( 23 ft ) from the edge of the base . Each subsequent terrace is set back 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) , leaving a narrow corridor at each stage . The top consists of three circular platforms , with each stage supporting a row of perforated stupas , arranged in concentric circles . There is one main dome at the center , the top of which is the highest point of the monument , 35 metres ( 115 ft ) above ground level . Stairways at the center of each of the four sides give access to the top , with a number of arched gates overlooked by 32 lion statues . The gates are adorned with Kala 's head carved on top of each and <unk> projecting from each side . This Kala @-@ Makara motif is commonly found on the gates of Javanese temples . The main entrance is on the eastern side , the location of the first narrative reliefs . Stairways on the slopes of the hill also link the monument to the low @-@ lying plain . 
 = = Reliefs = = 
 Borobudur is constructed in such a way that it reveals various levels of terraces , showing intricate architecture that goes from being heavily ornamented with bas @-@ reliefs to being plain in Arupadhatu circular terraces . The first four terrace walls are showcases for bas @-@ relief sculptures . These are exquisite , considered to be the most elegant and graceful in the ancient Buddhist world . 
 The bas @-@ reliefs in Borobudur depicted many scenes of daily life in 8th @-@ century ancient Java , from the courtly palace life , hermit in the forest , to those of commoners in the village . It also depicted temple , marketplace , various flora and fauna , and also native vernacular architecture . People depicted here are the images of king , queen , princes , noblemen , courtier , soldier , servant , commoners , priest and hermit . The reliefs also depicted mythical spiritual beings in Buddhist beliefs such as asuras , gods , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and apsaras . The images depicted on bas @-@ relief often served as reference for historians to research for certain subjects , such as the study of architecture , weaponry , economy , fashion , and also mode of transportation of 8th @-@ century Maritime Southeast Asia . One of the famous renderings of an 8th @-@ century Southeast Asian double outrigger ship is Borobudur Ship . Today , the actual @-@ size replica of Borobudur Ship that had sailed from Indonesia to Africa in 2004 is displayed in the Samudra <unk> Museum , located a few hundred meters north of Borobudur . 
 The Borobudur reliefs also pay close attention to Indian aesthetic discipline , such as pose and gesture that contain certain meanings and aesthetic value . The reliefs of noblemen , and noble women , kings , or divine beings such as apsaras , <unk> and <unk> are usually portrayed in tribhanga pose , the three @-@ bend pose on neck , hips , and knee , with one leg resting and one upholding the body weight . This position is considered as the most graceful pose , such as the figure of <unk> holding a lotus . 
 During Borobudur excavation , archeologists discovered colour pigments of blue , red , green , black , as well as bits of gold foil , and concluded that the monument that we see today — a dark gray mass of volcanic stone , lacking in colour — was probably once coated with <unk> white plaster and then painted with bright colors , serving perhaps as a beacon of Buddhist teaching . The same <unk> plaster can also be found in Sari , Kalasan and Sewu temples . It is likely that the bas @-@ reliefs of Borobudur was originally quite colourful , before centuries of torrential tropical rainfalls peeled @-@ off the colour pigments . 
 Borobudur contains approximately 2 @,@ 670 individual bas reliefs ( 1 @,@ 460 narrative and 1 @,@ 212 decorative panels ) , which cover the façades and balustrades . The total relief surface is 2 @,@ 500 square metres ( 27 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , and they are distributed at the hidden foot ( Kāmadhātu ) and the five square platforms ( Rupadhatu ) . 
 The narrative panels , which tell the story of Sudhana and <unk> , are grouped into 11 series that encircle the monument with a total length of 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . The hidden foot contains the first series with 160 narrative panels , and the remaining 10 series are distributed throughout walls and balustrades in four galleries starting from the eastern entrance stairway to the left . Narrative panels on the wall read from right to left , while those on the balustrade read from left to right . This conforms with <unk> , the ritual of circumambulation performed by pilgrims who move in a clockwise direction while keeping the sanctuary to their right . 
 The hidden foot depicts the workings of karmic law . The walls of the first gallery have two superimposed series of reliefs ; each consists of 120 panels . The upper part depicts the biography of the Buddha , while the lower part of the wall and also the balustrades in the first and the second galleries tell the story of the Buddha 's former lives . The remaining panels are devoted to Sudhana 's further wandering about his search , terminated by his attainment of the Perfect Wisdom . 
 = = = The law of karma ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The 160 hidden panels do not form a continuous story , but each panel provides one complete illustration of cause and effect . There are depictions of blameworthy activities , from gossip to murder , with their corresponding punishments . There are also praiseworthy activities , that include charity and pilgrimage to sanctuaries , and their subsequent rewards . The pains of hell and the pleasure of heaven are also illustrated . There are scenes of daily life , complete with the full panorama of samsara ( the endless cycle of birth and death ) . The encasement base of the Borobudur temple was <unk> to reveal the hidden foot , and the reliefs were photographed by <unk> <unk> in 1890 . It is these photographs that are displayed in Borobudur Museum ( Karmawibhangga Museum ) , located just several hundred meters north of the temple . During the restoration , the foot encasement was reinstalled , covering the Karmawibhangga reliefs . Today , only the southeast corner of the hidden foot is revealed and visible for visitors . 
 = = = The story of Prince Siddhartha and the birth of Buddha ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The story starts with the descent of the Lord Buddha from the Tushita heaven and ends with his first sermon in the Deer Park near Benares . The relief shows the birth of the Buddha as Prince Siddhartha , son of King Suddhodana and Queen Maya of Kapilavastu ( in present @-@ day Nepal ) . 
 The story is preceded by 27 panels showing various preparations , in the heavens and on the earth , to welcome the final incarnation of the Bodhisattva . Before descending from Tushita heaven , the Bodhisattva entrusted his crown to his successor , the future Buddha Maitreya . He descended on earth in the shape of white elephants with six tusks , penetrated to Queen Maya 's right womb . Queen Maya had a dream of this event , which was interpreted that his son would become either a sovereign or a Buddha . 
 While Queen Maya felt that it was the time to give birth , she went to the Lumbini park outside the Kapilavastu city . She stood under a <unk> tree , holding one branch with her right hand , and she gave birth to a son , Prince Siddhartha . The story on the panels continues until the prince becomes the Buddha . 
 = = = The stories of Buddha 's previous life ( Jataka ) and other legendary persons ( <unk> ) = = = 
 <unk> are stories about the Buddha before he was born as Prince Siddhartha . They are the stories that tell about the previous lives of the Buddha , in both human and animal form . The future Buddha may appear in them as a king , an outcast , a god , an elephant — but , in whatever form , he exhibits some virtue that the tale thereby inculcates . <unk> are similar to <unk> , but the main figure is not the Bodhisattva himself . The saintly deeds in <unk> are attributed to other legendary persons . <unk> and <unk> are treated in one and the same series in the reliefs of Borobudur . 
 The first twenty lower panels in the first gallery on the wall depict the <unk> , or the saintly deeds of Sudhana . The first 135 upper panels in the same gallery on the balustrades are devoted to the 34 legends of the <unk> . The remaining 237 panels depict stories from other sources , as do the lower series and panels in the second gallery . Some <unk> are depicted twice , for example the story of King <unk> ( Rama 's forefather ) . 
 = = = Sudhana 's search for the Ultimate Truth ( <unk> ) = = = 
 <unk> is the story told in the final chapter of the <unk> Sutra about Sudhana 's tireless wandering in search of the Highest Perfect Wisdom . It covers two galleries ( third and fourth ) and also half of the second gallery , comprising in total of 460 panels . The principal figure of the story , the youth Sudhana , son of an extremely rich merchant , appears on the 16th panel . The preceding 15 panels form a prologue to the story of the miracles during Buddha 's samadhi in the Garden of <unk> at <unk> . 
 During his search , Sudhana visited no fewer than thirty teachers , but none of them had satisfied him completely . He was then instructed by Manjusri to meet the monk <unk> , where he was given the first doctrine . As his journey continues , Sudhana meets ( in the following order ) <unk> , the physician Megha ( Spirit of Knowledge ) , the banker <unk> , the monk <unk> , the <unk> Asa ( Spirit of Supreme Enlightenment ) , <unk> , the Brahmin <unk> , Princess <unk> , the monk <unk> , a boy called <unk> , the <unk> <unk> , the banker <unk> , King <unk> , the god Siva Mahadeva , Queen Maya , Bodhisattva Maitreya and then back to Manjusri . Each meeting has given Sudhana a specific doctrine , knowledge and wisdom . These meetings are shown in the third gallery . 
 After the last meeting with Manjusri , Sudhana went to the residence of Bodhisattva Samantabhadra , depicted in the fourth gallery . The entire series of the fourth gallery is devoted to the teaching of Samantabhadra . The narrative panels finally end with Sudhana 's achievement of the Supreme Knowledge and the Ultimate Truth . 
 = = Buddha statues = = 
 Apart from the story of the Buddhist cosmology carved in stone , Borobudur has many statues of various Buddhas . The cross @-@ legged statues are seated in a lotus position and distributed on the five square platforms ( the Rupadhatu level ) , as well as on the top platform ( the Arupadhatu level ) . 
 The Buddha statues are in niches at the Rupadhatu level , arranged in rows on the outer sides of the balustrades , the number of statues decreasing as platforms progressively diminish to the upper level . The first balustrades have 104 niches , the second 104 , the third 88 , the fourth 72 and the fifth 64 . In total , there are 432 Buddha statues at the Rupadhatu level . At the Arupadhatu level ( or the three circular platforms ) , Buddha statues are placed inside perforated stupas . The first circular platform has 32 stupas , the second 24 and the third 16 , which adds up to 72 stupas . Of the original 504 Buddha statues , over 300 are damaged ( mostly headless ) , and 43 are missing . Since the monument 's discovery , heads have been acquired as collector 's items , mostly by Western museums . Some of these Buddha heads are now displayed in numbers of museums , such as the Tropenmuseum in Amsterdam and The British Museum in London . 
 At first glance , all the Buddha statues appear similar , but there is a subtle difference between them in the mudras , or the position of the hands . There are five groups of mudra : North , East , South , West and Zenith , which represent the five cardinal compass points according to Mahayana . The first four balustrades have the first four mudras : North , East , South and West , of which the Buddha statues that face one compass direction have the corresponding mudra . Buddha statues at the fifth balustrades and inside the 72 stupas on the top platform have the same mudra : Zenith . Each mudra represents one of the Five <unk> Buddhas ; each has its own symbolism . 
 Following the order of Pradakshina ( clockwise <unk> ) starting from the East , the mudras of the Borobudur buddha statues are : 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The aesthetic and technical mastery of Borobudur , and also its sheer size , has evoked the sense of grandeur and pride for Indonesians . Just like Angkor Wat for Cambodian , Borobudur has become a powerful symbol for Indonesia — to testify for its past greatness . Sukarno made a point of showing the site to foreign dignitaries . While Suharto regime — realized its important symbolic and economic meanings — diligently embarked on a massive project to restore the monument with the help from UNESCO . Many museums in Indonesia contain a scale model replica of Borobudur . The monument has become almost an icon , grouped with the wayang puppet play and gamelan music into a vague classical Javanese past from which Indonesians are to draw inspiration . 
 Several archaeological relics taken from Borobudur or its replica , has been displayed in some museums in Indonesia and abroad . Other than Karmawibhangga Museum within Borobudur temple ground , some museums boast to host relics of Borobudur , such as Indonesian National Museum in Jakarta , Tropenmuseum in Amsterdam , British Museum in London , and Thai National Museum in Bangkok . Louvre museum in Paris , Malaysian National Museum in Kuala Lumpur , and Museum of World Religions in Taipei also displayed the replica of Borobudur . The monument has drawn global attention to the classical Buddhist civilization of ancient Java . 
 The rediscovery and reconstruction of Borobudur has been hailed by Indonesian Buddhist as the sign of the Buddhist revival in Indonesia . In 1934 , Narada Thera , a missionary monk from Sri Lanka , visited Indonesia for the first time as part of his journey to spread the Dharma in Southeast Asia . This opportunity was used by a few local Buddhists to revive Buddhism in Indonesia . A bodhi tree planting ceremony was held in Southeastern side of Borobudur on 10 March 1934 under the blessing of Narada Thera , and some <unk> were ordained as monks . Once a year , thousands of Buddhist from Indonesia and neighboring countries flock to Borobudur to commemorate national Vesak ceremony . 
 The emblem of Central Java province and Magelang Regency bears the image of Borobudur . It has become the symbol of Central Java , and also Indonesia on a wider scale . Borobudur has become the name of several establishments , such as Borobudur University , Borobudur Hotel in Central Jakarta , and several Indonesian restaurants abroad . Borobudur has been featured in Rupiah banknote , stamps , numbers of books , publications , documentaries and Indonesian tourism promotion materials . The monument has become one of the main tourism attraction in Indonesia , vital for generating local economy in the region surrounding the temple . The tourism sector of the city of Yogyakarta for example , flourish partly because of its proximity to Borobudur and Prambanan temples . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = = = Gallery of reliefs = = = 
 = = = Gallery of Borobudur = = = 
 = Stankonia = 
 Stankonia is the fourth studio album by American hip hop duo OutKast . It was released on October 31 , 2000 , by La Face Records . The album was recorded in the duo 's recently purchased Atlanta recording facility Stankonia Studios , which allowed for fewer time and recording constraints , and featured production work from Earthtone III ( a production team consisting of Outkast and Mr. DJ ) and Organized Noise . 
 For the follow @-@ up to their 1998 album Aquemini , the duo worked to create an expansive and experimental musical aesthetic , drawing on a diverse array of sources that included funk , rave music , psychedelia , gospel , and rock within a Dirty South @-@ oriented hip hop context . During the recording sessions , André 3000 began moving beyond traditional rapping in favor of a more melodic vocal style , an approach to which Big Boi and several other producers were initially unaccustomed . Lyrically , the duo touched upon a wide range of subject matter , including sexuality , politics , misogyny , African @-@ American culture , parenthood , and introspection . Stankonia featured appearances from a variety of local musicians discovered by the group while they were visiting clubs in the city of Atlanta , Georgia . 
 Stankonia received universal acclaim from music critics . The album debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart , selling over 530 @,@ 000 copies the first week . It produced three singles : " B.O.B " , " Ms. Jackson " , and " So Fresh , So Clean " ; " Ms. Jackson " became the group 's first single to reach number one on the Billboard Hot 100 . At the 2002 Grammy Awards , OutKast won Best Rap Album for Stankonia and Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for " Ms. Jackson " . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 359 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 OutKast 's 1998 album Aquemini received extremely positive reviews from music critics , and expanded the group 's musical diversity and experimentation . The record received the coveted five out of five " mic " <unk> from The Source , and is credited with opening up Southern hip hop to other areas in the United States . Wu @-@ Tang Clan member Raekwon , who collaborated on the song " Skew It on the Bar @-@ B " from Aquemini , recalled , " Before that , the South just wasn 't played in New York . But that song was hot , the flows was crazy . The cycle changed . It really opened up the door for Southern rappers . " 
 In March 1998 , André 3000 and Big Boi purchased a studio off Northside Drive in Atlanta which had formerly belonged to R & B singer Bobby Brown . The studio had sentimental value for the duo , as it was the first place the two had ever recorded vocals together , on a remix of TLC 's " What About Your Friends " ( 1992 ) . The two named the studio " Stankonia " , a word created by André 3000 as a combination of the words " stank " , a slang synonym for " funky " , and " <unk> " , the title of a poster in his bedroom depicting a futuristic city . He explained , " Stankonia is this place I imagined where you can open yourself up and be free to express anything " . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The recording of Stankonia began in spring of 1999 and lasted for about a year . Owning a studio helped the band expand creatively , as the duo did not need to worry about time constraints that would occur with a rented studio . André 3000 observed , " You can sit there and fuck with just a kick and a snare all day long if you want to ... You 're not working on the clock . Really , you 're just working on your mind . " Big Boi spent the majority of the recording time in the studio , while André 3000 worked at home , creating beats and experimenting with an acoustic guitar . One song that came from a jam session on the guitar was " Ms. Jackson " , the album 's second single . André 3000 also created song lyrics by writing words on the walls of his home : " I had planned to paint my house anyway ; writing on the walls was just something I would do . " One stray lyric on his wall eventually developed into " Gasoline Dreams " . 
 Much of the album was formulated during " vibe sessions " in which the group and producers would visit clubs in downtown Atlanta , select performers they saw , and invite them to the studio . They would then " sit around , smoke a few , drink a few " , and create ideas for new songs . However , recording sessions became difficult as André 3000 grew tired of rapping on songs , which made Big Boi and the producers uneasy about how the music would sound . To maintain musical cohesion with Big Boi while continuing to expand his vocal palette , André decided to combine rapping with soul @-@ inspired crooning , which had a major influence on Stankonia 's sound . " <unk> & <unk> ' " features a guest appearance from then @-@ unknown rapper Killer Mike . The rapper noted that while working with OutKast , he used the opportunity to try to " compete " with the duo to improve his rapping skills . Big Boi was impressed with Killer Mike 's abilities , noting , " When I first heard him spit , his voice was just so commanding . He 's a very intelligent guy . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music and style = = = 
 While OutKast 's previous albums were considered to be laid @-@ back , mellow efforts , Stankonia contains faster , more high @-@ energy tempos , partially to reflect the " chaotic times " at the turn of the 21st century . The group took note of new , harder drugs hitting the hip @-@ hop scene and teenagers using ecstasy , cocaine , and methamphetamine . Big Boi reflected , " Niggas living this life at a fast speed don 't know what 's going on around them . If you live fast , you gonna come out of here real fast , so the music need to show that . " While recording Stankonia , the band refrained from listening to hip @-@ hop , " That music was starting to sound real comfortable . There wasn 't any adventure to it . " Instead , the duo drew influence from musicians such as Jimi Hendrix , Chuck Berry , Little Richard , and Prince . However , the band refrained from producing a throwback sound with the record and instead hoped to utilize these influences in a modern , experimental fashion . 
 On Stankonia , OutKast experimented with a wide variety of musical genres . According to M. Matos of Vibe , Stankonia " turned the South 's predominantly reclined hip @-@ hop sound into something freaky and menacing . " " B.O.B " features " jittery drum 'n'bass rhythms " and has been classified as a " stylistic tour de force " combining " Hendrix @-@ ian " guitars , organs , and gospel vocals . On the track , André 3000 and Big Boi employ a " frantic " flow in order to keep pace with the song 's high @-@ speed tempo , which runs at 155 beats per minute . " Humble <unk> " is a salsa @-@ influenced track that evolves into a club groove , while " Ms. Jackson " " marries early Prince with late P @-@ funk " . The smooth melodies of " I 'll Call Before I Come " have also been likened to Prince . " Gasoline Dreams " has been classified as a " gritty rock scorcher " comparable to the work of Public Enemy . David Bry of Vibe detected a " polished 80 's pimp strut " in " So Fresh , So Clean " and an " appreciative , fat @-@ ass bounce " in " We Luv Deez Hoes " . The album ends with three psychedelic @-@ influenced tracks , " Toilet Tisha " , " Slum Beautiful " , and " Stankonia ( Stank Love ) " . " Stankonia ( Stank Love ) " has also been described as an " homage of sorts " to gospel choirs and ' 60s doo @-@ wop groups . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Paul Lester of The Guardian described OutKast 's lyrical style on the album by saying , " They are , in a way , post @-@ hip @-@ hop , combining PM Dawn 's kooky confections with the Pharcyde 's hallucinatory whimsy , Public Enemy 's hardline politicking with De La Soul 's cartoon dementia , to fashion something vital and new . " The album commonly features the words " stank " and " smell " in their blues definition to mean " low @-@ down , blunt , pungent : a measure of authenticity " . The group often incorporates word play into the lyrics , including references to the " underground <unk> " and chants of " I stank I can , I stank I can " , an allusion to The Little Engine That Could . The song " Red Velvet " discusses the materialistic nature of the hip @-@ hop scene . " Humble <unk> " addresses critics who make negative assumptions about hip @-@ hop based on preconceived notions ; André 3000 raps in the song : " I met a critic / I made her shit her draws / She said she thought hip @-@ hop was only guns and alcohol / I said oh hell naw / but yet it 's that too / You can 't <unk> @-@ hate cause you done read a book or two . " 
 Much of the album discusses the status of women in the South , and contrasts with the misogynistic attitudes common in hip @-@ hop music . In his book Classic Material : The Hip @-@ Hop Album Guide , Oliver Wang writes that songs such as " Slum Beautiful " and " Toilet Tisha " " reimagine ' round the way girls , not only as just more than one @-@ dimensional accessories , but as objects of affection with lives and concerns that are worth exploring . " In " Toilet Tisha " , the duo empathizes with suicidal pregnant teenagers . " Ms. Jackson " is dedicated to the mother of a mother of an out of wedlock child , which André 3000 refers to as " the baby 's mama 's <unk> " . The song was inspired by his relationship with singer Erykah Badu , the mother of his child , Seven , and serves as an apology to her mother for causing her daughter pain . " I 'll Call Before I Come " discusses the members putting a woman 's sexual needs before their own . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Stankonia debuted at number two on the Billboard Top 200 album chart and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) within its first week of release . It also reached number two on the Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop albums chart , remaining on the chart for 45 weeks . By February 2002 , the album has sold 3 @.@ 79 million copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . On November 3 , 2003 , Stankonia was certified quadruple platinum , for shipments of four million copies . In Canada , the album peaked at number four , and was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association on September 23 , 2003 for shipments of over 200 @,@ 000 units . The record also became a top ten hit in Germany , Finland , and Norway , reaching the number six , number eight , and number eight spots on the countries ' official charts , respectively . 
 The lead single released from Stankonia , " B.O.B " , peaked at number 69 on the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop songs chart . However , the single was banned from many urban Top 40 radio stations due to its title and the subject matter it was assumed to have . On February 3 , 2001 , " Ms. Jackson " topped the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop songs chart , and then on February 17 , the single also reached number one on the Hot 100 , remaining on the chart for 22 weeks . The song also reached number 13 on the Billboard Pop Songs chart , as well as number three on the magazine 's Radio Songs chart . The third single , " So Fresh , So Clean " , peaked at number 30 on the Hot 100 , and stayed on the chart for 20 weeks . The single also peaked at number ten on the Billboard R & B / Hip @-@ Hop songs chart , and number 24 on the Radio songs chart . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stankonia received widespread acclaim from contemporary music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 95 , based on 20 reviews . Derek A. <unk> of NME noted that with Stankonia , OutKast " hit that rare balance of creative eccentricity and mass appeal " and wrote that the album contains " eternal qualities that will unravel in time on an emotional , intellectual and spiritual level . " Nathan Brackett of Rolling Stone called the record " one of the best albums of the year " noting that all of the tracks contain " a down @-@ home generosity and accessibility " and that " even the most street @-@ oriented songs have some sort of commentary in them . " Tony Green of The Village Voice praised OutKast 's " feel for sonics and structure " and stated , " they 've moved toward harder , darker textures , in service of song designs that are often disarmingly subtle . " Steve Huey of AllMusic commented that , " given the variety of moods , it helps that the album is broken up by brief , usually humorous interludes , which serve as a sort of reset button . It takes a few listens to pull everything together , but given the immense scope , it 's striking how few weak tracks there are " . <unk> Hight of PopMatters stated , " Within Stankonia , Outkast successfully presented a southern perspective of life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness . But on the surface , phat beats and pure funk should suffice . " Alternative Press commented that " experienced , acclaimed groups rarely make albums as bold and confrontational as Stankonia , because they have too much to lose " , but felt that " OutKast don 't care " , writing that they " coalesced the political and societal challenges of hip hop 's past into what is one of the genre 's most artistically unorthodox releases so far . " 
 Robert Christgau of The Village Voice observed " more bounce @-@ to @-@ the @-@ ounce and less molasses in the jams , more delight and less braggadocio in the raps " , and opined that Big Boi and André 3000 's " realism and high spirits drive each other higher " . Entertainment Weekly 's Ken Tucker wrote that " Stankonia reeks of artful ambition rendered with impeccable skill " and described OutKast as " endlessly good @-@ humored and imaginative even when dealing with the most grim and mind @-@ deadening facets of ghetto life . " Yahoo ! Music 's Soren Baker commented that " Dre and Big Boi again reinvent themselves , this time as Parliament @-@ inspired musicians who specialize on male @-@ female relationships , boasting , and out @-@ there lyrics . " Baker concluded in his review , " With another nearly flawless album , OutKast arguably solidifies their reputation as one of the best hip @-@ hop groups of all time . " The Los Angeles Times opined that " the record 's most interesting moments are gorgeous Prince @-@ style soul . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times wrote that " OutKast 's music savors the viscous propulsion of funk , with raps and tunes that never ignore the body and its instinctive desires ... Yet OutKast -- taking cues from a band it obviously reveres , Parliament @-@ Funkadelic -- never forgets that bodies are attached to minds . " URB called the album " a complex tome that <unk> contemporary hip @-@ hop values with a timeless Southern soul , while pushing the envelope damn near off the table . " Mojo called it " hip hop with the power to convert even the most reactionary nonbelievers . " 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Stankonia has received many accolades and appeared on many magazines ' " best of " lists ; in his book Dirty South , author Ben Westhoff noted that the album appeared on " every critical best @-@ list worth mentioning . " At the 2002 Grammy Awards , OutKast won Best Rap Album for Stankonia and Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for " Ms. Jackson " . Despite OutKast 's being expected favorites , The Recording Academy instead chose the 2000 soundtrack album O Brother , Where Art Thou ? for Album of the Year . Before the group 's nominations , much of the hip @-@ hop community felt that rappers were not being awarded enough attention from The Recording Academy . However , the album 's musical diversity allowed the band to reach a wider audience and was credited for opening the Academy up to more hip @-@ hop musicians . 
 In 2006 , Time named Stankonia as one of the 100 best albums of all time . Rolling Stone ranked the album number 16 on the magazine 's list of the 100 Best Albums of the 2000s . In 2009 , Pitchfork Media ranked Stankonia number 13 on its list of the top 200 albums of the 2000s , and Rhapsody ranked it at number 2 on its " 100 Best Albums of the Decade " list . Rhapsody also ranked the album number 6 on its " Hip @-@ Hop 's Best Albums of the Decade " list . Vibe ranked the record at number 23 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Albums from 1985 to 2005 " . Entertainment Weekly put it on its end @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade " best @-@ of " list , saying , " With hummable hits ( ' Ms. Jackson ' ) and out @-@ there experiments ( ' B.O.B. ' ) , the rap duo gave us all a visa to the funky if fictional land of Stankonia in 2000 . " Q listed Stankonia as one of the best 50 albums of 2001 . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 With Stankonia , OutKast became the first hip @-@ hop act to openly acknowledge rave culture as an influence . During the late 1990s , rappers tended to embrace slow , laid @-@ back beats in their productions . On several tracks on Stankonia , the group employed faster , more chaotic tempos to reflect rave culture and the introduction of new drugs such as ecstasy into the hip @-@ hop scene . Boston @-@ based DJ Armand Van Helden recalls , " In the nineties , the bpms in hip @-@ hop got slower and the clubs were moody ... it just kind of dragged . I really missed that kind of hands @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air shit . " A remix of " B.O.B " created by Rage Against The Machine 's Zack de la Rocha received airplay on alternative radio stations , expanding the group 's fanbase beyond hip @-@ hop and urban listeners . Despite containing anti @-@ war sentiments , " B.O.B " became popular amongst American troops deployed in Afghanistan . While working on her acclaimed album The ArchAndroid ( 2010 ) , American R & B singer Janelle Monáe cited Stankonia 's experimental nature as an influence . Rapper Pill also acknowledged Stankonia , and particularly the production of Organized Noize , as an inspiration : " The sounds , the instrumentation of the samples , the different horns — everything about the tracks were great to me . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes : 
 Earthtone III is a production team consisting of OutKast and David " Mr. DJ " <unk> . 
 " So Fresh , So Clean " contains a sample of " Before the Night is Over " by Joe Simon . 
 " Ms. Jackson " contains a sample of " Strawberry Letter # 23 " by The Brothers Johnson . 
 " We Luv Deez <unk> " contains a sample of " Worldwide " by Allen Toussaint . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Kepler @-@ 10 = 
 Kepler @-@ 10 , formerly known as KOI @-@ 72 , is a Sun @-@ like star in the constellation of Draco that lies 173 parsecs ( 564 light years ) from Earth . Kepler @-@ 10 was targeted by NASA 's Kepler spacecraft , as it was seen as the first star identified by the Kepler mission that could be a possible host to a small , transiting exoplanet . The star is slightly less massive , slightly larger , and slightly cooler than the Sun ; at an estimated 10 @.@ 4 billion years in age , Kepler @-@ 10 is almost 2 @.@ 6 times the age of the Sun . Kepler @-@ 10 is host to a planetary system made up of at least two planets . Kepler @-@ 10b , the first undeniably rocky planet , was discovered in its orbit after eight months of observation and announced on January 10 , 2011 . The planet orbits its star closely , completing an orbit every 0 @.@ 8 days , and has a density similar to that of iron . The second planet , Kepler @-@ 10c , was confirmed on May 23 , 2011 , based on follow @-@ up observations by the Spitzer Space Telescope . The data shows it has an orbital period of 42 @.@ 3 days and has a radius more than double that of Earth , but a higher density , making it the largest and most massive rocky planet discovered as of June 2014 . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 Kepler @-@ 10 was named because it was the tenth planetary system observed by the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA satellite designed to search for Earth @-@ like planets that transit , or cross in front of , their host stars with respect to Earth . The transit slightly dims the host star ; this periodic dimming effect is then noted by Kepler . After eight months of observation ranging from May 2009 to January 2010 , the Kepler team established Kepler @-@ 10b as the first rocky exoplanet discovered by the Kepler satellite . Kepler @-@ 10 was the first Kepler @-@ targeted star suspected of having a small planet in orbit . Because of that , verifying Kepler 's discovery was prioritized by telescopes at the W.M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii . The discovery was successfully verified . Although there had been many potentially rocky exoplanets discovered in the past , Kepler @-@ 10b was the first definitively rocky planet to have been discovered . 
 The discovery of Kepler @-@ 10b was announced to the public at a winter meeting of the American Astronomical Society on January 10 , 2011 in Seattle . On May 23 , 2011 , the existence of Kepler @-@ 10c was confirmed at the 218th AAS meeting in Boston . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 10 is a G @-@ type star , like the Sun . With a mass of 0 @.@ 895 ( ± 0 @.@ 06 ) Msun and a radius of 1 @.@ 056 ( ± 0 @.@ 021 ) Rsun , the star is approximately 10 % smaller than and 5 % wider than the Sun . The metallicity of Kepler @-@ 10 , as measured in [ Fe / H ] ( the amount of iron in the star ) , is <unk> ( ± 0 @.@ 04 ) ; this means that Kepler @-@ 10 is about 70 % as metal @-@ rich as the Sun . Metallicity tends to play a large role in the formation of planets , determining if they form , and what kind of planet they will form . In addition , Kepler @-@ 10 is estimated to be 11 @.@ 9 billion years old and to have an effective temperature of <unk> ( ± 44 ) K ; To compare , the Sun is younger and hotter , with an age of 4 @.@ 6 billion years and an effective temperature of 5778 K. 
 Kepler @-@ 10 is located at a distance of 173 ( ± 27 ) parsecs from the Earth , which equates to approximately 564 light years . Also , Kepler @-@ 10 's apparent magnitude , or brightness as seen from Earth , is 10 @.@ 96 ; it therefore cannot be seen with the naked eye . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 Per the usual exoplanet nomenclature , the first planet discovered to be orbiting Kepler @-@ 10 is called Kepler @-@ 10b . Announced in 2011 , it was the first rocky planet identified outside the Solar system . The planet has a mass that is 3 @.@ 33 ± 0 @.@ 49 times that of Earth 's and a radius that is 1 @.@ 47 + 0 @.@ 03 
 − 0 @.@ 02 times that of Earth . The planet orbits Kepler @-@ 10 at a distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU every 0 @.@ <unk> days ; this can be compared to the orbit and orbital period of planet Mercury , which circles the Sun at a distance of 0 @.@ 3871 AU every 87 @.@ 97 days . Because the planet orbits so closely to its star , its eccentricity is virtually zero . It , thus , has an extremely circular orbit . 
 Kepler @-@ 10c was also discovered by NASA 's Kepler Mission , the second exoplanet found to orbit Kepler @-@ 10 . Radial @-@ velocity measurements of the body suggest that it has a mass of 17 @.@ 2 ± 1 @.@ 9 Earth masses and a radius of 2 @.@ 35 Earth radii , making it the largest known rocky planet as of 2014 . Kepler @-@ 10c would orbit Kepler @-@ 10 at a distance of 0 @.@ 24 AU every 45 @.@ 29 days . 
 = Tropical Storm Arthur ( 2002 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Arthur was the first tropical cyclone of the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season . The origins of the storm are believed to have been from a decaying cold front in the Gulf of Mexico , which dropped light to moderate rainfall across the southeastern United States . Developing on July 14 near the coast of North Carolina , Arthur tracked quickly east @-@ northward through much of its duration as a tropical cyclone . It reached peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on July 16 , though as it interacted with a mid @-@ level cyclone and cooler waters it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . The remnants of Arthur passed over Newfoundland with gusty winds and rainfall , where one person drowned . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Tropical Storm Arthur are believed to have been from a decaying cold front in the northeastern Gulf of Mexico in July 2002 . By July 9 , a weak low @-@ level circulation was first detected , in association with a broad low pressure area . Across the region , surface pressures were high , while upper level wind shear was marginally favorable for slow tropical development . The system tracked slowly north @-@ northwestward , gradually becoming better defined , although thunderstorm activity remained limited and disorganized . 
 By July 11 , dry air and unfavorable wind shear prevented the convection from developing near the center . The low became elongated , though on July 12 the overall convection became more concentrated as it turned to a northeast drift . An approaching mid @-@ level trough caused the system to accelerate northeastward across Florida Panhandle , though upon doing so the thunderstorm activity quickly diminished . On July 13 , forecasters expected the system to be absorbed by the approaching trough . However , the low pressure area emerged into the western Atlantic Ocean near North Carolina early on July 14 , and upon doing so its convection increased and became better organized . The circulation and convection became further defined , and the National Hurricane Center estimates the system developed into Tropical Depression One late on July 14 about 45 miles ( 75 km ) west @-@ southwest of Hatteras , North Carolina . 
 Upon becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression was moving quickly to the east @-@ northeast , due to a deepening mid @-@ level low south of the Canadian Maritimes . It maintained good upper @-@ level outflow , and its track over the gulf stream allowed for steady strengthening . Early on July 15 , convection increased over the center and developed an organized rainband southwest of the center ; as a result , the National Hurricane Center upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Arthur . After continuing to steadily intensify , Arthur attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) early on July 16 about 490 miles ( 790 km ) south @-@ southeast of Halifax , Nova Scotia . Upon reaching peak intensity , the convection had become well @-@ organized over the center despite westerly wind shear . Subsequently , the center became separated from the area of deepest convection , and Arthur maintained its peak intensity as it began transitioning into an extratropical cyclone . The storm turned northward around the larger mid @-@ level low , and by July 17 Arthur completed extratropical transition . Shortly thereafter , the extratropical remnants crossed eastern Newfoundland . On July 19 , the remnants of Arthur turned to a southeast drift between Newfoundland and Greenland , and by late in the day its winds decreased to below gale force . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The precursor tropical disturbance dropped light to moderate precipitation in Florida , Georgia , and South Carolina , peaking at 4 @.@ 49 inches ( 114 mm ) in Weston , Florida . The system produced scattered precipitation across North Carolina , generally between 1 – 3 inches ( 25 – 75 mm ) . On July 16 , Arthur passed north of Bermuda , where it brought gusty winds and 0 @.@ 57 inches ( 14 @.@ 5 mm ) of rainfall . As an extratropical storm , Arthur produced gusty winds and dropped about 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of rainfall in Newfoundland . Strong waves capsized a boat in the <unk> River , killing one person . 
 Five ships recorded tropical storm force winds in association with Arthur , of which two were when the storm was extratropical . Early on July 16 , a vessel with the call sign Weston reported sustained winds of 51 mph ( 82 km / h ) from the south @-@ southwest , which was the strongest ship reported wind speed . As the storm approached Canada as an extratropical storm , a buoy reported an 8 minute average wind speed of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , along with a wind gust of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . 
 = The Land of Gorch = 
 The Land of Gorch is a recurring skit that appears in season one of the American comedy television program Saturday Night Live . It features Jim Henson 's Muppets . Prior to his work on Sesame Street , Henson had created puppetry work , including his show Sam and Friends , for adult audiences . His characters appeared regularly on the late @-@ night comedy television programs , and The Ed Sullivan Show . After Sesame Street , Henson feared he would become typecast into working on children 's television series . His talent agent Bernie Brillstein , who represented Gilda Radner , Dan Aykroyd , and John Belushi , helped him transition to Saturday Night Live . 
 The premise of The Land of Gorch featured Muppet characters , who were members of a royal family , in a faraway locale . They behaved <unk> and made frequent references to drug abuse , sexual innuendo , and consumption of alcohol . Characters included King Ploobis , Queen <unk> , their son , and servants Scred and Vazh . These characters often consulted their oracle Mighty Favog for advice . 
 The writers of Saturday Night Live clashed with Henson 's vision for the program . Michael O 'Donoghue , Alan Zweibel , and Al Franken often tried to avoid writing the weekly sketches . Henson felt they were trying to write for situational comedy rather than staying within his intended story . Frank Oz eventually agreed the partnership between Henson 's team and the show 's writers was imperfect , and was thankful they moved on to The Muppet Show . 
 The Land of Gorch had a significant impact on later Muppet works , including the feature film The Dark Crystal and the television show Dinosaurs . Commentators agreed the reception for The Land of Gorch was universally negative ; The A.V. Club said it was an in @-@ joke that nobody wanted to keep the sketches on Saturday Night Live . San Francisco Chronicle called the characters the opposite of Kermit the Frog and compared them to trolls . DVD Talk called the feature the worst mistake in the first season of Saturday Night Live . Academic Michael J. Bernsten wrote in his essay " The <unk> of Nightmares " that the idea failed because the characters were irredeemable and unfunny . 
 = = Premise = = 
 The Land of Gorch takes place in a world far away from contemporaneous society . The characters live on a fictional , swamp @-@ like planet in a fantasy genre . The set includes volcanoes and prehistoric themes . The environment is dismal and the puppets have grotesque physical appearances . 
 The creatures each have unique cultural identities and a sense of loyalty towards their inherent , traditional practices . The main characters comprise a royal family that includes King Ploobis , Queen <unk> , and a male child named Wiss . There are also a male servant named Scred , a female servant named Vazh , and a rock prophet named the Mighty Favog . Scred acts like a fervent supporter of dim @-@ witted King Ploobis , while Vazh displays flirtatious qualities . 
 The Land of Gorch segments deal with adult themes ; characters use euphemisms to refer to their sex drives and often consume alcohol . They often contradict each other and act obnoxiously and lasciviously . They grapple with adult issues including death , sexual intercourse , and alcoholism . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Early in his career , Jim Henson 's work was aimed at mature audiences . His television program Sam and Friends was designed for young adults . During this period , his characters often <unk> on late @-@ night , comedy television programs The Jimmy Dean Show and The Ed Sullivan Show . Throughout the 1960s , Jim Henson used his puppets for profane , irreverent comedy . These early Henson creations made references to substance abuse and sexual intercourse ; The A.V. Club said Henson was probably influenced by the work of Ralph Bakshi , who was also active during the 1960s . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Jim Henson originally conceived of his Muppets as characters aimed at an adult audience . He was disappointed the popularity of characters that appeared in Sesame Street , including Big Bird and Bert and Ernie , had solidified a public perception his Muppets were solely intended for educating children . Henson worried he would be stuck forever working on children 's television series . He felt his Muppet characters should be able to be appreciated by individuals of any maturity level . Henson told The Saturday Evening Post he had constantly dealt with others looking down upon the idea of puppet performers . He envied performer Edgar Bergen for his ability to appeal to a mature audience . Henson said he wanted to work on program that was broadcast during the peak adult @-@ viewing time and said he had prior difficulty persuading the major television networks to create a puppet program for mature audiences . 
 Bernie Brillstein , Henson 's talent agent , helped him move away from working solely on productions for children . When Henson decided to engage Brillstein as his talent agent , Henson was not well known within the industry . Brillstein was an asset to Henson ; his clients included Gilda Radner , Dan Aykroyd , and John Belushi . Henson wanted Muppets incorporated into Saturday Night Live as a way to expunge the popular view his characters were only for young audiences . With help from Frank Oz , Henson generated The Land of Gorch characters for use on Saturday Night Live . His new characters were featured in the television program 's first season . Henson designed the conceptual framework of The Land of Gorch characters to be eccentric . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 The designs for the characters and associated puppets in The Land of Gorch were created by Michael K. Frith and Jim Henson . The characters were specifically created for Saturday Night Live and were not previously used in the Henson puppet universe . Their appearance was built to be more realistic than Henson 's previous puppet creations . It was the first instance Henson used glass eyes in his models . " The Mighty Favog " character was co @-@ designed by Frith and Henson . King Ploobis and Scred were designed by Frith . Jerry Juhl and Jerry Nelson assisted with the production of the Muppets during the program . 
 = = = NBC contract and marketing = = = 
 NBC asked Saturday Night Live 's producer Lorne Michaels to add The Land of Gorch to the program to lighten its overall tone . In its initial contract for Saturday Night Live , NBC required producer Lorne Michaels , short films by comedian Albert Brooks , and Jim Henson and the Muppets . Michaels said he was pleased to be working Henson on his new show : " I 'd always liked and been a fan of [ the Muppets ] and Jim 's work " . He said he thought Henson 's idea could support a weekly routine on the program . Henson initially called the segment " Muppet Night Creatures " before settling on its final name . " Jim Henson and the Muppets " were marketed as a regular feature of Saturday Night Live before its first episode was hosted by George Carlin . 
 = = = Writing conflicts = = = 
 Because of regulations imposed by the Writers Guild of America , only those employed as writers for Saturday Night Live were allowed to write sketches for the program . Henson and his puppeteers merely performed the scripts for the segments — they were not involved in the writing process . Saturday Night Live cast members did not enjoy working with The Land of Gorch segments . Writing assignments for The Land of Gorch sketches was given to Saturday Night Live staff as a penalty for being least liked among the production team . Writers generally regarded the routines as childish . 
 The writing staff of Saturday Night Live and Henson 's team did share some qualities ; each group formed a separate social clique and were independently opinionated and creative . They differed in age @-@ range and background — producer Lorne Michaels was 32 @-@ years @-@ old in 1975 and Henson was 40 . Most of the writers were single and Henson was married with five children at the time . 
 Writer Michael O 'Donoghue said , " I don 't write for felt " . In a 1977 interview for Playboy , O 'Donoghue called The Land of Gorch characters " fucking Muppets " and " little hairy <unk> " . Saturday Night Live writer Alan Zweibel said the writers drew straws to decide who would draft that week 's Muppet routine . Zweibel said that in addition to himself , other writers who disliked working on scripts for The Land of Gorch included Michael O 'Donoghue , Al Franken , and Tom Davis . Zweibel had personal disagreements with Jim Henson , who disapproved a few storylines . Henson 's associate Jerry Juhl said John Belushi hated having the Muppets on the show . Juhl said they had gone through virtually every writer on the program trying to find one who would write sketches both parties could agree with . 
 Lorne Michaels said The Land of Gorch characters had been created without a set of rules or boundaries to govern the storylines . He said he felt his writing <unk> would have been able to work more effectively if there had been more guidelines on the characters ' behavior and function . Henson said he felt the type of humor being written for the show was tedious and unimaginative . 
 = = = Cancellation = = = 
 Jim Henson said his ideas did not mesh well with those of the writers . He said his creative team did not form a bond with the writing staff , which he said embraced a darkly irritating form of comedy . 
 Frank Oz said The Land of Gorch had its positives and drawbacks . Oz said he thought the routine was not a good fit for Saturday Night Live , and that the cartoon @-@ style humor of their characters did not work well with the comedy of Saturday Night Live , much of which was initially derived from the Second City environment . Oz said he generally enjoyed working on Saturday Night Live and watching in @-@ person the skills of performers including Andy Kaufman , Albert Brooks , John Belushi , Chevy Chase , and Dan Aykroyd . 
 The conflicts between Henson and the Saturday Night Live writers , The Land of Gorch segments were discontinued from production with the agreement of all parties . By the time Lorne Michaels asked one of his producers , " How do you fire the Muppets ? " , Henson 's staff had already begun focusing on producing The Muppet Show in London ; Oz was thankful for the move . The Muppet Show , which was <unk> in 1976 , featured new characters that were not previously seen on Saturday Night Live . Henson later said part of the reason he decided to stop producing the segments was to focus on traveling to England to work on The Muppet Show . 
 = = Characters = = 
 King Ploobis ( performed by Jim Henson ) — the greedy and decorative King of the Land of Gorch . He is married to Queen Peuta but has been having an affair with his servant Vazh . King Ploobis is always seeking advice from The Mighty Favog . 
 Queen Peuta ( performed by Alice Tweedie ) — the Queen of the Land of Gorch . She is married to King Ploobis . Due to King Ploobis having an affair with Vazh , Queen Peuta secretly has an affair with Scred . She has three feet and wears shoes that were made from the skins of the <unk> . 
 <unk> ( performed by Richard Hunt ) – The son of King Ploobis and Queen Peuta making him the prince . He is shown to have an addiction to smoking . 
 Scred ( performed by Jerry Nelson ) – King Ploobis ' right @-@ hand man and servant who is having an affair with Queen Peuta . Scred is always mistreated by King Ploobis . 
 Vazh ( performed by Rhonda <unk> in the first appearance , Fran Brill in later appearances ) — King Ploobis ' lovely servant and mistress . 
 The Mighty Favog ( performed by Frank Oz ) — A living statue who serves as the deity of the Land of Gorch . He would offer his advice to King Ploobis and the planet 's other inhabitants in exchange for sacrifices . 
 = = List of episodes = = 
 = = Home media = = 
 The Land of Gorch was released on the Saturday Night Live season one DVD release in December 2006 . 
 = = Themes = = 
 In his essay " The <unk> of Nightmares " , academic Michael J. Bernsten wrote that The Land of Gorch routines exemplified how disgustingly puppets could act , and illustrated the connection between the uncanny and odd behavior . He commented on the value of Henson 's contributions to Saturday Night Live within the artist 's larger corpus of work , and said none of Henson 's other creations were as profane or grotesque . Bernsten said these qualities made the characters a crucial part of the Muppet timeline . 
 Bernsten said audiences contemporaneous with the first season of Saturday Night Live were not ready for such characters . He said The Land of Gorch characters behaved so uncannily that audiences did not relate to them because they did not foresee hideous puppets behaving in such a mature manner . Bernsten said this was the reason the characters ' pithy one @-@ liner jokes succeeded . 
 According to Ben Underwood , the characters that appeared in The Land of Gorch were called " Muppets " by Henson and his crew , but diverged significantly from his other creations within the Muppet universe . Underwood said they exhibit a dichotomy of sweet and affectionate behavior while at the same time being disgusting . 
 Jason Segel , writer and star of the 2011 film The Muppets , likened Henson 's efforts with The Land of Gorch to the early struggles by Apple Inc. founder Steve Jobs with his burgeoning new company in its early years . Segel said the format did not work with Saturday Night Live because of its edgier tone ; " they had created a new world of sort of adult , darker Muppets to fit in with SNL and it didn 't quite work " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the conclusion of The Land of Gorch , Henson and his team had learned a great deal from being involved with the production . They gained institutional knowledge about adapting and quickly creating a television program within a seven @-@ day period . He also gained valuable friendships with multiple celebrities through his work on Saturday Night Live . They were later able to use these skills and relationships on Henson 's next television venture , The Muppet Show . 
 In a 1982 interview with Knight @-@ Ridder Newspapers , Henson said ideas for his feature film The Dark Crystal originated from his efforts at character creation on Saturday Night Live . Henson told the Associated Press in 1982 that The Dark Crystal characters evolved directly from his Saturday Night Live creations . Henson described the evolutionary process from The Land of Gorch to Dark Crystal , saying that because The Land of Gorch was featured on late @-@ night television , it helped expand the scope of his puppets , including risqué behavior . He described the challenge that motivated him to further develop concepts from The Land of Gorch on Dark Crystal , saying his next motivation was to draft a universe of puppets for a feature film without humans . 
 During his work on Saturday Night Live , Henson began to see a vision for " a feature @-@ length , self @-@ sustaining puppetry world devoid of human presence " . According to Catriona <unk> , " " evolutionary precursors " to The Dark Crystal were found within The Land of Gorch , including the idea of a royal family reliant upon spirituality . In their book Saturday Night : A Backstage History of Saturday Night Live , Doug Hill and Jeff <unk> said The Land of Gorch produced the prototypes for characters that would appear in The Dark Crystal . The Land of Gorch sketches were the first time Henson had used taxidermy eyeballs in one of his characters . He used this technique in The Dark Crystal . Henson said his experience on Saturday Night Live promted him to investigate ways to make his creations more lifelike in appearance . 
 The Land of Gorch influenced later works within the Jim Henson universe as well , including the television show Dinosaurs produced by The Jim Henson Company . The first episode 's story of Dinosaurs to feature a plot @-@ line supporting environmentalism had previously appeared in a similar version within The Land of Gorch . The Land of Gorch segment from the November 8 , 1975 episode of Saturday Night Live hosted by Candice Bergen included such themes which were reused in Dinosaurs . 
 The puppets used in The Land of Gorch were archived by the Jim Henson Company in their historical collection . The Company held its first exhibition of characters in 1979 to coincide with the release of The Muppet Movie . Characters from The Land of Gorch were featured in this exhibition , which was held in the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts . In 2006 , Henson 's Muppet character model " Scred " was featured as a highlight of his body of work in the exhibit " Jim Henson : Performing Artist " at the University of Maryland 's Clarice Smith Performing Arts Center . 
 In a 2011 appearance as host of Saturday Night Live while promoting his film The Muppets , Jason Segel mentioned The Land of Gorch in his opening monologue . In a follow @-@ up interview , he was asked about the possibility of re @-@ introducing The Land of Gorch to popular culture , and said , " I think that that is a reference that is probably lost to time ... They weren 't even famous then " . In 2013 , writer Jay <unk> marketed to publishing company Archaia Entertainment the idea of reviving The Land of Gorch characters in comic book format with a new storyline . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Phil Dyess @-@ Nugent said " nobody wanted this shit on the show " became an in @-@ joke among the Saturday Night Live staff . He said although he was confused about the reason the concept did not work for Saturday Night Live , he remembered skipping through the sketch to watch other parts of the episode . Writing for the same publication , Erik Adams called the sketches uninspired and one of the low points of Henson 's working relationship with NBC . The San Francisco Chronicle wrote that The Land of Gorch characters appeared antithetical to Kermit the Frog and compared them to trolls . 
 USA Today television critic Robert Bianco mused as to why the characters were not successful , saying they did not land with the audience because of an imbalance between the initial appeal of the Muppets to youth over against the mature comedy used in Henson 's other endeavors . Author Jake Austen said Henson 's characters were " unappreciated Muppets " . Vogue said the sketches feature " proto @-@ Muppets " behaving oddly in a dystopian future world . Associated Press called the characters Muppets in a disturbing and horrifying context . 
 The Economist described Henson 's Saturday Night Live characters as his odd children who were known to muse about aspects of philosophy . DVD Talk said The Land of Gorch was the most serious mistake from the first season of Saturday Night Live . The review also said the characters repeatedly lack humor and brought each episode to a dead stop because of the length of the sketches . Author Wesley Hyatt said the only redeeming scene from the sketches was a duet between Lily Tomlin and one of the characters , singing " I Got You Babe " . 
 Michael J. Bernsten wondered why The Land of Gorch characters were not appreciated , saying they were unfunny , unintelligent , and devoid of redeeming characteristics . He said , " They are probably the most unlikable Muppets ever created " . Bernsten attributed this notoriety to the Saturday Night Live writing staff rather than Jim Henson or Frank Oz . He said the staff 's lack of motivation to produce imaginative writing contributed to bland dialogue between the characters . 
 In her essay " Emmet Otter 's Jug @-@ Band Christmas : The Gift of the Muppets " , Catherine Edwards said The Land of Gorch sketches were a critical flop . Edwards interpreted this as a net @-@ benefit for fans of the Muppets because the failure of the skits resulted in Henson 's next successful venture , The Muppet Show . 
 = Your and My Secret = 
 Your and My Secret , known in Japan as lit . " My and Her Three X 's " ( Japanese : <unk> × × × , Hepburn : Boku to Kanojo no Peke Mittsu ) , is a manga series by Ai Morinaga . The series was first published in Enix 's Monthly Stencil in January 2001 , was later obtained by Mag Garden who published it in Monthly Comic Blade then Monthly Comic Avarus where it concluded its serialization in August 2011 . The individual chapters were collected and released into eight tankōbon volumes by Mag Garden . A continuation of the manga , subtitled as Extra @-@ Part ( <unk> , Bangai @-@ hen ) , was serialized in Mag Garden 's online magazine , Web Comic Beat 's , between June 2012 and March 2013 ; it was later released in a single tankōbon volume . In Japan , Boku to Kanojo no Peke Mittsu has been adapted into three radio dramas and a live action film . Your and My Secret follows the effeminate Akira Uehara who switches bodies with the tomboy Nanako Momoi due to an accident . 
 ADV Manga licensed Boku to Kanojo no Peke Mittsu and released it under the name Your and My Secret in 2004 . Tokyopop later obtained the license and released the first seven volumes of Your and My Secret . After Tokyopop 's closure in 2011 , the North American licensing was returned to Mag Garden . In 2012 , <unk> licensed and published the eight volumes digitally . The series has also been popularized under the name My Barbaric Girlfriend due to <unk> . Tokyopop 's localized volumes appeared on ICv2 's monthly top three @-@ hundred selling graphic novels . English reviewers have praised the series ' humor with mixed reaction to the plot and characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Akira Uehara volunteers to deliver homework to Nanako Momoi , his classmate and crush . [ ch . 1 ] At Nanako 's home , her grandfather 's invention causes Akira and Nanako to exchange bodies ; the invention is destroyed shortly after its use . [ ch . 2 ] Nanako is thrilled with the exchange as it complements her tomboy personality ; she begins dating her friend Makoto Shiina . Meanwhile , Akira 's effeminate personality combined with Nanako 's beauty garners the courtship of his friend , Shinnosuke Senbongi , to his discomfort . [ ch . 5 ] 
 The series continues episodically and focuses on Akira 's deteriorating resolve to return to his body and his hesitation in reconciling Shinnosuke 's feelings . Eventually , Akira decides to accept the new status quo but a new invention unintentionally reverses the exchange ; the invention is destroyed after its use once again and Nanako 's grandfather becomes amnesiac . On the behest of the Akira and friends , Shinnosuke begins researching on how to build a machine to reenact the exchange . [ ch . 62 ] Eight years later , Shinnosuke succeeds allowing the four to reunite with their respective lovers . [ Ex . 6 ] 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 Akira Uehara ( <unk> , Uehara Akira ) 
 Akira is an effeminate male with a crush Nanako Momoi . [ ch . 1 ] After exchanging bodies with her , his personality and Nanako 's feminine appearance causes his popularity to soar . [ ch . 4 ] His best friend , Shinnosuke Senbongi , learns his secret and becomes enamored with his new appearance . Initially , Akira was adamant on returning to his body and maintaining his masculinity . During the series , he reluctantly reconciles Shinnosuke 's feelings and upon realizing everyone is happier with the new status quo , resigns to live in Nanako 's body . [ ch . 57 ] He is voiced by Kenji Nojima in the three radio dramas and is portrayed by Shun <unk> in the live action film . 
 Nanako Momoi ( <unk> , Momoi Nanako ) 
 Nanako is an extreme tomboy with an insensitive personality . Like Akira Uehara , she becomes popular with the students and Akira 's parents after the exchange due to her personality and Akira 's masculine appearance . Initially Nanako intended to return to her body after having fun as a male and was very strict on how Akira treated her body . [ ch . 4 ] She resolves to stay in Akira 's body and relents her body 's ownership to Akira after she falls completely in love with her friend , Makoto Shiina . [ ch . 55 ] Her parents learn about the exchange and are supportive of the status quo as they accept Nanako 's hopelessness as a female . [ ch . 51 ] She is voiced by Miyuki Sawashiro in the three radio dramas and is portrayed by Mai Takahashi in the live action film . 
 Shinnosuke Senbongi ( <unk> , Senbongi Shinnosuke ) 
 <unk> is Akira Uehara 's childhood friend . [ ch . 6 ] He falls for Akira , in Nanako 's body , and wholly accepts the body exchange . [ ch . 19 ] Shinnosuke uses his wits in order to make Akira acknowledge his growing attraction towards him . He is voiced by Kōsuke Toriumi in the three radio drama and is portrayed by <unk> Fujisawa in the live action film . 
 Makoto Shiina ( <unk> , Shiina Makoto ) 
 Makoto is a good matured girl who is Nanako Momoi 's friend . She is unaware of the exchange and begins dating Nanako , in Akira 's body , while maintaining her friendship with Akira , in Nanako 's body . [ ch . 5 ] Her brother , <unk> Shiina ( <unk> , Shiina <unk> ) , is overprotective of her and threatens any males who comes close to her . She is voiced by Rie Kugimiya in the three radio dramas and is portrayed by <unk> Suzuki in the live action film . 
 Manzou Momoi ( <unk> , Momoi <unk> ) 
 Manzou is Nanako Momoi 's grandfather . He is overweight , lazy , perverted , and fails as an inventor . After the exchange , he refuses to rebuild the machine as he is happier having a feminine granddaughter who does the house chores . [ ch . 6 ] In the second accident which undoes Akira and Nanako 's exchange , he becomes amnesiac from a head injury . [ ch . 62 ] He is voiced by Kenichi Ogata in the three radio dramas and is portrayed by Masahiro Sato in the live action film . 
 = = Release = = 
 My and Her Three X 's is written and illustrated by Ai Morinaga . It began serialization in Enix 's Monthly Stencil magazine in its March 2001 issue and published five chapters in total upon the November 2001 issue 's release . Afterwards , its serialization was resumed in Mag Garden 's Monthly Comic Blade 's first issue , April 2002 , and published the thirty @-@ third chapter in the October 2007 issue . Its serialization was transferred to Mag Garden 's Monthly Comic Avarus beginning in the November 2007 issue where the final chapter was published in the September 2011 issue . Concurrent to the serialization , Ai Morinaga created side stories which were published in Comic Blade Masamune 2003 Summer Edition and Comic Blade <unk> issues 2 to 6 . Mag Garden collected the individual chapters and side stories into eight tankōbon volumes which were released between December 10 , 2002 and October 15 , 2011 . Your and My Secret 's plot was properly concluded in lit . " My and Her Three X 's Extra @-@ Part ( <unk> × × × <unk> , Boku to Kanojo no Peke Mittsu Bangai @-@ hen ) . Extra @-@ Part was published in Mag Garden 's online magazine , Web Comic Beat 's , between June 25 , 2012 and March 25 , 2013 . The chapters were later released in a tankōbon on May 14 , 2013 . Morinaga commented the serialization kept her indoors most of the time and limited her contact with people to her assistant , publisher , supermarket cashiers , and delivery boys . [ vol . 3 ] 
 ADV Manga licensed the series as Your and My Secret for North America and released the first volume on July 6 , 2004 . Tokyopop later acquired the license and released the first seven volumes between March 11 , 2008 and November 30 , 2010 . After Tokyopop 's North American division was closed down , the North American license were returned to Mag Garden . In 2012 , <unk> licensed the series for digital release in English ; the eight volumes were made available between May 3 , 2012 and August 23 , 2012 . The manga has also been localized in other languages such as Germany , Italian , Chinese , Thai , Vietnamese , and Spanish . <unk> of the Chinese translations popularized the series under the name My Barbaric Girlfriend ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = = Volume list = = = 
 = = = Radio drama = = = 
 Three radio dramas based on the manga series were produced . The first radio drama was available for order in Monthly Comic Blade 's August 2005 issue and is a reenactment of the first five chapters in the series . The second drama was included with the limited edition of the eighth volume . It is a reenactment of chapters 29 – 32 . The third drama was released with the limited edition of the extra volume . It reenacts the first three chapters in the extra volume . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 A live action film based on the manga was released direct to DVD on April 21 , 2006 by Sega . It is directed by Masaki Hamamoto with screenplay by Mikio Satake . Movie Drama My and Her Three X 's Visual Guide Book is a guide book which provides background production information on the film . It was released before the film on September 28 , 2005 . The plot begins similarity to the manga and Akira and Nanako exchange bodies . Manzou gives the two a deadline to raise money in order to rebuild the machine . Akira succeeds but is forced to pay off Nanako 's incurring debt . The deadline passes and Manzou leaves Japan , concluding with Akira and Nanako promising to earn enough money for when Manzou returns . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Tokyopop 's localized volumes appeared on ICv2 's monthly top three @-@ hundred selling graphic novels . About.com readers ranked the series third as Best New Shojo Manga in 2008 and was ranked in the 10 Bizarre Shojo Manga Love Stories in 2010 . Jason Thompson praised the series for being smart , funny , and unpredictable . Pop Culture <unk> agreed on the humor , and described the series as something all Shōjo fans will enjoy . Mania.com described the first volume as an enjoyable read , praised it for the humor and its interesting and realistic approach to the gender swap topic , but expressed annoyance with the protagonist 's behavior . Meanwhile , IGN panned the plot for being preposterous , citing the protagonists ' personalities to be too extreme , and gave no incentive to move past the first volume . 
 = 21st Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Skanderbeg = 
 The 21st Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Skanderbeg ( 1st Albanian ) was a German mountain infantry division of the Waffen @-@ SS , the armed wing of the German Nazi Party that served alongside , but was never formally part of , the Wehrmacht during World War II . 
 The division was developed around the nucleus of an ethnic Albanian battalion which had briefly seen combat against the Yugoslav Partisans in eastern Bosnia as part of the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) . Composed of Muslim Albanians with mostly German and Yugoslav Volksdeutsche ( ethnic German ) officers and non @-@ commissioned officers , it was given the title Skanderbeg after medieval Albanian lord George Kastrioti Skanderbeg , who defended the region of Albania against the Ottoman Empire for more than two decades in the 15th century . 
 Skanderbeg never reached divisional strength , being at most a brigade @-@ sized formation of between 6 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 500 troops . In May 1944 , members of the division arrested 281 Jews in Pristina and handed them over to the Germans , who transported them to the Bergen @-@ Belsen concentration camp , where many were killed . The division itself was better known for this action and for murdering , raping , and looting in predominantly Serb areas than for participating in combat operations on behalf of the German war effort . Its only significant military actions took place during a German anti @-@ Partisan offensive in the German occupied territory of Montenegro in June and July 1944 . Following those operations , the unit was deployed as a guard force at the chromium mines in Kosovo , where it was quickly overrun by the Partisans , leading to widespread desertion . Reinforced by German Kriegsmarine personnel and with fewer than 500 Albanians remaining in its ranks , it was disbanded on 1 November 1944 . The remaining members were incorporated into the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen . After the war , divisional commander SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen @-@ SS August Schmidhuber was found guilty of war crimes by a court in Belgrade and executed in 1947 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 On 7 April 1939 , five months prior to the outbreak of World War II , the Kingdom of Italy invaded Albania . The country was overrun in five days , and Italian King Victor Emmanuel III accepted the crown offered by the Parliament of Albania . The Royal Albanian Army was incorporated into the Royal Italian Army and a viceroy was appointed to administer the country as a protectorate . Following the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia on 6 April 1941 , Italian Albania was expanded to include adjacent parts of the Kingdom of Yugoslavia incorporated mainly from the Yugoslav banovinas ( regional subdivisions ) of Vardar and Morava . Kosovo was annexed to Albania , and in the beginning , Albanians living there enthusiastically welcomed the Italian occupation . Some Kosovo Albanians even suggested that Albanians were " Aryans of Illyrian heritage " . Although officially under Italian rule , the Albanians in Kosovo were given control of the region and encouraged to open Albanian @-@ language schools , which had been banned by the Yugoslav government . The Italians also gave the inhabitants Albanian citizenship and allowed them to fly the flag of Albania . The Royal Italian Army expelled most of the Serbs and Montenegrins that had settled Kosovo during the interwar period . The Kosovo Albanians despised the Serbs for the oppression they had experienced at their hands during the Balkan Wars , World War I , and under Yugoslav rule . They took advantage of their changed circumstances , attacked their Serb neighbours , and burned the homes of as many as 30 @,@ 000 Serb and Montenegrin settlers . 
 Albania remained occupied by Italy until its surrender to the Allies in September 1943 . In August of that year , faced with the imminent collapse of the Italian war effort , Nazi Germany deployed the 2nd Panzer Army to the Balkans to take over areas previously occupied by Italy . One of the Italian areas seized by the Germans was Albania , where the XXI Mountain Corps of Generaloberst ( General ) Lothar Rendulic 's 2nd Panzer Army had been deployed . A Wehrmacht plenipotentiary general , and a special representative of Heinrich Himmler , SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen @-@ SS und Polizei Josef Fitzthum , were both based in the Albanian capital of Tirana . The Germans took control of all Albanian forces that had been collaborating with the Italians prior to their capitulation , including the <unk> Kombëtar , an anti @-@ communist and nationalist militia . The Germans strengthened the Albanian army and gendarmerie , but quickly decided those troops were unreliable . That year , a number of Albanians from Kosovo and the Sandžak region were recruited into the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) , a Waffen @-@ SS division composed largely of Bosnian Muslims ( Bosniaks ) and Croats with mostly German officers . For about six months the division included about 1 @,@ 000 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo and the Sandžak who made up the 1st Battalion of the 2nd Regiment ( I / 2 ) , which later became the 1st Battalion of the 28th Regiment ( I / 28 ) . The division later recruited a further 500 men from the Sandžak . 
 The formation of an Albanian Waffen @-@ SS division was Fitzthum 's idea , initially opposed by the German Foreign Ministry representative Hermann Neubacher and the head of the SS @-@ Reichssicherheitshauptamt ( Reich Main Security Office ) SS @-@ Obergruppenführer und General der Polizei ( Lieutenant General ) Ernst Kaltenbrunner , who influenced Himmler to shelve it . But the Albanian government supported the idea ; in the face of increasing difficulties Himmler soon changed his mind , and in February 1944 the idea received Adolf Hitler 's approval . 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 In February 1944 , Hitler approved the creation of an Albanian Waffen @-@ SS division that was to serve only inside Kosovo , and was intended to protect ethnic Albania but remain under German control . It was meant to be one of three Muslim Waffen @-@ SS divisions serving in the Balkans , the other two being the 13th Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Handschar ( 1st Croatian ) and the 23rd Waffen Mountain Division of the SS Kama ( 2nd Croatian ) . Himmler 's goal was to expand Waffen @-@ SS recruiting in the Balkans and form two corps of two divisions each , with one corps to operate in the region of Bosnia in the Independent State of Croatia and the other in Albania . These corps would then be combined with the Volksdeutsche 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen and together would form a Balkan Waffen @-@ SS mountain army of five divisions . 
 In March 1944 , Bedri <unk> , the chairman of the Second League of Prizren , an organization created after the Italian surrender to advance the interests of Kosovo Albanians , proposed to Hitler that a force of 120 @,@ 000 – 150 @,@ 000 Kosovo Albanian volunteers be raised to fight the Yugoslav and Albanian partisans . <unk> asked the German leadership to give the Albanians equipment and supplies to fight the communist insurgency , and requested the expansion of the borders of the German puppet state of Albania at the expense of the German @-@ occupied Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia and the German occupied territory of Montenegro . These requests were not fulfilled , but in April 1944 Himmler ordered the establishment of a new Albanian volunteer division , which was subsequently named after the medieval Albanian warrior George Kastrioti Skanderbeg . By this point , the Germans and some members of the Albanian puppet government believed that about 50 @,@ 000 men could be recruited from Albanian @-@ held territory to join the SS . The SS had initially envisioned a force of 10 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 men for an Albanian SS division . Himmler saw the Muslim Albanians as a potential source of manpower in Germany 's war against the Yugoslav Partisans , who faced significant difficulties in recruiting Kosovo Albanians to join their ranks . The Germans found that Kosovo Albanians were more cooperative than Albanians in Albania itself . This was mainly because they feared a return to Yugoslav rule . Consequently , many of the division 's recruits were Kosovo Albanians . The quality of most of these recruits was poor , and only 6 @,@ 000 were considered suitable to receive training . Those that were accepted were a combination of about 1 @,@ 500 former Royal Yugoslav Army prisoners of war , elements of the failed Albanian army and gendarmerie , volunteers from both pre @-@ war and expanded Albania , and conscripts from families that had more than two sons . The enlistment of Albanian civilians was organized in close cooperation with the Albanian puppet government . 
 On 17 April 1944 , the Albanian battalion of the 13th SS Division was transferred via rail directly from combat in Bosnia to Kosovo to form part of the Skanderbeg division . The head of Waffen @-@ SS recruitment , SS @-@ Obergruppenführer Gottlob Berger , reported to Himmler that the Albanians " ... were quite sad about leaving . " On 23 May , Fitzthum reported the failure of Albanian units used in operations against the Partisans , and that he had dissolved four Albanian battalions organized by the Wehrmacht . He described most Albanian army and gendarmerie officers as " totally corrupt , unusable , undisciplined and <unk> . " 
 = = = Operations = = = 
 The division was founded as the 21 . Waffen @-@ SS Gebirgsdivision der SS Skanderbeg ( <unk> <unk> ) on 1 May 1944 as part of the XXI Mountain Corps . Most or all of the division 's officers , non @-@ commissioned officers ( NCOs ) , and specialists were German , and were mainly provided by the 7th and 13th SS Divisions , which noticeably weakened those formations . The divisional artillery regiment was formed from the 1st Albanian Artillery Regiment . The division was placed under the command of SS @-@ Standartenführer ( Colonel ) August Schmidhuber , who was promoted to SS @-@ Oberführer ( senior colonel ) in June . Estimates of the size of the division range from 6 @,@ 000 to 6 @,@ 500 men . Members took a religious oath using the Quran , pledging " jihad against unbelievers . " The division was originally equipped with captured Italian Carro Armato M15 / 42 tanks , which proved to be unreliable . Its garrison was located in the town of Prizren . 
 Early on , it became clear that most of the division 's Muslim Albanian members seemed to be interested only in settling scores with their Christian Serb adversaries , who became the target of numerous atrocities . In order to put a stop to the crimes , the Germans had to disarm battalions of the division in the towns of Peć and Prizren and arrest the Albanian officers , with one commanding officer even being sent to prison in Germany . On 14 May 1944 , members of the division raided Jewish homes in Pristina , arrested 281 Jews and handed them over to the Germans , who sent them to the Bergen @-@ Belsen concentration camp , where many were killed . Historian Noel Malcolm describes this event as " the most shameful episode in Kosovo 's wartime history . " The division was later involved in a massacre of Albanian partisans . It was generally better known for murdering , raping , and looting , mainly in ethnic Serb areas , and for arresting Jews , than for participating in combat operations on behalf of the German war effort . In addition to indiscriminately killing Serbs and Montenegrins , the division was responsible for the expulsion of up to 10 @,@ 000 Slavic families from Kosovo as new Albanian settlers arrived from the poor areas of northern Albania . The arrival of these Albanians was encouraged by Italian authorities , and it is estimated that as many as 72 @,@ 000 Albanians were settled or re @-@ settled in Kosovo during the war . Between 28 May and 5 July 1944 , the division apprehended a total of 510 Jews , communists and other anti @-@ fascists and turned them over to the Germans . It also carried out retaliatory hangings of suspected saboteurs . 
 In June 1944 , Skanderbeg engaged in large @-@ scale field manoeuvres in eastern Montenegro . In Andrijevica , the division summarily executed more than 400 Orthodox Christian civilians . It participated in operations <unk> ( Finally ) and <unk> ( Hawkeye ) in June and July , as well as Draufgänger ( Daredevil ) , during which it was the main force used by the Germans . These operations were focused on the destruction of strong Partisan forces in the Đakovica , Peć and Mokra Gora areas . According to Neubacher , the division was carelessly committed to fighting in the early stages of its training and performed poorly . Between 18 and 27 August , the division fought the Partisans in and around Debar but failed to capture the city . By the end of August 1944 , the Germans had decided that the division was only of use for basic guarding duties . Some members were charged with guarding chromium mines near Kosovo before the area was overrun by the Partisans . In the ensuing clashes , one of the division 's regiments lost more than 1 @,@ 000 men and many Albanians deserted , some after Serb Partisan attacks on areas northeast of <unk> . Army Group E claimed the division 's performance showed that it had " absolutely no military value . " 
 On 1 September 1944 , troops of the division in Tetovo and <unk> mutinied , killing their German officers and NCOs . By this time , the division numbered fewer than 7 @,@ 000 men , which was less than one @-@ third of its intended strength . Within two months of its initial deployment , 3 @,@ 500 men had deserted . Himmler brought in 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 Kriegsmarine ( German navy ) personnel from Greece to make up the numbers , but this had little effect on the division 's fighting ability . By the beginning of October 1944 , the division 's strength had fallen to about 4 @,@ 900 men , fewer than 1 @,@ 500 of whom were fit for combat . Schmidhuber held his men in contempt , and he , his superiors , and Fitzthum explained their failure to create an effective security force by denigrating the Albanian culture and military reputation . Later , less @-@ involved members of the Wehrmacht stated that the principal issue regarding the unit 's reliability may have been that the Germans did not work closely with the Albanians at the local level . In mid @-@ October , it was engaged in heavy fighting around Đakovica . By this time , desertions had significantly affected the division 's strength and its 86 officers and 467 NCOs were left with a force of only 899 men , about half of whom were Albanian . On 24 October , Generaloberst Alexander Löhr , the commander of Army Group E , ordered that all Albanian members of the division be disarmed and released . 
 On 1 November 1944 , the division was disbanded . At the same time , Albanians in Kosovo took up arms against the Partisans when they learned that the region would not be unified with Albania after the war , despite earlier Partisan promises . Atrocities occurred when 30 @,@ 000 Partisans were sent to Kosovo to quell Albanian resistance in the region . Between 3 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 Kosovo Albanians were killed in the ensuing violence . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The remaining German troops and former naval personnel were reorganized as the regimental Kampfgruppe Skanderbeg under the command of SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Alfred Graaf . The unit withdrew from the Kosovo region in mid @-@ November along with the rest of the German troops in the area . Many Serbs and Montenegrins then took revenge against the region 's ethnic Albanians , especially collaborators and those who had been members of the division . When Kampfgruppe Skanderbeg reached Ljubovija on the Drina river , it was placed under the command of the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen , which was securing the river crossings in that area . The Kampfgruppe held the towns of Zvornik and Drinjača during the first half of December 1944 as part of the Ljubovija bridgehead . It withdrew across the Drina and fought its way north , towards Brčko on the Sava river , where it relieved the Wehrmacht forces holding the town . In late December , the Kampfgruppe 's assault gun battery was committed to the <unk> Front at Vinkovci . The remainder of the Kampfgruppe was deployed to Bijeljina . 
 In January 1945 , the handful of naval personnel that survived were transferred to the 32nd SS Volunteer Grenadier Division 30 <unk> , and the remnants of the former division were reorganized as II Battalion of the 14th SS Volunteer Mountain Infantry Regiment of the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen . On 21 January 1945 , Schmidhuber was promoted to SS @-@ Brigadeführer und Generalmajor der Waffen @-@ SS ( brigadier ) and placed in command of the 7th SS Volunteer Mountain Division Prinz Eugen . After the war , he was found guilty of war crimes and hanged . In February 1945 , the battalion was disbanded altogether and its remaining manpower was assigned to the German police regiment near Zagreb . 
 The division itself was considered to have been a military failure ; not one of its members was ever awarded an Iron Cross while serving in it . Overall , it was better known for committing atrocities than for contributing to the German war effort . Its role in deporting Jews from Kosovo has been questioned by Albanian historian Shaban <unk> , who claims that the division did not participate in any deportations on behalf of the Germans . During the 1998 – 99 Kosovo War , American journalist Chris Hedges alleged that some Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) leaders were directly descended from members of the division and ideologically influenced by it . Malcolm has challenged this claim . 
 = = Insignia = = 
 The division 's identification symbol was the Albanian double @-@ headed eagle . Despite its short existence , a collar patch depicting a goat @-@ crested helmet was manufactured for the division but there is no evidence that it was ever used . Photographs exist of a machined @-@ woven cuff band with the title Skanderbeg , but this was awarded to the 14th SS Volunteer Gebirgsjäger Regiment of the 7th SS Division in autumn 1944 , and not to this division . Members of the cadre staff were photographed wearing an Albanian arm shield depicting a black Albanian double @-@ headed eagle on a red field . Many of the division 's Muslim members wore traditional grey @-@ coloured skull caps instead of the standard SS field cap . Others wore the traditional Albanian highlander hat , the <unk> . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The principal units of the division were : 
 50th Waffen Gebirgsjäger ( Mountain Infantry ) Regiment of the SS ( 1st Albanian ) ( I , II , III battalions ) 
 51st Waffen Gebirgsjäger Regiment of the SS ( 2nd Albanian ) ( I , II , III battalions ) 
 21st SS Reconnaissance Battalion ( four companies ) 
 21st SS Freiwilligen ( Volunteer ) Panzerjäger ( Anti @-@ tank ) Battalion ( three companies ) 
 21st SS Gebirgs ( Mountain ) Artillery Regiment ( four battalions ) 
 21st SS Freiwilligen Pioneer Battalion ( three companies ) 
 21st SS <unk> ( Replacement ) Battalion 
 21st SS Freiwilligen Signals Battalion ( three companies ) 
 21st SS Mountain Supply Troop 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Black Sabbath ( film ) = 
 Black Sabbath ( Italian : I tre <unk> della paura , lit . ' The Three Faces of Fear ' ) is a 1963 Italian @-@ French horror film directed by Mario Bava . The film is centered on three separate tales that have an introduction and conclusion from Boris Karloff . The film stars an international cast in three short stories . The first , titled " The Telephone " , involves Suzy ( Michèle Mercier ) who continually receives threatening telephone calls from an unseen stalker . The second is " The Wurdulak " , where a man named Gorca ( Karloff ) returns to his family after claiming to have slain a Wurdulak , an undead creature who attacks those that it had once loved . The third story , " The Drop of Water " , features Jacqueline Pierreux as Helen Corey who steals a ring from a corpse that is being prepared for burial and finds herself haunted by the ring 's original owner after arriving home . 
 Black Sabbath follows the 1960s trend of Italian film productions , being a low budget horror anthology film with an international cast . The film is credited to various authors but is predominantly based on several uncredited sources . Several changes were made to the script even after the film had gone into production . American International Pictures suggested changes to Mario Bava during filming to make the film acceptable for the American target audience . The company created their own English language dub of the film that removed scenes involving violence and re @-@ edited certain scenes . This version greatly changed the plot of " The Telephone " , giving it a supernatural story element and removing any reference to lesbianism or prostitution . 
 A follow @-@ up to Black Sabbath titled Scarlet Friday was originally going to be directed by Bava and star Boris Karloff . This project was never developed . Plans for a remake were announced in 2004 with Jonathan Hensleigh attached to write the script . Black Sabbath has received favorable reviews from critics . In the early 2010s , Time Out magazine conducted a poll with several authors , directors , actors , and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films . Black Sabbath placed at number 73 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Note : This plot summary refers to the original Italian version of the film 
 = = = " The Telephone " = = = 
 Rosy ( Michèle Mercier ) , a French call @-@ girl , returns to her basement apartment at night . She receives a series of strange phone calls . The caller eventually identifies himself as Frank , her former pimp who has recently escaped from prison . Rosy is terrified ; it was her testimony that sent Frank to prison . Rosy phones Mary ( Lydia Alfonsi ) for solace . The women have been estranged , but Rosy is certain that only Mary can help her . Mary agrees to come over that night . Seconds later , Frank calls again , promising that no matter what Rosy does he will have his revenge . Rosy doesn 't realize that Mary is impersonating Frank on the telephone . Mary arrives at Rosy 's apartment and attempts to calm Rosy 's nerves . Mary provides Rosy with a large knife for protection before she goes to sleep . 
 As Rosy sleeps , Mary writes a confession explaining that she made the calls to force a reunion , knowing that Rosy would call on her for help . While she is writing , an intruder enters the apartment . The intruder is Frank , who strangles Mary . The sound of their struggle awakens Rosy , and Frank realizes he murdered the wrong woman . Frank approaches Rosy 's bed , but she seizes her knife and stabs Frank . Rosy drops the knife and breaks down in hysteria . 
 = = = " The Wurdalak " = = = 
 In 19th Century Russia , Vladimir Durfe ( Mark Damon ) is a young nobleman who finds a beheaded corpse with a knife plunged into its heart . He takes the blade , and finds shelter in a small cottage . Durfe is approached by Giorgio ( <unk> Onorato ) who explains that the knife belongs to his father , who has not been seen for five days . Giorgio offers a room to Durfe and introduces him to the rest of the family : his wife ( Rika <unk> ) , their young son Ivan , Giorgio 's younger brother Pietro ( Massimo Righi ) , and sister Sdenka ( Susy Andersen ) . They all await the return of Gorca , who has gone to fight the <unk> , a living cadaver who feeds on human blood , especially of close friends and family members . At midnight , Gorca ( Boris Karloff ) returns to the cottage with a sour demeanor and unkempt appearance . After the family goes to sleep , Ivan and Pietro are attacked by Gorca who flees the cottage with Ivan . Giorgio chases after Gorca but only returns with Ivan 's corpse . Giorgio plans to stake and behead Ivan to prevent him from reviving as a Wurdalak , but is prevented from doing so by his wife . The two agree to give their son a burial . 
 That same night , their child appears outside and begs to be invited in . Giorgio is stabbed by his wife while she attempts to let in her son . On opening the door , she is greeted by Gorca who bites her . Vladimir and Sdenka flee from their home and hide in the ruins of a cathedral . As Vladimir sleeps , Sdenka walks outside and finds Gorca and his family surrounding her . Vladimir awakens and searches for Sdenka , finding her lying motionless in her bed at home . Sdenka awakens and upon receiving Vladimir 's embrace , she bites into his neck . 
 = = = " The Drop of Water " = = = 
 In London , England , Nurse Helen Chester ( Jacqueline Pierreux ) is called to a large house to prepare the corpse of an elderly medium for her burial . As she dresses the body , she notices a sapphire ring on its finger . Chester steals it , accidentally tipping over a glass of water which drips on the floor ; she is then assailed by a fly . Chester takes her ring home to her flat and witnesses strange events . The fly returns and continues to pester her , and the lights in her apartment go out as the sound of the dripping water is heard from various locations . Chester finds the woman 's corpse lying in her bed . It rises and floats toward her . Chester begs for forgiveness , but ultimately strangles herself . The next morning , the concierge ( Harriet White Medin ) discovers Chester 's body and calls the police . The pathologist arrives to examine the body and only finds a small bruise on her left finger where her ring once was . As the doctor announces this observation , the concierge appears distressed and hears the dripping of water . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1958 , American International Pictures founders James H. Nicholson and Samuel Z. Arkoff hired European talent agent Flavio <unk> to look for Italian commercial films for them after the large success of the Italian feature Hercules ( 1958 ) . In February 1963 , American International Pictures made a deal with the Italian film production company Galatea that they would contribute to a minimum of nine co @-@ productions in the next eight years . Black Sabbath follows many production trends of Italian films of the era . These co @-@ productions were influenced by the lack of large film stars in Italy . To avoid high costs or larger stars , producers created anthology films involving three or four short narratives whose combined running time was that of a regular feature film , as in Yesterday , Today and Tomorrow ( 1963 ) . A second trend was to match an up @-@ and @-@ coming actor or a much older actor with a European ingenue actress , as in Spy in Your Eye which paired Pier Angeli and Dana Andrews . The third trend was the move towards making Westerns and horror films which were less expensive to produce than the previous sword and sandal films . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 American International Pictures secured the rights to have American actors Mark Damon and Boris Karloff while the French co @-@ production company Societé <unk> Lyre secured Michele Mercier and Jacqueline Pierreux ( the latter is credited under the pseudonym Jacqueline <unk> ) . Mercier had previously worked with director Mario Bava on his film The Wonders of Aladdin ( 1961 ) . Italian production company Galatea had Susy Andersen cast while retaining Mario Bava who had directed their production of Black Sunday . 
 Bava is credited as writing the film 's script along with Alberto Bevilacqua and Marcello <unk> . The film 's opening credits credit the stories as " The Drop of Water " by Ivan Chekov , " The Telephone " by F.G. Snyder and " Sem 'ya <unk> " by Aleksei Tolstoy . Bava later took credit for the original story of " The Drop of Water " , but Italian critic Antonio <unk> traced its origins to a story titled " Dalle tre alle tre e mezzo " ( " Between Three and Three @-@ thirty " ) that was included in a 1960 anthology book titled <unk> di <unk> ( Ghost Stories ) . British historian Julian Granger identified the author of the story as Franco <unk> . " The Wurdulak " is loosely based on The Family of the <unk> by Aleksey Konstantinovich Tolstoy . The story of " The Wurdulak " was found in the 1960 anthology I <unk> tra <unk> . Other parts of the story were inspired by the Guy de Maupassant story " Fear " and Bram Stoker 's Dracula . 
 Bevilacqua stated that Bava wanted to create a stories about how terror can strike mankind in different time periods and asked his screenwriters to get him stories from books . After Bevilacqua finished his draft the screenplay , Marcello <unk> was brought in to work on it . Bevilacqua claimed that he was recalled for later rewrites , but that most of his added material was cut from the final film . American International Pictures approved of Bava 's thematic idea but encouraged him to look for public domain titles . 
 It was decided early in production that Boris Karloff would not only star in one of the tales , but also act as the film 's host ; he had recently hosted his own anthology television series , Thriller . Karloff was under contract with American International Pictures , and had just completed filming The Raven for them . The film 's cinematographer is credited as Ubaldo <unk> , but Bava shot several scenes himself without credit . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Black Sabbath was made at the end of production of The Girl Who Knew Too Much during an eight @-@ week period between February and March 1963 . American International Production 's involvement with the film allowed Salvatore Billitteri of the <unk> Sound Corporation to be on set to supervise the film for dubbing on its English @-@ language release . As the film was going to be dubbed in different languages , actors could no longer phonetically pronounce their dialogue as it had to be done rhythmically to match various languages . Billitteri was also on set to give suggestions to Bava on how to make his film more appropriate for American audiences which led to decreasing the amount of violence in the film . The film was first conceived under the title The Fear . 
 Bava wanted to include a contemporary story which led to the development of " The Telephone " . " The Telephone " has been described as " one of Bava 's first attempts at a giallo film The giallo film is a style of Italian film that involves a murder mystery that emphasized stylish visuals , flamboyant music and violence . " The Telephone " was Bava first color film that attempted to emulate the visual style of the covers that appeared on giallo digests . Some of the set pieces for " The Telephone " were taken from the black @-@ and @-@ white giallo film The Girl Who Knew Too Much ( 1962 ) . 
 " The Wurdulak " was the last of the short films to be shot , with shooting commencing on either February 25 or 27 . While filming , Karloff contracted pneumonia which led to him having to rely on oxygen tanks after production ended . Bava was initially going to end the film on a shot of Jacqueline Pierreux 's dead character . On the last day of filming , Billitteri suggested to not end the film on such a bleak image and told Bava to change it . Bava changed the ending to Boris Karloff 's character of Gorka on horseback who cautions the audience to watch out for vampires . The camera than pans back revealing he is on a stuffed horse revealing the studio set and simulated effects . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 By the 1960s , Italian horror films such as Black Sabbath were more violent , sexualized and downbeat than the horror films created in America . American International Pictures focused on a youth @-@ oriented audience whereas horror in Europe was intended for adults . The lead to the American edit removing plot elements of prostitution and lesbianism and making the most altered of Bava 's films on its English language version . American International Pictures made changes to all three stories and intro segments in the English @-@ language version of the film . The company re @-@ arranged the order of the stories to start with " The Drop of Water " , followed by " The Telephone " and then " The Wurdalak " . Changes were then made the plots with the most extensively edited being " The Telephone " . " The Telephone " removes any suggestion of a lesbian relationship between Rosy and Mary and references to prostitution . The character of Frank is also no longer a pimp but a ghost who leaves behind enchanted notes that magically write themselves as soon as the envelope they are contained in is opened . A new character is introduced named " The Colonel " who is Suzy 's neighbor in the film . " The Wurdalak " features alternative cuts of certain scenes and has violence trimmed from the Italian version . " The Drop of Water " features the least amount of changes from the Italian version . American International Pictures reshot the introduction by Boris Karloff in Los Angeles . It is unknown who directed these scenes . 
 American International Pictures completely changed the Roberto <unk> 's soundtrack from the original film with a soundtrack from Les Baxter . Kim Newman described Baxter 's score as " inappropriate " with " each shock is accompanied by overdone ' scary music ' " . Both the Italian and English language films have a different look . Bava supervised the Italian language version at Technicolor Roma under his own supervision while American International Pictures shipped their version to Pathé Color for processing . Mario Bava biographer Tim Lucas described the English language print as looking " warmer , but less nuanced , with flatter tonalities " and that it " doesn 't look bad " but that the Italian version " looks more vibrant , more flamboyantly nightmarish " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film opened in Italy in September 17 , 1963 under the title I tre <unk> della paura which translates to The Three Faces of Fear . Black Sabbath grossed ₤ 103 @.@ 5 million Italian lira on its initial theatrical release in Italy . American International Pictures released the English version of Black Sabbath in May 6 , 1964 as a double bill with Bava 's The Girl Who Knew Too Much then titled The Evil Eye . The English title of Black Sabbath was chosen to connect it with Bava 's previous film Black Sunday . The film opened in Paris in November 1965 under the title Les trois visages de la <unk> . 
 In 2004 , Variety announced that Valhalla Motion Pictures and Kismet Entertainment Group were collaborating to produce a remake Black Sabbath . Jonathan Hensleigh was attached to contribute to the script development of the film . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 Image Entertainment released the film in both the English and Italian versions on DVD on August 1 , 2000 . Kino released the film on Blu @-@ ray and DVD on July 16 , 2013 . Kino 's edition of the film was mastered in high definition from the 35mm negative with the Italian language dub and original soundtrack . Arrow Films released Black Sabbath on DVD and Blu @-@ ray in 2013 . Arrow 's transfer of the Italian version was from an original 35mm <unk> print transferred in Italy that had additional grading and restoration done in London . Arrow 's version of the American version of Black Sabbath was made from an 35mm interpositive in California . Arrow noted the high definition master they received from Italy was very difficult to restore as the master had issues with the image , sound and color quality and had the stories in the wrong order . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a contemporary review of the American International Picture 's edit , The Globe and Mail stated that " The Drop of Water " and " The Telephone " were " a good deal more sophisticated than usual horror fare " while " The Wurdulak " " bears no trace of [ Bava 's ] manner of directing " and that the acting was " rudimentary " . The Boston Globe gave the film a negative review , referring to the Black Sabbath as " three short films botched together " . The Monthly Film Bulletin stated that " the <unk> thing about the picture is its decor ( especially the heavy , dusty interiors of [ The Drop of Water ] " while noting the " acting is very <unk> and made worse by dubbing " . The review stated that Bava could " do better than this with less obvious material " and that he seemed " determined to spell everything out with a sudden zoom shots and shock cuts . " 
 Reviewing the English @-@ language version of the film , Time Out praised the film stating that " pictorially it 's amazing , and even the script and dubbing are way above average . " Time Out compared the film to anthology horror films made by the British production company Amicus noting that " If only Amicus ... had taken heed they might have got some ideas as to what can be done with the format . " Entertainment Weekly awarded the film an A- rating referring to it as " excellent " and that the stories were " composed of three tales of expertly building suspense " Kim Newman wrote in a retrospective review of the English dub , that " The Drop of Water " is the best of the three stories , and was described as " Bava 's most simply frightening work . " " The Telephone " was dismissed as being " less satisfying " , specifying that it potentially American International Pictures attempt at re @-@ writing the story that caused the stories problems . Newman declared that " The Wurdalak " was a " little masterpiece " praising Karloff 's performance and that the themes of the story looked <unk> the themes in Night of the Living Dead and It 's Alive . 
 In contemporary reviews of the Italian @-@ language version , The Dissolve gave the film three and a half stars out of five , stating " There are small twists in all three stories , but for the most part , the segments suggest where they ’ re headed early " and that the dialogue in the film is " sparse , and doesn 't shy away from any exploitable elements , from scantily clad women to bloody wounds and warped @-@ faced ghouls . But even more terrifying is the movie ’ s atmosphere of doom [ ... ] Black Sabbath is fraught with fatalism . " Total Film awarded the film four stars out of five , referring to it as a " wonderful horror anthology " . Online film database AllMovie praised " The Wurdulak " stating that Karloff 's " ghostly visage provides several unforgettable scares " and that " The Drop of Water " is short but " remains scary and suspenseful throughout " AllMovie described " The Telephone " as " only an average tale that follows through to a predictable twist " In the early 2010s , Time Out conducted a poll with several authors , directors , actors and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films . Black Sabbath placed at number 73 on their top list . 
 = = Influence and aftermath = = 
 Boris Karloff enjoyed working with Bava on Black Sabbath and he praised his work to both Christopher Lee and Vincent Price who would later go on to work with Bava in The Whip and the Body and Dr. <unk> and the Girl Bombs respectively . Plans were initially going to be made to involve Bava and Karloff working together on a film titled Scarlet Friday based on " The Dunwich Horror " . The project was later taken away from Bava and was released as The Dunwich Horror directed by Daniel Haller without Karloff involved . 
 The English rock band Black Sabbath appropriate their name from the film . Originally known as Earth , the group wanted to change their name as another group had the same name . The group saw a local cinema playing Black Sabbath and marveled that people paid money to be frightened . 
 Directors Roger Avary and Quentin Tarantino were influenced by Black Sabbath 's story structure for their original script for Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) . The film was originally going to be three short films with each one being directed by Avary , Tarantino and another unknown director . Tarantino originally described this idea by stating that " what Mario Bava did with the horror film in Black Sabbath , I was gonna do with the crime film . " 
 = = Biography = = 
 Hughes , Howard ( 2011 ) . Cinema Italiano - The Complete Guide From Classics To Cult . London - New York : <unk> ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 608 @-@ 0 . 
 = JMP ( statistical software ) = 
 JMP ( pronounced " jump " ) is a computer program for statistics developed by the JMP business unit of SAS Institute . It was launched in 1989 to take advantage of the graphical user interface introduced by the Macintosh . It has since been improved and made available for the Windows operating system . JMP is used in applications such as Six Sigma , quality control and engineering , design of experiments and scientific research . 
 The software consists of five products : JMP , JMP Pro , JMP Clinical , JMP Genomics and the JMP Graph Builder App for the iPad . A scripting language is also available . The software is focused on exploratory analytics , whereby users investigate and explore data , rather than testing a hypothesis . 
 = = History = = 
 JMP was developed in the 1980s by John Sall and a team of developers to make use of the graphical user interface introduced by the 1984 Apple Macintosh . It originally stood for " John 's Macintosh Project " or “ John ’ s Macintosh Product ” and was first released in October 1989 . It was used mostly by scientists and engineers for design of experiments ( DOE ) , quality and productivity support ( Six Sigma ) , and reliability modeling . Semiconductor manufacturers were also among JMP ’ s early adopters . 
 Interactive graphics and other features were added in 1991 with version 2 @.@ 0 . Version 2 was twice the size as the original , though it was still delivered on a floppy disk . It required 2 MB of memory and came with 700 pages of documentation . Support for Microsoft Windows was added in 1994 . JMP was re @-@ written with version 3 in 1999 . Version 4 , released in 2002 , could import data from a wider variety of data sources and added support for surface plots . Version 4 also added time series forecasting and new smoothing models , such as the seasonal smoothing method , called Winter 's Method , and <unk> ( <unk> Integrated Moving Average ) . It was also the first version to support JSL , JMP Scripting Language . 
 In 2005 , data mining tools like a decision tree and neural net were added with version 5 as well as Linux support , which was later withdrawn in JMP 9 . Later in 2005 , JMP 6 was introduced . JMP began integrating with SAS in version 7 @.@ 0 in 2007 and has strengthened this integration ever since . Users can write SAS code in JMP , connect to SAS servers , and retrieve and use data from SAS . Support for bubble plots was added in version 7 . JMP 7 also improved data visualization and diagnostics . 
 JMP 8 was released in 2009 with new drag @-@ and @-@ drop features and a 64 @-@ bit version to take advantage of advances in the Mac operating system . It also added a new user interface for building graphs , tools for choice experiments and support for Life Distributions . According to Scientific Computing , the software had improvements in " graphics , QA , ease @-@ of @-@ use , SAS integration and data management areas . " JMP 9 in 2010 added a new interface for using the R programming language from JMP and an add @-@ in for Excel . The main screen was rebuilt and enhancements were made to simulations , graphics and a new Degradation platform . In March 2012 , version 10 made improvements in data mining , predictive analytics , and automated model building . 
 = = Software = = 
 JMP consists of JMP , JMP Pro , JMP Clinical and JMP Genomics , as well as the Graph Builder iPad App . JMP Clinical and JMP Genomics combine JMP with SAS software . 
 JMP software is partly focused on exploratory data analysis and visualization . It is designed for users to investigate data to learn something unexpected , as opposed to confirming a hypothesis . JMP links statistical data to graphics representing them , so users can drill down or up to explore the data and various visual representations of it . Its primary applications are for designed experiments and analyzing statistical data from industrial processes . 
 JMP is a desktop application with a wizard @-@ based user interface , while SAS can be installed on servers . It runs in @-@ memory , instead of on disk storage . According to a review in Pharmaceutical Statistics , JMP is often used as a graphical front @-@ end for a SAS system , which performs the statistical analysis and tabulations . JMP Genomics , used for analyzing and visualizing genomics data , requires a SAS component to operate and can access SAS / Genetics and SAS / STAT procedures or invoke SAS macros . JMP Clinical , used for analyzing clinical trial data , can package SAS code within the JSL scripting language and convert SAS code to JMP . 
 JMP is also the name of the SAS Institute business unit that develops JMP . As of 2011 it had 180 employees and 250 @,@ 000 users . 
 = = JMP Scripting Language ( JSL ) = = 
 The JMP Scripting Language ( JSL ) is an interpreted language for recreating analytic results and for automating or extending the functionality of JMP software . JSL was first introduced in JMP version 4 in 2000 . JSL has a LISP @-@ like syntax , structured as a series of expressions . All programming elements , including if @-@ then <unk> and loops , are implemented as JSL functions . Data tables , display elements and analyses are represented by objects in JSL that are manipulated with named messages . Users may write JSL scripts to perform analyses and visualizations not available in the point @-@ and @-@ click interface or to automate a series of commands , such as weekly reports . SAS , R , and Matlab code can also be executed using JSL . 
 = = Notable applications = = 
 In 2007 , a wildlife monitoring organization , <unk> , started using JMP with the Footprint Identification Technology ( FIT ) system to identify individual endangered animals by their footprints . In 2009 , the Chicago Botanic Garden used JMP to analyze DNA data from tropical breadfruit . Researchers determined that the seedless , starchy fruit was created by the deliberate hybridization of two fruits , the <unk> and the <unk> . The <unk> Laboratory at Stanford has integrated JMP with the Fluorescence Activated Cell <unk> ( FACS ) . The FACS system is used to study HIV , cancer , stem @-@ cells and oceanography . 
 = The Boat Race 1923 = 
 The 75th Boat Race took place on 24 March 1923 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge 's crew was marginally heavier than Oxford 's , the latter included an Olympic silver medallist . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race . In this year 's race , umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Oxford won by three @-@ quarters of a length ( the narrowest margin of victory since 1913 ) in a time of 20 minutes 54 seconds , securing their first win in five years . The victory took the overall record in the event to 40 – 34 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1922 race by one length , while Oxford led overall with 39 victories to Cambridge 's 34 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford were coached by G. C. Bourne who had rowed for the university in the 1882 and 1883 races , Harcourt Gilbey Gold ( Dark Blue president for the 1900 race and four @-@ time Blue ) and E. D. Horsfall ( who had rowed in the three races prior to the First World War ) . Cambridge 's coaches were Harald Peake ( who had participated in the Peace Regattas of 1919 ) , G. L. Thomson and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . For the fifteenth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 According to author and former Oxford rower G. C. Drinkwater , the Oxford trial eights were " of a better average than those of the preceding years " and after they arrived at Putney , the Dark Blue crew " improved rapidly up to the day of the race " . Conversely he reported that Cambridge suffered " a dearth of good heavy @-@ wrights " and that the crew " were not of very high class " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 8 @.@ 875 lb ( 80 @.@ 0 kg ) , 0 @.@ 375 pounds ( 0 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew included four rowers with Boat Race experience , including P. C. Mallam and Guy Oliver Nickalls who were both participating in their third consecutive event . Nickalls was a silver medallist in the men 's eight at the 1920 Summer Olympics . Cambridge 's crew included three rowers who had represented the university in the previous year 's race : K. N. Craig , B. G. Ivory and Theodore Collet . Two of the participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British : Cambridge 's Kane and Mellen were from the United States . 
 = = Race = = 
 Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Cambridge . Umpire Pitman started the race in calm conditions at 5 : 10 p.m. Apparently disrupted by the wake of a nearby moored steamer , Oxford 's start was poor , allowing Cambridge to lead by a canvas ' length after a minute . Despite this , Oxford had drawn level a minute later , to hold a small lead by the time the crews commenced the long bend . By the Mile Post , the Dark Blues held a quarter @-@ length lead and by Hammersmith Bridge had extended this to three @-@ quarters of a length . <unk> at The Doves pub , Oxford began to draw clear of Cambridge . 
 By Chiswick Eyot , Oxford accelerated away from the Light Blues and were two lengths clear before a spurt from Cambridge ahead of Barnes Bridge reduced the lead to a length and a quarter by the time the crews passed below the bridge . With the bend in the river in their favour , and pushing hard , Cambridge slowly gained on the Dark Blues but could not level terms . Oxford passed the finishing post with a lead of three @-@ quarters of a length in a time of 20 minutes 54 seconds . It was their first victory in five years , the narrowest winning margin since the 1913 race and the slowest winning time since the 1920 race . The win took the overall record in the event to 40 – 34 in their favour . 
 = Schoolin ' Life = 
 " Schoolin ' Life " is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé for the deluxe edition of her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It was written by Knowles , Terius Nash , Shea Taylor as well as Carlos McKinney while production was handled by Knowles , The @-@ Dream , and Los Da Mystro . Jordan Young , also known by his stage name DJ Swivel , mixed the song at New York 's Jungle City Studios . Containing elements of disco and dance @-@ pop music , " Schoolin ' Life " is an uptempo R & B and funk song , in which Knowles employs guttural vocals and uses her whistle register . Having a retro nature , the song is built on a 1980s @-@ inspired dance beat , and is instrumentally complete with old school synthesizers , drum kits , electric guitars , and horns . 
 Lyrically , the song features Knowles schooling everyone from their 20s to their 50s . She gets feisty as she reflects on lessons she learned in her own life and affirms that she hasn 't certified as a teacher , a preacher or a doctor , but is willing to perform their various duties regardless . " Schoolin ' Life " was well received by contemporary music critics , who noted its aural resemblance to Prince 's prime work , praised its production , and coined it as one of the catchiest upbeat songs Knowles has ever recorded . It appeared on several critics ' lists of the best songs of 2011 . Following the release of 4 , " Schoolin ' Life " charted at number 155 on the South Korean International Singles Chart . The song was used in the eighth season of the American television reality program and dance competition So You Think You Can Dance . It was part of Knowles ' set list during her residency show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live . 
 = = Production and mixing = = 
 " Schoolin ' Life " was written by Beyoncé Knowles , Terius Nash , Shea Taylor , and Carlos McKinney . Production was handled by Knowles , The @-@ Dream , and Los Da Mystro . It was made available on the deluxe edition of 4 , which was sold exclusively at Target until that edition was released to iTunes Stores on January 2 , 2012 . The deluxe edition consists of an additional two deluxe only tracks , " Dance for You " and " Lay Up Under Me " and three remixes of " Run the World ( Girls ) " ( 2011 ) . Jordan Young aka DJ Swivel mixed the song at New York 's Jungle City Studios . Describing " Schoolin ' Life " as his favorite track on the album , Swivel told Sound on Sound that he was adamant about mixing the song : 
 I spent a lot of time after [ Knowles ] left the studio tightening up the rough . In fact , I 'm sure she let me mix it just because I loved the track so much ! I mixed this in the fantastic penthouse room in Jungle City . This record was , of course , about the vocals — but a lot of it was about the production elements too . Everything had to be audible ; there 's some interesting percussion , and the hook had to feel nice and big . 
 Around 100 tracks were used on " Schoolin ' Life " ; they were roughly split with 50 for the music and 50 for the vocals . As stated by Swivel , musically the aim of the mix was to take a large number of tracks and create a perfect balance . So , he used Waves ’ <unk> on the percussion and some of the snares , and spent some time EQ ’ ing . Swivel explained that there was much parallel processing on the lead vocal . The lead @-@ vocal bus was <unk> to a second bus , and one of them was entirely crushed on a 50 : 1 compression ratio which was totally limited and with a very low threshold . He elaborated , " It creates a very gritty distorted sound in there , really low to taste , and it fills in the lead vocal very nicely . The crushed vocal runs quietly underneath . " 
 After completing the lead vocals , Swivel decided to rework the 1980s sound on the snares as they were originally very tight . He therefore added a gated reverb for the snap sound which was long and drawn ‑ out snap sound . He also subbed in an additional kick underneath to add some real oomph to the bottom . Owing to the work Swivel had accomplished during production , the final mix took only a few hours . He said : " There were a lot of tracks , but I just enjoyed it , to be honest . I knew how I wanted it to sound , and it was pretty much the last song we cut ; a lot of the mixing was nailed in the production as well , which helped . Dream did a great job producing this track . " The bar one guitar track of " Schoolin ' Life " was entirely programmed . Similarly , the live drum section in the hook was actually done with programmed drums . Once the mixing was over , Swivel 's impression were as follows : 
 [ ' Schoolin ' Life ] absolutely had to have its own space . There are percussion elements and a few random sounds in there too , plus the nice guitar track , but certainly the main challenge was for all of these tracks to be well balanced and individually audible . It really is very easy to overlook something like that , which can potentially completely change the sound of a record . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Schoolin ' Life " is an uptempo R & B and funk song , which contains elements of disco and dance @-@ pop . Built on a 1980s @-@ inspired beat , the song 's instrumentation includes old school synthesizers , 1980s @-@ sounding drum kits wailing electric guitars , and horns . Music critics , including Jamie Peck of MTV noted that " Schoolin ' Life " was inspired by the prime work of Prince , particularly because of its lyrical content , the instruments used , and Knowles ' style of singing on it . Lyrically , the song finds Knowles detailing her experiences as she was growing up . In the first verse , she employs guttural vocals to address many life lessons to " 20 @-@ somethings " , " 30 @-@ somethings " , " 40 @-@ somethings " , and " 50 @-@ somethings " . Knowles warns them against some consequences , affirming " time really moves fast " and that growing up fast will leave them wanting more . Knowles also talks about still excelling in a world where parents try to shield everything , " Mom and dad tried to hide the world / Said the world 's just too big for a little girl / Eyes wide open can 't you see / I had my first heels by the age of 13 " . 
 In the chorus , Knowles gives listeners a flashback to her <unk> days and admits that she is certified neither as a teacher , a preacher nor a doctor , but is willing to perform their various duties regardless . She also sings , " I 'm great at writing physical love letters " , and " I 'm a freak , all day all night " . After asking , " Who needs a degree when you 're <unk> ' life ? " , Knowles echoes , " Oh oh oh oh oh oh woah oh oh " . In the second verse , she continues to sing about the ins and outs of life to the " pretty somethings " , " sexy somethings " , " bitter somethings " , and " little somethings " : " Living in a <unk> , see you when you crash babe " , " That body ain ’ t always gonna get you out of everything " , and " Stop living in regret , it ’ s not over yet " . In the bridge , she commands , " Make your life what you decide / Baby , party till the fire marshal shuts this sucker down " . The song ends with Knowles giving one her final lessons , " Don ’ t stop running until it ’ s finished — it ’ s up to you , the rest is unwritten " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jamie Peck of MTV described " Schoolin ' Life " as " [ a ] feisty lesson in fun ... It 's the perfect soundtrack for dancing on a fire escape or ... playing in a busted open fire hydrant ... Whatever , it 's hot ! " . He concluded that Prince would be proud of the song 's musical style and lyrical content . John Mitchell of the same publication found the song to be single @-@ worthy . Choosing " Schoolin ' Life " as one of the three best tracks on 4 , Tyrone S. Reid of Blogcritics commented that the song offers a proper lesson in how " to make the old and new schools boogie together " . He also noted that it is reminiscent of Prince 's work . Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media viewed the song as an irresistible Prince tribute , which he considered to be much more motivational than " I Was Here " . He called " Schoolin ' Life " as one " among the proper album 's finest moments " . Daniel Koren of PMA noted that the song recalls some of The @-@ Dream 's most Prince @-@ esque tracks , " Fast Car " and " Yamaha " . Ian Walker of AbsolutePunk wrote : 
 'I Miss You ' and bonus track ' Schoolin ' Life ' both showcase opposite sides of that magnificent decade 's musical spectrum . The former is a stripped down track carried mostly by a hollow beat and dismal synthesizers , allowing Knowles and her morosely beautiful voice center stage ... The latter picks up the pace , peppered liberally with old @-@ school horns and crashes . Knowles details her experiences growing up , but parallels can be drawn to the maturation she 's going through on this very album . More than any song , ' Schoolin ' Life ' literally oozes confidence , providing an endearing edge to an already catchy track . 
 Becky Bain of Idolator wrote that " Schoolin ' Life " is one of the catchier upbeat songs Knowles has ever recorded and felt that it deserves to be a future single . Casey Hamilton of the Boston website Gather wrote that credit for the song 's " retro @-@ radical nature " goes to producer The @-@ Dream , but it is Knowles herself who " truly delivers the shock value , managing to make a lightly introspective , loosely insightful , and largely entertaining tune " , before adding that it contains the sexiest lyrical content she has ever attempted . Hamilton concluded that Knowles ' vocals effectively match the funky and fun vibe of " Schoolin ' Life " , and concluded that the latter showcases " a side of the singer that is nice to see and even nicer to hear " . Duncan Cooper of The Fader magazine wrote that the song is " lyrically inspired , tough as hell and easily the best thing " on 4 . Danielle Cheesman of MSN Music commented that " ' Schoolin ' Life ' steals the whole entire spotlight " , further noting that it channels the " trademark <unk> " of Prince . He commended how Knowles " unleashes her inner ( and innate ) freak singing " . Cheesman concluded " how this isn 't on the original is beyond me " , before adding that there " maybe one extra single [ on the deluxe edition of 4 ] " . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 The Guardian 's critic Tom Ewing ranked " Schoolin ' Life " at number nine on his list of The 10 Best Tracks of 2011 . Priya Elan of NME placed the song at number five on her list of the 10 Best Pop Songs Of The Year , writing that it is the " most excellent , time @-@ defying look at Beyonce 's life so far " . He added that if viewed from a stylistic perspective , " Schoolin ' Life " may not have fit with 4 mature tone , but as a stand @-@ alone track " it was one of the most fun of the year " . The staff members of the website Popdust ranked " Schoolin ' Life " as the 87th best song of 2011 , commending Knowles for having pastiched it together " from decades @-@ musty synths and rip @-@ roar over it until it sounds completely current with a wink and a smirk . " On The Village Voice 's 2011 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Schoolin ' Life " was ranked at number 343 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In May 2012 , Knowles performed " Schoolin Life " during her revue show Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . The performance of the song was placed on the album Live in Atlantic City ( 2013 ) chronicling the concerts . It was previewed on Knowles ' official YouTube page on November 25 , 2013 . A writer of Vibe magazine felt that the laser light show from the performance " brighten [ ed ] up Atlantic City " . E ! News ' Natalie Finn praised Knowles for " tearing it up " onstage during the performance of the song with her backup dancers adding that her fans " are in for quite the education " . 
 = = Usage in media = = 
 On August 3 , 2011 , contestants Ricky Jaime and Sasha Mallory danced to " Schoolin Life " in Top 6 Perform round of the eighth season of the American television reality program and dance competition So You Think You Can Dance . Their dance performance was choreographed by Kumari Suraj . Gwen Orel of The Wall Street Journal further described their performance during a review of that episode of the show : " He 's in a fedora , and she 's got a cute short <unk> sheer skirt , with thigh high stockings and a garter belt , and a sheer purple blouse . I don ’ t get what this style really is , it seems to have a lot of arm movements , and some crouching jumps . He doesn ’ t look quite sharp enough next to her . His split leap is phenomenal . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 For the week ending July 30 , 2011 , " Schoolin ' Life " debuted at number 155 on the South Korean International Singles Chart , selling 4 @,@ 006 digital downloads . 
 = Max Geldray = 
 Max van Gelder ( 12 February 1916 – 2 October 2004 ) , professionally known as Max Geldray , was a jazz harmonica player . Best known for providing the musical interludes for The Goon Show , he was also credited as being the first harmonica player to embrace the jazz style . 
 Geldray was born in the Netherlands and played jazz in England , Belgium , France and his home country , before settling in Britain at the outbreak of the Second World War ; he was wounded during the Invasion of Normandy . He appeared in nearly every episode of The Goon Show , providing one of the musical interludes and the closing music for each programme . After The Goon Show series finished in 1960 , he settled in the US , where he worked as an entertainer in the Reno casinos alongside the likes of Sarah Vaughan and Billy Daniels . Moving to Palm Springs , he eventually became a part @-@ time counsellor at the Betty Ford Center . He was married twice and has one son . Geldray died in 2004 at the age of 88 . 
 = = Early life ( 1916 – 46 ) = = 
 Geldray was born Max Leon van Gelder , on 12 February 1916 in Amsterdam , Netherlands to Jewish parents . His father , Leon van Gelder , was a commercial traveller , and his mother was Margarite , née <unk> . By 1922 Leon was the European Manager for Maja perfume and the family moved out of Amsterdam to <unk> . Both parents could play the piano — Leon was self @-@ taught and played by ear , while Margarite was classically trained — and it was Leon who started to teach Geldray how to play . He developed love of jazz music after hearing Louis Armstrong on the radio in 1928 ; Geldray later wrote " how could anyone not love its energy , its vitality and the freedom of its form ? And Louis Armstrong among all the players , became something special to me " . 
 In February 1930 Geldray heard a mouth organ player on BBC Radio and mentioned the performance to a friend , Hans Mossel , owner of a music shop in Amsterdam ; Mossel had ordered a chromatic harmonica the previous week and gave it to Geldray , who practised assiduously . By 1934 Geldray had made some appearances on Dutch radio and formed a band with eight others ; an agent named Franklin billed the group as " Mac [ sic ] Geldray and his Mouth Accordion Band " , changing the surname of the principal to the name he retained for the rest of his life . With his performances , Geldray became the first person to play the harmonica in the jazz style . A change in the format of the band to a quartet and the introduction of a new manager led to a six @-@ week tour of English theatres in 1937 , accompanying the comedian Tom Moss ; the band changed its name to " The Hollander Boys " . During the tour Moss introduced Geldray to Jack Hylton , who invited him to play in his orchestra for the evening . 
 On his return to the Netherlands , the harmonica band broke up and Geldray travelled alone to Brussels , where he found work playing with the dance orchestra at the club Le Boeuf sur le Toit , where he remained for a year . He then worked with a dance band in The Hague , before joining the house band at the Ostend Casino , the Johnny Fresno Band . He would meet a number of influential acts who were booked to play the casino on occasion , including saxophonist Coleman Hawkins , the English bandleader Ambrose and French bandleader Ray Ventura . Ventura soon offered Geldray a job and in 1937 Geldray moved to Paris . While in Paris , he went to the Hot Club de France and played with jazz guitarist Django Reinhardt , a musician about whom Geldray asserts , " I can honestly say that I have never heard anyone better " . The two became close friends and played together often . With the invasion of France by German forces in early 1940 , Geldray travelled to England , where he realised he would be safer . On 20 September 1940 he joined the Royal Netherlands Motorized Infantry Brigade , part of the Dutch army exiled in England . During the war he continued to play and appeared on BBC Radio ; in 1942 he was part of the entertainment laid on for Princess Elizabeth 's sixteenth birthday at Windsor Castle . During the course of 1942 Geldray also met Sarah Prentice , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old Scottish variety artiste , whose professional name was Zaza Peters ; the couple married on 18 January 1943 . 
 Geldray took part in the Normandy landings with the <unk> Irene Brigade , but was injured by a bomb blast and spent time in a military hospital . Although he did not incur long @-@ term injuries , he suffered from recurring nightmares in the following years . After the liberation of Amsterdam , Geldray travelled to the city to find his parents who had been resident when the Germans invaded . He found that both parents and his sister <unk> had been killed in a concentration camp by the Nazis . At the end of the war , Geldray returned to Paris and once again found work with Ray Ventura 's orchestra for two years , before returning to London in 1947 . 
 = = BBC years ( 1947 – 61 ) = = 
 Settling in London , Geldray took up British citizenship , and worked on a number of BBC radio programmes , such as Workers ' Playtime , Melody Magazine and Forces ' All @-@ Star Bill . In 1951 he provided the musical interludes for a new BBC series Crazy People , a comedy show that starred Harry Secombe , Peter Sellers , Spike Milligan and Michael Bentine . Crazy People changed its name for subsequent series to The Goon Show and Geldray was a regular performer in the remaining nine series . The show followed a successful format of a vague plot interspersed by two musical performances ; the BBC were using the same structure for a number of radio series , including It 's That Man Again ( ITMA ) . In The Goon Show , the musical segments were taken up by Geldray and The Ray Ellington Quartet , with Geldray also playing " Crazy Rhythm " for the play @-@ out music . On occasions Geldray was given lines to perform , although he felt uncomfortable doing so , and his lack of acting ability became a long @-@ running joke within the programme . Geldray was also the butt of some of the Goons jokes and humour : he was referred to throughout the programmes as " <unk> " , on account of his nose , and his performances were often humorously dismissed by the announcer Wallace Greenslade , with such comments as : " That was Mr Max Geldray playing a harmonica . We thought you ought to know what it was , anyhow . " 
 In the early 1950s Geldray 's marriage ended with divorce , after the relationship had " burned itself out " , and he began a relationship with a dancer , Barbara . In 1956 Geldray appeared in three television comedy shows produced by ITV and starring the Goons : The Idiot Weekly , Price 2d ( broadcast 24 February – 23 April 1956 ) , A Show Called Fred ( broadcast 2 – 30 May 1956 ) and Son of Fred ( broadcast 17 September – 5 November 1956 ) . In 1957 he released an album , Goon with the Wind , which was produced by George Martin and released on the Parlophone label . Later that year , Geldray also appeared in Hancock 's 43 Minutes , the Christmas edition of Hancock 's Half Hour , broadcast on 23 December 1957 . In 1958 the BBC proposed dropping Geldray from The Goon Show in a cost @-@ cutting measure ; Peter Sellers threatened to leave the series , and Geldray remained . 
 The Goon Show finished its ten @-@ series run on 28 January 1960 . In 1961 , with his six @-@ year relationship with Barbara at an end , Geldray worked as an entertainer on four trips on the RMS Queen Elizabeth . On visiting Los Angeles he was impressed by the city and decided to emigrate to the US . 
 = = Moving to the US ( 1961 – 2004 ) = = 
 Geldray worked in the casinos of Reno , appearing with Sarah Vaughan and Billy Daniels ; he did not like the city , so returned to Los Angeles . In 1962 he met a divorcee with three children , Susan <unk> ; the couple married that year , and in 1964 they had a son , Philip . Geldray worked for a period as a sales assistant in a clothes shop before becoming the regional sales supervisor for The Christian Science Monitor . 
 In 1972 Geldray returned to the UK to appear in The Last Goon Show of All , a special programme recorded on 30 April and broadcast on 30 April 1972 to mark the 50th anniversary of the BBC . When the BBC refused to pay to fly Geldray from the US , two of the show 's cast — Spike Milligan and Peter Sellers — contributed to his expenses . After the performance , at the Camden Theatre , Princess Margaret came backstage and asked if she could be introduced to Geldray as she was an admirer of his playing . 
 In 1973 Geldray and his family moved to Palm Springs to look after his ailing stepfather ; he also played harmonica in the local Trinidad Bar . A local doctor approached him after one set and asked if Geldray would put on a show at his stroke centre , which led to Geldray undertaking voluntary work teaching stroke victims to play the harmonica . Following the death of Geldray 's youngest step @-@ son , Timmy , Susan Geldray began drinking to excess , and she underwent treatment at the Betty Ford Center . Geldray subsequently volunteered to help at the clinic and qualified as a counsellor and technician . To raise funds for the clinic he started " Jazz without Booze " , a series of concerts , which included prominent local musicians , including Stan Getz . In 1989 Geldray published his autobiography , Goon With the Wind , using the same title as he had for his 1957 album . 
 Geldray died in Palm Springs of natural causes on 2 October 2004 at the age of 88 . 
 = Diamonds Are Forever ( novel ) = 
 Diamonds Are Forever is the fourth novel by the English author Ian Fleming to feature his fictional British Secret Service agent James Bond . Fleming wrote the story at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica , inspired by a Sunday Times article on diamond smuggling . The book was first published by Jonathan Cape in the United Kingdom on 26 March 1956 . 
 The story centres on Bond 's investigation of a diamond @-@ smuggling ring originating in the mines of Sierra Leone and ends in Las Vegas . Along the way Bond meets and falls in love with one of the members of the smuggling gang , Tiffany Case . Much of Fleming 's background research formed the basis for his non @-@ fiction 1957 book The Diamond Smugglers . Diamonds Are Forever deals with international travel , marriage and the transitory nature of life . 
 As with Fleming 's previous novels , Diamonds Are Forever received broadly positive reviews at the time of publication . The story was serialised in the Daily Express newspaper , first in an abridged , multi @-@ part form and then as a comic strip . In 1971 it was adapted into the seventh Bond film in the series and was the last Eon Productions film to star Sean Connery as Bond . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British Secret Service agent James Bond is sent on an assignment by his superior , M. Acting on information received from Special Branch , M tasks Bond with infiltrating a smuggling ring transporting diamonds from mines in the Crown colony of Sierra Leone to the United States . Bond must infiltrate the smugglers ' pipeline to uncover those responsible . Using the identity of " Peter Franks " , a country house burglar turned diamond smuggler , he meets Tiffany Case , an attractive gang member who has developed an antipathy towards men after being gang @-@ raped as a teenager . 
 Bond discovers that the ring is operated by the Spangled Mob , a ruthless American gang run by the brothers Jack and Seraffimo Spang . He follows the trail from London to New York . To earn his fee for carrying the diamonds he is instructed by a gang member , Shady Tree , to bet on a rigged horse race in nearby Saratoga . There Bond meets Felix Leiter , a former CIA agent working at Pinkertons as a private detective investigating crooked horse racing . Leiter bribes the jockey to ensure the failure of the plot to rig the race , and asks Bond to make the pay @-@ off . When he goes to make the payment , he witnesses two homosexual thugs , Wint and Kidd , attack the jockey . 
 Bond calls Tree to enquire further about the payment of his fee and is told to go to the Tiara Hotel in Las Vegas . The Tiara is owned by Seraffimo Spang and operates as the headquarters of the Spangled Mob . Spang also owns an old Western ghost town , named Spectreville , restored to be his own private holiday retreat . At the hotel Bond finally receives payment through a rigged blackjack game where the dealer is Tiffany . After winning the money he is owed he disobeys his orders from Tree by continuing to gamble in the casino and wins heavily . Spang suspects that Bond may be a ' plant ' and has him captured and tortured . With Tiffany 's help he escapes from Spectreville aboard a railway push @-@ car with Seraffimo Spang in pursuit aboard an old Western train . Bond changes the points and re @-@ routes the train onto a dead @-@ end , and shoots Spang before the resulting crash . Assisted by Leiter , Bond and Tiffany go via California to New York , where they board the RMS Queen Elizabeth to travel to London , a relationship developing between them as they go . Wint and Kidd observe their embarkation and follow them on board . They kidnap Tiffany , planning to kill her and throw her overboard . Bond rescues her and kills both gangsters ; he makes it look like a murder @-@ suicide . 
 Tiffany subsequently informs Bond of the details of the pipeline . The story begins in Africa where a dentist bribes miners to smuggle diamonds in their mouths ; he extracts the gems during routine appointments . From there , the dentist takes the diamonds to a rendezvous with a German helicopter pilot . Eventually the diamonds go to Paris and then on to London . There , after telephone instructions from a contact known as ABC , Tiffany meets a person who explains how the diamonds will be smuggled to New York City . After returning to London — where Tiffany moves into Bond 's flat — Bond flies to Freetown in Sierra Leone , and then to the next diamond rendezvous . With the collapse of the rest of the pipeline , Jack Spang ( who turns out to be ABC ) shuts down his diamond @-@ smuggling pipeline by killing its participants . Spang himself is killed when Bond shoots down his helicopter . 
 = = Background and writing history = = 
 By mid 1954 the author Ian Fleming had published two novels — Casino Royale ( 1953 ) and Live and Let Die ( 1954 ) — and had a third , Moonraker , being edited and prepared for production . That year he read a story in The Sunday Times about diamond smuggling from Sierra Leone . He considered this story as the possible basis for a new novel and , through an old school friend , he engineered a meeting with Sir Percy Sillitoe , the ex @-@ head of MI5 , then working in a security capacity for the diamond @-@ trading company De Beers . The material Fleming gathered was used in both Diamonds Are Forever and The Diamond Smugglers , a non @-@ fiction book published in 1957 . 
 After Fleming 's friend , William Stephenson , sent him a magazine article about the spa town of Saratoga Springs , Fleming flew to the US in August 1954 , where he met his friends Ivar Bryce and Ernest Cuneo ; the three travelled to the town in New York State . There , Fleming and Cuneo visited a mud @-@ bath : en route to an up @-@ market establishment they took the wrong directions and ended up at a run @-@ down outlet , which became the inspiration for the Acme Mud and Sulphur Baths scene in the book . Fleming met the rich socialite , William Woodward , Jr . , who drove a Studillac — a Studebaker with a powerful Cadillac engine . According to Henry Chancellor , " the speed and comfort of it impressed Ian , and he shamelessly appropriated this car " for the book . Woodward was killed by his wife shortly afterwards — she claimed she mistook him for a prowler — and when Diamonds Are Forever was published , it was dedicated to Bryce , Cuneo and " the memory of W. W. Jr . , at Saratoga , 1954 and 55 " . 
 Fleming also travelled to Los Angeles with Cuneo , visiting the Los Angeles Police Intelligence headquarters , where they met Captain James Hamilton , who provided Fleming with information on the Mafia organisation in the US . From Los Angeles Fleming travelled to Las Vegas , where he stayed at the Sands Hotel ; he interviewed the hotel owner , Jack Entratter , where he learnt the background to the security systems and methods of cheating that he used in the novel . 
 Fleming wrote Diamonds Are Forever at his Goldeneye estate in Jamaica in January and February 1955 . He followed his usual practice , which he later outlined in Books and Bookmen magazine , in which he said : " I write for about three hours in the morning ... and I do another hour 's work between six and seven in the evening . I never correct anything and I never go back to see what I have written ... By following my formula , you write 2 @,@ 000 words a day . " On completion Fleming wrote to his friend Hilary Bray : 
 I baked a fresh cake in Jamaica this year which I think has finally exhausted my inventiveness as it contains every single method of escape and every variety of suspenseful action that I had omitted from my previous books — in fact everything except the kitchen sink , and if you can think up a good plot involving kitchen sinks , please send it along speedily . 
 He returned to London with the completed 183 @-@ page typescript in March that year ; he had earlier settled on a title , which he based on an advertisement slogan " A Diamond is Forever " in the American edition of Vogue . 
 Although Fleming provides no dates within his novels , John Griswold and Henry Chancellor — both of whom have written books on behalf of Ian Fleming Publications — have identified different timelines based on events and situations within the novel series as a whole . Chancellor put the events of Diamonds Are Forever in 1954 ; Griswold is more precise , and considers the story to have taken place in July and August 1953 . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Plot inspirations = = = 
 Fleming had previously travelled to the US on the RMS Queen Elizabeth ; the experience provided background information for the final four chapters of the novel . His trip had included a railway journey on the Super Chief , during which he and Cuneo had visited the cab to meet the driver and engineer , and an excursion on the 20th Century Limited , both of which gave information Fleming used for Spang 's train , the Cannonball . Fleming had a long @-@ standing interest in trains and following his involvement in a near @-@ fatal crash associated them with danger . In addition to Diamonds Are Forever , he used them in Live and Let Die , From Russia , with Love and The Man with the Golden Gun . 
 As with several others of his works , Fleming appropriated the names of people he knew for the story 's characters . The name of one of Fleming 's two travelling companions from the US , Ernest Cuneo , was used as Ernie <unk> , Bond 's taxi @-@ driving ally in Las Vegas , and one of the homosexual villains , " Boofy " Kidd , was named after one of Fleming 's close friends — and a relative of his wife — Arthur Gore , 8th Earl of Arran , known to his friends as " Boofy " . Arran , an advocate of the relaxation of the British laws relating to homosexuality , heard about the use of his name before publication and complained to Fleming about it , but was ignored and the name was retained for the novel . During his trip to America Fleming had come across the name Spang — old German for " maker of shoe buckles " — which he appropriated for the villainous brothers . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The writer Jonathan Kellerman 's introduction to the 2006 edition of Diamonds Are Forever describes Bond as a " surprisingly ... complex " character who , in contrast with the cinematic representation , is " nothing other than human . ... Fleming 's Bond makes mistakes and pays for them . He feels pain and regret . " The novelist Raymond Benson — who later wrote a series of Bond novels — writes that the character develops in Diamonds Are Forever , building on Fleming 's characterisation in his previous three novels . This growth arises through Bond 's burgeoning relationship with the book 's main female character , Tiffany Case . He falls in love ; the first time he has done so since Vesper Lynd in Casino Royale . According to Benson , Tiffany is portrayed as tough , but lonely and insecure , and " is Fleming 's first fully developed female character . " The cultural historians Janet Woollacott and Tony Bennett write that many of the main female characters in Fleming 's novels are uncommon , and Tiffany — along with Pussy Galore from Goldfinger and Honeychile Rider from Dr. No — has been " damaged ... sexually " having previously been raped . The effect of the trauma has led to Tiffany working for the villain , which allows Bond to complete his mission , and align her to a more honest lifestyle . 
 The literary analyst LeRoy L. Panek observes that Diamonds Are Forever along with Goldfinger and The Man with the Golden Gun have gangsters as antagonists rather than as spies ; the novel is the only one in the Bond canon without a connection to the Cold War . Panek , comparing the gangsters to Bond 's normal adversaries , identifies them as " merely incompetent gunsels " when compared with the British agent , who can eliminate them with relative ease . The essayist Umberto Eco sees the <unk> as being a forerunner of the SPECTRE organisation Fleming uses in his later novels . Kingsley Amis , who later wrote a Bond novel , considered that there was " no decent villain " , while Eco judges three of the villains — the two Spang brothers and Winter — as physically abnormal , as many of Bond 's adversaries are . Anthony Synnott , in his examination of aesthetics in the Bond novels , also considers that the gangster Michael " Shady " Tree fits into the abnormal category , as he is a red @-@ haired hunchback with " a pair of china eyes that were so empty and motionless that they might have been hired by a taxidermist " . 
 = = Style = = 
 Diamonds Are Forever opens with a passage in which a scorpion hunts and eats its prey , and is subsequently killed by one of the diamond couriers . Eco sees this " cleverly presented " beginning as similar to the opening of a film , remarking that " Fleming abounds in such passages of high technical skill " . When the writer William Plomer was proof @-@ reading the manuscript he saw literary merit , and wrote to Fleming that the passages relating to the racing stables at Saratoga were " the work of a serious writer " . Kellerman considers that " Fleming 's depiction of Las Vegas in the ' 50s is wickedly spot on and one of the finest renditions of time and place in contemporary crime fiction . The story is robust and complex . " 
 Fleming used well @-@ known brand names and everyday details to produce a sense of realism , which Amis called " the Fleming effect " . Amis describes " the imaginative use of information , whereby the pervading fantastic nature of Bond 's world ... [ is ] bolted down to some sort of reality , or at least counter @-@ balanced . " Benson considers that in Diamonds Are Forever the use of detail is " rich and flamboyant " which allows an " interesting and amusing " description of the US . Benson considers a weakness of the book to be a lack of structural development , although this is compensated by character development ; Kellerman also believes the novel to be " rich in characterization " . 
 Benson analyses Fleming 's writing style and identifies what he describes as the " Fleming Sweep " : a stylistic point that sweeps the reader from one chapter to another using ' hooks ' at the end of chapters to heighten tension and pull the reader into the next : Benson feels that the sweep in Diamonds Are Forever was " at full force " in the novel , which " maintain [ s ] a constant level of excitement " as a result . 
 = = Themes = = 
