 According to Benson the main theme of Diamonds Are Forever is expressed in the title , with the permanency of the gemstones held in contrast to other aspects of the story , particularly love and life . Towards the end of the novel Fleming uses the lines " Death is forever . But so are diamonds " , and Benson sees the gems as a metaphor for death and Bond as the " messenger of death " . 
 The journalist and author Christopher Hitchens observes that " the central paradox of the classic Bond stories is that , although superficially devoted to the Anglo @-@ American war against communism , they are full of contempt and resentment for America and Americans " ; Benson sees that Diamonds Are Forever contains examples of Fleming 's feelings of superiority towards American culture , including his description of the sleaziness of Las Vegas . Amis , in his exploration of Bond in The James Bond Dossier , pointed out that Leiter is 
 ... such a nonentity as a piece of characterization ... he , the American , takes orders from Bond , the Britisher , and that Bond is constantly doing better than he , showing himself , not braver or more devoted , but smarter , wittier , tougher , more resourceful , the incarnation of little old England . 
 The cultural historian Jeremy Black points to the theme of international travel in Diamonds Are Forever , which was still a novelty to most people in Britain at the time . This travel between a number of a locations exacerbates one of the problems identified by Black : that there was no centre to the story . In contrast to the other novels in the Bond canon , where Casino Royale had Royale , From Russia , with Love had Istanbul and Dr. No had Jamaica , Diamonds Are Forever had multiple locations and two villains and there was " no megalomaniac fervour , no weird self @-@ obsession , at the dark centre of the plot " . 
 According to Fleming 's biographer , Andrew Lycett , after the novel was completed , Fleming added four extra chapters " almost as an afterthought " , detailing the events on the Queen Elizabeth . This introduced the question of marriage , and allowed Fleming to discuss matrimony through his characters , with Bond telling case " Most marriages don 't add two people together . They subtract one from the other . " Lycett opines that the addition was because of the state of Fleming 's own marriage which was going through a bad time . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 Diamonds Are Forever was published on 26 March 1956 by Jonathan Cape with a cover designed by Pat Marriott . As with the three previous Bond books , the first edition of 12 @,@ 500 copies sold out quickly ; the US edition was published in October 1956 by Macmillan . The novel was serialised in The Daily Express newspaper from 12 April 1956 onwards — the first of Fleming 's novels he had sold to the newspaper — which led to an overall rise in the sales of the novels . From November 1956 sales of Diamonds Are Forever , and Fleming 's other novels , all rose following the visit of the Prime Minister , Sir Anthony Eden , to Fleming 's Goldeneye estate to recuperate following the Suez Crisis ; Eden 's stay was much reported in the British press . The book received boosts in sales in 1962 when Eon Productions adapted Dr. No for the cinema , and in 1971 when Diamonds Are Forever was produced for the big screen . In February 1958 Pan Books published a paperback version of the novel in the UK , which sold 68 @,@ 000 copies before the end of the year . Since its initial publication the book has been issued in numerous hardback and paperback editions , translated into several languages and has never been out of print . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Julian Symons , reviewing Diamonds Are Forever in The Times Literary Supplement , thought that Fleming had some enviable qualities as a writer , including " a fine eye for places ... an ability to convey his own interest in the mechanics of gambling and an air of <unk> " . Symons also saw defects in Fleming 's style , including " his inability to write convincing dialogue " . For Symons , the novel was Fleming 's " weakest book , a heavily padded story about diamond smuggling " , where " the exciting passages are few " . 
 Milward Kennedy of the The Manchester Guardian , thought that Fleming was " determined to be as tough as Chandler , if a little less lifelike " , while Maurice Richardson , in The Observer , considered Bond " one of the most cunningly synthesised heroes in crime @-@ fiction " . Richardson wrote how " Fleming 's method is worth noting , and recommending : he does not start indulging in his wilder fantasies until he has laid down a foundation of factual description . " Elements of a review by Raymond Chandler for The Sunday Times were used as advertising for the novel ; Chandler wrote that it was " about the nicest piece of book @-@ making in this type of literature which I have seen for a long time ... Mr. Fleming writes a journalistic style , neat , clean , spare and never pretentious " . 
 Writing in The New York Times , Anthony Boucher — described by Fleming 's biographer John Pearson as " throughout an avid anti @-@ Bond and an anti @-@ Fleming man " — was mixed in his review , thinking that " Mr. Fleming 's handling of American and Americans is well above the British average " , although he felt that " the narrative is loose @-@ jointed and weakly resolved " , while Bond resolves his assignments " more by muscles and luck than by any sign of operative intelligence " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Diamonds Are Forever was adapted as a daily comic strip for the Daily Express newspaper , and syndicated around the world . The original adaptation ran from 10 August 1959 to 30 January 1960 . The strip was written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky . 
 The novel was loosely adapted in a 1971 film starring Sean Connery and directed by Guy Hamilton . Diamonds Are Forever was the final Bond film undertaken by Sean Connery with Eon Productions , although he returned to the role of Bond twelve years later with Kevin McClory 's Taliafilm company for Never Say Never Again . 
 In July 2015 Diamonds Are Forever was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 , starring Toby Stephens as Bond ; it was directed by Martin Jarvis . 
 = Pilot ( Lost ) = 
 " Pilot " is the two @-@ part television pilot of the ABC television series Lost , with part 1 premiering on September 22 , 2004 , and part 2 one week later on September 29 . Both parts were directed by J.J. Abrams , who co @-@ wrote the script with Damon Lindelof . Jeffrey Lieber , who had been commissioned by ABC to write the first version of the script , earned a story credit . Filmed in Oahu , Hawaii , it was the most expensive pilot episode up to that time , costing between $ 10 and $ 14 million , largely due to the expense of purchasing , shipping , and dressing a decommissioned Lockheed 1011 to represent Flight 815 's wreckage . Many changes were made during the casting process , including the selected actors , the characters ' behaviors and fates . 
 The pilot introduces the survivors of Oceanic Flight 815 , who experience a plane crash and end up on a mysterious island . Three of the characters , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) and Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) , are featured before the crash in flashbacks of their experiences on the plane as it breaks apart in mid @-@ air ; this narrative technique would be reused in almost every subsequent episode of the series . The Lost pilot is one of the most critically acclaimed television pilots of all time . Both parts earned high ratings , with Part 1 breaking the record for a pilot episode with 18 @.@ 6 million viewers , and the episode would later win many awards and accolades . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part 1 = = = 
 On September 22 , 2004 , Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) awakens disoriented in the jungle and notices a yellow Labrador retriever ( Madison ) darting through the bamboo forest . Following the path it came from , Jack runs haphazardly through the jungle to a beach , where he is confronted by the carnage of the airplane crash of Oceanic Flight 815 . Jack , a surgeon , administers medical aid to the survivors , assisting the pregnant Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) , enlisting Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) to watch her , and administering CPR to Rose Henderson ( L. Scott Caldwell ) , saving her life . After the initial shock passes , Jack retreats to a quiet area beyond the beach to tend to his own injuries , when he notices Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) passing through the jungle . He asks her for assistance , which she gives by helping suture a wound on his back . Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) organizes a clean @-@ up crew , while Hurley salvages meals from the plane 's galley and distributes them to the survivors . Shannon Rutherford ( Maggie Grace ) refuses chocolate offered by her brother Boone Carlyle ( Ian Somerhalder ) , believing that rescue is imminent . A Korean man , Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , tells his wife , Sun @-@ Hwa Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) , in Korean that she should remain close to him at all times . 
 That night , as Jack and Kate decide to search for the plane cockpit as its transceiver would allow the survivors to send a distress signal , loud roaring noises and crashing trees are heard in the nearby jungle . The following morning , the two are accompanied by Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) on their way into the jungle . The cockpit is found leaning against a tree , forcing the trio to climb it to reach the cabin . Charlie disappears into the bathroom while Jack and Kate awaken the concussed pilot ( Greg Grunberg ) in the cabin . The pilot tells them that the plane had lost radio contact six hours after take off , where it turned back for Fiji and hit wake turbulence . After estimating that the flight was 1 @,@ 000 miles off course before it crashed , the pilot tries using the transceiver , but cannot get a signal . Suddenly the strange roaring noises heard on the beach the previous night return , and when the pilot investigates , he is seized by something outside and blood splatters on the window , prompting the trio to grab the transceiver and flee . During the escape , Charlie falls and Jack returns to help him , while a terrified Kate runs on . After the monster disappears , Kate , Charlie and Jack reunite and find the pilot 's bloodied corpse suspended in a treetop . 
 = = = = Flashbacks = = = = 
 On the airplane , Jack jokingly tells a flight attendant named Cindy ( Kimberley Joseph ) that his alcoholic drink is not strong , and she gives him a stronger one . Charlie runs by while being called after by flight attendants before turbulence shakes the plane , scaring Rose , who is sitting across from Jack . The two talk , and Rose mentions that her husband is in the bathroom . The plane gets exceptionally shaky , causing a man to hit the plane 's ceiling and oxygen masks to fall . 
 = = = Part 2 = = = 
 Jack , Kate , and Charlie head back to the beach , where ten @-@ year @-@ old Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) discovers a pair of handcuffs , which he shows to his father , Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) . Afterwards , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) attacks Sayid , claiming he is a terrorist who blew up the plane , but they are soon stopped by Jack and Michael . Sayid repairs the transceiver , but it has little battery life and does not have a signal . He explains to Kate that by heading up the mountains to higher ground , they might be able to acquire a signal . They decide to go inland , and Charlie , Sawyer , Shannon and Boone soon follow them . Along the way , they are attacked by a charging polar bear , which Sawyer shoots and kills . When asked about where he found the gun , Sawyer says he took it from a dead U.S. Marshal . Sayid accuses Sawyer of being the marshal 's prisoner . Kate takes the gun from Sawyer and Sayid instructs her on how to dismantle it . 
 Back at the beach , the marshal ( Fredric Lane ) wakes up as Jack is suturing him , and asks Jack , " Where is she ? " Inland , Sayid turns on the transceiver and it has a signal . However , it is being blocked by a looping transmission in French , which Shannon translates as " I 'm alone now , on the island alone . Please someone come . The others ... they 're dead . It killed them . It killed them all . " Sayid calculates that has been repeating for over sixteen years before Charlie says , " Guys , where are we ? " 
 = = = = Flashbacks = = = = 
 An anxious Charlie runs to the bathroom , where he locks himself to snort heroin . After the plane becomes shaky , Charlie is slammed against the bathroom ceiling , and decides to leave . After being nearly hit by a refreshment cart , Charlie rushes to a seat several rows back and straps himself in as the plane shakes . 
 Kate is revealed to be the marshal 's prisoner , wearing the handcuffs that Walt found in the jungle . As the turbulence hits , the marshal is knocked unconscious by a falling suitcase . Kate struggles to put on her oxygen mask due to the handcuffs , so she <unk> herself using the marshal 's keys and puts the marshal 's oxygen mask on him before attaching her own , at which point the tail end of the plane suddenly breaks off and flies away . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 The series began development in the summer of 2003 , when ABC senior vice president Thom Sherman decided to order from Spelling Television a script based on an idea of network president Lloyd Braun , who envisioned a series that was a cross between the novel Lord of the Flies , the movie Cast Away , the television series Gilligan 's Island , and the popular reality show Survivor . Braun had titled his concept Lost after a failed reality show that had broadcast in 2001 . Writer Jeffrey Lieber was contacted by Spelling 's vice president of series development Ted Gold , and in September 2003 pitched to ABC the concepts for what he called Nowhere . Sherman approved the idea and hired Lieber to write a script , but Braun wound up rejecting Lieber 's draft and subsequent rewrites . In January 2004 Braun contacted J. J. Abrams , who developed the TV series Alias for ABC , to write a new pilot script , which would retain the title Lost . Although initially hesitant , Abrams warmed up to the idea on the condition that the series would have a supernatural angle to it and he was assigned a writing partner . ABC executive Heather <unk> sent him Damon Lindelof , who had long intended to meet Abrams as he wished to write for Alias . Together , Abrams and Lindelof developed the characters and plot of Lost , along with creating a series " bible " which would store the major mythological ideas and plot points for an ideal five to six season run for the show . Lindelof and Abrams worked between January 13 and 16 , when Lindelof sent a 21 – page outline to ABC 's executives . A complete first draft of the pilot script was delivered on February 24 , and the teleplay kept on being revised , with the final script arriving on April 19 . The development of the show was constrained by tight deadlines , as it had been commissioned late in the 2004 season 's development cycle and Braun estimated that the whole process from writing to post @-@ production took 6 to 8 weeks . Despite the short schedule , the creative team remained flexible enough to modify or create characters to fit actors they wished to cast . 
 Though Abrams and Lindelof did not use Lieber 's work as inspiration for their own , Lieber 's request for arbitration at the Writer 's Guild of America pointing out the similarities in both scripts earned him a story credit . Lieber would later say the series would drift much from his concepts in Nowhere , declaring Lost was " more like Lord of the Rings than Lord of the Flies " . Writer @-@ producer Anthony Spinner later sued ABC on the accounts that he submitted a script titled " <unk> " to the network in 1977 , but the case was dismissed on the accounts that none of the people involved with Lost had read Spinner 's work . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In the initial plans for the series , Jack was going to die midway through the first episode . The role of Jack was originally offered to Michael Keaton , but when the producers quickly changed their minds about Jack 's death , making him the leader , Keaton gave up the job . After Matthew Fox 's casting as Jack , the character was established as a leader , and the airplane pilot was introduced to take Jack 's place as The Monster 's first victim . The pilot wound up being played by Greg Grunberg , a childhood friend of Abrams who the producer brings into most of his projects . Around seventy @-@ five women of different shapes , sizes , ethnicities and ages auditioned to be Kate . In the initial plans , Kate would emerge as the leader after Jack died . She was not going to be a fugitive , instead her husband was going to go to the bathroom shortly before the plane split in mid air , and she would remain adamant on the Island that he was alive . This ended up being used for Rose 's ( L. Scott Caldwell ) character instead . The producers were impressed with Canadian Evangeline Lilly 's audition for Kate , as she displayed the confidence with vulnerability that they were looking for . As this was Lilly 's first role , she had difficulty obtaining a visa to work in America . She was supposed to start on the first day of filming , but the schedule was rearranged to give her more time , and in the meantime , the producers began auditioning again in case the visa did not come through . However , during one of the auditions , they got an email confirming that she had obtained her visa and could start work on the show . 
 Matthew Fox , Dominic Monaghan and Jorge Garcia originally auditioned for the role of Sawyer , who at the time was supposed to be a suit @-@ wearing city con man , but the role was given to Josh Holloway . Garcia was the first actor the producers knew they were going to cast . While the producers thought Garcia was spectacular , they did not think he fit in the role of Sawyer , so they created the Hurley character for him instead . When Holloway auditioned for Sawyer , the producers liked his southern accent and the edge he brought to the character ( Holloway reportedly forgot his lines and kicked a chair in frustration ) . The producers knew he did not suit the role , but thought he was very watchable , so they rewrote the role to suit him , making him more feral , Southern , but kept the same intelligence he originally had . After appearing in The Lord of the Rings , Dominic Monaghan was offered many fantasy @-@ based roles , like elves and pixies . He was keen to portray a different role , so he wanted a contemporary part that had layers and an edge . Originally Charlie was an older rocker that has been a big hit in the 1980s but now had a heroin addiction . After the producers enjoyed Monaghan 's audition of Sawyer , they decided to cast him as Charlie and rewrote the script to make Charlie a young has @-@ been instead . 
 When the producers were auditioning actors for roles in Lost , Harold Perrineau was in the area . The producers called it a " natural move " to have him audition . Although initially skeptical about the show , he took the role when Lost creator J. J. Abrams explained more about it . A lot of children were seen for the role of Walt . They were narrowed down to the top three , with Malcolm David Kelley winning it , after the producers were impressed with his role in Antwone Fisher . Abrams had worked with Terry O 'Quinn previously on Alias , and was keen to work with him again . He explained to O 'Quinn that although the role in the first episodes would be fairly small , the character will develop afterwards . O 'Quinn took the role as he trusted Abrams . He was also the only character who did not have to officially audition for a part of a main character . The producers were looking for someone who had a " Paris Hilton quality " to play Shannon , but she could not just be shallow , as the storyline would require more than that . A lot of women were auditioned before the producers finally settled on Maggie Grace . She was written to be an antipathetic character in the first season as the producers needed a character they could use to create opposition and conflict . Unlike many other characters of the first season , who were rewritten based on their actors , Boone was largely the same through production . He was originally going to be named Boone Anthony Markham V , going by the nickname , " Five " . Ian Somerhalder was cast in the role , but he did not want to shoot a pilot ; however , he jumped at the opportunity once he found out he would be working with Abrams . 
 Lost was planned to be a multi @-@ cultural show with an international cast . The producers thought it was essential that an Australian was cast for the part of Claire , and the Oceanic 815 was leaving from Sydney . Emilie de Ravin was working in Edmonton , so was unable to go to the auditions , which were being held in Los Angeles . From a video she sent to the producers , they were able to tell that de Ravin had the youth and sweetness required for the role , but also looked as though she had some life experience . Sayid was not in the original draft of the pilot episode , but executive consultant Jeff Pinkner had worked with Naveen Andrews on a short @-@ lived ABC series called The Beast , and was keen to have him on Lost . The producers were surprised that Andrews was interested in the role . When they cast him , all Andrews was told was that Sayid was from Iraq and had been in the army . Yunjin Kim originally auditioned for Kate . At her audition she told the producers that she spoke fluent Korean , having been raised in South Korea , where she had starred in several films . The producers were impressed with Kim 's performance and wrote her the character of Sun , who was planned to be someone who could not speak English , but after examining her relationship with her husband , the audience would learn that she does in fact speak it . Daniel Dae Kim was cast in the role of Jin , Sun 's husband . Dae Kim described his audition as a " really interesting experience " . He found it especially hard as it was his first time acting in Korean , and he had not spoken in it regularly since being in high school , when he would talk to his parents . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on March 11 , 2004 , with soundstage shooting in Los Angeles for the scenes set inside the flight . The primary location was the Hawaiian island of Oahu . The wreckage of Flight 815 was made with a Lockheed L @-@ 1011 built in 1972 and previously used by Delta Air Lines until 1998 , that after being purchased by ABC was broken up and sent to Hawaii by ship . The purchasing , shipping , and dressing of the aircraft body accounted for most of the pilot 's budget , which at an estimated $ 10 to $ 14 million was the most expensive pilot episode up to that time . <unk> such an expensive and risky project amidst ABC 's low ratings eventually led Braun to be fired by The Walt Disney Company , ABC 's parent company . 
 J.J. Abrams decided not to do aerial shots to avoid revealing too much of the island , and also because he felt that the different point of view could confuse audiences . Filming wrapped on April 24 , Lindelof 's birthday . Extensive usage of visual effects , particularly bluescreen , was used in the pilot . One effect in particular was re @-@ shot just before part 2 was broadcast . The scene involving a stuffed polar bear was used for a pre @-@ broadcast commercial and was freeze framed and mocked on the internet , prompting ABC to replace it with a CGI bear . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The pilot episode 's world premiere was on July 24 , 2004 at Comic @-@ Con International in San Diego . Part 1 had its first ABC broadcast on September 22 , 2004 , reaching a ratings record for a pilot episode , with 18 @.@ 6 million viewers , and on the following week , part 2 scored 10 @.@ 5 / 17 on the Nielsen ratings , watched by 17 million viewers . Both parts aired on the same night for its first UK broadcast on Channel 4 , August 10 , 2005 , and it became an instant hit . It was the second most watched programme for Channel 4 for that week , with ratings of 6 @.@ 75 million , second only to Big Brother . 
 Reviews were favorable upon release . IGN gave it a 10 / 10 score declaring that Lost " delivers on every promise it makes to its audience . " In IGN 's 2008 series of " Flashback Reviews " , IGN 's Chris Carabott changed the scores ; he gave part 1 a 9 @.@ 5 / 10 , saying that the show 's mysteries " would keep many of us captivated for the next four years " ; he gave part 2 a 9 / 10 , saying that " It really is a roller coaster of emotion and that sense of dread that sets in here is brilliantly portrayed . " Entertainment Weekly gave an ' A ' , stating that even non @-@ science fiction and fantasy fans can like it , and USA Today gave it 4 stars praising the cast . The Futon Critic later chose the pilot as the fifth best TV episode of 2004 . TV Guide ranked the episode fifth on a list of the top 100 television episodes of all time . 
 At the 2005 Emmy Awards , Lost won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series . J.J. Abrams won an Emmy for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for the pilot , with Mary Jo Markey winning Outstanding Single @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series and Michael Giacchino winning Outstanding Music Composition for a Series ( Dramatic Underscore ) . The show in general won Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series and Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series , while receiving additional nominations for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Writing for Drama Series . Casting director April Webster won an Artios Award for her work in the pilot . The first part of the pilot also won two Golden Reel Awards for Best Sound Editing in Television Short Form : Sound Effects & Foley and Dialogue & ADR , and a VES Award for visual effects . The episode was nominated for a Hugo Award and awards from the American Society of Cinematographers , Art Directors Guild and Directors Guild of America . " Pilot " , along with " House of the Rising Sun " and " The Moth " , won a PRISM Award for Charlie 's drug storyline . 
 = Phresh Out the Runway = 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " ( also known as " Fresh Off the Runway " ) is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna for her seventh studio album Unapologetic ( 2012 ) . It was co @-@ written by Rihanna with French disc @-@ jockey David Guetta , Giorgio Tuinfort and Terius Nash . It is the first time that Rihanna and Guetta had collaborated since " Who 's That Chick ? " , released in November 2010 . " Phresh Out the Runway " is a hip hop and rave song that contains heavy synthesizers and bass . Lyrically , Rihanna explains how if any of her crew does not respect her , they should no longer remain with her . 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " received positive reviews from music critics ; most of them praised the composition , production and how Rihanna interpreted the song . However , the lyrics were subjected to criticism . Rihanna performed the track at the Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show on November 7 , 2012 , along with the album 's lead single , " Diamonds " . " Phresh Out the Runway " was included on the set list of the 777 Tour promotional tour and the Diamonds World Tour . Upon the release of Unapologetic , the song debuted at number 35 on the UK R & B Chart and 177 on the UK Singles Chart . It also debuted on the US R & B Songs chart at number 21 . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 Rihanna began " working on the new sound " for her seventh studio album in March 2012 , even though she had not yet begun recording . On September 12 , 2012 , Def Jam France announced via Twitter that Rihanna would release a new single the upcoming week while her seventh studio album is scheduled to be released in November 2012 . However , the tweet was shortly deleted and replaced with another clarifying that " more information will be made available tomorrow , Thursday , September 13 " . Via her official Twitter account , Rihanna posted series of " teasing " tweets announcing her seventh studio album . 
 On November 6 , 2012 , Rihanna revealed that there would be " another secret collab " on the album . She hinted at the identity : " Guess who is featured on the # 7th song on # Unapologetic , Hint : his birthday is tomorrow November # 7th . " In a followed tweet , she explicitly revealed that the secret artist is the French disk @-@ jockey David Guetta and announced that he produced " Phresh Out the Runway " along with " Right Now " for her seventh studio album Unapologetic . Rihanna and Guetta have previously collaborated on " Who 's That Chick ? " ( 2010 ) , which is included in the re @-@ release of his second studio album One Love ( 2009 ) , entitled One More Love ( 2010 ) . 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " was co @-@ written by Rihanna herself , Terius Nash and Giorgio Tuinfort . Production of the song was helmed by Guetta , Tuinfort as well as Nash under his production name Terius Nash . Josh Campbell engineered the song , with assistance from Joel Peters at SARM Studios in London . Rihanna 's vocals were recorded by Marcos Tovar and Kuk Harrell at R Studios in Los Angeles , California ; Harrell also handled production of Rihanna 's vocals . All instrumentation and programming was carried out by Guetta , Tuinfort and Nash . The song was finally mixed by Jaycen Joshua at SARM Studios and Metropolis Studios in London . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " is a hip hop and rave song , with a duration of three minutes and forty @-@ two seconds . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times noted that the song 's composition is a " chaotic dense spray of boasts over a muscular , scraping beat " . Brad Stern of MTV Buzzworthy labeled the song as " noisy , trap @-@ tastic <unk> " that is reminiscent of Rihanna 's 2012 single " Birthday Cake " and according to him , contains <unk> ' beats , brags aplenty , nasty unapologetic attitude . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted that " Phresh Out the Runway " is an aggregation off " distorted " synthesisers derived from Joey Beltram 's 1990 record " <unk> " " until it sounds weird and disorientating " . The Boston Globe 's James Reed labeled " Phresh Out the Runway " as a club banger containing a heavy bass " that rumbles more in your chest instead of rattling your feet . " Alex Macpherson of Fact wrote that on the song " Rihanna sprays declamations like machine gun fire over what could pass for a lost early ’ 90s Prodigy rave anthem . " The lyrical content of " Phresh Out the Runway " revolves around Rihanna explaining how if any of her crew does not respect her , then she should no longer remain with her , singing : " How could you be so hood , but you 're so fuckin ' pop ? / How could you be so fun and sound like you 're selling rocks ? " . On the song , Rihanna sounds " indignant " and " impressed " with being herself and proclaims : " Walk up in this bitch like I own the ho " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " received positive reviews from most music critics . Dan Martin for NME commented , " French overlord of the genre , David Guetta , is present , and his contributions on tracks like the opener ' Phresh Out the Runway ' are largely box @-@ ticking exercises to illustrate Rihanna ’ s commitment to making loads of money , but they ’ re at least subtle . " Chris <unk> for 4Music concluded that there is not doubt that the song is bold , brash and unapologetic opener of the album . Nathan S. for DJ Booth wrote that the song " finds Rihanna on the verge of just straight out rhyming " ; according to him her rhyming is pretty well . Esquire 's Miles Raymer commented that Rihanna is party girl and because of that every of her albums has one song with you can get crazy ; according to Raymer in this case is " Phresh Out the Runway " which if it is played in proper volume it can be " <unk> " . 
 Greg Kot for Chicago Tribune concluded that the song together with " Jump " and " Pour It Up " celebrates " live @-@ for @-@ the @-@ moment hedonism " . Smokey Fontaine for The Huffington Post called it a " loud " and " as @-@ curse filled " for it can capture the album 's title and reminds the parents that Rihanna 's music is not yet for their kids . Bernard Perusse for The Montreal Gazette criticized the song and called it a " robotic <unk> and f @-@ bomb shtick " , that rapidly creates " a melody @-@ free , pedestrian turf " . Pitchfork Media 's Jessica Hopper wrote that " ' Phresh Out the Runway ' is capitalist braggadocio ( nonsense grade ) so static it borders on unmusical . " Sarah H. Grant of Consequence of Sound called both " Right Now " and " Phresh Out the Runway " " texturally layered " , but " lyrically barren " . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 Rihanna performed " Phresh Out the Runway " for the first time at the Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show alongside " Diamonds " , on November 7 , 2012 . During the performance she wore a pink sheer lingerie . The show aired on December 4 , 2012 on CBS . During the seven days prior to the release of the album , Rihanna embarked on the 777 Tour , a seven @-@ date promotional tour where she performed seven concerts in seven different cities in seven different countries across North America and Europe . " Phresh Out the Runway " was included on the set list at the first concert in Mexico City , at the second concert in Toronto . Rihanna performed the song again at the third concert in Stockholm . Jack Rosenthal for Rolling Stone commented that performing the song appeared to be an " uphill climb " for Rihanna during the first two dates in Mexico City and Toronto , but felt that she looked more comfortable performing on the third date in Stockholm , writing " she sings it looking over her shoulder , a breezy afterthought . " She also included the song in her setlist for her Diamonds World Tour . 
 " Phresh Out the Runway " was featured at the end of the season three eighth episode of the American police procedural drama TV series , Hawaii Five @-@ 0 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at SARM Studios , Notting Hill , London , UK ; R Studios , Los Angeles , California ; Metropolis Studios , London , UK . 
 Mixed at Larrabee Recording Studios , Burbank , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unapologetic , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Unapologetic , " Phresh Out the Runway " debuted on the UK R & B Chart at number 35 on November 25 , 2012 . It debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 177 . The song debuted at number 21 on the US R & B Songs chart for the issue dated December 22 , 2012 , and peaked at number 46 on the R & B / Hip @-@ hop Digital Songs chart on December 3 , 2010 . 
 = Matt Byrne = 
 Matthew " Matt " Byrne ( born 8 October 1974 ) is a British wheelchair basketball player . He participated at the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens where he finished in third position . At the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing , Byrne finished in bronze medal position with Great Britain . He played for United Kingdom at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Byrne was born in 1974 in Nottingham . He is a paraplegic , meaning that he has an impairment in motor or sensory function of the lower extremities . He was introduced into wheelchair basketball during his rehabilitation at a hospital following a motorcross accident at the age of fifteen he is also married to Anna Byrne that is a teacher at the long <unk> school . 
 = = Wheelchair basketball = = 
 Byrne first played wheelchair basketball in 1991 , and joined the Sheffield Steelers club for five years before moving to the Nottingham Jaguars , near where he was born . His current club , the Wolverhampton Rhinos ( <unk> <unk> Rhinos ) , have won the Super League many times during his time there . He made his début for the Great Britain national team in 2001 . 
 Byrne participated in the 2001 / 2002 European Championships in Amsterdam , his first time competing at a major international event . He and the United Kingdom national team finished in fourth position , out of medal contention . In 2002 , he won a silver medal at the 2002 World Championships in Kitakyushu , a city on the third @-@ largest island of Japan . He finished third and won a bronze medal at the Sassari 2003 European Championships . 
 Byrne competed in the 2004 Summer Paralympic Games in Athens , Greece ; he and the United Kingdom national team won the bronze medal . Following his first Paralympics , Byrne and his team won a silver medal at the 2005 European Championships in Paris and took fifth place at the world championships in Amsterdam the following year . The U.K. team won the silver medal at the European Championships in Wetzlar , Netherlands in 2007 . 
 Byrne and the U.K. team proceeded to win bronze at the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing . The following year , he also won bronze at the European Championships in Adana , Turkey . In 2011 , he and his team won gold at the European Championships in Nazareth , northern Israel . 
 Byrne was a member of the U.K. ' s wheelchair basketball national team at the 2012 Summer Paralympics , held in London . The team finished in fourth place after losing to Canada and the United States . In 2012 , Byrne was made co @-@ captain of the Great Britain Men 's Wheelchair Basketball team . 
 = Jon Hol = 
 Jon Gundersen Hol ( 1 September 1851 – 1941 ) was a Norwegian engineer and activist . He is known for his pamphlet Rifleringen , published in February 1884 , that resulted in his arrest for lèse majesté . In the pamphlet , he called for soldiers and civilians to arm themselves and encircle the Parliament of Norway Building , creating a " Ring of Rifles " , should the need arise . The political situation in Norway at the time was unstable , with an ongoing impeachment case against the conservative government started by political liberals . King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway supported the conservative politicians , and Hol believed that a political and military counter @-@ offensive was planned , hence the need for guarding the Parliament . The tensions between liberals and conservatives drew Hol into politics in the first place in 1880 . Before this , he was an engineer by occupation and a writer , albeit apolitical . He increased his writing after 1880 , and also involved himself in non @-@ socialist trade unions , including the unsuccessful attempt of establishing a national trade union center in Kristiania . 
 When the conservatives lost the Impeachment case , there was a change of government and the charges against Hol were dropped . Two years later , he received an economic compensation from the Parliament . After some quiet years in which he concentrated on engineering work , Hol returned to politics as a member of the city council of Skien , representing the local temperance movement . He stood for parliamentary election twice , without success . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hol was born at the farm <unk> in Nord @-@ <unk> , the son of Gunder Johnsen and <unk> <unk> . He began a military education in 1869 , and later conducted self @-@ studies as well as attending various schools , including the Norwegian National Academy of Craft and Art Industry . In 1876 , he married Karen <unk> , a farmers ' daughter from Sør @-@ <unk> and in 1878 , he was hired by the city engineering corps of Kristiania . 
 = = Political activism = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 While studying , Hol became interested in journalism . He began writing for the apolitical magazine Norsk <unk> in 1877 , but found his interest in politics growing as he observed the mounting political turmoil at the time . Liberal politicians in the Norwegian Parliament struggled to introduce the practice of calling government ministers in for questioning . Initially , this was not meant to function as a lever against individual ministers , but rather to increase debate on important issues . The executive branch of government was not elected , and the intention was to enhance a co @-@ governing with the democratically elected legislature . Also , ministers were already criticized in parliamentary debates ; if they were questioned in person they would have the chance to defend themselves . This required altering the Constitution , a move which the executive branch , led by King Oscar II of Sweden and Norway , continuously vetoed . The conservatives in Parliament also opposed this , fearing that the increasingly liberal @-@ dominated parliament would use constitutional change to check the executive branch , and thereby infringe upon the separation of powers . The first royal veto came in 1872 , after which the proposition was slightly altered , but it was vetoed again in 1874 . Two identical propositions followed , and were defeated , in 1877 and 1880 . After 1880 , the question about ministers faded into the background ; instead the disagreement centered around the King 's right to a veto in constitutional cases . According to the Constitution , the King had the right to postpone a non @-@ constitutional act three times . On the other hand , the Constitution did not mention any veto in constitutional cases . Three views became distinct : some argued that the King had no veto at all , the middle ground was held by people who would allow a postponing veto , while the government and the King claimed an absolute veto . Allegedly , an absolute veto was in the " spirit " of 1814 and the separation of powers principle . Those who held the first view cited the principle of popular sovereignty . 
 Although the veto question became central , the ministers were not out of the spotlight . Since the ministers were inferior to the King within the executive branch , the King was responsible for all actions conducted by this branch ; however , the ministers were responsible for the advice given to the King when they were assembled in the Council of State . If any ministers were to dissent , according to the Constitution , they had to state this explicitly in the meeting protocol , lest they be considered in agreement and thus co @-@ responsible . The King was above the law , but the Prime Minister and his cabinet could be tried for Impeachment for advising the King to act out an unconstitutional veto . The Impeachment Court consisted of Supreme Court Justices and elected politicians from the <unk> , and as the latter group held a two @-@ thirds majority , an Impeachment trial with a fairly certain outcome could start as soon as the liberals won control over the <unk> seats through general elections . 
 = = = Arenas for activism = = = 
 Jon Hol sided with Johan Sverdrup , a liberal jurist who had become the spearhead of parliamentary opposition to the King . Hol also became involved in the workers ' society Kristiania Arbeidersamfund , which was dominated by political liberals ( not socialists ) at that time , as a member of the board . From 1881 , he worked on their publication Samfundet . This periodical eventually ceased publication , but was succeeded by <unk> in 1883 , which Hol co @-@ owned . Hol used Samfundet and <unk> as the main public arenas for his activism . He was also behind the rifle associations ' member magazine Norsk <unk> , which had been started in 1882 and edited by David Dietrichson for a short while before Hol took over . 
 = = = Rifle associations and the military = = = 
 Hol eventually came to believe that King Oscar II and his supporters , if opposed by the Norwegian Parliament , would usurp political power with the help of the Norwegian Army . Hol based this view on two speeches given by Oscar in 1882 , one of them at the closing of the parliamentary session that year and hence before the 1882 general election . Harald Nicolai Storm Wergeland , the Commander at Akershus Fortress , located nearby the Norwegian Parliament , was known as a staunch conservative . In 1880 , he had called for Parliament to increase the military contingent in the city . The Chief of Police supported this request ; in a letter to the Ministry of Justice and the Police he stated that there was a need for preparedness regarding the political situation , as a possible pretext for " disturbances and demonstrations " . Otto Nyquist , a personal friend of the King , was instated in 1882 as commander of the battalion stationed in Kristiania . In late 1883 , Oscar suggested that the storage of bolts of rifles in depots around the country be disconnected , to prevent a situation in which uprising peasantry turned the Army 's own weapons against them . Secret talks on a coup d 'état supported by the military were held between Oscar and Christian Selmer at the Scanian castle <unk> in 1883 , and the newspaper Morgenbladet publicly supported such a solution . 
 One of the means to counter this development , was the formation of semi @-@ military forces . All over the country , local rifle associations had sprung up . The first rifle association — <unk> for <unk> af <unk> og <unk> of 1861 — was politically conservative , but a great number of the newer associations , especially in rural districts , supported the political liberals and radicals . They exercised as regular troops , but did not commit acts of political violence . Rather , a latent purpose was to deter a possible conflict . If conservative Commanders of the Army were to use force to subdue the parliamentary process , it was clear that rifle associations , too , could march upon Kristiania , possibly aided by " rogue " commanders such as Albert Jacobsen . Hol supported the liberal rifle associations , and helped found Kristiania <unk> in his city . He also chaired Nordre <unk> , a local rifle association based in Nordre Aker . Apart from organizational work , he wrote several articles on the issue . In Samfundet he wrote that a " coup d 'etat or attempt thereof " would lead to a popular uprising , where " real Norwegians " , " soldier or non @-@ soldier " alike would encircle the Parliament Building with " thousands of bayonets " to " await " and the political processes and guard the Constitution . 
 This activism was not compatible with his professional career , as he was a municipal employee . In this situation , Hol chose to formally leave the radical organizations , resigning as a member of the board of Kristiania Arbeidersamfund and Kristiania <unk> . He thereby retained his job . However , in early 1884 he was fired by the municipality . 
 = = = = Rifleringen = = = = 
 In February 1884 , the Impeachment trial of Prime Minister Christian Selmer and his entire cabinet was nearing its end . One of the last actions of Selmer 's cabinet was to refuse to sanction a parliamentary money grant to the rifle association — the liberals had won the 1882 parliamentary election in a landslide victory — further polarizing the situation . Rumours flew that personnel of the Norwegian Army were preparing for action at Kongsvinger Fortress , some miles northeast of Kristiania . 
 On 6 February 1884 , Hol released a pamphlet which has come to be known as Rifleringen ( The Rifle Ring ) , with the subtitle <unk> Akt ( At attention ) . Like previous writings , it called upon semi @-@ military personnel and other weapon @-@ able citizens to arm themselves and encircle the Parliament Building . This time , he did not call for the citizens to " await " the situation , but instead to " fire ! at the traitors of the Fatherland " . 
 The pamphlet was confiscated by the police on 8 February . The person who printed the pamphlet , Nikolai Olsen , was arrested on the same day , and the apprehension of Jon Hol followed on 10 February . He remained in custody until 26 February , and was indicted on 11 March , for lèse majesté . Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson and Lars Holst were indicted on the same charge . Upon the arrests , the newspaper Verdens Gang noted that no conservative writers had been sanctioned , despite openly calling for a coup d 'état . 
 In the meantime , Christian Selmer was impeached on 27 February ; his cabinet members followed one by one , the last being impeached on 1 April . On 11 March , Selmer resigned . Two acting Prime Ministers were drawn from his cabinet ; Ole <unk> from 11 to 29 March and Niels Mathias Rye from 29 March to 3 April . Then , a new cabinet led by Selmer 's former Minister of Finance Christian <unk> <unk> was formed , but in reality it stood no chance of surviving as it faced the Liberal @-@ dominated Parliament , whose means of pressuring the executive branch had been strengthened following the Impeachment trial . In June , as <unk> entered his last month as Prime Minister , the King summoned mathematics professor Ole Jacob Broch to form a compromise cabinet , but this failed owing to Conservative opposition , spearheaded by up @-@ and @-@ coming politician Emil Stang . Broch gave up on 22 June , and Johan Sverdrup became Prime Minister on 26 June . In light of this change in circumstances , the case against Hol had been annulled by Royal Resolution — earlier on 6 June . 
 = = = Det norske Arbeiderforbund = = = 
 The Conservative politicians and the King had accepted the parliamentary process without any military conflict . However , conflicts as such still existed . The country 's establishment had been shocked by a number of labor conflicts , with a street battle at Kampen in 1878 and the storming of an employer 's home at Etterstad in May 1880 , as examples of the more volatile events . In August 1884 , workers at Akers Mekaniske Verksted faced a 10 % pay cut . A debate had been held in Kristiania Arbeidersamfund on 30 July , and the meeting decided to call a strike effective as of 1 August . In addition , Jon Hol took the initiative to found a national trade union center , Det norske Arbeiderforbund . Representatives from seventeen factories elected Hol as the secretary of Det norske Arbeiderforbund . The printer Nikolai Olsen became treasurer . Among the union 's demands were normal working hours for laborers and universal suffrage . It staunchly opposed socialist ideas , especially through the union newspaper Arbeideren . On 7 October , a new board was elected , and the first point of their manifesto was " Law @-@ <unk> — moral conduct — sobriety " . 
 Det norske Arbeiderforbund was supported by people from individual factories , but the mainly philanthropic activists were associated with the Liberal Party . However , the strike at Akers Mekaniske had been a failure , as the laborers had returned to work by on 26 August — with a 10 % pay cut . It soon faced competition from more worker @-@ dominated trade unions , coordinated through the <unk> <unk> . On the political side , a Labour Party was formed in 1887 , and from it the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions followed in 1899 . The historical role of Det norske Arbeiderforbund , as it turned out , was to mark the transition between two kinds of trade unionism ; the one dominated by the bourgeois Liberal Party and the one dominated by the socialist Labour Party . The organization became defunct around 1890 . The publication Arbeideren was continued , and beginning in 1906 , Arbeideren was the party organ of the newly founded Labour Democrats , a non @-@ socialist labour and social reform party associated with the Liberal Party . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hol had been fired from his municipal job on 13 February 1884 . After 1884 , he laid low for a few years , but on 26 May 1886 he was given NOK 1 @,@ 500 by the Liberal @-@ dominated Parliament as compensation for lost income . In 1887 he was again publicly employed , assisting in the construction of the <unk> @-@ <unk> Canal . He was hired as the city engineer of Skien in 1891 , holding this position for almost twenty @-@ five years , and later worked in Notodden , Kongsberg and Risør . From time to time he wrote technical articles on water pipes , among other subjects , in the magazine Teknisk Ukeblad . 
 He became active again in politics and the public sphere . He wrote for the liberal newspaper Dagbladet and the temperance magazine <unk> , as well as for the local press . He also represented the temperance movement in the city council of Skien for twenty years . In 1906 he ran in the parliamentary elections in the constituency Skien , but was not elected . He has been called an independent candidate . At the time , however , he was denoted by Statistics Norway as loosely adhering to the Coalition Party with a leaning towards the Liberals . In the first round of voting , Hol was a " running mate " ( deputy candidate ) of former parliamentarian and government minister Hans Nilsen Hauge , who adhered to the Coalition Party with a conservative leaning . They faced Carl Stousland who represented the Liberal Party and P. R. <unk> of the Labour Party . Stousland received 732 votes , Hauge 460 votes and <unk> 231 votes . As a " running mate " , Hol received 511 votes . He also got 8 votes as a primary candidate . In the second round of voting , the Coalition Party dropped Hauge and propped up Hol , who now had J. A. Larsen as his running mate . Also , the Labour Party pulled out . Hol received 595 votes , but succumbed to Stousland who got 855 votes . Hauge got 2 votes , and Hol got 23 " running mate " votes . 
 Hol stood for election again in the 1924 parliamentary election , when the voting system had changed completely . The constituency was now Market towns of Telemark and Aust @-@ Agder counties , and it was a plural @-@ member constituency where representatives were selected from the party lists with the most votes . Hol was fielded as the second candidate on the ballot of the Radical People 's Party ( Labour Democrats ) , the new name of the Labour Democrats . The first candidate was A. Jørgensen , police chief of Kragerø . The Radical People 's Party fared well in Skien and Kragerø . With 1 @,@ 050 votes in Kragerø the party prevailed over the Social Democrats and Communists . With 2 @,@ 075 votes in Skien the party prevailed over Labour . However , it fared much worse in the other six cities , carried 4 @,@ 571 votes in total and lost the election in the Market towns of Telemark and Aust @-@ Agder counties . 
 Hol died in 1941 , and was buried on 16 May 1941 at Vestre gravlund . 
 = Kia Stevens = 
 Kia Michelle Stevens ( born September 4 , 1977 ) is an American professional wrestler best known for her time with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling under the ring name Awesome Kong . She is also known by the ring name Amazing Kong and appeared in WWE as Kharma . She is a five @-@ time Women 's Champion , having won the TNA Knockouts Championship two times and the WWWA World Championship , NWA World Women 's Championship and AWA Superstars of Wrestling World Women 's Championship once . Her success is not limited to singles wrestling , as she frequently teamed with Aja Kong to form the tag team W Kong who held tag team championships in four different promotions , along with winning the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship with Hamada . She was also ranked first in the inaugural list of Pro Wrestling Illustrated 's Top 50 Females and is the third woman to enter the WWE Royal Rumble match . 
 She began her professional wrestling career in 2002 after appearing on a reality television show . She primarily wrestled in Japan for the first five years of her career , holding numerous championships there . In 2006 she began wrestling in her native United States again , appearing on the independent circuit before appearing on national television with TNA Wrestling where she was a driving force in the foundation of their Knockouts division . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 Joanie Laurer , known during her WWF career as Chyna , and Trish Stratus served as Stevens ' primary inspirations to become a professional wrestler . In 2002 , Stevens appeared on the Discovery Health Body Challenge as a contestant trying to lose weight in hopes of becoming a professional wrestler . Afterward , Stevens trained at the School of Hard Knocks out of San Bernardino , California . Soon , she was able to have her first professional match in the Empire Wrestling Federation . 
 = = = Japanese promotions ( 2002 – 2007 ) = = = 
 After putting on an impressive showing at a tryout , Stevens was invited to further her training in the dojo of <unk> puroresu ( female Japanese wrestling ) promotion All Japan Women 's Pro @-@ Wrestling ( AJW ) . While there she underwent a rigorous training schedule , became fluent in Japanese , and engaged in training for mixed martial arts but chose to pursue professional wrestling . She was given the ring name Amazing Kong by <unk> Matsunaga , who needed a replacement for Japanese female wrestler Aja Kong in several matches . Stevens , as Kong , worked for multiple women 's promotions in Japan , and she defeated Ayako Hamada for the WWWA World Heavyweight Championship in late 2004 . Later , Stevens cited Hamada as one of her favorite opponents . 
 In 2004 Kong debuted for the <unk> promotion Gaea Japan in a match against Aja Kong . In the battle of American Kong versus Japanese Kong on April 30 at Limit Break . At the promotion 's ninth anniversary event Aja Kong won the match but gained enough respect for Amazing Kong that the two attacked both competitors in the main event , revealing themselves as a new tag team named W Kong . The duo soon made their presence felt when they challenged Chigusa Nagayo and Lioness Asuka for the <unk> Tag Team Championship on May 5 and won . The team defended the championship successfully all Summer , eventually losing to Manami Toyota and Carlos Amano on September 20 . Going into 2005 , Kong main evented the final Gaea show before the promotion closed down . In the final match of Fifth Anniversary , Kong teamed with Ayako Hamada and Mayumi Ozaki in a winning effort against Akino , Dynamite Kansai and <unk> with Ayako picking up the victory . 
 After the closure of Gaea , W Kong went on to wrestle for a number of Japanese promotions including Hustle , where they were given the comedic gimmicks of Margaret and Erika which involved , among other things , wrestling in a yellow tutu . They won the predominantly male Hustle Super Tag Team Championship from June until October 2006 . They were also the final team to hold WWWA World Tag Team Championship before AJW shut down . In early 2007 , Kong also won the AWA Superstars of Wrestling World Women 's Championship in Tokyo , Japan and held it from January to May . She lost it to Nanae Takahashi in a three way match , which also included Wesna . 
 = = = Shimmer Women Athletes = = = 
 = = = = Championship pursuits ( 2006 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 Her success in Japan attracted the attention of United States promotion Shimmer Women Athletes , who began regularly booking her for their DVD tapings in Kong 's homeland from May 2006 . Her debut came on Volume 5 with a win against Nikki Roxx . She defeated Roxx again on Volume 14 : Hot Summer Nights in a rematch . The rematch was Kong 's fifth successive win which led her to challenge for the Shimmer Championship in October 2007 against inaugural champion Sara Del Rey , for the Volume 15 taping . Del Rey retained to give Kong her first Shimmer loss , albeit via count out . 
 Kong then began another winning streak , losing only to Ariel by disqualification after using a chair on Volume 17 which set back her chances of being given another championship match . She was placed in a Four @-@ Way <unk> match on Volume 21 ; during the match Mercedes Martinez used her Fisherman Buster finisher on Cheerleader Melissa but before she could be pinned , Kong dragged Martinez to the floor and the two battled it out while Ariel stole the win to receive a championship match . This incident led to a grudge match between Martinez and Kong on Volume 23 , which Kong won . On the following show , instead of a Shimmer Championship match , Kong was put in a contendership match for the Shimmer Tag Team Championship , forming a brief alliance of convenience with Del Rey , who herself was having issues with their opponents <unk> ( Cheerleader Melissa and Shimmer Champion MsChif ) . After winning the match , they faced the reigning champions Ashley Lane and Nevaeh in the following match , and once again Kong was disqualified after using chairs on her opponents . An assault continued until Martinez and Serena Deeb , who was feuding with Del Rey , appeared to help out the Tag Team Champions . This occurrence led to another tag team match with Kong and Del Rey picking up a victory over Martinez and Deeb . 
 Wanting to focus on her singles career again , Kong wrestled LuFisto on Volume 27 in a match to take on the Shimmer Champion . It ended in a double count @-@ out , with the two brawling outside the ring through the building and even during the next match in the show . This meant the championship match on Volume 28 , in November 2009 , would be a three @-@ way elimination match including the champion MsChif . Kong eliminated LuFisto early on with an Amazing Bomb , essentially leading to a rematch of Kong and MsChif 's critically respected Volume 9 match . In this match , however , MsChif took a return win after kicking out of the Amazing Bomb and delivering all of her signature finishing moves on Kong to become the first woman to pin Kong in Shimmer . She appeared for one more appearance in September 2010 for the Volume 35 event , answering an open challenge by Kellie Skater with an emphatic victory . 
 = = = = Ring of Honor ( 2007 , 2010 ) = = = = 
 Owing to Shimmer being a sister promotion of Ring of Honor ( ROH ) , Kong was noticed by ROH and scouted to appear on both products . On 15 September 2007 she made her debut for ROH at their Man Up pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) . Teaming with Daizee Haze in a tag team match , they defeated Sara Del Rey and Lacey . 
 Kong returned to ROH on May 8 , 2010 to take part in the promotion 's annual Supercard of Honor V. Once more she wrestled Del Rey , this time in a singles match which she lost after Del Rey used a weighted elbow pad thrown to her by Kings of Wrestling stablemate Chris Hero , sparking a rivalry between the two . Kong returned to settle the score with Del Rey two months later at Hate : Chapter II on July 23 . The Kings of Wrestling were in the midst of a rivalry with The Briscoe Brothers ( Jay and Mark ) , and so Kong teamed with them in a six @-@ person tag team match , where they defeated Del Rey , Hero and their stablemate Claudio Castagnoli , though Kong did not secure the pin . Consequently , they had a singles rematch the following night , with Kong finally defeating Del Rey one @-@ on @-@ one . At the end of the year , ROH held their live PPV Final Battle 2010 , which saw Del Rey challenge Daizee Haze to bring more competition to ROH . Haze responded by bringing Kong back for the December 18 match against Del Rey and her partner Serena Deeb . In the match Del Rey pinned Haze , while Deeb successfully neutralized Kong with a spear . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = 
 After growing success in Shimmer , Kong began appearing on the American independent circuit bringing with her the AWA World Women 's Championship from Japan . She put it on the line in a champion versus champion match against MsChif 's NWA World Women 's Championship on May 5 , 2007 becoming a joint champion with her win . A rematch between the two in September , exclusively for the NWA belt after Kong lost the AWA title in May , headlined the NWA No Limits 3rd Anniversary Show which saw Kong retain the title . Kong defended the belt in a number of promotions throughout the year but 11 months later , in April 2008 , MsChif won back the title via countout under a special stipulation to retain Kong 's stature . The following year , Kong once again challenged for the NWA World Championship at NWA Charlotte 's Valentine 's Day themed inaugural show , Thorns & Roses , in the penultimate match of the evening . With Daffney in her corner , MsChif and saved herself from the Awesome Bomb by using her green mist , disqualifying herself to retain the belt in the process . 
 In June 2007 , Kong toured Great Britain under the ChickFight promotion , wrestling guest matches under that banner for other promotions . The tour started on June 15 in Wales for Celtic Wrestling , where she picked up a victory over ChickFight stalwart Cheerleader Melissa . The following day Kong debuted for Real Quality Wrestling ( RQW ) and took part in a Four @-@ Way RQW Women 's Championship match , that saw Wesna win the belt from reigning champion Eden Black , with Jetta also coming up winless . The following day Kong competed in <unk> IX , the ninth and final all @-@ women knockout tournament under the ChickFight banner . She received a bye via forfeit , owing to a severe injury Cheerleader Melissa had given her opponent Sweet Saraya at RQW the night before , which allowed her to be fresh against Blue Nikita . After defeating Nikita in the semi @-@ final , she faced dethroned RQW Champion Eden Black and won the trophy . 
 After achieving notoriety on national television , Kong received more bookings including for the all @-@ female company Women Superstars Uncensored in March 2008 . She appeared at their First Anniversary Show answering an open challenge made by Rick Cataldo and <unk> Cotton , defeating them both in a handicap match within a minute . Later in the same event she teamed with Amy Lee and defeated Angel Orsini and Shimmer rival Mercedes Martinez . Despite picking up the victory , Kong felt that Lee stole the glory of a win from her and went to attack Lee ; this led to an Amy Lee 's Rules match in the main event of Dawn of a New Day which Kong won after Lee passed out , refusing to submit . The two had a rematch at Army of One which Kong lost by disqualification after hitting a referee leading to a deciding rubber match contested under Last Man Standing rules . At the Second Anniversary Show , Kong narrowly beat Amy Lee after charging at Lee with a chair only for Lee to pass out to the ground and Kong to hit the ropes and knock the chair back into herself . Judging Lee to have been down one count before Kong , Kong won the match but bowed to Lee afterwards out of respect . 
 After winning this match , Kong was given a match against Martinez for the WSU Championship in December 2009 at a WSU and National Wrestling Superstars co @-@ hosted event . Kong received another chance at the title at Evolve 5 : Danielson v Sawa for the Evolve promotion but still could not bring an end to Martinez 's two @-@ year reign . 
 = = = Total Nonstop Action Wrestling = = = 
 = = = = Knockout Champion ( 2007 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 Stevens debuted on the October 11 , 2007 episode of Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) ' s flagship show Impact ! under the tweaked name Awesome Kong as part of TNA 's attempt to bolster their Knockout division . After defeating Gail Kim , Kong participated appeared at the Bound for Glory PPV . There she took part in a 10 @-@ Knockout Gauntlet match to crown the first TNA Women 's Knockout Champion but she was eliminated by the combined effort of Angelina Love , ODB and eventual winner Gail Kim . Two months later at Turning Point , she lost a Women 's Knockout Championship match to Kim via disqualification after shoving the referee and Awesome Bombing him . This incident led to a No Disqualification match for the Women 's Knockout Championship at Final Resolution in January 2008 , which Kong also lost . On the next episode of Impact ! , airing 10 January , Kong debuted an anonymous manager wearing a <unk> , later named Raisha Saeed ; with her help Kong finally won the Women 's Knockout Championship . At Lockdown , Kong and Saeed teamed up for the first time , losing a Tag Team Cage match to Kim and ODB . 
 On the 8 May episode of Impact ! Kong began a regular $ 25 @,@ 000 challenge to females in the audience who wanted to challenge her for the Women 's Knockout Championship . The audience members , played by planted wrestlers , failed to defeat her but one challenger , Taylor Wilde , kept returning and on 10 July she won both the $ 25 @,@ 000 and Women 's Knockout Championship on her third attempt . Kong then failed to regain the championship from Wilde during a rematch at Victory Road . On October 23 , during a live episode of Impact ! Kong defeated Wilde to become a two @-@ time Knockout Champion . Two weeks later Wilde 's tag team partner Rhaka Khan turned on her and aligned herself with Kong and Saeed . The alliance of Kong , Saeed and Khan became known as The <unk> , with a fourth wrestler named Sojourner Bolt joining later . Wilde then found a new partner in Roxxi , who helped her defeat Kong and Saeed in a tag team match at Turning Point . Going into 2009 , Bolt became the contender for Kong 's championship and left the <unk> with Khan . Kong retained her title against Bolt at Destination X in April . 
 On the March 26 episode of Impact ! , Kong and Saeed were defeated by villainous tag team The Beautiful People ( Angelina Love and Velvet Sky ) , and after the match The Beautiful People tried to cut Kong 's hair as part of their makeover gimmick . They continued to target Kong 's hair and eventually accomplished the task on the April 16 episode of Impact ! which transitioned Kong into a fan favorite by attempting to retaliate . The tension built to a Three @-@ Way Cage match at Lockdown for the Women 's Knockout Championship with Kong defending against Angelina Love and continual rival Wilde . In the match , Kong lost the championship after Velvet Sky , on the outside , tied Kong 's hair to the cage preventing her from breaking up Love 's pin on Wilde . After losing the title , Kong defeated Love 's allies Sky , Madison Rayne and Cute Kip in separate Stretcher matches ahead of their rematch . Love , however , retained the title against Kong at Sacrifice . 
 = = = = Knockouts Tag Team Champion ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 In August 2009 Kong and Saeed entered the tournament to crown the inaugural TNA Knockouts Tag Team Champions . In the first round of the tournament , the team was able to defeat The Main Event Mafia ( Traci Brooks and Sharmell ) after Saeed blind tagged Kong and pinned Brooks , much to Kong 's dismay . Three weeks later they were eliminated from the tournament by their long term rival Taylor Wilde and her partner Sarita when Wilde pinned Saeed . Subsequently , Kong began rivalries with Tara and Knockout Champion ODB . At Bound for Glory , Kong had her last match for the Knockout Championship against Tara and ODB , but Saeed inadvertently cost Kong the match while interfering . On the following episode of Impact ! Kong faced Saeed in a grudge match and powerbombed her through the entrance stage , signalling the end of both their partnership and the Saeed character . After interfering in two of Tara 's matches , Kong and Tara wrestled at Turning Point in a Cage match , which Tara won . 
 On the December 17 episode of Impact ! Kong formed a tag team with Hamada as they won a three @-@ way non @-@ title match against The Beautiful People ( Madison Rayne and Velvet Sky ) and the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Champions Taylor Wilde and Sarita , when Kong pinned Rayne . On the first Impact ! episode of 2010 , Kong and Hamada defeated Sarita and Wilde to win the TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship . 
 In a non @-@ storyline incident Bubba the Love Sponge claimed on his January 19 radio show that Stevens had attacked him while backstage for the tapings of Impact ! the previous day due to his negative comments concerning the Haiti earthquake relief project . Kong , who had been a driving force in the wrestling community in raising funds for Haiti , was reportedly sent home from the tapings following the altercation . It was later reported that the same day as Bubba 's radio show , Stevens asked for her release from TNA , but it was not granted . After she refused to take part in TNA 's January 2010 tour of the United Kingdom , the company suspended her . The following month , Stevens filed a lawsuit against Bubba for an alleged threatening phone call . She was reportedly released from TNA on March 1 . On the March 8 episode of Impact ! it was announced that Kong and Hamada were stripped of the Knockouts Tag Team title after allegedly failing to defend them in 30 days , even though their previous defense had taken place just 21 days prior , against Madison Rayne and Velvet Sky . On March 22 , TNA confirmed Stevens ' release , while also claiming that she had requested her release due to personal reasons , but she later said it was due to monetary issues and recent changes to TNA management . 
 In March 2013 , Stevens turned down an offer to take part in a special all Knockouts pay @-@ per @-@ view held by TNA . During an interview in late November 2012 , Stevens revealed that she would never again work for TNA Wrestling . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE ( 2010 – 2012 ) = = = 
 On December 29 , 2010 , it was reported that Stevens had signed a contract with WWE . From April 11 , 2011 onwards , vignettes aired during WWE television with Stevens , whose face was concealed by shadows and her signature braids , dismembering female dolls while cackling maniacally . During the April 25 episode of Raw , Stevens ' face was shown for the first time in the vignettes , and her new ring name was revealed as Kharma . Kharma made her debut on May 1 at Extreme Rules , attacking Michelle McCool after a match , and she continued to attack former WWE Divas Champions on both Raw and SmackDown in the following weeks . On the May 23 episode of Raw , Kharma interrupted a tag team match but rather than attack everyone , she uncharacteristically broke down crying . The following week , Kharma spoke for the first time to reveal she was pregnant and thus forced to take a leave of absence from WWE . During her absence , she was included as a downloadable playable character in the WWE ' 12 video game . 
 Kharma made a surprise return in the 2012 Royal Rumble match as the twenty @-@ first entrant . She intimidated Michael Cole into eliminating himself before eliminating <unk> only to be thrown out by Dolph Ziggler . With her entrance , she became the third female , after Chyna and Beth Phoenix , to participate in a Royal Rumble match . This also marked her first and only official WWE match . In July 2012 , Stevens confirmed via Twitter that she had parted ways with WWE , after being released from her contract . By August 19 , she had been added to the list of the playable characters on the main roster in the WWE ' 13 video game . In September 2013 , Stevens revealed that she was granted her release from WWE because she was not ready to return in the time they allotted for her . She also confirmed her interest in returning to the company , stating she was ready . 
 = = = Return to the independent circuit and Japan ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 In early November , it was reported that Stevens ( again under the Amazing Kong gimmick ) would be appearing at a Shine event on November 16 , 2012 as the mystery partner of Jazz in a tag team match against Mercedes Martinez and Rain . At the event , Kong and Jazz defeated Martinez and Rain after Kong pinned Rain . On January 18 , 2013 , Kong defeated D 'Arcy Dixon , Nikki St. John and <unk> in a four @-@ way match to win the vacant Resistance Pro Wrestling Women 's Championship . On March 8 , Kong returned to Chikara , losing to Eddie Kingston in an intergender main event . Stevens has also wrestled for PWS Bombshells ( as Amazing Kong ) in early to mid @-@ 2013 , defeating Amy Lee in consecutive matches . 
 On April 6 , 2013 , Kong returned to Shimmer at the Volume 53 internet pay @-@ per @-@ view , defeating Mia Yim in the opening match . The Amazing Kong returned to Shine event on July 12 , 2013 in a losing effort to Ivelisse in a four way to qualify for Shine Championship tournament among the participants were Angelina Love and Kimberly . Then at Shine 12 on August 23 , 2013 she defeated Mercedes Martinez in a singles match . On September 27 , 2013 Kong and Jessicka Havok were in a losing effort against <unk> Kay and Ivelisse . On October 25 , 2013 she defeated Madison Eagles in a singles match and later in the night she was announced the next challenger for the Shine Championship . On December 13 , 2013 she was defeated by Rain for the Shine Championship by count @-@ out . On January 24 , 2014 she defeated Taylor Made and on Shine 18 Kong defeated Nikki Storm and Shine 19 she defeated Athena . On August 22 , 2014 Kong was part of a # 1 contender four corner survival match to challenge Ivelisse for the Shine Championship the other participants in the match were Leah Von Dutch , Su Yung , and Nevaeh . Nevaeh would emerge victorious in the # 1 contender match but was unsuccessful on capturing the Shine Championship . On September 21 , 2014 Stevens was part of Smash <unk> Classic where she was captain of Team USA , Stevens would lose in her tournament match against LuFisto who was team captain of team Canada which lead Team Canada victorious . 
 On August 26 , 2015 , Kong returned to Japan to work the first ever event of Nanae Takahashi 's new <unk> promotion , which saw her and Meiko Satomura lose to Takahashi and Ayako Hamada in a main event tag team match . At the end of the show , Kong reformed the W Kong tag team with Aja Kong . Stevens was supposed to return to take part in <unk> 's November 25 event , but on November 22 Takahashi announced that she had pulled out of the match due to " poor health " and claimed she had decided to retire from professional wrestling . Stevens later stated that she had wrestled her final match in Japan and retired the Amazing Kong name , but was for the time being still working as Awesome Kong . 
 Despite her previous announcement that she had wrestled her final match in Japan , Stevens , again working under the name Amazing Kong , returned to the country on July 18 , 2016 , to work Aja Kong 's 30th anniversary event , promoted by Oz Academy . In the main event of the show , Kong teamed with Aja Kong and Ayako Hamada to defeat Chihiro Hashimoto , Hiroyo Matsumoto and Rina Yamashita . 
 = = = Return to TNA ( 2015 – 2016 ) = = = 
 On January 7 , 2015 , during Impact Wrestling 's debut on Destination America , Awesome Kong returned after a battle royal , had an altercation in the ring with Havok and attacked referee Brian <unk> . Over the following weeks , tension would build between Kong and Havok , with their feud culminating in a steel cage match on the Lockdown edition of Impact Wrestling on February 6 , which Kong won . On the March 6 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kong failed to capture the TNA Knockouts Championship in her match against Taryn Terrell after she got herself disqualified . She received a no disqualification rematch against Terrell on the TKO : Night of Knockouts edition of Impact Wrestling on April 24 , which she lost after The Dollhouse ( Marti Bell and Jade ) attacked Kong . On the May 1 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kong turned face and allied herself with Gail Kim to feud with The Dollhouse . The following week , Kong and Kim were defeated by The Dollhouse in a 3 – on – 2 handicap match . On the June 17 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kong teamed up with Brooke to defeat The Dollhouse in a " Double or Nothing " tag team match , meaning that Kong and Brooke will face Taryn Terrell for the TNA Knockouts Championship in a three @-@ way match . At Slammiversary XIII , Kong once again teamed with Brooke to defeat The Dollhouse in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap match . Kong and Brooke received their three @-@ way championship match on the July 1 episode of Impact Wrestling , in which Terrell retained the title . 
 In mid – August , Kong , representing TNA , started a brief feud with Lei 'D Tapa , who represented Jeff Jarrett 's " Global Force Wrestling " . The two faced off on August 12 in a match , that ended in a double count @-@ out . On the September 16 episode of Impact Wrestling , Kong competed in a fatal – four way match against Brooke , Gail Kim and Tapa for the TNA Women 's Knockout Championship , which Kim would win . At Bound for Glory , Kong received a match against Kim for but was unsuccessful in regaining the championship . During October and November ( taped in July ) , she participated in the TNA World Title Series , where she ended first of her block , tied with Gail Kim , advancing to the finals where she lost to Jessie Godderz round of 16 <unk> and being eliminated . 
 On January 5 , 2016 , during Impact Wrestling 's debut on Pop , Kong allied with the The Dollhouse ( Jade , Marti Bell and Rebel ) and became their new leader after she attacked The Beautiful People ( Madison Rayne and Velvet Sky ) and Gail Kim , once again turning heel in the process . On February 5 , TNA announced that Stevens had been released from her contract following a backstage real – life physical altercation with Rebecca ( Reby ) Hardy just a week before TNA 's tour in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Other media = = 
 She is a playable character in the WWE ' 12 and WWE ' 13 video games . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stevens grew up in Carson , California and has a younger brother . Prior to becoming a professional wrestler , she was employed as a social worker . She also owned a business that put vending machines in several high schools . Stevens ' family and friends helped her fund her career in wrestling , when she went to train in Japan . She is also an investor in Nu Skin Enterprises , a line of skin and nutritional products . 
 On May 30 , 2011 Stevens announced that she was pregnant with her first child . In July she made an inquiry about how many of her followers were " expecting as well " . Two days after she competed in the 2012 Royal Rumble , a TMZ article claimed sources close to her informed them that she had given birth to a baby boy named Jamie on December 31 , 2011 . This alleged claim from close sources was rephrased as fact within an hour by Pro Wrestling Torch . 
 In March TMZ expanded the story by saying that Kia had told friends she had delivery a healthy boy on December 31 , and that the child ( gender unconfirmed ) died an unspecified time prior to her being able to give birth . TMZ said she announced the birth as a success due to her emotional state at the time and fear of telling the truth after announcing the pregnancy on television . She also stated her intention to start a foundation for women who have experienced the loss of an unborn child . 
 She is currently engaged to Dan Ouellette , with whom she had been in a relationship for four years prior to getting engaged . 
 On August 6 , 2012 , weeks after she confirmed her WWE release , Stevens stated that she was on a mission to lose weight . She had recruited a team of fitness experts and a therapist so she could get back into wrestling shape . She also showed interest into turning the whole experience into a reality show . Recent photos have revealed a much slimmer Stevens . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Amazing Bomb / Awesome Bomb ( Independent circuit / Japan ) / ( TNA ) ( Sitout powerbomb ) 
 Amazing Press ( Independent circuit / Japan ) / Diving splash ( TNA ) 
 Implant Buster ( Lifting double underhook facebuster ) 
 Signature moves 
 Accordion Rack ( Modified backbreaker rack ) 
 Body avalanche 
 Gorilla press slam 
 Lariat 
 Mongolian chop 
 One @-@ handed or a two @-@ handed chokeslam 
 Release falling powerslam – usually used as a crossbody counter 
 Running splash 
 Spinning back fist 
 With Hamada 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Falling powerbomb ( Kong ) / Missile dropkick ( Hamada ) combination 
 With Brooke 
 Double @-@ team finishing moves 
 Elevated elbow drop 
 Managers 
 Raisha Saeed 
 Daffney 
 Nicknames 
 " The Mean Queen " 
 " Queen Kong " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Empire March " by Dale Oliver ( TNA ) 
 " Bad Karma " by Jim Johnston ( WWE ) 
 " Doll Parts " by Hole ( TNA ; January 6 , 2016 – February 5 , 2016 ; used as a member of The Dollhouse ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All Japan Women 's Pro @-@ Wrestling 
 WWWA World Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWWA World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Aja Kong 
 Japan Grand Prix ( 2003 ) 
 AWA Superstars of Wrestling 
 AWA Superstars World Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Cauliflower Alley Club 
 Women 's Wrestling ( Active ) Award ( 2011 ) 
 ChickFight 
 ChickFight IX 
 Gaea Japan 
 <unk> Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Aja Kong 
 Hustle 
 Hustle Super Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Erika 
 Ladies Legend Pro @-@ Wrestling 
 <unk> Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Aja Kong 
 NWA Midwest 
 NWA World Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NEO Japan Ladies Pro Wrestling 
 NEO Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Haruka Matsuo ( 1 ) , and Kyoko Kimura ( 1 ) 
 Oz Academy 
 Iron Woman Tag Tournament ( 2004 ) – with <unk> Nagashima 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Ranked 1 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2008 
 PWI Woman of the Year ( 2008 ) 
 Pro Wrestling World @-@ 1 
 World @-@ 1 Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Resistance Pro Wrestling 
 <unk> Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Total Nonstop Action Wrestling 
 TNA Knockouts Championship ( 2 times ) 
 TNA Knockouts Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Hamada 
 Queen of the Knockouts ( 2015 ) 
 Gauntlet for the Gold ( 2016 – Knockouts ) 
 = = Mixed martial arts record = = 
 = Caracal = 
 The caracal ( Caracal caracal ; English pronunciation : / <unk> / ) , also known as the Persian lynx , is a medium @-@ sized wild cat that lives in Africa , the Middle East , Persia and the Indian subcontinent . It reaches 40 – 50 centimetres ( 16 – 20 in ) at the shoulder , and weighs 8 – 18 kilograms ( 18 – 40 lb ) . The coat is uniformly reddish tan or sandy , while the ventral parts are lighter with small reddish markings . The caracal is characterised by a robust build , long legs , a short face , long tufted ears , and long canine teeth . It was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1777 . Eight subspecies are recognised . 
 Typically nocturnal ( active at night ) , the caracal is highly secretive and difficult to observe . It is territorial , and lives mainly alone or in pairs . The caracal is a carnivore that typically preys upon small mammals , birds and rodents . It can leap higher than 3 metres ( 10 ft ) and catch birds in mid @-@ air . It stalks its prey until it is within 5 metres ( 16 ft ) of it , after which it runs it down , the prey being killed by a bite to the throat or to the back of the neck . Breeding takes place throughout the year with both sexes becoming sexually mature by the time they are a year old . Gestation lasts between two and three months , resulting in a litter of one to six kittens . Juveniles leave their mothers at nine to ten months , though a few females stay back with their mothers . The average lifespan of the caracal in captivity is nearly 16 years . 
 The caracal inhabits forests , savannas , marshy lowlands , semi @-@ deserts , deserts , and scrub forests . The caracal is classified as Least Concern by the IUCN . Its survival is threatened by habitat loss due to agricultural expansion and desertification ; caracals are often persecuted for killing small livestock . Caracals have been tamed and used for hunting since the time of the ancient Egyptians until as recently as the 20th century . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The caracal is placed in the family Felidae and subfamily Felinae . The species was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber as Felis caracal in the journal Die <unk> in Abbildungen nach der Natur mit Beschreibungen in 1776 . In 1843 , British zoologist John Edward Gray placed the animal in the genus Caracal . The name " caracal " is composed of two Turkish words : kara , meaning black , and kulak , meaning ear . The first recorded use of this name dates back to 1760 . Alternative names for the caracal include gazelle cat , red cat , red lynx and <unk> . The caracal is often referred to as the lynx , a physically similar cat . 
 Earlier , the caracal was classified under the genera Lynx or Felis . However , a 2006 phylogenetic study showed that the caracal evolved nearly a million years before the lynx appeared . The caracal is most closely related to the African golden cat ( <unk> aurata , often considered a species of Caracal ) . These two species , together with the serval ( Leptailurus serval ) , form one of the eight lineages of Felidae . The Caracal lineage came into existence 8 @.@ 5 mya , and the ancestor of this lineage arrived in Africa 8 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 6 mya . It diverged from the serval probably within the last five million years , around the boundary between the Pliocene and the Pleistocene . 
 Eight subspecies are recognised : 
 A 2006 study gave the phylogenetic relationships of the caracal as follows : 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The caracal is a slender , moderately sized cat characterised by a robust build , a short face , long canine teeth , tufted ears , and long legs . It reaches nearly 40 – 50 centimetres ( 16 – 20 in ) at the shoulder ; the head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically 78 centimetres ( 31 in ) for males and 73 centimetres ( 29 in ) for females . While males weigh 12 – 18 kilograms ( 26 – 40 lb ) , females weigh 8 – 13 kilograms ( 18 – 29 lb ) . The tan , bushy tail measures 26 – 34 centimetres ( 10 – 13 in ) , and extends to the hocks . The caracal is sexually dimorphic ; the females are smaller than the males in most bodily parameters . 
 The prominent facial features include the 4 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long black tufts on the ears , two black stripes from the forehead to the nose , the black outline of the mouth , and the white patches surrounding the eyes and the mouth . The eyes appear to be narrowly open due to the lowered upper eyelid , probably an adaptation to shield the eyes from the sun 's glare . The ear tufts may start drooping as the animal ages . The coat is uniformly reddish tan or sandy , though black caracals are also known . The underbelly and the insides of the legs are lighter , often with small reddish markings . The fur , soft , short and dense , grows coarser in the summer . The ground hairs ( the basal layer of hair covering the coat ) are denser in winter than in summer . The length of the guard hairs ( the hair extending above the ground hairs ) can be up to 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) long in winter , but shorten to 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) in summer . These features indicate the onset of moulting in the hot season , typically in October and November . The hindlegs are longer than the forelegs , so that the body appears to be sloping downward from the rump . 
 The caracal is often confused with the lynx , as both cats have tufted ears . However , a notable point of difference between the two is that the lynx is spotted and blotched , while the caracal shows no such markings on the coat . The African golden cat has a similar build as the caracal 's , but is darker and lacks the ear tufts . The sympatric serval can be told apart from the caracal by the former 's lack of ear tufts , white spots behind the ears , spotted coat , longer legs , longer tail and smaller footprints . 
 The skull of the caracal is high and rounded , featuring large auditory bullae , a well @-@ developed supraoccipital crest normal to the sagittal crest , and a strong lower jaw . The caracal has a total of 30 teeth ; the dental formula is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 13 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 1 . The deciduous dentition is 3 @.@ 1 @.@ 23 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 . The striking canines are up to 2 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) long , heavy and sharp ; these are used to give the killing bite to the prey . The caracal lacks the second upper premolars , and the upper molars are diminutive . The large paws , similar to those of the cheetah , consist of four digits in the hindlegs and five in the forelegs . The first digit of the foreleg remains above the ground and features the dewclaw . The claws , sharp and retractable ( able to be drawn in ) , are larger but less curved in the hindlegs . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The caracal is typically nocturnal ( active at night ) , though some activity may be observed during the day as well . However , the cat is so secretive and difficult to observe that its activity at daytime might easily go unnoticed . A study in South Africa showed that caracals are most active when air temperature drops below 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) ; activity typically ceases at higher temperatures . A solitary cat , the caracal mainly occurs alone or in pairs ; the only group seen is of mothers with their offspring . Females in oestrus will temporarily pair with males . A territorial animal , the caracal marks rocks and vegetation in its territory with urine and probably with dung , which is not covered with soil . Claw scratching is prominent , and dung middens are typically not formed . In Israel , males are found to have territories averaging 220 square kilometres ( 85 sq mi ) , while that of females averaged 57 square kilometres ( 22 sq mi ) . The male territories vary from 270 – 1 @,@ 116 square kilometres ( 104 – 431 sq mi ) in Saudi Arabia . In Mountain Zebra National Park ( South Africa ) , the female territories vary between 4 and 6 @.@ 5 square kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 and 2 @.@ 5 sq mi ) . These territories overlap extensively . The conspicuous ear tufts and the facial markings often serve as a method of visual communication ; caracals have been observed interacting with each other by moving the head from side to side so that the tufts flicker rapidly . Like other cats , the caracal meows , growls , hisses , spits and purrs . 
 = = = Diet and hunting = = = 
 A carnivore , the caracal typically preys upon small mammals , birds and rodents . Studies in South Africa have reported that it preys on the Cape grysbok , the common duiker , sheep , goats , bush vlei rats , rock hyraxes , hare and birds . A study in western India showed that rodents comprise a significant portion of the diet . They will feed from a variety of sources , but tend to focus on the most abundant one . Grasses and grapes are taken occasionally . Larger antelopes such as young kudu ] ] , bushbuck , mountain reedbuck and springbok may also be targeted . Mammals generally comprise at least 80 percent of the diet . Lizards , snakes and insects are infrequently eaten . They are notorious for attacking livestock , but rarely attack human beings . 
 Its speed and agility make it an efficient hunter , able to take down prey two to three times its size . The powerful hind legs allow it to leap more than 3 metres ( 10 ft ) in the air to catch birds on the wing . It can even twist and change its direction mid @-@ air . It is an adroit climber . It stalks its prey until it is within 5 metres ( 16 ft ) , following which it can launch into a sprint . While large prey such as antelopes are killed by a throat bite , smaller prey are suffocated by a bite on the back of the neck . Kills are consumed immediately , and less commonly dragged to cover . It will return to large kills if undisturbed . It has been observed to begin feeding on antelope kills at the hind parts . It may scavenge at times , though this has not been frequently observed . It often has to compete with foxes , wolves , leopards and hyaena for prey . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both sexes become sexually mature by the time they are a year old ; production of gametes begins even earlier at seven to ten months . However , successful mating takes place only at 12 to 15 months . Breeding takes place throughout the year . Oestrus , one to three days long , recurs every two weeks unless the female is pregnant . Females in oestrus show a spike in urine @-@ marking , and form temporary pairs with males . Mating has not been extensively studied ; limited number of observations suggest that copulation , that lasts nearly four minutes on an average , begins with the male smelling the areas urine @-@ marked by the female , who rolls on the ground . Following this he approaches and mounts the female . The pair separate after copulation . 
 Gestation lasts nearly two to three months , following which a litter consisting of one to six kittens is born . Births generally peak from October to February . Births take place in dense vegetation or deserted burrows of aardvark and porcupines . Kittens are born with their eyes and ears shut and the claws non @-@ retractable ( unable to be drawn inside ) ; the coat resembles that of adults , but the abdomen is spotted . Eyes open by ten days , but it takes longer for the vision to become normal . The ears become erect and the claws become retractable by the third or the fourth week . Around the same time the kittens start roaming their birthplace , and start playing among themselves by the fifth or the sixth week . They begin taking solid food around the same time ; they have to wait for nearly three months before they make their first kill . As the kittens start moving about by themselves , the mother starts shifting them everyday . All the milk teeth appear in 50 days , and permanent dentition is completed in 10 months . Juveniles begin dispersing at nine to ten months , though a few females stay back with their mothers . The average lifespan of the caracal in captivity is nearly 16 years . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The caracal inhabits forests , savannas , marshy lowlands , semi @-@ deserts and scrub forests . Dry areas with low rainfall and availability of cover are preferred . In montane habitats such as the Ethiopian Highlands , they occur at altitudes as high as 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) above the sea level . The caracal is widespread across the African continent , the Middle East and the Indian subcontinent . Although the Sahara Desert and the equatorial forests do not figure in its distribution , the caracal occurs in the Saharan ranges of Atlas , Hoggar and Tassili to the northwest and the <unk> to the west . The range has diminished considerably in northern and western Africa . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The caracal is categorised as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) ; African populations are listed under CITES Appendix II while Asian populations come under CITES Appendix I. In central , west , north and northeast Africa and Asia , the major threat to the survival of the caracal is habitat loss due to agricultural expansion and desertification . Caracal are often persecuted for killing small livestock . A 1989 survey revealed that the caracal was responsible for the elimination of nearly 5 @.@ 3 livestock per 100 square kilometres ( 39 sq mi ) per year in the erstwhile Cape Province , South Africa . During 1931 – 52 , the number of caracals killed averaged 2 @,@ 219 per year in the Karoo . Some tribes kill it for its meat . As of 1996 , hunting of caracals is prohibited in Afghanistan , Algeria , Egypt , India , Iran , Israel , Jordan , Kazakhstan , Lebanon , Morocco , Pakistan , Syria , Tajikistan , Tunisia , Turkey , Turkmenistan , and Uzbekistan . However , Namibia and South Africa recognise it as a " problem animal " ( vermin ) and allow its hunting to protect livestock . Caracals occur in a number of protected areas across their range . 
 = = Interaction with human beings = = 
 Caracals appear to have been religiously significant to the ancient Egyptians . Caracals occur in paintings and as bronze figurines ; their sculptures were believed to guard the tombs of pharaohs . <unk> caracals have also been discovered . The ear tufts have been elaborately depicted in some tombs , and referred to as umm <unk> 't ( " mother of feathers " ) . 
 Chinese emperors would use caracals , as well as cheetah , as gifts . In the 13th and the 14th centuries , the Yuan rulers bought numerous caracals , cheetah and tigers from the western parts of the empire and Muslim merchants in return for gold , silver , cash and silk . According to the Ming <unk> , the subsequent Ming dynasty ( 14th to 17th centuries ) continued this practice . Until as recently as the 20th century , the caracal was used in hunts by Indian rulers to hunt small game , while the cheetah was used for larger game . In those times , caracals would be exposed to a flock of pigeons and people would bet on which caracal would kill the largest number of pigeons . This probably gave rise to the expression " to put the cat among the pigeons " . 
 In the present day , caracals may be kept as pets . They can adapt well to domestic surroundings and are not generally aggressive toward domestic cats and dogs . However , they are typically <unk> as their scratches might be dangerous . Caracals should be kept away from pet birds , as they may prey on them . The coat of the caracal is used in making fur coats , while its skin does not have much economic significance . 
 = John Doggett = 
 FBI Special Agent John Jay Doggett is a fictional character in the Fox science fiction @-@ supernatural television series The X @-@ Files . With his FBI partners Dana Scully ( season 8 ) and Monica Reyes ( season 9 ) , they work on the X @-@ Files together , which is concerned with cases with particularly mysterious or possibly supernatural circumstances that were left unsolved and shelved by the FBI . John Doggett is played by Robert Patrick . Doggett was a main character from the eighth to ninth seasons ( 2000 – 2002 ) , replacing David Duchovny 's character Fox Mulder . Doggett appeared in the opening credits and every episode from the season eight premiere to the series finale . 
 Doggett made his first appearance in the 2000 episode " Within " . Doggett served in the United States Military from the 1970s to the 1980s . Later he started working for the New York Police Department , he was eventually promoted to detective . After his son 's death , he got a job in the FBI . He started to work for the Criminal Investigations Division . In 2000 , he was assigned to the X @-@ Files office , after the disappearance of Mulder . The introduction of Doggett was met with mostly positive reaction by critics , while getting more mixed response from longtime fans of the series . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 Doggett served in the United States Marine Corps in the 24th Marine Amphibious Unit from 1977 @-@ 1983 . His final rank was Sergeant ( E @-@ 5 ) . While serving in the military , he became good friends with fellow Marine Knowle Rohrer . From 1982 @-@ 1983 , Doggett played a role in the Multi @-@ National Peacekeeping Force for Lebanon development . Doggett retired from the U.S. Marine Corps with commendations after being wounded in the line of duty . After gaining a Juris Doctor and a Master 's degree in Public Administration from Syracuse University , Doggett went on to work for the New York Police Department from 1987 – 1995 , eventually becoming a detective in the Fugitive Division 's Warrant section . While he was working for the NYPD , his son , Luke Doggett ( played in flashbacks by Jake Fritz ) , was abducted and murdered . Doggett teamed up with Special Agent Monica Reyes , who was working out of the New York FBI field office at the time , to search for his son 's killer . After his son 's death , Doggett 's marriage to Barbara Doggett ( played by Patrick 's real @-@ life wife Barbara ) ended in divorce . 
 In 1995 , Doggett graduated from the FBI Academy and assumed the position of FBI Special Agent in the Criminal Investigations Division . In 2000 , Agent Doggett was assigned by Deputy Director Alvin Kersh to head up the manhunt to find Special Agent Fox Mulder . The manhunt was unsuccessful and Doggett was demoted to work on the X @-@ Files with Special Agent Dana Scully . During this time , Doggett and Kersh developed a bitter enmity , similar to the early relationship between Mulder and Walter Skinner . 
 Initially , Scully and Doggett were not very trusting of each other . After years of investigating several X @-@ Files cases with Mulder , Scully had slowly grown to believe in the existence of the paranormal . Doggett , however , is a no @-@ nonsense agent , who frequently utilizes his down @-@ to @-@ earth sensibilities he learned as a Marine and a cop . Doggett therefore functioned as " the skeptic " , while Scully somewhat served in Mulder 's old position of " the believer " . Gradually , Doggett and Scully came to trust one another to some degree , although he and Mulder , who later returned and recovered from his abduction , remained untrusting of each other for some time . Doggett and his new partner , Reyes , took charge of the X @-@ Files after Mulder was fired from the FBI and Scully left active duty to teach at the FBI Academy and to care for her son , Baby William . In the series finale , Doggett testified on Mulder 's behalf when Mulder was charged with murder . Later , he and Reyes narrowly escaped from Knowle Rohrer , who Doggett had discovered about a year prior was working for the conspiracy . At the end of the series , Doggett and Reyes are likely regular agents , as it appears that Kersh was forced to close down the X @-@ Files division . 
 Doggett does not appear , nor is he mentioned , in the 2008 X @-@ Files feature film . He similarly does not appear , nor does he receive a mention , in the 2016 television revival of The X @-@ Files . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 More than one hundred actors auditioned for the role , but only ten were taken seriously by the producers . Known actors such as Lou Diamond Phillips and Hart Bochner were among the auditionees for the role as Agent Doggett . Both Phillips and Bochner were considered for the role , but the producers eventually chose Robert Patrick . In an interview with , Chris Carter said " I think it was something that we all talked about , but I wrote his voice . So , I think he was someone we all came up with together , but his voice came out of my head . But , it was something that was helped in a large degree by casting Robert Patrick . " 
 Patrick had an obligation to work on another series after being cast as Doggett . The series was entitled L.A. Sheriff 's Homicide and was shooting its pilot episode . Carter was able to broker a deal with the other studio , paving the way for Patrick 's portrayal of Doggett in season eight premiere " Within " . Doggett was modeled after Bud White from the 1997 feature film , L.A. Confidential . Carter had previously named Dana Scully after Los Angeles Dodgers announcer Vin Scully , and he decided to name the new character after Vin Scully 's longtime broadcasting partner Jerry Doggett as an homage . Before the character got a name , he was referred to by the producers as " Agent White " . 
 Carter was inspired to write the scene in which Scully throws water into Doggett 's face , due to Carter being aware that new actor Patrick would be facing opposition from some members of the fan community , Patrick has even called that scene his favorite ever shot for the series , admitting that he couldn 't think of a better way to introduce the character and that the scene not only said a lot but that it had actually helped him . The introduction of the new character in the eighth season was one of two main factors that influenced the series ' production personnel to decide to go back to more serious episodes . The other major reason was to avoid " trivializing the absence of Mulder " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Some members of the fanbase criticized the introduction of Doggett , claiming that the character had been intentionally created to replace previous lead Fox Mulder 's work . Chris Carter responded to this with a denial of the accuracy of their claims , and further stated in an interview with National Public Radio ( NPR ) , " What he brings is a different approach to The X @-@ Files . First of all , he ’ s a knee jerk skeptic so he couldn ’ t be more different than the character of Mulder . He ’ s an insider at the FBI , well liked , has buddies . Mulder , of course , he ’ s been banished to the basement along with all of his X @-@ files . So when he ’ s put together with Agent Scully , who has become something of a reluctant believer , the dynamic on the show changes completely " . 
 Robert Patrick was awarded a Saturn Award in the category " Best Television Actor " in 2001 for his role as Doggett , winning over such nominees as Richard Dean Anderson for his work as Jack O 'Neill on Stargate SG @-@ 1 . He was also nominated for the award the following year . Entertainment Weekly reviewer Ken Tucker said that Patrick 's portrayal brought " hardboiled alertness " to the series , being overall positive towards the new character . Anita Gates from The New York Times said that most fans had " accepted " Doggett , and further commented that the character actually looked " like a Secret Service Agent . " Kathie Huddleston from Sci Fi Wire commented on the absence of Mulder , calling Patrick a " fine actor " , and asserting that the character was " way @-@ too @-@ serious " to be intended as a direct replacement for Mulder . Carter commented on the character , saying " everybody likes Robert Patrick and the character " , but continued with fans missed David Duchovny and his character . Patrick 's performance saw him named as one of " The Ten Sexiest Men of Sci @-@ Fi " by TV Guide . 
 = Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne = 
 Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ( pop . 43 @,@ 200 ) is a market town in Tameside , Greater Manchester , England . The population had increased to 45 @,@ 198 at the 2011 census . Historically in Lancashire , it is on the north bank of the River Tame , in the foothills of the Pennines , 6 @.@ 2 miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km ) east of Manchester . 
 Evidence of Stone Age , Bronze Age , and Viking activity has been discovered in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . The " Ashton " part of the town 's name probably dates from the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , and derives from Old English meaning " settlement by ash trees " . The origin of the " under @-@ Lyne " suffix is less clear ; it possibly derives from the British <unk> meaning elm or from Ashton 's proximity to the Pennines . In the Middle Ages , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne was a parish and township and Ashton Old Hall was held by the de Asshetons , lords of the manor . Granted a Royal Charter in 1414 , the manor spanned a rural area consisting of marshland , moorland , and a number of villages and hamlets . 
 Until the introduction of the cotton trade in 1769 , Ashton was considered " bare , wet , and almost worthless " . The factory system , and textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution triggered a process of unplanned urbanisation in the area , and by the mid @-@ 19th century Ashton had emerged as an important mill town at a convergence of newly constructed canals and railways . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne 's transport network allowed for an economic boom in cotton spinning , weaving , and coal mining , which led to the granting of municipal borough status in 1847 . 
 In the mid @-@ 20th century , imports of cheaper foreign goods led to the decline of Ashton 's heavy industries but the town has continued to thrive as a centre of commerce and Ashton Market is one of the largest outdoor markets in the United Kingdom . The 140 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 13 @,@ 000 m2 ) , two @-@ floored Ashton Arcades shopping centre opened in 1995 and an IKEA store in 2006 . 
 = = History = = 
 Evidence of prehistoric activity in the area comes from Ashton Moss – a 107 @-@ hectare ( 260 @-@ acre ) peat bog – and is the only one of Tameside 's 22 Mesolithic sites not located in the hilly uplands in the north east of the borough . A single Mesolithic flint tool has been discovered in the bog , along with a collection of nine Neolithic flints . There was further activity in or around the bog in the Bronze Age . In about 1911 , an adult male skull was found in the moss ; it was thought to belong to the Romano @-@ British period – similar to the Lindow Man bog body – until radiocarbon dating revealed that it dated from 1 @,@ 320 – 970 BC . 
 The eastern terminus of the early medieval linear earthwork Nico Ditch is in Ashton Moss ( grid reference <unk> ) ; it was probably used as an administrative boundary and dates from the 8th or 9th century . Legend claims it was built in a single night in 869 or 870 as a defence against Viking invaders . Further evidence of Dark Age activity in the area comes from the town 's name . The " Ashton " part probably derives from the Anglo @-@ Saxon meaning " settlement by ash trees " , the origin of the " under @-@ Lyne " element is less clear : it could derive from the British <unk> meaning elm , or may refer to Ashton being " under the line " of the Pennines . This means that Ashton probably became a settlement some time after the Romans left Britain in the 5th century . An early form of the town 's name , which included a burh element , indicates that in the 11th century Ashton and Bury were two of the most important towns in Lancashire . The " under Lyne " suffix was not widely used until the mid @-@ 19th century when it became useful for distinguishing the town from other places called Ashton . 
 The Domesday Survey of 1086 does not directly mention Ashton , perhaps because only a partial survey of the area had been taken . However , it is thought that St Michael 's Church , mentioned in the Domesday entry for the ancient parish of Manchester , was in Ashton . The town itself was first mentioned in the 12th century when the manor was part of the barony of Manchester . By the late 12th century , a family who adopted the name Assheton held the manor on behalf of the <unk> , barons of Manchester . Ashton Old Hall was a manor house , the administrative centre of the manor , and the seat of the Assheton family . With three wings , the hall was " one of the finest great houses in the North West " of the 14th century . It has been recognised as important for being one of the few great houses in south @-@ east Lancashire and possibly one of the few halls influenced by French design in the country . The town was granted a Royal Charter in 1414 , which allowed it to hold a fair twice a year , and a market on every Monday , making the settlement a market town . 
 According to popular tradition , Sir Ralph de Assheton , who was lord of the manor in the mid @-@ 14th century and known as the Black Knight , was an unpopular and cruel feudal lord . After his death , his unpopularity led the locals to parade an effigy of him around the town each Easter Monday and collect money . Afterwards the effigy would be hung up , shot , and set on fire , before being torn apart and thrown into the crowd . The first recorded occurrence of the event was in 1795 , although the tradition may be older ; it continued into the 1830s . 
 The manor remained in the possession of the Assheton family until 1514 when its male line terminated . The lordship of the manor passed to Sir George Booth devolving through the Booth family until the Earls of Stamford inherited it through marriage in 1758 . The Booth @-@ Greys then held the manor until the 19th century , whose patronage , despite being absentee lords , was probably the stimulus for Ashton 's growth of a large @-@ scale domestic @-@ based textile industry in the 17th century . Pre @-@ industrial Ashton was centred on four roads : Town Street , Crickets Lane , Old Street , and Cowhill Lane . In the late @-@ 18th and early @-@ 19th centuries , the town was re @-@ planned , with a grid pattern of roads . As a result , very little remains of the previous town . In 1730 a workhouse was established which consisted of a house and two cottages ; it later came to be used as a hospital . The Ashton Canal was constructed in the 1790s to transport coal from the area to Manchester , with a branch to the coal pits at Fairbottom . 
 Domestic fustian and woollen weaving have a long history in the town , dating back to at least the Early Modern period . Accounts dated 1626 highlight that Humphrey Chetham had dealings with <unk> in Ashton . However , the introduction of the factory system in the 19th century , during the Industrial Revolution , changed Ashton from a market town to a mill town . Having previously been one of the two main towns in the Tame Valley , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne became one of the " most famous mill towns in the North West " . On Christmas Day 1826 , workers in the town formed the Ashton Unity , a sickness and benefits society that was later renamed the Loyal Order of Ancient Shepherds . From 1773 to 1905 , 75 cotton mills were established in the town . On his tour of northern England in 1849 , Scottish publisher Angus Reach said : 
 In Ashton , too , there lingers on a handful of miserable old men , the remnants of the cotton hand @-@ loom weavers . No young persons think of pursuing such an occupation . The few who practice it were too old and confirmed in old habits , when the power @-@ loom was introduced , to be able to learn a new way of making their bread . 
 The cotton industry in the area grew rapidly from the start of the 19th century until the Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861 – 1865 . The growth of the town 's textile industry led to the construction of estates specifically for workers . Workers ' housing in Park Bridge , on the border between Ashton and Oldham , was created in the 1820s . The iron works were founded in 1786 and were some of the earliest in the north west . The Oxford Mills settlement was founded in 1845 by local industrialist and mill @-@ owner Hugh Mason who saw it as a model industrial community . The community was provided with a recreational ground , a gymnasium , and an institute containing public baths , a library , and a reading room . Mason estimated that establishing the settlement cost him around £ 10 @,@ 000 and would require a further £ 1 @,@ 000 a year to maintain ( about £ 600 @,@ 000 and £ 60 @,@ 000 respectively as of 2016 ) , and that its annual mortality rate was significantly lower than in the rest of the town . 
 A poor supply of fresh water and dwellings without adequate drainage led to a cholera outbreak in the town in 1832 . The Ashton Poor Law Union was established in 1837 and covered most of what is now Tameside . A new workhouse was built in 1850 which provided housing for 500 people . It later became part of Tameside General Hospital . Construction on the Sheffield , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Manchester Railway ( SA & MR ) began in 1837 to provide passenger transport between Manchester and Sheffield . Although a nine @-@ arch viaduct in Ashton collapsed in April 1845 , the line was fully opened on 22 December 1845 . The SA & MR was amalgamated with the Sheffield and Lincolnshire Junction Railway , the Great Grimsby & Sheffield Railway , and the Grimsby Docks Company in 1847 to form the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway ( MS & LR ) . In 1890 , the MS & LR bought the Old Hall and demolished it to make way for the construction of new sidings . 
 In the late 19th century , public buildings such as the market hall , town hall , public library and public baths were built . A donation from Hugh Mason funded the construction of the baths constructed in 1870 – 1871 . The Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne Improvement Act was passed in 1886 which gave the borough influence over housing and allowed the imposition of minimum standards such as drainage . Coal mining not as important to the town as the textile industry , but in 1882 the Ashton Moss Colliery had the deepest mine shaft in the world at 870 metres ( 2 @,@ 850 ft ) . Ashton 's textile industry remained constant between 1865 and the 1920s . Although some mills closed or merged , the number of spindles in use increased . With the collapse of the overseas market in the 1920s , the town 's cotton industry went into decline , and by the 1930s most of the firms and mills in the area had closed . 
 Ashton became a part of the newly formed Metropolitan Borough of Tameside in 1974 . In May 2004 , a massive fire ravaged the Victorian market hall , and a temporary building called " The Phoenix Market Hall " was built on Old Cross Street on the opposite side of the Old Market hall . Described as the " heart of Ashton " , the market was rebuilt and officially opened on 1 December 2008 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Lying within the historic county boundaries of Lancashire since the early 12th century , Ashton anciently constituted a " single parish @-@ township " , but was divided into four divisions ( sometimes each styled townships ) : Ashton Town , Audenshaw , Hartshead , and Knott Lanes . Ashton Town was granted a Royal Charter in 1414 , granting it the right to hold a market . All four divisions lay within the Hundred of Salford , an ancient division of the county of Lancashire . 
 In 1827 , police commissioners were established for Ashton Town , tasked with bringing about social and economic improvement . In 1847 , this area was incorporated under the Municipal Corporations Act 1835 , as a municipal borough with the name " Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne " , giving it borough status . When the administrative county of Lancashire was created by the Local Government Act 1888 , the borough fell under the newly created Lancashire County Council . The borough 's boundaries changed during the late 19th century through small exchanges of land with the neighbouring districts of Oldham , Mossley , Dukinfield , and Stalybridge . In the early 20th century , the Borough of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne grew ; Hurst Urban District was added in 1927 , parts of Hartshead and Alt civil parishes in 1935 , and parts of <unk> Rural District in 1954 . Since 1956 , Ashton has been twinned with Chaumont , France . 
 Under the Local Government Act 1972 , the town 's borough status was abolished , and Ashton has , since 1 April 1974 , formed part of the Metropolitan Borough of Tameside , within the metropolitan county of Greater Manchester . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne is divided into four wards : Ashton Hurst , Ashton St. Michaels , Ashton St Peters and Ashton Waterloo . As of the 2012 local elections , all twelve seats are held by Labour councillors . 
 Since the Reform Act 1832 the town has been represented in Parliament as part of the Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne parliamentary constituency . During its early years the constituency was represented in the House of Commons by members of the Liberal Party until the late 19th century , when it was broadly held by the Conservative Party . It has been held by the Labour Party since 1935 ; Angela Rayner has been the constituency 's Member of Parliament since 2015 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 At 53 ° 29 ′ 38 ″ N 2 ° 6 ′ 11 ″ W ( 53 @.@ <unk> ° , − 2 @.@ 1032 ° ) , and 160 miles ( 257 km ) north @-@ northwest of London , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne stands on the north bank of the River Tame , about 35 feet ( 11 m ) above the river . Described in Samuel Lewis 's A Topographical Dictionary of England ( 1848 ) as situated " on a gentle declivity " , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne lies on undulating ground by the Pennines , reaching a maximum elevation of about 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 305 m ) above sea level . It is 6 @.@ 2 miles ( 10 @.@ 0 km ) east of Manchester city centre , and is bound on all sides by other towns : Audenshaw , Droylsden , Dukinfield , Mossley , Oldham and Stalybridge , with little or no green space between them . Ashton experiences a temperate maritime climate , like much of the British Isles . 
 Generally the bedrock of the west of the town consists of coal measures , which were exploited by the coal mining industry , while the east is mainly millstone grit . Overlying the bedrock are deposits of glacial sand and gravel , clay , and some alluvial deposits . Ashton Moss , a peat bog , lies to the west of the town and was originally much larger . The River Tame forms part of the southern boundary , dividing the town from Stalybridge and Dukinfield , and the River Medlock runs to the west . 
 Ashton 's built environment is similar to the urban structure of most towns in England , consisting of residential dwellings centred on a market square and high street in the town centre , which is the local centre of commerce . There is a mixture of low @-@ density urban areas , suburbs , semi @-@ rural and rural locations in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , but overwhelmingly the land use in the town is residential ; industrial areas and terraced houses give way to suburbs and rural greenery as the land rises out of the town in the east . The older streets are narrow and irregular , but those built more recently are spacious , lined by " substantial and handsome houses " . Areas and suburbs of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne include Hartshead , Hazelhurst , Hurst , Taunton , and Waterloo . 
 = = Demography = = 
 As of the 2001 UK census , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne had a population of 43 @,@ 236 . The 2001 population density was 12 @,@ 374 per mi ² ( 4 @,@ 777 per km ² ) , with a 100 to 96 @.@ 1 female @-@ to @-@ male ratio . Of those over 16 years old , 30 @.@ 9 % were single ( never married ) and 50 @.@ 0 % married . Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne 's 18 @,@ 347 households included 33 @.@ 2 % one @-@ person , 33 @.@ 0 % married couples living together , 8 @.@ 9 % were co @-@ habiting couples , and 12 @.@ 4 % single parents with their children ; these figures were similar to those of Tameside , however both Tameside and Ashton have higher rates of single parents than England ( 9 @.@ 5 % ) . Of those aged 16 – 74 , 37 @.@ 0 % had no academic qualifications , similar to that of 35 @.@ 2 % in all of Tameside but significantly higher than the 28 @.@ 9 % in all of England , and 11 @.@ 9 % had an educational qualification such as first degree , higher degree , qualified teacher status , qualified medical doctor , qualified dentist , qualified nurse , midwife , health visitor , etc. compared to 20 % nationwide . 
 In 1931 , 10 @.@ 2 % of Ashton 's population was middle class compared with 14 % in England and Wales , and by 1971 , this had increased steadily to 17 @.@ 3 % compared with 24 % nationally . In the same time frame , there was the decline of the working class population . In 1931 , 33 @.@ 8 % were working class compared with 36 % in England and Wales ; by 1971 , this had decreased to 29 @.@ 2 % in Ashton and 26 % nationwide . The rest of the population was made up of clerical workers and skilled manual workers . 
 = = = Population change = = = 
 In 1700 , the population of Ashton , the Tame Valley 's main urban area , was an estimated 550 . The town 's 18th @-@ century growth was fuelled by an influx of people from the countryside attracted by the prospect of work in its new industries , mirroring the rest of the region . In the early 19th century , Irish immigrants escaping from the Great Irish Famine were also drawn to the area by the new jobs created , The availability of jobs created by the growth of the textile industry in the town led to Ashton 's population increasing by more than 400 % between 1801 and 1861 , from 6 @,@ 500 to 34 @,@ 886 . The population dropped by 9 % during the 1860s as a consequence of the cotton famine caused by the American Civil War . The table below details the population change since 1851 , including the percentage change since the last census . 
 = = Religion = = 
 St Michael and All Angels ' Church is a Grade I listed building that dates back to at least 1262 , although it was rebuilt in the 15th , 16th and 19th centuries . In 1795 it was the only church in the town , and one of only two in Tameside . There was a great increase in the number of chapels and religious buildings in the area during the 19th century , and by the end of the century there were 44 Anglican churches and 138 chapels belonging to other denominations . The most common denomination amongst the chapels were Catholic , Congregationalist , and Methodist . 
 The 19th @-@ century evangelist John Wroe attempted to turn Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne into a " new Jerusalem " . He founded the Christian Israelite Church , and from 1822 to 1831 Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne was the religion 's headquarters . Wroe intended to build a wall around the town with four gateways , and although the wall was never constructed , the four gatehouses were . Popular opinion in the town turned against Wroe when he was accused of indecent behaviour in 1831 , but the charges were dismissed . The Church spread to Australia , where it is still active . 
 As of the 2001 UK census , 68 @.@ 5 % of Ashton residents reported themselves as being Christian , 6 @.@ 1 % Muslim , 5 @.@ 0 % Hindu , and 0 @.@ 2 % Buddhist . The census recorded that 11 @.@ 4 % had no religion , 0 @.@ 2 % had an alternative religion , and 8 @.@ 7 % did not state their religion . The proportion of Hindus in the town was much higher than the average for the borough and the whole of England 1 @.@ 4 % and 1 @.@ 1 % respectively . The percentage of Muslims in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne was nearly double the national average of 3 @.@ 1 % , and was higher than the average of 2 @.@ 5 % for Tameside . In Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne are located 6 mosques ( October 2013 ) , including on <unk> Street in Penny Meadow ( Ashton Central Mosque , formerly known as Markazi Jamia Mosque ) and on Katherine Street in West End ( Masjid Hamza Mosque ) . 
 = = Economy = = 
 In the medieval period , farming was important in Ashton , particularly arable farming . By the 18th century , textiles had also become more to the town 's economy ; in the 1700s , 33 @.@ 2 % of those with jobs worked in textiles and 36 % in agriculture . With the advent of the Industrial Revolution in the second half of the 18th century , the textile industry in the town boomed . It continued to expand until the cotton famine of 1861 – 1865 , after which the industry was steady until it collapsed after the overseas markets shut down in the 1920s . 
 Coal has been mined in Ashton since at least the 17th century . In the late 18th and early 19th centuries demand for coal increased , which led to an expansion of the town 's coal industry . The produce of the collieries was transported by canal to Manchester . The industry began to decline during the late 19th century , and by 1904 only the Ashton Moss Colliery was still operational , the last colliery to be opened in the area . 
 Ashton town centre , which is the largest in Tameside , developed in the Victorian period . Many of the original buildings have survived , and as a result , the town centre is protected by Tameside Council as a conservation area . As well as being populated by leading high @-@ street names , Ashton has an outdoor market which was established in the medieval period . It is made up of about 180 stalls , and is open six days a week . The farmers ' market , with over 70 stalls , is the largest in the region , as is the weekday flea market . Ashton Market Hall underwent a £ 15M restoration after it was damaged by fire . The Ashton Renewal Area project has attracted investment in the town centre , encouraging conservation and economic development . 
 The 140 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 13 @,@ 000 m2 ) , two @-@ floored Ashton Arcades shopping centre opened in 1995 . Permission has been granted for a £ 40 million extension yet no work on this project has begun , on the nearby Lord Sheldon Way development of the new Golf Course is in its early stages , Tameside Hospital is under regeneration and there are preliminary stages being taken to welcome the Metrolink to Ashton . These four projects are currently the biggest in Ashton . In 2006 , after failing twice to gain permission , IKEA announced plans to build its first town centre @-@ store in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . The store is expected to create 500 new jobs as well as attract other businesses to the area . The store opened on 19 October 2006 and covers 296 @,@ 000 square feet ( 27 @,@ 500 m2 ) . At the time of its creation , the store was the tallest in Britain . 
 Amongst the facilities provided by Ashton Leisure Park are a 14 @-@ screen cinema , a bowling alley , and several restaurants . The St Petersfield area of Ashton underwent a £ <unk> redevelopment and provided 2 @,@ 000 jobs . The aim of the investment was to create a business district in the town and bring life to a neglected area of Ashton . The development provided 280 @,@ 000 square feet ( 26 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space and 400 @,@ 000 square feet ( 37 @,@ 000 m2 ) of retail and leisure space . Pennine Care NHS Trust relocated its headquarters to the St Petersfield area in 2006 . Until then a popular nightspot , in 2002 several night clubs were brought to the brink of closure after a downturn in trade caused by four murders in three months . 
 According to the 2001 UK census , the industry of employment of residents aged 16 – 74 was 22 @.@ 7 % manufacturing , 18 @.@ 6 % retail and wholesale , 11 @.@ 3 % health and social work , 9 @.@ 8 % property and business services , 6 @.@ 7 % construction , 6 @.@ 5 % transport and communications , 5 @.@ 8 % education , 5 @.@ 6 % public administration , 4 @.@ 3 % hotels and restaurants , 3 @.@ 8 % finance , 0 @.@ 4 % agriculture , 0 @.@ 7 % energy and water supply , and 3 @.@ 9 % other . Compared with national figures , the town had a relatively low percentage working in agriculture , public administration , and property which was also below the national average , and high rates of employment in construction at more than triple the national rate ( 6 @.@ 8 % ) . The census recorded the economic activity of residents aged 16 – 74 , 2 @.@ 0 % students were with jobs , 3 @.@ 8 % students without jobs , 6 @.@ 4 % looking after home or family , 9 @.@ 5 % permanently sick or disabled , and 3 @.@ 9 % economically inactive for other reasons . Ashton 's 4 @.@ 1 % unemployment rate was above the national rate of 3 @.@ 3 % . 
 = = Culture = = 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The most prominent football teams are Curzon Ashton F.C. and Ashton United F.C. Curzon Ashton play at the Tameside Stadium on Richmond Street . They are currently playing in the National League North , the highest level in the club 's history following two consecutive promotions , beating town rivals Ashton United in the playoffs . Of the teams who formed the Manchester Football Association Ashton United , under the name Hurst , were the first to win an FA Cup tie , when they beat Turton 3 – 0 in 1883 . In 1885 they were the first winners of the Manchester Senior Cup , beating Newton Heath ( who later became Manchester United ) in the final . Ashton United play at Hurst Cross stadium . Other sporting venues include the Richmond Park Athletics Stadium , also on Richmond Street , which has an all @-@ weather running track with facilities for all field events and is home to the East Cheshire Harriers & Tameside Athletics Club and the Ashton Cricket Club . This team has won the Central Lancashire Cricket League 's first and second division twice each , and the Wood Cup four times . 
 = = = Landmarks = = = 
 After the Ashton Canal closed in the 1960s , it was decided to turn the Portland Basin warehouse into a museum . In 1985 , the first part of the Heritage Centre and Museum opened on the first floor of the warehouse . The restoration of building was complete in 1999 ; the museum details Tameside 's social , industrial , and political history . The basin next to the warehouse is the point at which the Ashton Canal , the Huddersfield Narrow Canal and the Peak Forest Canal meet . It has been used several times as a filming location for Coronation Street , including a scene where the character Richard Hillman drove into the canal . 
 The earliest parts of Ashton Town Hall , which was the first purpose @-@ built town hall in what is now Tameside , date to 1840 when it was opened . It has classical features such as the Corinthian columns on the entrance facade . Enlarged in 1878 , the hall provides areas for administrative purposes and public functions . It is a Grade II listed building . After the Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne municipal borough was abolished in 1974 , the town hall was no longer required and became the home of the Museum of the Manchester Regiment . The museum exhibits relics related to the Manchester Regiment including five Victoria Crosses awarded to its members . 
 There are five parks in the town , three of which have Green Flag Awards . The first park opened in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne was Stamford Park on the border with Stalybridge . The park opened in 1873 , following a 17 @-@ year campaign by local cotton workers ; the land was bought from a local mill @-@ owner for £ 15 @,@ 000 ( £ 1 @.@ 3 million as of 2016 ) and further land was donated by George Grey , 7th Earl of Stamford . A crowd of between 60 @,@ 000 and 80 @,@ 000 turned out to see the Earl of Stamford formally open the new facility on 12 July 1873 . It now includes a boating lake , and a memorial to Joseph Rayner Stephens , commissioned by local factory workers to commemorate his work promoting fair wages and improved working conditions . A conservatory was opened in 1907 , and Coronation gates installed at both the Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Stalybridge entrances in 1953 . 
 Hartshead Pike is a stone tower on top of Hartshead Hill overlooking Ashton and Oldham . The current building was constructed in 1863 although there has been a building on the site since at least the mid @-@ 18th century , although the original purpose is obscure . The pike may have been the site of a beacon in the late 16th century . It has a visitor centre and from the top of the hill it is possible to see the Jodrell Bank Observatory in Cheshire , the Welsh hills , and the Holme Moss transmitter in West Yorkshire . 
 The Witchwood public house , in the St Petersfield area of the town , has been a music venue since the 1960s , hosting acts such as Muse , The Coral , and Lost Prophets . In 2004 The Witchwood came under threat when the area was being redeveloped , but was saved from demolition after a campaign by locals and led by Tom Hingley , drawing support from musicians such as Bert Jansch , The Fall , and The Chameleons . 
 The main Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne War Memorial , in Memorial Gardens , consists of a central cenotaph on plinth , surmounted by sculpted wounded soldier and the figure of " Peace who is taking the sword of honour " from his hand . It commemorates the 1 @,@ 512 people from the town who died in the First World War and the 301 who died in the Second World War . The cenotaph is flanked on both sides by two bronze lions . The plinth is decorated with military equipment representing the services , as well as bronze tablets listing the Roll of Honour from World War I. Commissioned by the Ashton War Memorial Committee , the statue was sculpted between 1919 and 1922 by John Ashton Floyd , and unveiled on 16 September 1922 by General Sir Ian Hamilton . 
 The tablet on the front of the memorial reads : 
 Erected in honour of the men of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and district who fought for King and Empire in The Great War , especially those who sacrificed their lives , and whose names are recorded hereon 
 1914 – 1919 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Roads = = = 
 Ashton is served by the M60 motorway , which cuts through the west end of Ashton ( Junction 23 ) . 
 In 1732 , an Act of Parliament was passed which permitted the construction of a turnpike from Manchester , then in Lancashire , to Salters Brook in Cheshire . The road passed through Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne as well as Audenshaw , Mottram @-@ in @-@ Longdendale , and Stalybridge . A Turnpike Trust was responsible for collecting tolls from traffic ; the proceeds were used for road maintenance . The Trust for Manchester to Salters Brook was one of over 400 established between 1706 and 1750 , a period in which turnpikes became popular . It was the first turnpike to be opened in Tameside , and driven by economic growth , more turnpikes were opened in the area in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . Acts of Parliaments were passed in 1765 , 1793 , and 1799 permitting the construction turnpikes from Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne to Doctor Lane Head in Saddleworth , Standedge in Saddleworth , and Oldham respectively . Towards the end of the 19th century , many Turnpike Trusts were wound up as they were superseded by local government ; the last in Tameside to close was the Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne to Salters Brook road in 1884 . 
 = = = Canals = = = 
 The town of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne became the focus of three canals which were constructed in Tameside in the 1790s because it was an important centre of coal mining in the Lancashire coalfield . The 1790s has been characterised as a period of mania for canal building in England . The first of the three to be built was the Ashton Canal , which was constructed between 1792 and 1797 . Connecting Manchester to Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , with a branch to Oldham , it cost about £ 170 @,@ 000 ( £ 15 million as of 2016 ) . The Peak Forest Canal was constructed from 1794 to 1805 , and was originally planned as a branch of the Ashton Canal . It connected the Portland Basin with the Peak District and cost £ 177 @,@ 000 ( £ 13 million as of 2016 ) . The Huddersfield Narrow Canal was built between 1794 and 1811 , to enable cross @-@ Pennine trade between Manchester and Kingston upon Hull ; the cost of construction was £ 400 @,@ 000 . 
 The advent of the railways in the 19th century signalled the decline of the canal system . The new railways were quicker and more economical than the canals , and the waterways declined . The Huddersfield Canal was bought by the Huddersfield and Manchester Railway in 1844 . Along with the Ashton and Peak Forest canals , the Huddersfield canal was later bought by the Sheffield , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Manchester Railway Company . The canals remained in use throughout the 19th century on a smaller scale than in their heyday , but by the mid @-@ 20th century all commercial traffic had ceased . Following an extended period of closure & dereliction , when the Huddersfield canal was in parts filled @-@ in or built over , a complete restoration was undertaken resulting in the full reopening of the canal in 2001 . They are now used for leisure craft and are still maintained and in good condition . 
 = = = Railways = = = 
 Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne railway station sees regular services on the Huddersfield Line between Manchester ( Victoria ) and Huddersfield . 
 The present station , known historically as Ashton ( Charlestown ) as was opened by the Ashton , Stalybridge and Liverpool Junction Railway ( AS & <unk> ) on 13 April 1846 . The AS & <unk> was absorbed by the Manchester and Leeds Railway in 1847 , which was then renamed the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway ( LYR ) . The LYR renamed it Ashton ( Charlestown ) in 1874 . The LYR amalgamated with the London and North Western Railway at the start of 1922 , and these in turn amalgamated with several other companies on 1 January 1923 , to form the London , Midland and Scottish Railway during the 1923 Grouping . It then passed to the London Midland Region of British Railways on nationalisation in 1948 . The station was renamed Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne on 6 May 1968 . 
 There were once three stations in the town : Charlestown , Park Parade ( closed 1956 ) and Oldham Road ( closed 1959 ) on the Oldham , Ashton and Guide Bridge Railway . Also , Guide Bridge , a few miles away , was known as Ashton & Hooley Hill and then Ashton in its earliest years . 
 The Sheffield , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Manchester Railway Company was founded in 1836 with the purpose of building a line linking Manchester and Sheffield . The line was opened in stages and by 1845 was complete . It included a branch to the nearby town of Stalybridge , the former Ashton Park Parade station was included on this branch . 
 = = = Trams = = = 
 In 1881 , a tramway with horse @-@ drawn tramcars was opened between Stalybridge and Audenshaw , through Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . The first tramway of its kind in Tameside , it was later extended to Manchester . The Oldham , Ashton and Hyde Electric Tramway Company , founded in 1899 , operated 13 km ( 8 mi ) of tram lines with electric tramcars . It was the first line around Manchester to use electricity . A line from Stalybridge to Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne was opened in 1903 and operated by the Stalybridge , Hyde , Mossley & Dukinfield Tramways & Electricity Board . The first bus service from Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne ran in 1923 and the 1920s saw a period of decline for the tramways as they suffered from the competition from buses . The last electric tram service in the town ran in 1938 . 
 After a 75 @-@ year absence , trams returned to Ashton in October 2013 , when the Manchester Metrolink tram system opened the East Manchester Line to the town : Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne tram stop in the town centre , lies alongside Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne bus station and is the terminus for the East Manchester Line , which runs to Manchester Piccadilly station and Manchester city @-@ centre . Away from the town centre towards Manchester there is also Ashton West tram stop and Ashton Moss tram stop . 
 = = Education = = 
 There are eight nursery schools , fifteen primary schools , and two secondary schools in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . In 2006 , the council began a scheme to develop education in the borough by opening six new secondary schools . Among the changes proposed as part of the £ <unk> scheme was the closure of Hartshead Sports College and Stamford Community High School , to be replaced by a 1 @,@ 350 @-@ pupil academy with 300 members of sixth form . The new school is named New Charter Academy after its sponsor , the New Charter Housing Trust . In 2007 , Hartshead Sports College was placed on " special measures " after it failed to achieve its targets for General Certificate of Secondary Education results and was criticised by Ofsted for its teaching standard . Originally expected to open in September 2009 , the academy opened in September 2008 . 
 The other secondary school in the town is St Damian 's RC Science College , which was founded in 1963 , and provides education for 800 pupils aged 11 – 16 . As part of the BSF Project , they created plans for a new school building ( built by Carillion ) and the pupils moved into this new building in May 2011 . Dale Grove School has 60 pupils and offers education for pupils aged 5 – 16 with special needs . Ashton Sixth Form College is a centre for further education with 1 @,@ 650 pupils aged 16 – 18 . Tameside College also provides opportunities for further education and operates in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Droylsden , and Hyde . Founded in 1954 and expanded in 1957 and 1964 , it was originally called Ashton College . 
 = = Public services = = 
 In the early 19th century , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne 's growth made it necessary to find a new water supply . Before the introduction of piped water the town 's inhabitants drew water from wells and the nearby River Tame . Industrial processes had polluted the river however , and the wells could not sustain a rapidly expanding population . From 1825 , a private company was responsible for piping water from reservoirs , but there were still many homes without proper drainage or water supply . Today , waste management is co @-@ ordinated by the local authority via the Greater Manchester Waste Disposal Authority . The first power station in Tameside was built in 1899 , providing power for the area . Ashton 's Distribution Network Operator for electricity is United Utilities ; there are no power stations in the town . United Utilities also manages the drinking and waste water . 
 Home Office policing in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne is provided by the Greater Manchester Police . The force 's Tameside Division have their divisional headquarters for policing Tameside in the town . Public transport in the area is co @-@ ordinated by Transport for Greater Manchester . Statutory emergency fire and rescue service is provided by the Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue Service , which has one station on Slate Lane . The Tameside General Hospital is a large NHS hospital on the outskirts of the town , administrated by Tameside Hospital NHS Foundation Trust . The North West Ambulance Service provides emergency patient transport . 
 = Deep Impact ( spacecraft ) = 
 Deep Impact was a NASA space probe launched from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station at 18 : 47 UTC on January 12 , 2005 . It was designed to study the interior composition of the comet Tempel 1 ( 9P / Tempel ) , by releasing an impactor into the comet . At 05 : 52 UTC on July 4 , 2005 , the impactor successfully collided with the comet 's nucleus . The impact excavated debris from the interior of the nucleus , forming an impact crater . Photographs taken by the spacecraft showed the comet to be more dusty and less icy than had been expected . The impact generated an unexpectedly large and bright dust cloud , obscuring the view of the impact crater . 
 Previous space missions to comets , such as Giotto and Stardust , were fly @-@ by missions . These missions were able to photograph and examine only the surfaces of cometary nuclei , and even then from considerable distances . The Deep Impact mission was the first to eject material from a comet 's surface , and the mission garnered large publicity from the media , international scientists , and amateur astronomers . 
 Upon the completion of its primary mission , proposals were made to further utilize the spacecraft . Consequently , Deep Impact flew by Earth on December 31 , 2007 on its way to an extended mission , designated EPOXI , with a dual purpose to study extrasolar planets and comet Hartley 2 ( <unk> / Hartley ) . 
 = = Scientific goals = = 
 The Deep Impact mission was planned to help answer fundamental questions about comets , which included what makes up the composition of the comet 's nucleus , what depth the crater would reach from the impact , and where the comet originated in its formation . By observing the composition of the comet , astronomers hoped to determine how comets form based on the differences between the interior and exterior makeup of the comet . Observations of the impact and its aftermath would allow astronomers to attempt to determine the answers to these questions . 
 The mission 's Principal Investigator was Michael A 'Hearn , an astronomer at the University of Maryland . He led the science team , which included members from Cornell University , University of Maryland , University of Arizona , Brown University , Belton Space Exploration Initiatives , JPL , University of Hawaii , SAIC , Ball Aerospace , and Max @-@ Planck @-@ Institut für <unk> Physik . 
 = = Spacecraft design and instrumentation = = 
 The spacecraft consists of two main sections , the 370 @-@ kg ( 815 @-@ lb ) copper @-@ core " Smart Impactor " that impacted the comet , and the " Flyby " section , which imaged the comet from a safe distance during the encounter with Tempel 1 . 
 The Flyby spacecraft is about 3 @.@ 2 meters ( 10 @.@ 5 ft ) long , 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 @.@ 6 ft ) wide and 2 @.@ 3 meters ( 7 @.@ 5 ft ) high . It includes two solar panels , a debris shield , and several science instruments for imaging , infrared spectroscopy , and optical navigation to its destination near the comet . The spacecraft also carried two cameras , the High Resolution Imager ( HRI ) , and the Medium Resolution Imager ( MRI ) . The HRI is an imaging device that combines a visible @-@ light camera with a filter wheel , and an imaging infrared spectrometer called the " Spectral Imaging Module " or SIM that operates on a spectral band from 1 @.@ 05 to 4 @.@ 8 micrometres . It has been optimized for observing the comet 's nucleus . The MRI is the backup device , and was used primarily for navigation during the final 10 @-@ day approach . It also has a filter wheel , with a slightly different set of filters . 
 The Impactor section of the spacecraft contains an instrument that is optically identical to the MRI , called the Impactor Targeting Sensor ( ITS ) , but without the filter wheel . Its dual purpose was to sense the Impactor 's trajectory , which could then be adjusted up to four times between release and impact , and to image the comet from close range . As the Impactor neared the comet 's surface , this camera took high @-@ resolution pictures of the nucleus ( as good as 0 @.@ 2 meters [ 7 @.@ 9 in ] per pixel ) that were transmitted in real @-@ time to the Flyby spacecraft before it and the Impactor were destroyed . The final image taken by the impactor was snapped only 3 @.@ 7 seconds before impact . 
 The impactor 's payload , dubbed the " Cratering Mass " , was 100 % copper , with a weight of 100 kg . Including this cratering mass , copper formed 49 % of total mass of the impactor ( with aluminium at 24 % of the total mass ) ; this was to minimize interference with scientific measurements . Since copper was not expected to be found on a comet , scientists could ignore copper 's signature in any spectrometer readings . Instead of using explosives , it was also cheaper to use copper as the payload . 
 Explosives would also have been superfluous . At its closing velocity of 10 @.@ 2 km / s , the impactor 's kinetic energy was equivalent to 4 @.@ 8 metric tons of TNT , considerably more than its actual mass of only 370 kg . 
 The mission coincidentally shared its name with the 1998 film , Deep Impact , in which a comet strikes the Earth . 
 = = Mission profile = = 
 Following its launch from Cape Canaveral Air Force Station pad SLC @-@ 17B at 18 : 47 UTC on January 12 , 2005 , the Deep Impact spacecraft traveled 429 million kilometers ( 267 million miles ) in 174 days to reach comet Tempel 1 at a cruising speed of 28 @.@ 6 km / s ( 103 @,@ 000 km / h or 64 @,@ 000 mph ) . Once the spacecraft reached the vicinity of the comet on July 3 , 2005 , it separated into the Impactor and Flyby sections . The Impactor used its thrusters to move into the path of the comet , impacting 24 hours later at a relative speed of 10 @.@ 3 km / s ( 37 @,@ 000 km / h or 23 @,@ 000 mph ) . The impactor , a 370 @-@ kilogram ( 820 @-@ pound ) projectile , delivered 1 @.@ 96 × 1010 joules of kinetic energy — the equivalent of 4 @.@ 7 tons of TNT . Scientists believed that the energy of the high @-@ velocity collision would be sufficient to excavate a crater up to 100 m ( 328 ft ) wide ( larger than the bowl of the Roman Colosseum ) . The size of the crater was still not known one year after the impact . The 2007 Stardust spacecraft <unk> mission determined the crater 's diameter to be 150 meters ( 490 ft ) . 
 Just minutes after the impact , the flyby probe passed by the nucleus at a close distance of 500 km ( 310 mi ) , taking pictures of the crater position , the ejecta plume , and the entire cometary nucleus . The entire event was also photographed by Earth @-@ based telescopes and orbital observatories , including the Hubble , Chandra , Spitzer , and XMM @-@ Newton . The impact was also observed by cameras and spectroscopes on board Europe 's Rosetta spacecraft , which was about 80 million km ( 50 million miles ) from the comet at the time of impact . Rosetta determined the composition of the gas and dust cloud that was kicked up by the impact . 
 = = Mission events = = 
 = = = Before launch = = = 
 A comet @-@ impact mission was first proposed to NASA in 1996 , but at the time , NASA engineers were skeptical that the target could be hit . In 1999 , a revised and technologically upgraded mission proposal , dubbed Deep Impact , was accepted and funded as part of NASA 's Discovery Program of low @-@ cost spacecraft . The two spacecraft ( Impactor and Flyby ) and the three main instruments were built and integrated by Ball Aerospace & Technologies Corp. in Boulder , Colorado . Developing the software for the spacecraft took 18 months and the application code consisted of 20 @,@ 000 lines and 19 different application threads . The total cost of developing the spacecraft and completing its mission reached US $ 330 million . 
 = = = Launch and commissioning phase = = = 
 The probe was originally scheduled for launch on December 30 , 2004 , but NASA officials delayed its launch , in order to allow more time for testing the software . It was successfully launched from Cape Canaveral on January 12 , 2005 at 1 : 47 pm EST ( 1847 UTC ) by a Delta 2 rocket . 
 Deep Impact 's state of health was uncertain during the first day after launch . Shortly after entering orbit around the Sun and deploying its solar panels , the probe switched itself to safe mode . The cause of the problem was simply an incorrect temperature limit in the fault protection logic for the spacecraft 's RCS thruster catalyst beds . The spacecraft 's thrusters were used to <unk> the spacecraft following third stage separation . On January 13 , 2005 , NASA announced that the probe was out of safe mode and healthy . 
 On February 11 , 2005 , Deep Impact 's rockets were fired as planned to correct the spacecraft 's course . This correction was so precise that the next planned correction maneuver on March 31 , 2005 was unnecessary and canceled . The " commissioning phase " verified that all instruments were activated and checked out . During these tests it was found that the HRI images were not in focus after it underwent a bake @-@ out period . After mission members investigated the problem , on June 9 , 2005 , it was announced that by using image processing software and the mathematical technique of deconvolution , the HRI images could be corrected to restore much of the resolution anticipated . 
 = = = Cruise phase = = = 
 The " cruise phase " began on March 25 , 2005 , immediately after the commissioning phase was completed . This phase continued until about 60 days before the encounter with comet Tempel 1 . On April 25 , 2005 , the probe acquired the first image of its target at a distance of 64 million km ( 40 million miles ) . 
 On May 4 , 2005 , the spacecraft executed its second trajectory correction maneuver . Burning its rocket engine for 95 seconds , the spacecraft speed was changed by 18 @.@ 2 km / h ( 11 @.@ 3 mph ) . Rick <unk> , the project manager for the mission at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory , reacted to the maneuver stating that " spacecraft performance has been excellent , and this burn was no different ... it was a textbook maneuver that placed us right on the money . " 
 = = = Approach phase = = = 
 The approach phase extended from 60 days before encounter ( May 5 , 2005 ) until five days before encounter . Sixty days out was the earliest time that the Deep Impact spacecraft was expected to detect the comet with its MRI camera . In fact , the comet was spotted ahead of schedule , 69 days before impact ( see Cruise phase above ) . This milestone marks the beginning of an intensive period of observations to refine knowledge of the comet 's orbit and study the comet 's rotation , activity , and dust environment . 
 On June 14 and June 22 , 2005 , Deep Impact observed two outbursts of activity from the comet , the latter being six times larger than the former . The spacecraft studied the images of various distant stars to determine its current trajectory and position . Don Yeomans , a mission co @-@ investigator for JPL pointed out that " it takes 7 ½ minutes for the signal to get back to Earth , so you cannot joystick this thing . You have to rely on the fact that the Impactor is a smart spacecraft as is the Flyby spacecraft . So you have to build in the intelligence ahead of time and let it do its thing . " On June 23 , 2005 , the first of the two final trajectory correct maneuvers ( targeting maneuver ) was successfully executed . A 6 m / s ( 20 ft / s ) velocity change was needed to adjust the flight path towards the comet and target the impactor at a window in space about 100 kilometers ( 62 mi ) wide . 
 = = = Impact phase = = = 
 Impact phase began nominally on June 29 , 2005 , five days before impact . The impactor successfully separated from the flyby spacecraft at 6 : 00 ( 6 : 07 Ground UTC ) July 3 UTC . The first images from the instrumented Impactor were seen two hours after separation . 
 The flyby spacecraft performed one of two divert maneuvers to avoid damage . A 14 @-@ minute burn was executed which slowed down the spacecraft . It was also reported that the communication link between the flyby and the impactor was functioning as expected . The impactor spacecraft executed three correction maneuvers in the final two hours before impact . 
 The impactor was maneuvered to plant itself in front of the comet , so that Tempel 1 would collide with it . Impact occurred at 05 : 45 UTC ( 05 : 52 Ground UTC , + / - up to three minutes , one @-@ way light time = 7m 26s ) on the morning of July 4 , 2005 , within one second of the expected time for impact . 
 The impactor returned images as late as three seconds before impact . Most of the data captured was stored on board the flyby spacecraft , which radioed approximately 4 @,@ 500 images from the HRI , MRI , and ITS cameras to Earth over the next few days . The energy from the collision was similar in size to exploding five tons of dynamite and the comet shone six times brighter than normal . 
 A mission timeline is located at Impact Phase Timeline ( NASA ) . 
 = = Results = = 
 Mission control did not become aware of the impactor 's success until five minutes later at 01 : 57 ET . Don Yeomans confirmed the results for the press , " We hit it just exactly where we wanted to " and JPL Director Charles <unk> stated " The success exceeded our expectations . " 
 In the post @-@ impact briefing at 01 : 00 PDT ( 08 : 00 UTC ) on July 4 , 2005 , the first processed images revealed existing craters on the comet . NASA scientists stated they could not see the new crater that had formed from the impactor , but it was later discovered to be about 100 meters ( 328 ft ) wide and up to 30 meters ( 98 ft ) deep . Lucy McFadden , one of the co @-@ investigators of the impact , stated " We didn 't expect the success of one part of the mission [ bright dust cloud ] to affect a second part [ seeing the resultant crater ] . But that is part of the fun of science , to meet with the unexpected . " Analysis of data from the Swift X @-@ ray telescope showed that the comet continued outgassing from the impact for 13 days , with a peak five days after impact . A total of 5 million kilograms ( 11 million pounds ) of water and between 10 and 25 million kilograms ( 22 and 55 million pounds ) of dust were lost from the impact . 
 Initial results were surprising as the material excavated by the impact contained more dust and less ice than had been expected . The only models of cometary structure astronomers could positively rule out were the very porous ones which had comets as loose aggregates of material . In addition , the material was finer than expected ; scientists compared it to talcum powder rather than sand . Other materials found while studying the impact included clays , carbonates , sodium , and crystalline silicates which were found by studying the spectroscopy of the impact . Clays and carbonates usually require liquid water to form and sodium is rare in space . Observations also revealed that the comet was about 75 % empty space , and one astronomer compared the outer layers of the comet to the same makeup of a snow bank . Astronomers have expressed interest in more missions to different comets to determine if they share similar compositions or if there are different materials found deeper within comets that were produced at the time of the Solar System 's formation . 
 Astronomers hypothesized , based on its interior chemistry , that the comet formed in the Uranus and Neptune Oort cloud region of the Solar System . A comet which forms farther from the Sun is expected to have greater amounts of ices with low freezing temperatures , such as ethane , which was present in Tempel 1 . Astronomers believe that other comets with compositions similar to Tempel 1 are likely to have formed in the same region . 
 = = = Crater = = = 
 Because the quality of the images of the crater formed during the Deep Impact collision was not satisfactory , on July 3 , 2007 , NASA approved the New Exploration of Tempel 1 ( or <unk> ) mission . The mission utilized the already existing Stardust spacecraft , which had studied Comet Wild 2 in 2004 . Stardust was placed into a new orbit so that it approached Tempel 1 at a distance of approximately 200 km ( 120 mi ) on February 15 , 2011 , 04 : 42 UTC . This was the first time that a comet was visited by two probes on separate occasions ( 1P / Halley had been visited by several probes within a few weeks in 1986 ) , and it provided an opportunity to better observe the crater that was created by Deep Impact as well as observing the changes caused by the comet ’ s latest close approach to the Sun . 
 On February 15 , NASA scientists identified the crater formed by Deep Impact in images from Stardust . The crater is estimated to be 150 meters ( 500 ft ) in diameter , and has a bright mound in the center likely created when material from the impact fell back into the crater . 
 = = Public interest = = 
 = = = Media coverage = = = 
 The impact was a substantial news event reported and discussed online , in print , and on television . There was a genuine suspense because experts held widely differing opinions over the result of the impact . Various experts debated whether the impactor would go straight through the comet and out the other side , would create an impact crater , would open up a hole in the interior of the comet , and other theories . However , twenty @-@ four hours before impact , the flight team at JPL began privately expressing a high level of confidence that , barring any unforeseen technical glitches , the spacecraft would intercept Tempel 1 . One senior personnel member stated " All we can do now is sit back and wait . Everything we can technically do to ensure impact has been done . " In the final minutes as the impactor hit the comet , more than 10 @,@ 000 people watched the collision on a giant movie screen at Hawaii 's Waikiki Beach . 
 Experts came up with a range of soundbites to summarize the mission to the public . Iwan Williams of Queen Mary , University of London , said " It was like a mosquito hitting a 747 . What we 've found is that the mosquito didn 't splat on the surface ; it 's actually gone through the windscreen . " 
 One day after the impact Marina Bay , a Russian astrologer , sued NASA for $ 300 million for the impact which " ruin [ ed ] the natural balance of forces in the universe . " Her lawyer asked the public to volunteer to help in the claim by declaring " The impact changed the magnetic properties of the comet , and this could have affected mobile telephony here on Earth . If your phone went down this morning , ask yourself Why ? and then get in touch with us . " On August 9 , 2005 the <unk> Court of Moscow ruled against Bay , although she did attempt to appeal the result . One Russian physicist said that the impact had no effect on Earth and " the change to the orbit of the comet after the collision was only about 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . " 
 = = = Send Your Name To A Comet campaign = = = 
 The mission was notable for one of its promotional campaigns , " Send Your Name To A Comet ! " . Visitors to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory 's website were invited to submit their name between May 2003 and January 2004 , and the names gathered — some 625 @,@ 000 in all — were then burnt onto a mini @-@ CD , which was attached to the impactor . Dr. Don Yeomans , a member of the spacecraft 's scientific team , stated " this is an opportunity to become part of an extraordinary space mission ... when the craft is launched in December 2004 , yours and the names of your loved @-@ ones can hitch along for the ride and be part of what may be the best space fireworks show in history . " The idea was credited with driving interest in the mission . 
 = = = Reaction from China = = = 
 Chinese researchers used the Deep Impact mission as an opportunity to highlight the efficiency of American science because public support ensured the possibility of funding long @-@ term research . By contrast , " in China , the public usually has no idea what our scientists are doing , and limited funding for the promotion of science weakens people 's enthusiasm for research . " 
 Two days after the U.S. mission succeeded in having a probe collide with a comet , China revealed a plan for what it called a " more clever " version of the mission : landing a probe on a small comet or asteroid to push it off course . China said it would begin the mission after sending a probe to the Moon . 
 = = = Contributions from amateur astronomers = = = 
 Since observing time on large , professional telescopes such as Keck or Hubble is always scarce , the Deep Impact scientists called upon " advanced amateur , student , and professional astronomers " to use small telescopes to make long @-@ term observations of the target comet before and after impact . The purpose of these observations was to look for " volatile outgassing , dust coma development and dust production rates , dust tail development , and jet activity and outbursts . " By mid @-@ 2007 , amateur astronomers had submitted over a thousand CCD images of the comet . 
 One notable amateur observation was by students from schools in Hawaii , working with US and UK scientists , who during the press conference took live images using the <unk> Automatic Telescope in Hawaii ( the students operated the telescope over the Internet ) and were one of the first groups to get images of the impact . One amateur astronomer reported seeing a structureless bright cloud around the comet , and an estimated magnitude 2 increase in brightness after the impact . Another amateur published a map of the crash area from NASA images . 
 = = = Musical tribute = = = 
 The Deep Impact mission coincided with celebrations in the Los Angeles area marking the 50th anniversary of " Rock Around the Clock " by Bill Haley and His Comets becoming the first rock and roll single to reach No. 1 on the recording sales charts . Within twenty @-@ four hours of the mission 's success , a two @-@ minute music video produced by Martin Lewis had been created using images of the impact itself combined with computer animation of the Deep Impact probe in flight , interspersed with footage of Bill Haley and His Comets performing in 1955 and the surviving original members of The Comets performing in March 2005 . The video was posted to NASA 's website for a couple of weeks afterwards . 
 On July 5 , 2005 , the surviving original members of The Comets ( ranging in age from 71 to 84 ) performed a free concert for hundreds of employees of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to help them celebrate the mission 's success . This event received worldwide press attention . In February 2006 , the International Astronomical Union citation that officially named asteroid <unk> <unk> included a reference to the JPL concert . 
 = = Extended mission = = 
 Deep Impact embarked on an extended mission designated EPOXI ( Extrasolar Planet Observation and Deep Impact Extended Investigation ) to visit other comets , after being put to sleep in 2005 upon completion of the Tempel 1 mission . 
 = = = Comet Boethin plan = = = 
 Its first extended visit was to do a flyby of Comet Boethin , but with some complications . On July 21 , 2005 Deep Impact executed a trajectory correction maneuver that allows the spacecraft to use Earth 's gravity to begin a new mission in a path towards another comet . 
 The original plan was for a December 5 , 2008 flyby of Comet Boethin , coming within 700 kilometers ( 430 mi ) of the comet . Michael A 'Hearn , the Deep Impact team leader , explained " We propose to direct the spacecraft for a flyby of Comet Boethin to investigate whether the results found at Comet Tempel 1 are unique or are also found on other comets . " The $ 40 million mission would provide about half of the information as the collision of Tempel 1 but at a fraction of the cost . Deep Impact would use its spectrometer to study the comet 's surface composition and its telescope for viewing the surface features . 
 However , as the Earth gravity assist approached , astronomers were unable to locate Comet Boethin , which may have broken up into pieces too faint to be observed . Consequently , its orbit could not be calculated with sufficient precision to permit a flyby . 
 = = = Flyby of Comet Hartley 2 = = = 
 JPL team targeted Deep Impact toward Comet Hartley 2 . However , this would require an extra two years of travel for Deep Impact . On May 28 , 2010 , a burn of 11 @.@ 3 seconds was conducted , to enable the June 27 Earth fly @-@ by to be optimized for the transit to Hartley 2 and fly @-@ by on November 4 . The velocity change was 0 @.@ 1 m / s ( 0 @.@ 33 ft / s ) . 
 On November 4 , 2010 , the Deep Impact extended mission ( EPOXI ) returned images from comet Hartley 2 . EPOXI came within 700 kilometers ( 430 mi ) of the comet , returning detailed photographs of the " peanut " shaped cometary nucleus and several bright jets . The probe 's medium @-@ resolution instrument captured the photographs . 
 = = = Comet <unk> ( C / 2009 P1 ) = = = 
 Deep Impact observed Comet <unk> ( C / 2009 P1 ) from February 20 to April 8 , 2012 , using its Medium Resolution Instrument , through a variety of filters . The comet was 1 @.@ 75 – 2 @.@ 11 astronomical units ( AU ) ( 2 @.@ 62 – 3 @.@ 16 × 108 km ) from the Sun and 1 @.@ 87 – 1 @.@ 30 AU from the spacecraft . It was found that the outgassing from the comet varies with a period of 10 @.@ 4 hours , which is presumed to be due to the rotation of its nucleus . The dry ice content of the comet was measured and found to be about ten percent of its water ice content by number of molecules . 
 = = = Possible mission to asteroid ( <unk> ) <unk> = = = 
 At the end of 2011 , Deep Impact was re @-@ targeted towards asteroid ( <unk> ) <unk> which it would reach in January 2020 . At the time of re @-@ targeting , whether or not a related science mission would be carried out in 2020 was yet to be determined , based on NASA 's budget and the health of the probe . A 71 @-@ second engine burn on October 4 , 2012 , changed the probe 's velocity by 2 m / s ( 6 @.@ 6 ft / s ) to keep the mission on track . 
 = = = Comet C / 2012 S1 ( ISON ) = = = 
 In February 2013 , Deep Impact observed Comet ISON . The comet remained observable until March 2013 . 
 = = = Contact lost and end of mission = = = 
 On September 3 , 2013 , a mission update was posted to the EPOXI mission status website , stating " Communication with the spacecraft was lost some time between August 11 and August 14 ... The last communication was on August 8 . ... the team on August 30 determined the cause of the problem . The team is now trying to determine how best to try to recover communication . " 
 On September 10 , 2013 , a Deep Impact mission status report explained that mission controllers believe the computers on the spacecraft are continuously rebooting themselves and so are unable to issue any commands to the vehicle 's thrusters . As a result of this problem , communication with the spacecraft was explained to be more difficult , as the orientation of the vehicle 's antennas is unknown . Additionally , the solar panels on the vehicle may no longer be positioned correctly for generating power . 
 On September 20 , 2013 , NASA abandoned further attempts to contact the craft . According to A 'Hearn , the most probable reason of software malfunction was a Y2K @-@ like problem ( at August 11 , 2013 , 00 : 38 : 49 , it was 232 of one @-@ tenth seconds from January 1 , 2000 ) . 
 = Chilean battleship Almirante Latorre = 
 Almirante Latorre , named after Juan José Latorre , was a super @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Chilean Navy ( Armada de Chile ) . She was the first of a planned two @-@ ship class that would respond to earlier warship purchases by other South American countries . Construction began at Elswick , Newcastle upon Tyne soon after the ship was ordered in November 1911 , and was approaching completion when she was bought by the United Kingdom 's Royal Navy for use in the First World War . Commissioned in September 1915 , she served in the Grand Fleet as HMS Canada for the duration of the war and saw action during the Battle of Jutland . 
 Canada was repurchased by Chile in 1920 . She took back her original name of Almirante Latorre , and served as the Chilean flagship and frequently as presidential transport . She underwent a thorough modernization in the United Kingdom in 1929 – 31 . In September 1931 , crewmen aboard Almirante Latorre instigated a mutiny , which the majority of the Chilean fleet quickly joined . After divisions developed between the mutineers , the rebellion fell apart and the ships were returned to government control . Almirante Latorre was placed in reserve for a time in the 1930s because of the Great Depression , but she was in good enough condition to receive interest from the United States after the attack on Pearl Harbor . This overture was declined and the ship spent most of the Second World War on patrol for Chile . She was scrapped in Japan beginning in 1959 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Almirante Latorre 's genesis can be traced to the numerous naval arms races between Chile and Argentina , which in turn were spawned by territorial disputes over their mutual borders in Patagonia and Puna de Atacama , along with control of the Beagle Channel . Naval races flared up in the 1890s and in 1902 ; the latter was eventually settled via British mediation . Provisions in the dispute @-@ ending treaty imposed restrictions on both countries ' navies . The United Kingdom 's Royal Navy bought the two Constitución @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleships that were being built for Chile , and Argentina sold its two Rivadavia @-@ class armored cruisers under construction in Italy to Japan . 
 After HMS Dreadnought was commissioned , Brazil decided in early 1907 to halt construction of three obsolescent pre @-@ dreadnoughts in favor of two or three dreadnoughts . These ships , commissioned as the Minas Geraes class , were designed to carry the heaviest battleship armament in the world at the time . They came as a shock to the navies of South America . Historian Robert Scheina commented that they " outclassed the entire [ elderly ] Argentinian fleet " . Although debates raged in Argentina over whether it would be prudent to counter Brazil 's purchase by acquiring their own expensive dreadnoughts , further border disputes — particularly near the River Plate with Brazil — decided the matter , and it ordered two Rivadavia @-@ class battleships ( no relation to the earlier cruisers ) from the Fore River Shipbuilding Company in the United States . With its major rival acquiring dreadnoughts , Chile responded by asking for tenders from American and European countries that would give the country the most powerful battleships afloat . 
 = = Construction , purchase and First World War service = = 
 On 6 July 1910 , the National Congress of Chile passed a bill allocating 400 @,@ 000 pounds sterling to the navy for two 28 @,@ 000 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 28 @,@ 449 t ) battleships — which would eventually be named Almirante Latorre and Almirante Cochrane — six destroyers , and two submarines . The contract to build the battleships was awarded to Armstrong Whitworth on 25 July 1911 . Almirante Latorre was officially ordered on 2 November 1911 , and was laid down less than a month later on 27 November , becoming the largest ship built by Armstrong at the time . The New York Tribune reported on 2 November 1913 that Greece had reached an accord to purchase Almirante Latorre during a war scare with the Ottoman Empire , but despite a developing sentiment within Chile to sell one or both of the dreadnoughts , no deal was made . 
 Almirante Latorre was launched on 27 November 1913 , in an elaborate ceremony that was attended by various dignitaries and presided over by Chile 's ambassador to the United Kingdom , Agustín Edwards Mac <unk> . The battleship was christened by the ambassador 's wife , Olga Budge de Edwards . After the First World War broke out in Europe , Almirante Latorre was formally purchased by the United Kingdom on 9 September 1914 ; she was not forcibly seized like the Ottoman Reşadiye and Sultân Osmân @-@ ı Evvel , two other ships being built for a foreign navy , because the Allies ' reliance on Chilean munitions imports made retention of Chile 's " friendly neutral " status with the United Kingdom a matter of vital importance . 
 Almirante Latorre was renamed HMS Canada and slightly modified for British service . The bridge was taken off in favor of two open platforms , and a mast was added in between the two funnels to support a derrick that would service launches . The super @-@ dreadnought completed fitting @-@ out on 20 September 1915 , and was commissioned into the Royal Navy on 15 October . She initially served with the 4th Battle Squadron of the Grand Fleet . Canada saw action in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , firing 42 rounds from her 14 @-@ inch guns and 109 6 @-@ inch shells during the battle , and suffered no hits or casualties . During the battle , she got off two salvoes at the disabled cruiser Wiesbaden at 18 : 40 , and fired five more at an unknown ship around 19 : 20 . Her 6 @-@ inch guns were utilized for firing at German destroyers at 19 : 11 . 
 Canada was transferred to the 1st Battle Squadron on 12 June 1916 . In 1917 – 18 , she was fitted with better rangefinders and range dials , and two of the aft 6 @-@ inch secondary guns were removed after they suffered blast damage from the middle 14 @-@ inch turret . In the latter year , flying @-@ off platforms for aircraft were added atop the superfiring turrets fore and aft . Canada was put into the reserve fleet in March 1919 . 
 = = Chilean service = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After the end of the war in Europe , Chile began to seek additional ships to bolster its fleet . The United Kingdom offered many of its surplus warships , including the two remaining Invincible @-@ class battlecruisers . The news that Chile could possibly acquire two Invincibles kindled a major uproar in the country , with naval officers publicly denouncing such an action and instead promoting the virtues of submarines and aircraft on the basis of lower costs and their performance in the First World War . The nations of South America worried that an attempt to regain the title of " the first naval power in South America " would start another naval arms race . 
 In the end , Chile purchased only Canada and four destroyers in April 1920 , all of which had been ordered by Chile prior to the war 's outbreak and requisitioned by the British for the war . The total cost of the five ships was less than a third of what Chile was due to pay for Almirante Latorre in 1914 . Canada was renamed Almirante Latorre once again and formally handed over to the Chilean government on 27 November 1920 . She departed Plymouth the same day with two of the destroyers , <unk> and Almirante Uribe , under the command of Admiral Luis Gomez Carreño . They arrived in Chile on 20 February 1921 , where they were welcomed by Chile 's president , Arturo Alessandri . Almirante Latorre was made the flagship of the navy . 
 In her capacity as flagship of the Chilean Navy , Almirante Latorre was frequently utilized by the president for various functions . In the aftermath of the magnitude 8 @.@ 5 1922 Vallenar earthquake , Almirante Latorre was used to transport Alessandri to the affected area . The ship also brought " tents , medical supplies , rations , clothing and 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pesos " for those affected . By 1923 , Chile only had Almirante Latorre , a cruiser , and five destroyers in commission , leading The New York Times to remark " experts would probably place Chile third in potential sea power [ after Brazil and Argentina ] " . While Almirante Latorre was individually more powerful than the Brazilian or Argentine dreadnoughts , they had two each to Chile 's one . Compounding this was a lack of modern cruisers to accompany the lone dreadnought . In 1924 , Almirante Latorre hosted the president again when he visited Talcahuano for the grand opening of a new naval drydock there . After the fall of the January Junta in 1925 , the dreadnought hosted the returning President Alessandri during a Naval Review in Valparaíso ; while on board , he gave a speech to senior naval officials to assure them that his new government " was for all Chileans , and not partisan in its inspiration " . In September , the last month of his term , Alessandri received the United Kingdom 's Edward , Prince of Wales , on board the battleship . The visit briefly quelled domestic unrest , and it marked the beginning of negotiations for a British naval mission , which arrived in the following year . 
 Almirante Latorre was sent to the United Kingdom for a modernization at the Devonport Dockyard in 1929 . Departing Chile on 15 May , she traveled past Balboa before traversing the Panama Canal nine days later . After refueling at Port of Spain on 28 May , the dreadnought continued across the Atlantic , passing the Azores before arriving in Plymouth on 24 June . Major alterations included rebuilding the bridge , updating the main battery fire control to more modern standards and adding it for the secondary armament for the first time , and replacing her steam turbine engines . Also added were a new mast between the third and fourth turrets , anti @-@ torpedo bulges similar to the British Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships , and new anti @-@ aircraft guns . Nearly two years after the modernization began , Almirante Latorre sailed back to Valparaíso on 5 March 1931 and put in on 12 April . Two 33 @-@ long @-@ ton ( 34 t ) tug boats which had been acquired for use in the harbors of Punta Arenas and Valparaíso were carried on the battleship 's deck during her voyage back to Chile . 
 = = = 1931 mutiny = = = 
 Despite the goodwill brought on by the removal of the " strongman " President Carlos Ibáñez del Campo in July 1931 , Chile could not overcome the Great Depression 's severe economic effects , and wages for civil servants making over 3 @,@ 000 pesos a year were cut by 12 – 30 percent to reduce government expenditures . This triggered a severe reaction among the sailors of the navy , who had already suffered a 10 percent salary cut and 50 percent loss in overseas bonuses . Various members of the crew on board Almirante Latorre , but no officers , met on 31 August and decided that a mutiny was the best course of action . 
 Shortly after midnight on 1 September , the junior crew members of Almirante Latorre , an armored cruiser ( O 'Higgins ) , seven destroyers , and a few submarines took over their ships while many of their shipmates were watching a boxing tournament in La Serena . They imprisoned the officers , most without conflict , and secured the ships by about 02 : 00 . They elected a committee , the Estado Mayor de <unk> , to take control of the mutiny . Later that day , at 16 : 55 , the mutineers radioed the minister of the navy , declaring that they were acting on their own accord , as opposed to acting in concert with a militant political party or communist insurgents . They asked for their full salaries to be restored and the punishment of those who had plunged Chile into a depression , while also stating that they would not use force to achieve these goals . 
 Just before midnight on 2 September , the mutineers messaged the Chilean government with a more " sophisticated " list of twelve demands . Meanwhile , further south , junior members of the navy in the main naval base of Talcahuano joined the mutiny , taking several vessels in the process . Several of these sailed north to join the other rebels , while two cruisers , a few destroyers and submarines remained to guard the base . Other bases joined the now @-@ full @-@ fledged rebellion as well , including the Second Air Group based in Quintero . With so many rebels appearing , it was feared by many that the plethora of unemployed workers would join . The government attempted to solicit aid from the United States in the form of military intervention or war materiel ( including two submarines and bombs capable of penetrating the armor of Almirante Latorre ) , but they were rebuffed both publicly and privately . Acting Vice President Manuel Trucco now found himself in an undesirable position ; he had to defeat the rebels before more units joined and bolstered their forces , but if he was too harsh , there was a risk that the populace would think that his policies were too similar to the former dictator Ibáñez del Campo . Trucco decided on a path of reconciliation . He sent a naval admiral , Edgardo von Schroeders , to negotiate with the mutineers . They met on board Almirante Latorre , where von Schroeders , seeing a potential split between sailors angry over their pay versus others with a more political agenda , tried to divide them along these lines and get them to surrender . However , a plea from the approaching southern fleet , asking for them to wait before any possible settlement , sealed the matter for the time being and von Schroders flew back to the capital . 
 5 September marked a turn in the rebels ' fortunes , despite the arrival of the southern fleet a day earlier . All of their land gains were taken by government forces , leaving only the fleet in the mutineers ' hands . By the next day , an air strike was mounted by government forces . The only damage done was to the submarine H4 , which was unable to dive , but at least one bomb landed about 50 yards ( 46 m ) from Almirante Latorre . Despite the scant damage , the attack broke the mutineers ' spirits ; they quickly offered to send a delegation to Santiago to discuss terms , but the government , bolstered by its land victories , refused . While the mutiny devolved into arguing and anarchy , individual ships began leaving the bay and setting sail for Valparaíso , and the rest soon followed . Almirante Latorre ended up in the Bay of <unk> with Blanco Encalada . Seven crewmen on the dreadnought received death sentences , later commuted to life in prison . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Still in the midst of the depression , Almirante Latorre was deactivated at Talcahuano in 1933 to lessen government expenditures , and only a caretaker crew was assigned to tend to the mothballed ship into the mid @-@ 1930s . In a 1937 refit in the Talcahuano dockyard , the aircraft catapult was taken off and anti @-@ aircraft weaponry was added . Almirante Latorre was never fully modernized , however , and by the Second World War her main battery was comparatively short @-@ ranged and her armor protection , designed before the " all or nothing " principle was put into practice , was wholly inadequate . Nevertheless , soon after Japan 's attack on Pearl Harbor , the United States approached the Chilean naval attaché and the vice admiral heading Chile 's naval commission to the United States with the aim of purchasing Almirante Latorre and a few destroyers to bolster the United States ' navy . The offer was declined , and Almirante Latorre was used for neutrality patrols during the Second World War . 
 Almirante Latorre was active until 1951 , when an accident in the ship 's engine room killed three crewmen . Moored at Talcahuano , the battleship became a storage facility for fuel oil . She was decommissioned in October 1958 , and was sold to Mitsubishi Heavy Industries in February 1959 for $ 881 @,@ 110 to be broken up for scrap . On 29 May 1959 , to the salutes of the assembled Chilean fleet , the old dreadnought was taken under tow by the tug Cambrian <unk> , and reached Yokohama , Japan , at the end of August , though the scrapping process did not begin immediately on arrival . 
 = = Endnotes = = 
 = Metroid Prime Pinball = 
 Metroid Prime Pinball is a pinball video game themed after the Metroid series . The game uses the graphical style and various story elements from Metroid Prime . It was developed by Fuse Games for the Nintendo DS handheld game console , and released by Nintendo in North America and Australia in 2005 , in Japan in 2006 , and in Europe in 2007 . Metroid Prime Pinball uses the basic mechanics of pinball , along with typical pinball items . New mechanics are introduced , such as wall jumping and the ability to fire weapons . The Nintendo DS 's touchscreen can be nudged with a finger to alter the pinball 's trajectory while in motion . 
 The initial idea for a video game that presented the Metroid series in a pinball setting came to Kensuke Tanabe after he learned that Fuse Games had previously worked on Mario Pinball Land , another pinball video game . Recalling that the series ' protagonist , Samus , can morph into a ball , Tanabe was convinced that the Metroid universe could be adapted to a pinball setting . The game was sold with a Rumble Pak accessory for the Nintendo DS , marking the first time the accessory was available for the Nintendo DS . 
 Metroid Prime Pinball received generally positive reviews . Critics praised the game 's transposition of the Metroid series into a pinball video game , but criticized its lack of variety . Metroid Prime Pinball sold 6 @,@ 228 copies during its debut month of October 2005 in the United States , and over 15 @,@ 000 units in Japan as of May 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Metroid Prime Pinball uses the basic mechanics of pinball , complete with an assortment of typical pinball items including flippers , spinners , bumpers , and ramps . In addition , new mechanics are introduced , such as enemies that wander around the table , wall jumping , and the ability to fire weapons . The Nintendo DS 's touchscreen can be used to nudge the pinball table and alter the ball 's trajectory . The game consists of six pinball tables , each inspired by a different area of Metroid Prime . Each table is shown across both screens of the Nintendo DS . Only two tables are initially available for play : Pirate Frigate and Tallon Overworld . After playing either of the first two tables , the player unlocks two more tables : Phendrana Drifts and Phazon Mines . In either table , the player must battle a boss to complete it . 
 During the course of the game , the player must acquire twelve Artifacts , which are prizes that are awarded after completing objectives such as winning minigames or beating bosses . Once having acquired twelve Artifacts , the player is granted access to a table called the Artifact Temple , which places six balls on the table at the same time . To complete the table , twelve different targets must be hit with the balls while they are bombarded by attacks from Meta Ridley , one of the antagonists of the Metroid Prime series . If all of the balls are lost , the table ends ; the player does not lose any of the twelve Artifacts already collected but is forced to revisit another table and complete it before being allowed a second attempt at the Artifact Temple . Upon completing the Artifact Temple , access is granted to the final table , Impact Crater . After the player defeats the Metroid Prime creature on the Impact Crater table , the game unlocks a higher difficulty level , Expert mode . 
 The game also features a " Single Mission " mode which confines players to a single board . The Pirate Frigate and Tallon Overworld boards challenge players to earn a high point score , as in real pinball ; on the other tables players are ranked by the time taken to complete a mission . In addition to the single @-@ player mode , the game features a multiplayer mode , which requires only one copy of the game and allows up to eight players to compete in a race to reach a target score . The mode uses a seventh table , Magmoor Caverns , that does not appear in the single @-@ player mode . 
 = = Development = = 
 While making Metroid Prime Hunters , a Metroid first @-@ person shooter video game for the Nintendo DS , Nintendo producer Kensuke Tanabe came up with the idea to make a pinball game based on the Metroid series as Fuse Games finished Mario Pinball Land , another pinball simulator based on a Nintendo property . Tanabe felt like the Metroid universe fit into such a setting due to series protagonist Samus being able to morph into a ball , and Fuse agreed that the license was " a great fit for pinball " , accepting to work on the game . Fuse Games then received some assets from Metroid Prime developers Retro Studios , and collaborated with the Hunters team at Nintendo Software Technology to elaborate on specific aspects of Metroid Prime Pinball , such as Samus 's wall climbing and shooting abilities . Head of development Adrian Barritt said that in Metroid Prime Pinball the team tried to fix criticisms raised about the difficulty of Mario Pinball Land , creating a " more beginner friendly " game . 
 Named Project Code : Metroid Pinball while in development , the first gameplay footage from the game was released on May 17 , 2005 at the E3 convention . Nintendo of America revealed on August 22 , 2005 that the game , by then titled Metroid Prime Pinball , would be sold with the Rumble Pak accessory , which can be plugged into the Game Boy Advance slot of the Nintendo DS . When the Rumble Pak is installed , the Nintendo DS shakes whenever the pinball in the game hits an object . This was the first time that the Nintendo DS version of the Rumble Pak was introduced . It was first sold exclusively with Metroid Prime Pinball before becoming available as a standalone product from Nintendo . 
 Nintendo DS games that use the device 's top and bottom screens as one continuous screen are harder to control because of a gap in the middle , sometimes called a visual " dead zone " ; objects in this area are not visible . The developers of Metroid Prime Pinball , a game which takes advantage of both screens , resolved this problem by placing a second set of pinball flippers at the bottom of the upper screen to give players a reference to work with . The tabletops in the game use pre @-@ rendered artwork for graphical effects , including Samus 's Morph Ball , which uses renderings of images at several different angles to provide a smooth animation . To simulate the appearance of a real pinball game from a player 's point of view , the tabletop in Metroid Prime Pinball was tipped back . The game offers players the ability to nudge the table , a technique used in pinball games to influence the ball 's movement . This is achieved by touching the Nintendo DS 's bottom touchscreen with a finger and pushing it in the direction that the player wants to nudge the tabletop . The game 's soundtrack was composed by Kenji Yamamoto and Masaru Tajima , with audio effects from the Metroid Prime series are borrowed by the game to provide a " CD @-@ like " music experience . The voice of the Power Suit was provided by Lorelei King . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Metroid Prime Pinball was released by Nintendo for the Nintendo DS in North America on October 24 , 2005 , in Australia on December 1 , 2005 , in Japan on January 19 , 2006 , and in Europe on June 22 , 2007 . Metroid Prime Pinball sold 6 @,@ 228 copies during its debut month of October 2005 in the United States . The game has sold over 15 @,@ 000 units in Japan as of May 2008 . It was given " generally favorable reviews " , according to the review aggregator website Metacritic . 
 Despite early skepticism over the quality of a pinball video game themed after the Metroid series , reviews praised the integration of the two in Metroid Prime Pinball . Nintendo Power called the game a " fully realized and well @-@ tuned hybrid of pinball play and Metroid Prime atmosphere " , and the Official Nintendo Magazine named it one of the better recently released pinball games . GameZone believed that the game appeals to anyone who is a fan of pinball games or the Metroid Prime franchise , to which Play magazine attested , adding that the game embodies the Metroid Prime series well . 
 Appreciating the game 's pinball gameplay , 1UP.com thought that its Metroid motif did not add much more to the game . Nintendo World Report felt differently ; they were impressed with the game 's " top @-@ notch graphics and sound that believably invoke the Metroid series " . They also appreciated the pinball innovations introduced in the game that incorporate features from the series , concluding , " This game really does feel like a seamless , if unlikely , merging between classic arcade pinball and the creepy @-@ cool Metroid Prime series . " The sentiment was shared by GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin , who was convinced that pinball was an excellent medium to simulate the challenging struggles found in the Metroid series , noting that the game " pulls it off very well " by being faithful to the main series . Bryn Williams of GameSpy was impressed after playing the game ; he noted that it was one of the more interesting gaming sessions that anyone can have on the Nintendo DS . Metroid Prime Pinball 's gameplay was lauded by reviewers . Craig Harris of IGN appreciated Fuse Games ' work on the game , praising the graphics , audio , and gameplay , along with its " pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play " element that made it easy for people with varying levels of skill to play . X @-@ Play felt the same way , noting that the simple controls and " short bursts of gameplay " make Metroid Prime Pinball a perfect handheld video game . In addition , they asserted that the game has great value because of the included wireless multiplayer mode , which allows up to eight players to play the game with just one game card . 
 A few critics were negative about Metroid Prime Pinball . The reviewer from the Electronic Gaming Monthly video game magazine found it hard to see the pinball while playing the game , especially when it was in the area between the top and bottom Nintendo DS screens . With a limited selection of game modes , GamePro 's Rice Burner was disappointed with the game , and concluded that because every game mode features the same tabletops , Metroid Prime Pinball lacked variety , which Game Informer 's reviewer agreed with , noting that he would have had more fun with the game if he " had access to a little more content " . The minigames were criticized by Game Revolution , which claimed that there were too many minigames that were only of average quality . Furthermore , it asked the game 's developer , Fuse Games , to spend more time making a great pinball game rather than several minor minigames , requesting " a character @-@ based game that 's great at pinball rather than a fence @-@ riding jack of all trades that is master of none " . Eurogamer had a different experience , finding that the minigames provided more entertainment than the main game , which they remarked was a " cardinal sin in pinball " . They also criticized the tilt feature for being unintuitive and difficult to use . The reviewer for GamesMaster felt that Metroid Prime Pinball was directed more towards Metroid fans than pinball aficionados , calling it a " flashy but insipid " game . 
 = Halkett boat = 
 A Halkett boat is a type of lightweight inflatable boat designed by Lt Peter Halkett ( 1820 – 1885 ) during the 1840s . Halkett had long been interested in the difficulties of travelling in the Canadian Arctic , and the problems involved in designing boats light enough to be carried over arduous terrain , but robust enough to be used in extreme weather conditions . 
 Halkett 's first design was a collapsible and inflatable boat made of rubber @-@ impregnated cloth . When deflated , the hull of the boat could be worn as a cloak , the oar used as a walking stick , and the sail as an umbrella . This was followed by a two @-@ man craft that was small enough to fit into a knapsack , and when deflated served as a waterproof blanket . 
 Although widely praised by Canadian explorers , Halkett 's designs had a limited market , and he was unable to persuade the Royal Navy that they would serve any useful purpose in general naval service . Efforts to market them as platforms for fishing and duck shooting failed , and they were commercially unsuccessful . Only two Halkett boats , that of Orcadian explorer John Rae , and one held in the Hudson 's Bay Company Museum Collection at the Manitoba Museum are known to survive today . 
 = = Peter Halkett = = 
 Peter Halkett was a Lieutenant in the Royal Navy in the 1840s . The son of John Halkett , a director of the Hudson 's Bay Company who for many years had lived in Canada before returning to England , Peter Halkett had long held an interest in the exploration of the Canadian Arctic . He had a particular interest in John Franklin 's disastrous Coppermine Expedition of 1819 – 1822 . 
 Franklin 's three @-@ year exploration of the northern coast of Canada in search of the Northwest Passage had ended in disaster amid accusations of murder and cannibalism , with 11 of the 20 members of the group killed and the survivors reduced to eating lichen , their own boots , and the remains of rotten carcasses abandoned by wolves . The party had become stranded on the wrong side of the Coppermine River after their boats had been destroyed in a storm ; John Richardson had attempted to swim to safety and suffered severe hypothermia . A single member of the party had fashioned a small canoe from canvas and willow , and the survivors had been obliged to cross the river one at a time using the makeshift canoe . 
 Halkett was an amateur inventor , and during his spare time whilst serving in the navy he worked on solving the problem of how to design a boat that would be small and light enough to transport easily on foot through wilderness , but robust enough to carry people in safety across wide bodies of water . His solution was to design a boat in which all components would double as items of clothing , or accessories that Halkett assumed the user would be carrying in any event . 
 = = Boat @-@ cloak = = 
 Halkett designed a waterproof cloak made from an early form of Macintosh cloth , cotton impregnated with India rubber by using naphtha as a solvent . The lining of the cloak contained an airtight and watertight inflatable ovoid , split into four separate airtight compartments in case of puncture , and a pocket containing a paddle blade and a small bellows . The wearer of the cloak would carry a walking stick , which would double as the shaft of the paddle , and a large umbrella to serve as a sail . The cloak weighed around 7 1 ⁄ 2 pounds ( 3 @.@ 4 kg ) in total , and took three to four minutes to inflate ; once inflated , it could support the weight of six to eight people . 
 In early 1844 , Halkett successfully tested a prototype boat @-@ cloak on the River Thames , paddling it 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) without taking on any water , despite , in his words , being " met by — passed by — and almost run down by — various Metropolitan Steamers plying to and fro in their several vocations , and causing no little commotion in the troubled waters of the River " . Buoyed by this success , he took the prototype boat @-@ cloak with him while on naval service , using it whenever the opportunity arose to test it under various sea conditions . In November 1844 , Halkett hoped to test the boat @-@ cloak in bad weather conditions , in the rough seas of the Bay of Biscay , but the weather was unusually calm . He was forced to take down his umbrella , and paddle , recalling later that " the winds that day were too civil by half , and the sleepless bay almost quite dormant " . The boat @-@ cloak was positively received by explorers ; John Richardson ( who had almost died during the 1819 – 1822 Coppermine expedition ) wrote that " Had we been possessed of such a contrivance in our first expedition , I have little doubt of our having brought the whole party in safely " . 
 = = Halkett 's boats in the Canadian Arctic = = 
 Spurred on by the successful testing of the boat @-@ cloak , Halkett designed a larger version that folded into a knapsack . When inflated , it could carry two men , operating a paddle on each side , and when deflated served as a waterproof blanket to allow the users to camp on wet ground . The Admiralty was sceptical about potential uses for Halkett 's designs ; on 8 May 1845 Lord Herbert , First Secretary to the Admiralty wrote to Halkett that " My Lords are of an opinion that your invention is extremely clever and ingenious , and that it might be useful in Exploring and Surveying Expeditions , but they do not consider that it would be made applicable for general purposes in the Naval Service " . 
 Although the Admiralty saw no use to which Halkett 's designs could be put in general naval service , this larger design was extremely well received by explorers . John Franklin bought one to take on the ill @-@ fated 1845 expedition in which the entire expedition party of 129 men and two ships vanished . Franklin saw Halkett boats as so essential to travel in Canada that he gave the boat intended for his expedition to Sir George Simpson , Governor @-@ in @-@ Chief of Rupert 's Land , for use in his travels in the region . He ordered a replacement boat from Halkett , who delivered it in time for him to take possession before setting out on his last expedition . 
 <unk> John Rae , known by the Inuit as <unk> ( <unk> , " He who takes long strides " ) , was a Hudson 's Bay Company surgeon who became a surveyor of the Canadian Arctic . Unlike most Europeans of the period , Rae believed that the local inhabitants knew best how to cope with extreme weather conditions . He travelled Inuit @-@ style , using sledges and snowshoes and sleeping in snow igloos . Rae took a Halkett boat on his first expedition in 1846 , reporting that it was " most useful in crossing and recrossing the river at Repulse Bay " , and that " although in constant use for upwards of six weeks on a rocky coast it never required the slightest repair " and " ought to form part of the equipment of every expedition " . 
 Keen to find out what had become of the ships and men of Franklin 's expedition , in 1848 the Royal Navy sent a search party led by John Richardson and John Rae , and equipped with a Halkett boat provided by the government , to search for the lost expedition . The party was unable to locate Franklin , but found the Halkett boat invaluable , on one occasion using the single boat to ferry their entire party across a river in 14 trips . Rae noted that although the rubber of the boat became stiff from the cold , there was no difficulty in warming it to soften the material when necessary . Halkett boats were likewise taken on the subsequent HMS Enterprise expedition that was sent to search for Franklin , during which they were successfully used for fishing . 
 In 1851 French explorer Joseph René Bellot mounted another expedition to find Franklin , sponsored by Franklin 's wife . Bellot took a Halkett boat @-@ cloak on the journey , noting in his journal that it was " of immense value in a country where the want of wood renders it impossible to form any sort of raft " . Bellot 's expedition was unable to locate Franklin , and it was not until 1853 that an expedition led by Rae ( equipped with " two beautiful Halkett boats " ) located a group of Inuit who recounted seeing men dragging a boat four years earlier , and later finding their bodies . 
 = = Commercial failure = = 
 Despite being promoted as ideal for lake @-@ fishing and duck @-@ shooting , and being exhibited in the Great Exhibition of 1851 , Halkett 's boat designs were not commercially successful and never entered general use outside the specialised field of Canadian exploration . Later promoted to Captain , Halkett died on 23 March 1885 , aged 65 , and the manufacture of his boat designs was abandoned . John Rae gave his boat from the 1853 expedition to a Miss Peace of Kirkwall , and it lay forgotten on the rafters of a Kirkwall <unk> . It was identified and recovered many years later , and is now displayed in the Stromness Museum at Orkney . A second surviving example is held in the Hudson 's Bay Company Museum Collection at the Manitoba Museum . 
 = We Don 't Need to Whisper = 
 We Don 't Need to Whisper is the debut studio album by the American rock band Angels & Airwaves . Recorded at <unk> Ranch in San Diego , California and produced by guitarist / vocalist Tom DeLonge , the album was released on May 23 , 2006 through Geffen Records . In February 2005 , DeLonge ( who desired to spend more time with his family ) departed from his former band Blink @-@ 182 after months of heated exchanges and increasing tension within the trio and spent the following three weeks in complete isolation , contemplating his life , career , and future in music . 
 We Don 't Need to Whisper is the band 's only album to bear the Parental Advisory label , though subsequent albums also contain explicit language . 
 Inspired by personal crises and global events , We Don 't Need to Whisper was conceptualized as DeLonge taught himself to play instruments and created his own home studio . He recruited his longtime friend and guitarist David Kennedy of Box Car Racer , as well as drummer Atom Willard and bassist Ryan Sinn to form Angels & Airwaves , who were primarily inspired by arena rock groups such as U2 and The Police . DeLonge 's later public statements regarding the band 's music prompted media interest and concern from his relatives and family . 
 We Don 't Need to Whisper peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 and has since sold nearly 800 @,@ 000 copies . Three of the four singles released in promotion of the album reached the top 20 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart , with " The Adventure " peaking at number five . It received largely mixed reviews from music critics , many who celebrated the album 's obvious musical influences but found its contents rather pretentious . A documentary film based on the recording process of the album and early history of the band , Start the Machine , was released in 2008 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 consisted of guitarist Tom DeLonge , bassist Mark Hoppus and drummer Travis Barker , and by 2004 had been regarded as the most successful pop punk act of the time since the releases of Enema of the State ( 1999 ) and Take Off Your Pants and Jacket ( 2001 ) . During its brief hiatus in 2002 , DeLonge suffered a herniated disc in his back and collected several darker musical ideas he viewed unsuitable for the band ; the ideas were used in supergroup Box Car Racer 's self @-@ titled album , recorded with assistance from Hazen Street guitarist and longtime friend David Kennedy . Box Car Racer was intended as a one @-@ time experimental project but evolved into a full @-@ fledged band involving Barker . The side project would cause personal conflicts between DeLonge and Hoppus , the latter was not a member of the supergroup and felt betrayed . The moody subject matter on Box Car Racer was incorporated into the sound of Blink @-@ 182 , who explored experimentalist elements on their eponymous fifth studio album ( 2003 ) . After the success of Box Car Racer , DeLonge declined a solo recording deal offered by Geffen Records because he believed it would cast negative light on Blink @-@ 182 , but it loomed over the band in addition to growing internal tension . 
 While the trio embarked on a European tour the following fall , DeLonge felt increasingly quarreled both about his creative freedom within the group and the toll touring impacted his personal life . He eventually expressed his desire to take a half @-@ year respite from touring to spend more time with family matters , a decision that Hoppus and Barker asserted was an lengthy interruption . DeLonge did not blame his bandmates for disappointment with his requests , but was dismayed that they apparently could not understand them . He protested Meet the Barkers , a reality television series starring Barker which was produced for a 2005 premiere , and disliked surveillance cameras , feeling his personal privacy was invaded . Blink @-@ 182 agreed to perform at Music for Relief 's Concert for South Asia , a benefit show to aid victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake , but further arguments that ensued during rehearsals rooted in the band members ' increasing paranoia and bitterness toward each other . DeLonge judged the band 's priorities to be " mad , mad different " and claimed that they had simply grew apart as they aged . This communication breakdown led to heated exchanges resulting in his departure from the group , which Geffen announced on February 22 , 2005 would be going on an " indefinite hiatus " , and he would not speak to Barker or Hoppus for several years , although he called the latter his greatest friend . 
 DeLonge underwent a complete reassessment of his prime concerns in the aftermath of the band 's break @-@ up — a move " bearing the hallmarks of a nervous breakdown " — and went on a three @-@ week " spiritual journey " in complete isolation away from his family , contemplating his life , career , and future in music . DeLonge was psychologically hurt by the band 's dissolution , likening it to a divorce and calling it a " traumatic experience " and a " disaster . " He had been known for his role in the Blink @-@ 182 as " the low @-@ brow prankster " and wanted to restart his career without worrying whether fans would find him funny . The background of Angels & Airwaves was based on DeLonge 's endorsement of John Kerry in the 2004 presidential election , travelling the political circuit with the Democratic Party candidate ; DeLonge was inspired by Kerry 's need for widespread reform and likened his presidential campaign to a drug , remarking later that it " really changed [ me ] . " He rediscovered the epiphany developed during his tour with Kerry and applied it to the philosophy of Angels & Airwaves , while he redefined himself as he learned to play piano and self @-@ produce and formed his own home studio . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 DeLonge had to assemble Angels & Airwaves after recording several demos in his home studio . Following Blink @-@ 182 's disestablishment , he declined offers from highly prolific musicians to collaborate on their developing material and recruited longtime friend and Box Car Racer guitarist David Kennedy . Atom Willard and Ryan Sinn soon followed , but the latter dropped out and was reluctant to join another band soon after the collapse of his previous group , The Distillers . Kennedy found him in a similar situation with his band Hazen Street , and found the new environment refreshing . Uncertain on joining the band , DeLonge offered Sinn a job at Macbeth Footwear 's warehouse , where he worked until he permanently committed to the band in August . The band members put forth several sayings and rules including " Friends and family first ; band second . " 
 We Don 't Need to Whisper was inspired by a mix of both personal developments and global events . During production , DeLonge studied World War II , which he considered the " last great war clearly a battle between good and evil . " He saw America enter a post @-@ war period of prosperity , and perceived it as an analogy for possibilities in his life . The album was encouraged by other personal crises as well , such as DeLonge 's father 's diagnosis of leukemia and his brother 's deployment to Iraq ; DeLonge criticized the Iraq War as unnecessary . Although the band deemed the project lightly progressive rock @-@ influenced , the album lacks guitar solos the genre is commonly known for in place of melodies inspired by 1970s rock bands , such as Pink Floyd , Rush and Led Zeppelin . DeLonge was influenced by and listened to Peter Gabriel , U2 , The Police and The Cure , all who were artists that achieved massive success and inspired DeLonge 's desire to reach the widest audience possible . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The overlying message the band intended for We Don 't Need to Whisper is that the future could become a utopia . Opening track " Valkyrie Missile " opens We Don 't Need to Whisper with a cinematic organ melody , 1980s @-@ influenced guitars and a quote from an astronaut : " Anybody out there ? " . " Distraction " follows and is filled with hand claps and a keyboard melody over verses lamenting death and destruction . " Do It for Me Now " originated from a beat DeLonge created in 2004 for rapper Talib Kweli , who turned the opportunity down ; the Morse code beat was later adapted by the band and stimulated DeLonge 's vision of the song being the soundtrack to " young lovers watching the sunrise . " " The Adventure " is an " exhilarating ode to a beckoning future with a huge guitar sound reminiscent of The Cure . " The song was motivated by a friend whose marriage was falling apart when his wife committed adultery . The situation had a deep impact on DeLonge in that he spent a night up crying for him when he wrote the track . " A Little 's Enough " was inspired by a religious concept in which a God came to bring positive change on Earth when it faces terrorism , war or famine . 
 " The War " , an anthem about the Iraq War and its death toll , is succeeded by " It Hurts " , a track about a friend of DeLonge with a cheating girlfriend . " It 's a terrible situation where my friend is being crushed from the inside out by all the manipulative stuff she 's doing and this song 's about that . " 
 During development , DeLonge often took his daughter Ava to an ice cream shop in San Diego , and on one occasion they wandered into a next door toy store and DeLonge was enchanted by the sound of a pink toy piano , which he would eventually purchase . He placed the piano in his shower and recorded " Start the Machine " , which attempts to illustrate the state of " being on a boat as you 're leaving a city in flames , " only to find a tropical island and a more alluring place ahead . DeLonge considered it a reference to his time with Blink @-@ 182 and central to Angels & Airwaves ' theme that " something special [ can come ] out of destruction . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In September 2005 , after spending months avoiding publicity , DeLonge announced his new Angels & Airwaves project and promised " the greatest rock and roll revolution for this generation . " His statements — containing predictions that the album would usher in an " entire new culture of the youth " and lead to the band 's dominance — were regarded as highly grandiose in the press and mocked and set sources in his belief that his album would become a recording critics would refer to two decades on as the album of the 2000s , or the sole successor to what he considered the most recent " important " album , Nirvana 's Nevermind ( 1991 ) . He also contended he began writing Whisper immediately following the release of Blink @-@ 182 , seeing it as a " force to be reckoned with " that he " knew [ he ] had to beat " and while wishing to take the project to " that Police level , that Joshua Tree level , " he observed in interviews that prior to Blink @-@ 182 's hiatus , he thought Angels & Airwaves would become a highly important band . The other band members did not refute DeLonge 's press statements , viewing them as tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek and offering little substance . 
 Thoroughly utilized by the band , DeLonge often discussed minor details and plans for accompanying films and other promotional matter , and his managers approached him having an " intervention " in which they <unk> questioned his frame of mind . His ambitious beliefs were intensified by his addiction to Vicodin , a drug which he used due to his back problem and did not try out again when he was unable to obtain it for a week , hallucinating and deep in withdrawal . 
 = = Reception = = 
 We Don 't Need to Whisper received largely mixed reviews from contemporary music critics at the time of its release . Alternative Press was generally the most enthusiastic of the positive reviews , considering it influential to rock bands in 2006 . The publication found the album to not be abounding or thought @-@ provoking and commented : " While the lyrics might be DeLonge at his most soul @-@ searching , the music is built for nothing smaller than football stadiums . " IGN was also very positive in their assessment of the record , writing , " This album is like a post @-@ millennial concept record that beckons to be listened to with the lights dimmed and the headphones clamped tightly around your aural receptors . [ ... ] It may not be your cup of tea , but kudos to the quartet for not merely re @-@ treading the blink market with more mature lyrics . " Entertainment Weekly journalist Leah Greenblatt gave the album a B- rating , commending its obvious influences while also criticizing DeLonge 's vocals . It stated that his vocals might improve to resemble those of Robert Smith heard on tracks like " It Hurts " , but likened it to a high school student with a job at Del Taco communicating with a drive @-@ through microphone . 
 Rolling Stone writer Christian Hoard summarized the record and the mixed reviews simply as " DeLonge yanks heartstrings with so @-@ so results " and saw the atmospheric elements as excessive . Spin had a similar sentiment : " Here , his three sidemen elevate [ DeLonge 's ] emo tendencies to something grander and more <unk> romantic — though somewhat less exciting . Blender <unk> the composition of the album as it contains the " duller " aspects of Blink @-@ 182 accompanied with U2 @-@ influenced guitar <unk> critics arraigned the album to be pretentious and contrasted Angels & Airwaves with Blink @-@ 182 . The A.V. Club journalist Kyle Ryan described his experience with We Don 't Need to Whisper as 50 minutes of DeLonge demonstrating his musical skills . English magazine Uncut discerned his departure from Blink @-@ 182 and the album 's serious tone . Allmusic writer Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the differences in musical style between both bands , but remained polarized about the album and commented that " It may not make for a successful record , but it does make for an interesting one , particularly in how DeLonge 's desire to be taken seriously has led him to use the serious music of his adolescence as a signifier that he 's serious now , but We Don 't Need to Whisper is too doggedly dour and amorphous to be more than a curiosity . " The album sold 127 @,@ 000 copies its first week , and was certified Gold by the RIAA . It was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award for Best New Artist in a Video , Best Special Effects in a Video and Best Editing in a Video for " The Adventure , " as well as Best Band of 2006 for We Don 't Need to Whisper . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Tom DeLonge , all music composed by Angels & Airwaves . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Artwork = = 
 Shilo 
 = USS Colhoun ( DD @-@ 85 ) = 
 USS Colhoun ( DD @-@ 85 / APD @-@ 2 ) was a Wickes @-@ class destroyer in the United States Navy during World War I and later redesignated APD @-@ 2 in World War II . She was the first Navy ship named for Edmund Colhoun . 
 Launched in 1918 , she remained on convoy duty for the final few months of World War I , and she then operated out of the Atlantic for several years until being decommissioned in 1922 . Returning to service in 1940 as a high @-@ speed troop transport , Colhoun was dispatched to support the Guadalcanal campaign early in World War II . While unloading supplies to the island on 31 August 1942 , she was attacked by aircraft of the Empire of Japan , and sunk with the loss of 50 men . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Colhoun was one of 111 Wickes @-@ class destroyers built by the United States Navy between 1917 and 1919 . She , along with 25 of her sisters , were constructed at Fore River Shipyard shipyards in Quincy , Massachusetts using specifications and detail designs drawn up by Bethlehem Steel . 
 She had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 060 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 040 long tons ; 1 @,@ 170 short tons ) an overall length of 315 feet 5 inches ( 96 @.@ 14 m ) , a beam of 31 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 68 m ) and a draught of 9 feet 2 inches ( 2 @.@ 79 m ) . On trials , Harding reached a speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . She was armed with four 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) / 50 caliber guns and twelve 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . She had a regular crew complement of 100 officers and enlisted men . She was driven by two Curtis steam turbines powered by four Yarrow boilers . 
 Specifics on Colhoun 's performance are not known , but she was one of the group of Wickes @-@ class destroyers designed by Bethlehem Steel , built from a different design than the ' Liberty type ' destroyers constructed from detail designs drawn up by Bath Iron Works , which used Parsons or Westinghouse turbines . The non- ' Liberty ' type destroyers deteriorated badly in service , and in 1929 all 60 of this group were retired by the Navy . Actual performance of these ships was far below intended specifications especially in fuel economy , with most only able to make 2 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 300 km ; 2 @,@ 600 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) instead of the design standard of 3 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 700 km ; 3 @,@ 600 mi ) at 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . The class also suffered problems with turning and weight . 
 Colhoun was the first commissioned in the U.S. Navy named for Edmund Colhoun . The second Colhoun was a Fletcher @-@ class destroyer commissioned in 1944 . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Colhoun was launched on 21 February 1918 from Fore River Shipyard and sponsored by Helen A. Colhoun , the daughter of Edmund Ross Colhoun . She was commissioned on 13 June 1918 under the command of Commander B. B. <unk> . Reporting to the United States Atlantic Fleet , she was assigned as a convoy escort between New York City and ports in Europe , escorting ships carrying troops and supplies supporting World War I from 30 June and 14 September 1918 . On 18 November 1918 , she reported to New London , Connecticut to assist in tests of sound equipment which was under development at the time . On 1 January 1919 , she was rushed to assist the troop transport Northern Pacific which had run aground off Fire Island , New York . Colhoun assisted in transporting 194 of the troops off of the ship , who had been returning from Europe , to their destination port in Hoboken , New Jersey . 
 On 1 December 1919 , she was placed in reduced commission at Philadelphia Navy Yard , and then underwent an overhaul at Norfolk Navy Yard . Between 1919 and 1922 , Colhoun remained assigned to the Atlantic Fleet on reserve status , based out of Charleston , South Carolina . She took part in sporadic fleet exercises and large maneuvers , as well as taking several midshipman cruises through the Caribbean and along the east coast . In mid @-@ 1922 , she returned to Philadelphia Naval Yard and was decommissioned on 28 June . 
 Colhoun was towed to Norfolk Navy Yard on 5 June 1940 , and began conversion to a high @-@ speed transport . She was recommissioned into the fleet on 11 December 1940 , and received the hull classification symbol of APD @-@ 2 . Following this , she underwent a year of training exercises between Norfolk and the Caribbean , where she was during the attack on Pearl Harbor , and the entry of the U.S. into World War II . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 With the war underway , she sailed for the Pacific to join the U.S. Pacific Fleet . There , she joined Transport Squadron 12 based out of Pearl Harbor , and began conducting anti @-@ submarine warfare exercises there for a time . She arrived in Nouméa , New Caledonia on 21 July 1942 . With a shortage of combat ships at the beginning of the war , Colhoun served a dual role as both a high @-@ speed transport and an anti @-@ submarine warfare vessel . In this role , she began preparations for the invasion of the Solomon Islands . On 7 August 1942 , she carried units of the 1st Marine Raider Battalion in the initial assault landings which began the Guadalcanal Campaign and continued to serve as both transport and antisubmarine vessel in support of the invasion . 
 On the morning of 30 August 1942 , Colhoun ported at <unk> Point and unloaded stores for the U.S. Marine Corps garrison on Guadalcanal , and then exited the harbor to undertake anti @-@ submarine patrols . Just before 12 : 00 , an air raid siren was issued and Colhoun moved out to sea . A second alert was received at 14 : 00 . Shortly thereafter , a lookout spotted a formation of Japanese aircraft approaching using the sun as cover . The Japanese aircraft , using clouds as cover , dove and released three bombs against Colhoun , two splashing nearby and one striking the after searchlight platform and a nearby boat . The bomb blew the after davits down and forward , blocking the after engine room hatches , and starting a fire from the diesel oil spilled by the boat . 
 Colhoun attempted to return fire with her anti @-@ aircraft batteries , but the Japanese aircraft remained obscured by clouds . A second dive launched five or six bombs on her starboard side , knocking down the foremast and blowing two 20 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) and one 4 inches ( 100 mm ) gun off the ship . A lubrication oil cooler pump in the after engine room was blown through the bulkhead into the forward engine room . Another two bombs scored direct hits on the after deck house , killing all of the men there . An order was given to abandon ship , and several tank lighters arrived quickly from Guadalcanal to assist in taking in survivors . Colhoun sank at 09 ° 24 ′ S 160 ° 01 ′ E. Fifty @-@ one men were killed and 18 wounded in her sinking . She was stricken from the Naval Vessel Register on 11 September 1942 . She received one battle star for her service in World War II . 
 = North Staffordshire Regiment = 
 The North Staffordshire Regiment ( Prince of Wales 's ) was a line infantry regiment of the British Army , which was in existence between 1881 and 1959 . The 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot was created on 21 April 1758 from the 2nd Battalion of the 11th Regiment of Foot . In 1881 , under the Childers Reforms , the 64th Regiment of Foot was merged with the 98th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment of Foot ( originally raised in 1824 ) to form the Prince of Wales 's ( North Staffordshire Regiment ) . In 1921 the regimental title was altered to the North Staffordshire Regiment ( Prince of Wales 's ) . 
 Formed at a time when the British Empire was reaching its peak , the regiment served all over the Empire , in times of both peace and war , and in many theatres of war outside the Empire . It fought with distinction in World War I and World War II , as well as in other smaller conflicts around the world . These other wars included the Second Sudanese War , the Second Boer War , the Anglo @-@ Irish War and the Third Anglo @-@ Afghan War . 
 In 1959 , as part of a defence review , the North Staffordshire Regiment , by now reduced to only a single regular battalion , was amalgamated with the South Staffordshire Regiment to form the Staffordshire Regiment ( Prince of Wales 's ) which was , in 2006 , amalgamated with the Cheshire Regiment and the Worcestershire and Sherwood Foresters Regiment ( 29th / 45th Foot ) to form the Mercian Regiment . Today the traditions of the North Staffordshire Regiment are continued by the Mercian Regiment . 
 = = Formation history = = 
 The Prince of Wales 's ( North Staffordshire ) Regiment was formed under the Childers Reforms on 1 July 1881 , by the amalgamation of the 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot and 98th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment of Foot . These two regular regiments became , respectively , the 1st and 2nd battalions of the new regiment . The Militia and Rifle Volunteers forces of North Staffordshire were also incorporated into this new regiment , and a permanent depot was established at Whittington Barracks , Lichfield , which also housed the newly formed South Staffordshire Regiment . 
 The 64th Regiment of Foot was originally raised in 1756 as the 2nd Battalion of the 11th ( Devonshire ) Foot , and was renumbered the 64th in 1758 . It had a long history of overseas service with much less time spent in Europe . It had served in the West Indies during the Seven Years ' War , America during the American War of Independence , South America , the West Indies and Canada during the Napoleonic Wars . Subsequent long periods were spent in Ireland and the West Indies before action was seen in India during the Indian Mutiny . At the time of the forming of the amalgamation with the 98th Foot , the 64th was based in Ireland . 
 The 98th Regiment of Foot , raised in 1824 in Chichester , had a much shorter history , but like the 64th had spent the majority of its time overseas spending a long time in South Africa before seeing action in China in the First Anglo @-@ Chinese ( or Opium ) War and India on the North West Frontier . It was based in Afghanistan when the amalgamation occurred . 
 The battalions that constituted the regiment in 1881 were as follows : 
 1st Battalion : the 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot ; 
 2nd Battalion : the 98th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment of Foot ; 
 3rd ( Militia ) Battalion : The King 's Own ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Light Infantry Militia , based in Stafford ; 
 4th ( Militia ) Battalion : The King 's Own ( 3rd Staffordshire ) Rifles Militia , based in Newcastle @-@ under @-@ Lyme ; 
 1st Volunteer Battalion : 2nd Staffordshire ( Staffordshire Rangers ) Rifle Volunteer Corps , based in Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent ; 
 2nd Volunteer Battalion : 5th Staffordshire Rifle Volunteer Corps , based in Lichfield but later moved to Burton @-@ on @-@ Trent . 
 = = Volunteers and Territorials = = 
 The 2nd and 5th Staffordshire Rifle Volunteer Corps were designated the 1st and 2nd Volunteer battalions , North Staffordshire Regiment , in 1883 . Together with the Volunteer battalions of the South Staffordshire Regiment , they formed the Staffordshire Volunteer Infantry Brigade in 1888 . This brigade was intended to assemble at Wolverhampton in time of war , while in peacetime it acted as a focus for collective training of the Volunteers . On the formation of the Territorial Force in 1908 , the two Volunteer battalions were renumbered as the 5th and 6th battalions of the North Staffordshire Regiment , forming part of the Staffordshire Brigade in the North Midland Division . 
 The reserve battalions of the regiment were also reorganised in 1908 by the Territorial and Reserve Forces Act 1907 , with the two militia battalions being re @-@ designated the 3rd ( Special ) and 4th ( Special Reserve ) battalions , and the volunteer battalions being re @-@ designated as Territorial Force and renumbered as the 5th and 6th battalions ( TF ) . 
 = = Early service ( 1881 – 1914 ) = = 
 = = = Garrison duties and the Mahdist War = = = 
 The 1st Battalion was stationed in Ireland at the time of the amalgamation . It moved to England in 1883 , and the following year to the West Indies , based mainly in Barbados , but with detachments on other islands . It moved to Natal in 1887 , to Mauritius in 1890 , to Malta in 1893 and to Egypt in 1895 . From there the 1st Battalion took part in operations in the Second Sudanese War under Lord Kitchener . During the campaign , the 1st Battalion were based initially at Wadi Halfa but moved to <unk> to avoid a cholera outbreak . In September the battalion took part in the action against the Dervish Army at Hafir , which was decisive in ending the campaign . As a result , the North Staffordshire Regiment received the unique " Hafir " battle honour , given to no other British regiment . 
 = = = Second Boer War = = = 
 The 2nd Battalion was stationed in India in 1881 when the North Staffordshire Regiment was formed , and remained there until 1886 . During this time period , it took part in an expedition to the <unk> Valley in 1884 , thus making it the first battalion in the regiment to see active service . In 1886 , it returned to England via Aden , and then deployed to Ireland in 1893 . In 1899 , 2nd Battalion mobilised and moved to South Africa , where it took part in the Second Boer War . Forming part of 15th Brigade in the 7th Division , the majority of the battalion saw little action throughout the conflict , being mostly occupied in garrison duties in Johannesburg in 1900 . In 1901 , the battalion was part of a mobile column under Brigadier @-@ General <unk> in the Eastern Transvaal which carried out a scorched earth campaign . 
 More action was seen by the mounted infantry company of the regiment that had been formed on arrival in South Africa . In January 1900 Lord Roberts , commander of the British forces in South Africa , ordered that every infantry battalion in South Africa was to raise a company of mounted infantry . These companies were to be detached from their parent units and operate as part of eight independent mounted infantry battalions . The North Staffords company thus formed became part of the 8th Battalion , Mounted Infantry . This unit was involved in the pursuit of Koos de la Rey and was present when he was captured at <unk> . The militia and volunteer battalions also saw service in the Second Boer War . The 4th Battalion was deployed in the Cape Colony and later the Bechuanaland Protectorate before being replaced by the 3rd Battalion . Additionally , the two volunteer companies which formed from the 1st and 2nd Volunteer battalions served alongside the 2nd Battalion at various times . As a result of these contributions and those of the two regular battalions , the regiment was awarded the " South Africa 1900 – 1902 " battle honour . 
 At the war 's end in 1902 , the battalion returned briefly to England . In the following year , it returned to India , remaining there until 1919 . 
 = = = Meeting in India = = = 
 The 1st Battalion was subsequently stationed in India from 1897 until 1903 . Here , the 1st and 2nd Battalions met for the first time , and no fewer than 590 men from the 1st Battalion were transferred to the 2nd Battalion . Thus 1st Battalion was reduced to a small cadre , which served for nine years upon its return to Lichfield and other stations in England , before moving to <unk> in Ireland in 1912 . 
 = = First World War ( 1914 – 1918 ) = = 
 The North Staffordshire Regiment was heavily committed to the fighting during the First World War , and over the course of the conflict , was expanded to 18 battalions , some by duplication of the Territorial Force battalions and others , labelled " service " battalions raised as part of Field Marshal Kitchener 's New Army . These battalions saw service in a number of theatres including on the Western Front , at Gallipoli , in the Middle East , and India . The following list details the involvement of these battalions : 
 1st Battalion – served in France from September 1914 until November 1918 ; 
 2nd Battalion – served in India throughout the war ; 
 3rd ( Reserve ) Battalion – operated as a training battalion in the United Kingdom throughout the war ; 
 4th ( Extra Reserve ) Battalion – garrison battalion in Guernsey 1914 – 1916 . Returned to United Kingdom in 1916 . Served in France 1917 – 1918 ; 
 1 / 5th Battalion Territorial Force ( TF ) – mobilised in 1914 , and served in France from 1915 to 1918 ; 
 1 / 6th Battalion TF – mobilised in 1914 , served in France from 1915 to 1918 ; 
 2 / 5th Battalion TF – formed in 1914 , moved to Ireland in 1916 where it was involved in the Easter Rising , served in France 1917 – 1918 . Merged with 1 / 5th Battalion in February 1918 ; 
 2 / 6th Battalion TF – formed in 1914 , moved to Ireland in 1916 where it was involved in the Easter Rising , served in France 1917 – 1918 . Merged with 1 / 6th Battalion in July 1918 ; 
 3 / 5th Battalion TF – formed in 1915 . Renamed 5th ( Reserve ) Battalion in April 1916 . Served as a training battalion in England 1915 – 1918 ; 
 3 / 6th Battalion TF – formed in 1915 . Renamed 6th ( Reserve ) Battalion in April 1916 . Merged with 5th ( Reserve ) Battalion in September 1916 ; 
 7th ( Service ) Battalion – formed in 1914 . Took part in Gallipoli Campaign July 1915 – January 1916 . Evacuated to Egypt . Served in Mesopotamia from February 1916 . From July 1918 were part of North Persia Force ( Dunsterforce ) and ended the war in Baku , Azerbaijan . 
 8th ( Service ) Battalion – formed in 1914 . Served in France 1915 – 1918 ; 
 9th ( Service ) Battalion ( Pioneers ) – formed as a service battalion in 1914 . Became a pioneer battalion in 1915 . Served in France and Belgium 1915 – 1919 ; 
 10th ( Reserve ) Battalion – formed as a service battalion in 1914 . Became a reserve battalion in 1915 . Renamed as 3rd Training Reserve Battalion of 1st Reserve Brigade in 1916 ; 
 11th ( Reserve ) Battalion – formed as a service battalion in 1914 . Became a reserve battalion in 1915 . Renamed as 4th Training Reserve Battalion of 1st Reserve Brigade in 1916 ; 
 12th ( Service ) Battalion – formed 1918 in France from 11th Garrison Guard Battalion . Renamed as a service battalion and continued to serve in France ; 
 1st ( Garrison ) Battalion – formed in 1916 . Served in France 1916 – 1918 . Renamed 13th ( Garrison ) Battalion in July 1918 ; 
 2nd ( Home Service Garrison ) Battalion – formed in 1916 . Became 17th Battalion Royal Defence Corps in 1917 . 
 The numbering of the Territorial Force battalions was laid down by War Office instructions issued in 1914 and 1915 . On joining the Territorial Force men were asked if they would serve overseas ( foreign service ) or just volunteered for service in the United Kingdom ( home service ) and their service records amended accordingly . At the declaration of war all Territorial battalions were mobilised and on 15 August 1914 the War Office issued instructions for those men who had volunteered for foreign service to be separated out into what were called first line battalions . Home service men were placed in second line battalions . Thus there would now be a first line 5th Battalion and a second line 5th Battalion . On 24 November 1914 , as the first line battalions began to go overseas , additional instructions were issued allowing the raising of a third line battalion once the first line battalion was on foreign service . In January 1915 these designations were simplified and the battalions called the 1 / 5th , 2 / 5th and 3 / 5th battalions respectively . 
 The battalions that served in France took part in many of the major actions of the war including the 1915 Battle of Neuve Chapelle , the 1915 Battle of Loos , the Battle of the Somme in 1916 , the Third Battle of Ypres in 1917 and the Battle of Amiens in 1918 . 
 = = = Military service = = = 
 1st Battalion 
 The 1st Battalion went to France in September 1914 as part of 17th Brigade in 6th Division . It took part in the First Battle of Ypres being based in the Armentières sector on the southern flank of the battle . In December 1914 it was in trenches in the Rue @-@ du @-@ Bois area ( near Fleurbaix ) , and participated in the Christmas truce , where British and German soldiers <unk> in no man 's land . 
 In March 1915 it carried out a successful action in the Battle of Neuve Chapelle , capturing the village of L <unk> . 
 In October 1915 17th Brigade was exchanged with 71st Brigade of 24th Division , as part of an official policy of mixing Regular with New Army units . Immediately on joining 24th Division , the battalion was moved to 72nd Brigade within the division . It was to remain part of this formation until the end of the war . 
 In April and June 1916 the battalion suffered casualties of well over 500 in two serious gas attacks , on both occasions when in trenches north of Wulverghem ( near Messines ) . 
 In August – September 1916 , the 24th Division participated in the Battle of the Somme . The 1st Battalion was engaged in the fighting around Guillemont and later the defence of Delville Wood , suffering a total of more than 350 casualties . 
 In June 1917 , the battalion was involved ( and suffered over 150 casualties ) in the assault on Messines Ridge , one of the most successful British offensives of the war . This battle formed a prelude to the Third Battle of Ypres , when the battalion took part in the initial assault on 31 July 1917 . Its objectives were to capture the German frontline trench called Jehovah trench , the second line trench called Jordan trench and the remains of Bulgar Wood . These three objectives were 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) , 1 @,@ 500 yards ( 1 @,@ 400 m ) and 1 @,@ 750 yards ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) from the British front line . The battalion managed to capture both the trenches and a platoon reached Bulgar Wood before events around them forced a retreat from Bulgar Wood and Jordan trench . The battalion dug in on the Jehovah trench line having lost 11 officers and 258 other ranks as casualties , almost 50 % of the battalion strength . After the war , the anniversary of this attack became the main Regimental Day . 
 On 21 March 1918 , the 1st Battalion was in front @-@ line trenches near St. Quentin when the German Army launched Operation Michael , the opening attack in their Spring Offensive . The battalion was virtually wiped out , losing 19 officers and 662 men in the attack itself and the withdrawal which followed . The battalion was subsequently re @-@ formed , and in the last weeks of the war in October 1918 took part in the Battle of the Selle , in which it suffered nearly 200 casualties . 
 2nd Battalion 
 The 2nd Battalion was one of only eight Regular battalions of the British Army to remain in India throughout the war . It took part in operations on the North West Frontier in 1915 , as a result of which the regiment was awarded the battle honour " North West Frontier , India , 1915 " . <unk> , the commanding officer at this time was Major Fox and the adjutant Captain <unk> . Although it was a Regular Army battalion , it received very few replacements during the war . From a pre @-@ war establishment strength of a HQ plus eight companies , after the 1915 North West Frontier campaign the battalion comprised only a HQ company and four rifle companies . This cannot be attributed to war casualties as the battalion suffered less than 100 casualties throughout the entire war . 
 1 / 5th and 1 / 6th Battalions 
 The 1 / 5th and 1 / 6th battalions arrived in France in February 1915 as part of 137th ( Staffordshire ) Brigade of 46th ( North Midland ) Division . Among the first Territorial Force units to go to France , these two battalions took part in the 1915 Battle of Loos , especially the battles around the Hohenzollern Redoubt in 1915 , and at <unk> on the northern flank of the Battle of the Somme . 
 By September 1918 the 1 / 5th Battalion had been reduced to a cadre and had been transferred away from 46th Division . The 1 / 6th remained and with the rest of 137th Brigade took part in the storming of the St Quentin Canal . It was a company of the 1 / 6th Battalion , led by acting Captain A. H. Charlton , that seized the <unk> Bridge over the St Quentin Canal on 29 September before the Germans could fire the explosive charges , an action for which Charlton was decorated with the Distinguished Service Order . 
 12th Battalion 
 The 12th Battalion formed part of 40th Division and served in France on the River Lys during the advance in Flanders ( 18 August to 6 September 1918 ) and the Fifth Battle of Ypres , and in France and Belgium during the final weeks of the war . 
 = = = Awards and decorations = = = 
 Altogether , the regiment was awarded 52 battle honours , but it was ruled that only ten could be carried on the colours . 
 = = = = Victoria Crosses = = = = 
 Four Victoria Crosses were awarded to men of the North Staffordshire Regiment during World War I : 
 Sergeant John Carmichael , 9th Battalion ; for gallantry on 8 September 1917 during the Third Battle of Ypres ; 
 Lance @-@ Corporal William Harold Coltman , 1 / 6th Battalion ; for gallantry on the nights of 3 & 4 October 1918 near <unk> , France ; 
 Acting Lieutenant Colonel Edward Elers Delaval Henderson , 7th Battalion ( attached 9th Battalion Royal Warwickshire Regiment ) ; for gallantry on 25 January 1917 in Mesopotamia . This award was made posthumously ; 
 Lance @-@ Corporal John Thomas , 2 / 5th Battalion for gallantry on 30 November 1917 during the Battle of Cambrai . 
 = = = Reputation for profanity = = = 
 Even by the standards of the British Army , the Regiment ( and the 1st Battalion in particular ) seems to have gained a reputation during the First World War for profane language . When the 1st Battalion was relieved in the front line following its defence of Delville Wood in September 1916 , one of the advanced posts was missed out by mistake . The Lance @-@ Corporal in command , suspecting something was amiss , sent a man back to the front @-@ line trench to investigate . The soldier realised he was at some risk of being shot by his own side , and so " when he had crawled within shouting distance he enquired politely but firmly what — — bastards were holding that — — trench . The 9th East <unk> , who were the troops thus addressed , recognised the North Stafford idiom and let him in unhurt " . Bernard Martin , who served as a 2nd Lieutenant with the 1st Battalion , records another incident which probably took place in 1917 , when ( very unusually ) the battalion was addressed at a church parade by a general , who railed against " the disgusting word many of you utter every time you speak . ... I tell you again this indecent word is not to be used any longer . It is so common amongst you that it has become the shameful nickname by which your battalion is known throughout my Division " . As the parade ended , one soldier was heard to ask , " What was that bugger gassing about ? " ; to which another replied , " <unk> if I know , I was having a kip . Where 's the old bugger gone now ? " . 
 = = Interwar years ( 1918 – 1939 ) = = 
 The 1st Battalion was posted to the Curragh , Ireland after the armistice , becoming involved in the Irish War of Independence until 1922 , when it moved to Gibraltar . In the following year it was moved to Thrace , where it played a peace @-@ keeping role in the conflict between Greek and Turkish forces . In 1923 it moved to India and remained in the Far East until 1948 . 
 The 2nd Battalion was stationed in India in 1919 when Afghan forces crossed the border and occupied some Indian territory , sparking the brief Third Anglo @-@ Afghan War . During this conflict , the battalion was involved very early on , firstly in the investing of Peshawar City , where Afghan sympathisers were mooting a holy war and on 11 May 1919 when they were involved in a bayonet charge on the Afghan forces at Bagh , near Landi Kotal . For their involvement , the regiment received the battle honour " Afghanistan NWF 1919 " . The battalion returned to England via Egypt and the Sudan in 1921 , and was quickly redeployed to Ireland . On the establishment of the Irish Free State in 1922 , it returned to the regimental depot at Lichfield . Until 1939 , it spent time in " home stations " . Apart from England , this included service in Gibraltar from 1930 to 1932 and a year in Palestine in 1936 – 7 . 
 The 3rd and 4th ( Special Reserve ) Battalions were placed in suspended animation in 1921 , finally being disbanded in 1953 . 
 The Territorial Force was reconstituted as the Territorial Army in 1920 , and the 5th and 6th battalions were reformed , still with the 137th ( Staffordshire ) Brigade of 46th ( North Midland ) Division . In 1936 , the 5th Battalion was converted to an anti @-@ aircraft searchlight unit of the Royal Engineers as 41st ( North Staffordshire Regiment ) Anti @-@ Aircraft Battalion while remaining ' part of the corps of the North Staffordshire Regiment ' . It was transferred to the Royal Artillery in August 1940 as the 41st ( 5th North Staffordshire ) Searchlight Regiment TA . In the same year the remaining 6th Battalion was transferred to 166th Infantry Brigade , 55th ( West Lancashire ) Infantry Division after the HQ of the 46th Division became 2nd Anti @-@ Aircraft Division . Throughout the spring and summer of 1939 , due to the increasing threat posed by Nazi Germany , the size of the Territorial Army was doubled , and the 6th Battalion formed a duplicate 7th Battalion . 
 In 1921 , the regimental title was altered to The North Staffordshire Regiment ( The Prince of Wales 's ) . In 1937 , the black facings formerly worn by the 64th Foot were restored , replacing the white colour that had been imposed on all non @-@ royal English regiments in 1881 . 
 The London , Midland and Scottish Railway renamed one of their Royal Scot class locomotives , number <unk> ( formerly Caledonian ) , after the regiment . 
 = = Second World War ( 1939 – 1945 ) = = 
 In September 1939 , the North Staffordshire Regiment consisted of two Regular and two Territorial battalions – the 1st and 2nd Regular and the 6th and 7th Territorials . Following the outbreak of the Second World War on 3 September 1939 , the regiment was expanded as it had been during the First World War . This expansion , however , was limited this time only to the addition of two more battalions – the 8th and 9th battalions , of which both were raised in 1940 but later converted to other roles . The roles of the two regular battalions were reversed this time , with the 1st Battalion serving in India and Burma throughout the war , while the 2nd Battalion remained in Italy and North Africa . 
 The North Staffordshire Regiment was awarded 22 battle honours for the Second World War but , as at the end of the First World War , only 10 could be displayed on the colours . 
 = = = Regular Army = = = 
 The 1st Battalion was in British India on the outbreak of the Second World War and saw no action until 1942 , when one company that was stationed on the Andaman Islands were involved in the defence of the islands during the Japanese invasion . In 1943 , the battalion served for six months in Burma , with the 36th Indian Infantry Brigade , part of the 26th Indian Infantry Division , before being withdrawn to India again . For the rest of the war , the battalion was employed mainly on internal security duties and saw no further action . 
 The 2nd Battalion was sent to France shortly after the outbreak of war in September 1939 as part of the 2nd Infantry Brigade ( alongside the 1st Loyal Regiment and 1st Gordon Highlanders ) , 1st Infantry Division and was part of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , and was involved in the battles of France and Belgium before eventually being evacuated from Dunkirk on 1 June 1940 . Following that , the 2nd Battalion spent years on home defence in the United Kingdom preparing for a possible German invasion of England which never arrived . The battalion remained in the United Kingdom until 1943 when , still as part of 1st Infantry Division , it sailed to North Africa and took part in the campaign in Tunisia , British First Army . The battalion did not participate in the invasion of Sicily or the initial invasion of Italy but was one of the lead units in the Anzio landings in January 1944 , under command of US Fifth Army , where they suffered extremely heavy casualties . On 7 February the battalion suffered 323 casualties attempting to capture <unk> Ridge which they captured but were forced to surrender the ridge after expending their ammunition . By May , following Operation Diadem , the battalion had absorbed eight drafts of replacements . Now fighting as part of the British Eighth Army , the 2nd Battalion continued to serve in Italy , fighting around the Gothic Line , until January 1945 when the battalion and the rest of 1st Infantry Division were transferred to Palestine . 
 = = = Territorial Army = = = 
 The 41st ( 5th North Staffordshire Regiment ) Searchlight Regiment , Royal Engineers , previously the 5th North Staffords , served in Anti @-@ Aircraft Command as part of the air defence of the Midlands from 1939 to 1944 . The regiment became the first complete searchlight regiment to land in Normandy after the D @-@ Day landings of 6 June 1944 . It served with 21st Army Group , as part of 31st ( North Midland ) Anti @-@ Aircraft Brigade , until the end of the war in Europe and then undertook garrison duty in Lower Saxony . 
 The two Territorial battalions formed part of 176th Infantry Brigade ( which included both the 6th and 7th North Staffords and the 7th South Staffords ) of 59th ( Staffordshire ) Infantry Division . The division trained in the United Kingdom for many years until it landed in Normandy in June 1944 as part of Operation Overlord where they fought in the Battle for Caen and gained an excellent reputation during Operation Charnwood and the Second Battle of the Odon . However , only the 6th Battalion landed in France as the 7th Battalion had been transferred elsewhere in 1942 , being replaced in the 176th Brigade by the 7th Royal Norfolks . The 6th Battalion had been in France for less than two months when , in August 1944 , along with other infantry units of 59th Division , it was broken up to supply replacements to other British units , due to a severe shortage of infantry replacements throughout the Army at the time . The 7th Battalion , upon leaving 59th Division , served with the 207th and 228th Infantry brigades in the Orkney and Shetland islands in 1943 – 1945 , and later the 25th Brigade , before being transferred in 1945 as an administrative unit in the 183rd Brigade within the 61st Infantry Division and , in 1945 after the war in Europe was over , was preparing for a move to the Far East to fight the Japanese but they surrendered before the division arrived . The battalion was disbanded after the war in 1947 . 
 = = = Hostilities @-@ only = = = 
 The 8th Battalion was initially raised as a training battalion in 1940 and was assigned to the 205th Independent Infantry Brigade ( Home ) and was mainly concerned in home defence duties . The 8th Battalion was transferred to the Royal Artillery in March 1942 and converted to the 180th Field Regiment . The regiment served with the 48th Infantry ( Reserve ) Division in a training role until it was disbanded in August 1944 . 
 The 9th Battalion was , like the 8th Battalion , also initially raised as a training battalion , and was assigned to the 224th Independent Infantry Brigade ( Home ) . The 9th Battalion was transferred to the Royal Armoured Corps in December 1941 , becoming 154th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps , retaining their North Staffords cap badge on the black beret of the Royal Armoured Corps , as did all other infantry units converted in this way . The regiment was assigned to 36th Army Tank Brigade alongside RAC regiments converted from infantry battalions . However , the regiment was disbanded in July 1943 . 
 = = Postwar service ( 1945 – 1959 ) = = 
 Following the independence of India in 1947 , all infantry regiments in the British Army were reduced to a single regular battalion . Accordingly , the 1st Battalion left India to take part in a ceremony officially amalgamating with the 2nd Battalion in Egypt in 1948 . The new 1st Battalion remained in Egypt until 1950 , when it returned to the depot in Staffordshire . A year later , the battalion was posted to the disputed port city of Trieste . In 1953 , the battalion was transferred to Korea , where they were stationed on garrison duties as part of the United Nations force established at the end of the Korean War . In 1954 , it moved to Hong Kong , where the regiment 's 200th anniversary was celebrated in 1956 . 
 = = Amalgamation = = 
 In July 1957 , a defence review was announced , which resulted in the amalgamation of the North Staffordshire Regiment with the South Staffordshire Regiment , with the new regiment becoming part of the new administrative Mercian Brigade . The amalgamation of the 1st Battalions of the two regiments took place on 31 January 1959 at Minden , Germany , to form the 1st Battalion , Staffordshire Regiment ( The Prince of Wales 's ) . 
 In 1947 , 41 Searchlight Regiment was reformed in the Territorial Army as 576 ( 5th Bn , The North Staffordshire Regiment ) Searchlight Regiment RA ( TA ) , later becoming 576 Light Anti @-@ Aircraft / Searchlight Regiment ( 576 LAA / SL ) . When AA Command was disbanded in 1955 and the number of air defence units reduced , 576 LAA / SL Regiment was amalgamated with 349 ( Lancashire Yeomanry ) LAA and 493 Heavy Anti @-@ Aircraft Regiments as 441 LAA / SL Regiment . 
 The 6th Battalion continued as a Territorial unit of the new regiment without a change of title . In 1961 , it merged with the 441st Light Anti Aircraft Regiment , Royal Artillery , the successor to the 5th North Staffords , to become the 5th / 6th Battalion . The combined battalion was abolished in 1967 on the creation of the Territorial and Army Volunteer Reserve in 1967 . 
 The Staffordshire Regiment only had a separate existence from 1959 – 2007 . As part of the reforms proposed in the 2003 Defence White Paper , Delivering Security in a Changing World , the regiment was merged with the Cheshire Regiment and the Worcestershire and Sherwood Foresters Regiment to form the Mercian Regiment . The amalgamation took place on 1 September 2007 when the Staffordshire Regiment became the 3rd Battalion , the Mercian Regiment . Subsequently , in 2014 , The Mercian Regiment reduced its number of regular battalions from three to two , with the 3rd Battalion being disbanded and the personnel being redeployed into the 1st and 2nd Battalions . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The following lists all battle honours awarded to the Regiment or inherited by the regiment from the 64th Foot and 98th Foot . 
 Prior to 1914 all battle honours awarded to a unit were displayed upon the colours . However the number of battle honours awarded during the First World War was such that it was ordered that no more than 24 honours were to be carried on the colours , of which no more than 10 were to be honours relating to the First World War . Similarly , following the Second World War it was ordered that up to 10 honours relating to that conflict could be displayed on the colours , in addition to honours already carried . The choice of the honours to be displayed were at the discretion of regimental committees . 
 The honours chosen by the North Staffordshire Regiment to be carried on the colours are shown in capitals in the following list . 
 = = = Honours awarded to the 64th Foot = = = 
 <unk> 1759 
 <unk> 1794 
 ST <unk> 1803 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 <unk> @-@ AB 
 <unk> 
 <unk> 
 = = = Honours awarded to the 98th Foot = = = 
 The <unk> <unk> CHINA 
 <unk> 
 = = = 1881 – 1914 = = = 
 <unk> 
 SOUTH <unk> 1900 – 1902 
 = = = 1914 – 1919 = = = 
