 = = = 1939 – 1945 = = = 
 = = Football = = 
 The 2nd Battalion 's football team was a member of the Irish Football League for three seasons , 1896 – 99 , while the battalion was stationed at the Victoria Barracks , Belfast . 
 = 2009 Royal Mail industrial disputes = 
 The 2009 Royal Mail industrial disputes is an industrial dispute in the United Kingdom involving Royal Mail and members of the Communication Workers Union ( CWU ) , which began in the summer of 2009 . It was the country 's first industrial action involving postal workers since 2007 and came about after the Communication Workers Union accused Royal Mail of refusing to enter into dialogue regarding how the implementation of modernisation plans would affect the job security of postal workers . 
 The strike action began on a local level after postal workers at Royal Mail offices in London and Edinburgh accused their bosses of cutting jobs and services , which they claimed broke the 2007 Pay and Modernisation Agreement , the agreement that was struck to end the 2007 strikes , and accused Royal Mail of threatening modernisation of the service . After a series of localised walkouts over the summer months , and after failing to reach an agreement , the CWU opened a national ballot for industrial action in September 2009 . 
 On 8 October , it was announced that postal workers had voted three to one in favour of taking strike action over job security and working conditions . It was later announced that a national strike would be held on Thursday 22 October and Friday 23 October . After further talks failed , more strikes were announced to take place on Thursday 29 October , Friday 30 October and Saturday 31 October . Discussions continued throughout the second wave of strikes with proposals being put to both sides , but these were overshadowed by the announcement of a third walkout on Friday 6 November and Monday 9 November . However , on 5 November it was announced that strikes had been called off until the New Year to allow time for fresh talks to take place . A resolution to the dispute was finally reached following lengthy discussions on 8 March 2010 , and on 27 April it was reported that postal workers voted to accept the deal . 
 = = Background = = 
 Central to the 2009 dispute was the agreement that ended the 2007 round of strikes . The 2007 Pay and Modernisation Agreement saw the parties involved agree to a four @-@ phase plan , which would be implemented with dialogue between both sides at each stage of the process . However , the Communication Workers Union said that although Royal Mail had carried out three of the phases in this way , it had refused to discuss the final phase , which concerned the government 's plans for modernisation , and how these would affect the job security of Royal Mail employees . 
 One of the key aspects of Royal Mail 's modernisation drive involved the introduction of the walk sequencing machine that organises mail into the order the postman will deliver them on his round . The union feared that a national introduction of this equipment would lead to thousands of full @-@ time workers being made redundant and a significant increase in the number of part @-@ time staff . The Communication Workers Union argued that although it had signed up to this part of the agreement in 2007 and that the plans would make it necessary for some jobs to be lost , it had not understood the exact nature of Royal Mail 's plan . Furthermore , the union said that when Royal Mail stopped talking to staff about the long @-@ term effects of job security , there had been no choice other than to threaten a strike to restart discussions . Royal Mail , on the other hand , said that it had not stopped talking to the union and continued to involve it in its modernisation strategy . 
 = = Localised strike action = = 
 Localised strike action began in June 2009 when workers at Royal Mail offices in London and Edinburgh staged a 24 @-@ hour strike on 19 June over concerns about the impact that modernisation would have on postal workers . This was followed the next day by a similar walkout in parts of Scotland . Speaking about the situation at the time Dave Ward , the CWU 's deputy general secretary said , " We are now seeing cuts but not modernisation in the postal industry and there 's only so long before this is going have a major impact on services . The CWU does not and has not blocked change . Once again we are seeing Royal Mail working against the union and failing to engage the workforce . " Ward also said that his union would offer Royal Mail and the government a three @-@ month no @-@ strike deal if Royal Mail fulfilled its part of the 2007 agreement . 
 However , talks between the Communication Workers Union and Royal Mail failed to broker a deal . The CWU criticised Royal Mail 's business policy as " chaos management " and in August and September the localised strike intensified . By September it was estimated that there was a backlog of 20 million undelivered letters . On 10 September the CWU announced plans to hold a national ballot on strike action , the results of which were expected to be announced on 30 September during the Labour Party Conference . Royal Mail responded to the announcement by saying that the decision to go ahead with the ballot was " wholly irresponsible " as talks were still ongoing . 
 = = Strike ballot and national action = = 
 Ballot papers proposing a national strike were sent out to union members on 17 September . On 8 October it was announced that postal workers had voted three to one in favour of taking strike action over job security and working conditions . The first round of strikes were later scheduled for Thursday 22 October and Friday 23 October . These would consist of two 24 @-@ hour stoppages , with mail centre staff and drivers striking on 22 October and delivery and collection staff doing likewise the following day . 
 Talks between Royal Mail and the CWU continued , but relations were strained by the emergence of a leaked document suggesting that Royal Mail would achieve its reforms " with or without union engagement " . CWU general secretary Billy Hayes called the document 's contents " an organised attempt to sideline the union " and expressed his concern that Business Secretary Peter Mandelson appeared to be familiar with it . Furthermore , following the first round of strikes , it emerged that both sides had been " tantalisingly close " to brokering a deal on the evening of 20 October , but that Royal Mail had backed away from this the following morning . Consequently , the strikes went ahead as planned . 
 New talks were announced on 24 October , which would be brokered by the TUC and chaired by its general secretary Brendan Barber . Peter Mandelson welcomed the talks , describing them as " an opportunity to break the deadlock " . Further strikes were also announced for the last three days of October , which would involve mail centre staff on 29 and 30 October and delivery staff on 31 October . Three days of negotiations aimed at ending the dispute began on 26 October , but although they were described by Barber as having been useful , they ended without agreement and the second wave of strikes went ahead . Royal Mail later blamed a hard core element of London postal union leaders for refusing to endorse a proposal that both sides had agreed to . 
 Discussions were held during the second wave of strikes , when Brendan Barber announced on the afternoon of Friday 30 October that proposals had been put to both Royal Mail and the CWU for them to consider over the weekend . Talks resumed on the Monday , however this news was overshadowed by the announcement that a further two days of strikes would be held on Friday 6 November and Monday 9 November . It was also announced that these would be all out strikes with everybody walking out at the same time rather than the rolling strike action that had been adopted previously , thus leading to a complete stoppage throughout the course of the action . These were later called off in order for further talks to take place . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The strike action led to a backlog of tens of millions of items of undelivered mail , with an estimated 30 million letters and parcels affected after the first wave of walkouts , and rising to in excess of 50 million following the second . Businesses in London were forced to lay off staff , or defer paying them , generally because they were unable to dispatch goods or couldn 't receive payment for them . However , the strikes had less of an impact outside the capital . 
 On Tuesday 3 November a YouGov poll conducted for The Daily Telegraph appeared to show that public support for the industrial action had dropped in comparison to a similar poll conducted two weeks earlier . However , Richard O 'Hagan of the Daily Mail argued that there was little support for the strikes due to the economic climate of Britain at the time . 
 It was also reported that the CWU had started a fighting fund to help support postal workers who were experiencing financial difficulties as a result of the strike . <unk> lose a day 's pay for each day they strike , and although most workers had lost just two days pay so far , many in the London area who had taken part in previous industrial action earlier in the year had lost as much as 18 days of wages . There was also speculation that the CWU lacked the funds for a lengthy dispute and donations to the union 's fighting fund were pledged by other unions , including UNISON and Unite . 
 = = Suspension of strike action = = 
 On 5 November , the eve of the first planned all out strike it was announced that strike action had been called off until at least the New Year to allow for what Brendan Barber described as " a period of calm " in which both Royal Mail and the CWU could reach a long term agreement . But he added that although the postal service would be free from disruption over the Christmas period , a long term deal was still some distance away . The CWU also announced on the same day that it would not press ahead with a legal challenge to Royal Mail 's employment of temporary workers to clear the backlog , which had been due to begin at the High Court the following day . 
 = = Resolution = = 
 Following lengthy discussions between Royal Mail managers and union representatives a deal to settle the dispute was finally agreed to on 8 March 2010 . This would see Royal Mail workers receiving a 6 @.@ 9 % pay rise over three years ( worth 2 % in 2010 , 1 @.@ 4 % in 2011 and 3 @.@ 5 % in 2012 ) , while extra payments worth up to £ 1 @,@ 400 would be made to full @-@ time workers once all the agreed changes have been made . These will take the form of a £ 400 payment following the agreement of union members and a further £ 1 @,@ 000 to be paid once the planned changes have been implemented . In addition the Royal Mail agreed to keep 75 % of the workforce as full @-@ time , rather than part @-@ time staff , and to reduce working hours from 40 to 39 hours a week . In exchange , the CWU agreed to Royal Mail 's modernisation strategy which include plans to introduce the automated walk sequencing machinery . 
 Welcoming the deal , the deputy general secretary of the Communication Workers Union , Dave Ward said , " It 's been a long time coming , but this deal delivers on the major issues that postal workers have fought for . There 's a balance of pay and operational changes that will help to offset job losses and ensure our members are fairly rewarded for change . " Royal Mail 's outgoing chief executive , Adam Crozier said that the resolution was " a good deal for our customers as it ensures stability over the next three years , " and allowed Royal Mail to proceed with modernisation . On 27 April the Communication Workers Union announced that its members had voted two to one in favour of the deal , thus ending the dispute . 
 = Burrow Mump = 
 Burrow Mump is a hill and historic site overlooking Southlake Moor in the village of Burrowbridge within the English county of Somerset . It is a scheduled monument , with the ruined church on top of the hill a Grade II listed building . 
 The hill stands at a strategic location overlooking the point where the River Tone and the old course of the River Cary join the River Parrett . Although there is some evidence of Roman visitation , the first fortification of the site was the construction of a Norman motte . It has been called King Alfred 's Fort , however there is no proof of use by Alfred the Great . A medieval church was built on the hill in the 15th century . The current ruined church on top of the hill was built in 1793 . The land and ruin were donated to the National Trust in 1946 as a war memorial . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The hill is 24 metres ( 79 ft ) high , and stands at a strategic point where the River Tone and the old course of the River Cary join the River Parrett , above the surrounding low lying land of the Somerset Levels . It is made of Triassic sandstone capped by Keuper marl ascribed to the Mercia Mudstone Group . 
 = = Early use = = 
 Burrow Mump is also known as St Michael 's Borough or <unk> . Both words ' burrow ' and ' <unk> ' mean hill . 
 Archaeological surveys have shown some Roman material including a piece of pottery and coins found nearby which , possibly linked to its situation at a river junction , may indicate its use for trade . Square pits , one of which may have been a well and post holes from the Middle Ages have been identified during excavations , these may have been from an adulterine castle . It is likely that it was a Norman motte with a terraced track that spirals around the hill to reach it . The plateau at the top is 45 metres ( 150 ft ) by 25 metres ( 80 ft ) and along with the scarped top of the slope formed the motte , which may have been formed during The Anarchy between 1135 and 1153 . The site has been called King Alfred 's Fort , but there is no evidence of it being a fort or having any link with Alfred the Great , apart from its ownership by the nearby Athelney Abbey which he established and was linked to Burrow Mump by a causeway . It may have served as a natural outwork to the defended royal island of Athelney at the end of the 9th century . 
 Excavations have shown evidence of a 12th @-@ century masonry building on the top of the hill , which may be from the probable adulterine castle . The side of the mound may have been terraced for agricultural use due to much of the surrounding land flooded on a regular basis during the medieval period . 
 The first recorded writing mentioning this site is from William Worcester in about 1480 when he referred to it as <unk> @-@ borough . A medieval church dedicated to St Michael , belonging to the Athelney Abbey , dates from at least the mid @-@ 15th century . This formed a sanctuary for royalist troops in 1642 and 1645 during the English Civil War , and a detachment of the king 's army occupied it in 1685 during the course of the Monmouth Rebellion . 
 = = 18th century rebuilding = = 
 In 1793 , the church was rebuilt with a west tower , 3 @-@ bay nave and south porch , in squared and coursed lias with red brick and Hamstone dressings . The attempt at total rebuilding ended in failure to collect enough money , despite donations from William Pitt the Younger and Admiral Hood , and a church for the community was built instead at the foot of the hill ( Burrowbridge ) in 1838 . In the mid 20th century the ruin on Burrow Mump underwent some repairs to the north west corner . 
 The ruined church is one of the churches dedicated to St. Michael that falls on a ley line proposed by John Michell . Other connected St. Michaels on the ley line include churches built at Othery and Glastonbury Tor . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 The site of 3 @.@ 573 hectares ( 8 @.@ 83 acres ) including the hill and ruined church were presented , in 1946 , by Major Alexander Gould Barrett , to the National Trust and serve as a memorial to the 11 @,@ 281 Somerset men who lost their lives during the first and second world wars . The National Trust was taken to court for nuisance after soil from Burrow Mump slipped onto a neighbouring farmers land . The ruin was classified as a Grade II listed building in 1963 . It has been a Scheduled monument since 1949 . 
 = Getty Center = 
 The Getty Center , in Los Angeles , California , is a campus of the Getty Museum and other programs of the Getty Trust . The $ 1 @.@ 3 billion Center opened to the public on December 16 , 1997 and is well known for its architecture , gardens , and views overlooking Los Angeles . The Center sits atop a hill connected to a visitors ' parking garage at the bottom of the hill by a three @-@ car , cable @-@ pulled <unk> funicular . 
 Located in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles , the Center is one of two locations of the J. Paul Getty Museum and draws 1 @.@ 3 million visitors annually . ( The other location is the Getty Villa in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles , California . ) The Center branch of the Museum features pre @-@ 20th @-@ century European paintings , drawings , illuminated manuscripts , sculpture , and decorative arts ; and 19th- and 20th @-@ century American , Asian , and European photographs . In addition , the Museum ’ s collection at the Center includes outdoor sculpture displayed on terraces and in gardens and the large Central Garden designed by Robert Irwin . Among the artworks on display is the Vincent Van Gogh painting Irises . 
 Designed by architect Richard Meier , the campus also houses the Getty Research Institute ( GRI ) , the Getty Conservation Institute , the Getty Foundation , and the J. Paul Getty Trust . The Center 's design included special provisions to address concerns regarding earthquakes and fires . 
 = = Location and history = = 
 Originally , the Getty Museum started in J. Paul Getty 's house located in Pacific Palisades in 1954 . He expanded the house with a museum wing . In the 1970s , Getty built a replica of an Italian villa on his home 's property to better house his collection , which opened in 1974 . After Getty 's death in 1976 , the entire property was turned over to the Getty Trust for museum purposes . However , the collection outgrew the site , which has since been renamed the Getty Villa , and management sought a location more accessible to Los Angeles . The purchase of the land upon which the Center is located , a campus of 24 acres ( 9 @.@ 7 ha ) on a 110 @-@ acre ( 45 ha ) site in the Santa Monica Mountains above Interstate 405 , surrounded by 600 acres ( 240 ha ) kept in a natural state , was announced in 1983 . The site cost $ 25 million . The top of the hill is 900 feet ( 270 m ) above I @-@ 405 , high enough that on a clear day it is possible to see not only the Los Angeles skyline but also the San Bernardino Mountains , and San Gabriel Mountains to the east as well as the Pacific Ocean to the west . 
 In 1984 , Richard Meier was chosen to be the architect of the Center . After an extensive conditional @-@ use permit process , construction by the Hathaway Dinwiddie Construction Company began in August 1989 . The construction was significantly delayed , with the planned completion date moved from 1988 to 1995 ( as of 1990 ) . By 1995 , however , the campus was described as only " more than halfway complete " . 
 The Center ultimately opened to the public on December 16 , 1997 . Although the total project cost was estimated to be $ 350 million as of 1990 , it was later estimated to be $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . After the Center opened , the villa closed for extensive renovations and reopened on January 28 , 2006 , to focus on the arts and cultures of ancient Greece , Rome , and Etruria . Currently , the Museum displays collections at both the Getty Center and the Getty Villa in Pacific Palisades . 
 In 2005 , after a series of articles in the Los Angeles Times about the spending practices of the Getty Trust and its then @-@ president Dr. Barry Munitz , the California Attorney General conducted an investigation of the Getty Trust and found that no laws had been broken . The trust agreed to appoint an outside monitor to review future expenditures . The Getty Trust experienced financial difficulties in 2008 and 2009 and cut 205 of 1 @,@ 487 budgeted staff positions to reduce expenses . Although the Getty Trust endowment reached $ 6 @.@ 4 billion in 2007 , it dropped to $ 4 @.@ 5 billion in 2009 . The endowment rebounded to $ 6 @.@ 2 billion by 2013 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Meier has exploited the two naturally @-@ occurring ridges ( which diverge at a 22 @.@ 5 degree angle ) by overlaying two grids along these axes . These grids serve to define the space of the campus while dividing the import of the buildings on it . Along one axis lie the galleries and along the other axis lie the administrative buildings . Meier emphasized the two competing grids by constructing strong view lines through the campus . The main north @-@ south axis starts with the helipad , then includes a narrow walkway between the auditorium and north buildings , continues past the elevator kiosk to the tram station , through the rotunda , past the walls and support columns of the exhibitions pavilion , and finally the ramp besides the west pavilion and the central garden . Its corresponding east @-@ west visual axis starts with the edge of the scholar 's wing of the Getty Research Institute ( GRI ) , the walkway between the central garden and the GRI , the overlook to the azalea pool in the central garden , the walkway between the central garden and the west pavilion , and finally the north wall of the west pavilion and the courtyard between the south and east pavilions . 
 The main axes of the museum grid that is offset by 22 @.@ 5 degrees begins with the arrival plaza , carries through the edge of the stairs up to the main entrance , aligns with the columns supporting the rotunda as well as the center point of the rotunda , aligns with travertine benches in the courtyard between the pavilions , includes a narrow walkway between the west and south pavilions , a staircase down to the catus garden and ends in the garden . The corresponding cross axis starts with the center point of the circle forming the GRI library garden , then passing to the center of the entrance rotunda , and aligning with the south wall of the rotunda building . Although all of the Museum is aligned on these alternative axes , portions of the exhibitions pavilion and the east pavilion are aligned on the true north @-@ south axis as a reminder that both grids are present in the campus . 
 The primary grid structure is a 30 @-@ inch ( 760 mm ) square ; most wall and floor elements are 30 @-@ inch ( 760 mm ) squares or some derivative thereof . The buildings at the Getty Center are made from concrete and steel with either travertine or aluminium cladding . Around 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 square feet ( 110 @,@ 000 m2 ) of travertine was used to build the Center . 
 Throughout the campus , numerous fountains provide white noise as a background . The initial design has remained intact ; however benches and fences have been installed around the plaza fountains to discourage visitors from wading into the pools . Some additional revisions have been made in deference to the Americans with Disabilities Act . 
 The north promontory is anchored by a circular grass area , which serves as a heliport in case of emergencies , and the south promontory is anchored by a succulent plant and cactus garden . The complex is also encircled by access roads that lead to loading docks and staff parking garages on both the west and east sides of the buildings . The hillside around the complex has been planted with California Live Oak ( Quercus agrifolia ) trees . 
 The Museum has a seven @-@ story deep underground parking garage with over 1 @,@ 200 parking spaces . Its roof has an outdoor sculpture garden . An automated three @-@ car , cable @-@ pulled <unk> funicular takes passengers between the parking garage at the bottom of the hill and the Museum at the top of the hill . 
 = = Arrival court and central rotunda = = 
 Visitors typically arrive at a tram station in the arrival plaza located between the administrative buildings and the Museum entrance . A large set of steps leads to the main doors of the rotunda building . The rotunda building houses information desks , two orientation theatres and Museum shops . It also holds a grand staircase that starts a path toward the paintings located on the second floor of each art pavilion . The rotunda opens to the south to a terrace that links all five of the Museum pavilions . A separate building to the west of the arrival plaza and stairs holds a cafeteria and restaurant . Next to the restaurant is a stone arch , which separates the Museum from the GRI . Stairs from the terrace connecting the GRI and the restaurant lead down to the central garden . 
 = = Museum = = 
 The J. Paul Getty Museum 's estimated 1 @.@ 3 million visitors annually make it one of the most visited museums in the United States . The collection of the J. Paul Getty Museum on display at the Getty Center includes " pre @-@ 20th @-@ century European paintings , drawings , illuminated manuscripts , sculpture , and decorative arts ; and 19th- and 20th @-@ century American and European photographs " . The paintings include : 
 <unk> <unk> ( The Royal End ) by Paul Gauguin ( 1892 ) . The Museum 's director , Michael Brand , stated that the purchase of the painting was " one of the key moments in the history of our collection . " The literal translation of the Tahitian words of the title are " noble " and " sleeping eyes " , which implies " death " . 
 Irises by Vincent van Gogh ( 1889 ) . The Museum purchased the painting in 1990 ; it had sold for $ 53 @.@ 9 million in 1987 . 
 Portrait of a <unk> by Pontormo ( 1528 – 1530 ) . When the Museum bought the painting for $ 35 @.@ 2 million at an auction in 1989 , " the price more than tripled the previous record at auction for an Old Master painting " . 
 A copy of Portrait of Louis XIV , which measures 114 x 62 @-@ 5 / 8 inches , by the workshop of Hyacinthe Rigaud ( after 1701 ) . 
 Getty 's extensive photograph collection is located on the lower level of the west pavilion . 
 The Museum building consists of a three @-@ level base building that is closed to the public and provides staff workspace and storage areas . Five public , two @-@ story towers on the base are called the North , East , South , West and the Exhibitions Pavilions . The Exhibitions Pavilion acts as the temporary residence for traveling art collections and the Foundation 's artwork for which the permanent pavilions have no room . The permanent collection is displayed throughout the other four pavilions chronologically : the north houses the oldest art while the west houses the newest . The first @-@ floor galleries in each pavilion house light @-@ sensitive art , such as illuminated manuscripts , furniture , or photography . Computer @-@ controlled skylights on the second @-@ floor galleries allow paintings to be displayed in natural light . The second floors are connected by a series of glass @-@ enclosed bridges and open terraces , both of which offer views of the surrounding hillsides and central plaza . Sculpture is also on display at various points outside the buildings , including on various terraces and balconies . The lower level ( the highest of the floors in the base ) includes a public cafeteria , the terrace cafe , and the photography galleries . 
 = = Central Garden = = 
 The 134 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 12 @,@ 400 m2 ) Central Garden at the Getty Center is the work of artist Robert Irwin . Planning for the garden began in 1992 , construction started in 1996 , and the garden was completed in December 1997 . 
 Irwin was quoted as saying that the Central Garden " is a sculpture in the form of a garden , which aims to be art . " Water plays a major role in the garden . A fountain near the restaurant flows toward the garden and appears to fall into a grotto on the north garden wall . The resulting stream then flows down the hillside into the azalea pool . The designers placed rocks and boulders of varying size in the stream bed to vary the sounds from the flowing water . A tree @-@ lined stream descends to a plaza , while the walkway criss @-@ crosses the stream , which continues through the plaza , and goes over a stone waterfall into a round pool . A maze of azaleas floats in the pool , around which is a series of specialty gardens . More than 500 varieties of plant material are used for the Central Garden , but the selection is " always changing , never twice the same " . 
 After the original design , an outdoor sculpture garden , called the " Lower Terrace Garden " was added in 2007 on the west side of the central garden just below the scholar 's wing of the GRI building . 
 = = Getty Research Institute ( GRI ) = = 
 The Getty Research Institute ( GRI ) is " dedicated to furthering knowledge and advancing understanding of the visual arts . " Among other holdings , GRI 's research library contains over 900 @,@ 000 volumes of books , periodicals , and auction catalogs ; special collections ; and two million photographs of art and architecture . GRI 's other activities include exhibitions , publications , and a residential scholars program . At the Getty Center , GRI is located to the west of the Museum . The round building encircles a landscaped garden and is located to the west of the central garden . The main entrance of GRI is connected by a terrace to the main arrival court of the Museum , with outdoor sculptures placed along the route . GRI has one art gallery on its entrance level that is open to the public . 
 = = Other offices = = 
 Meier also designed three other buildings located next to the north promontory and offset at a 22 @.@ 5 degree angle from the main axis of the Museum pavilions . The north @-@ most building is an auditorium . Next to it is the North Building , with the East Building sitting between the North Building and the rotunda . The main entrance to the East Building is flanked by two round silos that hold its elevators . A bridge over a sunken courtyard links the main entrance of the East Building to the main walkway that connects the auditorium and North Buildings to the rotunda . These buildings house the Getty Conservation Institute ( GCI ) , the J. Paul Getty Trust and the Getty Foundation . These buildings are generally closed to the public except for special events held in the auditorium . They are linked to the Museum both by landscaped terraces and by an enclosed glass walkway that leads from the main rotunda . 
 GCI , which is headquartered at the Getty Center but also has facilities at the Getty Villa , commenced operation in 1985 . It " serves the conservation community through scientific research , education and training , model field projects , and the dissemination of the results of both its own work and the work of others in the field " and " adheres to the principles that guide the work of the Getty Trust : service , philanthropy , teaching , and access " . GCI has activities in both art conservation and architectural conservation . 
 The Getty Foundation awards grants for " the understanding and preservation of the visual arts " . In addition , it runs the Getty Leadership Institute for " current and future museum leaders " . Its offices are north of the Museum . The foundation offices are located in the two administrative buildings that are north of the Museum . The J. Paul Getty Trust , which oversees the Getty Conservation Institute , Getty Foundation , Getty Research Institute , and J. Paul Getty Museum , also has offices there . 
 = = Preparation for natural disasters = = 
 = = = Earthquakes = = = 
 Although the Center 's site was thought to have little motion during earthquakes , which are frequent in the Los Angeles area , in 1994 , as the Center was being constructed , the Northridge earthquake struck . It caused " disturbing hairline cracks ... in the welds and plated joints of the steel framework . " As a result , the steelwork through the site was retrofitted . The Center 's buildings are thought to be able to survive an earthquake of 7 @.@ 5 magnitude on the Richter scale . 
 = = = Fires = = = 
 In the 16 electrical transformers at the Center , silicone fluid is used as a coolant " with less risk of ignition " than hydrocarbon coolant . The native flammable chaparral was removed and fire @-@ resistant poverty weed was added to the slopes around the Center . Each year , a herd of goats is rented to clear brush on the surrounding hills . 
 At the north end of the Center , a tank with 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 US gal ( 3 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 l ) of water , together with a grass @-@ covered helipad , allow helicopters to collect water . The access ramp from the entry plaza to the Museum was constructed to allow a fire truck to pass over it . Inside the Museum , the sprinkler system is designed to balance " between the potential damage of a fire and the risk of water damage to valuable artwork " . 
 = = Panoramic view looking south = = 
 = My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy = 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy is the fifth studio album by American hip hop recording artist Kanye West , released on November 22 , 2010 , by Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records . Following a period of public and legal controversy , West retreated to a " self @-@ imposed exile " in Hawaii in 2009 . There , he worked on the album in a communal recording environment that involved numerous contributing musicians and producers . The album features guest appearances from Bon Iver , Jay Z , Pusha T , Rick Ross , Kid Cudi , Nicki Minaj , John Legend and more . Production is led by West himself , alongside a variety of high @-@ profile record producers including Mike Dean , No I.D. , Jeff Bhasker , RZA , S1 , Bink and DJ Frank E. Noted by critics for its maximalist aesthetic , opulent production quality , and dichotomous themes , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy incorporates aspects of West 's previous works , including soul , baroque , electro , and symphonic styles . The album deals with themes of excess and celebrity , and explores such issues as consumer culture , race , and the idealism of the American Dream . 
 To promote My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , West released free songs through his GOOD Fridays series and four singles : the Billboard hits " Power " , " Monster " , and " Runaway " , and the international hit " All of the Lights " . It was also promoted with a short film set to the record 's music , Runaway . The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America and had sold 1 @,@ 032 @,@ 000 copies in the US by 2013 . My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy received widespread critical acclaim and was also named the best record of 2010 in numerous critics ' polls and year @-@ end lists . 
 = = Background = = 
 The album was conceived during West 's self @-@ imposed exile in Oahu , Hawaii , following a period of legal and public image controversy amid an overworked mental state . West later said that his fatigue from overworking led to his controversial outburst at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards , his disgust with its ensuing media response , and his hiatus from recording . Amid negative response to the incident , his scheduled tour with recording artist Lady Gaga in promotion of his previous album , 808s & Heartbreak , was cancelled on October 1 , 2009 , without citing a reason . 
 It was formerly known as Good Ass Job and tentatively Dark Twisted Fantasy . GOOD Music artist Big Sean was the second to announce the title of the album as Good Ass Job . On July 24 , 2010 , on Kanye West 's blog , a banner appeared reading " My Dark Twisted Fantasy Trailer " . On July 28 , 2010 , West announced via his new official Twitter account that " The album is no longer called ' Good Ass Job ' I 'm bouncing a couple of titles around now . " The official title , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , was announced on October 5 , 2010 . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Recording sessions took place primarily at Avex Recording Studio in Honolulu , Hawaii , with additional recording at Glenwood Place Studios in Burbank , California , and at Electric Lady Studios and Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City . It was reported that West spent over $ 3 million in expenses from his record label Def Jam on the recording . He later explained the initial recording process to Noah Callahan @-@ Bever , Complex editor @-@ in @-@ chief and West 's confidant at the time , who said that " he 'd holed up in Hawaii and was importing his favorite producers and artists to work on and inspire his recording . Rap Camp ! " Artists who were reported to have participated in the sessions for My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy included Raekwon , RZA , Pusha T , Rick Ross , Charlie Wilson , Big Sean , Cyhi the Prynce , Swizz Beatz , Dwele , Nicki Minaj , T.I. , Drake , Teyana Taylor , Common , Jay @-@ Z , Eminem , Lil Wayne , John Legend , Fergie , Rihanna , The @-@ Dream , Ryan Leslie , Elton John , M.I.A. , Justin Vernon , Seal , Beyoncé Knowles , Kid Cudi , Mos Def , Santigold , Alicia Keys , Elly Jackson , and Tony Williams . Record producers who participated in the sessions with West included Q @-@ Tip , RZA , DJ Premier , Madlib , and Pete Rock . Madlib said he made five beats for the album , while DJ Premier said his beats were ultimately discarded . 
 West , who had previously recorded at Avex for 808s & Heartbreak , block @-@ booked the studio 's three session rooms indefinitely to work on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . According to Noah Callahan @-@ Bever , who visited West during the recording sessions , " when he hits a creative wall ... he heads to another studio room to make progress on another song " . He often worked through the night and napped in the studio , and recording engineers were present behind the mixing board 24 hours a day . Before recording in the afternoon , West and most of his crew played games of 21 against locals at the Honolulu YMCA for leisure . Kid Cudi smoked marijuana in preparation and worked out on a treadmill , while RZA worked out in the weight room . West held breakfast each morning at his Diamond Head residence for his crew . Throughout the album 's development , West elicited other producers and musicians to weigh in on its music with conversations and contributions at the studio . In observing discussions among them during his visit , Callahan @-@ Bever noted : " Despite the heavyweights assembled , the egos rarely clash ; talks are sprawling , enlightening , and productive ... we are here to contribute , challenge , and inspire " . In an interview with Callahan @-@ Bever , Q @-@ Tip described the process as " music by committee " and elaborated on its significance to the sessions and West 's work ethic : 
 He 'll go , ‘ Check this out , tell me what you think . ’ Which speaks volumes about who he is and how he sees and views people . Every person has a voice and an idea , so he 's sincerely looking to hear what you have to say — good , bad , or whatever ... When he has his beats or his rhymes , he offers them to the committee and we 're all invited to dissect , strip , or add on to what he 's already started . By the end of the sessions , you see how he integrates and transforms everyone 's contributions , so the whole is greater than the sum of its parts . He 's a real wizard at it . What he does is alchemy , really . 
 Pete Rock said of his studio experience with West , " He 's definitely hip @-@ hop , his roots , I was testing him on joints ... He takes it to another level which is dope . He had these musicians and this song , they played around my little raggedy beat and made it real . I love the way he works — he goes from one room , writing rhymes then goes to another beat and goes to another room and does something else — I love what he 's done " . Rapper Pusha T characterized the album as " a collage of sounds " and found West 's methods unorthodox when recording , saying that " We could easily be working on one song , thinking we 're in a mode , and he 'll hear a sound from someone like [ producer ] Jeff Bhasker and immediately turn his whole attention to that sound and go through his mental Rolodex to where that sound belongs on his album , and then it goes straight to that song , immediately " . DJ Premier said of the production in comparison to West 's previous work , " Well , first of all , if you look at all of Kanye West 's output , he actually did a lot to bring back sampling and make it cool again , even though he 's more of a mainstream artist ... but his new album is strictly hard beats and rhyme . He 's totally done with electro . You 're gonna be surprised what you hear " . 
 In late 2010 , just hours before the album had to be turned in , West called Teyana Taylor to the studio to look at some fashion pieces . Taylor had struck up a friendship with West and the GOOD Music family before , first meeting West on his Glow in the Dark Tour , with Pharrell Williams ' band N.E.R.D. & Rihanna . While in the studio , Taylor was determined to make an appearance on West 's album . She purposefully hummed along with the tracks he played for her , to get his attention . He eventually asked her to put vocals on a few tracks , notably " Dark Fantasy " and " Hell of a Life . " Upon recalling the experience of recording " Dark Fantasy , " Taylor stated that " at the time it was pretty empty , just verses . " She remembers that West " put [ her ] in another room by [ herself ] and said , ' Go ' . " Taylor came back with the " intro and chorus , " and " did all the scratches and the cuts [ herself ] . " She admitted that she was " nervous " upon letting West hear her contributions to the tracks , trying to cover her nervousness by stating that she " hadn ’ t been in the studio for so long . " 
 To prevent any of the material from leaking onto the Internet , West made the recording of the album as secretive as he could ; he instituted a " No tweeting , no talking , no e @-@ mailing " rule for others at the sessions to abide by . Pusha T recalled West 's attitude in an interview for Rolling Stone , saying that " then there happened to be a leak , and I remember Kanye ranting and raving , like , ' Fuck this ! We 're not going to ever work there again ! We 're going to work in hotel rooms ! ' " West subsequently recorded in hotel rooms for Watch the Throne , his 2011 album with Jay @-@ Z. 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy 's music has been noted by writers for incorporating elements from West 's previous four albums . Entertainment Weekly 's Simon Vozick @-@ Levinson perceives that such elements " all recur at various points " , namely " the luxurious soul of 2004 's The College Dropout , the symphonic pomp of Late Registration , the gloss of 2007 's Graduation , and the emotionally exhausted electro of 2008 's 808s & Heartbreak " . Sean Fennessey of The Village Voice writes that West " absorb [ ed ] the gifts of his handpicked collaborators , and occasionally elevat [ ed ] them " on previous studio albums , noting collaborators and elements as Jon Brion for Late Registration ( " arranging orchestral majesty " ) , DJ Toomp for Graduation ( " adapted DJ Toomp ’ s oozing menace " ) , and Kid Cudi for 808s & Heartbreak ( " Cudi ’ s moaning melodies became elemental " ) . 
 The music was described as maximalist by Jon Caramanica of The New York Times , who also took note of East Coast hip hop elements , and Ryan Dombal from Pitchfork Media , who deemed it a " culmination " of West 's past work : " Musically , [ the album ] largely continues where 2007 's Graduation left off in its maximalist hip @-@ hop bent , with flashes of The College Dropout 's comfort @-@ food sampling and Late Registration 's baroque instrumentation weaved in seamlessly " . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman views it as the " culmination " of those albums , while noting that " it does not merely draw characteristics from each one of them . The 13 tracks ... sometimes fuse them together simultaneously . Consequently , the sonic and emotional layers are often difficult to pry apart and enumerate " . Kellman denotes " All of the Lights " as most representative of the album 's " contrasting elements and maniacal extravagance " . By contrast , Robert Christgau from MSN Music comments that the music eschews the " grace " of The College Dropout and Late Registration for " grandiosity " and " the sonic luxuries of this world @-@ beating return to form " . 
 The album 's themes deal primarily with excess and celebrity , and also touch on decadence , grandiosity , escapism , sex , wealth , romance , self @-@ aggrandizement , and self @-@ doubt . Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine notes the album 's ethos as " more is more " and describes it as " a meditation on fame " , in which West decries the burden that it entails . My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy also features more open references to drinking and drug use than on West 's previous albums . Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club describes it as " darkly funny , boldly introspective , and characteristically fame @-@ obsessed " , noting " manic highs and depressive lows emotionally " in the album . Christgau found the themes of insecurity and uncertainty on the album to be West 's " heart , his message , the reason he 's so major " , noting the tracks " Hell of a Life " and " Runaway " as examples . Greg Kot , writing in the Chicago Tribune , said West displayed a transparency and " almost pathological allegiance to expressing his emotions , unfiltered " . 
 In the opinion of Pitchfork Media 's Ryan Dombal , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy was " a hedonistic exploration into a rich and famous American id " , while Chris Martins from Spin said it was an alternately grandiose and eloquent production that " owed as much to the artist 's self @-@ aggrandizing ego as to the voracious id that would destroy it publicly " . Music writer Ann Powers interprets West 's predominant theme on My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy to be " the crisis of the jet @-@ lagged cosmopolitan ... the exhausted cry of one who 's always new in town , chasing whatever goal or girl is in the room , fueled by consumer culture 's relentless buzz , but finally left unsatisfied " . Powers views the songs to work " as pornographic boasts , romantic disaster stories , devil @-@ haunted dark nights of the soul " and perceives West 's " uncertainty about his own place in the world " to be connected to the subject of race , stating " The rootlessness West celebrates and despairs of on ' Fantasy ' belongs to someone who feels unwelcome everywhere . This isn 't just a personal problem . It 's the curse of what the author Michael Eric Dyson has called ' the exceptional black man ' , embraced for his talents but singled out for the color of his skin " . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The album 's opening track , " Dark Fantasy " , is introduced with a narrative by Nicki Minaj , attempting an English accent , that serves as a retelling of writer Roald Dahl 's poetic rework of " Cinderella " . It introduces My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy 's themes of decadence and hedonism , with West musing how " the plan was to drink until the pain was over / But what ’ s worse , the pain or the hangover ? " . His lyrics on the track contain various musical and popular culture references , including those to the song " Mercy Mercy Me ( The Ecology ) " , the Lamborghini Murciélago sports car , rapper Nas , fashion designer Phoebe Philo , short story " The Legend of Sleepy Hollow " , the song " Sex on Fire " , singer Leona Lewis , and television character Steve Urkel . " All of the Lights " incorporates drum ' n ' bass breaks and brass fanfare . West 's lyrics contain a reference to the death of Michael Jackson in the opening lines and present a narrative of a character who abuses his lover , does prison time , scuffles with her new boyfriend , and subsequently mourns his absence from his child 's life . For the song , West enlisted 11 guest vocalists , including Alicia Keys , John Legend , Elton John , Tony Williams , Elly Jackson , and Rihanna , who sings the song 's hook . In an interview for MTV , Jackson said of the song 's vocal layering , " He got me to layer up all these vocals with other people , and he just basically wanted to use his favorite vocalists from around the world to create this really unique vocal texture on his record , but it 's not the kind of thing where you can pick it out " . 
 " Devil in a New Dress " is built on a sample of Smokey Robinson 's " Will You Still Love Me Tomorrow " . Its lyrics are about lust and heartache , with sexual and religious imagery described by one critic as " part bedroom allure , part angelic prayer " . It is the only track without production by West but features his characteristic style of manipulating the pitch and tempo of classic soul samples . " Runaway " features a piano @-@ based motif comprising a series of sustained descending half and whole notes , with a coda that incorporates light strings and vocoder @-@ singing by West . The narrator 's self @-@ critical lyrics reflect on his personality and character flaws . Sean Fennessey cites the song as the point in the album in which " self @-@ laceration overtakes chest @-@ beating " , noting West 's sung @-@ line " I 'm so gifted at finding what I don 't like the most " . Inspired by his two @-@ year relationship with model Amber Rose , " Hell of a Life " contains a psychedelic rock sample and a narrative about marrying a porn star . According to critic Ryan Dombal , the song " attempts to bend its central credo — ' no more drugs for me , pussy and religion is all I need ' — into a noble pursuit ... The song blurs the line between fantasy and reality , sex and romance , love and religion , until no lines exist at all . It 's a <unk> nirvana with demons underneath ; a fragile state that can 't help but break apart on the very next song " . " Blame Game " is a low @-@ key track about a painful domestic dispute . It features piano by producer Mike Dean , additional vocals by John Legend , and a profane skit by comedian Chris Rock . 
 " Lost in the World " features tribal drums and samples Bon Iver 's " Woods " , a song originally written about alienation , applied by West " as the centerpiece of a catchy , communal reverie . " It features several musical changes , beginning with Bon Iver frontman Justin Vernon 's faint vocals , followed by 4 / 4 drums , gospel @-@ styled chorus , and increased tempo , and a final measured tempo . " Lost in the World " transitions into the closing track " Who Will Survive in America " . It serves as the album 's coda and is built on a sample of Gil Scott @-@ Heron 's " Comment No. 1 " , a blunt , surrealist piece delivered by Scott @-@ Heron in spoken word about the African @-@ American experience and the fated idealism of the American dream . Scott @-@ Heron 's original speech , which criticized the 1960s Revolutionary Youth Movement for failing to recognize the more basic needs of the African @-@ American community , is edited to a reduced version on the track that , according to music writer Greg Kot , " retains its essence , that of an African @-@ American male who feels cut off from his country and culture " . By contrast , Sean Fennessey interprets it as " a too @-@ serious denouement for an album that is more about the self ’ s little nightmares than some aching societal rejection " . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 On October 4 , 2010 , the release date was announced as November 22 , 2010 . Prior to its release , West initiated the free music program GOOD Fridays through his website on August 20 , 2010 , offering a free download of previously unreleased songs each Friday of the week , a portion of which were included on the album . Titled after his imprint label GOOD Music , the program generated considerable publicity in the months leading up to the album 's release . Online marketing coordinator Karen Civil said of the program in retrospect , " It 's a genius idea . He did something no one had ever done before , and at a point when he was the most hated person in music , he brought excitement back with his Friday releases " . G.O.O.D. Fridays was originally intended to continue through December , but was extended by West through January 2011 . My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy was released as a digital download on Amazon.com at a list price of $ 3 @.@ 99 , which coincided with the site 's $ 3 discount promotional offer on MP3 purchases made valid through the release week . 
 Following the release of the album , West performed headlining sets at several large festivals , including SXSW 2011 , Lollapalooza , Austin City Limits , and Coachella 2011 ; the latter was described by The Hollywood Reporter as " one of greatest hip @-@ hop sets of all time . " To promote My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , West performed at Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 On May 28 , 2010 , an unfinished version of a speculative first single titled " Power " was leaked onto the Internet . It features additional vocals by Dwele and was co @-@ produced by Kanye West and S1 . The official remix , featuring Jay @-@ Z and Swizz Beatz , was premiered on August 20 , 2010 on Hot 97 by DJ <unk> . The single spent eight weeks and peaked at number 22 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . The song was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance , presented at the 53rd Grammy Awards in 2011 . 
 On September 12 , West performed the second single " Runaway " at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards . Three weeks later on October 2 , West performed the song on Saturday Night Live , along with " Power " . " Runaway " was officially released to the iTunes Store on October 4 , 2010 . It spent 12 weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 12 on the chart . Rolling Stone named it the best single of 2010 in its year @-@ end list . A 35 @-@ minute short film of the same name , directed by West and containing the song 's official music video , was released on October 23 , 2010 . Filmed in Prague over a period of four days during Summer 2010 , the film stars West and model Selita Ebanks and features the script written by Hype Williams with the story written by West . West described the video as an " overall representation of what [ he dreams ] " and a parallel to his music career . 
 The third single " Monster " was sent out to radio on September 21 , and it was released to the iTunes Store on October 23 , 2010 . The song was originally released on August 27 , 2010 as part of West 's music program G.O.O.D. Friday . It spent five weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 , peaking at number 18 on the chart . Rolling Stone ranked it number 10 on its list of the Best Singles of 2010 . The song was performed at Jay @-@ Z 's and Eminem 's " Home and Home " concert on September 14 , 2010 , along with Nicki Minaj . 
 In October , West announced " All of the Lights " as the fourth official single . Prior to its release as a single , it had debuted at number 92 on the Billboard Hot 100 upon the album 's release , and the track " Dark Fantasy " entered the chart at number 60 the same week . The single was released on January 18 , 2011 , in the US and on February 21 , 2011 , in the UK . It reached number 18 and spent eight weeks on the Billboard Hot 100 . By December 2011 , it had sold over 1 @,@ 561 @,@ 000 digital units in the US . " All of the Lights " also charted well worldwide , including number eight in Brazil , number 15 in the United Kingdom , number 13 in Ireland , number 14 in Scotland , and number 22 in South Korea , It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , for shipments of 70 @,@ 000 copies in Australia , gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand , for shipments of 7 @,@ 500 in New Zealand , and platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , for shipments of one million in the US . 
 = = = Cover art = = = 
 On October 17 , 2010 , Kanye West revealed through Twitter that My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy had been rejected by certain stores because of the cover art . The artwork ( a portrait by George Condo ) shows West being straddled by an armless winged female ( a phoenix ) . Both characters are depicted nude , and one nipple of the phoenix 's breasts and her buttocks are visible . The artist later said that Kanye wanted a cover image that would be banned . The painting is centered with a thin yellow border on a red background . The artwork follows along the apparent theme of the album , as well as West 's music film Runaway . This is one of five covers ; all of them were included with its purchase . A second cover , with a painting of a ballerina by Condo , was posted on the Amazon.com pre @-@ order page . It was intended to be the original artwork for Runaway , but West used a photograph of a ballerina instead . 
 George Condo and Kanye West met up for several hours where they listened to tapes of his music , and over the next few days Condo made eight or nine paintings for the album . Two of them were portraits of West , one in extreme closeup , with mismatched eyes and four sets of teeth . Another showed his head , crowned and decapitated , placed sideways on a white slab , impaled by a sword . There was also a painting of a <unk> ballerina in a black tutu , a painting of the crown and the sword by themselves in a grassy landscape , and a scene of a naked West on a bed , straddled by a naked white female creature with fearsome features , wings , no arms , and a long , spotted tail , the last one being the original album cover . According to New York , a new painting for the album , " The Priest " , was completed by Condo , who described it as an attempt to bring depictions of religious figures into the modern world . 
 = = Reception = = 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 albums chart , selling 496 @,@ 000 copies in the United States during its first week . It was West 's fourth consecutive US number @-@ one album , and its debut week served as the fourth @-@ best sales week of 2010 , while its first @-@ week digital sales of 224 @,@ 000 copies served as the fourth @-@ highest sales week for a digitally @-@ downloaded album . It spent 32 weeks on the Billboard 200 , and by July 2013 , it had sold 1 @,@ 351 @,@ 000 copies in the United States , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy received rave reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 94 , which indicates " universal acclaim " , based on 45 reviews . Andy Gill from The Independent called it " one of pop 's gaudiest , most grandiose efforts of recent years , a no @-@ holds @-@ barred musical extravaganza in which any notion of good taste is abandoned at the door " . In the Los Angeles Times , Ann Powers found the music " Picasso @-@ like , fulfilling the Cubist mandate of rearranging form , texture , color and space to suggest new ways of viewing things " . Time magazine 's David Browne viewed it as West 's most lavish record and said it proved again that few other artists shared his ability to adeptly combine diverse elements . Dan Vidal of URB highlighted West 's ability to bring out the best out of his collaborators , finding it comparable to the work of Miles Davis . Writing for Rolling Stone , Rob Sheffield called the album West 's best and most wildly inspired album to date , claiming that no other artist was recording music as dark or uncanny , while Sputnikmusic critic Channing Freeman hailed it as " the first album in which he 's truly lived up to his potential in every way - as a rapper , as a lyricist , as a songwriter " . The Village Voice 's Sean Fennessey found the album overwhelming and skillfully produced because of how each song transitions over " like some long night out into the hazy morning after " . 
 In a less enthusiastic review for The Guardian , Kitty Empire was critical of West 's lyrics regarding " women as ruthless money @-@ grabbers " on an otherwise " herculean " and " flawed near @-@ masterpiece " . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman found his rapping inconsistent on what was nonetheless " a deeply fascinating accomplishment " in West 's catalogue : " As fatiguing as it is invigorating , as cold @-@ blooded as it is heart @-@ rending , as haphazardly splattered as it is meticulously sculpted , [ the album ] is an extraordinarily complex 70 @-@ minute set of songs ... As the ego and ambition swells , so does the appeal , the repulsiveness , and – most importantly – the ingenuity " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy appeared on numerous year @-@ end top albums lists . Many critics named it the best album of 2010 , including Billboard , Time , Slant Magazine , Pitchfork Media , Rolling Stone , and Spin . My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy was voted best album in The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 2010 , winning by the largest margin in the poll 's history . The singles " Power " , " Runaway " , and " Monster " were voted in the top @-@ 10 of the Pazz & Jop 's singles list . This is the third instance in which a Kanye West album topped the Pazz & Jop 's annual critics ' poll , followed by The College Dropout in 2004 and Late Registration in 2005 ; Yeezus would eventually be the fourth in 2013 . Metacritic , which collates reviews of music albums , named it the best @-@ reviewed album of 2010 . 
 In 2012 , Rolling Stone ranked the album number 353 on its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , and Complex included it in their list of " 25 Rap Albums From the Past Decade That Deserve Classic Status " . Entertainment Weekly named it 8th best album of all time on their 2013 list . In October 2013 , Complex named it the best hip hop album of the last five years . NME ranked the album at 24 on their 500 Greatest Albums Of All Time list . 
 In August 2014 , the song " Runaway " ( featuring Pusha T ) was ranked in the third position in Pitchfork Media 's list of the 200 " best tracks " released since 2010 . During the same week , the publication named it the best album of the 2010s decade — between 2010 and 2014 — commenting , " West broke the ground upon which the new decade 's most brilliant architects built their masterworks ; Bon Iver , Take Care , Channel Orange , and good kid , m.A.A.d city don ’ t exist without the blueprint of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy . The list ends here because it ’ s where the decade truly begins . " The critics ' aggregation site Acclaimed Music determined My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy to be the 73rd most ranked record on all @-@ time best album lists . 
 = = = Grammy Awards = = = 
 My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album , presented at the 54th Grammy Awards in 2012 . The song " All of the Lights " was nominated for Grammy Awards for Song of the Year , Best Rap Song , and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration , winning in the latter two categories . However , My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy was not nominated for Album of the Year , which was viewed as a " snub " by several outlets , along with the rejection of Watch the Throne , West 's collaborative album with Jay @-@ Z , for that category . In an article for Time , music journalist Touré elaborated on the album 's acclaim , called West 's nominations in minor categories " booby prizes " , and stated , " <unk> is by far the best reviewed album in many years : the critical community flipped out over it like nothing since Radiohead ’ s zenith . And it sold well , over 1 @.@ 2 million so far . So what happened ? How is it Grammy overlooked Kanye ’ s magnum opus and gave noms to four sonic widgets and Adele 's 21 ? " He explored possible reasons for The Recording Academy to snub him , including split votes between My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy and Watch the Throne , concerns over West 's past controversies , and more commercially appealing nominees , but ultimately stated : 
 What I think may be going on is a lack of respect for hip hop and its complexity from people who care about music but don 't know much about hip hop ... Predictably , Grammy tends toward pop @-@ friendly hip hop that 's easily understood by those who don 't understand hip hop . Pop in this regard is not meant as an insult , it 's merely music palatable to non @-@ aficionados of the genre ... But now that he 's released his most mature work , [ West is ] being ignored . 
 In the Los Angeles Times , music journalist Randall Roberts was critical of the nominations for the 54th Grammy Awards , particularly for the Album of the Year category , noting the exclusion of My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy , " the most critically acclaimed album of the year , a career @-@ defining record " , as a snub in favor of nominating less substantial albums . West , who was vocal in his displeasure with past award snubs , responded onstage during a concert on the Watch the Throne Tour , saying " That 's my fault for dropping Watch the Throne and Dark Fantasy the same year . I should 've just spaced it out , just a little bit more . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Track notes = = = 
 ^ a signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ b signifies an additional producer 
 " Dark Fantasy " features background vocals by Nicki Minaj and Justin Vernon of Bon Iver , and additional vocals by Teyana Taylor and Amber Rose . 
 " Gorgeous " features background vocals by Tony Williams . 
 " POWER " features additional vocals by Dwele . 
 " All of the Lights " features additional vocals by Rihanna , Kid Cudi , Tony Williams , The @-@ Dream , Charlie Wilson , John Legend , Elly Jackson of La Roux , Alicia Keys , Elton John , Fergie , Ryan Leslie , Drake , Alvin Fields and Ken Lewis . 
 " Runaway " features background vocals by Tony Williams and additional vocals by The @-@ Dream . 
 " Hell of a Life " features additional vocals by Teyana Taylor and The @-@ Dream . 
 " Blame Game " features additional vocals by Chris Rock and Salma <unk> . 
 " Lost in the World " and " Who Will Survive in America " feature additional vocals by Charlie Wilson , Kay Fox , Tony Williams , Alicia Keys and Elly Jackson of La Roux . 
 " Dark Fantasy " contains samples of " In High Places , " written by Mike Oldfield and Jon Anderson , and performed by Oldfield . 
 " Gorgeous " contains portions and elements of the composition " You Showed Me , " written by Gene Clark and Roger McGuinn , and performed by The Turtles . 
 " POWER " contains elements from " It 's Your Thing , " performed by Cold Grits ; elements of " Afromerica , " written by Francois <unk> , Jean @-@ Pierre Lang , and Boris Bergman , and performed by Continent Number 6 ; and material sampled from " 21st Century Schizoid Man , " composed by Robert Fripp , Michael Giles , Greg Lake , Ian McDonald , and Peter Sinfield , and performed by King Crimson . 
 " So Appalled " contains samples of " You Are — I Am , " written by Manfred Mann , and performed by Manfred Mann 's Earth Band . 
 " Devil in a New Dress " contains samples of " Will You Still Love Me Tomorrow , " written by Carole King and Gerry Goffin , and performed by Smokey Robinson 
 " Runaway " contains a sample of " Expo 83 , " written by J. Branch , and performed by Backyard Heavies ; and excerpts from Rick James Live at Long Beach , CA , 1981 . 
 " Hell of a Life " contains samples of " She ’ s My Baby , " written by Sylvester Stewart , and performed by The Mojo Men ; samples of " Stud @-@ Spider " by Tony Joe White ; and portions of " Iron Man , " written by Terence Butler , Anthony Iommi , John Osbourne , and William Ward , and performed by Black Sabbath . 
 " Blame Game " contains elements of " Avril 14th , " written by Richard James , and performed by Aphex Twin . 
 " Lost in the World " contains portions of " Soul Makossa " , written by Manu Dibango ; a sample of " Think ( About It ) , " written by James Brown , and performed by Lyn Collins ; samples of " Woods , " written by Justin Vernon , and performed by Bon Iver ; and samples of " Comment No. 1 , " written and performed by Gil Scott @-@ Heron . 
 " Who Will Survive In America " contains samples of " Comment No. 1 " performed by Gil Scott @-@ Heron . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits were adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = = Musicians = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart precession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Russian battleship Imperator Aleksandr III ( 1901 ) = 
 Imperator Alexandr III ( Russian : Император Александр III ) was a Borodino @-@ class battleship built for the Russian Imperial Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . The design of the Borodino class was derived from that of the French @-@ designed battleship Tsesarevich . The ship was completed a few months before the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War in February 1904 and was assigned to the Second Pacific Squadron sent to the Far East six months later to break the Japanese blockade of Port Arthur . The Japanese captured the port while the squadron was in transit and their destination was changed to Vladivostok . During the Battle of Tsushima in May 1905 , Imperator Alexandr III was sunk by Japanese gunfire with the loss of her entire crew . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Imperator Alexandr III was 397 feet ( 121 @.@ 0 m ) long overall , had a beam of 76 feet 1 inch ( 23 @.@ 19 m ) and a draft of around 29 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 9 m ) at deep load . Designed to displace 13 @,@ 516 long tons ( 13 @,@ 733 t ) , she was over 600 long tons ( 610 t ) overweight and displaced 14 @,@ 181 long tons ( 14 @,@ 409 t ) . This caused a problem during sea trials on 6 October 1903 when Imperator Alexandr III made a high @-@ speed turn that caused her to heel 15 ° and submerged the embrasures for the 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns . Her intended crew consisted of 28 officers and 754 enlisted men , although she carried 826 – 46 crewmen in service . Her design was based on that of the Tsesarevich , modified to suit Russian machinery . 
 The ship was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam generated by 20 Belleville boilers . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 800 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 800 kW ) and designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Imperator Alexandr III , however , only reached a top speed of 17 @.@ 7 knots ( 32 @.@ 8 km / h ; 20 @.@ 4 mph ) from 16 @,@ 225 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 099 kW ) during her official machinery trials on 23 July 1903 . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 350 long tons ( 1 @,@ 370 t ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 2 @,@ 590 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 2 @,@ 980 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship 's main battery consisted of four 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in two twin @-@ gun turrets , one forward and one aft of the superstructure . The secondary armament consisted of 12 Canet 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns , mounted in twin @-@ gun turrets . A number of smaller guns were carried for defence against torpedo boats . These included twenty 75 @-@ millimeter ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) QF guns and twenty 47 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . She was also armed with four 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes , one each at the bow and stern above water and two submerged . Imperator Alexandr III 's waterline armor belt consisted of Krupp armor and was 5 @.@ 7 – 7 @.@ 64 inches ( 145 – 194 mm ) thick . The armor of her gun turrets had a maximum thickness of 10 in ( 254 mm ) and her deck ranged from 1 to 2 inches ( 25 to 51 mm ) in thickness . The 1 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 38 mm ) armored lower deck curved downwards and formed an anti @-@ torpedo bulkhead . 
 = = Service = = 
 Construction began on Imperator Alexandr III , named after Tsar Alexander III , on 5 September 1899 at the Baltic Works in Saint Petersburg . The ship was laid down on 23 May 1900 and launched on 3 August 1901 . She was completed in November 1903 at the cost of 13 @,@ 979 @,@ 000 rubles . 
 On 15 October 1904 , Imperator Alexandr III set sail for Port Arthur from Libau along with the other vessels of the Second Pacific Squadron , under the overall command of Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky . Rozhestvensky led his squadron , including Imperator Alexandr III , down the Atlantic coast of Africa , rounding Cape Horn , and reached the island of Nosy Be off the north @-@ west coast of Madagascar on 9 January 1905 where they remained for two months while Rozhestvensky finalized his coaling arrangements . The squadron sailed for Camranh Bay , French Indochina , on 16 March and reached it almost a month later to await the obsolete ships of the 3rd Pacific Squadron , commanded by Rear Admiral Nikolai Nebogatov . The latter ships reached Camranh Bay on 9 May and the combined force sailed for Vladivostok on 14 May . While exact figures are not available for Imperator Alexandr III , it is probable that the ship was approximately 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) overweight as she and her sisters were overloaded with coal and other supplies ; all of which was stored high in the ships and reduced their stability . The extra weight also submerged the waterline armor belt and left only about 4 feet 6 inches ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) of the upper armor belt above the waterline . 
 Rozhestvensky decided to take the most direct route to Vladivostok using the Tsushima Strait and was intercepted by the Japanese battlefleet under the command of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō on 27 May 1905 . At the beginning of the battle , Imperator Alexandr III was second in line behind Rozhestvensky 's flagship , Knyaz Suvorov . Very little is known of the ship 's actions during the battle as there were no survivors from the ship and visibility was poor for most of the battle , but Captain W. C. Pakenham , the Royal Navy 's official military observer under the Anglo @-@ Japanese Alliance , noted that she was set on fire early in the engagement . She did initially follow Knyaz Suvorov when that ship 's steering was damaged about a half @-@ hour after the Japanese opened fire at 14 : 10 , but turned north when her captain , Nikolai Bukhvostov , realized that Knyaz Suvorov was out of control . Tōgō tried to concentrate his fire on the crippled Knyaz Suvorov around 16 : 00 , but Bukhvostov turned Imperator Alexandr III straight for the Japanese battleline in a successful attempt to focus their attention on his ship . He was successful , but she was badly damaged in the process . Observers noted that her bow was badly damaged and that there was a large hole in the forward hull on the port side . When the shooting resumed around 18 : 00 , the Japanese concentrated their fire upon the ship and her sister , Borodino . Imperator Alexandr III sheered out of line to port around 18 : 30 and capsized , but did not sink until 19 : 07 ; there were no survivors . 
 = = Memory = = 
 In 1908 , a granite obelisk , designed by Artem Ober and Yakov <unk> , was constructed in the surrounding gardens of St. Nicholas Naval Cathedral , Saint Petersburg to remember the men of the Imperator Aleksandr III . 
 = Daniel E. Barbey = 
 Vice Admiral Daniel Edward Barbey ( 23 December 1889 – 11 March 1969 ) was an officer in the United States Navy who served in World War I and World War II . A graduate of the Naval Academy , he participated in the 1912 United States occupation of Nicaragua and the 1915 United States occupation of Veracruz . While serving with the War Plans Section of the Bureau of Navigation in Washington , D.C. between the World Wars , developed an interest in amphibious warfare . In 1940 he produced Fleet Training Publication 167 – Landing Operations Doctrine , United States Navy , which would become the Navy 's " bible " of amphibious operations , and would remain in use throughout World War II . 
 As commander Amphibious Force , Atlantic Fleet in 1940 and 1941 he supervised amphibious training and conducted Fleet Landing Exercises . In May 1942 , Barbey was appointed to organize a new Amphibious Warfare Section within the Navy Department , which was charged with responsibility for the coordination of amphibious training and the development and production of the new generation of landing craft . In January 1943 he assumed command of Amphibious Force , Southwest Pacific Force , which became the VII Amphibious Force . He planned and carried out 56 amphibious assaults in the Southwest Pacific Area between September 1943 and July 1945 . After the war , he commanded the Seventh Fleet and Fourth Fleet . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Daniel Edward Barbey was born in Portland , Oregon on 23 December 1889 . He graduated from the Naval Academy and was commissioned an ensign in June 1912 . His first assignment was aboard the armored cruiser USS California , which participated in the 1912 United States occupation of Nicaragua . In May 1914 he was transferred to the destroyer USS Lawrence as engineering officer , participating in the United States occupation of Veracruz . He remained on Lawrence , where he was promoted to lieutenant ( junior grade ) on 8 June 1915 , serving first as engineering officer , and later as executive officer and commanding officer . In October 1916 he became engineering officer of the gunboat USS Annapolis , serving in Central American and Mexico waters . He received a Letter of Commendation from the Secretary of the Navy for the ship 's service during the Mexican Revolution . Barbey was involved in the fitting out of the destroyer USS Stevens from December 1917 to May 1918 , becoming its executive officer when it was commissioned on 24 May . Under an accelerated wartime promotion system , he was promoted to Lieutenant on 8 June 1918 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Barbey was assigned to the Naval Base at Cardiff , Wales in January 1919 , becoming the Naval Port Officer at Cardiff from July to August 1919 , when he was transferred to the U.S. Naval Headquarters in London . In November 1919 he became Naval Port Officer , Constantinople , Turkey . In October 1920 , he also became operations officer and flag secretary to Rear Admiral Mark L. Bristol , Commander U.S. Naval Detachment in Turkish Waters and High Commissioner to Turkey . Barbey ceased to be Naval Port Officer in July 1921 , but continued as flag secretary to Admiral Bristol . During this time , Barbey served as the U.S. delegate on the Allied Commission for the Control of Trade with Turkey and as an observer with the White Army in the Crimea . 
 Returning to the U.S. in February 1922 , he served briefly on the cargo ship USS Capella before becoming assistant engineering officer of the battleship USS Oklahoma in the Pacific . He was promoted to lieutenant commander on 15 October 1922 . Continuing the pattern of alternating duty afloat and ashore , he then spent two years as Officer in Charge of the Portland Navy Recruiting Station , before returning to the Atlantic as engineering officer of the light cruiser USS Cincinnati in June 1925 . From February 1927 to June 1928 , he was executive officer of the oil tanker USS Ramapo . He then spent the next three years as aide to the Superintendent of the U.S. Naval Academy , Rear Admiral Samuel S. Robison . From June 1931 to June 1933 he commanded the destroyer USS Lea . He then spent two years as an inspector of ordnance at the Mare Island Naval Ammunition Depot in California , where he was promoted to the rank of commander in September 1933 . In February 1935 , he was posted to the battleship USS New York as damage control officer . He briefly commanded the Ramapo before becoming Commander of Destroyer Division 17 in the Pacific . 
 In June 1937 Barbey was assigned to War Plans Section of the Bureau of Navigation in Washington , D.C .. During this assignment , he worked on mobilization plans , and developed an interest in amphibious warfare from studying reports of Japanese amphibious operations in the Second Sino @-@ Japanese War . He was particularly intrigued by photographs of special landing craft with hinged bow ramps . In 1940 he produced Fleet Training Publication 167 – Landing Operations Doctrine , United States Navy ( FTP 167 ) . This would become the Navy 's " bible " of amphibious operations , and would remain in use throughout World War II . He was promoted to captain in February 1940 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Amphibious warfare = = = 
 Barbey assumed command of New York in the Pacific but in January 1941 he returned to the Atlantic to become Chief of Staff to Rear Admiral Randall Jacobs , Commander Service Force , Atlantic Fleet . This included the embryo Amphibious Force , Atlantic Fleet . In 1940 and 1941 he supervised the amphibious training of the 1st Marine Division and the 1st Infantry Division , conducting Fleet Landing Exercises along the coast of North Carolina . In May 1942 , Admiral Ernest King , Commander in Chief U.S. Fleet appointed Barbey to organize a new Amphibious Warfare Section within the Navy Department . Barbey was charged with responsibility for the coordination of amphibious training and the burgeoning amphibious craft construction program . He became involved with the development and production of the new generation of landing craft . He was promoted to the rank of rear admiral in December 1942 . 
 On 8 January 1943 Barbey assumed command of Amphibious Force , Southwest Pacific Force . He established his headquarters aboard the attack transport ( APA ) USS Henry T. Allen on the Brisbane River and set about building up his small training command into a major amphibious force capable of carrying out the strategy of the Supreme Commander , Southwest Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , General Douglas MacArthur , for an amphibious advance from Australia to the Philippines . On 15 March 1943 , " by a stroke of Admiral King 's pen , " the Southwest Pacific Force became the Seventh Fleet and its Amphibious Force became the VII Amphibious Force . On meeting Barbey for the first time , MacArthur had only one question : " are you a lucky officer ? " 
 The VII Amphibious Force inherited the Royal Australian Navy amphibious training center HMAS Assault at Port Stephens , New South Wales and a Combined Training School at Bribie Island and nearby Toorbul Point in Queensland . There was only one APA , the Henry T. Allen , which was in a poor state of repair and trailed an oil slick wherever it went , precluding its use in a combat zone , but VII Amphibious Force had three Australian assault transports , known as Landing Ships , Infantry ( LSI ) : HMAS Manoora , Kanimbla and Westralia . For the moment , they were too valuable to risk in forward areas . They were augmented by a flotilla each of the new beaching craft , Landing Ships , Tank ( LST ) , Landing Craft , Infantry ( LCI ) and Landing Craft , Tank ( LCT ) . There were also a small number of high speed transports ( APD ) . MacArthur directed that the two navies would use a common doctrine , FTP 167 . However , this was written with the assumption that APDs would be available and carry beach parties . Doctrine therefore required modification from the start . 
 = = = New Guinea campaign = = = 
 Operation Chronicle , the landings at Kiriwina and Woodlark Islands , was the VII Amphibious Force 's first operation , presented no great difficulty as the islands were known to be unoccupied . However half the assault troops experienced seasickness , problems were encountered with clearing the sand bar at the entrance to <unk> Harbor , and Barbey 's decision to land at night and withdraw before dawn in order to avoid encountering Japanese aircraft highlighted the inexperience of his crews and deficiencies in their training . Unloading activities on the coral @-@ fringed Kiriwina dragged on for a fortnight . 
 For the landing at Lae , Barbey elected to make a night approach and a dawn landing . As the LCIs approached the beach , they were set upon by three Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " bombers which score a bomb hit and two near misses on USS LCI @-@ 339 . Badly damaged and riddled by strafing bullets and fragments , the ship was beached but became a total loss . That afternoon , six LSTs were attacked by a force of about 80 Japanese aircraft . Some 48 Lockheed P @-@ 38 Lightnings were vectored to assist but USS LST @-@ 471 and USS LST @-@ 473 were hit , killing 57 crewmen and Australian troops . 
 A few weeks later Barbey was called upon to make a landing at Finschhafen . Not confident of the promised air support , Barbey decided to make another night landing , with the landing ships clearing the beach before dawn . Major General George Wootten , the commander of the assault troops , doubted that the VII Amphibious Force could find the correct beach in the dark , and was proven correct by events ; the VII Amphibious Force was not yet proficient enough to conduct night landings . Fortunately , this time Japanese air attacks failed to sink or damage any amphibious ships . For his part in the landings at Lae and Finschhafen , Barbey was awarded the Navy Cross . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Cross to Rear Admiral Daniel Edward Barbey ( NSN : 0 – 7930 ) , United States Navy , for extraordinary heroism and distinguished service in the line of his profession as Commander , Amphibious Force , Seventh Fleet , during attacks on Japanese @-@ occupied Lae and <unk> in New Guinea , on 4 September and 22 September 1943 . With singular skill and inspiring courage , Rear Admiral Barbey personally led his forces to the beachheads under relentless air attacks and expertly directed the brilliantly executed landings which ultimately resulted in victory to our forces . The sound tactical knowledge , fearless leadership and inspiring devotion to duty displayed by Rear Admiral Barbey were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 The Battle of Arawe and the Battle of Cape Gloucester involved a number of " firsts " for the VII Amphibious Force . It marked the first use of an Australian LSI , HMAS Westralia , in combat , and the first appearance in SWPA of a Landing Ship , Dock ( LSD ) , USS Carter Hall . The LSD was used to carry <unk> , also making their debut in SWPA , which were necessary to cross the coral reefs . Fire support was provided by two LCIs equipped with rockets . This proved so successful that Barbey had another six modified for the purpose . Casualties were evacuated using specially modified LCTs and <unk> equipped as hospital ships . For the first time , Beach Party 1 participated , providing a fully trained naval beach party for the first time . Contrary to doctrine , it was not affiliated with a particular APA . The Arawe operation also saw the first use of another innovation of Barbey 's , the landing craft control officers . However , an attempt to land a force in rubber boats was a total failure , and was not repeated . Afterward , Barbey received his first properly equipped amphibious command ship , the USS Blue Ridge . He also acquired an experienced deputy in Rear Admiral William M. Fechteler . Fechteler commanded the assault on the Admiralty Islands , in which APDs were employed in order to meet the Army 's requirement for a reconnaissance in force . 
 = = = Western New Guinea campaign = = = 
 During Operations Reckless and Persecution , Barbey personally directed the landing at Tanahmerah Bay . The beaches there proved to be unsuitable , and Barbey diverted the follow @-@ up forces to Humboldt Bay . MacArthur told war correspondent Frazier Hunt that Barbey was " just about the number one amphibious commander in the world , " but Admiral Chester Nimitz was more critical . VII Amphibious Force carried nearly 80 @,@ 000 personnel , 50 @,@ 000 tons ( 56 @,@ 000 m3 ) of stores and 3 @,@ 000 vehicles to the area but the resulting accumulation of stores on and immediately behind the beach included dumps in which fuel and ammunition were stored together . A lone Japanese aircraft bombed a dump and set off fires and explosions . Twenty men were killed and over a hundred wounded , and twelve LST loads of stores were destroyed . Meanwhile , three Japanese bombers attacked and torpedoed the cargo ship USS <unk> . The ship was severely damaged and towed back to Finschhafen with half its cargo still on board . For these operations , Barbey was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Rear Admiral Daniel Edward Barbey ( NSN : 0 – 7930 ) , United States Navy , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility as Commander of the Amphibious Forces of the Seventh Fleet from 8 January 1943 to 12 May 1944 . <unk> building and developing an organization from men and material untried in battle , Rear Admiral Barbey succeeded in bringing the forces under his command to the high state of combat readiness within a few months which enabled them to enter upon the New Guinea operation at the peak of their efficiency . Working in closest cooperation with associated Army Commanders and ably planning for determined aggression , he aided essentially in overcoming Japanese resistance during numerous landing operations and rendered invaluable support for forces until they were firmly established in various strategic positions in this vital area . An inspiring and forceful leader , Rear Admiral Barbey contributed immeasurably to the success of the campaigns in New Britain , New Guinea and the Admiralties and his brilliant administration of exacting responsibilities throughout this period reflects the highest credit upon the United States Naval Service . 
 = = = Philippines campaign = = = 
 Barbey paid a visit to Washington , D.C. in June 1944 to discuss his needs but his trip was mistimed , for the Joint Chiefs of Staff had left for Europe to observe the Invasion of Normandy and Barbey had to wait for Admiral King to return . In their discussions , King emphasised that it was his intention that MacArthur 's advance would proceed no further than Mindanao . This was scuttled in September 1944 by his own admirals , who recommended a descent on Leyte . By July enough amphibious ships had arrived in SWPA to allow Barbey to divide the VII Amphibious Force . <unk> assumed command of Amphibious Group 8 , while Amphibious Group 9 was formed under Rear Admiral Arthur D. Struble . In 1945 , a third group , Amphibious Group 6 , was formed under Rear Admiral Forrest B. Royal . For the invasion of Leyte , MacArthur and his naval commander , Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid expected that Barbey would continue in command of the amphibious forces , but Nimitz preferred the commander of the III Amphibious Force , Vice Admiral Theodore S. Wilkinson , who was senior and in Nimitz 's opinion , more experienced . In the end , a compromise was reached , with both amphibious forces participating , and Kinkaid in overall command . For his part , Barbey was awarded a second Navy Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America , authorized by Act of Congress , 9 July 1918 , takes pleasure in presenting a Gold Star in lieu of a Second Award of the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Vice Admiral Daniel Edward Barbey ( NSN : 0 – 7930 ) , United States Navy , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility as Commander of the Amphibious Forces of the Seventh Fleet , in action against enemy Japanese forces in the Southwest Pacific Area from 2 July 1944 to 1 February 1945 . Initiating a series of ably executed operations , Vice Admiral Barbey and the intrepid forces under his command effected successful surprise landings at Noemfoor on 2 July , at Sansapor on 30 July , and at Morotai on 15 September 1944 , thereby establishing Southwest Pacific Air Forces within effective striking distance of the Philippines . As Commander of the Northern Attack Force at Leyte on 20 October , he participated with distinction in the highly successful operation which gained lodgment for our forces in the Philippine Islands and , as Commander of the Northern Attack Force at Lingayen Gulf on 9 January 1945 , he again shared equally with the Commander Southern Attack Force the credit for the brilliant amphibious operation which finally assured the re @-@ conquest of Luzon and the Philippine Archipelago . By his inspiring leadership and outstanding performance of duty in the planning and execution of these vital operations , Vice Admiral Barbey upheld the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 Promoted to vice admiral on 9 December 1944 , Barbey directed 30 more assaults in 1945 , mostly in the southern Philippines and Borneo . He conducted the last amphibious operation of the war , the landings at Balikpapan , Borneo on 1 July 1945 . In all , " Uncle Dan " , as he was known , planned and conducted 56 amphibious operations , landing more than one million Australian and American soldiers and marines . For his wartime service in the Southwest Pacific , the U.S. Army awarded Barbey the Army Distinguished Service Medal . On Australia Day in 1948 the Australian government honored him with an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire , which was presented at the Australian embassy in Washington by Norman Makin , the Australian Ambassador to the United States . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 After the war , Barbey replaced Kinkaid as commander of the Seventh Fleet . He continued the task of landing occupation forces in South Korea and North China . While providing training , transportation and support to the Chinese Nationalist Party forces , he attempted to prevent his own forces from becoming embroiled in the Chinese Civil War , which was engulfing North China . In March 1946 he became Commander Amphibious Force , Atlantic Fleet . In September he became commander of the Fourth Fleet . He briefly returned to the Far East in February 1947 as Chairman of the Joint Military Board on fact @-@ finding mission to evaluate strategic requirements there . He returned to the U.S. in March to become Commandant of the 10th Naval District and commander of the Caribbean Sea Frontier from 1 May 1947 until 10 October 1950 . His final assignment was as Commandant of the 13th Naval District . He retired as a vice admiral on 30 June 1951 . 
 = = Retirement and last years = = 
 In retirement , Barbey published his memoirs of his wartime service as MacArthur 's Amphibious Navy in 1969 . He died at the Naval Hospital in Bremerton , Washington on 11 March 1969 . His papers are in the Naval Historical Center at the Washington Navy Yard in Washington , D.C. The Navy named a Knox @-@ class frigate , USS Barbey ( FF @-@ 1088 ) in his honor , which was launched at the Avondale Shipyards in <unk> , Louisiana by his widow on 4 December 1971 . 
 = = Decorations = = 
 Vice Admiral Daniel E. Barbey ´ s ribbon bar : 
 = Tone cluster = 
 A tone cluster is a musical chord comprising at least three adjacent tones in a scale . Prototypical tone clusters are based on the chromatic scale and are separated by semitones . For instance , three adjacent piano keys ( such as C , C ♯ , and D ) struck simultaneously produce a tone cluster . Variants of the tone cluster include chords comprising adjacent tones separated <unk> , <unk> , or <unk> . On the piano , such clusters often involve the simultaneous striking of neighboring white or black keys . 
 The early years of the twentieth century saw tone clusters elevated to central roles in pioneering works by ragtime artists Jelly Roll Morton and Scott Joplin . In the 1910s , two classical avant @-@ gardists , composer @-@ pianists Leo Ornstein and Henry Cowell , were recognized as making the first extensive explorations of the tone cluster . During the same period , Charles Ives employed them in several compositions that were not publicly performed until the late 1920s or 1930s . Composers such as Béla Bartók and , later , Lou Harrison and Karlheinz Stockhausen became proponents of the tone cluster , which feature in the work of many twentieth- and twenty @-@ first @-@ century classical composers . Tone clusters play a significant role , as well , in the work of free jazz musicians such as Cecil Taylor and Matthew Shipp . 
 In most Western music , tone clusters tend to be heard as dissonant . Clusters may be performed with almost any individual instrument on which three or more notes can be played simultaneously , as well as by most groups of instruments or voices . Keyboard instruments are particularly suited to the performance of tone clusters because it is relatively easy to play multiple notes in unison on them . 
 = = Music theory and classification = = 
 Prototypical tone clusters are chords of three or more adjacent notes on a chromatic scale , that is , three or more adjacent pitches each separated by only a semitone . Three @-@ note stacks based on diatonic and pentatonic scales are also , strictly speaking , tone clusters . However , these stacks involve intervals between notes greater than the half @-@ tone gaps of the chromatic kind . This can readily be seen on a keyboard , where the pitch of each key is separated from the next by one semitone ( visualizing the black keys as extending to the edge of the keyboard ) : <unk> scales — conventionally played on the white keys — contain only two semitone intervals ; the rest are full tones . In Western musical traditions , pentatonic scales — conventionally played on the black keys — are built entirely from intervals larger than a semitone . Commentators thus tend to identify diatonic and pentatonic stacks as " tone clusters " only when they consist of four or more successive notes in the scale . In standard Western classical music practice , all tone clusters are classifiable as <unk> chords — that is , they are constructed from minor seconds ( intervals of one semitone ) , major seconds ( intervals of two semitones ) , or , in the case of certain pentatonic clusters , augmented seconds ( intervals of three semitones ) . Stacks of adjacent microtonal pitches also constitute tone clusters . 
 In tone clusters , the notes are sounded fully and in unison , distinguishing them from ornamented figures involving <unk> and the like . Their effect also tends to be different : where ornamentation is used to draw attention to the harmony or the relationship between harmony and melody , tone clusters are for the most part employed as independent sounds . While , by definition , the notes that form a cluster must sound at the same time , there is no requirement that they must all begin sounding at the same moment . For example , in R. Murray Schafer 's choral Epitaph for Moonlight ( 1968 ) , a tone cluster is constructed by dividing each choir section ( soprano / alto / tenor / bass ) into four parts . Each of the sixteen parts enters separately , humming a note one semitone lower than the note hummed by the previous part , until all sixteen are contributing to the cluster . 
 Tone clusters have generally been thought of as dissonant musical textures , and even defined as such . As noted by Alan <unk> , however , instrumental timbre can have a significant impact on their effect : " Clusters are quite aggressive on the organ , but soften enormously when played by strings ( possibly because slight , continuous fluctuations of pitch in the latter provide some inner mobility ) . " In his first published work on the topic , Henry Cowell observed that a tone cluster is " more pleasing " and " acceptable to the ear if its outer limits form a consonant interval . " Cowell explains , " the natural spacing of so @-@ called dissonances is as seconds , as in the overtone series , rather than sevenths and ninths .... Groups spaced in seconds may be made to sound euphonious , particularly if played in conjunction with fundamental chord notes taken from lower in the same overtone series . Blends them together and explains them to the ear . " Tone clusters have also been considered noise . As Mauricio Kagel says , " clusters have generally been used as a kind of anti @-@ harmony , as a transition between sound and noise . " Tone clusters thus also lend themselves to use in a percussive manner . Historically , they were sometimes discussed with a hint of disdain . One 1969 textbook defines the tone cluster as " an extra @-@ harmonic clump of notes . " 
 = = Notation and execution = = 
 In his 1917 piece The Tides of Manaunaun , Cowell introduced a new notation for tone clusters on the piano and other keyboard instruments . In this notation , only the top and bottom notes of a cluster , connected by a single line or a pair of lines , are represented . This developed into the solid @-@ bar style seen in the image on the right . Here , the first chord — stretching two octaves from D2 to D4 — is a diatonic ( so @-@ called white @-@ note ) cluster , indicated by the natural sign below the staff . The second is a pentatonic ( so @-@ called black @-@ note ) cluster , indicated by the flat sign ; a sharp sign would be required if the notes showing the limit of the cluster were spelled as sharps . A chromatic cluster — black and white keys together — is shown in this method by a solid bar with no sign at all . In scoring the large , dense clusters of the solo organ work Volumina in the early 1960s , György Ligeti , using graphical notation , blocked in whole sections of the keyboard . 
 The performance of keyboard tone clusters is widely considered an " extended technique " — large clusters require unusual playing methods often involving the fist , the flat of the hand , or the forearm . Thelonious Monk and Karlheinz Stockhausen each performed clusters with their elbows ; Stockhausen developed a method for playing cluster glissandi with special gloves . Don Pullen would play moving clusters by rolling the backs of his hands over the keyboard . Boards of various dimension are sometimes employed , as in the Concord Sonata ( ca . 1904 – 19 ) of Charles Ives ; they can be weighted down to execute clusters of long duration . Several of Lou Harrison 's scores call for the use of an " octave bar " , crafted to facilitate high @-@ speed keyboard cluster performance . Designed by Harrison with his partner William Colvig , the octave bar is 
 a flat wooden device approximately two inches high with a grip on top and sponge rubber on the bottom , with which the player strikes the keys . Its length spans an octave on a grand piano . The sponge rubber bottom is sculpted so that its ends are slightly lower than its center , making the outer tones of the octave sound with greater force than the intermediary pitches . The pianist can thus rush headlong through fearfully rapid passages , precisely spanning an octave at each blow . 
 = = Use in Western music = = 
 = = = Before the 1900s = = = 
 The earliest example of tone clusters in a Western music composition thus far identified is in the Allegro movement of Heinrich Biber 's Battalia à 10 ( 1673 ) for string ensemble , which calls for several diatonic clusters . An orchestral diatonic cluster occurs also in the representation of chaos in the opening of Jean @-@ <unk> Rebel 's 1737 – 38 ballet Les <unk> . From the next century @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half , only a few more examples have been identified , none calling for more than a fleeting instance of the form . These are mostly in French programmatic compositions for the harpsichord or piano that represent cannon fire with clusters , for example in works by François <unk> ( Les Caractères de la guerre , 1724 ) , Michel Corrette ( La Victoire d 'un combat naval , <unk> par une frégate contre plusieurs <unk> <unk> , 1780 ) , Claude @-@ <unk> <unk> ( March des Marseillois , 1793 ) , Pierre Antoine César ( La Battaille de <unk> , ou la prise de Mons , ca . 1794 ) , Bernard <unk> ( La Bataille de <unk> , pièce militaire et <unk> , for piano trio , 1800 ) , and Jacques @-@ Marie <unk> @-@ Charpentier ( Battaille d 'Austerlitz , 1805 ) . 
 The next known compositions after Charpentier 's to feature tone clusters are Charles @-@ Valentin Alkan 's " Une <unk> " ( A Rocket ) Op. 55 , published in 1859 , and his " Les <unk> " ( The Imps ) , a miniature from the set of 49 Esquisses ( sketches ) for solo piano , published in 1861 . There is also the solo piano piece Battle of Manassas , written in 1861 by " Blind Tom " Bethune and published in 1866 . The score instructs the pianist to represent cannon fire at various points by striking " with the flat of the hand , as many notes as possible , and with as much force as possible , at the bass of the piano . " In 1887 , Giuseppe Verdi became the first notable composer in the Western tradition to write an unmistakable chromatic cluster : the storm music with which Otello opens includes an organ cluster ( C , C ♯ , D ) that also has the longest notated duration of any scored musical texture known . Still , it was not before the second decade of the twentieth century that tone clusters assumed a recognized place in Western classical music practice . 
 = = = In classical music of the early 1900s = = = 
 " Around 1910 , " Harold C. Schoenberg writes , " Percy Grainger was causing a stir by the near – tone clusters in such works as his <unk> March . " In 1911 , what appears to be the first published classical composition to thoroughly integrate true tone clusters was issued : <unk> ( The <unk> of Bells ) , by Canadian composer J. Humfrey Anger ( 1862 – 1913 ) . 
 Within a few years , the radical composer @-@ pianist Leo Ornstein became one of the most famous figures in classical music on both sides of the Atlantic for his performances of cutting @-@ edge work . In 1914 , Ornstein debuted several of his own solo piano compositions : Wild Men 's Dance ( aka Danse Sauvage ; ca . 1913 – 14 ) , Impressions of the Thames ( ca . 1913 – 14 ) , and Impressions of Notre Dame ( ca . 1913 – 14 ) were the first works to explore the tone cluster in depth ever heard by a substantial audience . Wild Men 's Dance , in particular , was constructed almost entirely out of clusters ( listen ) . In 1918 , critic Charles L. Buchanan described Ornstein 's innovation : " [ He ] gives us masses of shrill , hard dissonances , chords consisting of anywhere from eight to a dozen notes made up of half tones heaped one upon another . " 
 Clusters were also beginning to appear in more pieces by European composers . Isaac Albéniz 's use of them in Iberia ( 1905 – 8 ) may have influenced Gabriel Fauré 's subsequent piano writing . Joseph Horowitz has suggested that the " dissonant star clusters " in its third and fourth books were particularly compelling to Olivier Messiaen , who called Iberia " the wonder of the piano . " The Thomas de Hartmann score for Wassily Kandinsky 's stage show The Yellow Sound ( 1909 ) employs a chromatic cluster at two climactic points . Alban Berg 's Four Pieces for clarinet and piano ( 1913 ) calls for clusters along with other avant @-@ garde keyboard techniques . Claude Debussy 's 1915 arrangement for solo piano of his Six <unk> Antiques ( 1914 ) , originally a set of piano duets , includes tone clusters in the fifth piece , Pour l <unk> . Richard Strauss 's An Alpine Symphony ( 1915 ) " starts and ends with the setting sun — a B flat minor chord cluster slowly built down . " 
 Though much of his work was made public only years later , Charles Ives had been exploring the possibilities of the tone cluster — which he referred to as the " group chord " — for some time . In 1906 – 7 , Ives composed his first mature piece to extensively feature tone clusters , Scherzo : Over the <unk> . <unk> for a nine @-@ piece ensemble , it includes both black- and white @-@ note clusters for the piano . Revised in 1913 , it would not be recorded and published until the 1950s and would have to wait until 1963 to receive its first public performance . During the same period that Ornstein was introducing tone clusters to the concert stage , Ives was developing a piece with what would become the most famous set of clusters : in the second movement , " Hawthorne , " of the Concord Sonata ( ca . 1904 – 15 , <unk> . 1920 , <unk> . 1928 , rev. 1947 ) , mammoth piano chords require a wooden bar almost fifteen inches long to play . The gentle clusters produced by the <unk> or flannel @-@ covered bar represent the sound of far @-@ off church bells ( listen ) . Later in the movement , there are a series of five @-@ note diatonic clusters for the right hand . In his notes to the score , Ives indicates that " these group @-@ chords ... may , if the player feels like it , be hit with the clenched fist . " Between 1911 and 1913 , Ives also wrote ensemble pieces with tone clusters such as his Second String Quartet and the orchestral Decoration Day and Fourth of July , though none of these would be publicly performed before the 1930s . 
 = = = In the work of Henry Cowell = = = 
 In June 1913 , a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old Californian with no formal musical training wrote a solo piano piece , Adventures in Harmony , employing " primitive tone clusters . " Henry Cowell would soon emerge as the seminal figure in promoting the cluster harmonic technique . Ornstein abandoned the concert stage in the early 1920s and , anyway , clusters had served him as practical harmonic devices , not as part of a larger theoretical mission . In the case of Ives , clusters comprised a relatively small part of his compositional output , much of which went unheard for years . For the intellectually ambitious Cowell — who heard Ornstein perform in New York in 1916 — clusters were crucial to the future of music . He set out to explore their " overall , cumulative , and often programmatic effects . " 
 Dynamic Motion ( 1916 ) for solo piano , written when Cowell was nineteen , has been described as " probably the first piece anywhere using <unk> chords independently for musical extension and variation . " Though that is not quite accurate , it does appear to be the first piece to employ chromatic clusters in such a manner . A solo piano piece Cowell wrote the following year , The Tides of Manaunaun ( 1917 ) , would prove to be his most popular work and the composition most responsible for establishing the tone cluster as a significant element in Western classical music ( listen ) . ( Cowell 's early piano works are often erroneously dated ; in the two cases above , as 1914 and 1912 , respectively . ) Assumed by some to involve an essentially random — or , more kindly , aleatoric — pianistic approach , Cowell would explain that precision is required in the writing and performance of tone clusters no less than with any other musical feature : 
 Tone clusters ... on the piano [ are ] whole scales of tones used as chords , or at least three contiguous tones along a scale being used as a chord . And , at times , if these chords exceed the number of tones that you have fingers on your hand , it may be necessary to play these either with the flat of the hand or sometimes with the full forearm . This is not done from the standpoint of trying to devise a new piano technique , although it actually amounts to that , but rather because this is the only practicable method of playing such large chords . It should be obvious that these chords are exact and that one practices diligently in order to play them with the desired tone quality and to have them absolutely precise in nature . 
 Historian and critic Kyle Gann describes the broad range of ways in which Cowell constructed ( and thus performed ) his clusters and used them as musical textures , " sometimes with a top note brought out melodically , sometimes accompanying a left @-@ hand melody in parallel . " 
 Beginning in 1921 , with an article serialized in The Freeman , an Irish cultural journal , Cowell popularized the term tone cluster . While he did not coin the phrase , as is often claimed , he appears to have been the first to use it with its current meaning . During the 1920s and 1930s , Cowell toured widely through North America and Europe , playing his own experimental works , many built around tone clusters . In addition to The Tides of Manaunaun , Dynamic Motion , and its five " encores " — What 's This ( 1917 ) , <unk> Conversation ( 1917 ) , Advertisement ( 1917 ) , <unk> ( 1917 , rev. 1959 ; frequently misspelled " Antimony " ) , and Time Table ( 1917 ) — these include The Voice of Lir ( 1920 ) , <unk> ( 1921 ) , The Harp of Life ( 1924 ) , Snows of Fujiyama ( 1924 ) , <unk> of the Reel ( 1930 ) , and Deep Color ( 1938 ) . Tiger ( 1930 ) has a chord of 53 notes , probably the largest ever written for a single instrument until 1969 . Along with Ives , Cowell wrote some of the first large @-@ ensemble pieces to make extensive use of clusters . The Birth of Motion ( ca . 1920 ) , his earliest such effort , combines orchestral clusters with glissando . " Tone Cluster , " the second movement of Cowell 's Concerto for Piano and Orchestra ( 1928 , <unk> . 1978 ) , employs a wide variety of clusters for the piano and each instrumental group ( listen ) . From a quarter @-@ century later , his Symphony No. 11 ( 1953 ) features a sliding chromatic cluster played by muted violins . 
 In his theoretical work New Musical Resources ( 1930 ) , a major influence on the classical avant @-@ garde for many decades , Cowell argued that clusters should not be employed simply for color : 
 In harmony it is often better for the sake of consistency to maintain a whole succession of clusters , once they are begun ; since one alone , or even two , may be heard as a mere effect , rather than as an independent and significant procedure , carried with musical logic to its inevitable conclusion . 
 = = = In later classical music = = = 
 In 1922 , composer Dane <unk> , a friend of Cowell 's , declared approvingly that the development of the tone cluster " imperilled [ the ] existence " of " the musical unit , the note . " While that threat was not to be realized , clusters began to appear in the works of a growing number of composers . Already , Aaron Copland had written his Three Moods ( aka Trois Esquisses ; 1920 – 21 ) for piano — its name an apparent homage to a piece of Leo Ornstein 's — which includes a triple @-@ forte cluster . The most renowned composer to be directly inspired by Cowell 's demonstrations of his tone cluster pieces was Béla Bartók , who requested Cowell 's permission to employ the method . Bartók 's First Piano Concerto , Piano Sonata , and Out of Doors ( all 1926 ) , his first significant works after three years in which he produced little , extensively feature tone clusters . 
 In the 1930s , Cowell 's student Lou Harrison utilized keyboard clusters in several works such as his Prelude for <unk> ( 1937 ) . At least as far back as 1942 , John Cage , who also studied under Cowell , began writing piano pieces with cluster chords ; In the Name of the Holocaust , from December of that year , includes chromatic , diatonic , and pentatonic clusters . Olivier Messiaen 's Vingt regards sur l 'enfant Jésus ( 1944 ) , often described as the most important solo piano piece of the first half of the twentieth century , employs clusters throughout . They would feature in numerous subsequent piano works , by a range of composers . Karlheinz Stockhausen 's Klavierstück X ( 1961 ) makes bold , rhetorical use of chromatic clusters , scaled in seven degrees of width , from three to thirty @-@ six semitones , as well as ascending and descending cluster arpeggios and cluster glissandi . Written two decades later , his Klavierstück XIII employs many of the same techniques , along with clusters that call for the pianist to sit down on the keyboard . George Crumb 's Apparitions , Elegiac Songs , and <unk> for Soprano and Amplified Piano ( 1979 ) , a setting of verse by Walt Whitman , is filled with clusters , including an enormous one that introduces three of its sections . The piano part of the second movement of Joseph Schwantner 's song cycle <unk> ( 1983 ) has perhaps the single largest chord ever written for an individual instrument : all 88 notes on the keyboard . 
 While tone clusters are conventionally associated with the piano , and the solo piano repertoire in particular , they have also assumed important roles in compositions for chamber groups and larger ensembles . Robert Reigle identifies Croatian composer Josip <unk> 's organ @-@ and @-@ violin Sonata Religiosa ( 1925 ) , with its sustained chromatic clusters , as " a missing link between Ives and [ György ] Ligeti . " Bartók employs both diatonic and chromatic clusters in his Fourth String Quartet ( 1928 ) . The sound mass technique in such works as Ruth Crawford Seeger 's String Quartet ( 1931 ) and Iannis Xenakis 's <unk> ( 1955 ) is an elaboration of the tone cluster . " Unlike most tonal and non @-@ tonal linear dissonances , tone clusters are essentially static . The individual pitches are of secondary importance ; it is the sound mass that is foremost . " In one of the most famous pieces associated with the sound mass aesthetic , containing , " one of the largest clustering of individual pitches that has been written " , Krzysztof Penderecki 's Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima ( 1959 ) , for fifty @-@ two string instruments , the quarter @-@ tone clusters " see [ m ] to have abstracted and intensified the features that define shrieks of terror and keening cries of sorrow . " Clusters appear in two sections of the electronic music of Stockhausen 's Kontakte ( 1958 – 60 ) — first as " hammering points ... very difficult to synthesize " , according to Robin Maconie , then as glissandi . In 1961 , Ligeti wrote perhaps the largest cluster chord ever — in the orchestral Atmosphères , every note in the chromatic scale over a range of five octaves is played at once ( quietly ) . Ligeti 's organ works make extensive use of clusters . Volumina ( 1961 – 62 ) , graphically notated , consists of static and mobile cluster masses , and calls on many advanced cluster @-@ playing techniques . 
 The eighth movement of Messiaen 's oratorio La Transfiguration de Notre Seigneur Jésus @-@ Christ ( 1965 – 69 ) features " a shimmering halo of tone @-@ cluster glissandi " in the strings , evoking the " bright cloud " to which the narrative refers ( listen ) . Orchestral clusters are employed throughout Stockhausen 's Fresco ( 1969 ) and Trans ( 1971 ) . In Morton Feldman 's Rothko Chapel ( 1971 ) , " Wordless vocal tone clusters seep out through the skeletal arrangements of viola , celeste , and percussion . " Aldo Clementi 's chamber ensemble piece Ceremonial ( 1973 ) evokes both Verdi and Ives , combining the original extended @-@ duration and mass cluster concepts : a weighted wooden board placed on an electric harmonium maintains a tone cluster throughout the work . Judith Bingham 's Prague ( 1995 ) gives a brass band the opportunity to create tone clusters . Keyboard clusters are set against orchestral forces in piano concertos such as <unk> Rautavaara 's first ( 1969 ) and Esa @-@ Pekka Salonen 's ( 2007 ) , the latter suggestive of Messiaen . The choral compositions of Eric Whitacre often employ clusters . 
 Three composers who made frequent use of tone clusters for a wide variety of ensembles are Giacinto Scelsi , Alfred Schnittke — both of whom often worked with them in microtonal contexts — and Lou Harrison . Scelsi employed them for much of his career , including in his last large @-@ scale work , <unk> ( 1974 ) , which premiered in 1986 . They are found in works of Schnittke 's ranging from the Quintet for Piano and Strings ( 1972 – 76 ) , where " microtonal strings fin [ d ] tone clusters between the cracks of the piano keys , " to the choral Psalms of Repentance ( 1988 ) . Harrison 's many pieces featuring clusters include <unk> Rondo ( 1963 ) , Concerto for Organ with Percussion ( 1973 ) , Piano Concerto ( 1983 – 85 ) , Three Songs for male chorus ( 1985 ) , Grand Duo ( 1988 ) , and Rhymes with Silver ( 1996 ) . 
 = = = In jazz = = = 
 Tone clusters have been employed by jazz artists in a variety of styles , since the very beginning of the form . Around the turn of the twentieth century , Storyville pianist Jelly Roll Morton began performing a ragtime adaptation of a French quadrille , introducing large chromatic tone clusters played by his left forearm . The growling effect led Morton to dub the piece his " Tiger Rag " ( listen ) . In 1909 , Scott Joplin 's deliberately experimental " Wall Street Rag " included a section prominently featuring notated tone clusters — apparently the first published work in the history of Western music with a cluster sequence . The fourth of Artie Matthews 's Pastime Rags ( 1913 – 20 ) features dissonant right @-@ hand clusters . Thelonious Monk , in pieces such as " Introspection " ( 1946 ) and " Off Minor " ( 1947 ) , uses clusters as dramatic figures within the central improvisation and to accent the tension at its conclusion . They are heard on Art Tatum 's " Mr. Freddy Blues " ( 1950 ) , undergirding the cross @-@ rhythms . By 1953 , Dave Brubeck was employing piano tone clusters and dissonance in a manner anticipating the style free jazz pioneer Cecil Taylor would soon develop . The approach of hard bop pianist Horace Silver is an even clearer antecedent to Taylor 's use of clusters . During the same era , clusters appear as punctuation marks in the lead lines of Herbie Nichols . In " The Gig " ( 1955 ) , described by Francis Davis as Nichols 's masterpiece , " clashing notes and tone clusters <unk> [ t ] a pickup band at odds with itself about what to play . " Recorded examples of Duke Ellington 's piano cluster work include " Summertime " ( 1961 ) and ... And His Mother Called Him Bill ( 1967 ) . 
 In jazz , as in classical music , tone clusters have not been restricted to the keyboard . In the 1930s , the Jimmie Lunceford Orchestra 's " Stratosphere " included ensemble clusters among an array of progressive elements . The Stan Kenton Orchestra 's April 1947 recording of " If I Could Be With You One Hour Tonight , " arranged by Pete Rugolo , features a dramatic four @-@ note trombone cluster at the end of the second chorus . As described by critic Fred Kaplan , a 1950 performance by the Duke Ellington Orchestra features arrangements with the collective " blowing rich , dark , tone clusters that evoke Ravel . " In the early 1960s , arrangements by Bob <unk> and Gerry Mulligan for Mulligan 's Concert Jazz Band employed tone clusters in a dense style bringing to mind both Ellington and Ravel . Eric Dolphy 's bass clarinet solos would often feature " microtonal clusters summoned by frantic overblowing . " Critic Robert Palmer called the " tart tone cluster " that " pierces a song 's surfaces and penetrates to its heart " a specialty of guitarist Jim Hall 's . 
 Clusters are especially prevalent in the realm of free jazz . Cecil Taylor has used them extensively as part of his improvisational method since the mid @-@ 1950s . Like much of his musical vocabulary , his clusters operate " on a continuum somewhere between melody and percussion . " One of Taylor 's primary purposes in adopting clusters was to avoid the dominance of any specific pitch . Leading free jazz composer , bandleader , and pianist Sun Ra often used them to rearrange the musical furniture , as described by scholar John F. Szwed : 
 When he sensed that [ a ] piece needed an introduction or an ending , a new direction or fresh material , he would call for a space chord , a collectively improvised tone cluster at high volume which " would suggest a new melody , maybe a rhythm . " It was a <unk> conceived device which created another context for the music , a new mood , opening up fresh tonal areas . 
 As free jazz spread in the 1960s , so did the use of tone clusters . In comparison with what John <unk> describes as Taylor 's " endless forms and contrasts , " the solos of <unk> Richard Abrams employ tone clusters in a similarly free , but more lyrical , flowing context . Guitarist Sonny Sharrock made them a central part of his improvisations ; in Palmer 's description , he executed " glass @-@ shattering tone clusters that sounded like someone was ripping the pickups out of the guitar without having bothered to <unk> it from its overdriven amplifier . " Pianist Marilyn <unk> has been another major free jazz proponent of the tone cluster , frequently in collaboration with Anthony Braxton , who played with Abrams early in his career . Since the 1990s , Matthew Shipp has built on Taylor 's innovations with the form . European free jazz pianists who have contributed to the development of the tone cluster palette include Gunter Hampel and Alexander von <unk> . 
 Don Pullen , who bridged free and mainstream jazz , " had a technique of rolling his wrists as he improvised — the outside edges of his hands became scarred from it — to create moving tone clusters , " writes critic Ben Ratliff . " Building up from arpeggios , he could create eddies of noise on the keyboard ... like concise Cecil Taylor outbursts . " In the description of Joachim <unk> , Pullen " uniquely <unk> cluster playing and made it tonal . He phrases impulsively raw clusters with his right hand and yet embeds them in clear , harmonically functional tonal chords simultaneously played with the left hand . " John Medeski employs tone clusters as keyboardist for Medeski , Martin , and Wood , which mixes free jazz elements into its soul jazz / jam band style . 
 = = = In popular music = = = 
 Like jazz , rock and roll has made use of tone clusters since its birth , if characteristically in a less deliberate manner — most famously , Jerry Lee Lewis 's live @-@ performance piano technique of the 1950s , involving fists , feet , and derrière . Since the 1960s , much drone music , which crosses the lines between rock , electronic , and experimental music , has been based on tone clusters . On The Velvet Underground 's " Sister Ray , " recorded in September 1967 , organist John Cale uses tone clusters within the context of a drone ; the song is apparently the closest approximation on record of the band 's early live sound . Around the same time , Doors keyboardist Ray Manzarek began introducing clusters into his solos during live performances of the band 's hit " Light My Fire . " 
 Kraftwerk 's self @-@ titled 1970 debut album employs organ clusters to add variety to its repeated tape sequences . In 1971 , critic Ed Ward lauded the " tone @-@ cluster vocal harmonies " created by Jefferson Airplane 's three lead singers , Grace Slick , Marty Balin , and Paul Kantner . Tangerine Dream 's 1972 double album Zeit is replete with clusters performed on synthesizer . In later rock practice , the D add9 chord characteristic of jangle pop involves a three @-@ note set separated by major seconds ( D , E , F ♯ ) , the sort of guitar cluster that may be characterized as a harp effect . 
 The sound of tone clusters played on the organ became a convention in radio drama for dreams . Clusters are often used in the scoring of horror and science @-@ fiction films . For a 2004 production of the play Tone Clusters by Joyce Carol Oates , composer Jay Clarke — a member of the indie rock bands <unk> and The Standard — employed clusters to " subtly build the tension " , in contrast to what he perceived in the cluster pieces by Cowell and Ives suggested by Oates : “ Some of it was like music to murder somebody to ; it was like horror @-@ movie music ” . 
 = = Use in other music = = 
 In traditional Japanese gagaku , the imperial court music , a tone cluster performed on shō ( a type of mouth organ ) is generally employed as a harmonic matrix . <unk> Matsudaira , active from the late 1920s to the early 2000s , merged gagaku 's harmonies and tonalities with avant @-@ garde Western techniques . Much of his work is built on the shō 's ten traditional cluster formations . Lou Harrison 's <unk> Rondo , which mixes Eastern and Western instrumentation and styles , mirrors the gagaku approach — sustained organ clusters emulate the sound and function of the shō . Traditional Korean court and aristocratic music employs passages of simultaneous ornamentation on multiple instruments , creating dissonant clusters ; this technique is reflected in the work of twentieth @-@ century Korean German composer Isang Yun . 
 Several East Asian free reed instruments , including the shō , were modeled on the sheng , an ancient Chinese folk instrument later incorporated into more formal musical contexts . <unk> , one of the traditional chord formations played on the sheng , involves a three @-@ pitch cluster . Malayan folk musicians employ an indigenous mouth organ that , like the shō and sheng , produces tone clusters . The characteristic musical form played on the bin @-@ <unk> , a strummed harp of central India 's <unk> people , has been described as a " rhythmic ostinato on a tone cluster . " 
 Tone clusters are used in traditional Asante trumpet music : " Intentional dissonance dispels evil spirits , and the greater the clangor , the greater the barrage . 
 = = = Listening = = = 
 American Mavericks : Program 1 — The Meaning of Maverick three works by Cowell on demand , including Concerto for Piano and Orchestra — its second movement is titled " Tone Cluster , " though all three movements feature them 
 Art of the States : Henry Cowell six works by the composer , including The Tides of Manaunaun and The Harp of Life , with their chromatic and diatonic clusters , and <unk> , which features pentatonic clusters 
 Art of the States : John Cage three works by the composer , including In the Name of the Holocaust 
 John Cage — In The Name Of The Holocaust video of performance by Margaret Leng Tan 
 Ornstein Piano Music Marc @-@ André Hamelin 's performance of Suicide in an Airplane from Leo Ornstein : Piano Music ( Hyperion <unk> ) 
 = 2015 Tour de France = 
 The 2015 Tour de France was the 102nd edition of the Tour de France , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The 3 @,@ 360 @.@ 3 km ( 2 @,@ 088 mi ) -long race started in Utrecht , the Netherlands , on 4 July 2015 , and concluded with the Champs @-@ Élysées stage in Paris , on 26 July . A total of 198 riders from 22 teams entered the 21 @-@ stage race , which was won by Chris Froome of Team Sky . The second and third places were taken by the Movistar Team riders Nairo Quintana and Alejandro Valverde , respectively . 
 BMC Racing Team 's Rohan Dennis won the first stage to take the race leader 's yellow jersey . Trek Factory Racing rider Fabian Cancellara claimed it on the second , only to lose it after crashing out on the following stage . This put Froome in the lead , after the Tour 's first uphill finish . He lost the position to Etixx – Quick @-@ Step 's Tony Martin at the end of the fourth stage , but Martin 's withdrawal from the race after a crash at the end of the sixth stage put Froome back into the lead . He extended this lead during the stages in the Pyrenees and defended it successfully against attacks from Quintana during the final stages that took place in the Alps . 
 Froome became the first British rider to win the Tour twice , after his 2013 victory . Peter Sagan of Tinkoff – Saxo won the points classification . Froome also won the mountains classification . The best young rider was Quintana , with his team , Movistar Team , the winners of the team classification . Romain Bardet of AG2R La Mondiale was given the award for the most combative rider . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty @-@ two teams participated in the 2015 edition of the Tour de France . All of the seventeen UCI WorldTeams were automatically invited , and obliged , to attend the race . On 14 January 2015 , the organiser of the Tour , Amaury Sport Organisation ( ASO ) , announced the five second @-@ tier UCI Professional Continental teams given wildcard invitations , one of which , MTN – Qhubeka , was to become the first African @-@ registered trade team to participate in the race 's history . The team presentation – where each team 's roster are introduced in front of the media and local dignitaries – took place at <unk> Park in Utrecht , the Netherlands , on 2 July , two days before the opening stage held in the city . Each team arrived in small boats along the <unk> canal . 
 The number of riders allowed per squad was nine , therefore the start list contained a total of 198 riders . From the riders that began the race , 160 made it to the finish in Paris . The riders came from 32 countries ; France , the Netherlands , Italy , Spain , Belgium , Australia , Germany , Great Britain and Switzerland all had 10 or more riders in the race . Eritrean riders Daniel Teklehaimanot and <unk> Kudus , both of MTN – Qhubeka , became the first black Africans to compete in the Tour de France . The average age of all the riders was 29 @.@ 67 ; the youngest was Kudus , at 21 , and the oldest was the 41 @-@ year @-@ old Matteo Tosatto of Tinkoff – Saxo . Cofidis was the youngest team and Trek Factory Racing the oldest . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favourites = = 
 In the lead up to the Tour , the main contenders for the general classification , known in the media as the ' big four ' , were Chris Froome ( Team Sky ) , Alberto Contador ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , Nairo Quintana ( Movistar Team ) and Vincenzo Nibali ( Astana ) . All had won at least one Grand Tour , amassing a total of twenty Grand Tour podiums . Former Tour de France winners Froome ( 2013 ) and Contador ( 2007 and 2009 ) returned to the race having crashed out of the 2014 edition . The riders considered outsiders were Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Thibaut Pinot ( FDJ ) , Joaquim Rodríguez ( Team Katusha ) , followed by AG2R La Mondiale 's Jean @-@ Christophe Péraud and Romain Bardet . 
 Froome had shown his form during the season with overall victories at the Vuelta a Andalucía and the Critérium du Dauphiné , the Tour 's warm @-@ up race . Contador had earlier in the season won the Giro d 'Italia and was aiming to become the first rider since Marco Pantani in 1998 to achieve the Giro @-@ Tour double . He was also aiming to hold all three Grand Tour titles simultaneously , having won the 2014 Vuelta a España . Thirteen days before the start of the Tour , Contador won the Route du Sud , defeating Quintana by seventeen seconds . Quintana placed second in the 2013 Tour , winning the mountains and young rider classifications . He was absent in 2014 as he concentrated on the 2014 Giro d 'Italia , which he won . His major victory of the 2015 season was the Tirreno – Adriatico . The defending champion Nibali was considered a contender , although his best result of the season was tenth in the Tour de Romandie , and placed thirteenth at the Dauphiné . 
 The sprinters considered favourites for the points classification and wins on the flat or hilly bunch sprint finishes were Alexander Kristoff ( Team Katusha ) , Mark Cavendish ( Etixx – Quick @-@ Step ) , Andre Greipel ( Lotto – Soudal ) , Peter Sagan ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) and John Degenkolb ( Giant – Alpecin ) . Kristoff and Cavendish both showed their form during the season coming into the Tour , with eighteen and twelve wins , respectively . Greipel was also a contender , spearheaded by his sprint train , much like Cavendish . Three @-@ time consecutive winner of the points classification Sagan was expected to have a hard time repeating as winner due to the changes in the classification 's point structure and also due to the fact he had to ride in support of Contador . Degenkolb , who won the one @-@ day classic races Milan – San Remo and Paris – Roubaix in the season , would take the lead of the Giant – Alpecin team due to the absence of the 2014 Tour 's four @-@ stage winner Marcel Kittel , who was not selected due to lack of fitness . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 On 8 November 2013 , the ASO announced Utrecht would host the 2015 edition 's Grand Départ ( the Tour 's opening stages ) . It was the sixth time the Tour had started in the Netherlands , a record for a country outside France . The previous five were : 1954 , in Amsterdam ; 1973 , in Scheveningen ; 1978 , in Leiden ; 1996 , in ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch ; and 2010 , in Rotterdam . Utrecht paid the ASO a reported € 4m to host the Grand Départ . The full route of the Tour was unveiled on 22 October 2014 at the Palais des Congrès in Paris . 
 After the first stage in Utrecht , the second stage left the city to finish in the region of Zeeland in the south of the Netherlands . The third began in Antwerp , Belgium , and concluded at the Mur de Huy , a steep climb known for its inclusion in the one @-@ day classic race La Flèche Wallonne . Stage four started in Seraing , before ending in Cambrai , France ; it featured seven cobbled sectors with a combined distance of 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) . Stages five to nine crossed northern France westwards , beginning in the region of Nord @-@ Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais and ending in Brittany . The riders then took an air transfer to the south of the country for next three stages through the Pyrenees , which include the Tour 's most climbed mountain , the Col du Tourmalet , on stage eleven . Stages 13 to 16 formed a continuous four @-@ stage journey that navigated eastwards to the Alps . Four stages took place in and around the mountain range , before a second air transfer taking the Tour back to the north east to finish with the Champs @-@ Élysées stage in Paris . The Tour included six new start or finish locations : Utrecht , in stage 1 ; Zeeland , in stage 2 ; <unk> , in stage 7 ; La Pierre Saint @-@ Martin , in stage 10 ; <unk> , in stage 13 ; and Sèvres , in stage 21 . 
 At the announcement of the route , the race director Christian Prudhomme described it as " <unk> " ( English : " untypical " ) , adding " If you do not climb , you will not win the Tour in 2015 . " The most noticeable differences were the lack of time trial kilometers and the mountainous terrain . There were 21 stages in the race , covering a total distance of 3 @,@ 360 @.@ 3 km ( 2 @,@ 088 mi ) , 298 @.@ 7 km ( 185 @.@ 6 mi ) shorter than the 2014 Tour . The longest race stage was the fourth at 223 @.@ 5 km ( 139 mi ) , and stage 21 the shortest at 110 @.@ 5 km ( 69 mi ) . The opening individual time trial was 13 @.@ 8 km ( 8 @.@ 6 mi ) – although it was too long to be classified a prologue – and the team time trial on stage 9 was 28 km ( 17 @.@ 4 mi ) . Stages 3 and 8 , although officially classified flat , finished at the Mur de Huy and Mûr @-@ de @-@ Bretagne respectively , whilst the hilly stage 14 ended at the Côte de la Croix Neuve . There were seven stages defined as mountainous , six of which had summit finishes : stage 10 , to La Pierre Saint @-@ Martin ; stage 11 , to Cauterets ; stage 12 , to Plateau de Beille ; stage 17 , to Pra Loup ; stage 19 , to La Toussuire - Les Sybelles ; and stage 20 , to Alpe d 'Huez ) . On 25 June , it was announced that due to a landslide , the route of stage twenty would be changed , bypassing the Col du Galibier and instead climbing the Col de la Croix de Fer . The stage distance , however , remained intact . The rest days were after stage 9 , in Pau , and 16 , in Gap . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The race 's opening individual time trial stage in Utrecht was won by Rohan Dennis of BMC Racing Team by a margin of five seconds over Etixx – Quick @-@ Step 's Tony Martin , with Trek Factory Racing 's Fabian Cancellara a further second down . Dennis set the record for the fastest average speed in a time trial at the Tour , with 55 @.@ 446 km / h ( 34 @.@ 5 mph ) . His win put him in the race leader 's yellow jersey . On stage two , crosswinds along the coastal route to the finish in Zeeland caused the peloton ( the main group ) to split into echelons , resulting in time gaps between riders . The stage ended in a bunch sprint , won by André Greipel , putting him in the green jersey as the leader of the points classification . Dennis was in a group that finished one minute twenty @-@ eight seconds in arrears . Cancellara finished third placed in the stage and took the race lead , profiting from a time bonus missed by Martin , who came in ninth . The general classification favourites that gained time from being in the leading group of twenty @-@ six were Chris Froome , Alberto Contador and Tejay Van Garderen ; the other favourites finished in the same group as Dennis . On the third stage , the race was neutralised following a major crash 58 km ( 36 mi ) from the finish which put six of riders out of the race , including Cancellara . The peloton continued to the final climb , the Mur de Huy , where Joaquim Rodríguez held off Froome to take the stage by one second . Rodríguez was awarded the first the polka dot jersey as the leader of the mountains classification and Froome took the yellow , while also gaining time over the other general classification favourites . It was the third day in succession Martin ended in second place overall , and to three different riders . The partially cobbled fourth stage saw Martin take the victory and the yellow jersey with an attack on the lead group 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) from the finish in Cambrai . 
 On the fifth stage , a bunch sprint occurred and Greipel got the better of it by beating Peter Sagan and Mark Cavendish , respectively . In the sixth stage , Zdeněk Štybar of Etixx – Quick @-@ <unk> after escaping on the concluding small ascent in the port city of Le Havre . A crash in the final kilometer forced Martin to abandon the Tour with a broken collarbone , the second yellow jersey wearer to surrender after Cancellara . A record was set after the stage , with Daniel Teklehaimanot becoming the first black African to lead the mountains classification . Although Froome now led the race , no rider wore the yellow jersey on stage seven as Martin had finished the stage and earned the right to wear it . Cavendish won the seventh from a bunch sprint in Fougères , Brittany . Froome was awarded the yellow jersey after the stage . Stage eight , finishing atop the Mûr @-@ de @-@ Bretagne , saw the first French victory of the Tour , with AG2R La Mondiale rider Alexis Vuillermoz launching an attack inside the final kilometer to take the victory . The general classification favourites finished together except Vincenzo Nibali who lost ten seconds . Sagan moved into the green jersey . BMC Racing Team won stage nine 's team time trial by one second over Team Sky . The squad of Nairo Quintana , Movistar Team , came in third , four seconds in arrears . Alberto Contador 's Tinkoff – Saxo in fourth , twenty @-@ eight seconds down , and Nibali 's Astana following , a further seven seconds behind . The first rest day took place the following day in Pau . 
 Stage ten was the race 's first arrival at altitude with the finish at La Pierre Saint @-@ Martin in the Pyrenees . The day 's breakaway was caught and passed on the final climb by a select group . Froome attacked with 6 @.@ 4 km ( 4 mi ) remaining to take the win , with teammate Richie Porte and Quintana a minute in arrears . The stage saw time gaps open up across the general classification leaders . The biggest loser was Nibali , who came in twenty @-@ first , over four minutes behind Froome , who increased his lead to second placed Tejay van Garderen to two minutes and fifty @-@ two seconds . Froome took the polka dot jersey and Greipel the green . Stage eleven was another mountainous stage ; it was won by Rafał Majka ( Tinkoff – Saxo ) , who was part of the early breakaway and attacked on the slopes of the Col du Tourmalet . He soloed across the line in Cauterets one minute ahead of second @-@ placed Dan Martin ( Cannondale – Garmin ) . The green jersey returned to Sagan . Rodríguez gained his second victory of the race on stage twelve ; he was part of an early twenty @-@ two rider breakaway that reached the final climb to Plateau de Beille . Froome kept his lead intact . 
 Stage thirteen saw the escapees being brought inside the one kilometer to go marker ( known as the flamme rouge ) . Greg Van Avermaet of BMC Racing Team took the uphill victory ahead of the chasing Sagan . On stage fourteen , a twenty @-@ four rider breakaway reached the final climb , the Côte de la Croix Neuve . After the breakaway had fractured , Thibaut Pinot and Romain Bardet led over the summit , before Steve Cummings of MTN – Qhubeka overtook them to take the victory at <unk> Airport on the plateau above Mende . Sagan was part of the breakaway , amassing maximum points at the intermediate sprint . Over four minutes after Cummings had finished , Froome outsprinted Quintana while the other general classification favourites were slightly distanced . Quintana moved into second place overall , displacing Van Garderen . Stage fifteen had for principal difficulty the Col de l <unk> climb , which saw most of the sprinters succeeding at passing the climb in the lead group , with the notable exception of Cavendish . Greipel won his third stage of the Tour , followed by John Degenkolb and Alexander Kristoff , respectively . On the next stage , featuring the Col de Manse as the final climb , Rubén Plaza ( Lampre – Merida ) escaped the leading group of breakaway riders on the ascent . Sagan chased him down the descent , but to no avail as Plaza soloed to victory in Gap . The next day was the second rest day , spent in Gap . 
 Stage seventeen , the first of four Alpine stages , saw third placed overall Van Garderen withdraw from the race with illness . The stage was won by Giant – Alpecin 's Simon Geschke , who escaped from the breakaway with under 50 km ( 31 mi ) remaining to win in Pra Loup . Fifth placed overall Contador crashed on the descent of the Col d 'Allos , losing over two minutes to race leader Froome . On stage eighteen , Bardet attacked the breakaway close to the summit of the Col du <unk> and opened a gap on descent before riding solo to victory in Saint @-@ Jean @-@ de @-@ Maurienne . Bardet moved up to tenth overall and became joint first with Rodríguez in the mountains classification , displacing Froome . In stage nineteen , Nibali broke away from the general classification group close to the summit of the Col de la Croix de Fer to bridge and pass the breakway group and win at La Toussuire - Les Sybelles . Quintana came in second , forty @-@ four seconds later , with Froome coming in a further thirty . In the Tour 's penultimate stage , a select group of riders attacked on the Col de la Croix de Fer and made it to the finish on Alpe d ’ <unk> , where they met the disintegrate early breakaway . Pinot attacked passed the breakaways to take the victory ahead of the encroaching Quintana , who came in second after attacking the chasing general classification group on the Alpe . Quintana gained a margin of eighty seconds over Froome , but it was not enough and had to settle for second place overall . 
 The final stage in Paris was won by Greipel , his fourth victory of this year 's Tour . Froome finished the race to claim his second Tour de France , becoming the first British rider to win the race on two occasions . He beat second @-@ placed Quintana by seventy @-@ two seconds , with his Movistar Team teammate Alejandro Valverde third . Froome also claimed the mountains classification , the first time a rider had won both since Eddy Merckx in 1970 . Although he failed to win any stages during the race , Sagan won his fourth consecutive points classification with a total of 432 , 66 ahead of Greipel in second . The best young rider was Quintana , followed by Bardet and Giant – Alpecin 's Warren Barguil , respectively . Movistar Team finished as the winners of the team classification , over fifty @-@ seven minutes ahead of second @-@ placed Team Sky . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 There were four main individual classifications contested in the 2015 Tour de France , as well as a team competition . The most important was the general classification , which was calculated by adding each rider 's finishing times on each stage . The rider with the least accumulated time is the race leader , identified by the yellow jersey ; the winner of this classification was considered the winner of the Tour . Time bonuses returned to the Tour for the first time since the 2008 edition . For all stage finishes , excluding the two time trial stages , the three first finishers of stages earned bonuses of 10 , 6 and 4 seconds respectively . Of the reintroduction , race director Christian Prudhomme said : " We want to open up the race , we want the race to be decided on any day of the Tour . " If a crash happened within the final 3 km ( 1 @.@ 9 mi ) of a stage ; this did not include the time trials and summit finishes , the riders involved received the same time as the group they were in when the crash occurred . Rain on the final stage forced the final times of the general classification to be taken on the first crossing of the finish line before the ten laps of the cobbled Champs @-@ Élysées . Riders were required to cross the finish line on the final lap to receive their times . 
 The points classification leader was identified with a green jersey . Riders received points for finishing among the highest placed in a stage finish , or in intermediate sprints during the stage . The points system was also changed . A stage win was worth 50 points instead of 45 , second place awarded 30 instead of 35 and third 20 instead of 30 . The sprint points rule change aimed to make a stage win more valuable . The points available for each stage finish were determined by the " coefficient " ranking scale . The new system was in effect only on the Tour 's six stages classified as flat ( stages 2 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 15 and 21 ) . On seven stages ( the cobble stage and six hillier stages , namely stages 3 , 4 , 8 , 10 , 13 , 14 and 16 ) the rider who won received 30 points , 25 for the second rider , and so on . For the mountain stages ( stages 11 , 12 , 17 , 18 , 19 , 20 ) and the individual time trial ( stage 1 ) , the winner received 20 points . No points were awarded on stage nine 's team time trial . 
 No changes were made to the mountains classification , where points were awarded to the riders that reached the top of the most difficult ascents first . The climbs were categorised as either hors catégorie ( English : beyond category ) , first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorised climbs . The overall leader wore a polka dot jersey . Double points were awarded on the summit finishes on stages 10 , 12 , 17 , 19 and 20 . 
 The young rider classification , denoted by a white jersey , was calculated the same way as the general classification , but the classification was restricted to riders who were born on or after 1 January 1990 . The team classification was calculated using the finishing times of the best three riders per team on each stage ( not the team time @-@ trial ) ; the leading team was the team with the lowest cumulative time . The number of stage victories and placings per team determined the outcome of a tie . The riders in the team that lead this classification were identified with yellow number bibs on the back of their jerseys and yellow helmets . In addition , there was a combativity award , given after each stage to the rider considered , by a jury , to have " made the greatest effort and who has demonstrated the best qualities of sportsmanship " . No combativity awards were given for the time trials and the final stage . The winner wore a red number bib the following stage . At the conclusion of the Tour , Romain Bardet won the overall super @-@ combativity award . 
 A total of € 2 @,@ 030 @,@ 150 was awarded in cash prizes in the race . The overall winner of the general classification received € 450 @,@ 000 , with the second and third placed riders getting € 200 @,@ 000 and € 100 @,@ 000 respectively ; all finishers of the race were awarded with money . The holders of the classifications benefited on each stage they lead ; the final winners of the points and mountains were given € 25 @,@ 000 , while the best young rider and most combative rider got € 20 @,@ 000 . Team prizes were available , with € 10 @,@ 000 for the team time trial and € 50 @,@ 000 for the winners of the team classification . € 8 @,@ 000 was given to the winners of each stage of the race . There were also two special awards each with a prize of € 5000 , the Souvenir Jacques Goddet , given to the first rider to pass Goddet 's memorial at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet in stage eleven , and the Souvenir Henri Desgrange , given to first rider to pass the summit of the highest climb in the Tour . The Souvenir Henri Desgrange was originally to be on the Col du Galibier in stage twenty , but due to a route change it was replaced with the Col d 'Allos in stage seventeen . Rafał Majka won the Jacques Goddet and Simon Geschke the Henri Desgrange . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = UCI World Tour rankings = = 
 The race was the eighteenth of the twenty @-@ eight events in the UCI World Tour , with riders from the WorldTeams competing individually for points that contributed towards the rankings . Points were awarded to the top twenty finishers in the general classification and to the top five finishers in each stage . The 338 points accrued by Chris Froome moved him up to second in the individual ranking , behind Alejandro Valverde . Despite Movistar Team 's strong showing , Team Sky took over the lead of the team ranking due to Froome 's points . With three riders in the top ten Spain remained the leaders of the nations ranking . 
 = Guilty Gear Isuka = 
 Guilty Gear Isuka ( Japanese : ギルティギア <unk> , Hepburn : Giruti Gia Isuka ) is a 2D fighting video game developed by Arc System Works and published by Sammy Corporation . Announced by Arc in September , it was first released on December 17 , 2003 in Japanese arcades as the sixth installment of the Guilty Gear series . Later , the game was ported for a release on the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) , Xbox , and Windows in Japan . The PS2 version was brought to North America by Sammy , and , in Europe , the home console version was released by 505 Game Street and the PC version by Zoo Digital Publishing . 
 While the gameplay remained almost the same as in previous titles , the game introduced a four @-@ player battle mode , and the PS2 version included new features to the series , including a scrolling adventure , a customization mode , and two new characters . Guilty Gear Isuka received mixed critical reviews . It was praised for its visual , music and customization features . However , although some aspects of the new gameplay — such as the two fighting planes and the turn button — were praised as original , their implementation was criticized . The removal of features present in previous titles was also not well received by critics . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = Combat system = = = 
 The basic gameplay system of Guilty Gear Isuka is like the other games in the series . The game uses a four attack button configuration that consists of punch , kick , slash , and high slash . Unlike previous games , it features a " turn " button , since a character does not automatically turn around if its opponent moves to the other side of the screen . Each character ( or team ) starts a fight with at least a " soul " ; when a character life bar is emptied , its life is filled while the player lost a soul . If the life is depleted when the player has no souls , it is defeated . It also features previous installments features like the tension gauge , which allows the player to perform super moves , and the burst gauge , which allows the player to break combinations and super moves . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 The game introduces a four @-@ player option in Versus Mode , giving a player four characters who can fight two @-@ on @-@ two , three @-@ on @-@ one or everyone @-@ for @-@ themselves . There are two fighting planes , one in the foreground and the other behind it . 
 Another innovation was Boost Mode : a two @-@ player , side @-@ scrolling , arcade @-@ style beat ' em up mode not included in the arcade version , in which a player fights enemy waves to accumulate items , health and experience . For the Xbox , this mode was adapted for online play with Xbox Live , supporting up to 16 players . Experience points from Boost Mode can be used in the new Robo @-@ Ky II Factory mode , in which a player can customize a robot named Robo @-@ Ky II by teaching him moves , combos , or one of 65 special attacks from other characters . In addition to the attacks , other aspects such as jump height , offense , defense , recovery time , tension , and speed can be improved . 
 The game also features other modes : Color Edit , a palette swap editor that allows the player to customize nearly every aspect of the characters , including buckles and hair ; Training , in which a player can practice with ( and against ) computer @-@ controlled opponents and Arcade , similar to the survival mode featured in other fighting games . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Guilty Gear Isuka features twenty playable characters in its arcade version : Anji Mito , Axl Low , Baiken , Bridget , Chipp Zanuff , Dizzy , Eddie , Faust , I @-@ No , Jam Kuradoberi , Johnny , Ky Kiske , May , Millia Rage , Potemkin , Slayer , Sol Badguy , Testament , Venom , and Zappa . Three characters were added to the PlayStation 2 edition : <unk> , Robo @-@ Ky , and Robo @-@ Ky II . 
 = = Development and release = = 
 In September 2003 , Sammy Corporation announced that a new game dubbed Guilty Gear X Series The <unk> Version would be featured at the Japan Amusement Machinery Manufacturers Association ( JAMMA ) arcade show ; at the show , the company revealed that Guilty Gear Isuka would be the game 's name . " In Guilty Gear Isuka we want to satisfy existing fighter fans with new content and never @-@ before @-@ seen innovations . We also want to reach out to mainstream fans to show them that , right now , the envelope in fighting games is also being pushed in two dimensions " , declared Tim <unk> , senior VP of Sammy Studios , Inc . A PlayStation 2 version of the game was announced to be in development on March 3 , 2004 . An August 24 announcement said that the game would be compatible with Xbox . 
 Guilty Gear Isuka was released in Japan on December 17 , 2003 by Sammy for the <unk> arcade cabinets , followed by the PlayStation 2 version on July 29 , 2004 . An Xbox version was released by Arc System Works on December 16 , 2004 , and Sourcenext released the game for Windows on November 25 , 2005 . In North America , Guilty Gear Isuka was released by Sammy for PlayStation 2 on November 2 , 2004 . In Europe , 505 Games Street released it on June 16 , 2005 for PlayStation 2 , and the PC version was released on April 7 , 2006 by Zoo Digital Publishing ( now Zushi Games ) . In 2007 , the game was made compatible with Xbox 360 . DotEmu also released Guilty Gear Isuka on its DRM @-@ free shop in April 2011 . On January 16 , 2014 , the game was released on the Steam digital distribution platform for Windows PCs . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Guilty Gear Isuka was the 176th @-@ bestselling Japanese title in 2004 , with 74 @,@ 270 copies sold for PlayStation 2 as of December 26 . It was " Best Fighting Game " at the Best of E3 2004 Awards from IGN , and was nominated for " Best Sequel Fighting " at the 2004 National Academy of Video Game Testers and Reviewers ( <unk> ) Awards . The game received mixed reviews from critics , with a score of 75 @.@ 56 % at GameRankings and 73 / 100 at Metacritic . Allgame 's Damian Francis gave the game three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five ; Famitsu 's four reviewers scored it 7 , 7 , 6 , and 7 ( out of 10 ) respectively , with a total score of 27 out of 40 . 
 Although the introduction of two planes and the turning button were considered good ideas in theory , both features were heavily criticized by reviewers . Jeremy Dunham of IGN , Manny LaMancha of GamePro and Benjamin Turner of GameSpy felt it difficult to fight one @-@ on @-@ one when a player can start a cat @-@ and @-@ mouse game , while GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin and Brian Gee of Game Revolution found the features to cause " chaos " . Turner said it deprived the player of the ability " to have a normal Guilty Gear X2 @-@ style match " , and Dunham said the computer reacted faster . David Smith of 1UP.com called it an " irrational control scheme " . The perceived poor execution of its new features led GameSpy to give it a special " It <unk> Good on Paper " award . 
 Conversely , other additions received more positive feedback . Dunham called the Boost and Factory modes " intriguing distractions " , while Turner praised the latter for " much depth and nuance " , unreached by other games . Kasavin said the Boost Mode gets boring quickly due to the lack of an objective ; though Kasavin declared that the Factory Mode " is quite possibly the most interesting part of the gameplay " , he criticized how it depends on playing " a mindless side @-@ scroller over and over . " The new backgrounds were commended by Dunham , Kasavin and Smith , with the latter saying that Sammy should have saved them for a better game . 
 The maintenance of aspects from previous titles , including its animation and soundtrack , was praised by Kasavin , Turner , and Gee . Its soundtrack was said to be " the best score in the franchise so far " by Dunham , and was rated among video game soundtracks which " never got the recognition they truly deserve " by Siliconera . LaMancha , however , criticized a lack of improvement of its animation and music compared to its gameplay . The removal of other features from previous titles was criticized : Dunham and Kasavin complained about the lack of a story mode , while Joe Juba of Game Informer said the series had a " magic " until Isuka , criticizing the new additions and the absence of a traditional arcade mode . Isuka was well @-@ rated on balance , but considered inferior to the previous Guilty Gear X2 # Reload . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Guilty Gear Isuka Original Soundtrack ( ギルティギア イスカ オリジナルサウンドトラック , Giruti Gia Isuka Orijinaru Saundotorakku ) , composed by Daisuke Ishiwatari , Tetsuya Ohuchi and Yoshihiro Kusano , arranged by Ohuchi and Kusano , was released on CD by Team Entertainment on April 21 , 2004 . An additional edition was released on iTunes on November 23 , 2005 ; it contains six more tracks , <unk> 26 tracks . 
 It was well received by critics ; Don Kotowski and Harry of Square Enix Music Online rated it 8 out of 10 . Kotowski said Ishiwatari is the mainstream in the soundtrack , while Ohuchi and Kusano " somewhat disappoint " , qualifying it as " a great album " in overall . Harry said the only thing bad about this album is its " too short " length . Writing for the same site , a reviewer dubbed GoldfishX rated it 7 out of 10 , citing " it lacks the depth of previous entries in the series . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Ichijinsha released two Guilty Gear Isuka manga adaptations under its DNA Media Comics line . The first one , titled Guilty Gear Isuka 4 Koma Kings ( ギルティギア イスカ <unk> , Giruti Gia Isuka Yon Koma <unk> ) , is a yonkoma series released on February 25 , 2004 . The other series is an anthology titled Guilty Gear Isuka Comic Anthology ( ギルティギア イスカ コミックアンソロジー , Giruti Gia Isuka Komikku Ansorojī ) , which was released on March 25 of the same year . Subsequently , on March 30 , Guilty Gear Isuka Outlive Encyclopedia ( <unk> , Giruti Gia Isuka <unk> <unk> ) was released by Enterbrain . It is an encyclopedia compiled by Monthly Arcadia , a Enterbrain magazine , which was released along with a DVD with commentaries on the game features . Two guidebooks were released by SoftBank Creative ; Guilty Gear Isuka Technical Guide ( ギルティギア イスカ <unk> , <unk> Gaido ) and Guilty Gear Isuka Complete Guide ( ギルティギア イスカ <unk> , Konpurīto Gaido ) were published on August 9 , and on September 6 , 2004 , respectively . 
 = Quantock Hills = 
 The Quantock Hills is a range of hills west of Bridgwater in Somerset , England . The Quantock Hills were England 's first Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty , being designated in 1956 , and consist of large amounts of heathland , oak woodlands , ancient parklands and agricultural land . 
 Natural England have designated the Quantock Hills as national character area 144 . They are entirely surrounded by NCA 146 : the Vale of Taunton and Quantock Fringes . 
 The hills run from the Vale of Taunton Deane in the south , for about 15 miles ( 24 km ) to the north @-@ west , ending at Kilve and West Quantoxhead on the coast of the Bristol Channel . They form the western border of Sedgemoor and the Somerset Levels . From the top of the hills on a clear day , it is possible to see Glastonbury Tor and the Mendips to the east , Wales as far as the Gower Peninsula to the north , the Brendon Hills and Exmoor to the west , and the Blackdown Hills to the south . The highest point on the Quantocks is Wills Neck , at 1 @,@ 261 feet ( 384 m ) . Soil types and weather combine to support the hills ' plants and animals . In 1970 an area of 6 @,@ 194 @.@ 5 acres ( 2 @,@ 506 @.@ 8 ha ) was designated as a Biological Site of Special Scientific Interest . 
 Archaeological landscape features include Bronze Age round barrows , extensive ancient field systems and Iron Age hill forts . Evidence from Roman times includes silver coins discovered in West Bagborough . The hills are now a peaceful area popular with walkers , mountain bikers , horse riders and tourists . They explore paths such as the Coleridge Way ( the poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge lived in Nether Stowey from 1797 to 1799 ) or visit places of interest in the surrounding villages . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The name first appears in Saxon charters in around AD 880 as <unk> and two centuries later in the Domesday Book as <unk> and <unk> . The name means settlement by a rim or circle of hills ; <unk> is Celtic for a rim or circle , and -ton or -tun is Old English for a settlement . The highest point of the hills is called Will 's Neck meaning ridge of the Welshman , probably referring to a time when the hills marked the boundary between the expanding Saxon kingdom of Wessex and the lands of the Britons or ' Welsh ' to the West . A battle was fought locally at that time . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Quantock Hills are largely formed by rocks of the Devonian period , which consist of sediments originally laid down under a shallow sea and slowly compressed into solid rock . In the higher north @-@ western areas older Early Devonian rocks known as Hangman Grits ( or , more formally , the Hangman Sandstone Formation ) predominate and can be seen in the exposed rock at West Quantoxhead quarry , which was worked for road building . The Hangman Grits are described in three divisions : the lowest are the Little Quantock Beds , which are located near Crowcombe , and made up of siltstones and slates . Between Triscombe and West Quantoxhead is a layer of the Triscombe Beds which is around 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) thick and is made up of green sandstone and mudstones . The uppermost division is the <unk> Combe Beds of sandstone and conglomerate and is approximately 300 metres ( 980 ft ) thick . 
 Further south there are newer Middle and Late Devonian rocks , known as Ilfracombe beds and Morte Slates . These include sandstone and limestone , which have been quarried near Aisholt . At Great Holwell , south of Aisholt , is the only limestone cave in the Devonian limestone of North Devon and West Somerset . The lower fringes around the hills are composed of younger New Red Sandstone rocks of the Triassic period . These rocks were laid down in a shallow sea and often contain irregular masses or veins of gypsum , which was mined on the foreshore at Watchet . 
 Several areas have outcrops of slates . Younger rocks of the Jurassic period can be found between St Audries and Kilve . This area falls within the Blue Anchor to <unk> Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) and is considered to be of international geological importance . 
 Kilve has the remains of a red @-@ brick retort built in 1924 after the shale in the cliffs was found to be rich in oil . Along this coast , the cliffs are layered with compressed strata of oil @-@ bearing shale and blue , yellow and brown Lias embedded with fossils . The <unk> Company was founded in 1924 to exploit these strata but was unable to raise sufficient capital . The company 's retort house is thought to be the first structure erected here for the conversion of shale to oil and is all that remains of the anticipated Somerset oil boom . 
 At Blue Anchor the coloured alabaster found in the cliffs gave rise to the name of the colour " Watchet Blue " . The village has the only updraught brick kiln known to have survived in Somerset . It was built around 1830 and was supplied by small vessels carrying limestone to the small landing jetty . Now used as a garage , the kiln is thought to have operated until the 1870s , when the large @-@ scale production of bricks in Bridgwater rendered small brickyards uneconomic . 
 <unk> tuff is a greenish @-@ grey , hard pyroclastic rock formed by the compression of volcanic ash and is found almost exclusively in the south @-@ eastern end of the Quantock Hills . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , the Quantock Hills has a temperate climate that is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) and shows a seasonal and a diurnal variation , but because of the modifying effect of the sea the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom ( UK ) . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months , with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . December is normally the most cloudy month and June the sunniest . High pressure over the Azores often brings clear skies to south @-@ west England , particularly in summer . 
 Cloud often forms inland especially near hills , and acts to reduce sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1 @,@ 600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds , and a large proportion of rain falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 31 to 35 inches ( 790 to 890 mm ) . About 8 to 15 days of snowfall is typical . From November to March , mean wind speeds are highest ; winds are lightest from June to August . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 In 1970 an area of 6 @,@ 194 @.@ 5 acres ( 2 @,@ 506 @.@ 8 ha ) in the Quantocks was designated as a Biological Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) . This a conservation designation denoting a protected area in the United Kingdom , selected by Natural England , for areas with particular landscape and ecological characteristics . It provides some protection from development , from other damage , and ( since 2000 ) also from neglect , under the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 . 
 The streams and open water such as <unk> Reservoir and Ashford Reservoir on Cannington Brook also provide habitats for a range of species . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The hilltops are covered in heathland of gorse , heather , bracken and thorn with plantations of conifer . The western side of the Quantocks are steep scarp slopes of pasture , woods and parkland . Deep stream @-@ cut combes to the north @-@ east contain extensive oak @-@ woods with small flower @-@ rich bogs above them . The areas where there is limited drainage are dominated by heather ( Calluna vulgaris ) , with significant populations of cross @-@ leaved heath ( Erica <unk> ) , purple moor @-@ grass ( Molinia caerulea ) , bilberry ( Vaccinium <unk> ) and wavy hair @-@ grass ( Deschampsia flexuosa ) . Drier areas are covered with bell heather ( Erica cinerea ) , western gorse ( Ulex gallii ) and bristle bent ( Agrostis curtisii ) , while bracken ( Pteridium aquilinum ) is common on well @-@ drained deeper soils . The springs and streams provide a specialist environment that supports bog <unk> ( <unk> tenella ) . The woodland is generally birch / sessile oak woodland , valley alder woodland and ash / wych elm woodland , which support a rich lichen flora . Alfoxton Wood is one of only three British locations where the lichen <unk> <unk> is present . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The various habitats , together with the wide range of slopes and aspects , provide ideal conditions for a rich fauna . Amphibians such as the palmate newt ( Triturus helveticus ) , common frog ( Rana <unk> ) , and common toad ( Bufo bufo ) are represented in the damper environments . Reptiles present include adder ( Vipera berus ) , grass snake ( Natrix natrix ) , slow worm ( <unk> fragilis ) and common lizard ( Lacerta vivipara ) . Many bird species breed on the Quantocks , including the grasshopper warbler ( Locustella naevia ) , nightjar ( Caprimulgus europaeus ) , raven ( Corvus corax ) and the European pied flycatcher ( Ficedula hypoleuca ) . The Quantocks are also an important site for red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) . Invertebrates of note include the silver @-@ washed fritillary butterfly ( Argynnis <unk> ) , and three nationally rare dead @-@ wood beetles : <unk> limbatus , <unk> undulata and <unk> ruficollis . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Evidence of activity in the Quantocks from prehistoric times includes finds of Mesolithic flints at North Petherton and Broomfield and many Bronze Age round barrows ( marked on maps as tumulus , plural tumuli ) , such as <unk> Barrow above <unk> . Several ancient stones can be seen , such as the Triscombe Stone and the Long Stone above Holford . Many of the tracks along ridges of the Quantocks probably originated as ancient <unk> . A Bronze Age hill fort , Norton Camp , was built to the south at Norton Fitzwarren , close to the centre of bronze making in Taunton . 
 Iron Age sites in the Quantocks include major hill forts at Dowsborough and Ruborough , as well as several smaller earthwork enclosures , such as Trendle Ring and <unk> Camp . Ruborough near Broomfield is on an easterly spur from the main Quantock ridge , with steep natural slopes to the north and south east . The fort is triangular in shape , with a single rampart and ditch ( univallate ) , enclosing 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) . A linear outer work about 131 yards ( 120 m ) away , parallel to the westerly rampart , encloses another 4 acres ( 16 @,@ 000 m2 ) . The name Ruborough comes from <unk> <unk> or Ruwan @-@ <unk> meaning Rough Hill . The Dowsborough fort has an oval shape , with a single rampart and ditch ( univallate ) following the contours of the hill top , enclosing an area of 7 acres ( 2 @.@ 8 ha ) . The main entrance is to the east , towards Nether Stowey , with a simpler opening to the north west , aligned with a <unk> leading down to Holford . A col to the south connects the hill to the main Stowey ridge , where a linear earthwork known as Dead Woman 's Ditch cuts across the spur . 
 Little evidence exists of Roman influence on the Quantock region beyond isolated finds and hints of transient forts . A Roman port was at Combwich , and it is possible that a Roman road ran from there to the Quantocks , because the names Nether Stowey and Over Stowey come from the Old English stan wey , meaning stone way . In October 2001 the West Bagborough Hoard of 4th @-@ century Roman silver was discovered in West Bagborough . The 681 coins included two denarii from the early 2nd century , and eight <unk> and 671 siliqua dating to 337 – 367 AD . The majority were struck in the reigns of emperors Constantius II and Julian and derive from a range of mints including Arles and Lyons in France , Trier in Germany and Rome . 
 = = = Dark Ages and Anglo @-@ Saxon = = = 
 The area remained under Romano @-@ British Celtic control until 681 – 685 AD , when Centwine of Wessex pushed west from the River Parrett , conquered the Welsh King Cadwaladr , and occupied the rest of Somerset north to the Bristol Channel . Saxon rule was later consolidated under King Ine , who established a fort at Taunton in about 700 AD . 
 The first documentary evidence of the village of Crowcombe is by Æthelwulf of Wessex in 854 , where it was spelt ' <unk> ' . At that time the manor belonged to Glastonbury Abbey . In the later Saxon period , King Alfred led the resistance to Viking invasion from Athelney , south @-@ east of the Quantocks . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , the early port at Watchet was plundered by Danes in 987 and 997 . Alfred established a series of forts and lookout posts linked by a military road , or herepath , so his army could cover Viking movements at sea . The herepath has a characteristic form that is familiar on the Quantocks : a regulation 66 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) wide track between avenues of trees growing from hedge laying embankments . The herepath ran from the ford on the River Parrett at Combwich , past Cannington hill fort to Over Stowey , where it climbed the Quantocks along the line of the current Stowey road , to Crowcombe Park Gate . Then it went south along the ridge , to Triscombe Stone . One branch may have led past Lydeard Hill and Buncombe Hill , back to Alfred 's base at Athelney . The main branch descended the hills at Triscombe , then along the avenue to Red Post Cross , and west to the Brendon Hills and Exmoor . There is some evidence that an area of the hills known as Quantock Common may have been a Saxon Royal Forest . 
 = = = Medieval = = = 
 After the Norman conquest of England in 1066 William de Moyon was given land at Dunster , Broomfield and West Quantoxhead , his son becoming William de Mohun of Dunster , 1st Earl of Somerset , while William Malet received Enmore . East Quantoxhead was given to the Luttrells ( previously spelled de <unk> ) , who passed the manor down through descendants into the 20th century . A <unk> also became the Earl of Carhampton and acquired Dunster Castle in 1376 , holding it until it became a National Trust property in 1976 . 
 Stowey Castle at Nether Stowey was built in the 11th century . The castle is sited on a small isolated knoll , about 390 ft ( 119 m ) high . It consisted of a square keep ( which may have been stone , or a wooden superstructure on stone foundations ) and its defences and an outer and an inner bailey . The mount is 29 ft ( 9 m ) above the 6 ft ( 2 m ) wide ditch which itself is 7 ft ( 2 m ) deep . The motte has a flat top with two large and two small mounds , which may be sites of towers , at the edge . The blue lias rubble walling is the only visible structural remains of the castle , which stand on a conical earthwork with a ditch approximately 820 ft ( 250 m ) in circumference . The castle was destroyed in the 15th century , which may have been as a penalty for the local Lord Audley 's involvement in the Second Cornish Uprising of 1497 led by Perkin Warbeck against the taxes of Henry VII . Some of the stone was used in the building of Stowey Court in the village . 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 There was very little action on the Quantocks during the English Civil War . Sir John Stawell of Cothelstone was a leading Royalist . When Taunton fell to parliamentary troops and was held by Robert Blake , he attacked Stawell at Bishops Lydeard and imprisoned him . After the restoration Charles II conferred the title of Baron Stawell on Blake 's son Ralph . A group of Clubmen met at Triscombe in 1645 and petitioned parliament calling for peace through negotiation . 
 At the end of the Monmouth Rebellion of 1685 , ( also known as the Pitchfork Rebellion ) , many participants were executed in the Quantocks . The rebellion was an attempt to overthrow the King of England , James II , who became king when his elder brother , Charles II , died on 6 February 1685 . James II was unpopular because he was Roman Catholic , and many people were opposed to a " papist " king . James Scott , 1st Duke of Monmouth , claimed to be rightful heir to the throne and attempted to displace James II . The rebellion ended with the defeat of Monmouth 's forces at the Battle of Sedgemoor on 6 July 1685 . Monmouth was executed for treason on 15 July , and many of his supporters were executed , including some by hanging at Nether Stowey and Cothelstone , or transported in the Bloody Assizes of Judge Jeffreys . 
 Dodington was the site of the Buckingham Mine where copper was extracted . The mine was established before 1725 and followed earlier exploration at Perry Hill , East Quantoxhead . It was financed by the Marquis of Buckingham until 1801 when it was closed , until various attempts were made to reopen it during the 19th century . 
 In 1724 the 14th century spire of the Church of the Holy Ghost in Crowcombe was damaged by a lightning strike . The top section of the spire was removed and is now planted in the churchyard , and stone from the spire was used in the flooring of the church . Inside the church , carved bench @-@ ends dating from 1534 depict such pagan subjects as the Green Man and the legend of the men of Crowcombe fighting a two @-@ headed dragon . 
 Norton Fitzwarren was the site of a boat lift on the now unused section of the Grand Western Canal from 1839 to 1867 . A 300 @-@ person prisoner of war camp built here during World War II housed Italian prisoners from the Western Desert Campaign and German prisoners from the Battle of Normandy . 
 = = Walking Routes = = 
 Poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge lived in Nether Stowey in the Quantocks from 1797 to 1799 . In his memory a footpath , The Coleridge Way , was set up by the Exmoor park authorities . The 36 @-@ mile ( 58 km ) route begins in Nether Stowey and crosses the Quantocks , the Brendon Hills and Exmoor before finishing in Porlock . 
 The Quantock Greenway is a footpath that opened in 2001 . The route of the path follows a figure of eight centred on Triscombe . The northern loop , taking in Crowcombe and Holford , is 19 miles ( 31 km ) long , and the southern loop to Broomfield extends for 18 miles ( 29 km ) . The path travels through many types of landscape , including deciduous and coniferous woodland , private parkland , grazed pasture and cropped fields . 
 The Macmillan Way West follows the Quantocks ridge for several miles . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The Quantock Hills were designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( AONB ) in 1956 , the first such designation in England under the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . Notice of the intention to create the AONB under The Quantock Hills Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty ( Designation ) Order , 1956 was published in the London Gazette on 7 February 1956 . Since responsibility for the Quantock AONB is shared between the County Council and three District Councils The Quantock Hills Joint Advisory Committee was set up in 1973 and is responsible for drawing up management plans for the Quantocks . 
 The charity Friends of Quantock is both a Quantock landowner and a conservation pressure group . 
 Many of the villages on the Quantocks have their own parish councils , which have some responsibility for local issues . They also elect councillors to Somerset County Council and one of the three District Councils which cover the area , Taunton Deane , West Somerset or Sedgemoor . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 There is no single owner of the open land on the Quantocks . Major landowners include the Forestry Commission , The National Trust , the Fairfield Estate , Somerset County Council and Friends of Quantock . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The film Pandaemonium ( 2000 ) , based on the lives of Wordsworth and Coleridge , much of it filmed on the hills . 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 The poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge lived here for three years from 1797 , while he wrote The Rime of the Ancient Mariner ( written in 1797 – 98 and published in 1798 ) , part of Christabel ( the first part was reputedly written in 1797 , and the second in 1800 ) , Frost at Midnight , and Kubla Khan ( completed in 1797 and published in 1816 ) . 
 Poet William Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy lived at Alfoxton House in Holford between July 1797 and June 1798 , during the time of their friendship with Coleridge . 
 In 1913 , the poet Edward Thomas wrote a prose account of a bicycle journey to the Quantocks , published in 1914 as " In Pursuit of Spring " . 
 The poet Henry Newbolt lived in Aisholt in the 1920s . 
 Virginia and Leonard Woolf spent a few days of their honeymoon at The Plough Inn , Holford , before continuing to the continent in 1912 . They returned about a year later to try to help Virginia recover from one of her recurring nervous breakdowns . 
 Charles Williams visited Aisholt and wrote a poem there . 
 The opening of John le Carré 's novel Tinker , Tailor , Soldier , Spy ( 1974 ) is set in the Quantocks . 
 Anne Ridler visited Aisholt many times and wrote a poem titled ′ Aisholt Revisited ′ . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , English novelist Ruth Elwin Harris wrote her Quantock Quartet , a set of novels centred on four sisters growing up around the Quantock Hills during the early 20th century . 
 = = = Art = = = 
 A number of artists spent time on the Quantocks in the 1860s , many of them lodging at Halsway Manor . They are sometimes referred to as the <unk> . They include John William North , George John <unk> and Frederick Walker . 
 A more recent Painter of the Quantocks was Paul Johnson who was a resident artist . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The video to the Bryan Adams hit " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " was filmed in the landscape of Holford and Kilve . 
 <unk> 's album Hand <unk> ( 2006 ) features a track titled " Quantock " . 
 " Checking out the Quantocks " , is a line from Half Man Half Biscuit 's song " Joy Division Oven Gloves " , from their album Achtung Bono . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 The Doctor Who episode " Shada " ( 1980 ) makes a sidelong reference to this region – the Fourth Doctor ( played by Tom Baker ) claims that walking through the Time Vortex " is a little trick I learned from a space @-@ time mystic in the Quantocks " . 
 The Quantocks are the setting for the final episodes of the third and eighth series ( 2006 and 2012 ) of Peep Show . 
 = = Places of interest = = 
 Coleridge Cottage is a cottage situated in Nether Stowey . It was constructed in the 17th century as a building containing a parlour , kitchen and service room on the ground floor and three corresponding bed chambers above . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II * listed building . 
 Having served for many years as Moore 's Coleridge Cottage Inn , the building was acquired for the nation in 1908 , and the following year it was handed over to the National Trust . On 23 May 1998 , following a £ 25 @,@ 000 appeal by the Friends of Coleridge and the National Trust , two further rooms on the first floor were opened . 
 At Aley is Quantock Lodge , a green @-@ grey 19th @-@ century mansion built from <unk> tuff . It was the family home of Henry Labouchere , 1st Baron Taunton , until the 1960s when it was converted into a school . In 2000 , it became a centre for recreation and banqueting and summer camps for youths . 
 Broomfield is home to Fyne Court . Once the home of pioneer 19th century electrician , Andrew Crosse . Since 1972 it has been owned by the National Trust . It has been leased from the National Trust since 1974 by the Somerset Wildlife Trust ( Formally Somerset Trust for Nature Conservation ) and is run as a nature reserve and visitor centre . The Quantock Hills AONB Service have their headquarters at Fyne Court . 
 The Church of St Mary in Kingston St Mary dates from the 13th century , but the tower is from the early 16th century and was re @-@ roofed in 1952 , with further restoration from 1976 to 1978 . It is a three @-@ stage crenellated tower , with crocketed pinnacles , bracketed pinnacles set at angles , decorative pierced merlons , and set @-@ back buttresses crowned with pinnacles . The decorative " hunky @-@ punks " are perched high on the corners . These may be so named because the carvings are <unk> ( squatting ) and are " punch " ( short and thick ) . They serve no function , unlike gargoyles that carry off water . The churchyard includes tombs of the Warre family who owned nearby <unk> House , a historic country house in <unk> Fitzpaine visited by about 70 @,@ 000 people per year . The site includes a 0 @.@ 2 @-@ acre ( 810 m2 ) biological Site of Special Scientific Interest notified in 2000 . The site is used for roosting by Lesser horseshoe bats , and has been designated as a Special Area of Conservation ( SAC ) . The house was used as the headquarters of the British 8th Corps during the Second World War , and has been owned by Somerset County Council since 1951 . It is used as an administrative centre and a base for the Somerset Fire and Rescue Service . 
 The Norman Church of St Giles in <unk> dates from the 14th century but is predominantly from the 15th century with 19th century restoration , including the addition of the north aisle in 1868 . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II * listed building . From October 1763 to January 1764 the vicar was the diarist James Woodforde . 
 The West Somerset Railway ( WSR ) is a heritage railway that runs along the edge of the Quantock Hills between Bishops Lydeard and Watchet . The line then turns inland to Washford , and returns to the coast for the run to Minehead . At 23 miles ( 37 km ) , it is the longest privately owned passenger rail line in the UK . 
 Halsway Manor in Halsway , is now used as England 's National Centre for Traditional Music , Dance and Song . It is the only residential folk centre in the UK . The eastern end of the building dates from the 15th century and the western end was a 19th @-@ century addition . The manor , which is mentioned in the Domesday Book , was at one time used by Cardinal Beaufort as a hunting lodge and thereafter as a family home until the mid @-@ 1960s when it became the folk music centre . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade II * listed building . 
 Halswell House in Goathurst has Tudor origins but was purchased by the Tynte family and rebuilt in 1689 . The surrounding park and 17 acres ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) pleasure garden was developed between 1745 and 1785 . The grounds contain many fish ponds , cascades , bridges and fanciful buildings , including the Temple of Harmony , which stands in Mill Wood and has now been fully restored . 
 = RAF Coastal Command during World War II = 
 RAF Coastal Command was a formation within the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . Founded in 1936 , it was to act as the RAF maritime arm , after the Fleet Air Arm became part of the Royal Navy in 1937 . Naval aviation was neglected in the inter @-@ war period , 1919 – 1939 , and as a consequence the service did not receive the resources it needed to develop properly or efficiently . This continued until the outbreak of the Second World War , during which it came to prominence . Owing to the Air Ministry 's concentration on RAF Fighter Command and RAF Bomber Command , Coastal Command was often referred to as the " Cinderella Service " , a phrase first used by the First Lord of the Admiralty at the time A V Alexander . 
 Its primary task was to protect convoys from the German Kriegsmarine 's U @-@ boat force . It also protected Allied shipping from the aerial threat posed by the Luftwaffe . The main operations of Coastal Command were defensive , defending supplies lines in the various theatres of war , most notably the Mediterranean , Middle East and African theatres and the battle of the Atlantic . It also served in an offensive capacity . In the Mediterranean theatre and the Baltic sea it carried out attacks on German shipping moving war materials from Italy to North Africa and from Scandinavia to Germany . By 1943 Coastal Command finally received the recognition it needed and its operations proved decisive in the victory over the U @-@ boats . 
 The service saw action from the first day of hostilities until the last day of the Second World War . It flew over one million flying hours , 240 @,@ 000 operations and destroyed 212 U @-@ boats . Coastal Command 's casualties amounted to 2 @,@ 060 aircraft to all causes and some 5 @,@ 866 personnel killed in action . During 1940 – 1945 Coastal Command sank 366 German transport vessels and damaged 134 . The total tonnage sunk was 512 @,@ 330 tons and another 513 @,@ 454 tons damaged . A total of 10 @,@ 663 persons were rescued by the Command , including 5 @,@ 721 Allied crews , 277 enemy personnel , and 4 @,@ 665 non @-@ aircrews . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 On the outbreak of war in 1939 Coastal Command had forces of ten Avro Anson , including four auxiliaries , two Vickers Vildebeest , two Short Sunderland , three Saro London and one Supermarine Stranraer squadrons . The Vildebeest and London were all obsolescent . The Ansons made up half of this force , but with insufficient range to undertake deep ocean reconnaissance it was left to the flying @-@ boat squadrons , of which four out of six had obsolescent machines . This left three squadrons with suitable aircraft , the Lockheed Hudson and Sunderland that could operate effectively . Anson engines were in limited supply in 1939 . Moreover , the Sunderland and Hudson airframes were also limited , the later being delivered at a rate of just two per month . To fill the gap in production capacity , the Air Ministry dispatched several missions to the United States to buy more Hudson airframes . 
 Not only was the supply of available aircraft poor , by the then Director of Organisation at the Air Ministry Charles Portal recognised there would be a future problem in procurement of aircraft . Coastal Command 's operational nature would make twenty @-@ four hour operations a basic requirement . Suitable aircraft for take @-@ off and landing , in particular flying @-@ boats , in all weather was vital for the safety of crews and the effectiveness of the Command . The new twin @-@ engine Saro Lerwick had been touted as the ideal aircraft . It only came into service in April 1939 and was then found to be unsuitable . There was a need for long @-@ range machines to cover the South @-@ Western Approaches . In December 1939 to August 1940 the following reinforcements were sent : No. 10 Squadron RAAF received Sunderlands , No. 235 Squadron RAF , No. 236 Squadron RAF , No. 248 Squadron RAF and No. 254 Squadron RAF equipped with Bristol Blenheims from RAF Fighter Command in February 1940 ; in June 1940 No. 53 Squadron RAF and No. 59 Squadron RAFs with Blenheim on loan from RAF Bomber Command , and in August 1940 , No. 98 Squadron RAF 's Fairey Battles , also on loan from the Bomber Service and based in Iceland . By 15 June a further 15 squadrons were to have been handed over to Coastal Command , this was only achieved by the loan of seven squadrons from other commands , despite express agreement by the Air Ministry and Admiralty . The daily operational strength of Coastal Command amounted to 298 aircraft , most unsuitable for maritime operations . Within a month , that had risen to 39 squadrons and 612 aircraft . However they were made of 11 different types , causing training and conversion problems . 
 By 1 December 1941 the situation was improving . Some 18 Consolidated Catalinas , nine Sunderlands , 20 Armstrong Whitworth Whitley and 170 American Hudsons . The Command 's strike aircraft consisted of 60 Bristol Beaufort and 40 Bristol Beaufighters and 60 Blenheim fighter versions for a total of 397 aircraft in 18 squadrons . By June 1942 this figure increased 496 aircraft . Philip Joubert de la Ferté was not satisfied . He believed the command was short of three land @-@ based and ten flying @-@ boat squadrons . He refuted the Air Ministry 's assertions that Coastal Command , in terms of suitable aircraft , was " comparatively well off " . 
 After Arthur Harris ' appointment as GOC Bomber Command , the situation declined . Harris , since his days as a group captain at the Air Ministry 's strategic planning division , had attacked the use of resources in maritime aviation , suggesting that bombing enemy shipyards and port facilities would solve the threat to trade defence . By November 1942 , 259 Hudsons were available , but were shared by other services . The Whitley and Hampden were too vulnerable to operate near enemy coastlines without heavy fighter escort . Beaufort squadrons were sent to the Middle East to operate over the Balkans and North Africa . The highly successful de Havilland Mosquito was sought @-@ after , but priority was given to the other two air commands . By February 1943 , GOC Coastal Command John Slessor , had some 850 aircraft . But in respect of quality he was not impressed . Slessor continually wrote to the Air Ministry , complaining that Mosquitoes were being used as reconnaissance machines , while over 200 were being used by the RAF tactical air forces supporting the army , and merchant shipping was suffering high losses in the Atlantic . His successor Sholto Douglas ' written records indicate the desire to upgrade , rather than produce new aircraft . By his tenure , January 1944 , ten squadrons of Consolidated Liberators , five Vickers Wellingtons squadrons equipped with the Leigh light , and two Handley Page Halifax , Hudson , and Boeing Fortress squadrons were available . Among other technological developments , these long @-@ range aircraft helped defeat the U @-@ boats in May 1943 . 
 = = = Official requirements = = = 
 Until the fall of France in 1940 , the function of Coastal Command and its aircraft was to cover the English Channel , North Sea and Western Approaches . But the fall of Western Europe and Norway resulted in a vast hostile coastline from the North Cape to the Bay of Biscay . The entry of Italy into the war extended that threat to the Mediterranean . The Irish Sea covering the British western ports required a further three flying @-@ boat squadrons . In total , a further 200 long @-@ range aircraft were needed . The Blackburn Botha was unsuitable and the Anson and Hudson were expected to act as interim solutions . The Anson in particular had limited range and did not possess the capacity to carry heavy weaponry needed to sink a submarine . 
 Towards the autumn of 1941 , U @-@ boats began operating further into the Atlantic . Coastal Command 's requirement programme was 150 Catalinas and 76 Sunderlands for 26 flying @-@ boat units ; 32 Liberators and 32 Wellingtons or Whitleys to equip four long @-@ range GR squadrons ; 64 Mosquitoes and 180 GR Hudsons for 15 medium to long @-@ range units ; 128 Beauforts for eight torpedo @-@ bomber squadrons ; and 160 Beaufighters for 10 long @-@ range fighter squadrons . However , four flying @-@ boats and two GR short @-@ range squadrons were to be sent to West Africa , and another three flying @-@ boat squadrons were for Gibraltar . 
 By December 1941 operational requirements necessitated aircraft with an extra @-@ long @-@ range of 2 @,@ 000 miles as U @-@ boats were operating 700 miles from the British Isles . If patrols were deployed 350 – 600 miles covering port approaches , the enemy would move to the 600 – 700 mile area and out of range . By then ASV ( air @-@ to @-@ surface @-@ vessel ) radar homing had been developed , and aircraft were being developed with all @-@ weather and short @-@ take off capabilities . First priority went to Coastal Command Anti @-@ submarine warfare , units by this time . ( Anti @-@ submarine warfare was then denoted " A / S " but since been denoted " ASW " ) 
 In January 1942 it was decided that the limit of long @-@ range aircraft endurance should be the crew ’ s limits , ( due to extreme aircrew fatigue seriously effecting efficiency ) not the fuel supply of the aircraft . De la Ferté decided , on 7 January , sorties should not exceed 14 hours , which reduced flying hours by four per mission . This was despite the entry of the very long @-@ range Liberators in June 1941 . The Liberator Mk I had a stated Air Ministry range of 2 @,@ 720 miles , but crew endurance methods now meant it would be airborne for just 2 @,@ 240 . De la Ferté wrote to the Ministry arguing the Liberator should be used for reconnaissance work , rather than bomb load for the solitary squadron being accepted at that time . The Liberator would assist in closing the ' Mid @-@ Atlantic Gap ' which U @-@ boats could operate in without worrying about air interdiction . After replacing Bowhill in 1941 , de la Ferté had issued a directive on 12 June 1941 to use Wellingtons and Whitleys as an interim solution to unrestricted submarine warfare now practised by the Germans . Their uneconomical operational cost meant immediate replacement of these medium @-@ range machines was pressing . Some Avro Lancasters and Halifaxes , with some difficulty , were seconded from Bomber Command . 
 The Lancaster was denied as a large @-@ scale or long @-@ term replacement . The Chief of the Air Staff , Portal , argued it was the only aircraft capable of carrying an 8 @,@ 000 lb bomb to Berlin and could not be spared . As a result , the RAF 's official history does not include the Lancaster as a Coastal Command aircraft . With a range of 2 @,@ 350 miles it could have been invaluable . The Boeing Fortress was given to the service only because the Air Ministry considered it unfit as a heavy bomber . It issued a directive on 27 January 1942 stating all Fortresses were to given over to Coastal Command for A / S operations . No. 59 Squadron RAF , No. 206 Squadron RAF and No. 220 Squadron RAF all used the Fortress as successful reconnaissance aircraft . However , the bulk of the force by early 1942 was still medium @-@ range aircraft , which could now reach only 600 miles into the Atlantic . U @-@ boats were now operating at 700 miles plus . 
 De la Ferté pushed his case hard to Portal to get the resources needed for the spring , 1942 . Portal had accepted that production of Sunderlands was " disappointing " and it had only just met wastage of the existing five squadrons . Portal also admitted a complete " lack of interest on the part of all concerned " . Portal insisted he would emphasis the Command 's case . But by February 1942 , the expected rate of new Catalina aircraft , which the command expected at a rate of three per week , with a final six to complete a batch of 30 before May , were offset by the move of three Catalina squadrons overseas ( No. 209 , 240 and 413 squadrons ) . 
 The situation continued in the same way throughout 1942 . By March , the few suitable aircraft in operational service were <unk> serviceable most of the time . By 15 January 1942 , de la Ferté knew just one @-@ fifth of his aircraft were operational . The situation slowly improved throughout the year despite mounting convoy losses and resistance from Bomber Command . By the time John Slessor succeeded de la Ferté as AOC @-@ in @-@ C , he identified 60 squadrons with a total of 850 aircraft , of which 34 were A / S squadrons , operating 450 machines . Slessor felt the Catalina was too vulnerable to U @-@ boat flak and the " prima donnas " , namely the Liberator with its long range , were not available in sufficient numbers . On 18 June 1942 the War Cabinet was told that Coastal Command had only 39 Liberators . When it became obvious that the losses to U @-@ boats were becoming unacceptable in March 1943 , Coastal Command was finally given sufficient resources it needed . 
 = = = Anti @-@ Submarine Bomb = = = 
 In September 1939 , as with most other aspects of A / S , no clear plan existed for the armament of Coastal Command 's aircraft . While operational control was given to the Admiralty , the faith of both services in ASDIC proved ill @-@ founded . It ruled out the submarine threat , and caused a refocusing on surface attacks . In addition , no A / S weapons had been developed properly in the inter @-@ war period . Most of the munitions were left over from the First World War , due in part to a wish to economise and the fact no order had been given to dispose of them . 
 The primary weapon against the U @-@ boats in a future conflict was to be the 100 lb ( 45 kg ) anti @-@ submarine bomb ( ASB ) . It was developed in 1926 following a 1925 Admiralty request . Trials were undertaken in 1927 . Inexplicably , although the weapon was introduced and ready for testing in 1931 , not a single test was carried out against any submarines or to determine the bomb 's behaviour under water . The Air Ministry preferred 250 lb ( 110 kg ) and 500 lb ( 230 kg ) bombs , which were unacceptable to the Admiralty , due to corrosion issues in salt water , possible due to the ammonium nitrate fillings . Nevertheless , a trial order of 50 was placed in May 1939 . The 100 lb ( 45 kg ) A / S bomb proved useless . The aircraft available could only carry two , and even if they scored direct hits , little damage was done . 
 = = = Depth Charges = = = 
 Depth charges ( DCs ) were more promising . Only flying boats were able to carry the 450 lb ( 200 kg ) DC in service in 1939 . It could be dropped from low altitude which was an advantage considering no suitable bomb sight was available . On 16 August 1940 Captain Ruck @-@ Keene suggested DCs should be standard armament for A / S aircraft which the Admiralty accepted . Captain D. V. Peyton @-@ Ward suggested on 8 September all convoy escorting aircraft should be armed with DCs . 
 The 450 lb ( 200 kg ) DC was modified for use with nose and tail fairings for safe usage , in case the aircraft had to ditch , the DC would not explode . It had a hydrostatic pistol which meant it would explode at 50 ft ( 15 m ) or more . ( This was later found to be too deep . ) Other weapons , such as the 250 lb ( 110 kg ) depth bomb , exploded on contact and was likely to porpoise . 450 lb ( 200 kg ) DCs were standard until September 1941 but were dangerous for use with aircraft that could not confirm accurate heights . At night , 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DCs were used instead . The 250 lb ( 110 kg ) weapon was cleared for use on 23 January 1941 and by May tests revealed the tail fin had improved the accuracy of the charge when dropped from any height up to 250 ft ( 76 m ) . The fins made less impact when dropped above this height . According to some claims , the 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DC had to be within 9 – 33 ft ( 2 @.@ 7 – 10 @.@ 1 m ) to be lethal ; operational records show the lethal radius was 19 ft ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) . The depth setting and detonation problems were solved by June 1942 and the 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DC proved a formidable A / S weapon . The pistols with a 32 ft ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) setting were available and Torpex @-@ filled weapons were now in circulation . 
 In January 1945 , depth charges were further improved and settings of 16 – 24 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 3 m ) , with a mean depth of 19 ft ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) , were achieved . Operational research by Peyton @-@ Ward improved weaponry . Interviewing crews he was responsible for implementing the Type 13 pistol which offered depth settings as shallow as 26 – 30 ft ( 7 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 1 m ) . Ward also developed the ' total release ' tactic , dropping the entire load at once , to ensure maximum chance of a kill . 
 On 31 March 1942 , de la Ferté advised the Anti @-@ submarine Committee using both 500 lb ( 230 kg ) and 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DCs was not satisfactory . It was more efficient to release a large stick of 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DCs as the required lethal stick was four times the bombing error in range . The 250 lb ( 110 kg ) Mark VIII was not cleared for heights above 150 ft ( 46 m ) or speeds of 150 kn ( 280 km / h ; 170 mph ) , and de la Ferté hoped for a DC filled with Torpex that could be dropped at 200 kn ( 370 km / h ; 230 mph ) from 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) . The Director of Operational Research Office came up with a 600 lb ( 270 kg ) DC that could be dropped from 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , but the Army and Navy received priority . By 5 June 1943 , the new type was in service , and developments continued in exploder technology from August 1943 to December 1944 . It was found it could be released at any height between 12 @,@ 000 – 5 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 700 – 1 @,@ 500 m ) , at any speed , with spacings greater than 80 ft ( 24 m ) . However , it came too late to effect A / S operations , and the 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DC remained the standard type . The 250 lb ( 110 kg ) Mark IX DC with Torpex filling dropped in sticks of four to eight , anywhere from " point @-@ blank altitude " and within 150 ft ( 46 m ) of the target , proved decisive . Despite the 25 lb ( 11 kg ) solid @-@ head rockets , the 600 lb ( 270 kg ) ASB , and the 40mm cannon , none , in the opinion of Slessor , compared with the Mark XI depth charge . 
 = = = Machine guns and cannon = = = 
 In March the first British @-@ made Browning machine guns were delivered to coastal aircraft units . The Browning and Vickers Gas Operated ( VGO ) .303 in ( 7 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns became the standard weapon . The VGO fired at a rate of 900 rounds per minute , the Browning at 1 @,@ 030 . The Vickers was pan fed , and could jam , but the belt @-@ fed Browning was trouble free . Gun armament had to be reviewed as its weight curtailed range . On 21 October 1942 , two forward @-@ firing .303 in ( 7 @.@ 7 mm ) guns with enough ammunition for a 15 @-@ second burst weighed 400 lb ( 180 kg ) . Single .50 in ( 13 mm ) machine guns were considered , but dropped ; two guns increased the weight to 690 lb ( 310 kg ) . Enemy submarines and aircraft typically fired 20mm cannon and ranged up to 1 @,@ 000 yd ( 910 m ) , while .303 in ( 7 @.@ 7 mm ) machine guns had a range of only 400 yd ( 370 m ) . Some Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) units used .50 in ( 13 mm ) guns and increased the number on Sunderlands from seven to 18 to ward off air attack and suppress U @-@ boat flak . 
 In 1937 , experiments on Hispano @-@ Suiza HS.404 cannons took place . Cannons were used for defence in the rear of the aircraft but were not successful in the Hudson . 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) cannons were tested in 1939 — most likely by Vickers S prototypes . Operational research documents explain that the weight , ammunition loads , and the fact the weapon fired too few rounds before components were worn out , contributed to the abandonment of its use . Instead , the cannons were given to anti @-@ shipping wings , such as the Beaufighters which proved <unk> de Havilland Mosquitos fitted with a Molins " 6 @-@ pounder Class M " cannon , a modification of the QF 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun proved a hugely successful maritime strike aircraft . 
 = = = Torpedoes = = = 
 Torpedo capability was always considered paramount . The lack of suitable aircraft and shortage of the weapon itself resulted in the strike arm of Coastal Command being severely handicapped . As late as 10 December 1941 the torpedo resources were given to the Fleet Air Arm ( FAA ) which would receive 75 percent of all torpedoes . Torpedoes were sensitive and highly costly in production terms . The weather conditions off enemy coasts made their use more complicated and the depth of the water was considered too shallow . It was also uneconomical to use the weapon against low @-@ tonnage shipping , Coastal Command 's main target . Aside from that , the Beaufort torpedo @-@ bomber was being posted overseas from August 1941 onwards . 
 On 11 June 1942 , a report from the ORS stated that maritime strike sorties should carry bombs rather than torpedoes as their main weapon . It was believed they were more effective , particularly if the new Mark XIV bombsight was available . A similar conclusion was made about the buoyant bomb which could not be used properly without the Mark XIV bombsight . The need for intensive training , a lack of aircraft , priority being given to the Navy , and production limitations for low @-@ level bomb sights ; all these factors influenced the policy on torpedo usage . 
 During July , August and September 1941 trials were undertaken with Catalinas using Mark I and Mark II torpedoes of the British 18 inch torpedo series . It was suggested that a Mark XII could be used , although the speed of flight had to be reduced to 103 mph ( 166 km / h ; 90 kn ) at 35 feet . Without reliable altimeter to give the correct altitude , this was dangerous work as it made the Catalina an easy target for enemy flak . 
 The Mark 24 Mine ( FIDO ) was an acoustic homing torpedo to be used after the dropping of DC loads . The first success with this weapon was soon after its introduction , when it was used in the sinking of U @-@ 388 on 20 June 1943 . A few days later , another was sunk . Publicity was lacking . Even the pilot was unable to see the weapons with their own eyes such was the secrecy surrounding them . 
 = = = Rockets = = = 
 Rocket projectiles were developed during the Second World War . In the case of Coastal Command , they were to be used in A / S and as maritime strike weapons . For aircraft use there were two different types of head : a 60 lb one with high explosive and a 25 lb armour @-@ piercing head of steel – known as the ' Rocket Spear ' . Groups of four rockets were arranged on under @-@ wing racks . Trials began in November 1942 and ended in February 1943 in respect of A / S. The firing range against U @-@ boats was considered to be 1 @,@ 000 yd ( 910 m ) or less and could be fired in pairs or salvos . The first recorded success was No. 48 Squadron RAFs sinking of U @-@ 594 on 4 June 1943 . The rockets tended to follow the line of flight of the aircraft rather than the line of sight . Tests indicated a 30 percent hit rate . However , just one hit was lethal to a U @-@ boat . Though effective against U @-@ boats , the later DCs were favoured . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Following the production of the 600 lb depth bomb , a Mark III angular @-@ velocity , low @-@ level bombsight was developed . At the eighth meeting of the Anti @-@ Submarine Committee , chaired by de la Ferté , on 16 December 1942 at <unk> Coastal Command , they examined ORU reports of the results with the device . No. 59 Squadron RAF had been given the task of testing the sight and were operating the Liberator <unk> during the period that the results were gathered . AOC Wing Commander <unk> Bartlett AFC & P / O H.R. Longmuir ( Bomber Leader ) presented the following report to the committee : 
 Thirty @-@ four bombs were dropped by three aimers ( P / O H.R. Longmuir , F / O G.W. <unk> & F / O <unk> Cole ) at a stationary target , and later on a target towed at 8 knots [ <unk> ] . For [ a total of ] forty @-@ two bombs the average range error was <unk> [ yards ] . 
 However it was considered the low @-@ level sight 's chief advantages would be demonstrated under operational conditions . The sight was considered a great advancement on any previous method of low @-@ level bombing , either by eye or with a bombsight . The best figures from No. 59 Squadron 's trials were 6 yd range error with release from 800 ft , and 5 yd error when approaching at 100 ft , but releasing from 400 ft with the aircraft 's nose slightly up . Some academics in the ORS stated a 20 yd error range existed but maintained the Mark III was promising . Some crews did not trust the device , which was the case when asked to use equipment of which they had little experience . Instead , many continued relying on their own trusted eyesight . A continued lack of resources meant there was no widespread use of the sights . In later months , the aircrew changed tactics and with new weapons , they decided that it would take too long to zero @-@ in on a target using the device . Pilots and crew often opted to use their own judgement by direct sighting with considerable success . 
 = = = Sensors = = = 
 Magnetic Airborne Detection ( MAD ) was used to detect submerged U @-@ boats . It consisted of a sensitive magnetometer installed in the cone of the aircraft ( mostly Catalinas ) that could detect anomalies in the Earth 's magnetic field within a range of 400 feet and was sensitive to detect a submarine to within a few feet . The mine was used in conjunction with a 65 @.@ 5 lb retro bomb . It was filled with 25 lb of Torpex and the weapon was rocket propelled backwards to the line of flight at a speed that counteracted the aircraft 's forward motion . It was released rearwards from rails on the wings of the aircraft . Thus , with the aircraft 's forward motion cancelled @-@ out by the rocket motor , the device fell directly onto the target . 
 It possessed two advantages over the use of DCs ; no pre @-@ setting of depth was required , and the enemy was unaware of the attack if no hits were made . 
 In July 1942 the U @-@ boats became aware of Coastal Command aircraft using another innovation – sonobuoys , which were thought of as the air equivalent of the Navy 's ASDIC . A U @-@ boat reported them on 29 July being dropped in the north transit area , and they were thought by the enemy to be devices for preventing U @-@ boats from travelling on the surface . They were , in fact , for detecting submerged U @-@ boats , and were used by No. 210 Squadron RAF , operating Sunderlands . In operational records they were coded High Tea . Most crews were unaware of their existence . The devices stayed in use until 1998 , when some wartime crews saw them for the first time . Until then the RAF had kept them secret . 
 Even by May 1943 Mark II ASV ( Air @-@ to @-@ surface @-@ vessel ) was still being used . By then the German Metox receivers could detect the 1.5m radiations . A variable condenser was installed as an interim solution to reduce the strength of the signal . This gave U @-@ boats the impression the aircraft was moving away from it . There was a radical change in 1943 with radar equipment when the ASV Mark III was becoming available . Based on RAF Bomber Command 's H2S , it transmitted a much shorter wavelength of 9 @.@ 1 cm instead of 1.5m as with Mark Is and IIs and could not be detected by Metox receivers in U @-@ boats . Instead of fixed aerials there was a rotary scanner , and thus the return signals gave a visual trace through 360 degrees on a CRT known as the Plan Position Indicator ( PPI ) . The Mark II would only cover a forward arc , unlike the Mark III . The Mark III would indicate surface vessels via a dot on the screen while the coast would be given in the shape of an outline . Targets remained visible on the screen to within a quarter of a mile . The Mark III also suffered much less from ' sea return ' obscuring targets at short range . 
 = = Training = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 During the 1920s and 1930s the only fully trained crews were pilots , other crew members being volunteers from skilled ground trades who underwent short courses in gunnery and bomb aiming . Pilots were responsible for navigation , and when accurate navigation was essential , a second pilot was carried . Early in 1936 the Air Navigation School had been formed at RAF Manston to take over this training for all pilots destined for Coastal and Bomber Commands . Conversion training for Flying Boats was also given there . 
 From the start of the war to mid @-@ 1941 , Coastal Command had only one functioning Operational Training Unit ( OTU ) . Officially it had to provide training for 17 units . The pressure on the OTU was such that it offered little more than a conversion programme for pilots and crews hoping to man land @-@ based aircraft . In 1940 , Bomber Command was asked to support Coastal forces , even though at that time in the war it overstretched itself . Requests to the Air Ministry to meet outstanding OTU requirements were largely ignored . The single landplane OTU was established to train 1 @.@ 1 crews per month . This figure , on the outbreak of war , proved grossly inadequate . 
 OTU squadrons , according to GOC Bowhill , should have been prepared to deliver an output of three crews per month for torpedo and fighter squadrons and two for General Reconnaissance units . Only at this point did the Air Ministry revise its policy . They did so , however , in a manner which indicated it still did not appreciate the problems of the Command . Bomber Command had received several months of ' working up ' and breathing space from the declaration of war to the German invasion of Western Europe , but Coastal Command had not . Furthermore , Bomber Command was given permission to merge several new squadrons into OTUs . It seemed as if Bomber Command was still receiving better treatment . 
 For torpedo training it was even more difficult . Shallow water was needed to recover training duds . Torpedoes usually sank by 20 to 50 feet before making their run . Thorney Island was selected but then quickly ruled out as a useful site . It was later used , but at the time , its location near Portsmouth was considered too near the English Channel and as a result Turnberry in south @-@ west Scotland was selected instead with Fighter Command giving up the site to Coastal Command . These Torpedo Training Units ( <unk> ) were formed in January 1943 . Training in this regard enabled the Command to cope with increasing demands for trained aircrews . 
 The Air Ministry was unsympathetic to Coastal Command and the lack of any suitable place for aerodromes made improvements difficult to implement . OTU airfields required a number of features not available in all locations . The main requirement was a quiet area so that OTU flights would not interfere with stations that were already operational . To prevent losses to enemy air attacks , it was also necessary to keep OTUs as far away from enemy airspace as possible , while the sensitive airspace over convoy routes and near Scapa Flow were also inappropriate places to launch OTUs . 
 By late 1940 there were severe shortages of pilots and wireless operators / gunners , with 100 pilots and 200 other personnel required . In the short term the OTU course was reduced to get the crews out to operational commands faster . It now took no longer than a month compared with the six to eight weeks considered necessary . This reduced the number of fit pilots , and the quality of pilots overall . The number of unfit pilots was recorded at 374 . To cope with the shortening of training , it had to have a well @-@ stocked general training programme . Coastal Command did not possess such an administration . Only 24 pupils were graduating when the minimum requirement was 64 . This was compensated by the removal of gunnery and bombing training and a reduction in night and formation flying . Still , Bomber Command received most of the 36 @,@ 000 aircrew between 1940 and 1942 . Entry requirements for crews were relaxed and the programmes found more recruits that way . Manpower was also supplemented by the Commonwealth with Canada providing some of the 6 @,@ 500 personnel sought by the Air Ministry . By the end of 1941 , the operational strength of Coastal Command increased by seven squadrons . 
 In 1942 Coastal Command 's problems did not abate . Experienced crews were siphoned off to Malta , to undertake ASO against German and Italian shipping in the Mediterranean . Hudson , Blenheim and Beaufighter squadrons had shortfalls of 69 , 28 and 20 aircrews by January 1942 . The leftover crews , some 75 percent , were far off the 200 operational hours considered for a pilot to be experienced . Efficiency fell among squadrons . The mixing of experienced crews and the inexperienced damaged morale and accident rates increased . 
 = = = Mid to late war = = = 
 By late 1942 , training became sufficient in quality and the number of crews increased . For example , No. 17 Group RAF produced 238 trained crews in August 1943 , using the 1 @,@ 007 aircraft available . During that year , 1 @,@ 863 crews totalling some 11 @,@ 482 men , were trained on 14 different types of aircraft in 255 @,@ 800 hours . A combination of changed requirements and the formation of more specialist and advanced training overseas reduced the need for further expansion in 1944 . The figures in 1943 proved to be the highest annual out put of trained crews in wartime . With sufficient manpower now available , four OTUs were closed in 1944 . By July 1944 the 26 syllabuses increased to 38 and the course hours increased to 12 weeks and 87 hours . A / S training was soon set in two stages ; conversion training taking five to six weeks and 32 day and night flying training and then an operational phase , in which another 55 hours and 30 sorties were flown in five weeks . This phase included ten flights on radar and gunnery training . 
 The specialised training was conducted from several schools . Anti @-@ submarine training was provided from the Combined Anti @-@ Submarine Training Centre at <unk> , beginning in May 1943 . Air @-@ Sea rescue schools were set up at Blackpool , equipped with Avro Ansons . Conversion units , such as No. 6 OTU , was detailed to provide conversion training for crews , who were to fly the Consolidated Liberator , Boeing Fortress and Handley Page Halifax . Training still remained below what was needed , owing to manpower requirements on the front line . It was not until October 1944 , that it became widely accepted to give crews refresher training on new types of aircraft , that this practice became policy . Even so , one conversion course was all that was afforded to any crew . Increasing the training hours from 72 to 87 helped in some respects . Also , by 1945 , it had become standard practice for Squadron Leaders to visit and help the OTUs keep pace with changes operational difficulties , by reporting back to the schools on how best the OTU establishment could serve the needs of Squadrons , through training or otherwise . 
 Rather than introducing any revolutionary tactical doctrine , crews gradually became more experienced and increased their effectiveness that way , while specialist training was provided when it was required . Survival rates remained mediocre , owing to the nature of long @-@ range operations over water . However , with greater innovations , such as radar , better designed aircraft , and more potent weaponry , the crews built on their experiences and the service became an effective naval air service . 
 = = Western Europe = = 
 = = = Norwegian Campaign = = = 
 On 16 February 1940 , No. 220 Squadron RAF Hudsons were sent on a mission to hunt down the Altmark , a German tanker responsible for the Altmark Incident . The tanker had several hundred British prisoners of war on board . No. 233 Squadron RAF aircraft spotted the ship entering <unk> , in neutral Norway . HMS Cossack was dispatched and recovered the men . On 9 April 1940 the Germans launched Operation Weserübung . Poor visibility enabled most of the German invasion fleet to evade detection until it was too late . Reconnaissance aircraft of Coastal Command had sighted and reported movements of the Scharnhorst and Gneisenau on 7 April . However , they were believed to be on exercise and not operations . They were sighted again the next day by No. 204 Squadron RAFs Sunderlands . Coastal Command was now ordered to carry out extensive reconnaissance operations in the North Sea and around the Norwegian Coast . It was the Command 's reconnaissance operations that located the German cruiser Königsberg in Bergen fjord . Blackburn Skuas of No. 800 and 803 Squadrons FAA sank the vessel . 
 On 17 April a miscommunication between Coastal Command Blenheims resulted in the loss of air support for the cruiser HMS Suffolk . It came under intense attack and was badly damaged . It was beached and recovered at Scapa Flow . On 20 April 1940 No. 233 Squadron damaged the 1 @,@ 940 ton German ship Theodor in Grimstad fjord . Anti @-@ shipping missions and bombing attacks against enemy occupied airfields were carried out by No. 224 , 233 and 269 Squadrons without success . One aircraft was lost to flak . On 8 June , Scharnhorst and Gneisenau sank HMS Glorious and her two escorting destroyers . No. 22 , 233 , 224 , 269 and 42 Squadron and their Hudson , Skua , and Fairey Swordfish aircraft attempted to counter strike . Scharnhorst was repeatedly attacked but only hit twice along with an unnamed supply ship . Submarine HMS Clyde damaged Gneisenau . During the course of the attacks , eight Skuas were lost on one mission to a staffel ( Squadron ) of Messerschmitt Bf 110s . Another four Beauforts and at least one other unidentified British type was lost to enemy aircraft and flak . 
 = = = Netherlands , Belgium and France = = = 
 Coastal Command had begun scouting for German shipping near the Dutch coast in spring 1940 . Squadrons were working up on the Blenheim IV fighters at the time . However their preparation was short @-@ lived . The German assault on Western Europe on 10 May 1940 changed the tempo of events . On 11 May , No. 235 Squadron RAF was used to cover the landing of small British Army units near The Hague . Shortly after its capture , No. 22 Squadron RAF dropped ten 500 lb bombs on Waalhaven airport , Rotterdam . No. 206 Squadron conducted armed reconnaissance along the Dutch coast and after permission was received , No. 220 and 233 Squadrons bombed oil storage tanks at Hamburg and Bremen on 18 May . Five Beauforts made similar attacks on Rotterdam on 29 May , which caused extensive fires . The same day , No. 22 Squadron made the first daylight anti @-@ shipping attack on E @-@ boats in IJmuiden harbour . No. 40 and No. 500 Squadron conducted the same kind of strikes . 
 During the Battle of Dunkirk the Command 's aircraft flew bombing missions against enemy ports and covered the evacuation effort . On 31 May 1940 , Pilot Officer P. Peters and his gunner LAC Pepper of No. 500 Squadron possibly shot down Coastal Command 's first air @-@ to @-@ air victories of the war by dispatching two Messerschmitt Bf 109s trying to intercept them . No. 220 Squadron shot down four Junkers Ju 87 Stukas on 1 June , while Hudsons of No. 206 managed to shoot down another two Bf 109s . However , air @-@ to @-@ air combat was rare for Coastal Command . No. 22 , 812 and 815 Squadrons engaged in mining operations off Denmark , the Netherlands and Belgium . By the end of the Dunkirk evacuation on 4 June 1940 , Coastal Command 's No. 16 Group RAF had flown 327 sorties in direct and indirect support of the Army and Navy . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 The occupation of continental Europe and the Scandinavian North Sea coastline now meant tracking U @-@ boats and enemy warships making for the Atlantic was now more difficult with the thin resource pool available . Assets were needed for reconnaissance , air support for Sunderlands operating in the Atlantic approaches , and anti @-@ invasion patrol . However , any shipping of mainland Europe was likely to be hostile , which presented plenty of targets . No. 18 Group RAF continued offensive operations further north against German shipping near Norway . Its first success being the ' torching ' of a German freighter near Kristiansund on 22 June by a No. 220 Squadron crew . Priority was anti @-@ invasion operations . With the Battle of Britain underway , the Command was ordered to disrupt German preparations for Operation Sea Lion . In this respect , former RAF @-@ Army co @-@ operation squadrons , No. 53 and 59 , were handed to Coastal Command in July 1940 for these tasks . No. 254 Squadron was supplemented with No. 21 and 57 Squadron , Bomber Command , in attacking shipping off the Norwegian coast , as result of alerts that suggested a German amphibious assault from there . 
 The Avro Ansons of No. 16 Group 's No. 500 Squadron was fitted out with extra armour plating and side mountings for defensive guns . A free mounted 20mm was installed in the lower fuselage to offer protection . Though no evidence exists to indicate it was a success , crews appreciated the extra security . The British Cannon Manufacturing Company , impressed with the innovation , built a specialised mount for it . They began operations along with Fairey Battles of No. 12 Squadron RAF and No. 142 Squadron RAF , Bomber Command , operating from Eastchurch . Some conversions were made ; No. 217 switched to Beauforts in May 1940 , but still operated some Anson aircraft , and No. 502 received the Whitley in October 1940 , a bitter disappointment for its crews . 
 The Beaufort was too fast for the torpedoes available , so new tactics had to be developed and the aircraft was restricted to mine @-@ laying or bombing missions . It was soon grounded for other reasons . After No. 22 Squadron carried out more trials , it began operations on 31 August 1940 . On 11 September a torpedo attack succeeded in hitting a 6 @,@ 000 ton freighter . On 17 September No. 22 , 53 and 57 Squadron sank a 1 @,@ 600 ton freighter in Cherbourg harbour . An E @-@ boat was also destroyed and oil tanks were also set ablaze and burned uncontrollably for several days . The cost was a single Beaufort . 
 Other notable actions included strikes on convoys by No. 42 Squadron RAF . On 10 October it attacked heavily defended convoys off Cherbourg , Dieppe and Le Havre . A 2 @,@ 500 ton German transport was sunk and one enemy fighter was destroyed , but the squadron lost 66 percent of its aircraft that embarked on the mission . No. 217 took part in attacks on Luftwaffe airfields in France , and Nos. 224 , 269 and 42 Squadrons made attacks on Norwegian rail targets late in the year . Anti @-@ barge operations were also carried out . These ships were to transport German Army units to Britain . On 13 September , they carried out another large raid on the Channel ports , sinking 80 large barges in the port of Ostend . Some 84 barges were sunk in Dunkirk after another raid on 17 September and by 19 September , almost 200 barges had been sunk . 
 = = Battle of the Atlantic = = 
 = = = State upon outbreak of war = = = 
 Until late 1939 , A / S work had largely been ignored . In the opening months of the trade defence war , September 1939 to early 1940 , three main points arose in this respect . Firstly , the Germans were incapable of maintaining a sustained anti @-@ shipping campaign owing to a small number of U @-@ boats . Second , the Air Staff 's fear of massed air attacks on shipping did not take place and could be discarded . Thirdly , despite the first two points , losses to Allied shipping from U @-@ boat attack was enough for importance of A / S to increase . The Royal Navy 's belief in an ASDIC equipped surface fleet to effectively sweep the seas clear of U @-@ boats proved unfounded ( owing to the limitations of ASDIC and vulnerability of surface vessels ) . Coastal Command aircraft had proven best able to locate U @-@ boats , but the flawed anti @-@ submarine bombs ( <unk> ) meant that they could not inflict severe damage to enemy submarines . 
 Losses in the North Atlantic had been just under 50 @,@ 000 tons from September 1939 to June 1940 . This was about to get worse , when France and the Low Countries fell in May to June 1940 . U @-@ boats could operate from French Atlantic ports , reducing their need to make the dangerous journey from ports in Norway or Germany around Scotland , and increasing their operational range in the ocean by several hundred miles . The Luftwaffe with its small , but valuable fleet of Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 200 Condors , could now operate from the same area . From June 1940 onwards , the Battle of the Atlantic began in earnest . 
 = = = Versus the Commerce Raiders = = = 
 While the British proclaimed the Battle of the Atlantic open on 6 March 1941 , attempts by the German Kriegsmarine to disrupt British trade routes had begun before the start of the war . The Graf Spee had slipped into the Atlantic in August 1939 , and had caused significant damage in the south Atlantic , before being eliminated as a threat in Montevideo harbour , in the aftermath of the Battle of the River Plate . Other operations were mounted by Admiral Scheer and Admiral Hipper into British waters in 1940 with various success . Although Coastal Command was tasked with shadowing German surface fleets , Coastal Command had not contributed to any effective engagements fought with German commerce raiders until 1941 . 
 From 8 to 10 October 1939 , Gneisenau and Scharnhorst had been spotted by Coastal Command in the North Sea . However , they were incapable of inflicting damage to the ships . When Bomber Command arrived they could not locate the vessels as they had not been trained to locate enemy vessels at sea , or attack moving targets . Coastal Command also failed to detect the breakout of Scharnhorst and Gneisenau during Operation Berlin in 1941 . The German warships succeeded in sinking 22 merchant ships , although all were sailing independently . However , after their return to port , on 6 April , and being located by a reconnaissance Spitfire , Coastal Command 's No. 22 Squadron , from St. Eval in Cornwall launched a strike by six Beauforts . Only one , piloted by Flying Officer Kenneth Campbell succeeded in making a torpedo @-@ run . With 250 anti @-@ aircraft guns , flak ships and Gneisenau 's own guns , Campbell and his crew were shot down and killed , but not before the torpedo struck the ship on the stern below the waterline , putting it out of action for months . Campbell was awarded the Victoria Cross . The other members of his crew were Sergeants <unk> Scott , W. Mullis , <unk> Hillman . 
 Not long afterwards , the Kriegsmarine launched Operation Rheinübung . The Bismarck and heavy cruiser Prinz Eugen set out into the Atlantic from Norway . Their target was the Atlantic Convoys . During the later stage of the Bismarck operation , a Catalina of No. 209 Squadron RAF spotted the vessel , just 650 miles short of his destination port of Brest , France . It relayed the message to the British Fleet , enabling Fairey Swordfish aircraft to intercept . An 818 Naval Air Squadron FAA aircraft piloted by Sub @-@ Lieutenant John Moffat hit the Bismarck with a torpedo on its stern , jamming its rudder gears , which eventually led to its sinking . Prinz Eugen had been detached prior to Bismarck 's last battle . Despite her discovery by Coastal Command 's aircraft further south , she escaped to Brest on 1 June . Rheinübung was the last attempt by a Kriegsmarine surface ship to breakout into the Atlantic . 
 One of Coastal Command 's notable failures was to prevent the German Operation Cerberus from being carried out . Scharnhorst , Gneisenau , and Prinz Eugen had escaped their base at Brest , in France , and sailed for Germany through the English Channel . They succeeded without suffering major damage . Coastal Command only had one complete and one half trained squadron of <unk> covering the area from Norway to the Bay of Biscay , or only three aircraft for every 100 mi ( 160 km ) . Intercept operations by the RAF , FAA , and Royal Navy failed , with heavy losses in aircraft . 
 = = = Versus the Condors = = = 
 Coastal Command was assigned to the mission of defending the Convoys from aerial assault also . It lacked the proper training , tactics and suitable aircraft to pose a serious threat to Luftwaffe operations until the beginning of 1942 . The Luftwaffe had also neglected naval aviation . Its only suitable weapon for use in the battle of the Atlantic was the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 200 Condor . The Fw 200s began attacks in July 1940 from airfields in occupied France . At the time , Coastal Command had only 60 Avro Ansons , Armstrong Whitworth Whitleys , Short Sunderlands , and Lockheed Hudsons , all too slow and lightly armed to intercept the Fw 200 . Most were also short @-@ range . The Sunderland had the firepower and endurance , but was too slow to catch the Condor . Only one or two aircraft were sent to cover convoys as they approached Britain as a result air @-@ to @-@ air combat was rare . Only five recorded actions took place . The results were two RAF aircraft destroyed ( one Hudson and one Whitley ) for two Luftwaffe Condors destroyed and one damaged . Between August 1940 and February 1941 , Fw 200s sank 85 vessels for a claimed total of 363 @,@ 000 <unk> . 
 The entry of the Beaufighter meant Coastal Command had an aircraft capable of dealing with the Condors . Armed with four 20mm cannons in its nose and being 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) faster than the Fw 200 , it proved to be potent . On 6 April 1941 a Beaufighter shot down a Fw 200 . Two more Fw 200s were damaged in 1942 by the Beaufighters and five were shot down in 1943 despite Condors making an effort to stay away from Beaufighter @-@ escorted convoys . This became impossible as the numbers of the RAF aircraft rose . In December 1943 , de Havilland Mosquitos were used en masse in the Bay of Biscay , making Condor operations " suicidal " . 
 = = = Versus the U @-@ boats , 1939 – 41 = = = 
 A / S operations in 1939 were complicated by the inadequacy of effective armament more than by lack of long @-@ range aircraft . Until the modification of the DC to suit its use by aircraft , the Command was left with 100 and 250 lb ( 45 and 113 kg ) bombs , which were useless against U @-@ boats . Sinking of merchant vessels was immediate , and on 13 November 1939 , a directive effectively made all sorties A / S missions . This was essential , given the sinking of 73 ships in the first two months of war . However , squadrons lacked the weapons , aircraft , and means of detecting U @-@ boats . 
 Convoys from Britain lacked the surface vessel escort after 13 ° W. Hudsons could only make sweeps up to 17 ° W but lacked endurance to stay there . From Gibraltar , the lack of flying boats meant a lack of air cover after 100 miles . Nevertheless , great efforts were made with limited resources to provide cover from first to last light , the time when U @-@ boats could use the rising and setting sun to see the silhouettes on the horizon . 
 However , it was more difficult in practice . The French were still a vacillating ally until the spring / summer , 1940 , but the Command was still stretched by German naval forces operating from Germany , and then Norway . The Germans used surface vessels and U @-@ boats to breakout into the Atlantic by using periods of dark , in winter , and weather conditions unfavourable to aircraft that were still without radar . Tiger Moth biplanes were used , as were civil pilots , to compensate for the lack of Hudsons . These machines were also without armament to defend from enemy fighters . It could carry 250 lb DCs , but there was no sufficient stock . Only 100 lb bombs could be used by the Anson , and they were ineffective . Crew were also insufficiently trained . 
 In January 1940 , the U @-@ boats opened another offensive . Some 21 Submarines sank 42 ships . All were east of 11 ° W , and thus within range of the Command ’ s aircraft . The situation worsened , although it was not disastrous until after the collapse of France . The need for long @-@ range aircraft was identified by the first success of Coastal Command . A No. 228 Squadron Sunderland sighted a U @-@ boat , German submarine U @-@ 55 ( 1939 ) , enable to submerge after sinking three ships . It directed Destroyers to engage it . U @-@ 55 was scuttled . Had it not been for the Sunderland , the submarine would have escaped . 
 In May and June , at the very western end of the English Channel , U @-@ boats began operating effectively . Some 17 attacks were made by aircraft on the U @-@ boats , none successful . The ASB was ordered to be replaced with the DC . No specialised aerial DCs were available . A modified 450 lb Naval DC was used . No effective tactics were available to locate U @-@ boats . By 1940 , they attacked at night , and on the surface . ASDIC was useless against surfaced submarines , and flares could not be used at the low altitude required by aircraft to make an attack . To combat this , closer co @-@ operation by the Navy and Coastal Command was needed . 
 Using the French ports , U @-@ boats targeted many of their victims just east of 20 ° W. The services set up the <unk> ( Area Combined Headquarters ) for A / S operations in the Atlantic . Organisation and inter @-@ service was born , and became the ‘ nerve centre ’ of the Atlantic war . However , the units still required ASV , means of illuminating , and attacking targets , not mention aircraft with endurance . The Air Ministry refused . RAF Fighter Command was to receive the priority , to make good losses from the Battle of Britain . During 1 October to 1 December 1940 , 100 Allied ships were sunk . In the First Happy Time , May 1940 to 2 December 1940 , the U @-@ boats sank 298 ships for more than 1 @.@ 6 million tons , almost all in the Northwest Approaches . This included 37 tankers ( 27 British ) . Most of these kills were made by 18 U @-@ boats . This success was achieved without the help of the Luftwaffe , which had itself , failed to appreciate the importance of maritime aviation . Meaningful German convoy reconnaissance had been nonexistent . 
 More effective tactics had to be used if there were to be no greater resources for the Command . Two major changes adopted by Coastal Command were sweeps over convoy routes and sweeps against U @-@ boat transit routes . According to German and Italian submarine logs , both were effective and denied them the chance of shadowing convoys on the surface . It also rapidly increased the chances of a kill . The transit tactic over the Bay of Biscay resulted in many air @-@ to @-@ air and air @-@ to @-@ submarine combats , reaching its peak in 1943 . As it was , in 1940 the Command was credited with just two sinkings with Navy vessels , one sunk unaided , and two damaged . The damaged ships could have been sunk had proper weapons been available . 
 In 1941 the situation improved . From 1 January to 5 March 1941 , 79 ships were sunk . In return , just one U @-@ boat was damaged . But in August to December , three were sunk and another three damaged by air attack . With just 12 U @-@ boats at sea this was a considerable achievement . DCs were being circulated to squadrons and ASV was coming online , though some crews did not believe in its ability to detect submarines . Coastal Command issued tactical instructions to enact ' full release ' of DCs , spaced 60 feet apart , and set at a depth of 50 feet . Later , pistols achieved 25 – 32 feet depth . The spacing was later altered to 100 feet . The ' total release ' was questioned . A miss could mean the exhausting of ammunition for other sightings . Aircraft like the Wellington could carry ten 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DCs , one of which could sink a U @-@ boat if it hit within 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) . Total release of 10 DCs would be wasteful . The aircraft were ordered to attack within 30 seconds of a sighting , as U @-@ boats could dive in that time . Some crews attacked below the 100 foot altitude stated and had to avoid striking the submarine . The modified naval 450 lb ( 200 kg ) DC could not be released at over 150 kn ( 170 mph ; 280 km / h ) , as it broke up . The 250 lb ( 110 kg ) DC could be dropped at speeds of 200 kn ( 230 mph ; 370 km / h ) and was very accurate . It became the standard weapon . 
 Along with Ultra breakthroughs , ASV also helped contain the U @-@ boat threat in 1941 . Maximum range for contact with a U @-@ boat was 15 mi ( 24 km ) . Medium range was about 9 mi ( 14 km ) . Variable capacitors were introduced to reduce the strength of the ASV output signal to make it harder for U @-@ boats to detect searching aircraft . By July 1941 , improvements and intelligence drove U @-@ boats some 300 mi ( 480 km ) west , into the Atlantic , where there was less density of shipping and no air support . However , British air patrols were reduced as the enemy was now 500 miles from their bases . Aircraft density was reduced by 80 percent at 500 miles . 
 At this time , the Command had to formulate a new strategy to combat the U @-@ boats . During the preceding months , the Command had contributed little to the U @-@ boat war . It contributed to the capture of U @-@ 570 , renamed Graph , and shared in three kills with naval forces . In addition , out of 245 air attacks on submarines , just 10 to 12 were <unk> de la Ferté , on taking office as AOC Coastal Command , demanded more focused effort on offensive operations against the U @-@ boats . What de la Ferté meant by " offensive operations " was interdiction of U @-@ boats in transit , from the U @-@ boat pens on the French Atlantic coast into the north Atlantic : 
 The trunk of the Atlantic U @-@ Boat menace , the roots being in the Biscay ports and the branches spreading far and wide , to the North Atlantic convoys , to the Caribbean , to the eastern seaboard of the North America and to the sea @-@ lanes where the faster merchant ships sail without escort . 
 The Bay of Biscay was the main transit point for U @-@ boats heading into the Atlantic . Five out of six U @-@ boats took this route , and passed within range of RAF air bases . Coastal Command resolved to interdict these routes , from June to November 1941 , and was known as the " First Bay Offensive " . The offensive was ineffective . In the period , 1 September to 30 November , 3 @,@ 600 flying hours were made , producing 31 sightings , 28 attacks , which possible heavily damaged only five U @-@ boats . The only kill came on the last day of the offensive , when U @-@ 206 was sunk by a Whitley of No. 502 Squadron RAF which was guided by ASR . 
 = = = Versus the U @-@ boats , 1942 – 43 = = = 
 In 1942 the Allies lost some 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tons of shipping , and though they replaced 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 tons , U @-@ boats still managed to sink 1 @,@ 160 out of the 1 @,@ 664 Allied ships lost . Most of these sinkings took place in the mid @-@ Atlantic gap , well within range of long @-@ range Sunderlands and Liberators , only the Command lacked these aircraft in quantity . Following the entry of the United States of America into the war , German U @-@ boats had plenty of targets . Coastal Command found it difficult to maintain strength . Its units now operated from the United States , West Africa , the Mediterranean , Iceland , Russia , Gibraltar , North Africa and the Middle East . Squadrons were also sent to the Pacific Theatre of Operations . 
 On the positive side , Coastal Command began increasing its AS efficiency . Rocket Projectiles , 250 lb DC with improved pistols for shallower depths and Leigh lights were introduced . ASV radar , despite the priority of Bomber Command , was also coming into use . On 6 July 1942 a U @-@ boat was sunk with the help of the Leigh light . This triggered some 42 sinkings with the help of the device . The Germans provided some respite from ASV radar with the French Metox radar warning receiver . The Allies responded by reducing the signal , making it more difficult for the Germans to detect them . Later , 9 @.@ 1 cm wavelength radar was introduced , overcoming U @-@ boat countermeasures . 
 Coastal Command sank 27 U @-@ boats in 1942 and damaged 18 more . Some of these kills were shared with the Navy . Bomber Command , by contrast , whose priority garnered them greater resources at the expense of Coastal Command , failed to destroy a single completed U @-@ boat on the slip until April 1944 . Arthur Harris , GOC Bomber Command , deplored the use of aircraft for defensive purposes and insisted the threat would be checked by attacking production . An indication of the effectiveness of air tactics was the fact very few Allied ships were sunk within 600 miles of British waters by late 1942 . Between June 1942 to June 1943 , 71 enemy submarines were sunk by the command . 
 In February 1943 , John Slessor took over as AOC . During this time , a debate was taking place in the RAF over how best to attack U @-@ boats and sink them in large numbers . Arthur Harris , AOC Bomber Command , and the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , were in favour of knocking out their bases and attacking submarine construction yards . Partly this was a mark of the AOCs in the air forces , particularly Harris , who hated using ' his ' bombers in what he considered to be " defensive " roles . Slessor agreed with the need to take the war to the U @-@ boats . He preferred attacking the German vessels in the Bay of Biscay , in transit to the Atlantic . His operational tool was Air @-@ Vice Marshal <unk> Bromet 's No. 19 Group . The offensive became collectively known as " The Second Bay Offensive " . Operation Gondola , lasting from 4 – 16 February . This operation included two B @-@ 24 squadrons with SCR 517 ( ASV III ) radar . A total of 300 sorties were managed , 19 sightings and 8 attacks were made . Only one U @-@ boat ( German submarine U @-@ 519 ( 2 ) ) was sunk by No. 2 Squadron . The US units were then abruptly moved to the Moroccan Sea Frontier , despite the protests of Slessor . 
 While Slessor lost some units , his ASW capability was enhanced with the arrival of H2S radar , which was used in Coastal Command 's operations over the Bay and was undetectable to Metox . On the night of the 2 / 3 February , a Stirling bomber was shot down over Rotterdam , enabling the Germans to examine the radar and develop counter measures . They were shocked by the advanced nature of its design , which had proven their own research to be wide of the mark . Harris had won the majority of the resources for Bomber Command and used H2S . The radar was , however , used for ASW . No. 172 Squadron RAF and No. 407 Squadron RCAF had the device fitted to supplement their Leigh Lights . No. 172 attacked the first U @-@ boat , U @-@ 333 on 5 March , but was shot down . The submarine noted the lack of warning , and sent the warning to U @-@ boat command . However , Operation <unk> , 20 – 28 March 1943 achieved revenge . During this period , 41 U @-@ boats passed through the Bay , with 26 sightings and 15 attacks . Only U @-@ 665 was sunk , by a No. 172 Squadron Wellington . Operation <unk> II , on 6 to 13 April , sighted 11 and attacked four of the 25 submarines passing through , sinking one U @-@ boat ; U @-@ 376 , sunk by No. 172 Squadron . Operation <unk> soon followed , and Bromet was able to deploy 70 ASV III equipped B @-@ 24s , Wellingtons , and Halifaxes . Only one U @-@ boat ( U @-@ 526 ) , was sunk , and it was dispatched by a mine . The offensive ended on 30 April 1943 . The results had been disappointing . The Command had flown 80 @,@ 443 hours , lost 170 aircraft , sunk 10 submarines , and damaged 24 . 
 While the Bay Offensive had failed in the spring , in the mid @-@ Atlantic , a turn in fortunes was experienced by Coastal Command . In 1943 , the Command received the long @-@ range aircraft it needed . The Liberator and increased numbers of British types , including the Halifax and Lancaster bomber , in part , were diverted to Coastal Command to deal with the U @-@ boat threat in March . In May the Command sighted 202 U @-@ boats and attacked 128 . The Command lost heavily during this period , but it succeeded in inflicting a decisive defeat on the U @-@ boats . Moreover , German blockade runners were prevented from carrying their cargo to Germany @-@ held ports in France . During the year 1943 , U @-@ boat losses amounted to 258 to all causes . Of this total , 90 were sunk by Coastal Command , and 51 damaged . Up until that time , in May 1943 , Coastal Command had sighted submarines on 825 occasions , which resulted in 607 attacks . Only 27 were sunk , and three were shared destroyed . Another 120 were damaged . Against those figures , 233 aircraft , 116 of which were lost owing to weather conditions , were destroyed . Of this figure , 179 were from No. 19 Group RAF , attacking U @-@ boats over the Bay of Biscay . 
 The defeat of the U @-@ boats in the mid @-@ Atlantic and their withdrawal , meant the Bay of Biscay became congested with German submarines seeking refuge . Thus , AOC Slessor revisited the interdiction strategy which had been tried , and failed in 1941 and 1943 . This time , there were crucial differences . Firstly , the improvement of radar had enhanced detection of submarines , submerged and surfaced , and intelligence breakthroughs , in which the British Ultra organisation had broken the naval Enigma codes and confirmed a major change in German strategy , enabled the British to focus on the Biscay . 
 When renewed air operations began over the Bay , the Command found U @-@ boats not only adhering to a new strategy ( of avoidance ) , they discovered the Germans obeying new tactical instructions . The German crews were ordered to transit the Bay in groups , submerged , and at night , but on the surface in daylight , to concentrate their defensive fire . Later U @-@ boat designs had their firepower upgraded for this purpose . Also , the Luftwaffe provided Junkers Ju 88 night fighters to escort the submarines . The increased firepower and determination of German air and submarine crews to fight it out did not deter British crews . The Third Bay Offensive became the bloodiest in the aircraft @-@ submarine battle yet , which involved heavy losses . Despite efforts to defend themselves , by 17 June , air attacks had forced German submarines to make the trip submerged during daylight . The effects were not just indirect ; patrols also inflicted increasing losses on U @-@ boats . From 1 July to 2 August 1943 , 86 submarines passed through the Bay ; 55 were sighted and 16 sunk , in exchange for 14 aircraft . 
 The Luftwaffe made a significant effort to defend the submarines . In August , 17 aircraft and six Allied fighters were lost in aerial combat over the Bay . Dornier Do 217 and Ju 88s , equipped with Henschel Hs 293 radio @-@ controlled glide bombs , were also used and forced Royal Navy units to abandon attacking submarines in the region . The German submarines were ordered to ' hug ' the Spanish coast , which was at the limit of Coastal Command 's range , and in neutral territory . ( Spain was Axis friendly , so unlikely to protest . ) This tactical move corrected Dönitz 's earlier mistakes of allowing transit within range of Allied air bases , and the Germans regained a measure of safety in the Bay . The successes won in July 1943 , had reached their peak , and would not be repeated . 
 = = = Versus the U @-@ boats , 1944 – 45 = = = 
 The defeat of the U @-@ boats in May 1943 did not signal the end of the Battle of the Atlantic . Some 60 vessels remained , and posed a threat to convoys . In later months , the Schnorchel , a device originated by the Dutch and later adopted by the Kriegsmarine after the Germans invaded the Netherlands were capable of allowing a U @-@ boat to replace its air supply and vent its diesel exhaust without surfacing became available . However , it was sensitive to the weather , and put immense pressure and strain on crews who had to remain submerged for long period in hostile waters . Further , Coastal 's Mark III radar could detect the mast . The smoke emitted was visible from 1 @,@ 000 feet . In some cases the mast itself could be seen , some one foot in diameter , projecting two feet and moving at 12 – 15 knots . The technological response was to use High Tea , a series of sonobuoys dropped by aircraft onto the surface of the sea to detect U @-@ boats . By late 1943 , the U @-@ <unk> was losing 20 percent of its strength per month . Some 70 percent that did return were seriously damaged . 
 Despite the end of the third and final air offensive over the Bay of Biscay , patrols continued until the liberation of France . The Bay of Biscay patrol statistics for the period 1 May to 2 August 1943 , show Coastal Command had flown for 32 @,@ 343 hours and lost 57 aircraft to all causes , sinking 28 U @-@ boats and damaging 22 . From 3 August 1943 to 31 May 1944 , it flew 114 @,@ 290 hours , losing 123 aircraft to all causes , and sinking 12 U @-@ boats and damaging ten more . 
 In 1944 and 1945 , U @-@ boats became less and less effective . They remained at sea to tie down as much Allied air and sea forces as possible , to relieve pressure on the other two services ( Heer and Luftwaffe ) . When the Allies launched Operation Overlord in June 1944 , U @-@ boats attempted to interdict shipping , but lost 24 of their number from 6 — 30 June . A further 12 submarines from Norway joined 35 from French ports for operations , only to suffer 50 attacks on the first day . Six returned due to damage . On 25 August 1944 , owing to the Allied advance toward U @-@ boat ports , all submarines were ordered to Norway . This evacuation from France was complete by 30 September . Between 6 June and 31 August 20 out of 30 Schnorchel boats were lost . For Coastal Command , the end of 1944 witnessed the interception of 47 percent of all sighted U @-@ boats , which resulted in a 20 percent of those attacked being sunk . 
 The main Allied detector at this time was the Magnetic Airborne Detector ( MAD ) . MAD entered service in 1943 , only to find its targets had vanished from coastal waters . It was able to plot and recognise distortions in Earth 's magnetic field caused by submarines . It took some skill to use and only worked if it was directly above the target . It also was only effective at low altitudes . It had some success in the Gibraltar strait , but was ineffective in British waters owing to different conditions . The only recorded MAD victory in British waters was the sinking of U @-@ 1055 on 30 April 1945 off Ushant . Another invention was the American 3 @-@ cm radar and <unk> . These devices , along with the Mark 24 Mine ( Fido ) , was responsible for the destruction of U @-@ 905 and U @-@ 296 , sunk by No. 86 Squadron RAF and No. 120 Squadron RAF . 
 However , as the last year of the war dawned , the Germans regained some ground in the technology battle . Grand Admiral Dönitz had not yet given up hope of achieving strategic effect in the U @-@ boat war . The Types XXI , XXII , and XXIII were becoming available , and in an attempt to impose some effect , he ordered operations in British home waters . These designs were faster , and more difficult to detect . German operations with five Type <unk> in British waters sank seven ships without loss , two of these on 7 May 1945 . By the end of April , 12 Type <unk> had completed trials and 99 more were on trials , but only one Type XXI became operational before the surrender . Their introduction came too late . The bulk of operations were continued by older , Type VII submarines . The type suffered heavy losses to Allied aircraft , losing 23 in British waters in the last five weeks of the war . Now experiencing a " Happy Time " in reverse , submarines in the Baltic Sea lost 50 of their number , and 83 in total to Allied aircraft . 
 In response , German submarines flowed out of the Baltic to Norway through the mined coastal waters , close to the Swedish coast . Coastal Command 's No. 16 Group and No. 18 Group RAF had success against these submarines in April and May 1945 . German crews travelled on the surface , for fear of mines , exposing them to air attack . Mosquitoes and Beaufighters from the two groups sunk several vessels . The last kill took place on 7 May 1945 , when Flight Lieutenant K. Murray , flying a No. 210 Squadron RAF Catalina , crippled U @-@ 320 . The submarine foundered two days later with all hands . 
 In the last three years of the war , Coastal Command sank more U @-@ boats than any other service and continued to hold the technological advantage from 1943 onwards . A brief threat , in the shape of the German Type XXI and Type XIII emerged , too late to alter the outcome . The Allies held the technological edge from 1943 onward . Official wartime operations ceased at midnight on 4 June 1945 . The last mission was flown by Wing Commander J. Barret DFC , GOC No. 201 Squadron RAF . By that time over 2 @,@ 000 decorations had been awarded . These included four Victoria Crosses , 17 George Medals , and 82 Distinguished Service Orders . 
 = = Offensive operations , 1940 — 1945 = = 
 = = = Early struggle = = = 
 Up to the end of 1940 , Coastal Command 's Anti @-@ shipping Operations ( ASO ) campaign against German seaborne trade in north @-@ west European waters had claimed a direct attack on only six vessels , totalling 5 @,@ 561 tons , and 14 others badly damaged . In exchange , 158 aircraft were shot down or lost to other causes ; 26 for every enemy vessel . Human casualties amounted to 600 men including 46 to 50 POWs . Coastal Command 's performance contrasted heavily with the service ' joint mine @-@ laying effort with Bomber Command , that sank 86 enemy vessels in the same period , ( totalling 82 @,@ 983 tons ) and ten others damaged for the loss of just 31 aircraft . The performance of Coastal Command 's strike wings was down to poor intelligence and equipment , which it was refused , in favour of diverting them to other roles . 
 As there was no defined anti @-@ shipping role in pre @-@ war plans , obtaining information on the enemy 's seaborne commercial traffic did not receive high priority , and once the war started , it was difficult to establish quickly the means of acquiring this information , especially after the fall of Norway and France in April and May 1940 . The extent of the intelligence vacuum at the start of Coastal Command 's campaign is demonstrated by the fact that Air Ministry planners were unaware of the heavy anti @-@ aircraft armament being fitted to enemy merchant vessels . Casualty rates , often in excess of 20 percent , clarified matters in 1940 . 
 The failure of Coastal Command to acquire any tangible results prompted the Admiralty to complain to the Air Ministry on 5 November 1940 . In December it was agreed that 15 of the planned new 100 RAF squadrons be given to Coastal Command . These were to be operational by 1941 . In the interim , four aircraft were to be given to each of the squadrons to bolster their strength , while a further Beaufort fighter and Beaufort torpedo bomber squadron were also made available . 
 In mid @-@ 1941 , just as ASO units were finding their feet , a large number of personnel and aircraft were sent to Malta ( and the Desert Air Force ) to interdict Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps supplies from Italy to North Africa . Adding to the problem was a shortage of materials and testing facilities . <unk> squadrons and re @-@ equipping them was slow . Not until 1942 did the ASO squadrons get the recognition needed , in the wake of the German Operation Cerberus . Maintenance was also poor . Each service was to maintain an operational ready rate of 70 to 75 percent . In Coastal Command it was 40 , and not much higher in others at that point . Greater emphasis was made and serviceability increased . 
 The Operations Research Section ( ORS ) was also set up in light of the success of such programs in Fighter and Bomber Commands . Many scientists were appointed to the ORS Coastal Command . Some acted as advisors to Air Marshal Bowhill . Four sections were set up ; planned flying and maintenance , ASO , A / S , and weather and navigation . Resources were spread evenly . However , A / S received more attention . The rest did not receive close attention until 1943 , when the U @-@ boats had been contained and a certain degree of ascendancy achieved . 
 In July 1941 , Blenheims from Bomber Command 's No. 2 Group joined the campaign . They claimed 104 vessels sunk and 72 damaged . Only 73 vessels totalling 178 @,@ 000 tons were credited destroyed and 62 vessels , totalling 96 @,@ 780 tons damaged . Intelligence in August 1941 saw this drop to 31 destroyed ( 73 @,@ 348 tons ) and 58 ( 148 @,@ 000 tons ) damaged . Post @-@ war assessments reveal even this was over stated . Final figures were seven sunk ( 9 @,@ 556 tons ) and six ( 13 @,@ 088 ) seriously damaged . The figures improved after the autumn 1941 . More resources , better training and equipment including more capable strike aircraft resulted in increasing kill numbers . By 1942 , increased numbers of better aircraft and armament enabled the offensive capabilities of the Command to increase dramatically . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 The Bristol Beaufort solved medium @-@ range operational problems but long @-@ range strikes were beyond the type . No. 2 Group RAF from Bomber Command took on ASO from March to October but their Blenheims were not suitable . The answer lay with the Bristol Beaufighter . It offered a combination of speed , rugged endurance , and multi @-@ role capability with a variety of different armament . It became operational in early 1942 . It made an immediate impact . In September 1942 , 15 squadrons of these aircraft were to be created by April 1943 into special ASO units , or Strike Wings . The first came into operation in November 1942 , with No. 143 , 236 and 254 squadron based at North Coates . The inexperienced crews initially suffered heavy casualties for little return . But when withdrawn and intensively trained , the wing returned in April 1943 with success . In May 1943 the de Havilland Mosquito joined the wing and on 22 June they began operations with rockets . One of the first Mosquito @-@ equipped Coastal Units was No. 333 ( Norwegian ) squadron , on 10 May . In October FB VI Mosquitoes were used , and later the XVIII fitted with the 57mm Molins cannon was also used as the Mosquito ' <unk> ' , and a planned larger @-@ gunned version of the ' <unk> ' with a <unk> anti @-@ aircraft artillery gun modified for use as an anti @-@ tank gun , the <unk> 32 pdr , was tested in a similar manner in a single Mosquito , although this did not fly until after the war . Both rockets and the 57mm Molins cannon were effective , and the Command had the aircraft to begin large @-@ scale <unk> . By January 1944 , German construction was not keeping pace with losses . In the period , January to April 1944 , the Germans lost 38 @,@ 202 tons of shipping , directly to Coastal Command 's operations . In June to August , seven vessels were sunk in Norwegian waters . The Banff Wing sank 17 vessels , totalling 23 @,@ 582 tons in September to December 1944 . They shared in the destruction of two and damaged 10 , for a total of 10 @,@ 000 tons . During this time , the Mosquitoes main weapon was the 25 lb ( 11 kg ) rocket . 
 The following ASO kill account was obtained by Coastal Command aircraft : 
 = = Other theatres = = 
 Coastal Command played a limited part in the Mediterranean Theatre of Operations . No. 202 Squadron RAF and No. 233 Squadron RAF operated from Gibraltar . They were involved in the sinking of U @-@ 74 and U @-@ 447 on 2 May and 7 May 1943 , respectively as part of AHQ Gibraltar , under command of Air Commodore S.P. Simpson . 
 = = Non @-@ combat operations = = 
 = = = Meteorological Operations = = = 
 The Meteorological Flight first came into being on 1 November 1924 . Its main priority was identifying temperature , pressure , humidity and general weather conditions being logged at sea level to 18 @,@ 000 feet . These flights were named <unk> ( Temperature / Humidity ) . Changes in air conditions usually came in the Atlantic in the west . The Meteorological Office ( MET ) relied on reports from ships in this regard . The need for aircraft for operations was ignored in 1939 owing to lack of aircraft . However , in June 1940 , Bomber Command started to become anxious about base landing conditions and the accuracy of general forecasts . In response from strong support , No. 403 Squadron RAF , No. 404 Squadron RAF and No. 405 Squadron RAF were formed for this purpose . The routes requested by the MET usually involved distances of up to 1 @,@ 000 nm . Hudsons were ideal for this operation , but since none were available Bristol Blenheims filled the role . On 1 March 1941 Coastal Command assumed operational control of all the units . They were redesignated No. 1401 to 1406 flights . All were handed over to No. 18 Group RAF . In October 1940 , two more flights , 1407 and 1408 were sent to Iceland to begin operations from there . Several types of single engine aircraft were used ; Gloster Gladiators , Hawker Hurricanes and Supermarine Spitfires . Operations were conducted mostly up to 15 @,@ 000 feet in wartime as the aneroid capsule altimeter was not able to give accurate readings . A Mk . 14B <unk> altimeter was used . The aircraft had to be flown at the height measured for two minutes to allow the readings to settle or stabilise . 
 Operation sorties from the summer , 1940 to March 1942 were high in number . No. 1405 flight flew 291 sorties from Tiree in Scotland covering the Atlantic Ocean west of the Faroe Islands gap . In 1943 long @-@ range Handley Page Halifax and de Havilland Mosquitos became available in increasing numbers . No. 521 Squadron RAF 's Mosquitoes joined the 8th Pathfinder Group as flight 1409 in March 1943 . Halifax of No. 518 Squadron RAF started to conduct deep operations into the central Atlantic from Tiree on 15 September 1943 . Readings on these operations were taken every 50 nm . Sea level pressure readings were taken every 100 nm . The usual flight patterns involved a climb to 18 @,@ 000 feet on the return leg . It was flown 500 nm , then a slow descent to sea level followed by a return to base at 1 @,@ 500 feet . Other flights were made from covering the Atlantic , Bay of Biscay , North Sea and Western Mediterranean Sea . Coastal Command covered 91 percent of the Allied MET flights between November 1943 and June 1944 . Sorties over the Atlantic on 4 June 1944 contributed to the decision to launch Operation Overlord on 6 June 1944 . No. 518 Squadron alone flew on 363 days of the year in 1944 in support of MET operations . 
 = = = Rescue Operations = = = 
 Prior to the Second World War , there was no British air @-@ sea rescue ( ASR ) organisation for rescuing aircrew from the sea . Instead , aircrew relied on the Royal National Lifeboat Institute ( RNLI ) , salvage tugs , vessels in the vicinity , or if in range , the High Speed Launches ( HSL ) established at flying boat bases . New HSL ’ s had been developed with a range of 500 mi ( 800 km ) by the mid @-@ 1930s , but only seven were in service by 1938 . On 14 January 1941 , the first air @-@ sea rescue was set up ( the Directorate of Air Sea Rescue Services ) . The service the aircraft used were diverse . Westland Lysanders were used to scouting the coastlines , while the Supermarine Walrus was planned to be used for long @-@ term use . By June 1941 rescue from the seas had increased to 35 percent . The Air Ministry decided the service could do better . It was merged with another Directorate , Aircraft Safety . On 23 September 1941 Air Marshal John Salmond took over the organisation . In October 1941 No. 275 Squadron RAF and No. 278 Squadron RAF were given to ASR work . This was supported by two squadrons from Coastal Command equipped with Hudsons . No. 16 Group was authorised to create No. 279 Squadron RAF on 24 October to act as a specialised ASR squadron . No. 280 Squadron RAF was created on 28 November 1941 and was given Anson aircraft in place of Hudsons , as they were desperately needed for A / S operations . By 1942 the Mark I Airborne Lifeboat and <unk> dingy were in production ; these were usually jettisoned for crews in the water . 
 Aircraft suitability once again came in for discussion during the war . Ansons and Boulton Paul Defiants were not suitable for ASR operations . The Vickers Warwick was earmarked for the main ASR aircraft . Four 20 @-@ aircraft squadrons with specialised ASR conversion were to be made available by the spring , 1943 . While development was slow . Nevertheless , the effort paid off . In May 1943 , 156 men of Bomber Command were rescued from the sea by No. 279 Squadron alone . By the end of 1943 Coastal Command had rescued 1 @,@ 684 aircrew out of 5 @,@ 466 presumed to have ditched in the sea . On D @-@ Day , 6 June 1944 , 163 aircrew and 60 other personnel were rescued . During the month , June 1944 , 355 were saved by ASR units of Coastal Command . In all , 10 @,@ 663 persons were rescued by Coastal Command in ASR operations . Of this total , 5 @,@ 721 were Allied aircrew , 277 enemy aircrew , and 4 @,@ 665 non @-@ aircrew . 
 = = = Reconnaissance Operations = = = 
 In 1936 , the British Secret Intelligence Service Chief of Air Intelligence , Wing Commander F. W. Winterbotham , developed aerial photograph techniques in collaboration with the French . The task was to gather a record of German targets . By the summer , 1939 , RAF Bomber Command 's No. 2 Group RAF was carrying out this role . However , various problems with standard equipment led to the formation of specialist formations for this duty . One of the first squadrons to act as a PR ( Photographic reconnaissance ) unit was No. 212 Squadron RAF , which saw service in the campaigns in Western Europe , in May and June 1940 under Fighter Command 's control . However , at the end of that campaign , the Admiralty pressed its case for the need for coastal and sea reconnaissance . With operations now over , owing to the evacuation of northern Europe by the Allies , these reconnaissance operations were given to Coastal Command on 18 June 1940 . This included the Interpretation Unit , which analysed photographic evidence . The organisation was called the PRU ( Photographic Reconnaissance Unit ) . It was administered by No. 16 Group RAF , but under the operational control of Coastal Command . 
 The first operations in 1940 concerned Operation Sea Lion , the planned invasion of Britain by the Wehrmacht . The unit was to receive 30 PR Supermarine Spitfire aircraft , specialised and adapted for reconnaissance use . They would be capable of 1 @,@ 750 miles round trips . However , just 13 aircraft were available to the unit , and their range limited to 1 @,@ 300 miles . Eventually , an assortment of Vickers Wellington and Spitfire flights were established . In August 1940 , the first PR Spitfires arrived , but teething problems ensured that it would be a long time before standardisation was achieved with equipment . In August , Coastal Command flew 193 sorties over the suspected invasion ports in the Netherlands , Belgium and France . 
 After the threat from invasion muted in 1941 , the Command 's attention turned to the Battle of the Atlantic . During this time , the Command used the Martin Maryland , which excelled in PR work . On 13 July 1941 , the first PR Mosquito arrived , though it was some time before the aircraft was operational . By September 1941 , the operational strength of the PRU 's first flight was 37 Spitfires , two <unk> and two Mosquitoes . The long @-@ range Spitfires and Mosquitoes could reach deep into German airspace , and photograph the Baltic Sea ports and monitor German surface ships . Flights of eight hours were not uncommon . One Spitfire reached Gdynia , searching for the German battleship Tirpitz . Tactics needed to vary to avoid Spitfires being intercepted by German patrols at heights of 30 @,@ 000 ft . Constant trips alerted the Germans to the British operations , but the Admiralty insisted in the volume of flights so they could keep tabs on German capital ships . With surprise lost , the only solution was to change the height and directions of approach . 
 Over France , the losses became quite severe , particularly over the port of Brest , France . German defences were strong , owing to Operation Cerberus and Operation Donnerkeil , a joint Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe plan to enable the escape of Gneisenau , Scharnhorst and Prinz Eugen through the English Channel . Five Spitfires and a Mosquito were lost on PR operations in December 1941 . The failure to photograph and pin @-@ point the location of the ships , led to their successful move to Germany in February 1942 . It was not until the day of the German operation that a Coastal Command aircraft caught sight of the ships , and by then it was too late . 
 Success was forthcoming in 1942 . Later , in February 1942 , Coastal Command identified the Luftwaffe Würzburg radar sets in France . Eager to evaluate them , the British Army carried out Operation Biting , a commando raid to capture , dismantle and transport an example of the mobile radar to Britain . The force increased to 70 aircraft in eight flights as the year progressed . Operations were carried out in the Atlantic , over Scandinavia , the North Sea , and the Baltic Sea . In November , PR units operated from Gibraltar in support of Operation Torch , the Allied landing in French North Africa . It was detailed to keep watch on the movements of the Vichy French Fleet at Toulon , France . One of the most active squadrons at this time operated Spitfires . No. 540 Squadron RAF was particularly busy in 1943 , over Norway . 
 In June 1943 , decreased demand from the Admiralty meant the PRU supported RAF Bomber Command more frequently . In the Battle of the Ruhr , extensive use of PR Spitfires to identify and report the effects of air attacks . Spitfires of No. 542 Squadron RAF were used in this way to record the results of Operation Chastise . PRU was also instrumental in locating German missile testing sites on the Baltic Sea , near Peenemünde , allowing Bomber Command to attack them . In September 1943 , the Admiralty asked for the PRU 's help in Operation Source , to cripple German heavy units in Norway . No. 544 Squadron RAF contributed to the success of the operation . After this success , all PR units were standardised at strength of 20 aircraft . 
 The identification of German missile sites by the PRU made Operation Crossbow possible in 1944 . Coastal Command continually identified German V @-@ 1 launch ramps , despite the German camouflage efforts . This enabled British aircraft to bomb them and reduce their effectiveness by one @-@ third . By June , 69 ramps had been located , although it was not until 26 February 1945 , when Squadron Leader <unk> White actually spotted a V @-@ 2 , on its launch pad , ready to fire , that it became clear how elusive a weapon of that size could be . 
 In late 1944 , No. 540 Squadron RAF supported No. 5 Group RAFs bombing and sinking of the <unk> it covered northern Germany and Scandinavia until the end of the war . No. 544 Squadron RAF , another Coastal Command veteran , flew missions during Operation <unk> , flying Top Secret mail to the Soviet Union , during the Fourth Moscow Conference , 9 to 20 October 1944 . The same operations were carried out during the Yalta Conference in February 1945 . At the end of the war in May 1945 , only No. 540 and 541 Squadrons were kept in being in the post @-@ war RAF . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 Coastal Command lost 2 @,@ 060 aircraft to all causes ; 741 during Anti @-@ submarine ( A / S ) sorties , 876 during anti @-@ shipping operations ( ASO ) , 42 Mine @-@ laying , 78 during air superiority missions , 129 during bombing raids against land targets , and 194 during photo reconnaissance operations . Some 5 @,@ 863 personnel were killed in action , 2 @,@ 317 were killed in accidents , 38 were killed by other causes . Some 986 were wounded , 23 died of natural causes , and 1 @,@ 100 were wounded by other means than enemy action . This totalled 10 @,@ 327 casualties in aircrews . Some 159 ground crews were killed in action , 535 were killed in accidents and 218 were killed by other causes . A further 49 were wounded while 224 died of natural causes . Some 466 were wounded by other means for a total of 1 @,@ 651 . 
 = Aubrey Dawkins = 
 Aubrey <unk> Dawkins ( born May 8 , 1995 ) is an American college basketball player for the UCF Knights who will sit out the season for the 2016 – 17 team . He transferred to UCF after he completed his sophomore season for the 2015 – 16 Michigan Wolverines . He is the son of Johnny Dawkins who became the UCF coach following the 2015 – 16 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season . Dawkins was raised in North Carolina until spending his high school years in Northern California at St. Francis High School and Palo Alto High School and a post graduate year in New England at New Hampton Prep . As a collegiate freshman for the 2014 – 15 Wolverines , he began the season on the bench , but became a starter when injuries plagued the team in January 2015 . In his more prominent role later in the season , Dawkins led the 2014 – 15 Big Ten Conference in effective field goal percentage and true shooting percentage during conference play . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dawkins was born in Durham , North Carolina , the youngest of the four children of Tracy and Johnny Dawkins . The elder Dawkins spent 11 years on Mike Krzyzewski 's coaching staff at Duke . The family moved to California in 2008 when his father became the Stanford Cardinal men 's basketball head coach . Dawkins was a freshman at St. Francis High School of Mountain View , California in 2009 . By the time he began his sophomore season he stood at 5 feet 8 inches ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) . As a junior , Dawkins transferred to Palo Alto High School in Palo Alto , California . That year he earned 2012 All @-@ San Jose Mercury News boys basketball third team recognition . As a senior , he stood at 6 feet 5 inches ( 1 @.@ 96 m ) , By January of his senior season he had not received any scholarship offers . That year he averaged 18 @.@ 8 points and 7 @.@ 0 rebounds and was on the 2013 All @-@ San Jose Mercury News boys basketball first team along with Aaron Gordon . 
 After graduating , Dawkins did a post graduate year at the New Hampton School in New Hampton , New Hampshire where he averaged 12 @.@ 3 points and 3 @.@ 6 rebounds before receiving a late scholarship offer from Michigan . His grades were not sufficient to pursue a scholarship at Stanford and despite his relationship with Chris Collins , Northwestern was not interested in Dawkins given their commitments from wings Vic Law and Scottie Lindsey . While at New Hampton , he was being recruited by Steve Donahue of Boston College , but Donahue left Boston College in 2014 and recommended Dawkins to Beilein . Before Michigan stepped in , it appeared that he would have committed to Dayton , although he was also considering Utah State , Pepperdine as well as Montana , and Rhode Island was showing a strong interest . In fact , during the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , Dawkins attended the Sweet 16 round to watch his father 's Stanford Cardinal play Dayton in the South Regional on March 27 . Dawkins accepted a recruiting visit to Michigan in early April 2014 when he received his scholarship offer . He made his verbal commitment on April 28 and signed his National Letter of Intent on May 9 . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Freshman year = = = 
 The 2013 – 14 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team had been outright champions of 2013 – 14 Big Ten Conference and reached the Elite Eight round of the 2014 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . However , they lost three players to the 2014 NBA draft : Nik Stauskas , Mitch McGary and Glenn Robinson III . Dawkins enrolled at the University of Michigan on June 20 , 2014 and became roommates with teammate Muhammad @-@ Ali Abdur @-@ Rahkman . Dawkins made his collegiate debut for Michigan against Hillsdale on November 15 , along with six other true freshmen and a redshirt freshman . He posted 3 points and 3 rebounds in 6 minutes of playing time . 
 The 2014 – 15 team won its Big Ten Conference home opener against Illinois in overtime on December 30 , 2014 on the day it announced Jim Harbaugh would become the new Michigan Wolverines football head coach . Aubrey Dawkins , who had a career total of 15 points entering the game , scored a game @-@ high 20 @-@ points , including a 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 three @-@ point field goal effort . On January 17 Michigan defeated Northwestern , but lost leading scorer Caris LeVert for the season . The team defeated Rutgers on January 20 , with Dawkins in the starting lineup for the first time in LeVert 's place , as was expected upon news of the LeVert injury . 
 On March 3 against Northwestern , Dawkins posted a career @-@ high 21 points in a 49 @-@ minute double overtime appearance . On March 7 , Michigan won its Big Ten Conference finale against Rutgers with a career @-@ high scoring effort by Dawkins ( 31 ) . The 31 points was the most by a Michigan freshman since Trey Burke posted 32 against Minnesota on March 9 , 2012 in the 2012 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament . The 31 @-@ point effort included eight three @-@ point field goals ( on 11 attempts ) , the second most ever by a Wolverine , the most by a Wolverine since Glen Rice posted 8 on March 23 , 1989 , vs. North Carolina in the 1989 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament and the most by a Big Ten player during the 2014 – 15 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , earning Dawkins the final Big Ten Freshman of the Week honor for the 2014 – 15 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season . At the time of the honor , Michigan head coach John Beilein noted that over the course of the season , he and his staff had worked with Dawkins to reconstruct the delivery of his jump shot : " He came in with an extremely high arch and a slow release ... He 's really done a great job of speeding up his delivery , lowering his arch ... " On March 12 , Dawkins continued his hot streak with a team @-@ high 18 points against Illinois in the second round of the 2015 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament to help Michigan extend its streak of opening round wins in the tournament to 9 . His performance included 8 consecutive points during Michigan 's 23 – 4 run to end the first half and two memorable dunks . For conference play of the 2014 – 15 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season , Dawkins led the league in both Effective field goal percentage and True shooting percentage , but that season did not show strengths in other aspects of the game such as assists , rebounding , defense and drawing fouls . By the following July , Dawkins put on 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 80 kg ) pounds . 
 = = = Sophomore year = = = 
 Dawkins began the season with 15 points on 6 – of – 7 shooting , including 2 – of – 3 3 @-@ point shooting and a highlight real one @-@ handed offensive rebound dunk as well as a career @-@ high and game @-@ high 6 rebounds as a starter against Northern Michigan . On November 20 against Xavier , Dawkins posted a career high of 6 rebounds . Dawkins finished the season 5th in the 2015 – 16 Big Ten Conference in three point shooting percentage ( 3rd in conference games ) . On April 6 , 2014 , he transferred to play for the UCF Knights , where his father had been named head coach two weeks prior . Dawkins left Michigan with a 43 @.@ 9 % three point shooting percentage and will have to sit out a full season due to NCAA eligibility rules . His playing time had declined during his sophomore season where he was battling Zak Irvin , Duncan Robinson and Kameron Chatman for playing time . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 He is the son of former Duke Naismith College Player of the Year , National Basketball Association point guard and former Stanford head coach Johnny Dawkins . 
 = Battle of Salamis = 
 The Battle of Salamis ( / <unk> / ; Ancient Greek : <unk> τῆς <unk> , <unk> tēs <unk> ) was a naval battle fought between an alliance of Greek city @-@ states under Themistocles and the Persian Empire under King Xerxes in 480 BC which resulted in a decisive victory for the outnumbered Greeks . The battle was fought in the straits between the mainland and Salamis , an island in the Saronic Gulf near Athens , and marked the high @-@ point of the second Persian invasion of Greece . 
 To block the Persian advance , a small force of Greeks blocked the pass of Thermopylae , while an Athenian @-@ dominated Allied navy engaged the Persian fleet in the nearby straits of Artemisium . In the resulting Battle of Thermopylae , the rearguard of the Greek force was annihilated , whilst in the Battle of Artemisium the Greeks had heavy losses and retreated after the loss at Thermopylae . This allowed the Persians to conquer Boeotia and Attica . The Allies prepared to defend the Isthmus of Corinth whilst the fleet was withdrawn to nearby Salamis Island . 
 Although heavily outnumbered , the Greek Allies were persuaded by the Athenian general Themistocles to bring the Persian fleet to battle again , in the hope that a victory would prevent naval operations against the Peloponessus . The Persian king Xerxes was also eager for a decisive battle . As a result of subterfuge on the part of Themistocles , the Persian navy sailed into the Straits of Salamis and tried to block both entrances . In the cramped conditions of the Straits , the great Persian numbers were an active hindrance , as ships struggled to maneuver and became disorganized . Seizing the opportunity , the Greek fleet formed in line and scored a decisive victory . 
 Xerxes then retreated to Asia with much of his army , leaving Mardonius to complete the conquest of Greece . However , the following year , the remainder of the Persian army was decisively beaten at the Battle of Plataea and the Persian navy at the Battle of Mycale . Afterwards , the Persians made no more attempts to conquer the Greek mainland . These battles of Salamis and Plataea thus mark a turning point in the course of the Greco @-@ Persian wars as a whole ; from then onward , the Greek poleis would take the offensive . A number of historians believe that a Persian victory would have hamstrung the development of Ancient Greece , and by extension western civilization , and this has led them to claim that Salamis is one of the most significant battles in human history . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Greek city @-@ states of Athens and Eretria had supported the unsuccessful Ionian Revolt against the Persian Empire of Darius I in 499 @-@ 494 BC , led by the satrap of Miletus , Aristagoras . The Persian Empire was still relatively young , and prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples . Moreover , Darius was a usurper , and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule . The Ionian revolt threatened the integrity of his empire , and Darius thus vowed to punish those involved ( especially those not already part of the empire ) . Darius also saw the opportunity to expand his empire into the fractious world of Ancient Greece . A preliminary expedition under Mardonius , in 492 BC , to secure the land approaches to Greece ended with the re @-@ conquest of Thrace and forced Macedon to become a client kingdom of Persia . 
 In 491 BC , Darius sent emissaries to all the Greek city @-@ states , asking for a gift of ' earth and water ' in token of their submission to him . Having had a demonstration of his power the previous year , the majority of Greek cities duly obliged . In Athens , however , the ambassadors were put on trial and then executed ; in Sparta , they were simply thrown down a well . This meant that Sparta was also now effectively at war with Persia . 
 Darius thus put together an amphibious task force under Datis and Artaphernes in 490 BC , which attacked Naxos , before receiving the submission of the other Cycladic Islands . The task force then moved on Eretria , which it besieged and destroyed . Finally , it moved to attack Athens , landing at the bay of Marathon , where it was met by a heavily outnumbered Athenian army . At the ensuing Battle of Marathon , the Athenians won a remarkable victory , which resulted in the withdrawal of the Persian army to Asia . 
 Darius therefore began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition . Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt , and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece . Since this was to be a full @-@ scale invasion , it required long @-@ term planning , stock @-@ piling and conscription . Xerxes decided that the Hellespont would be bridged to allow his army to cross to Europe , and that a canal should be dug across the isthmus of Mount Athos ( rounding which headland , a Persian fleet had been destroyed in 492 BC ) . These were both feats of exceptional ambition , which would have been beyond any other contemporary state . By early 480 BC , the preparations were complete , and the army which Xerxes had mustered at Sardis marched towards Europe , crossing the Hellespont on two pontoon bridges . 
 The Athenians had also been preparing for war with the Persians since the mid @-@ 480s BC , and in 482 BC the decision was taken , under the guidance of the Athenian politician Themistocles , to build a massive fleet of triremes that would be necessary for the Greeks to fight the Persians . However , the Athenians did not have the manpower to fight on land and sea ; and therefore combatting the Persians would require an alliance of Greek city states . In 481 BC , Xerxes sent ambassadors around Greece asking for earth and water , but made the very deliberate omission of Athens and Sparta . Support thus began to coalesce around these two leading states . A congress of city states met at Corinth in late autumn of 481 BC , and a confederate alliance of Greek city @-@ states was formed . It had the power to send envoys asking for assistance and to dispatch troops from the member states to defensive points after joint consultation . This was remarkable for the disjointed Greek world , especially since many of the city @-@ states in attendance were still technically at war with each other . 
 Initially the ' congress ' agreed to defend the narrow Vale of Tempe , on the borders of Thessaly , and thereby block Xerxes 's advance . However , once there , they were warned by Alexander I of Macedon that the vale could be bypassed through the pass by the modern village of <unk> , and that the army of Xerxes was overwhelming , the Greeks retreated . Shortly afterwards , they received the news that Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont . A second strategy was therefore adopted by the allies . The route to southern Greece ( Boeotia , Attica and the Peloponnesus ) would require the army of Xerxes to travel through the very narrow pass of Thermopylae . This could easily be blocked by the Greek hoplites , despite the overwhelming numbers of Persians . Furthermore , to prevent the Persians bypassing Thermopylae by sea , the Athenian and allied navies could block the straits of Artemisium . This dual strategy was adopted by the congress . However , the Peloponnesian cities made fall @-@ back plans to defend the Isthmus of Corinth should it come to it , whilst the women and children of Athens had been evacuated en masse to the Peloponnesian city of Troezen . 
 Famously , the much smaller Greek army held the pass of Thermopylae against the Persians for three days before being outflanked by a mountain path . Much of the Greek army retreated , before the Spartans and Thespians who had continued to block the pass were surrounded and killed . The simultaneous Battle of Artemisium was up to that point a stalemate ; however , when news of Thermopylae reached them , the Allied fleet also retreated , since holding the straits of Artemisium was now a moot point . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Allied fleet now sailed from Artemisium to Salamis to assist with the final evacuation of Athens . En route Themistocles left inscriptions addressed to the Ionian Greek crews of the Persian fleet on all springs of water that they might stop at , asking them to defect to the Allied cause . Following Thermopylae , the Persian army proceeded to burn and sack the Boeotian cities that had not surrendered , Plataea and Thespiae , before marching on the now evacuated city of Athens . The Allies ( mostly Peloponnesian ) prepared to defend the Isthmus of Corinth , demolishing the single road that led through it , and building a wall across it . 
 This strategy was flawed , however , unless the Allied fleet was able to prevent the Persian fleet from transporting troops across the Saronic Gulf . In a council @-@ of @-@ war called once the evacuation of Athens was complete , the Corinthian naval commander <unk> argued that the fleet should assemble off the coast of the Isthmus in order to achieve such a blockade . However , Themistocles argued in favour of an offensive strategy , aimed at decisively destroying the Persians ' naval superiority . He drew on the lessons of Artemisium , pointing out that " battle in close conditions works to our advantage " . He eventually won through , and the Allied navy remained off the coast of Salamis . 
 The time @-@ line for Salamis is difficult to establish with any certainty . Herodotus presents the battle as though it occurred directly after the capture of Athens , but nowhere explicitly states as much . If Thermopylae / Artemisium occurred in September , then this may be the case , but it is probably more likely that the Persians spent two or three weeks capturing Athens , refitting the fleet , and resupplying . Clearly though , at some point after capturing Athens , Xerxes held a council of war with the Persian fleet ; Herodotus says this occurred at Phalerum . Artemisia , queen of Halicarnassus and commander of its naval squadron in Xerxes 's fleet , tried to convince him to wait for the Allies to surrender believing that battle in the straits of Salamis was an unnecessary risk . Nevertheless , Xerxes and his chief advisor Mardonius pressed for an attack . 
 It is difficult to explain exactly what eventually brought about the battle , assuming that neither side simply attacked without forethought . Clearly though , at some point just before the battle , new information began to reach Xerxes of rifts in the allied command ; the Peloponnesians wished to evacuate from Salamis while they still could . This alleged rift amongst the Allies may have simply been a ruse , in order to lure the Persians to battle . Alternatively , this change in attitude amongst the Allies ( who had waited patiently off the coast of Salamis for at least a week while Athens was captured ) may have been in response to Persian offensive maneuvers . Possibly , a Persian army had been sent to march against the Isthmus in order to test the nerve of the fleet . 
 Either way , when Xerxes received this news , he ordered his fleet to go out on patrol off the coast Salamis , blocking the southern exit . Then , at dusk , he ordered them to withdraw , possibly in order to tempt the Allies into a hasty evacuation . That evening Themistocles now attempted what appears to have been a spectacularly successful use of disinformation . He sent a servant , Sicinnus , to Xerxes , with a message proclaiming that Themistocles was " on the king 's side and prefers that your affairs prevail , not the Hellenes " . Themistocles claimed that the Allied command was in @-@ fighting , that the Peloponnesians were planning to evacuate that very night , and that to gain victory all the Persians need to do was to block the straits . In performing this subterfuge , Themistocles seems to have been trying to bring about exactly the opposite ; to lure the Persian fleet into the Straits . This was exactly the kind of news that Xerxes wanted to hear ; that the Athenians might be willing to submit to him , and that he would be able to destroy the rest of the Allied fleet . Xerxes evidently took the bait , and the Persian fleet was sent out that evening to effect this block . Xerxes ordered a throne to be set up on the slopes of Mount Aigaleo ( overlooking the straits ) , in order to watch the battle from a clear vantage point , and so as to record the names of commanders who performed particularly well . 
 According to Herodotus , the Allies spent the evening heatedly debating their course of action . The Peloponnesians were in favour of evacuating , and at this point Themistocles attempted his ruse with Xerxes . It was only when Aristides , the exiled Athenian general arrived that night , followed by some deserters from the Persians , with news of the deployment of the Persian fleet , that the Peloponnesians accepted that they could not escape , and so would fight . 
 However , Peloponnesians may have been party to Themistocles 's stratagem , so serenely did they accept that they would now have to fight at Salamis . The Allied navy was thus able to prepare properly for battle the forthcoming day , whilst the Persians spent the night fruitlessly at sea , searching for the alleged Greek evacuation . The next morning , the Persians sailed into the straits to attack the Greek fleet ; it is not clear when , why or how this decision was made , but it is clear that they did take the battle to the Allies . 
 = = The opposing forces = = 
 = = = The Greek fleet = = = 
 Herodotus reports that there were 378 triremes in the Allied fleet , and then breaks the numbers down by city state ( as indicated in the table ) . However , his numbers for the individual contingents only add up to 371 . He does not explicitly say that all 378 fought at Salamis ( " All of these came to the war providing triremes ... The total number of ships ... was three hundred and seventy @-@ eight " ) , and he also says that the Aeginetans " had other manned ships , but they guarded their own land with these and fought at Salamis with the thirty most seaworthy " . Thus it has been supposed that the difference between the numbers is accounted for a garrison of 12 ships left at Aegina . According to Herodotus , two more ships defected from the Persians to the Greeks , one before Artemisium and one before Salamis , so the total complement at Salamis would have been 373 ( or 380 ) . 
 According to the Athenian playwright Aeschylus , who actually fought at Salamis , the Greek fleet numbered 310 triremes ( the difference being the number of Athenian ships ) . Ctesias claims that the Athenian fleet numbered only 110 triremes , which ties in with Aeschylus 's numbers . According to <unk> , the Greek fleet numbered only 220 . The fleet was effectively under the command of Themistocles , but nominally led by the Spartan nobleman Eurybiades , as had been agreed at the congress in 481 BC . Although Themistocles had tried to claim leadership of the fleet , the other city states with navies objected , and so Sparta ( which had no naval tradition ) was given command of the fleet as a compromise . 
 Plain numbers represent triremes ; those indicated in parentheses are <unk> ( fifty @-@ oared galleys ) 
 = = = The Persian fleet = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the Persian fleet initially numbered 1 @,@ 207 triremes . However , by his reckoning they lost approximately a third of these ships in a storm off the coast of Magnesia , 200 more in a storm off the coast of Euboea , and at least 50 ships to Allied action at the Battle of Artemisium . Herodotus claims that these losses were replaced in full , but only mentions 120 ships from the Greeks of Thrace and nearby islands as reinforcements . Aeschylus , who fought at Salamis , also claims that he faced 1 @,@ 207 warships there , of which 207 were " fast ships " . Diodorus and Lysias independently claim there were 1 @,@ 200 ships in the Persian fleet assembled at Doriskos in the spring of 480 BC . The number of 1 @,@ 207 ( for the outset only ) is also given by Ephorus , while his teacher Isocrates claims there were 1 @,@ 300 at Doriskos and 1 @,@ 200 at Salamis . Ctesias gives another number , 1 @,@ 000 ships , while Plato , speaking in general terms refers to 1 @,@ 000 ships and more . 
 The number 1 @,@ 207 appears very early in the historical record ( 472 BC ) , and the Greeks appear to have genuinely believed they faced that many ships . Because of the consistency in the ancient sources , some modern historians are inclined to accept 1 @,@ 207 as the size of the initial Persian fleet ; others reject this number , with 1 @,@ 207 being seen as more of a reference to the combined Greek fleet in the Iliad , and generally claim that the Persians could have launched no more than around 600 warships into the Aegean . However , very few appear to accept that there were this many ships at Salamis : most favour a number in the range 600 @-@ 800 . This is also the range given by adding the approximate number of Persian ships after Artemisium ( ~ 550 ) to the reinforcements ( 120 ) quantified by Herodotus . 
 = = Strategic and tactical considerations = = 
 The overall Persian strategy for the invasion of 480 BC was to overwhelm the Greeks with a massive invasion force , and complete the conquest of Greece in a single campaigning season . Conversely , the Greeks sought to make the best use of their numbers by defending restricted locations and to keep the Persians in the field for as long as possible . Xerxes had obviously not anticipated such resistance , or he would have arrived earlier in the campaigning season ( and not waited 4 days at Thermopylae for the Greeks to disperse ) . Time was now of the essence for the Persians – the huge invasion force could not be reasonably supported indefinitely , nor probably did Xerxes wish to be at the fringe of his empire for so long . Thermopylae had shown that a frontal assault against a well defended Greek position was useless ; with the Allies now dug in across the Isthmus , there was little chance of conquering the rest of Greece by land . However , as equally demonstrated by Thermopylae , if the Greeks could be outflanked , their smaller numbers of troops could be destroyed . Such an outflanking of the Isthmus required the use of the Persian navy , and thus the destruction of the Allied navy . Therefore , if Xerxes could destroy the Allied navy , he would be in a strong position to force a Greek surrender ; this seemed the only hope of concluding the campaign in that season . Conversely by avoiding destruction , or as Themistocles hoped , by crippling the Persian fleet , the Greeks could effectively thwart the invasion . 
 However , it was strategically not necessary for the Persians to actually fight this battle at Salamis . According to Herodotus , Queen Artemisia of Caria pointed this out to Xerxes in the run @-@ up to Salamis . Artemisia suggested that fighting at sea was an unnecessary risk , recommending instead : 
 If you do not hurry to fight at sea , but keep your ships here and stay near land , or even advance into the Peloponnese , then , my lord , you will easily accomplish what you had in mind on coming here . The Hellenes are not able to hold out against you for a long time , but you will scatter them , and they will each flee to their own cities . 
 The Persian fleet was still large enough to both bottle up the Allied navy in the straits of Salamis , and send ships to land troops in the Peloponnesus . However , in the final reckoning , both sides were prepared to stake everything on a naval battle , in the hope of decisively altering the course of the war . 
 The Persians were at a significant tactical advantage , outnumbering the Allies , but also having " better sailing " ships . The " better sailing " that Herodotus mentions was probably due to the superior seamanship of the crews ; most of the Athenian ships ( and therefore the majority of the fleet ) were newly built as according to Themistocles ' request to the Athenians to build a fleet of 200 triremes in 483 BC , and had inexperienced crews . It is important to note that despite the inexperienced crew on part of the Athenians , these newly constructed triremes would ultimately prove crucial in the forthcoming conflict with Persia . The most common naval tactics in the Mediterranean area at the time were ramming ( triremes being equipped with a ram at the bows ) , or boarding by ship @-@ borne marines ( which essentially turned a sea battle into a land one ) . The Persians and Asiatic Greeks had by this time begun to use a manoeuver known as diekplous . It is not entirely clear what this was , but it probably involved sailing into gaps between enemy ships and then ramming them in the side . This maneuver would have required skilled sailing , and therefore the Persians would have been more likely to employ it ; the Allies however , developed tactics specifically to counter this . 
 There has been much debate as to the nature of the Allied fleet compared to the Persian fleet . Much of this centres on the suggestion , from Herodotus , that the Allied ships were heavier , and by implication less maneuverable . The source of this heaviness is uncertain ; possibly the Allied ships were bulkier in construction , or that the ships were water @-@ logged since they had not been dried out in the winter ( though there is no real evidence for either suggestion ) . Another suggestion is that the heaviness was caused by the weight of fully armored hoplite marines ( 20 fully armored hoplites would have weighed 2 tons ) . This ' heaviness ' , whatever its cause , would further reduce the likelihood of them employing the diekplous . It is therefore probable that the Allies had extra marines on board if their ships were less maneuverable , since boarding would then be the main tactic available to them ( at the cost of making the ships even heavier ) . Indeed , Herodotus refers to the Greeks capturing ships at Artemisium , rather than sinking them . It has been suggested that the weight of the Allied ships may also have made them more stable in the winds off the coast of Salamis , and made them less susceptible to ramming ( or rather , less liable to sustain damage when rammed ) . 
 Tactically speaking then , a battle in the open sea , where their superior seamanship and numbers could count was preferable for the Persians . For the Greeks , the only realistic hope of a decisive victory was to draw the Persians into a constricted area , where their numbers would count for little . The battle at Artemisium had seen attempts to negate the Persian advantage in numbers , but ultimately the Allies may have realised that they needed an even more constricted channel in order to defeat the Persians . Therefore , by sailing into the Straits of Salamis to attack the Greeks , the Persians were playing into the Allies ' hands . It seems probable that the Persians would not have attempted this unless the Persians were confident of the collapse of the Allied navy , and thus Themistocles 's subterfuge appears to have played a key role in tipping the balance in the favor of the Greeks . Salamis was , for the Persians , an unnecessary battle and a strategic mistake . 
 = = The battle = = 
 The actual battle of Salamis is not well described by the ancient sources , and it is unlikely that anyone ( other than perhaps Xerxes ) involved in the battle had a clear idea what was happening across the width of the straits . What follows is more of a discussion than a definitive account . 
 = = = Dispositions = = = 
 In the Allied fleet , the Athenians were on the left , and on the right were probably the Spartans ( although Diodorus says it was the <unk> and <unk> ) ; the other contingents were in the center . The Allied fleet probably formed into two ranks , since the straits would have been too narrow for a single line of ships . Herodotus has the Allied fleet in a line running north @-@ south , probably with the northern flank off the coast of modern @-@ day Saint George 's Islet ( <unk> <unk> ) , and the southern flank off the coast of Cape <unk> ( part of Salamis ) . Diodorus suggests the Allied fleet was aligned east @-@ west , spanning the straits between Salamis and Mount Aigaleo ; however , it was perhaps unlikely that the Allies would have rested one of their flanks against Persian occupied territory . 
 It seems relatively certain that the Persian fleet was sent out to block the exit from the Straits the evening before the battle . Herodotus clearly believed that the Persian fleet actually entered the Straits at nightfall , planning to catch the Allies as they fled . However , modern historians have greatly debated this point , with some pointing out the difficulties of maneuvering in this confined space by night , and others accepting Herodotus 's version . There are thus two possibilities ; that during the night the Persians simply blocked the exit to the Straits , and then entered the straits in daylight ; or that they entered the straits and positioned themselves for battle during the night . Regardless of when they attempted it , it seems likely that the Persians pivoted their fleet off the tip of Cape <unk> , so that from an initial east @-@ west alignment ( blocking the exit ) , they came round to a north @-@ south alignment ( see diagram ) . The Persian fleet seems to have been formed into three ranks of ships ( according to Aeschylus ) ; with the powerful Phoenician fleet on the right flank next to Mount Aigaleo , the Ionian contingent on the left flank and the other contingents in the centre . 
 Diodorus says that the Egyptian fleet was sent to circumnavigate Salamis , and block the northern exit from the Straits . If Xerxes wanted to trap the Allies completely , this maneuver would have made sense ( especially if he was not expecting the Allies to fight ) . However , Herodotus does not mention this ( and possibly alludes to the Egyptian presence in the main battle ) , leading some modern historians to dismiss it ; though again , others accept it as a possibility . Xerxes had also positioned around 400 troops on the island known as <unk> , in the middle of the exit from the straits , in order to kill or capture any Greeks who ended up there ( as a result of shipwreck or grounding ) . 
 = = = The opening phase = = = 
 Regardless of what time they entered the straits , the Persians did not move to attack the Allies until daylight . Since they were not planning to flee after all , the Allies would have been able to spend the night preparing for battle , and after a speech by Themistocles , the marines boarded and the ships made ready to sail . According to Herodotus , this was dawn , and as the Allies " were putting out to sea the barbarians immediately attacked them " . If the Persians only entered the straits at dawn , then the Allies would have had the time to take up their station in a more orderly fashion . 
 Aeschylus claims that as the Persians approached ( possibly implying that they were not already in the Straits at dawn ) , they heard the Greeks singing their battle hymn ( paean ) before they saw the Allied fleet : 
 Herodotus recounts that , according to the Athenians , as the battle began the Corinthians hoisted their sails and began sailing away from the battle , northwards up the straits . However , he also says that other Greeks denied this story . If this did in fact occur , one possible interpretation is that these ships had been a decoy sent to reconnoitre the northern exit from the straits , in case the arrival of the encircling Egyptian detachment was imminent ( if indeed this also occurred ) . Another possibility ( not exclusive of the former ) is that the departure of the Corinthians triggered the final approach of the Persians , suggesting as it did that the Allied fleet was disintegrating . At any rate , if they indeed ever left , the Corinthians soon returned to the battle . 
 Approaching the Allied fleet in the crowded Straits , the Persians appear to have become disorganised and cramped in the narrow waters . Moreover , it would have become apparent that , far from disintegrating , the Greek fleet was lined up , ready to attack them . However , rather than attacking immediately , the Allies initially appeared to back their ships away as if in fear . According to Plutarch , this was to gain better position , and also in order to gain time until the early morning wind . Herodotus recounts the legend that as the fleet had backed away , they had seen an apparition of a woman , asking them " <unk> , how far will ye yet back your ships ? " However , he more plausibly suggests that whilst the Allies were backing water , a single ship shot forward to ram the nearest Persian vessel . The Athenians would claim that this was the ship of the Athenian Ameinias of Pallene ; the Aeginetans would claim it as one of their ships . The whole Greek line then followed suit and made straight for the disordered Persian battle line . 
 = = = The main battle = = = 
 The details of the rest of the battle are generally sketchy , and no one involved would have had a view of the entire battlefield . <unk> were generally armed with a large ram at the front , with which it was possible to sink an enemy ship , or at least disable it by shearing off the banks of oars on one side . If the initial ramming was not successful , marines boarded the enemy ship and something similar to a land battle ensued . Both sides had marines on their ships for this eventuality ; the Greeks with fully armed hoplites ; the Persians probably with more lightly armed infantry . 
 Across the battlefield , as the first line of Persian ships was pushed back by the Greeks , they became fouled in the advancing second and third lines of their own ships . On the Greek left , the Persian admiral Ariabignes ( a brother of Xerxes ) was killed early in the battle ; left disorganised and leaderless , the Phoenician squadrons appear to have been pushed back against the coast , many vessels running aground . In the centre , a wedge of Greek ships pushed through the Persians lines , splitting the fleet in two . According to Plutarch , Ariabignes was killed by Ameinias and <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) of Pallene . When Ariabignes attempted to board on their ship , they hit him with their spears , and thrust him into the sea . Plutarch also mention that it was Artemisia who recognized Ariabignes body floating among the shipwrecks and brought it back to Xerxes . 
 Herodotus recounts that Artemisia , the Queen of Halicarnassus , and commander of the Carian contingent , found herself pursued by the ship of Ameinias of Pallene . In her desire to escape , she attacked and rammed another Persian vessel , thereby convincing the Athenian captain that the ship was an ally ; Ameinias accordingly abandoned the chase . However , Xerxes , looking on , thought that she had successfully attacked an Allied ship , and seeing the poor performance of his other captains commented that " My men have become women , and my women men " . The friendly ship she sank was a <unk> ship and the king of the <unk> , <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) was on <unk> of the crew of the <unk> ship survived . 
 The Persian fleet began to retreat towards Phalerum , but according to Herodotus , the Aeginetans ambushed them as they tried to leave the Straits . The remaining Persian ships limped back to the harbour of Phalerum and the shelter of the Persian army . The Athenian general Aristides then took a detachment of men across to <unk> to slaughter the garrison that Xerxes had left there . The exact Persian casualties are not mentioned by Herodotus . However , he claims that the next year , the Persian fleet numbered 300 triremes . The number of losses then depends on the number of ships the Persian had to begin with ; something in the range of 200 – 300 seems likely , based on the above estimates for the size of the Persian fleet . According to Herodotus , the Persians suffered many more casualties than the Greeks because most Persians did not know how to swim . Xerxes , sitting on Mount Aigaleo on his throne , witnessed the carnage . Some ship @-@ wrecked Phoenician captains tried to blame the Ionians for cowardice before the end of the battle . Xerxes , in a foul mood , and having just witnessed an Ionian ship capture an <unk> ship , had the Phoenicians beheaded for slandering " more noble men " . According to Diodorus , Xerxes " put to death those Phoenicians who were chiefly responsible for beginning the flight , and threatened to visit upon the rest the punishment they deserved " , causing the Phoenicians to sail to Asia when night fell . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of Salamis , Xerxes attempted to build a pontoon bridge or causeway across the straits , in order to use his army to attack the Athenians ; however , with the Greek fleet now confidently patrolling the straits , this proved futile . Herodotus tells us that Xerxes held a council of war , at which the Persian general Mardonius tried to make light of the defeat : 
 Sire , be not grieved nor greatly distressed because of what has befallen us . It is not on things of wood that the issue hangs for us , but on men and horses ... If then you so desire , let us straightway attack the Peloponnese , or if it pleases you to wait , that also we can do ... It is best then that you should do as I have said , but if you have resolved to lead your army away , even then I have another plan . Do not , O king , make the Persians the laughing @-@ stock of the Greeks , for if you have suffered harm , it is by no fault of the Persians . Nor can you say that we have anywhere done less than brave men should , and if Phoenicians and Egyptians and <unk> and Cilicians have so done , it is not the Persians who have any part in this disaster . Therefore , since the Persians are in no way to blame , be guided by me ; if you are resolved not to remain , march homewards with the greater part of your army . It is for me , however , to enslave and deliver Hellas to you with three hundred thousand of your host whom I will choose . 
 Fearing that the Greeks might attack the bridges across the Hellespont and trap his army in Europe , Xerxes resolved to do this , taking the greater part of the army with him . Mardonius handpicked the troops who were to remain with him in Greece , taking the elite infantry units and cavalry , to complete the conquest of Greece . All of the Persian forces abandoned Attica , however , with Mardonius over @-@ wintering in Boeotia and Thessaly ; the Athenians were thus able to return to their burnt city for the winter . 
 The following year , 479 BC , Mardonius recaptured Athens ( the Allied army still preferring to guard the Isthmus ) . However , the Allies , under Spartan leadership , eventually agreed to try to force Mardonius to battle , and marched on Attica . Mardonius retreated to Boeotia to lure the Greeks into open terrain and the two sides eventually met near the city of Plataea ( which had been razed the previous year ) . There , at the Battle of Plataea , the Greek army won a decisive victory , destroying much of the Persian army and ending the invasion of Greece ; whilst at the near @-@ simultaneous Battle of Mycale the Allied fleet destroyed much of the remaining Persian fleet . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Battle of Salamis marked the turning point in the Greco @-@ Persian wars . After Salamis , the Peloponnesus , and by extension Greece as an entity , was safe from conquest ; and the Persians suffered a major blow to their prestige and morale ( as well as severe material losses ) . At the following battles of Plataea and Mycale , the threat of conquest was removed , and the Allies were able to go on the counter @-@ offensive . The Greek victory allowed Macedon to revolt against Persian rule ; and over the next 30 years , Thrace , the Aegean Islands and finally Ionia would be removed from Persian control by the Allies , or by the Athenian @-@ dominated successor , the Delian League . Salamis started a decisive swing in the balance of power toward the Greeks , which would culminate in an eventual Greek victory , severely reducing Persian power in the Aegean . 
 Like the Battles of Marathon and Thermopylae , Salamis has gained something of a ' legendary ' status ( unlike , for instance , the more decisive Battle of Plataea ) , perhaps because of the desperate circumstances and the unlikely odds . A significant number of historians have stated that Salamis is one of the most significant battles in human history ( though the same is often stated of Marathon ) . In a more extreme form of this argument , some historians argue that if the Greeks had lost at Salamis , the ensuing conquest of Greece by the Persians would have effectively stifled the growth of Western Civilization as we know it . This view is based on the premise that much of modern Western society , such as philosophy , science , personal freedom and democracy are rooted in the legacy of Ancient Greece . Thus , this school of thought argues that , given the domination of much of modern history by Western Civilization , Persian domination of Greece might have changed the whole trajectory of human history . It is also worth mentioning that the celebrated blossoming of hugely influential Athenian culture occurred only after the Persian wars were won . 
 Militarily , it is difficult to draw many lessons from Salamis , because of the uncertainty about what actually happened . Once again the Allies chose their ground well in order to negate Persian numbers , but this time ( unlike Thermopylae ) had to rely on the Persians launching an unnecessary attack for their position to count . Since it brought about that attack , perhaps the most important military lesson is to be found in the use of deception by Themistocles to bring about the desired response from the enemy . 
 = = See Also = = 
 Battle of <unk> - a sea battle in which a small fleet of Korean ships defeated a far larger Japanese invasion fleet 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Herodotus , The Histories Perseus online version 
 Aeschylus , extract from The Persians 
 Ctesias , Persica ( excerpt in Photius 's epitome ) 
 Diodorus Siculus , Bibliotheca Historica 
 Thucydides , History of the Peloponnesian War 
 Ephorus , Universal History 
 Plutarch , Themistocles 
 Cicero , On the Laws 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Burn , A.R. ( 1985 ) . " Persia and the Greeks " in The Cambridge History of Iran , Volume 2 : The Median and Achaemenid Periods , Ilya Gershevitch , ed . Cambridge University Press . 
 Fehling , D. ( 1989 ) . Herodotus and His " Sources " : Citation , Invention , and Narrative Art . Translated by J.G. Howie . Leeds : Francis Cairns . 
 Finley , Moses ( 1972 ) . " Introduction " . Thucydides – History of the Peloponnesian War ( translated by Rex Warner ) . Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ 044039 @-@ 9 . 
 Green , Peter ( 1970 ) . The Year of Salamis , 480 – 479 BC . London : Weidenfeld and Nicolson ( ISBN 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 ) . 
 Green , Peter ( 1998 ) . The Greco @-@ Persian Wars . Berkeley : University of California Press ( hardcover , ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ 20573 @-@ 1 ) ( paperback , ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ 20313 @-@ 5 ) . 
 Hanson , Victor Davis ( 2001 ) . Carnage and Culture : Landmark Battles in the Rise of Western Power . New York : <unk> , 2001 ( hardcover , ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 ) ; New York : Anchor Books ( paperback , ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 ) . 
 Ιστορία του <unk> <unk> ( History of the Greek nation ) vol Β , <unk> <unk> ( Editorial Athens ) 1971 . 
 Holland , Tom ( 2005 ) . Persian Fire . London : Abacus ( ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 349 @-@ 11717 @-@ 1 ) . 
 Köster , A.J. ( 1934 ) . Studien zur Geschichte des Antikes Seewesens . Klio Belheft 32 . 
 Lazenby , JF . ( 1993 ) . The Defence of Greece 490 – 479 BC . Aris & Phillips Ltd . ( ISBN 0 @-@ 85668 @-@ 591 @-@ 7 ) . 
 Lee , Felicia R. ( 2006 ) . A Layered Look <unk> Ancient Greek Texts The New York Times , 27 November 2006 . 
 Pipes , David ( 1998 ) . " Herodotus : Father of History , Father of Lies " . Archived from the original on January 27 , 2008 . Retrieved 2008 @-@ 01 @-@ 18 . 
 Strauss , Barry ( 2004 ) . The Battle of Salamis : The Naval Encounter That Saved Greece — and Western Civilization . New York : Simon and Schuster ( hardcover , ISBN 0 @-@ 7432 @-@ 4450 @-@ 8 ; paperback , ISBN 0 @-@ 7432 @-@ 4451 @-@ 6 ) . 
