 = Stanley Savige = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Stanley George Savige , KBE , CB , DSO , MC , ED ( 26 June 1890 – 15 May 1954 ) was an Australian Army soldier and officer who served in the First World War and Second World War . 
 In March 1915 , after the outbreak of the First World War , Savige enlisted in the First Australian Imperial Force . He served in the ranks during the Gallipoli Campaign , and received a commission . He later served on the Western Front , where he was twice recommended for the Military Cross for bravery . In 1918 , he joined Dunsterforce and served in the Caucasus Campaign , during which he was instrumental in protecting thousands of Assyrian refugees . He subsequently wrote a book , Stalky 's Forlorn Hope , about his experiences . After the war he played a key role in the establishment of Legacy Australia , the war widows and orphans benefit fund . 
 During the early years of the Second World War , Savige commanded the 17th Infantry Brigade in the North African Campaign , the Battle of Greece and Syria – Lebanon Campaign . His outspoken criticism of professional soldiers earned him their rancour . He returned to Australia in early 1942 , and later commanded the 3rd Division in the Salamaua – Lae campaign . He ultimately rose to the rank of lieutenant general in the Australian Army , commanding the II Corps in the Bougainville Campaign . 
 In later life , Savige was a director of Olympic Tyre & Rubber Ltd from 1946 to 1951 and chairman of Moran & Cato Ltd from 1950 to 1951 . He was also chairman of the Central War Gratuity Board from 1946 to 1951 , and a commissioner of the State Savings Bank of Victoria . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stanley Savige was born on 26 June 1890 , in <unk> , Victoria , the eldest of eight children to Samuel Savige , a butcher , and his wife Ann Nora , née Walmsley . Stan Savige left Korumburra State School at the age of twelve to work as a blacksmith 's striker . While at Korumburra , he enlisted in the school junior cadets as a bugler . The family moved to Prahran , Victoria , in 1907 , where Savige worked at a variety of jobs and served in the Prahran senior cadets for 18 months , from 1907 to 1909 . He became a <unk> , forming the First Yarra Troop . Savige was an active member of the South Yarra Baptist Church , where he was a Sunday school teacher . Through his church activities , Savige met Lilian Stockton , to whom he became engaged on New Year 's Day , 1914 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 Savige enlisted in the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 6 March 1915 , and was posted to the 24th Infantry Battalion , which departed Melbourne for Egypt on the transport Euripides on 8 May 1915 . He was passed over for a commission due to his lack of education , but was promoted to corporal on 30 April and lance sergeant on 8 May . The 24th Infantry Battalion landed at Gallipoli on 5 September 1915 and took over part of the line at Lone Pine . Savige became company sergeant major on 20 September . There , he was commissioned as a second lieutenant on 9 November 1915 . During the evacuation of Gallipoli in December 1915 , Savige was one of three officers chosen to serve with the battalion rearguard . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 After a brief period of rest and reorganisation in Egypt , the 2nd Division — of which the 24th Infantry Battalion was part — embarked for France on 21 March 1916 . Savige became commander of the battalion scout platoon and led a number of night patrols into no man 's land . On 12 April , he became battalion intelligence officer and he was promoted to lieutenant on 1 May . Coming to the attention of his brigade commander , Brigadier General John Gellibrand , Savige was attached to 6th Infantry Brigade headquarters as a trainee brigade intelligence officer . " We expected a lot of the new B. I. O. , " Gellibrand later recalled , " and we got it . " Savige served in operations at Pozières and Mouquet Farm in July and August 1916 . At one point he ran through heavy shellfire on an errand . The orderly who went into it with him was never seen again . Savige was promoted to captain on 15 September . On 8 November , he was wounded at Flers but remained on duty . However , on 20 December he was admitted to hospital , suffering from influenza . Savige rejoined the 24th Infantry Battalion on 5 January 1917 and was appointed adjutant on 3 February . 
 In February 1917 , the German Army began a withdrawal from its positions in the Somme sector to the Hindenburg Line . Gellibrand was in temporary command of the 2nd Division , which at this time was opposite the village of Warlencourt . Patrols from the 6th Infantry Brigade found Warlencourt empty and occupied it unopposed . The 24th Infantry Battalion kept in contact with the Germans as they pulled back . On 13 March , the 24th Infantry battalion — now responsible for the entire brigade front — found <unk> empty and occupied it . By 17 March 1917 , the trenches in front of Bapaume were empty and the 6th Infantry Brigade occupied its northern suburbs . 
 In the Second Battle of Bullecourt during May 1917 , the 6th Infantry Brigade managed to penetrate the Hindenburg Line but its hold was precarious , as the 5th Infantry Brigade on its flank had not been able to manage the same feat . The brigade then faced strong German counter @-@ attacks . Savige was in the front trench , where he attempted to coordinate the 24th Infantry Battalion 's defence . The situation , Savige realised , was " somewhat serious " . Extraordinary tenacity and bravery was required to hold the position . " The 6th Brigade 's achievement on this day , " wrote Charles Bean , " had few parallels in the history of the AIF . In the whole line of battle from Vimy to near Quéant , theirs had been almost the only success . " 
 Savige was mentioned in despatches for Bullecourt , and recommended for the Military Cross . His citation read : 
 For conspicuous gallantry in action at the Hindenburg Line on 3rd May 1917 . After assisting to reorganise a party of broken infantry he acted as staff officer to the Senior Officer in the captured position . In this capacity he displayed most commendable coolness , energy and ability , in securing reliable information as to the progress of the action . 
 Savige was ultimately awarded the Military Cross on 1 January 1918 , for both his " consistent good work and devotion to duty " in the period spanning 26 February to 17 March 1917 and his " coolness under fire and tenacity of purpose " during the Second Battle of Bullecourt from April – May 1917 . He was mentioned in despatches a second time for his role in the Battle of Passchendaele , although he was originally recommended for a bar to his Military Cross . His citation read : 
 For conspicuous gallantry . On the night of the 3rd / 4th Oct. he assisted in laying out jumping @-@ off and direction tapes at Zonnebeke on which the attacking battalions formed up . He then checked their correctness — This was done under heavy fire . He then helped to guide the attackers to their positions . 
 On the night 8th / 9th October. he did similar work on Broodseinde Ridge under particularly heavy fire and throughout the attack on the 9th October. he remained in the forward area gathering information and forwarding it to Brigade Headquarters . This Officer has been on many occasions conspicuous for his gallantry . 
 Although Savige was informed that the citation had gone through , the medal was never gazetted . He became assistant brigade major of the 6th Infantry Brigade on 10 September and was acting brigade major from 22 November until 11 January 1918 . 
 = = = Iran = = = 
 Following the abdication of the Russian Tsar in 1917 , the Caucasus Front collapsed , leaving Central Asia open to the Turkish Army . The British War Office responded with a plan to send a force of hand @-@ picked British officers and NCOs to organise any remaining Russian forces or civilians who were ready to fight the Turkish forces . A request for Australian officers to participate was sent to the commander of the Australian Corps , General Sir William Birdwood . Some twenty officers , drawn from " the cream of the cream " of Australian leaders , were chosen , including Savige . This force became known as Dunsterforce after its commander , Major General Lionel Charles Dunsterville , the inspiration for the titular character of Rudyard Kipling 's novel Stalky & Co . Dunsterforce arrived in Baku in August 1918 . It was hoped that , from the Christian Georgian , Armenian and Assyrian people who had supported the Russians and historically feared the Turks , Dunsterforce could raise an army to contain the Turks but " the task proved superhuman " . 
 Following the capture of Urmia by the Turks , Savige discovered tens of thousands of fleeing Assyrian refugees . He deployed a small group of volunteers from his own force , along with refugees , to form a rearguard to hold back the Persians and Kurds who were murdering the refugees and carrying off the young girls as slaves . Official Historian Charles Bean later wrote that : 
 The stand made by Savige and his eight companions that evening and during half of the next day against hundreds of the enemy thirsting like wolves to get at the defenceless throng was as fine as any episode known to the present writer in the history of this war . 
 Savige was subsequently decorated with the Distinguished Service Order for his efforts on this occasion . His citation read : 
 For conspicuous gallantry and devotion to duty during the retirement of refugees from Sain <unk> to <unk> <unk> , 26 / 28th July , 1918 ; also at <unk> , 5 / 6th August . In command of a small party sent to protect the rear of the column of refugees , he by his resource and able dispositions kept off the enemy , who were in greatly superior numbers . He hung on to position after position until nearly surrounded , and on each occasion extricated his command most skilfully . 
 His cool determination and fine example inspired his men , and put heart into the frightened refugees . 
 For his services in Iran , Savige was also mentioned in despatches a third time . He later wrote a book about his experiences , entitled Stalky 's Forlorn Hope , which was published in Melbourne in 1920 . In November 1918 , he was evacuated to a hospital in Bombay , suffering an attack of malaria , and returned to Australia in January 1919 on the City of Exeter . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Savige married Lilian Stockton on 28 June 1919 at the South Yarra Baptist Church . Their marriage produced a daughter , Gwendolyn Lesley , who was born in 1920 . Savige also raised his two nephews , Stanley James and William , after his sister Hilda died in 1924 . Savige had to struggle to re @-@ establish himself in civilian life . He was unemployed for a time before finding work with a Melbourne wholesale firm . In 1923 he became sole agent for the Returned Soldiers ' Mill in Geelong . He was successful as a salesman and eventually became sole agent for all of Australia . In 1930 , he ran unsuccessfully for the Victorian Legislative Assembly Electoral district of Caulfield on the Nationalist Party of Australia ticket . 
 In 1923 , Gellibrand founded the Remembrance Club in Hobart , with the aim of encouraging returned servicemen in business . Savige visited Gellibrand in Hobart during August 1923 , and Gellibrand urged him to set up a similar club in Melbourne . Soon after Savige 's return to Melbourne , a group of ex @-@ servicemen met to say farewell to one of their number who was about to go to England . Savige used this opportunity to bring up the idea of a club similar to Gellibrand 's Remembrance Club . After several informal meetings , the Melbourne club 's inaugural meeting was held in Anzac House , Melbourne . Legacy Australia was founded as an ex @-@ servicemen 's club , but soon became a charitable organisation focusing on war widows and orphans . For the next 26 years , due to his commitment , energy and enthusiasm , Savige 's name became inseparable from both the club and the movement . 
 Savige joined the Militia on 19 February 1920 , with his AIF rank of captain . He served with Headquarters 3rd Division — then under Gellibrand — from July 1921 to November 1924 . He commanded the 37th Infantry Battalion from 1 December 1924 to 31 July 1928 , the 24th Infantry Battalion from 1 August 1928 to 31 May 1935 , and the 10th Infantry Brigade from 1 June 1935 to 12 October 1939 . Along the way , he was promoted to major on 1 July 1924 , lieutenant colonel on 1 July 1926 , colonel on 1 June 1935 , and brigadier on 1 May 1938 . His promotion , while neither meteoric nor exceptional , was still far faster than that enjoyed by regular officers like Frank Berryman , Horace Robertson , or George Alan Vasey , who had been majors in the AIF but remained at that rank for nearly twenty years , only to find themselves junior to Militia officers like Savige . For his part , Savige was a critic of the regulars . While commander of 10th Infantry Brigade , he insisted that Royal Military College , Duntroon graduates serve first as platoon commanders before assuming staff posts , so they could acquire an understanding of the men . He wrote to Gellibrand : 
 [ Staff Corps ] men are taken in hand at an early age and trained only to be soldiers . In peace they are chiefly military clerks with an ability to repeat the contents of the little red books . Some of course get beyond that stage but they are few in number . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Libya = = = 
 Shortly after the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , Prime Minister Robert Menzies announced the decision to form a Second Australian Imperial Force . He further directed that all commands in the new 6th Division would go to militiamen . Lieutenant General Sir Thomas Blamey — who was appointed commander of the 6th Division on 28 September — selected Savige to command its 17th Infantry Brigade , the brigade from Victoria . Savige was given the AIF serial number <unk> . He and Blamey had worked together when Blamey had commanded the 3rd Division from 1931 to 1937 , and Savige was " almost fanatically loyal to Blamey through bad as well as good times " . For regular officers , their exclusion from command positions was " the final straw " . Savige suspected — accurately in part — that Staff Corps officers were out to get him . A " general atmosphere of criticism and derogation " infected the force that would eventually sour relations between Blamey and some Staff Corps officers . 
 Considering its inexperience , Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade was given a complicated role in the Battle of Bardia . While the 2 / 6th Infantry Battalion made a demonstration on the right , the 2 / 5th Infantry Battalion , reinforced by part of the 2 / 7th Infantry Battalion , attempted to follow up the 16th Infantry Brigade 's attack , with the remainder of the 2 / 7th in reserve . The brigade had to move in four directions at once . The plan soon went wrong , as the 2 / 5th in particular suffered a series of mishaps . By nightfall , Colonel Frank Berryman , the divisional chief of staff , had reached the conclusion that the 17th Infantry Brigade had become too tired and disorganised for further effort . This was only partly due to enemy action ; the rest was attributable to Berryman 's own plan , which had dispersed the brigade and provided it with inadequate armoured and , in the final stages , artillery support . Savige also bore some of the blame , for failing to ensure that his subordinates understood and carried out the plan . 
 At the Battle of Tobruk , Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade was again split up and given a secondary role . However , in the advance on Derna , the brigade managed to beat Robertson 's 19th Infantry Brigade to Giovanni Berta . By late February , the campaign was over and Savige was tasked with holding a defensive line near El Agheila . He became convinced that German troops were moving into the area , but his concerns were dismissed by the Brigadier General Staff at I Corps , Brigadier Sydney Rowell . A month later , Savige was proven right when the Afrika Korps pounced on the British forces around El Agheila , but by then he and the 17th Infantry Brigade were in Egypt , preparing for the Battle of Greece . Although the campaign had raised doubts about his suitability for command — mostly resulting from his performance at Bardia , but also with regard to the running feud with Vasey , Berryman and Robertson — Savige was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire . His citation read : 
 Brigadier Savige commanded the 17th Aust . Inf . Bde in the Battles of Bardia ( 3 – 5 Jan ) Tobruk ( 21 – 22 Jan ) , Derna ( 24 – 31 Jan ) , and the pursuit to <unk> . He showed fine control organisation and leadership throughout , culminating in an excellent example of initiative and drive which broke the enemy flank west of Derna thus accelerating the enemy retreat and final defeat . 
 = = = Greece and Syria = = = 
 The 17th Infantry Brigade was the last to land in Greece , arriving at Piraeus on 12 April . Savige was placed in charge of Savige Force , consisting of the 2 / 5th , 2 / 6th , 2 / 7th and 2 / 11th Infantry Battalions , with armour , artillery , engineer and other support . He was given the mission of covering the Allied flank around <unk> . On 17 April , Savige received orders to withdraw from <unk> , leaving only a rearguard behind . The road behind him , however , was packed with vehicles , and a crucial bridge on the only reasonably good road back had accidentally been demolished . Savige elected to disregard his orders and hold his position until the road was clear . He then managed to withdraw , although his driver 's foot was broken in an air raid . Savige arrived back in Palestine on 1 May 1941 and began the task of rebuilding his brigade . For the campaign in Greece , he received his fourth mention in despatches . 
 In June 1941 , the 7th Division fought in the Syria – Lebanon Campaign . One of its problems was that it was trying to fight three battles with only two brigades , because the 18th Infantry Brigade that was normally part of the division was engaged in the Siege of Tobruk . Accordingly , Savige 's 17th Infantry Brigade headquarters was brought in to provide the 7th Division with a third brigade headquarters . Savige was given three battalions that had never worked together before — the 2 / 3rd and 2 / 5th Infantry Battalions and 2 / 2nd Pioneer Battalion . He scored a notable success in the Battle of Damour , which he rated as his most successful battle of the war , although his conduct was not above criticism by Berryman , who felt that Savige had located his headquarters too far back , resulting in failure to seize an important opportunity . Ultimately , though , this had no significant impact on the battle . 
 By June 1941 , Blamey had become concerned about Savige 's health . A thorough medical examination in August declared that Savige had reached a stage of complete exhaustion . Blamey therefore decided to send Savige and Brigadier J. J. Murray back to Australia on a recruiting campaign as " a graceful way of retiring with honour two officers who have done useful work in the Middle East but seemed to him unequal to the severe physical demands of fast @-@ moving modern warfare " . Savige said goodbye to the three battalions of the 17th Brigade at a special parade at <unk> in Syria on 15 December 1941 . At the time his next post was to have been Director of Recruiting and Propaganda in Australia . 
 = = = Defence of Australia = = = 
 Savige arrived in Australia on 5 January 1942 to find that his new appointment had been changed to commander of the 3rd Division , and he was promoted to the rank of major general two days later . The outbreak of war with Japan prompted a wholesale reorganisation of the forces in Australia and Savige was one of a number of officers with experience in the Middle East who was promoted and given command of a Home Army formation . Savige threw himself into the task of preparing his command for the war , weeding out the physically unfit and incompetent . By May , he had removed some 60 officers . Replacing them was another matter . The division was at less than half strength when Savige assumed command and was filled with large numbers of 18 @-@ year @-@ old conscripts . One new arrival was especially welcome : Lieutenant Colonel John Wilton , who was posted as General Service Officer , First Grade ( GSO1 ) in August . Savige later recalled that " I never had a more competent staff , nor such a co @-@ operative team , than that staff after Wilton came along . " The 3rd Division moved to southern Queensland in July , where it came under Lieutenant General Edmund Herring 's II Corps . In October , Herring succeeded Rowell as commander of New Guinea Force , and Savige became acting corps commander . With his attention focused on the corps , Savige relied on Wilton to supervise the training of the 3rd Division . 
 = = = Wau – Salamaua = = = 
 The 3rd Division was alerted to move to New Guinea in February 1943 , but Blamey did not initially intend for Savige to command it , for he felt that " it 's very tough going up there " , and he still had doubts about Savige 's physical fitness . A thorough medical examination cleared the way , and Savige departed for Port Moresby in March 1943 . The successful conclusion of the Battle of Wau left the 17th Infantry Brigade — now under Brigadier Murray Moten — at Wau as the only troops in contact with the enemy in the South West Pacific Area . Herring , now in command of New Guinea Force , ordered Savige to threaten the Japanese position at Salamaua ; the result was the Salamaua – Lae campaign . Despite the rugged conditions , Savige led from the front . He visited forward positions and flew over frontline areas wearing his scarlet general 's cap band to let his men — and any Japanese sniper — know that the general was on the job . 
 Once again , Savige would not escape controversy . In this case , difficulties arose from the fact that Herring failed to make it clear to Savige and Wilton exactly what was meant by " threaten " . What would end up being threatened by Savige 's very success was Blamey 's plan for the capture of Lae , which called for the Japanese defenders of Lae to be drawn away towards Salamaua . The campaign also included an acrimonious exchange between Savige and American commanders that threatened Allied harmony . This arose , ironically , because of Herring 's deliberately vague instructions , which he hoped would ensure Allied harmony . 
 On 15 August , Blamey and Berryman , now a major general , arrived in Port Moresby . Berryman was sent forward to visit Savige and evaluate his performance , with a brief to pass judgement on Savige 's conduct of the campaign — and relieve him if necessary . Although " it was an open secret that Berryman had a very low opinion of Savige 's military competence " , after surveying the situation for himself , Berryman was forced to admit to Wilton that he " never thought that he would have to admit that Savige was right . " Berryman returned to Port Moresby and informed Blamey and Herring that they had misjudged Savige . Nonetheless , in deference to Herring 's wishes , Blamey relieved Savige anyway . On 23 August , Savige , bitterly disappointed that he would not see the final capture of Salamaua , handed over the Salamaua operation to the 5th Division under Major General Edward Milford . Savige was awarded a Companion of the Order of the Bath for his services in the Salamaua campaign . His citation read : 
 Maj @-@ Gen. Savige had control of the Battle for Salamaua from 30 Jun. 43 till his relief on 26 Aug. 43 . The battle was finally won on 11 <unk> 43 — the credit for victory must rest with Maj @-@ Gen. Savige during whose period of command , the back of the enemy 's defence was broken . The nature of the country rendered great assistance to the defender , and careful planning alone enabled the defences to be overcome . The supplying of our forward troops was also a terrific problem . 
 Maj @-@ Gen. Savige triumphed over all these difficulties , his men were kept supplied , they were encouraged to endure the most dreadful hardships , and to overcome great difficulties of terrain . Maj @-@ Gen. Savige 's plans were well conceived and he saw them carried through . The success achieved is of the greatest importance to the Allied cause , and Maj @-@ Gen. Savige by his fine leadership has made a very real contribution to the ultimate success of the United nations . 
 The victories won over the enemy at the battles for Mubo and Komiatum were due to his well conceived plans and energetic execution . 
 = = = New Guinea = = = 
 In February 1944 , the appointment of Herring as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Victoria led to a vacancy at I Corps , for which General Blamey nominated both Vasey and Savige , but , " having regard to their respective careers " , recommended the latter . Army Minister Frank Forde queried Blamey 's recommendation , and asked who was the senior officer . Blamey explained that Savige was senior to Vasey — although not as senior as Arthur " Tubby " Allen , James Cannan or Eric Plant . Blamey pointed out that seniority was not the paramount concern for promotion at such a level , and that he was not prepared to recommend these officers at this time , whereupon Forde dropped his objection . General Douglas MacArthur considered Vasey 's supersession " outrageous " . 
 On 12 April 1944 , Savige 's I Corps headquarters moved up from Queensland to relieve that of Berryman ’ s II Corps at Finschhafen . The two staffs had hoped to exchange office equipment , thus saving on shipping , but Advanced LHQ ordered that each should move with all its stores . Instead , the designations of the two corps were exchanged , so that I Corps was still the corps in Australia and II Corps the one in New Guinea . On 20 April , II Corps was ordered to assume the designation and function of New Guinea Force and the existing headquarters of New Guinea Force in Port Moresby was broken up . Savige therefore assumed command of New Guinea Force , his new headquarters opening at Lae on 6 May . At this time , no major combat operations were taking place and activities were winding down in Australian New Guinea . New Guinea Force 's main role was rolling up the base installations and shipping units back to Australia . On 9 September 1944 , MacArthur discarded the task force organisation . Henceforth the US Sixth Army and Eighth Army and Lieutenant General Vernon Sturdee ’ s First Army reported directly to him . First Army headquarters arrived at Lae on 1 October and assumed control of Australian troops in New Guinea . At midnight , New Guinea Force was discontinued , and Savige 's headquarters became II Corps once more . 
 = = = Bougainville = = = 
 Although geographically the largest of the Solomon Islands , Bougainville was politically part of Australian New Guinea and Prime Minister John Curtin desired that Australia should contribute to the garrison . Savige ’ s II Corps was ordered to " reduce enemy resistance on Bougainville Island as opportunity offers without committing major forces " . " To a commander like General Savige , who was not only deeply imbued with the doctrine of aggressiveness which was an AIF article of faith in both world wars but also burning to end his military career in a swirl of action , " " wrote correspondent John Hetherington , Savige 's orders " were <unk> flexible . " GHQ reckoned that there were no more than 12 @,@ 000 Japanese left on Bougainville , while LHQ estimated 25 @,@ 000 . Actually , more than 40 @,@ 000 Japanese were still alive on Bougainville in November 1944 . 
 Savige 's sixth and last campaign of the war was free of controversy about his command . Once again , he had a talented regular officer as chief of staff , Brigadier Ragnar Garrett , with whom he had worked in Greece during 1941 and more recently in New Guinea . Moreover , as a corps commander , tactical details could be left to subordinates , although Savige still had to keep a close eye on them to ensure that they did not take unnecessary risks or incur needless casualties . Savige continued to tour the front lines wearing his scarlet cap band and flying his car flag . He also maintained his concern for , and rapport with , the ordinary soldiers under his command . The final campaign on Bougainville cost 516 Australian lives . Some 8 @,@ 500 Japanese were killed while 9 @,@ 800 died of other causes , leaving 23 @,@ 571 still alive when the war ended . On 8 September 1945 , Savige accepted their surrender at Torokina . 
 = = After the war = = 
 From October 1945 to May 1946 , Savige served as co @-@ ordinator of demobilisation and dispersal . He transferred to the Reserve of Officers on 6 June . Resuming his business interests , he was a director of Olympic Tyre & Rubber Ltd from 1946 to 1951 and chairman of Moran & Cato Ltd from 1950 to 1951 . He was also chairman of the Central War Gratuity Board from 1946 to 1951 and from 1951 a commissioner of the State Savings Bank of Victoria . He was a leader in Melbourne 's Anzac Day marches , a patron of a number of his former units ' associations , and honorary colonel of the 5th Battalion ( Victorian Scottish Regiment ) . 
 Blamey recommended Savige for a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire for the Salamaua campaign in October 1944 . A year later , he recommended Savige for a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath for the campaign on Bougainville . Both recommendations were turned down by the Labor government . Following the election of the coalition government in the 1949 election , Blamey wrote to the newly elected Prime Minister , Robert Menzies , requesting honours for his generals . This time he was successful , and Savige was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( Military Division ) in the King 's Birthday Honours on 8 June 1950 . In 1953 , he travelled to London to represent Legacy at the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II . 
 = = Death = = 
 Savige died of coronary artery disease at his home in Kew , Victoria on 15 May 1954 . He was accorded a funeral with full military honours at St Paul 's Cathedral , Melbourne . The service was conducted by the Chaplain of Southern Command and Bishop of Geelong , the Right Reverend Dr J. D. McKie , who told the congregation that " Sir Stanley 's greatest virtue was humanity . He had great consideration for his troops . He thought that they were not there just to be used , but to be helped . " A crowd of 3 @,@ 000 mourners watched him laid to rest at Kew Cemetery . Savige left an estate valued at £ 66 @,@ 000 . He was survived by his daughter Gwendolyn and his nephew Stanley , his wife having died two months earlier . In his will , he directed that his papers be donated to the Australian War Memorial , where they remain . The War Memorial also holds his portrait by Alfred Cook . In August 2006 , Australian @-@ Assyrian community leaders from Sydney and Melbourne gathered to commemorate Savige 's role in saving Assyrian refugees in 1918 , and the mayor of <unk> , Lisa Price , unveiled a bronze bust of the general . 
 = International Aerial Robotics Competition = 
 The International Aerial Robotics Competition ( IARC ) began in 1991 on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology and is the longest running university @-@ based robotics competition in the world . Since 1991 , collegiate teams with the backing of industry and government have fielded autonomous flying robots in an attempt to perform missions requiring robotic behaviors never before exhibited by a flying machine . In 1990 , the term “ aerial robotics ” was coined by competition creator Robert Michelson to describe a new class of small highly intelligent flying machines . The successive years of competition saw these aerial robots grow in their capabilities from vehicles that could at first barely maintain themselves in the air , to the most recent automatons which are self @-@ stable , self @-@ navigating , and able to interact with their environment — especially objects on the ground . 
 The primary goal of the competition has been to provide a reason for the state @-@ of @-@ the art in aerial robotics to move forward . Challenges set before the international collegiate community have been geared towards producing advances in the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art at an increasingly aggressive pace . From 1991 through 2009 , a total of six missions have been proposed . Each of them involved fully autonomous robotic behavior that was <unk> at the time and impossible for any robotic system fielded anywhere in the world , even by the most sophisticated military robots belonging to the super powers . 
 In October 2013 a new seventh mission was proposed . As with previous missions , the Mission 7 involves totally autonomous flying robots , but this is the first IARC mission to involve the interaction between multiple ground robots and even simultaneous competition between two aerial robots working against each other and against the clock to influence the behavior and trajectory of up to ten autonomous ground robots . 
 In 2016 , the International Aerial Robotics Competition and its creator were officially recognized during the Georgia legislative session in the form of " Senate Resolution 1255 ” which recognized it as the longest running aerial robotics competition in the world and for having been responsible for moving forward the state of the art in aerial robotics on several occasions during the past quarter century . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = First mission = = = 
 The initial mission to move a metallic disc from one side of an arena to another with a completely autonomous flying robot was seen by many as almost impossible . The college teams continued to improve their entries over the next two years when the competition saw its first autonomous takeoff , flight , and landing by a team from the Georgia Institute of Technology . Three years later in 1995 a team from Stanford University was able to acquire a single disk and move it from one side of the arena to the other in a fully autonomous flight — half a decade earlier than some pundits had predicted . 
 = = = Second mission = = = 
 The competition mission was then toughened and made a bit less abstract by requiring teams to search for a toxic waste dump , map the location of partially buried randomly oriented toxic waste drums , identify the contents of each drum from the hazard labels found somewhere on the outside of each drum , and bring a sample back from one of the drums — all without any human intervention whatsoever . 
 In 1996 a team from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Boston University , with backing from Draper Labs , created a small fully autonomous flying robot that repeatedly and correctly mapped the location of all five of the toxic waste drums , and correctly identified the contents of two from the air , thereby completing approximately seventy five percent of the mission . The following year , an aerial robot developed by a team from Carnegie Mellon University completed the entire mission . 
 = = = Third mission = = = 
 The third mission was begun in 1998 . It was a search and rescue mission requiring fully autonomous robots to take off , fly to a disaster area and search for survivors and the dead amid raging fires , broken water mains , clouds of toxic gas , and rubble from destroyed buildings . The scenario was recreated at the U.S. Department of Energy 's Hazardous Material Management and Emergency Response ( HAMMER ) training facility where the above hazards could be recreated . Because of the realism of the scenario , <unk> were used instead of human actors to simulate survivors incapable of extracting themselves from the disaster area . 
 An aerial robot from Germany 's Technische Universität Berlin was able to detect and avoid all of the obstacles ( many of which could have destroyed the robot itself ) , identify all the dead on the ground and the survivors ( distinguishing between the two based on movement ) , and relay pictures of the survivors along with their locations back to first responders who would attempt a rescue . This mission was completed in 2000 . 
 = = = Fourth mission = = = 
 The fourth mission was initiated in 2001 . This fully autonomous mission involved three scenarios requiring the same autonomous behavior . 
 The first scenario was a hostage rescue mission where a submarine 3 kilometers off the coast of a third world nation must send in an aerial robot to find a coastal city , identify the embassy where the hostages are being held , locate valid openings in the embassy building , enter ( or send in a sensor probe / subvehicle ) and relay pictures of the hostages back 3 km to the submarine prior to mounting an amphibious assault on the embassy to free the hostages . 
 The second scenario revolved around the discovery of an ancient mausoleum by archaeologists . An ancient virus contained in the mausoleum has quickly killed all the archaeological team , but prior to their death they radioed that a very important and undocumented tapestry is hanging inside . The local government is planning to cleanse the area with a fuel @-@ air explosion in 15 minutes , so the scientists will send in an autonomous aerial robot to find the mausoleum , enter it ( or send in a sensor probe / subvehicle ) and relay pictures of the tapestry back prior to the destruction of the mausoleum and its contents . 
 The third scenario involved an explosion at a nuclear reactor facility which shuts down two of three reactors . Everyone is killed in the disaster and scientists must send in an aerial robot to find the operating reactor building , enter the building ( or send in a sensor probe / subvehicle ) and relay pictures of the control panels to determine if a melt @-@ down is imminent . The scientists are forced to maintain a 3 kilometer stand @-@ off distance due to the extreme radiation hazard . 
 All three missions involve the same elements : 
 Rapid ingress over a 3 km path 
 Location of a building complex 
 Location of a specific building within the complex 
 Identification of valid openings in that building 
 Entry into the building by the aerial robot or a sensor @-@ carrying subvehicle 
 Relay of pictures from within back to the launch point 3 km away 
 Mission completion within 15 minutes 
 Full autonomy throughout all aspects of the mission 
 This fourth IARC mission was conducted at the U.S. Army 's Fort Benning Soldier Battle Lab using the McKenna <unk> ( Military Operations on Urban Terrain ) site , which replicates a complete German village created for war gaming when the main cold war threat was perceived to come through the Fulda Gap into Germany . The fourth mission was completed in 2008 with various teams having already demonstrated all of the required aerial robotic behaviors mandated by the fourth mission rules , except being able to demonstrate these behaviors seamlessly in under 15 minutes — a feat considered by the organizer and judges to be inevitable given a bit more time , and therefore no longer a significant challenge . Thus the fourth mission was terminated , $ 80 @,@ 000 in awards distributed , and the fifth mission established . 
 = = = Fifth mission = = = 
 The fifth mission picked up where the fourth mission left off by demonstrating the fully autonomous aerial robotic behaviors necessary to rapidly negotiate the confined internal spaces of a structure once it has been penetrated by an air vehicle . The nuclear reactor complex explosion scenario of the fourth mission was used as the backdrop for the fifth mission . The fifth mission required a fully autonomous aerial vehicle ( presupposed to have been launched from a " mothership " just outside the structure as demonstrated during the fourth mission ) to penetrate the structure and negotiate the more complex interior space containing hallways , small rooms , obstacles , and dead ends in order to search for a designated target without the aid of global @-@ positioning navigational aids , and relay pictures back to a monitoring station some distance from the structure . The First Symposium on Indoor Flight Issues was held in conjunction with this 2009 IARC event . 
 = = = Sixth mission = = = 
 The sixth mission began in 2010 as an extension of the fifth Mission theme of autonomous indoor flight behavior , however the sixth mission demanded more advanced behaviors than were currently possible by any aerial robot extant in 2010 . This espionage mission involved covertly stealing a flash drive from a particular room in a building , for which there was no a priori knowledge of the floor plan , and depositing an identical drive to avoid detection of the theft . The 2010 Symposium on Indoor Flight Issues was held concurrently at the University of Puerto Rico - Mayagüez during the 20th anniversary competition . The Official Rules for the current 6th Mission are available at the Competition web site . 
 = = = Seventh mission = = = 
 The seventh mission began in 2014 demanding more advanced behaviors than were currently possible by any aerial robot extant in 2014 . The mission involves autonomous aerial robots controlling autonomous ground robots <unk> . The mission is divided into mission 7a and 7b . Mission 7a requires a single autonomous aerial robot to herd as many of the 10 autonomous ground robot targets as possible , across the green boundary line in under 10 minutes . The arena is 20m x 20m ( 65 @.@ 62 feet x 65 @.@ 62 feet ) and has a green boundary line at one end , a red boundary line at the opposite end , and white sidelines . The pattern on the floor of the arena is unknown to the aerial robot designers a priori , however it is known that there is a 1m x 1m ( 3 @.@ 28 feet x 3 @.@ 28 feet ) white square grid pattern overlaid upon the arena . Other than what is seen on the arena floor , there are neither walls for SLAM mapping nor GPS availability . Techniques such as optical flow or optical <unk> are possible solutions to navigation within the arena . 
 In addition to the 10 ground robot targets , there are 4 " tall " robot obstacles ( as much as 2m ( 6 @.@ 56 feet in height ) which circulate within the arena . Collisions with obstacle ground robots ends the run with no score . The ( non obstacle ) ground robot targets automatically reverse direction every 20 seconds and have up to 20 ° of noise applied to their trajectories at 5 second intervals . If an aerial robot touches the ground robot on top with a magnet , the ground robot will turn clockwise 45 ° . If the aerial robot blocks its forward motion by landing in front of it , the ground robot targets will reverse direction . Ground robot targets that feely escape the arena count against the aerial robot 's team score . The autonomous aerial robots must decide which ground robots are in imminent danger of crossing any boundary but the green one , and redirect them toward the green boundary . 
 Five of the 10 ground robot targets are green and 5 are red . Mission 7b pits the best teams from 7a against each other , one on one , to get as many of its own green ground robots across the green boundary while misdirecting the opponent 's red ground robots . Similarly , the opponent is trying to get as many of its red ground robots across the red boundary while misdirecting the opponent 's green ground robots . 
 The Official Rules for the current 7th Mission are available at the Competition web site . In addition , a video derived from the August 2014 events held at the American Venue ( the Georgia Institute of Technology 's <unk> Pavilion ) and Asia / Pacific Venue ( Yantai China ) , explains the details of mission 7 graphically . 
 = = Participants = = 
 Collegiate teams participating in the IARC have come primarily from the United States and the Peoples Republic of China , but also from Germany , England , Switzerland , Spain , Canada , Chile , Qatar , Iran , and India . Teams range in size from several students , up to twenty or more . Both undergraduate and graduate students populate the teams , but some teams have been composed entirely of undergraduates or postgraduates . Industry is not permitted to enter , but it may assist the student teams with funding and equipment . 
 = = Aerial robots = = 
 The aerial robots vary in design from fixed wing airplanes , to conventional helicopters , to ducted fans , to airships , and beyond to bizarre hybrid creations . Because the competition focuses on fully autonomous behavior , the air vehicle itself is of less importance . 
 Teams choosing to develop new air vehicle types have never won , as they are disadvantaged in comparison to those which adapt existing , working , air vehicles , and can therefore concentrate on performing the mission rather than developing something that will fly at all . As a result , adaptations of conventional rotary wing and fixed wing entries have always been the overall winners , with airships and ducted fans a close second . 
 Aerial robots must be unmanned and autonomous , and must compete based on their ability to sense the semi @-@ structured environment of the competition arena . They may be intelligent or preprogrammed , but they must not be controlled by a remote human operator . Computational power need not be carried on the air vehicle itself . Computers operating from standard commercial power may be set up outside the competition arena boundary and <unk> or bi @-@ directional data may be transmitted to / from the vehicles in the arena . Size or weight constraints are normally placed on the aerial robots , which must be equipped with a method of manually activated remote override of the primary propulsion system . 
 = = Venues = = 
 The International Aerial Robotics Competition was first held on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology ( first mission , 1991 – 1995 ) . Walt Disney World 's EPCOT Center asked that the competition move to its location for the second mission , where it was held at the entrance to the park during 1996 and 1997 . The U.S. Department of Energy 's Hazardous Material Management and Emergency Response ( HAMMER ) training facility then brought the IARC to Richland WA from 1998 to 2000 for the conduct of the third mission . The fourth mission began in 2001 at the U.S. Navy 's Webster Field in Maryland , but was moved to the Canada Olympic Village ( Calgary , Canada ) the following year because Webster Field was unsuitable . Weather , difficulty in airspace management , and extreme electromagnetic interference drove the IARC to an ideal venue where these issues could be managed : the U.S. Army 's Fort Benning Soldier Battle Lab , McKenna <unk> site . For the fourth mission scenarios , the existence of the uninhabited McKenna village provides the perfect venue . Due to the nature of the challenge , the fifth mission took place in an indoor location at the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez . The sixth mission was initiated in the coliseum on the campus of the University of Puerto Rico at Mayagüez during August 2010 , however the sixth mission was moved to Grand Forks , North Dakota beginning in 2011 . A second venue was established in Beijing China beginning in 2012 . This " Asia / Pacific Venue " serves the Asian and Australian continents while the " American Venue " serves the American , European , and African continents . Teams are free to enter the competition at either venue . Beginning in August 2012 , the two venues conducted the sixth mission under the same set of rules . The new seventh mission was begun at the <unk> Pavilion on the campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology ( American Venue ) and in Yantai , Shandong Province , China ( Asia / Pacific Venue ) during August 2014 . 
 = = Prizes = = 
 IARC prizes have traditionally been " winner take all " , although during the competition 's early years monetary progress awards were given to further development of the best performers . With the fourth mission it was realized that there would be no quick winners , and that several years of development would be required by each of the teams . Therefore , an incremental " growing prize pot " was established , to which the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International Foundation adds another US $ 10 @,@ 000 each year . The 2008 prize level was set at a total of $ 80 @,@ 000 . Any team completing the fourth mission in under 15 minutes would receive the entire $ 80 @,@ 000 prize , otherwise the prize would be distributed based on 2008 competitor performance most closely approaching the 15 @-@ minute mission goal . By 2008 , Levels 1 through 3 of the fourth mission had been demonstrated , proving that all required aerial robotic behaviors were possible , but by the end of the 2008 event , no single team was able to sequentially and seamlessly demonstrate all behaviors in under 15 minutes . The $ 80 @,@ 000 was therefore divided between the ten finalists : ( Georgia Institute of Technology received $ 27 @,@ 700 ; Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University $ 17 @,@ 700 ; and Embry Riddle / DeVry Calgary $ 12 @,@ 200 , with the remainder shared between the other finalists based on merit ) . $ 10 @,@ 000 was awarded to a team from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2009 which , in addition to receiving the AUVSI @-@ sponsored prize award , also received their $ 1 @,@ 000 application fee back under the incentive program outlined in the Official IARC Rules for 2009 which stated that any team completing the fifth mission during the first year of the mission , would receive a full rebate of their application fee . In August 2013 , a team from Tsinghua University completed the entire sixth mission , thereby winning $ 40 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Spin offs = = 
 The competition creator , Robert Michelson , is past President of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International ( AUVSI ) . The IARC was first established with seed money for logistics and a grand prize that was backed by the Association . After the initial success and tremendous media attention garnered by the IARC , the AUVSI launched the Intelligent Ground Vehicle Competition a few years later in Detroit , MI . This was organized by AUVSI Board member , Jerry Lane who worked at the U.S. Army Tank Automotive Command at the time . In 1998 , the underwater community was represented when AUVSI and the U.S. Office of Naval Research teamed up to offer the first International Autonomous Underwater Vehicle Competition which is held annually in the U.S. All of these competitions , land , sea , and air , have at their core , " full autonomy " as a distinctive characteristic . The Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International Foundation continues to support these competitions with logistics and prize money although there are numerous industry co @-@ sponsors as well . 
 = = Selected IARC Reports and Publications = = 
 Michelson , R.C. , “ Autonomous Aerial Robots , ” Unmanned Systems , Volume 29 - No. 10 , October 2011 , Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International , Washington , D.C. , pp 38 – 42 
 Howe , J. , <unk> , M. , <unk> , J. , et al . , " Design and Development of South Dakota School of Mines and Technology ’ s Aerial Robotic Reconnaissance System " , 1994 Proceedings of the AUVSI . 
 Chapuis , J. , Eck , C. , <unk> , H.P. , Mudra , R. , " The Swiss Entry into the 1996 International Aerial Robotics Competition , " 1996 Proceedings of the AUVSI , July 1996 , Orlando , FL , pp. 947 – 953 
 Padgett , W.T. , " Teaching design through design competition , " Frontiers in Education <unk> Teaching and Learning in an Era of Chang , 27th Annual Conference Proceedings , 5 – 8 November 1997 , <unk> , pp. 1477 – 1480 
 Koo , T.J. , Shim , D.H. , <unk> , O. , <unk> , B. , Ma , Y. , Hoffman , F. , Sastry , S. , " Hierarchical Hybrid System Design on Berkeley Unmanned Autonomous Aerial Vehicle , " 1998 Proceedings of the AUVSI , July 1998 
 Greer , D. , McKerrow , P. , Abrantes , J. , " Robots in Urban Search and Rescue Operations , " Proceedings of the 2002 Australasian Conference on Automation , Auckland , Australian Robotics and Automation Association , 27 – 29 November 2002 , pp. 25 – 30 
 Proctor , A.A. , Kannan , S.K. , Raabe , C. , Christophersen , H.B. , and Johnson , <unk> , “ Development of an Autonomous Aerial Reconnaissance System at Georgia Tech , ” Proceedings of the Association for Unmanned Vehicle Systems International Unmanned Systems Symposium & Exhibition , 2003 . 
 = Calogero Vizzini = 
 Calogero Don Calò Vizzini ( July 24 , 1877 – July 10 , 1954 ) was a historical Mafia boss of Villalba in the Province of Caltanissetta , Sicily . Vizzini was considered to be one of the most influential and legendary Mafia bosses of Sicily after World War II until his death in 1954 . In the media he was often depicted as the " boss of bosses " – although such a position does not exist in the loose structure of Cosa Nostra . 
 He was the archetype of the paternalistic " man of honour " of a rural Mafia that disappeared in the 1960s and 1970s . In those days a mafioso was seen by some as a social intermediary and a man standing for order and peace . In the first stage of his career he used violence to establish his position , but in the second phase he limited recourse to violence , turned to principally legal sources of income , and exercised his power in an open and legitimate manner . 
 Vizzini is the central character in the history of direct Mafia support for the Allied Forces during the invasion of Sicily in 1943 . After World War II he became the personification of the reinstatement of Cosa Nostra during the Allied occupation and the subsequent restoration of democracy after the repression under Fascist rule . Initially he supported the separatist movement , but changed allegiance to the Christian Democrat party , when it became clear that Sicilian independence was unfeasible . 
 When he died in 1954 , thousands of peasants dressed in black , and high @-@ ranking mafiosi , politicians and priests took part in his funeral . The funeral epitaph stated that " his ' mafia ' was not criminal , but stood for respect of the law , defense of all rights , greatness of character . It was love . " However , Don Calo 's rise to power and persistence in power was tied with extortion , violence and murder . Vizzini ’ s stature as an all powerful Mafia boss rose to mythical proportions , but more recently historians have moderated his magnitude . 
 = = Early years in Villalba = = 
 Vizzini was born in Villalba , a village in the Province of Caltanissetta , with a population of approximately 4 @,@ 000 people at the time . This area in the middle of Sicily , known as the " Vallone " , was a poor region where most people lived off subsistence agriculture . His father , Beniamino Vizzini , was a peasant , but managed to marry into a slightly more well @-@ off family that owned some land . A member of his mother ’ s family , Giuseppe Scarlata , had risen to high eminence in the Catholic Church . Calogero ’ s brothers , Giovanni and Giuseppe ( not to be confused with the bishop of Noto of the same name ) , both became priests in Villalba . Calogero Vizzini , however , was semi @-@ literate and did not finish elementary school . 
 The Mafia of Villalba was of relatively recent origin , as it did not go back to the 1860s , considered to be the period when the Mafia emerged around Palermo . It started as a form of private protection and has little to do with large estates as was the case in many other rural areas where many mafiosi started as caretakers and lease @-@ holders ( <unk> or bailiff ) for absentee landlords . 
 In the 1890s some people – including the young Calogero Vizzini – decided to do something about the absence of peace and security in the countryside . The state police at the time was as much a danger as the brigands . The Villalba Mafia thus emerged as an alternative social regime centred on the membership in church @-@ sponsored associations that generated considerable social capital . It later transformed into a protection racket , victimizing villagers and landowners alike through violence , intimidation and <unk> . 
 Don Calò once explained how he saw the Mafia when he was interviewed by one of Italy ’ s most famous journalists , Indro Montanelli , for the Corriere della Sera ( October 30 , 1949 ) : 
 " The fact is that in every society there has to be a category of people who straighten things out when situations get complicated . Usually they are functionaries of the state . Where the state is not present , or where it does not have sufficient force , this is done by private individuals . " 
 At one time , Vizzini ’ s criminal dossier included 39 murders , six attempted murders , 13 acts of private violence , 36 robberies , 37 thefts and 63 extortions . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Vizzini became a <unk> – an intermediary between the peasants who wanted their wheat milled into flour and the mills that were located near the coast . Mafiosi that did not tolerate any competition controlled the mills . In the case of Villalba the mills were some 80 kilometres away . To get the grain safely to the mills over roads infested by bandits was no easy task . 
 He arranged protection with the bandit Francesco Paolo Varsallona whose hide @-@ out was in the Cammarata mountains . Varsallona , an alleged " man of honour " , also supplied manpower to noble landowners to repress farmers ' revolts . Vizzini enrolled in Varsallona ’ s band while conducting his <unk> business . Both were arrested in 1902 when Varsallona ’ s band finally fell into a trap set up by the police . Vizzini stood trial with the rest of the band for " association to commit a crime " – but he was one of the few to be acquitted . 
 The episode had few negative consequences . In 1908 Vizzini was able to acquire a substantial part of the <unk> estate when he brokered a deal between the owner , the duke Francesco Thomas de <unk> who resided in Paris , and the local rural bank <unk> <unk> , whose president , the priest Scarlata , was Vizzini ’ s uncle . Vizzini held 290 hectares for himself and generously left the rest to the bank to lease out to Catholic peasants . 
 = = World War I and after = = 
 By 1914 , at the outbreak of World War I , Vizzini was the undisputed head of the Mafia in Villalba . The war provided the mafiosi with new opportunities for self @-@ enrichment when the Italian Army requisitioned horses and mules in Sicily for the cavalry and artillery . Vizzini came to an agreement with the Army Commission to delegate the responsibilities to him . He collected a poll tax on the animals whose owners wanted to avoid requisition . He was also the broker for animals that were rustled for the occasion , buying at a low price from the hustlers and selling at market prices to the Army . 
 However , too many horses and mules died of diseases or old age before they even reached the battlefield and the army ordered an inquiry . In 1917 , Vizzini was sentenced to 20 years in first instance for fraud , corruption and murder , but he was absolved thanks to powerful friends who exonerated him . He made his fortune on the black market during World War I , and expanded his activities to the sulphur mines . As a representative of a consortium of sulphur mine operators , Vizzini participated in high @-@ level meetings in Rome and London concerning government subsidies and tariffs , next to such men as Guido <unk> of <unk> chemical industries and Guido Jung , Finance minister during Benito Mussolini ’ s fascist regime . 
 Don Calò further established his fortune in 1922 when he led disgruntled peasants who grabbed land from the aristocratic absentee landlords . Vizzini bought three estates in the Villalba region ; he divided them up and handed them over – allegedly without making a penny , according to some – to a cooperative he had founded . According to a local villager , although every peasant got a plot , Don Calò kept more than 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 49 km ² ) for himself . 
 At the time , according to German sociologist Henner Hess , Vizzini could easily have had himself elected as a parliamentary deputy . Nevertheless , he preferred to remain in the background and instead advise voters and elected officials , playing the role of benevolent benefactor , strengthening his clientele and prestige . He was present at a dinner in July 1922 with the future ruler of Italy , Benito Mussolini , in Milan and supported the March on Rome by Mussolini in October 1922 , financing the column that marched from Sicily . 
 The authorities , however , had him listed as a dangerous criminal . A 1926 police report described Vizzini as a " dangerous cattle rustler , the Mafia boss of the province linked with cattle rustlers and Mafiosi of other provinces . " With the rise of Mussolini and Fascist rule , Vizzini ’ s fortunes changed . Mussolini did not tolerate a rival power on Sicily . He appointed Cesare Mori as the prefect of Palermo and granted special powers to persecute the Mafia . Vizzini claimed to have been incarcerated by Mori , but there are no historical records . He most likely was sent into confinement on the Italian mainland , although the exact town is not sure . Despite the confinement he was seen regularly in Villalba and Caltanissetta . 
 = = Alleged support for allied invasion of Sicily = = 
 In July 1943 , Calogero Vizzini allegedly helped the American army during the invasion of Sicily during World War II ( Operation Husky ) . In the US , the Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) had recruited mafia support to protect the New York City waterfront from Axis Powers sabotage since the US had entered the war in December 1941 . The ONI collaborated with Lucky Luciano and his partner Meyer Lansky , a Jewish mobster , in what was called Operation Underworld . The resulting Mafia contacts were also used by the US Office of Strategic Services ( OSS ) – the wartime predecessor of the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) – during the invasion of Sicily . Later , the alliance was maintained in order to check the growing strength of the Italian Communist party on the island . 
 Popular myth has it that a US Army airplane had flown over Villalba on the day of the invasion and dropped a yellow silk foulard marked with a black L ( indicating Luciano ) . Two days later , three American tanks rolled into Villalba after driving thirty miles through enemy territory . Don Calogero climbed aboard and spent the next six days traveling through western Sicily organizing support for the advancing American troops . As General Patton 's Third Division moved onward the signs of its dependence on Mafia support were obvious to the local population . The Mafia protected the roads from snipers , arranged enthusiastic welcomes for the advancing troops , and provided guides through the confusing mountain terrain . 
 While mafiosi supported the US Army , recent research has led most serious historians to dismiss the legend of Luciano 's foulard nowadays . Vizzini was unknown in other parts of Sicily at the time and had no overall power since prefect Mori ’ s operations had disconnected the network of the Mafia . According to historian Salvatore Lupo : 
 " The story about the Mafia supporting the Anglo @-@ Americans with the invasion in Sicily is just a legend without any foundation , on the contrary there are British and American documents about the preparation of the invasion that refute this conjecture ; the military power of the Allies was such that they did not need to use such measures . " 
 Historian Tim Newark unraveled the myth in his book Mafia Allies . A version that is probably closer to the truth is that Vizzini simply led a delegation of locals to meet an Allied patrol whose commander had asked to speak to whoever was in charge . He quotes local historian , Luigi Lumia , who described how a procession of people with Calogero Vizzini at the helm made its way towards the tanks chanting : ' Long Live America ' , ' Long Live the Mafia ' , ' Long Live Don Calo ' . Vizzini was taken to a command post outside Villalba and was interrogated about a recent firefight involving an American jeep on patrol . When Vizzini made it clear that the Italian soldiers had fled and the firefight had been caused by exploding ammunition , the frustrated US army official took his rage out in a stream of obscenities . Vizzini was utterly embarrassed by the incident and ordered his interpreter not to tell anybody what had happened . 
 = = Mayor of Villalba = = 
 The Mafia only became credible again after the end of the invasion . The Allied Military Government of Occupied Territories ( AMGOT ) , looking for anti @-@ fascist notables to replace fascist authorities , made Don Calogero Vizzini mayor of Villalba , as well as an Honorary Colonel of the US Army . In the chaos that followed the invasion of Sicily and the collapse of Fascism , the American army often relied on senior churchmen for advice on whom to trust . Don Calò was one of those recommended . He had a long record of involvement with Catholic social funds and there were several clergymen in his family . 
 A witness at the time described the appointment of Vizzini : " When Don Calò Vizzini was made mayor of the town almost the entire population was assembled in the square . Speaking in poor Italian , this American lieutenant said , ' This is your master ' . " According to Vizzini ’ s own account he was carried shoulder high through Villalba on the day he took office as mayor . He claimed to have acted as a peacemaker ; only his intervention saved his Fascist predecessor from being lynched . 
 Michele Pantaleone , who first reported the legend of Luciano ’ s foulard , observed the Mafia 's revival in his native village of Villalba . He described the consequences of AMGOT 's policies : 
 " By the beginning of the Second World War , the Mafia was restricted to a few isolated and scattered groups and could have been completely wiped out if the social problems of the island had been dealt with ... the Allied occupation and the subsequent slow restoration of democracy reinstated the Mafia with its full powers , put it once more on the way to becoming a political force , and returned to the <unk> Societa the weapons which Fascism had snatched from it . " 
 The Americans authorities apparently appreciated Vizzini , because he had opposed the Fascists and yielded substantial political power on the island . As far as Vizzini was concerned , he liked to boast about his excellent contacts with the Americans , and underlined their support for the separatist movement . Vizzini would become an important player in the midst of the separatist crisis later on . The Americans seem to have treated Vizzini as the Mafia ’ s overall boss . The OSS relied on the Mafia , and in particular on Vizzini , for its intelligence . His codename was ‘ Bull Frog ’ in secret communications . For a while , the chief of the OSS Palermo office , Joseph Russo , met him and other Mafia bosses ‘ at least once a month ’ . 
 = = King of the black market = = 
 Because of his excellent connections , Vizzini also became the ' king ' of the rampant post @-@ war black market and arranged to get Villalba 's overly inquisitive police chief killed . AMGOT relied on mafiosi who were considered staunch anti @-@ fascists because of the repression under Benito Mussolini . Many other mafiosi , such as Giuseppe Genco Russo , were appointed as mayors of their own hometowns . Coordinating the AMGOT effort was the former lieutenant @-@ governor of New York , Colonel Charles Poletti , whom Luciano once described as " one of our good friends . " 
 A peasant told the social activist Danilo <unk> in the 1950s how the situation was in Villalba after the Americans had landed : the Mafia " robbed the storehouses of the agrarian Co @-@ op and the army ’ s storehouses ; sold food , clothes , cars and lorries in Palermo on the black market . In Villalba all power was in their hands : church , Mafia , agricultural banks , latifundia , all in the hands of the same family … One used to go and see him and ask ' Can you do me this favour ? ' even for a little affair one had with some other person . " ' 
 Vizzini established one of the largest black market operations in southern Italy , together with the American gangster Vito Genovese , who had fled to Italy in 1937 after being accused of murder . Don Calogero sent truck caravans loaded with all the basic food commodities necessary for the Italian diet rolling northward to hungry Naples , where their cargoes were distributed by Genovese 's organization . All of the trucks were issued passes and export papers by the AMGOT administration in Naples and Sicily , and some corrupt American army officers even made contributions of gasoline and trucks to the operation . According to Luke <unk> , a lieutenant in the Carabinieri assigned to follow Genovese during his time in Italy : “ <unk> of food supplies were shipped from Vizzini to Genovese — all accompanied by the proper documents which had been certified by men in authority , Mafia members in the service of Vizzini and Genovese . ” 
 = = Supporting the separatists = = 
 Vizzini initially supported the separatist movement in Sicily . On December 6 , 1943 , Vizzini participated at the first clandestine regional convention of the Sicilian separatists movement of the Sicilian Independence Movement ( <unk> <unk> Siciliano - MIS ) in Catania . Other prominent Mafia bosses like Giuseppe Genco Russo , Gaetano <unk> , Michele Navarra and Francesco Paolo Bontade did not hide their sympathies for the separatists either . The separatists benefited from covert support of the OSS . As Italy experienced a leftward drift in 1943 @-@ 1944 , the American military became increasingly concerned about their future prospects in Italy . The island 's naval bases and strategic location in the Mediterranean provided a possible future counterbalance to a Communism on the Italian mainland . The Italian Communist Party 's membership had doubled and the largely left inspired resistance movement in the north was gathering strength . 
 On December 9 , 1943 , the central committee of the separatist movement held a secret meeting in Palermo . Vizzini 's presence suggested the Mafia ’ s support for independence , and aided the conservative wing in their attempt to control the movement . Vizzini shared common views with baron Lucio Tasca – one of the more important leaders of the movement – and despite protests by the more progressive wing , Vizzini remained at the meeting representing the province of Caltanissetta . 
 Later , Vizzini represented the Fronte Democratico d ’ Ordine Siciliano , a satellite political organization of the separatist movement . The Fronte Democratico demonstrated the Mafia 's hesitation to fully commit to the MIS . The Fronte was popular on the island and advocated independence of Sicily under American influence . Although the Americans strongly emphasized that the United States did not want Sicily as the 49th state , in late 1944 , some claimed that the Fronte 's ideas were the result of American propaganda that had encouraged separatism prior to the invasion . Fronte leaders spread rumours that they had the backing and protection of the United States . Many of its members were " lieutenants in the high Mafia " and Vizzini was considered its leader . 
 Declassified secret dispatches from the US consul in Palermo , Alfred T. Nester , to the United States Department of State show Vizzini ’ s involvement in the separatist movement and covert support from Italian army officials . Nester had good ties with leading mafiosi . General Giuseppe Castellano – who negotiated the 1943 Armistice with Italy – and Vizzini met with Trapani politician Virgilio Nasi to offer him the leadership of a movement for Sicilian autonomy with the support of the Mafia . The plan was to stage Nasi as a candidate for High Commissioner for Sicily to oppose the favourite , the Christian Democrat Salvatore Aldisio . 
 Castellano became convinced that the Mafia was the strongest political and social force on Sicily to be reckoned with . He started to establish cordial relations with Mafia leaders . The general believed that law and order could be restored if " the system formerly employed by the old and respected <unk> ( f ) ia should return to the Sicilian scene . " Castellano made contacts with Mafia leaders and met with them several times . He gained the cooperation of Vizzini , who had supported separatism but was now prepared for a change in the island ’ s political situation in the direction of regional autonomy . 
 = = Shifting to the Christian Democrats = = 
 Most mafiosi soon changed sides , joining the Christian Democrat party ( <unk> Cristiana – DC ) when it became clear that an independent Sicily was not feasible and the OSS quietly dropped support for the separatist movement in 1945 and turned to the DC . Bernardo <unk> , one of the party ’ s leaders , approached Vizzini to abandon the separatists and join the Christian Democrats . He welcomed Vizzini 's joining the DC in an article in the Catholic newspaper Il Popolo in 1945 . 
 Vizzini offered to meet with Aldisio – who had been appointed High Commissioner in August 1944 – to solve the island ’ s grain problem , implying he had the power to do so . There is no evidence that Aldisio and Vizzini ever met to discuss the issue . <unk> did , however , invite Calogero Volpe , a fellow Christian Democrat and Mafia member befriended by Vizzini , to secret gatherings with Christian Democrats . The meetings were seen as a first step in a government alliance with the Mafia . Aldisio ’ s appointment was perceived by Mafia chieftains as a first indication of the government ’ s determination to subdue the separatist movement . They were now forced to reconsider their support . 
 Vizzini ’ s support for the DC was not a secret . During the crucial 1948 elections that would decide on Italy ’ s post @-@ war future , Vizzini and Genco Russo sat at the same table with leading DC politicians , attending an electoral lunch . In the course of the start of the Cold War , the 1948 elections were a triumph for the Christian Democrats , who would govern Italy with up and downs for the next 45 years in different coalitions . One of its main aims was to keep the Italian Communist Party – the biggest communist party in a NATO member state – away from power . 
 = = The Villalba incident = = 
 Vizzini , a staunch anti @-@ Communist who opposed the fight for land of Sicilian peasants , organised his own peasant cooperatives in his area during both post @-@ war periods , through which he deflected the appeal of the left @-@ wing parties , maintained his hold over the peasants , and guaranteed his own continued access to the land . He was in a fierce dispute over the lease of the large estate <unk> of the Trabia family in Palermo , with a peasant cooperative headed by Michele Pantaleone who had founded the Italian Socialist Party ( Partito Socialista Italiano – PSI ) in Villalba . Vizzini had tried hard to persuade Pantaleone to marry his niece but failed . Pantaleone used his leverage with the left wing press . In return Don Calò arranged for the crops on Pantaleone family ’ s land to be vandalized . There was even a failed attempt on Pantaleone ’ s life . 
 On September 16 , 1944 , leaders of the <unk> del <unk> ( Popular Front ) in Sicily , the communist Girolamo Li Causi and Pantaleone , went to speak to the landless labourers at a rally in Villalba , challenging Don Calò in his own personal fiefdom . In the morning tensions rose when Christian Democrat mayor Beniamino Farina – a relative of Vizzini as well as his successor as mayor – angered local communists by ordering all hammer @-@ and @-@ sickle signs erased from buildings along the road on which Li Causi would travel into town . When his supporters protested , they were intimidated by separatists and thugs . 
 The rally began in late afternoon . Vizzini had agreed to permit the meeting as long as land problems , the large estates , or the Mafia were not addressed . Both speakers who preceded Li Causi , among which was Pantaleone , followed Vizzini ’ s commands . Li Causi did not . He denounced the unjust exploitation by the Mafia , and when Li Causi started to talk about how the peasants were being deceived by ‘ a powerful leaseholder ’ – a thinly disguised reference to Vizzini – the Mafia boss hurled : It ’ s a lie . Pandemonium broke out . The rally ended in a shoot @-@ out which left 14 people wounded including Li Causi and Pantaleone . Six months later Vizzini acquired of the lease for the <unk> estate . 
 According to Vizzini ’ s own account , La <unk> sui <unk> di Villalba ( The Truth About the Events in Villalba ) that appeared in separatist newspapers , it had been the Communist who had started the shooting . When Pantaleone and Li Causi had arrived in the town , they asked Vizzini if they were in hostile territory and whether their meeting might be disturbed . Vizzini “ assured them that they were free to hold their meeting without any fear of disturbance if they were careful enough not to speak on local matters . ” Vizzini admitted that he interrupted Li Causi , but denied that he had ignited the violence . The Carabinieri quickly restored order and arrested eight people , including the mayor . Several others , including Vizzini , evaded the police dragnet . Sixty persons were interrogated , but the investigation was doomed from the start . ( Don Calò and his bodyguard were accused of attempted manslaughter . The trial dragged on until 1958 , but by 1946 the evidence had already disappeared . Vizzini was never convicted because by the time of the verdict he was already dead . ) 
 The Villalba attack inaugurated a long series of Mafia attacks in Sicily on political activists , trade union leaders and ordinary peasants resisting Mafia rule . In the following years many left @-@ wing leaders were killed or otherwise attacked , culminating in the killing of 11 people and the wounding of over thirty at a May 1 labour parade in <unk> della Ginestra . The <unk> della Ginestra massacre was attributed to the bandit and separatist leader Salvatore Giuliano . Nevertheless , the Mafia was suspected of involvement in the bloodbath and many other attacks on left @-@ wing organisations and leaders . 
 = = Links to American gangsters = = 
 In 1949 Vizzini and Italian @-@ American crime boss Lucky Luciano set up a candy factory in Palermo exporting all over Europe and to the US . Police suspected that it was a cover for heroin trafficking . The laboratory operated undisturbed until April 11 , 1954 , when the Roman daily Avanti ! published a photograph of the factory under the headline " Textiles and Sweets on the Drug Route . " That evening the factory was closed , and the laboratory 's chemists were reportedly smuggled out of the country . 
 In 1950 , Lucky Luciano was photographed in front of the Hotel Sole in the centre of old Palermo – often the residence of Don Calò Vizzini – talking with Don Calò ’ s bodyguards . The photographer was beaten up , but he never reported the fact to the authorities after receiving an expensive new camera and cash . Vizzini ’ s network reached the United States where he knew the future family boss Angelo <unk> of Philadelphia , known as Angelo Bruno , who was born in Villalba . 
 = = Boss of bosses ? = = 
 In the media Vizzini was often depicted as the " boss of bosses " – although such a position did not exist in the loose structure of Cosa Nostra , and later Mafia turncoats denied he ever was the boss of the Mafia in Sicily . According to the pentito Tommaso Buscetta the title capo dei <unk> or " boss of bosses " did not exist in Cosa Nostra . According to author John Dickie , " the question is if Vizzini was as dominant in the Mafia as he was famous outside it . " In the matter of Mafia support for the separatist movement , other Cosa Nostra bosses sidelined Vizzini , who was considered to be tainted by his association with radical separatist leaders Andrea Finocchiaro Aprile and Lucio Tasca . These bosses wanted nothing to do with either the island ’ s bandits or <unk> , to which Vizzini and Lucio Tasca were suspected to be connected . According to the pentito Antonio Calderone Vizzini never had been the boss of Cosa Nostra of Sicily . 
 Nevertheless , Vizzini wielded considerable power . The Italian journalist Luigi Barzini , who claimed to know Vizzini well , described his stature and daily life in Villalba in his book The Italians : 
 " From the shadows along the walls and narrow side streets emerged people who had arrived earlier , some from far away , and were waiting to talk to him . They were peasants , old women with black veils on their head , young mafiosi , middle class men . They all walked along with him in turn , explaining their problems . He listened , then called one of his henchmen , gave a few orders , and summoned the next petitioner . Many kissed his hand in gratitude as they left . " 
 Vizzini ’ s generous and protective manner , the deferential greetings of passers @-@ by , the meekness of those approaching him , the smiles of gratefulness when he spoke to them , reminded Barzini of an primeval scene : a prince holding court and handing out justice publicly . However , Barzini also concluded , " [ o ] f course , the many victims of his reign were not visible , the many corpses found riddled with bullets in the countryside during more than half a century , the widows weeping , the fatherless orphans . " The former mayor of Villalba and local historian , Luigi Lumia , remembers Don Calò walking the streets of Villalba : 
 " He was squat with skinny legs and a protruding stomach . He always wore tinted spectacles , as you can see on photographs . And behind these spectacles his eyes were half closed , as if he was slumbering . His mouth was always open , with his lower lip hanging out . He looked dim @-@ witted , for those who did not know him . " 
 His power was not restricted to just his hometown , but reached the high offices on Sicily as well . According to Indro Montanelli , Vizzini could get through on the telephone without trouble to the regional president , the prefect , the cardinal @-@ archbishop of Palermo and any deputy or mayor of Sicily any time he wanted . Lumia maintains that Vizzini never explicitly ordered someone to kill somebody . 
 " He always tried to ' accommodate ' matters and bring people to reason , that is to say , in the way he had decided how people and things should be . If someone remained headstrong nonetheless … with a gesture , a nod , he left it to his friends to take care of the problem . Every now and then he intervened : ' But who made him do it ? ' , ' Who knows what end he will find ' . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Don Calò Vizzini died on July 10 , 1954 , at the age of 76 , while entering Villalba in an ambulance that was transporting him home from a clinic in Palermo . Thousands of peasants dressed in black and politicians and priests took part in his funeral , including <unk> boss Giuseppe Genco Russo and the powerful boss Don Francesco Paolo Bontade from Palermo ( the father of future Mafia boss Stefano Bontade ) – who was one of the pallbearers . Even the New York Times reported the news of the death of this local Mafia chief . 
 Villalba 's public offices and the Christian Democratic headquarters closed for a week in mourning . An elegy for Vizzini was pinned to the church door . It read : 
 " Humble with the humble . Great with the great . He showed with words and deeds that his Mafia was not criminal . It stood for respect for the law , defence of all rights , greatness of character : it was love . " 
 He left approximately two billion lire ( about USD 320 @,@ 000 at the exchange rate at the time ) worth of sulphur , land , houses and varied investments . According to other sources , he left a patrimony of a billion Italian lire ( about USD 160 @,@ 000 ) to his grandsons , the sons of his sister , including sulphur mines in <unk> , land holdings and a mansion in the centre of Villalba . Don Calo had remained unmarried after a love affair at the age of 20 with a local girl , <unk> . However , her parents lived in the United States and brought her over , and Vizzini did not want to leave his native Villalba . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Vizzini throughout his lifetime acquired extensive land holdings , the Mafia historian Salvatore Lupo considers him to be the undertaker of the large feudal estates rather than the protector of that system . Vizzini also made sure that local peasants ( in particular the ones organised in catholic cooperatives ) got their share of land , once he had secured his cut . When land reform was finally enacted in 1950 , mafiosi like Vizzini were in a position to perform their traditional role of brokerage between the peasants , the landlords , and the state . They were able to exploit the intense land hunger of the peasants , gain concessions from the landlords in return for limiting the impact of the reform , and make substantial profits from their mediation in land sales . 
 Vizzini was the archetype of the paternalistic " man of honour " of a bygone age , that of a rural and semi @-@ feudal Sicily that existed until the 1960s , where a mafioso was seen by some as a social intermediary and a man standing for order and peace . In the first stage of his career he used violence to establish his position , but in the second phase he limited recourse to violence , turned to principally legal sources of income , and exercised his power in an open and legitimate manner . 
 He represented a Mafia that controlled power and did not let power control them , according to German sociologist Henner Hess . To make a good impression , or fare <unk> , is important : " they enjoy the respect shown them , they enjoy power , but they do not wish to give rise to its discussion . They know very well that behind the veil of modesty power is felt to be all the more uncanny . " Italian journalist Indro Montanelli quoted a typical remark by Don Calò : 
 " A photograph of me ? Whatever for ? I 'm no one . I 'm just a citizen . … It is strange … People think that I don ’ t talk much from modesty . No . I don ’ t talk much because I don ’ t know much . I live in a village , I only rarely go to Palermo , I know few people … " 
 " When I die , the Mafia dies , " Vizzini once told Montanelli . However , with the death of Vizzini his old @-@ fashioned traditional rural Mafia slowly passed away to be replaced with a more modern , often urban version of gangsterism involved in cigarette smuggling , drug trafficking and laundering their proceeds in construction and real @-@ estate development . While still alive and after his death Vizzini ’ s stature as an all powerful Mafia boss rose to mythical proportions . Since the 1990s historians have moderated his magnitude . 
 = Mu wave = 
 Mu waves , also known as mu rhythms , comb or wicket rhythms , <unk> rhythms , or sensorimotor rhythms , are synchronized patterns of electrical activity involving large numbers of neurons , probably of the pyramidal type , in the part of the brain that controls voluntary movement . These patterns as measured by electroencephalography ( EEG ) , magnetoencephalography ( MEG ) , or <unk> ( <unk> ) , repeat at a frequency of 7 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 ( and primarily 9 – 11 ) Hz , and are most prominent when the body is physically at rest . Unlike the alpha wave , which occurs at a similar frequency over the resting visual cortex at the back of the scalp , the mu wave is found over the motor cortex , in a band approximately from ear to ear . A person suppresses mu wave patterns when he or she performs a motor action or , with practice , when he or she visualizes performing a motor action . This suppression is called desynchronization of the wave because EEG wave forms are caused by large numbers of neurons firing in synchrony . The mu wave is even suppressed when one observes another person performing a motor action or an abstract motion with biological characteristics . Researchers such as V. S. Ramachandran and colleagues have suggested that this is a sign that the mirror neuron system is involved in mu wave suppression , although others disagree . 
 The mu wave is of interest to a variety of scholars . Scientists who study neural development are interested in the details of the development of the mu wave in infancy and childhood and its role in learning . Since a group of researchers believe that autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) is strongly influenced by an altered mirror neuron system and that mu wave suppression is a downstream indication of mirror neuron activity , many of these scientists have kindled a more popular interest in investigating the mu wave in people with ASD . Assorted investigators are also in the process of using mu waves to develop a new technology : the brain @-@ computer interface ( BCI ) . With the emergence of BCI systems , clinicians hope to give the severely physically disabled population new methods of communication and a means to manipulate and navigate their environments . 
 = = Mirror neurons = = 
 The mirror neuron system consists of a class of neurons that was first studied in the 1990s in macaque monkeys . Studies have found sets of neurons that fire when these monkeys perform simple tasks and also when the monkeys view others performing the same simple tasks . This suggests they play a role in mapping others ' movements into the brain without actually physically performing the movements . These sets of neurons are called mirror neurons and together make up the mirror neuron system . Mu waves are suppressed when these neurons fire , a phenomenon which allows researchers to study mirror neuron activity in humans . There is evidence that mirror neurons exist in humans as well as in non @-@ human animals . The right fusiform gyrus , left inferior parietal lobule , right anterior parietal cortex , and left inferior frontal gyrus are of particular interest . Some researchers believe that mu wave suppression can be a consequence of mirror neuron activity throughout the brain , and represents a higher @-@ level integrative processing of mirror neuron activity . Tests in both monkeys ( using invasive measuring techniques ) and humans ( using EEG and fMRI ) have found that these mirror neurons not only fire during basic motor tasks , but also have components that deal with intention . There is evidence of an important role for mirror neurons in humans , and mu waves may represent a high level coordination of those mirror neurons . 
 = = Development = = 
 A fruitful conceptualization of mu waves in pediatric use that is independent of their frequency is that mu wave suppression is a representation of activity going on in the world , and is detectable in the frontal and parietal networks . A resting oscillation becomes suppressed during the observation of sensory information such as sounds or sights , usually within the frontoparietal ( motor ) cortical region . Measured in this way , the mu wave is detectable during infancy as early as four to six months , when the peak frequency the wave reaches can be as low as 5 @.@ 4 Hz . There is a rapid increase in peak frequency in the first year of life , and by age two frequency typically reaches 7 @.@ 5 Hz . The peak frequency of the mu wave increases with age until maturation into adulthood , when it reaches its final and stable frequency of 8 – 13 Hz . These varying frequencies are measured as activity around the central sulcus , within the <unk> cortex . 
 Mu waves are thought to be indicative of an infant ’ s developing ability to imitate . This is important because the ability to imitate plays a vital role in the development of motor skills , tool use , and understanding causal information through social interaction . <unk> is integral in the development of social skills and understanding nonverbal cues . Causal relationships can be made through social learning without requiring experience firsthand . In action execution , mu waves are present in both infants and adults before and after the execution of a motor task and its accompanying desynchronization . While executing a goal @-@ oriented action , however , infants exhibit a higher degree of desynchronization than do adults . Just as with an action execution , during action observation infants ’ mu waves not only show a desynchronization , but show a desynchronization greater in degree than the one evidenced in adults . This tendency for changes in degree of desynchronization , rather than actual changes in frequency , becomes the measure for mu wave development throughout adulthood , although the most changes take place during the first year of life . Understanding the mechanisms that are shared between action perception and execution in the earliest years of life has implications for language development . Learning and understanding through social interaction comes from imitating movements as well as vowel sounds . Sharing the experience of attending to an object or event with another person can be a powerful force in the development of language . 
 = = = Autism = = = 
 Autism is a disorder that is associated with social and communicative deficits . A single cause of autism has yet to be identified , but the mu wave and mirror neuron system have been studied specifically for their role in the disorder . In a typically developing individual , the mirror neuron system responds when he or she either watches someone perform a task or performs the task him- or herself . In individuals with autism , mirror neurons become active ( and consequently mu waves are suppressed ) only when the individual performs the task him- or herself . This finding has led some scientists , notably V. S. Ramachandran and colleagues , to view autism as disordered understanding of other individuals ' intentions and goals thanks to problems with the mirror neuron system . This deficiency would explain the difficulty people with autism have in communicating with and understanding others . While most studies of the mirror neuron system and mu waves in people with autism have focused on simple motor tasks , some scientists speculate that these tests can be expanded to show that problems with the mirror neuron system underlie overarching cognitive and social deficits . 
 Based on findings correlating mirror neuron activity and mu wave suppression in individuals with autism as in typically developing individuals , studies have examined both the development of mirror neurons and therapeutic means for stimulating the system . A recent study has found that fMRI activation magnitudes in the inferior frontal gyrus increase with age in people with autism . This finding was not apparent in typically developing individuals . Furthermore , greater activation was associated with greater amounts of eye contact and better social functioning . Scientists believe the inferior frontal gyrus is one of the main neural correlates with the mirror neuron system in humans and is often related to deficits associated with autism . These findings suggest that the mirror neuron system may not be non @-@ functional in individuals with autism , but simply abnormal in its development . This information is significant to the present discussion because mu waves may be integrating different areas of mirror neuron activity in the brain . Other studies have assessed attempts to consciously stimulate the mirror neuron system and suppress mu waves using neurofeedback ( a type of biofeedback given through computers that analyze real time recordings of brain activity , in this case EEGs of mu waves ) . This type of therapy is still in its early phases of implementation for individuals with autism , and has conflicting forecasts for success . 
 = = Brain @-@ computer interfaces = = 
 Brain @-@ computer interfaces ( BCIs ) are a developing technology that clinicians hope will one day bring more independence and agency to the severely physically disabled . Those the technology has the potential to help include people with near @-@ total or total paralysis , such as those with tetraplegia ( quadriplegia ) or advanced amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) ; BCIs are intended to help them to communicate or even move objects such as motorized wheelchairs , <unk> , or robotic grasping tools . Few of these technologies are currently in regular use by people with disabilities , but a diverse array are in development at an experimental level . One type of BCI uses event @-@ related desynchronization ( ERD ) of the mu wave in order to control the computer . This method of monitoring brain activity takes advantage of the fact that when a group of neurons is at rest they tend to fire in synchrony with each other . When a participant is cued to imagine movement ( an " event " ) , the resulting desynchronization ( the group of neurons that was firing in synchronous waves now firing in complex and individualized patterns ) can be reliably detected and analyzed by a computer . Users of such an interface are trained in visualizing movements , typically of the foot , hand , and / or tongue , which are each in different locations on the cortical homunculus and thus distinguishable by an <unk> ( EEG ) or <unk> ( <unk> ) recording of electrical activity over the motor cortex . In this method , computers monitor for a typical pattern of mu wave ERD contralateral to the visualized movement combined with event @-@ related synchronization ( ERS ) in the surrounding tissue . This paired pattern intensifies with training , and the training increasingly takes the form of games , some of which utilize virtual reality . Some researchers have found that the feedback from virtual reality games is particularly effective in giving the user tools to improve control of his or her mu wave patterns . The ERD method can be combined with one or more other methods of monitoring the brain 's electrical activity to create hybrid BCIs , which often offer more flexibility than a BCI that uses any single monitoring method . 
 = = History = = 
 Mu waves have been studied since the 1930s , and are referred to as the wicket rhythm because the rounded EEG waves resemble croquet wickets . In 1950 , Henri Gastaut and his coworkers reported desynchronization of these waves not only during active movements of their subjects , but also while the subjects observed actions executed by someone else . These results were later confirmed by additional research groups , including a study using subdural electrode grids in epileptic patients . The latter study showed mu suppression while the patients observed moving body parts in somatic areas of the cortex that corresponded to the body part moved by the actor . Further studies have shown that the mu waves can also be <unk> by imagining actions and by passively viewing point @-@ light biological motion . 
 = = = Brain waves = = = 
 Delta wave – ( 0 @.@ 1 – 3 Hz ) 
 Theta wave – ( 4 – 7 Hz ) 
 Alpha wave – ( 8 – 15 Hz ) 
 Mu wave – ( 7 @.@ 5 – 12 @.@ 5 Hz ) 
 SMR wave – ( 12 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 Hz ) 
 Beta wave – ( 16 – 31 Hz ) 
 Gamma wave – ( 32 – 100 Hz ) 
 = Ms. Marvel ( Kamala Khan ) = 
 Kamala Khan is a fictional superheroine appearing in comic books published by Marvel Comics . Created by editors Sana Amanat and Stephen Wacker , writer G. Willow Wilson and artist Adrian Alphona , Khan is Marvel 's first Muslim character to headline her own comic book . Khan made her first appearance in Captain Marvel # 14 ( August 2013 ) before taking over the Ms. Marvel comic book series in February 2014 . 
 Within the Marvel Universe , Khan is a teenage Pakistani American from New Jersey with shapeshifting abilities , who discovers that she has Inhuman genes in the aftermath of the " Inhumanity " storyline and assumes the codename Ms. Marvel from her idol Carol Danvers . Marvel 's announcement that a Muslim character would headline a comic book was met with widespread reaction and the first volume of Ms. Marvel won the Hugo Award for best graphic story in 2015 . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 In November 2013 , Marvel Comics announced that Kamala Khan , a teenage American Muslim from Jersey City , New Jersey , would take over the comic book series Ms. Marvel beginning in February 2014 . The series , written by G. Willow Wilson and drawn by Adrian Alphona , marks the first time a Muslim character has headlined a book at Marvel Comics . However , Noelene Clark of the Los Angeles Times noted that Khan is not the first Muslim character in comic books , which include Simon Baz , Dust and M. The conception of Kamala Khan came about during a conversation between Marvel editors Sana Amanat and Stephen Wacker . Amanat said , " I was telling him [ Wacker ] some crazy anecdote about my childhood , growing up as a Muslim @-@ American . He found it hilarious . " The pair then told Wilson about the concept and Wilson became eager to jump aboard the project . Amanat said that the series came from a " desire to explore the Muslim @-@ American diaspora from an authentic perspective . " Amanat stated that Khan 's costume was influenced by the shalwar kameez . They wanted the costume to represent her cultural identity , but did not want her to wear a hijab . Amanat also stated that they wanted the character to look " less like a sex siren " to appeal to a more vocal female readership . 
 Marvel knew that they wanted a young Muslim girl , but stated that she could be from any place of origin and have any background . Wilson initially considered making her an Arab girl from Dearborn , Michigan but ultimately chose to create a Desi girl from Jersey City . Jersey City , which sits across the Hudson River from Manhattan , has been referred to as New York City 's " Sixth borough " . It therefore forms an important part of Khan 's identity and the narrative journey of her character since most of Marvel Comics ' stories are set in Manhattan . Wilson explains , " A huge aspect of Ms. Marvel is being a ' second string hero ' in the ' second string city ' and having to struggle out of the pathos and emotion that can give a person . " 
 The series not only explores Khan 's conflicts with supervillains but also explores conflicts with Khan 's home and religious duties . Wilson , a convert to Islam , said " This is not evangelism . It was really important for me to portray Kamala as someone who is struggling with her faith . " Wilson continued , " Her brother is extremely conservative , her mom is paranoid that she 's going to touch a boy and get pregnant , and her father wants her to concentrate on her studies and become a doctor . " Amanat added , 
 As much as Islam is a part of Kamala ’ s identity , this book isn 't preaching about religion or the Islamic faith in particular . It 's about what happens when you struggle with the labels imposed on you , and how that forms your sense of self . It 's a struggle we 've all faced in one form or another , and isn 't just particular to Kamala because she 's Muslim . Her religion is just one aspect of the many ways she defines herself . 
 In the series , Khan takes the name Ms. Marvel from Carol Danvers , who now goes by the alias Captain Marvel . Captain Marvel writer Kelly Sue <unk> revealed that Khan actually made a brief appearance in Captain Marvel # 14 ( August 2013 ) saying , " Kamala is in the background of a scene in Captain Marvel 14 ... She is very deliberately placed in a position where she sees Carol protecting civilians from Yon @-@ <unk> . " According to Wilson , Khan idolizes Carol so when Khan acquires superhuman abilities , she emulates Danvers . " Captain Marvel represents an ideal that Kamala pines for . She 's strong , beautiful and doesn 't have any of the baggage of being Pakistani and ' different , ' " Wilson explained . " Khan is a big comic book fan and after she discovers her superhuman power – being a polymorph and able to lengthen her arms and legs and change her shape – she takes on the name of Ms. Marvel , " Amanat elaborated . Khan is one of several characters who discover that they have Inhuman heritage following the " Inhumanity " storyline , in which the Terrigen Mists are released throughout the world and activate dormant Inhuman cells . 
 In the series ' first story arc , Khan faces off against a new villain , Mr. Edison / the Inventor . Wilson created the Inventor to be Khan 's first arch rival in order to mirror Khan 's own complexity . Wilson characterizes The Inventor , and the overall visual look of the opening story arc as " kooky and almost Miyazaki @-@ esque at times " , owing to the art style of illustrator Adrian Alphona , which balances the drama of the threats which Khan faces with the humor of Alphona 's " tongue in cheek sight gags . " During the storyline , Khan also teams @-@ up with the X @-@ Man Wolverine against the Inventor . Because Wolverine is dealing with the loss of his healing factor during this time , Khan is placed in the position of having to shoulder much of the responsibilities , as Wilson felt this was a role reversal that would subvert reader expectations that Wolverine would take the lead in such a team @-@ up . 
 At 2014 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , writer Dan Slott announced that Khan would team @-@ up with Spider @-@ Man beginning in The Amazing Spider @-@ Man # 7 ( October 2014 ) during the " Spider @-@ Verse " storyline . Slott characterized Khan " the closest character to classic Peter Parker , " explaining , " She 's a teenage superhero , juggling her life , making mistakes , trying to do everything right . " 
 Beginning in June 2015 , Ms. Marvel tied into the " Secret Wars " crossover event with the " Last Days " storyline , which details Khan 's account of the end of the Marvel Universe . Wilson explained , " In the ' Last Days ' story arc , Kamala has to grapple with the end of everything she knows , and discover what it means to be a hero when your whole world is on the line . " In the storyline , Khan rushes to deal with the threat in Manhattan . However , Wilson revealed , " She will face a very personal enemy as the chaos in Manhattan spills over into Jersey City , and she will be forced to make some very difficult choices . There will also be a very special guest appearance by a superhero Kamala — and the fans — have been waiting to meet for a long time . " 
 In March 2015 , Marvel announced that Khan will join the Avengers in All @-@ New All @-@ Different Avengers <unk> ( May 2015 ) by writer Mark Waid and artists Adam Kubert and Mahmud <unk> , which takes place in the aftermath of " Secret Wars " . A second volume of Ms. Marvel starring Khan by Wilson , Alphona and Takeshi Miyazawa is also scheduled to debut following " Secret Wars " as part of Marvel 's All @-@ New , All @-@ Different Marvel initiative . Amanat said , 
 By the time this new launch comes around , it will have been almost two years since the premiere of Ms. Marvel — and boy , has Kamala Khan been through a lot since then . She 's been slowly coming into her own , dealing with the challenges of navigating adulthood and being a super hero . But her training is over now and it 's time for the big leagues ; the question is can she handle it ? ... As much as Kamala has a right to be there — it 's still a bit of a culture shock . Dreaming of being an Avenger and then suddenly being one is a lot to take on for someone of her age . So , she 'll be a little awestruck , a little overly ambitious . 
 In March 2016 , Marvel announced that Ms. Marvel would tie into the " Civil War II " storyline by releasing a promotional image that teases a potential rift between Khan and Danvers . In July 2016 , Marvel announced that Khan will join the Champions , a team of teenage superheroes who split off from the Avengers following the conclusion of " Civil War II " . The team , featured in a series by writer Mark Waid and artist Humberto Ramos , consists of Khan , Spider @-@ Man ( Miles Morales ) , Nova ( Sam Alexander ) , Hulk ( Amadeus Cho ) , Viv Vision , and a teenage version of Cyclops . Waid said , " The first three are the kids who quit the Avengers proper . That was an easy get . Those three , in and of themselves , form a nice little <unk> . Their dynamic is great . They all show up in each other 's books , and even though they have their arguments and stress points , clearly they 're good together . " 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 Paperback 
 Hardcover 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial reaction = = = 
 Marvel 's announcement was met with widespread reactions online . <unk> <unk> , founder of <unk> Media Watch , a diversity advocacy group , told Al Jazeera America that " She is going to be a window into the American Muslim experience " and that she " normalizes this idea of the American experience as Muslim . " Brett White of Comic Book Resources said , " With Kamala Khan , the daughter of Pakistani immigrants living in Jersey City , Marvel Comics has shown yet again that it wants to include groups of the American population that have yet to be personally inspired by their heroes . " Hussein Rashid writing for CNN said , " The character of Kamala Khan has the opportunity to offer something new to pop @-@ culture portrayals of Muslims . She is born in the United States , appears to be part of the post @-@ 9 / 11 generation and is a teenager . " <unk> Khan of The Guardian compared Kamala Khan to Malala Yousafzai and indicated that the rest of entertainment industry should follow Marvel 's example . However , Dr. Leon <unk> of the University of Liverpool felt that the character 's family would reinforce the stereotype of restrictive Muslim parents and that her shape @-@ shifting ability resembled several anti @-@ Muslim stereotypes , especially <unk> : a legal dispensation whereby a believing individual can deny his faith or commit otherwise illegal or blasphemous acts while they are at risk of significant persecution . Political satirist Stephen Colbert joked about Marvel 's decision to introduce a Muslim superhero on his television show . Comedian Conan O 'Brien also made a joke via Twitter , linking the character 's religion to polygamy , but later removed it due to public backlash . 
 = = = Critical reaction = = = 
 Meagan Damore of Comic Book Resources said , " There is nothing not to love about Ms. Marvel # 1 : every character is well formed and distinct ; the story , lovingly crafted ; the art , meticulously planned and — at times — downright funny . " Jen Aprahamian of Comic Vine said " Ms. Marvel makes a delightful debut , showing confidence and heart even before she puts on a mask . Kamala is not your average superheroine and her stories seem like they 're headed in an exciting direction . Kudos to Marvel for expanding its range ; amping up the diversity factor in a way that doesn 't feel token or temporary is a great move , and Ms. Marvel is launching with a solid first issue and a world — a universe , even — of story possibilities . " Joshua <unk> of IGN said , " Ms. Marvel introduces a vibrant and troubled character that you can 't help but love . " George Marston of Newsarama said , " Ms. Marvel is a solid debut issue , and that in itself should be a victory not just for G. Willow Wilson and Adrian Alphona , but for Marvel Comics itself ... It 's not exactly edgy , and Kamala Khan is not exactly the first reluctant teen hero in Marvel 's long history , but Ms. Marvel is one of the strongest debuts for a new character that Marvel has had in a long time . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Ms. Marvel Volume 1 : No Normal was the best @-@ selling graphic novel in October 2014 , and by November 2014 , it reached # 2 on The New York Times Best Seller list of paperback graphic books . In April 2015 , Ms. Marvel Volume 2 : Generation Why debuted at # 4 on The New York Times Best Seller list of paperback graphic books . In July 2015 , Ms. Marvel Volume 3 : Crushed debuted at # 3 on The New York Times Best Seller list of paperback graphic books . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 In January 2015 , images of Khan began appearing over anti @-@ Islamic advertisements on San Francisco city buses . The advertisements , purchased by the American Freedom Defense Initiative , equated Islam with Nazism . In response , street artists covered the ads with images of Khan alongside messages like " " Calling all <unk> Busters , " " Stamp out Racism , " " Free speech isn 't a license to spread hate , " " Islamophobia hurts us all , " and " Racist . " About the response , Wilson tweeted , " Some amazing person has been painting over the anti @-@ Muslim bus ads in SF with Ms. Marvel graffiti ... To me , the graffiti is part of the back @-@ and @-@ forth of the free speech conversation . Call and response . Argument , counterargument . " 
 In March 2016 , Sana Amanat introduced President Barack Obama at a reception for Women 's History Month in the White House . In his opening remarks Obama replied , " Ms. Marvel may be your comic book creation , but I think for a lot of young boys and girls , Sana 's a real superhero . " 
 = = Other versions = = 
 An older version of Khan appears in Inhumans : Attilan Rising by Charles Soule and John Timms as part of the 2015 " Secret Wars " storyline , which details Black Bolt 's rebellion against Queen Medusa of New Attilan . In her review of Inhumans : Attilan Rising # 2 , Emma <unk> of The Rainbow Hub said , " While [ Khan has ] had a few chances to shine in the core Inhuman book , her reintroduction ( complete with character redesign by Dave Johnson and strong line work by John Timms ) packs a real punch . Soule 's evolution of her powers and costume will hopefully also coincide with further opportunities later in the story to learn more about her views on the resistance and reasons for supporting Attilan – solidifying this version of Kamala as a comparatively matured hero forced to make difficult moral choices . " 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Audio books = = = 
 In August 2015 , GraphicAudio released Ms. Marvel : No Normal , which adapts the first @-@ five issues of the comic book series into audio format . Marvel and GraphicAudio have collaborated before in the past but Ms. Marvel : No Normal marks the first time that they have adapted an audiobook straight from a comic book . Jeff Reingold Marvel 's Manager of Licensed Publishing said , " The challenge here was conveying the comic visuals into a strictly audio form without the use of a third @-@ person narrator . " 
 = = = Books = = = 
 In March 2016 , Marvel Press announced that they would release a 128 @-@ page chapter @-@ book titled Ms. Marvel : Fists of Fury in October 2017 . According to the official synopsis , the story will focus on bullying due to Khan 's gender and background . 
 = = = Television = = = 
 Khan is scheduled to appear in the upcoming third season of the animated television series Avengers Assemble ( which has been retitled Avengers : Ultron Revolution ) . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Khan is featured in Marvel Puzzle Quest , a free @-@ to @-@ play match 3 adventure game , developed by D3 Publisher . 
 Khan appears as a playable character in Lego Marvel 's Avengers , voiced by Ashley Burch . 
 Khan appears as a playable character in the mobile game Marvel Avengers Academy , voiced by Priyanka Chopra . 
 Khan appears as a playable character in the mobile game Marvel : Future Fight . 
 Khan appears as a playable character in the mobile game Marvel : Contest of Champions . 
 = Eustathios Argyros ( general under Leo VI ) = 
 Eustathios Argyros ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ; died ca . 910 ) was a Byzantine aristocrat and one of the most prominent generals under Emperor Leo VI the Wise ( r . 886 – 912 ) . The first member of the Argyros family to rise to high posts , he fought with distinction against the Arabs in the east , before being disgraced ca . 907 , possibly in connection with the flight of Andronikos Doukas to the Arabs . Rehabilitated soon after , he was appointed as strategos of Charsianon , from which post he oversaw the settlement of Armenian lords as march @-@ wardens along the Empire 's eastern frontier . Promoted to commander of the imperial bodyguard in late 908 , he again fell into disgrace shortly after and died of poison ( apparently a suicide ) on his way to his estates . 
 = = Life = = 
 Eustathios Argyros was the son of the tourmarches Leo Argyros , the founder of the noble Argyros family . 
 Nothing is known of his life or prior to the turn of the 10th century , although he may have been in imperial service as early as 866 , when a man of the same name is recorded as protostrator of the Caesar Bardas in connection with the latter 's murder on 21 April . The Byzantine historians praise Eustathios Argyros as an intelligent , valiant , prudent and just man , and account him , along with Andronikos Doukas , as the best of Leo VI 's generals . The historians Jean @-@ Claude Cheynet and Jean @-@ François Vannier , experts on Byzantine <unk> , consider him " the true founder of the family 's glory " . 
 His life is only known after 904 . At this time , evidently after a succession of — unknown — military commands , Eustathios had reached , according to Theophanes Continuatus , the rank of patrikios and hypostrategos of the Anatolic Theme . The significance of the term " hypostrategos " has been debated ; normally it would designate the second @-@ in @-@ command to the strategos or military governor of a theme , but Vannier suggested that on account of his high title of patrikios , Argyros was actually the strategos . Theophanes Continuatus further extols Argyros and mentions that he scored several successes against the Arabs in the east , most likely a reference to the great Byzantine victory over the Arabs of Tarsus and Mopsuestia at Germanikeia in December 904 , under the overall command of Andronikos Doukas . He then fell into disgrace and was exiled . Although no details or reasons are offered for his exile , this has been interpreted by modern scholars as being connected to the failed rebellion and flight of Andronikos Doukas to the Arabs in 906 – 907 . Eustathios was rehabilitated soon after ; if indeed his disgrace was related to the flight of Andronikos Doukas , this happened likely in 907 / 8 , when Andronikos Doukas ' son Constantine escaped from his Arab exile and returned to Constantinople , where he was pardoned by Emperor Leo . 
 Eustathios was then appointed as strategos of the border theme of Charsianon , a position notably inferior in rank to that of the Anatolics that he had held previously . The Argyros family , however , had strong connections with Charsianon , from which it hailed . There he received the return to imperial service of a number of Armenian lords , Melias , the three brothers <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , and Ismael , who were established as march @-@ wardens along the Empire 's eastern border . Of them , Melias in particular would go on to become the founder of the theme of Lykandos and one of the main Byzantine leaders in the wars against the Arabs over the next 30 years . 
 In late 908 Eustathios Argyros was promoted to the rank of magistros — the highest court dignity open to someone not a member of the imperial family — and the post of Drungary of the Watch , i.e. commander of the imperial bodyguard , and replaced as strategos of Charsianon by Constantine Doukas . About a year later , he fell again under Leo 's suspicion , and was ordered to return to his family 's estates at Charsianon . Again the reason is unknown ; perhaps , according to Cheynet and Vannier , it was a result of the unreliability of the Armenian lords he had welcomed into the Empire , who frequently went over to the Arabs . On the way , he died after taking poison by one of his servants , and was buried on <unk> , the summit of Mount Aran . While historian Romilly James Heald Jenkins has suggested that Argyros ' poisoning was done through an agent of the powerful and scheming court eunuch Samonas , it more likely was suicide . His two sons , Pothos and Leo , who served in the palace as manglabites ( personal bodyguards of the emperor ) , arranged to have their father 's body transferred for burial to the monastery of Saint Elizabeth in the Charsianon district , founded by Eustathios ' father . 
 = = Family = = 
 Eustathios ' sons Pothos and Leo would go on to hold senior military commands , including the post of Domestic of the Schools ( commander @-@ in @-@ chief ) . Another son , Romanos , is known only from his participation in the Battle of Achelous in 917 . Leo Argyros married a daughter of Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) , and was probably the grandfather or great @-@ grandfather of Emperor Romanos III Argyros ( r . 1028 – 1034 ) . 
 = = Identity = = 
 Some modern scholars like R. J. H. Jenkins ( The ' Flight ' of Samonas ) , R. H. Dolley ( The Lord High Admiral Eustathios Argyros and the betrayal of Taormina to the African Arabs in 902 ) and Ekkehard Eickhoff ( <unk> und <unk> zwischen Islam und <unk> ) consider Eustathios Argyros to have been identical with the contemporary admiral Eustathios , active in the years before 904 , mainly due to the reference by the 11th @-@ century historian John Skylitzes that Argyros pursued a career in the army as well as in the fleet . This identification is rejected by other scholars like <unk> Vannier ( <unk> <unk> : les <unk> ( <unk> – <unk> siècles ) ) and R. Guilland ( Recherches sur les institutions <unk> ) . Furthermore , the admiral is given the surname " Argyros " in some modern works that distinguish him from the general , while others reject the surname entirely . According to the Prosopographie der mittelbyzantinischen Zeit , " a definitive decision can no longer be made " , and the main argument for the two being different persons is the incompatibility of their careers : the admiral Eustathios likewise experienced a tumultuous career with accusations of treason , rehabilitation , and renewed disgrace , and it is unlikely that such a man would again be entrusted with senior posts . 
 = Americus ( horse ) = 
 Americus , originally named Rey del <unk> and raced occasionally as Rey del <unk> ( foaled 1892 , died 1910 ) , was an American Thoroughbred racehorse who was exported to England . He had some success as a racehorse , but was more notable for his influence at stud . He was bred in California and won the 1895 Culver Stakes prior to his export . He continued to race in England , until he was nine years old , while also standing as a breeding stallion . He stood at stud in Italy , Ireland , Germany , and Belgium before dying in Germany in 1910 . Americus ' most famous descendant was his great @-@ granddaughter Mumtaz Mahal . 
 = = Background = = 
 Americus , a bay stallion , was foaled ( born ) in 1892 . He was bred in California by E. J. " Lucky " Baldwin . Americus was sired by Emperor of Norfolk and out of the mare Clara D who was sired by the imported stallion Glenelg . His maternal grandmother was a mare named The Nun , sired by Lexington . Americus was inbred to Lexington , as his sire was by Norfolk who was by Lexington . The Nun was a full sister to Norfolk , making Americus even more inbred . He was originally named Rey del <unk> , but occasionally raced under the name of Rey del <unk> . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 Americus raced as a three @-@ year @-@ old in America , winning a number of races . In May 1895 , he raced at Louisville under the ownership of the Santa Anita Stable , winning a race on May 14 at a distance of 5 / 8 of a mile . On May 20 , he finished second in the Schulte Stakes . By June , he was at Coney Island , where he came in second in a sweepstakes race on June 15 . On June 18 , he lost a sweepstakes to Domino , finishing third . On July 4 , he won a sweepstakes at a distance of 3 / 4 of a mile . As a three @-@ year @-@ old , Americus also won the Culver Stakes . 
 While still a three @-@ year @-@ old , he was exported to England where he was registered in the General Stud Book . He was imported by Richard Croker , at a cost of about 8000 guineas . Americus ' importation to England occurred before the imposition of the Jersey Act , which allowed him and his offspring to be registered in the General Stud Book , something that would not have happened had he been imported into England after 1913 , due to the Jersey Act 's prohibition on registering horses tracing to Lexington in the General Stud Book . 
 His new owner continued to race Americus , even though he was no longer in prime racing condition . In 1899 , as a seven @-@ year @-@ old , Americus was described as looking " as fat as a <unk> bull " before he ran in the Stewards ' Cup at Goodwood , but belied his appearance by running well for five furlongs before fading into fourth place . A year later he finished second in the same race . Americus also stood at stud in between races , and raced until he was nine years old . Americus was a sprinter , specializing in short @-@ distance races . 
 = = Stud record = = 
 In 1905 Americus was standing at stud in Ireland , but spent the years 1906 and 1907 in Italy . He returned to Ireland in 1908 and 1909 , but in 1909 was sold and exported to Germany . It is unknown what happened to him after he went to Germany . At some point before his disappearance in Germany , he also stood at stud in Belgium . Americus died at the <unk> Stud in Germany in March 1910 . 
 In his breeding career , Americus sired Americus Girl , the dam of Lady Josephine by Sundridge . Lady Josephine was in turn the dam of Mumtaz Mahal , later owned by the Aga Khan and a famous broodmare . 
 = Domentziolus ( nephew of Phocas ) = 
 Domentziolus ( Greek : <unk> ) or <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) was a nephew of the Byzantine emperor Phocas ( r . 602 – 610 ) , appointed curopalates and general in the East during his uncle 's reign . He was one of the senior Byzantine military leaders during the opening stages of the Byzantine – Sassanid War of 602 – 628 . His defeats opened the way for the fall of Mesopotamia and Armenia and the invasion of Anatolia by the Persians . In 610 , Phocas was overthrown by Heraclius , and Domentziolus was captured but escaped serious harm . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The exact parentage of Domentziolus is unclear : Phocas had two known brothers , Comentiolus and another also named Domentziolus , who has sometimes been suggested as the younger Domentziolus 's father . Shortly after the accession of Phocas , in 603 , the younger Domentziolus was raised to the titles of vir <unk> , patricius and curopalates . 
 = = = General in the East = = = 
 Domentziolus , however , is better known as a general in the Byzantine @-@ Sassanid War of 602 – 628 . Phocas 's elevation to the throne had been recognized by neither the Sassanid Persian shah Khosrau II , nor by Narses , the Byzantine governor of the province of Mesopotamia . The two had allied against Phocas , with Narses gathering his forces in Edessa , while waiting for Sassanid reinforcements . In 604 , Phocas appointed Domentziolus as magister militum per Orientem and sent him against the Persians . His predecessors Germanus and Leontius had both been defeated , the former killed in battle and the latter recalled and imprisoned by Phocas . 
 According to the Life of St. Theodore of Syceon , Domentziolus fell into a Persian ambush but was able to escape . In 604 / 605 , he also surrounded Narses and his troops , and persuaded him to surrender on guarantees of his personal safety . Phocas , nonetheless , had Narses executed by burning him alive . At about the same time , Dara , an important Byzantine city in Mesopotamia , fell to the Persians . Khosrau was encouraged to cease simply raiding the Byzantine provinces , instead attempting to conquer them . In 607 , he launched concurrent invasions on Mesopotamia and Armenia . 
 With the Byzantine forces at the Persian front having already suffered heavy casualties in previous confrontations , Domentziolus was unable to oppose the Sassanid raids during 605 . There was also little chance of further reinforcements . Phocas had concluded peace treaties with the Lombards and Avars in an attempt to secure control of his provinces in the Italian Peninsula and the Balkans . He had already stripped the Balkans of most of their military forces , reassigning them to the Persian front . But this policy had backfired with the undermanned Balkans facing a Slavic invasion , notably endangering Thessalonica . 
 While one Persian force , under Shahrbaraz , was able to secure control of Amida , Domentziolus concentrated his efforts on a second one under Shahin <unk> . He was heavily defeated in the vicinity of Theodosiopolis ( modern Erzurum ) , and the Persians were able to recover most of <unk> , which had been ceded to Byzantium in 591 . In 608 , Shahrbaraz and Shahin continued their respective efforts to conquer Mesopotamia and Armenia . 
 By 609 , the Sassanid conquest of Mesopotamia and Armenia was mostly complete . Shahin next led an invasion of Cappadocia . Domentziolus 's forces were bypassed , while another kinsman of Phocas , called Sergius , attempted to face the invaders and was killed in combat . Sergius was possibly magister militum per Armeniam . Shahin managed to capture Caesarea Mazaca ( modern Kayseri ) , the main city of the area . His forces were then able to make raids " all the way to Chalcedon " in Bithynia , in the vicinity of Constantinople . 
 = = = Downfall of the regime = = = 
 Meanwhile , another front had opened . The Exarchate of Africa under Heraclius the Elder had revolted against Phocas . The situation in 609 – 610 was quickly becoming dire for Domentziolus and all Phocas loyalists . Their defense against the Sassanids had failed . There were Persian forces in Mesopotamia , Armenia , Syria and the Anatolian provinces . Rebel Byzantine forces held Africa and Egypt . Slavs were occupying northern Illyricum . In Thessalonica and various towns of Anatolia and Syria , the Blues and Greens were settling their differences with open conflict . In areas of Syria , the Jews were revolting and lynching Christians . Even in Constantinople , the crowds taunted Phocas for his love of liquor , implying alcoholism . 
 In 610 , Shahrbaraz was approaching Antioch . But the Persian front was not the immediate threat : the rebels of Africa were . Having secured control of Egypt , they proceeded to invade Syria and Cyprus while a large fleet under Heraclius the Younger , a son of the exarch , set sail for Constantinople . Supporters from Sicily , Crete and Thessalonica were joining his campaign . The rebels reached Constantinople in October 610 . The only forces available to Phocas to defend the city were the Excubitors of his bodyguard and the irregular forces of the Blues and Greens , the city 's racing factions . Priscus , the commander of the Excubitors , chose the moment to reveal his allegiance to Heraclius , having apparently secretly conspired for some time . The Greens also changed sides . Constantinople fell with relative ease . 
 Heraclius the Younger became the new Byzantine emperor . Phocas was executed , along with several of his kinsmen and loyalists . Domentziolus too was sentenced to death , but was pardoned and released after the intercession of Theodore of Syceon . Nothing further is known of him after that . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 According to the hagiography of Theodore of Syceon , Domentziolus was married to a lady named Irene , and had three sons . Elizabeth Dawes summarizes the tale given as following : " <unk> , patrician and curopalates , asks Theodore to visit him in <unk> . His wife Eirene has no children : the saint blesses her and promises her three children - and they will be boys . All the male and female slaves of the household are brought to Theodore for his blessing . A slave girl had long been ill , troubled by a hidden demon . He beats on her breast and the demon declares itself . Then the Saint laying her on the ground Put his foot on her neck , turned his eyes to the east and uttered a silent prayer . At the end of his prayer he recited aloud the doxology of the Holy Trinity . For some time the slave girl remained speechless and then was completely cured . Later Eirene gave birth to three sons , as the Saint had prophesied . The conception of her first son immediately followed the Saint 's prayer . Emperor and Patriarch say farewell to Theodore and he returns to his monastery . " Since Theodore died by 613 , the tale would have to occur prior to this date . 
 = I Am ... Sasha Fierce = 
 I Am ... Sasha Fierce is the third studio album by American recording artist Beyoncé . It was released on November 15 , 2008 , by Music World Entertainment and Columbia Records . In its initial release , the album was formatted as a dual disc , intending to market Beyoncé 's contrasting facets of artistry . The first disc , I Am ... , contains slow and midtempo pop and R & B ballads , while the second , Sasha Fierce ( named after Beyoncé 's on @-@ stage alter ego ) , focuses on more uptempo beats that blend electropop and Europop genres . In composing the songs ' lyrics , Beyoncé worked with many writers , with each session accompanied by live orchestration . 
 Beyoncé credited both her husband , rapper Jay Z , and jazz singer Etta James for inspiring her to push the limits of her songwriting and artistry . Musically , I Am ... drew inspiration from folk and alternative rock , while blending acoustic guitar elements into contemporary ballads . The tracks on the first disc were written and produced by Beyoncé , during collaborative efforts with Babyface , Tricky Stewart , The @-@ Dream and Ryan Tedder . Sasha Fierce boasted production from Darkchild and Sean Garrett . The album received generally lukewarm reviews from critics , many of whom felt that it does not properly differentiate the double @-@ discs ' contrasts and goals . 
 I Am ... Sasha Fierce debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 482 @,@ 000 units , earning Beyoncé her third consecutive US number @-@ one solo album . The album earned over thirty platinum and one diamond certifications in separate worldwide markets . As of 2015 , I Am ... Sasha Fierce has sold over 8 million copies worldwide and around 35 million songs . The album garnered seven Grammy Award nominations at the 52nd Annual Grammy Awards ceremony , winning five and eventually collecting a record setting six wins — the most awards won in one night by a female . To promote the album , Beyoncé made several award show and televised appearances across Europe and America and embarking on the worldwide I Am ... World Tour ( 2009 – 10 ) . 
 The album spawned several singles ; some served as international and stateside releases , while others were purely for promotional purposes . The two lead singles from I Am ... Sasha Fierce , " If I Were a Boy " and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , both charted highly internationally . The former topped the charts in over eight countries and reached number three on the Billboard Hot 100 , with the latter becoming her fifth number one single on the Hot 100 chart . " Diva " and " Ego " were released as US @-@ only singles , while " Halo " and " Sweet Dreams " were promoted internationally as the third and fourth singles respectively . " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " was released internationally as the fifth single , while " Video Phone " was released in September 2009 and " Why Don 't You Love Me " was released in July 2010 . 
 = = Production and recording = = 
 The recording of the album took place over an eight @-@ month period . Beyoncé recorded the album in sessions at Tree Sound Studios in Atlanta , Georgia ; Chung King Studios , Electric Lady Studios , <unk> Productions in New York ; GAD Studios in Ibiza , Spain ; Mansfield Studios and The Campground in Los Angeles ; South Beat Studios in Miami Beach ; and The Boom Boom Room in Burbank , California . Beyoncé either co @-@ wrote or co @-@ produced all material on I Am ... Sasha Fierce . She collaborated with several record producers and songwriters , including Babyface , StarGate ( a production duo composed of Tor Erik Hermansen and Mikkel Storleer Eriksen ) , Tricky Stewart , The @-@ Dream , Darkchild , Sean Garrett , Solange Knowles , Jim Jonsin , Rico Love , Ryan Tedder , Bangladesh , Ian Dench , Dave McCracken , Wayne Wilkins and Blac Elvis . Beyoncé also collaborated with some musicians she had never worked with in the past , like Toby Gad and BC Jean on " If I Were a Boy " ; she also worked again with Amanda Ghost on " Disappear " . 
 For the I Am ... disc , Beyoncé was influenced by folk and alternative rock genres , while incorporating other instruments she had not normally used previously , such as the acoustic guitar . Tedder specifically assisted Beyoncé with crafting the album 's balladry . The ballads were crafted in a way to combine " the best elements " of pop and soul music , while simultaneously " expanding the possibilities of both genres " . Beyoncé attempted something different as people had strong expectations from her ; she experimented with stronger lyrics . Beyoncé worked with Ghost to re @-@ write Franz Schubert 's " Ave Maria " after having co @-@ written " Disappear " in London . Ghost told The Daily Telegraph that they were both inspired by their then @-@ recent marriages and had walked down the aisle to " Ave Maria " . 
 During the eight @-@ month period , Beyoncé recorded over 70 songs and decided during the editing process that she did not want to reconcile the two approaches into one disc . If a song was meaningless to her , she cut them off during the process of elimination for the final track @-@ listing . Making comparisons to a magazine , Beyoncé further elaborated that the record was a double album and that it had two covers . The black @-@ and @-@ white artworks for the standard , deluxe and platinum editions of I Am ... Sasha Fierce were all shot by German photographer Peter Lindbergh . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In an interview for Billboard magazine , Beyoncé described I Am ... Sasha Fierce as a double album . She said , " One side has songs that are more mainstream and another has my more traditional R & B songs for my fans who 've been there the whole time . Some of it sounds like Barbra Streisand , Karen Carpenter and The Beatles around the 1970s . " Music writer Andy Kellman of Allmusic viewed its first disc as , " essentially a small set of adult contemporary ballads . Acoustic guitars , pianos , strings , contemplative soul searching , and grand sweeping gestures fill it out , with more roots in ' [ 19 ] 70s soft rock than soul . " The second disc , Sasha Fierce , contains consistent electro influences , which are displayed in songs like " Radio " and " Sweet Dreams " . Kellman said in his review that " Diva " resembles B 'Day 's " Freakum Dress " or " Ring the Alarm " in terms of audacity . Despite being on the Sasha Fierce disc , " Ego " , " Why Don 't You Love Me " and " Scared of Lonely " were noted to be a meeting ground between the album 's halves . According to Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News , they resemble Sasha Fierce musically , but thematically and lyrically , they are vulnerable like Beyoncé on the I Am ... disc . The album formally introduces Beyoncé 's alter ego Sasha Fierce . She revealed that Sasha was born during the making of her 2003 hit single " Crazy in Love " . In an interview with Emmet Sullivan of People magazine , Beyoncé affirmed that her alter ego is strictly for the stage , with the editor describing Sasha Fierce as the singer 's sensual , aggressive alter ego . 
 " If I Were a Boy " , the first single of I Am ... , stands as the only song on either disc that Beyoncé did not co @-@ write . BC Jean , who wrote most of the song 's lyrics , took inspiration from the product of a poor relationship . Beyoncé explained in Essence Magazine that " If I Were a Boy " is different from her previous songs in the sense that it is not a traditional R & B song . Music critics remarked that the song seemed to be a mixture of Beyoncé 's 2006 hit " Irreplaceable " , Fergie 's 2007 single " Big Girls Don 't Cry " , and Ciara 's 2007 single " Like a Boy " . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times saw the song 's theme of female empowerment as an expansion on that of " Irreplaceable " . Musically , " Single Ladies " is an upbeat @-@ dance @-@ pop and R & B song , and features dancehall and bounce influences . According to Jonah Weiner of Blender , the song makes a clear reference to marriage while Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune felt that the lyrics had a connection with " post @-@ breakup " . " Halo " , composed by Ryan Tedder and Evan Bogart , was initially intended for Beyoncé but was almost recorded by Leona Lewis due to Beyoncé 's schedule . According to Christian Williams of Billboard , " Halo " has a mainstream pop sound , with subtle R & B undertones . Critics noted " Diva " as a variation on Lil Wayne 's " A Milli " and coined it as its female counterpart . " Diva " carries a stuttering beat . " Sweet Dreams " was critically acclaimed for its use of electronic bassline , which some critics compared to Michael Jackson 's " Beat It " , and for its electropop sound . " Sweet Dreams " is derived from contemporary R & B and incorporates influences from the classic 1980s funk . " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " is a midtempo piano ballad . Its production and melody is backed by strings and a drum machine beat . According to Spence D. of IGN Music , " Hello " comes off like another ballad that " populate [ s ] the first part of the album . " It contains the Jerry Maguire line – " You had me at hello " – as part of its chorus . It essentially consists of " sweet guitar @-@ picking and delicate harmonies . " According to critics , " Video Phone " contains lyrics that are in reference to " a celebration of Skype sex and putting on a solo show , on camera , for a guy you just met at the club " . The remixed version featured both Beyoncé and Lady Gaga trading verses with one another . Musically the song consists of simple lyrics , with hidden innuendos , and is backed by thin @-@ spread beats ; Beyoncé and Gaga uttering gasps and groans while singing the song . " Disappear " consists of " sweet guitar @-@ picking and delicate harmonies " . " That 's Why You 're Beautiful " is a slow @-@ tempo soft rock and rock power ballad , which consists of a " grungy " guitar riff and <unk> drums . Critics compared the song with the materials by Alice in Chains and Jill Scott . The platinum edition of the album also included a cover version by Beyoncé of the 1979 Billy Joel song " Honesty " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The deluxe edition of the album was released simultaneously with the standard edition . Mathew Knowles , Beyoncé 's father and then manager , held a listening party for the album in New York on October 22 , 2008 . On June 16 , 2009 , Above and Beyoncé : Video Collection & Dance Mixes was released as a combined CD and DVD . The release included a CD of dance remixes to the singles of the album ( including the " Ego " remix with rapper Kanye West ) and the DVD features videos previously released for these singles . Finally , the platinum edition of I Am ... Sasha Fierce was released in a list of selected countries in November 2009 , featuring a CD and a DVD . The deluxe edition of the album was re @-@ issued in the United States on November 23 , 2009 , including all of the previously released songs in addition to the new songs " Poison " , " Why Don 't You Love Me " , and the remix of " Video Phone " with Lady Gaga . 
 An EP titled I Am ... Sasha Fierce – The Bonus Tracks was released on November 23 , 2009 , in several countries featuring these new tracks . Beyoncé covered a version of the song " Honesty " ( a 1979 song by Billy Joel ) and included it as a bonus track for the platinum edition of the album . In February 2010 a bonus track from the album 's multiple re @-@ releases , " Why Don 't You Love Me " , which served as a promotional single , climbed up the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , eventually taking the top spot and becoming Beyoncé 's thirteenth number @-@ one dance hit . On May 4 , 2010 , a full @-@ length music video appeared online after its release as a promotional single . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Beyoncé promoted the album through various televised appearances and awards ceremonies by performing songs featured on I Am ... Sasha Fierce . Beyoncé first promoted " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " in a concert organized by the Power 105 @.@ 1 radio station on October 29 , 2008 . Beyoncé first performed " If I Were a Boy " on November 6 , 2008 , at the MTV Europe Music Awards . She later sang " Single Ladies " on November 9 , 2008 , at the 2008 World Music Awards in Monaco . She then took to the stage of The Oprah Winfrey Show to perform " If I Were a Boy " on November 13 , 2008 . She appeared on television show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) on November 15 , 2008 , where she sang " Single Ladies " . On November 16 , 2008 , Beyoncé sang a medley of " If I Were a Boy " , " Single Ladies " , and " Crazy in Love " during the final episode of Total Request Live . " Single Ladies " was also performed by Beyoncé on November 18 , 2008 , at BET 's 106 & Park , at the 2008 American Music Awards on November 23 , 2008 , on The Ellen DeGeneres Show on November 25 , 2008 , on The Today Show the following day , and on The Tyra Banks Show with two male dancers , on January 9 , 2009 . Beyoncé 's first live performance of " Halo " was at the 2009 NAACP Awards on February 12 , 2009 . She later performed the song on the Late Show with David Letterman after an interview on April 22 , 2009 . Beyoncé was due to perform " Sweet Dreams " at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards on September 13 ; however , she only performed the bridge from the song at the beginning of her performance , before switching to " Single Ladies " . She later performed " Sweet Dreams " at the MTV Europe Music Awards on November 5 , 2009 . She performed " If I Were a Boy " on January 31 , 2010 , at the 52nd Grammy Awards ceremony and also covered Alanis Morissette 's 1995 song " You Oughta Know " on the same event . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 To promote the album , Beyoncé embarked on a worldwide tour with several performances . The I Am ... World Tour kicked off in Edmonton , Canada , on March 26 , 2009 , in support of the album . The European leg of the tour started on April 26 , 2009 , in Zagreb , Croatia , and ended on June 9 , 2009 , in London , England . On June 21 , 2009 , she began the third leg of the tour in the United States and finished in August with the I Am ... Yours 4 @-@ day revue at Encore Las Vegas on the Las Vegas Strip . Starting on September 15 , 2009 , the fourth leg began in Melbourne , Australia and finished on September 24 in Perth , Australia . Beyoncé then went on to perform in Asia , the Middle East , Europe , Africa , and the United Kingdom , before finishing the 2009 portion of the tour on November 24 in Belfast , Northern Ireland . The tour had its final leg in 2010 , visiting Latin America . Starting on February 4 , 2010 , in Florianópolis , Brazil , she visited five other places before ending in Trinidad on February 18 , 2010 . According to Pollstar , the tour earned $ 17 @.@ 2 million between January 1 – June 30 , 2010 , which added to her total of $ 86 million for her first 86 concerts in 2009 , bringing the tour total to $ 103 @.@ 2 million for the 97 shows . The I Am ... Yours residency at the Encore Theater in Las Vegas was recorded on August 2 , 2009 , and later released as a DVD , audio CD and television special in late November 2009 titled I Am ... Yours : An Intimate Performance at Wynn Las Vegas . Various performances on the tour were filmed worldwide for a live DVD , I Am ... World Tour , which was released on November 30 , 2010 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 On October 8 , 2008 , Beyoncé premiered two lead singles from the album . " If I Were a Boy " peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 , topped eight charts worldwide and reached the top ten in many other charts . " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " was the second lead single and peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Beyoncé 's fifth number @-@ one single , and was also successful in other international markets , peaking in top @-@ ten listings around the world . The singles were certified 2 × platinum and 4 × platinum , respectively , by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . " Diva " was released as a US @-@ only single and peaked at number nineteen on the US Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Beyoncé 's twelfth top @-@ twenty single , and at number three on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It was certified gold by the RIAA . The next single , " Halo " , was released internationally and peaked at number five in the US Billboard Hot 100 , proving to be commercially successful and reaching top @-@ ten listings around the world . It was certified double @-@ platinum in early 2010 by the RIAA . 
 Following announcements of the I Am ... World Tour two more singles were initially lined up , namely " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " and " Sweet Dreams " — though they switched order to become the sixth and seventh singles respectively . " Sweet Dreams " reached the top @-@ ten in most countries , managing to top the New Zealand Singles chart , and was certified platinum in the United States . " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " , the seventh single , reached the top @-@ forty in charts around the world , despite never being certified nor released in the United States . More than one year after the album 's release , " Video Phone " was released as the eighth single from I Am ... Sasha Fierce with a music video and digital download release , taking form as an extended remix featuring American recording artist , Lady Gaga . Like its predecessor , it reached the top @-@ forty in countries around the world , peaking at number sixty @-@ five in the US . It also became Beyoncé 's fourteenth number @-@ one on the US Dance Club Chart . As of July 2010 , the digital tracks from the album had sold a combined total of 12 @.@ 3 million units in the United States ; and according to Columbia Records the album has sold 15 million digital singles worldwide . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 62 , based on 24 reviews . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani wrote that the album 's " strength " is " its individual songs ... a testament to Beyoncé as one of today 's most reliable singles artists " , but felt that " the real disparity is her inability to reconcile the adult @-@ contemporary schmaltz of I Am with the more modern , edgy sounds of Sasha Fierce . " Adam Mattera of The Observer felt that both discs lack depth , observing that the first is " too busy chasing radio formats to expose any genuine soul " , and criticizing the second disc 's " succession of independent woman anthems such as ' Single Ladies ' and ' Diva ' , which will no doubt inspire drag queens the world over but leave most others bemused . " Allmusic 's Andy Kellman called its double @-@ disc " gimmick " " flimsy " and favored its second disc 's " decent , if easily forgettable , upbeat pop . " He expressed that on the I Am ... disc , " Beyoncé feels each line to the fullest extent , which almost rescues the set 's <unk> . " In his consumer guide for MSN Music , Robert Christgau named it the " dud of the month " with a " B " grade , indicating " a bad record whose details rarely merit further thought " . He found its " split @-@ personality bit " to be " deeply vapid " , only observing " three good songs on this 11 @-@ track artifact " . 
 Jonah Weiner of Blender commented that " Beyoncé is still a beauty @-@ shop feminist , quick with the smack @-@ downs , and she still describes the rattling rush of love with preternatural poise " . Stacey Anderson of Spin commented that its first disc " meanders over [ ... ] down @-@ tempo cuts " and called ... Sasha " an intriguing but diluted direction " . The Village Voice 's Nana Ekua Brew @-@ Hammond felt that the I Am ... disc lacks cohesion , but complimented " Sasha Fierce as " brassy , big @-@ headed , confrontational , and witty , " and stated , " each incendiary track challenges you to leave your inhibitions at coat @-@ check . " Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone noted that its slow songs are " full of bland self @-@ affirmation and saggy lines " , but wrote that " the " Sasha " disc boasts Beyoncé 's most adventurous music yet " . Colin McGuire of PopMatters called the album " a little rough around the edges at times " and viewed its Sasha Fierce disc as " a far more compelling trip down dance @-@ lane " . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly wrote that the album offers " two compelling sides " of Beyoncé and stated : " The collection might have been better served had she edited it down to one disc , rather than <unk> what ultimately seems like a marketing gimmick . And while fans will surely speculate , there 's little in the lyrics that feels more revealing than previous emotional fire @-@ starters . " Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The New Yorker found the album to be " something of a mess " , mostly because the alter ego " trips on the idea of redefinition " . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly ranked I Am … Sasha Fierce at number two on her list of the 10 Best Albums of 2008 , stating that " ' If I Were a Boy ' and ' Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) ' are undoubtedly album highlights ; still , the surprise here is how consistently satisfying the rest of it is – even the less showy tracks blossom on repeated listening . " Mark Edward Nero of About.com ranked it at the ninth place on his list of the Best R & B Albums of 2008 . Christian Gerard of NBC Washington placed I Am ... Sasha Fierce on his list of " Honorable Mentions " while writing the list for the Best Albums of 2008 . Agence France @-@ Presse , as reported by ABS @-@ CBN News and Current Affairs , recognized the album as the twelfth best selling one of 2008 . On The Village Voice ' Pazz & Jop year @-@ end lists , I Am ... Sasha Fierce was ranked at numbers 333 and 580 in 2008 and 2009 respectively . The album was ranked number twelve on the list of Best Albums of the Decade in Rolling Stone 's Reader 's Poll . The writers of Entertainment Weekly ranked I Am ... Sasha Fierce at number eight on their list of The Best Albums of The 2000s . 
 I Am ... Sasha Fierce won a 2009 Soul Train Award for Album of the Year . Beyoncé won the Favorite Female R & B Artist award at the 2009 American Music Awards , where the album also garnered a nomination in the category Favorite Album for Soul / R & B. Beyoncé also won Best R & B Artist at the 2009 BET Awards . However , she lost the same award to Alicia Keys at the 2010 BET Awards . Similarly , Beyoncé was nominated for Best International Female Solo Artist at the 2009 BRIT Awards , at the 2009 Meteor Awards ( Ireland ) , and at the 2010 International Dance Music Awards . In 2009 Beyoncé won the Best International Act accolade at the Music of Black Origin Awards ( United Kingdom ) , where I Am ... Sasha Fierce was also nominated for Best Album . At the 2009 MTV Europe Music Awards , Beyoncé was recognized as the Best Female Artist and " Single Ladies " won Best Video accolade with " Halo " the winner in the Best Song category . 
 I Am ... Sasha Fierce was nominated for the Outstanding Album award at the 2009 NAACP Image Award , and for International Album of the Year at the 2010 NRJ Music Award . At the 2010 <unk> World Awards , Beyoncé won Artist of the Year as well as Best R & B Artist , however , the album lost in the category Album of the Year . Beyoncé was also nominated for Favorite Female Artist and for Favorite R & B Artist at the 36th People 's Choice Awards as well as at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards , and in the categories World 's Best R & B Artist and World 's Best Pop Artist at the 2010 World Music Awards . I Am ... Sasha Fierce and its singles earned Beyoncé seven Grammy Award nominations , including Album of the Year . She won a record @-@ setting 6 Grammy awards out of the seven , plus an award for her rendition of the classic Etta James song " At Last " , from the Cadillac Records soundtrack . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album debuted at number one on the US Billboard 200 , selling 482 @,@ 000 units in its first week and giving Beyoncé her third consecutive number one album in the US . With this , Beyoncé became the third female artist of the 2000s decade to have her first three albums debut at the top spot of the US Billboard 200 albums chart . Having sold 1 @,@ 459 @,@ 000 copies in 6 weeks of release in 2008 alone , I Am ... Sasha Fierce emerged as the tenth best selling album of that year according to Billboard magazine . With this achievement , Beyoncé eventually equaled Garth Brooks , Mariah Carey , and Shania Twain for placing an album in Nielsen SoundScan 's year @-@ end top 10 for the fifth time . The album later emerged as the second best selling album of 2009 in the US itself . It has been certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . As of January 2014 , I Am ... Sasha Fierce has sold 3 @.@ 12 million copies in the US . In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number ten on November 29 , 2008 , becoming Beyoncé 's lowest @-@ debuting album despite having higher first week sales than her previous album , B 'Day . Following her performance at the 2008 The X Factor finale with winner Alexandra Burke , the album moved up to number nine on December 27 , 2008 . Due to the success of its singles in the United Kingdom , particularly " Sweet Dreams " , I Am ... Sasha Fierce rose from number five to its highest peak of number two in its thirty @-@ ninth week on the chart , which was the week of August 16 , 2009 . It is her best @-@ selling album in the UK , having sold over 1 @.@ 5 million copies . 
 In Australia , I Am ... Sasha Fierce debuted at number nine in late November 2008 and peaked at number eight in early January 2009 . Following the success of singles " Sweet Dreams " and " Broken @-@ Hearted Girl " , the album rebounded to a new peak of three on two separate occasions in October 2009 and it was certified triple @-@ platinum on November 23 , 2009 . In New Zealand , the album debuted at number 16 in late November 2008 and initially peaked at number six in early March 2009 . After growing popularity of its singles , especially " Sweet Dreams " , the album upped to a new peak of three on September 21 , 2009 . The album was certified platinum on April 26 , 2009 , ( after twenty @-@ three weeks on the chart ) shipping over 15 @,@ 000 copies to retailers and was later certified double platinum . In Spain , the album debuted and peaked at number 7 on November 26 , 2008 , and was certified platinum for shipment of over 60 @,@ 000 copies on October 26 , 2009 . The album was also the best @-@ selling international album in Turkey in 2009 . As of December 2015 , the album has sold over 8 million copies worldwide . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = = Platinum edition = = = 
 In September 2009 , an enhanced two @-@ disc version of the album was released , its first disc featuring 16 tracks from the original version with four bonus audio tracks , and its second disc , the video collection from Above and Beyoncé , including seven music videos . 
 = = = The Bonus Tracks EP = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Managerial 
 Performance credits 
 Visuals and imagery 
 Instruments 
 Technical and production 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Erica Hahn = 
 Erica Hahn , M.D. is a fictional character from the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) medical drama television series Grey 's Anatomy , portrayed by actress Brooke Smith . Hahn was a recurring character through the show 's second and third seasons , and joined the main cast in the fourth season . Prior to assuming the role , Smith observed heart surgery being performed , and admitted to finding stressful the pressure of continually portraying a medical professional realistically . 
 The character is presented as highly professional , to the point of being a " workaholic " . She is notably hard on Resident Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) , admitting that Cristina reminds her of herself as a student . Despite her intentions to keep away from relationships , she becomes romantically involved with orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) . The storyline was praised for its realistic portrayal of a developing same @-@ sex relationship between two women , although consultants from the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation expressed some concerns over what they deemed the somewhat exploitative talk of a threesome between Hahn , Torres and Mark Sloan . Hahn was written out of Grey 's Anatomy in November 2008 , with Smith commenting that the decision originated with the ABC network rather than with series creator Shonda Rhimes . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Upon her first appearance in the series it is established that Hahn is a long @-@ time rival of main character and fellow cardiothoracic surgeon Preston Burke , dating back to their days at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , where she graduated second after Burke . She is introduced as a cardiothoracic attending surgeon at Seattle Presbyterian Hospital when she and Burke fight over a donor heart . Hahn reappears in season three when she is contacted by George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) for a consult on his father 's valve replacement after George finds out about Burke 's hand tremors and Cristina helping him cover it up . Hahn transfers to Seattle Grace Hospital in the season four episode , " Haunt You Everyday " , after performing a successful heart transplant at the request of the Chief of Surgery , Richard Webber . She takes on the role previously held by Burke , Seattle Grace 's Head of Cardiothoracic Surgery . Hahn cultivates an antagonistic relationship with Burke 's former protégée Cristina Yang , refusing to let her scrub in on surgeries , and constantly criticizing her overly enthusiastic behavior . She later confesses to Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) that she is purposely hard on Cristina , as she reminds her of herself as a Resident . 
 The character deflects the romantic attention of fellow attending Mark Sloan , admitting that she finds him attractive but wishes to keep her private life separate from her working life . She also develops a friendship with Callie Torres which becomes temporarily strained when Callie is led to believe Hahn has romantic designs on her . Although Hahn laughs off the notion , she goes on to kiss Callie in front of Sloan , to prove that he couldn 't handle a threesome with the two of them , leaving Callie stunned . In the season four finale , Callie initiates a second passionate kiss , which Hahn reciprocates . The two attempt a romantic relationship , but while Erica comes to terms with her sexuality quickly , Callie is not so sure of herself , and sleeps with Mark Sloan to " make sure " . Erica initially forgives her , but eventually decides that she does not want a relationship with Callie while she is still so unsure about her sexuality , and so leaves her post at Seattle Grace . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Erica Hahn was initially conceived as a minor character , and occasional guest @-@ star rival of Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) . The character first appeared in three episodes of the show 's second season , followed by another two episodes of the show 's third season . Discussing whether she thought Hahn might become a main character after her season three appearance , Smith has stated that at the time : " I didn 't really think it was going to work out " , joking that " After every time I would hope that they would call and also hope not too – kind of like when I used to be single . " However , following Washington 's departure from the show , Hahn was brought back as a main character in the show 's fourth season , replacing Burke as Seattle Grace 's Head of Cardiothoracic Surgery . Smith has said that she was not expecting her character to be introduced to the show full @-@ time , as she " didn 't want to be disappointed if it didn 't happen . " She has stated that a deciding factor in her return was the opportunity it presented to explore the character in greater depth , explaining : " When I work on something that has a beginning , middle and end , I can create an arc . With Dr. Hahn , I need to figure out who she is " . Researching the role , Smith watched a heart surgery performed , and liaised with the surgical nurses employed by Grey 's Anatomy producers to maintain realism in the show 's operating room . She dubbed this research stressful , stating that " I got very neurotic about the fact that I didn ’ t go to medical school . I ’ m not actually a doctor " , explaining ; " I have no idea what it really is to be a surgeon and yet I have to act like I am really good at it . I have to look like I ’ ve been doing it a long time " . 
 On November 3 , 2008 , it was reported by Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Ausiello that Erica would depart from Grey 's Anatomy on November 6 . Series creator Shonda Rhimes issued the statement that : 
 E ! Online 's Kristin Dos Santos reported that Smith 's dismissal from the show was enforced by the ABC network , as part of an attempt to " de @-@ gay " Grey 's Anatomy . She revealed that as well as writing out the character Erica Hahn , Grey 's Anatomy newcomer Melissa George would no longer be playing a bisexual character as announced . Brooke Smith , interviewed by Michael Ausiello , stated that : 
 Smith explained that the script for her final episode did not involve her character being written out , and that Erica 's final scene on the show is " just [ her ] heading to [ her ] car . " She agreed with the assessment that her dismissal originated from ABC and not Shonda Rhimes herself , stating : " it definitely seemed like [ Shonda 's ] hands were tied . " Rhimes also said : " We didn 't have a controversy with Dr. Hahn . The press created a whole thing that had nothing to do with reality . " 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 Describing her character 's personality , Smith has stated : " Dr. Hahn is a workaholic and she 's very professional [ ... ] I think she feels that there should be professionalism at work , and when other people do things that aren 't professional she gets a little upset . " , adding : " She has little rules in her head about how you ’ re supposed to act at work . That doesn ’ t mean she can ’ t break the rules . But everyone else is supposed to follow them . " Stacy McKee , writer of season four episode " Kung Fu Fighting " , which saw the establishment of Hahn as a main character , has deemed her : " hardcore . [ ... ] a kick ass female surgeon " . Smith has explained that the show 's writers " didn ’ t want to rush to make [ Hahn ] likable , and hoped I didn ’ t mind . A lot of actors don ’ t want to be unlikable , even if they ’ re the bad guy . But I ’ m okay with that — I ’ m good with being unlikable . " Series creator Shonda Rhimes , discussing the rivalry between Hahn and her Resident Cristina Yang – which saw Hahn reprimanded by Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) , Seattle Grace 's Chief of Surgery , for her lack of encouragement — has given the insight : " Hahn is a brilliant surgeon and is great with her patients but her teaching skills ? Well , let ’ s just say she can use a little more loving care with her students , particularly Cristina . [ ... ] I felt sorry for Hahn because Hahn grew up in a surgical world that included even fewer women than there is now ( so Hahn is accustomed to a “ dog eat dog ” kind of surgical world ) . " Trish Doolan , who consulted with the show 's producers on the developing lesbian storyline between Hahn and Callie Torres , said of the character : " She 's very strong , very good at what she does , and actually a lot of men are threatened by that . She 's very confident with what she does and who she is " . 
 Initially upon her arrival at Seattle Grace , plastic surgeon Mark Sloan was seen to develop feelings for Hahn , only to be repeatedly rebuffed . The character explained that she kept her personal and professional lives separate , but as Smith has explained : " She came to the wrong hospital if she thought she wasn ’ t going to have a personal life ! " Smith has admitted to eavesdropping on a writers ’ meeting in an attempt to find out what was in store for her character romantically , as it was being closely guarded , even from her . She discussed with TV Guide editor Michael Ausiello early in her tenure as Hahn how she and Sandra Oh had pushed for a lesbian relationship between Hahn and Cristina , having previously played lovers in the play Stop Kiss . She agreed with Ausiello 's assessment that Hahn would make an " awesome lesbian " and that : " I 've certainly let [ the producers ] know I 'm open to it . [ ... ] They were like , " OK , duly noted ! " I think they wanted me to shut up already . " Equally , however , Smith has revealed that when she and Shonda Rhimes first discussed the possibility of Hahn being gay ; " " we felt it was too obvious that a strong , powerful woman would be a lesbian " . 
 Despite this assessment , the end of the show 's fourth season saw Hahn grow closer to orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres , in a relationship dubbed " Eri @-@ Cal " and later " <unk> " by Entertainment Weekly . Rhimes has stated that : " Callie and Erica have an undeniable chemistry . And watching the story unfold is something the writers are looking forward to . I wanted to illuminate their relationship in the same way we do all relationships on the show — it will be funny , sweet , honest , and a little bit dirty . " She has explained that in developing the relationship between the two : " we wanted it to be real – not some stunt to get people talking . We wanted to see what would happen if a woman suddenly had feelings for another woman . " The two characters shared a kiss at the end of season finale , with which After Ellen have noted : " Callie and Erica became the only regular lesbian / bisexual female characters currently on network television . This is also the first time that two regular characters on a network show have begun a lesbian romance , as opposed to one becoming involved with a new lesbian character introduced expressly for that relationship . " 
 Before embarking on the storyline , the show 's producers consulted with the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation to ensure they maintained realism throughout . Trish Doolan , star of April 's Shower was invited to consult in the workshop sessions which took place , and surmised that ; " They were really wanting to be truthful to the two characters they 're focusing on in the woman @-@ woman relationship " , with Nikki Weiss , who also consulted , adding : " they didn 't want to stereotype anything , either , and write from a place where they didn 't understand it . [ ... ] I don 't think they did it as a stunt to get people back to watching after the strike . I really think that they wanted to develop these two characters , and that you could see a closeness with them way before they ever decided any kind of — I think they just have a chemistry together , as actresses , too . And you could tell that in the room . They definitely have a chemistry . " 
 Discussing her own reaction to the storyline , Smith has commented ; " I was psyched . I thought it was a great idea . " She revealed that the writers have not fully divulged Hahn 's romantic backstory to her , explaining ; " a lot of it is still vague . I mean , there 's what the writers think and what I 've sort of thought , and in my mind . Maybe I had a crush in high school or in college or something — there was something , but I don 't think it 's ever — I think it might be her first time . " Continuing with this theme , Smith also spoke with Kristin Dos Santos for E ! about her character 's lack of definitive romantic history , jesting ; " I 'll look at the script next week and be like " Oh my God , I 've been a lesbian for years and I didn 't know . " She also discussed the meetings with GLAAD she and Ramirez attended , and their impact on her portrayal of the storyline , explaining : " It was actually very helpful because they did talk about their own personal lives , and how , I guess if you 're an open person , and life is change , then anything can happen . And it could really rock your world I imagine , if you all of a sudden thought that you might be in love with a woman and maybe you weren 't before . " 
 Following the announcement that Erica was being written out of Grey 's Anatomy , Smith was asked whether she was happy with the direction the storyline had taken . She responded : " You know , I was starting to get there , yeah . I was personally a little impatient with the gay panic , but it was more Callie 's thing anyway . I think Dr. Hahn was sort of figuring it out . " She deemed the scene which saw Callie sleep with Mark as practice for sleeping with Erica " a little icky " , adding : " If you 're a woman , don 't you know how to please yourself ? " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Mary Macnamara of the Los Angeles Times has praised the character highly , writing : " Hahn is a terrific character , sassy and professional , with an appropriately acerbic view of the various romantic shenanigans . She also seems to be a carefully considered stand @-@ in for viewers choking on the soapy silt of last season , a way for the writers to move forward without messing with the hugely successful brand . ( Don ’ t get too nervous , Brooke , but the future of TV ’ s once highest @-@ rated drama may be in your hands . ) " Discussing the character in terms of her relationship with Callie Torres , AfterEllen.com were also largely positive , assessing that : " The story line offered both the drama Grey 's is known for and — despite some marginally exploitative threesome talk — a truthfulness network television has rarely achieved when it comes to lesbian relationships . " Trish Doolan and Nikki Weiss , invited by GLAAD to consult with Grey 's Anatomy producers on the storyline , praised the effort put into researching the issue by the writers and actors involved , though were more negative on the scene which saw Hahn kiss Callie in an elevator in front of Mark Sloan . Weiss commented : " I just felt like , if they really cared about each other , I don 't think they would do that as a stunt . That seemed a little , I don 't know , forced . [ ... ] [ It ] was more like a conquest , like he could have [ Erica ] too or something . " AfterEllen.com agreed with this view , criticizing the way the scene was edited so as to keep cutting to Mark 's point of view , as though " privileging the male gaze . " Smith , however , has refuted this interpretation , stating that ; " Frankly , when I played that scene , I played it as , " You think that if you walked in the room and we were together , we would just be on you , but we wouldn 't . " So that 's why I kissed her . In that moment , I swear to God , when I was playing it , that 's what I was thinking . You know there 's a bit of a competition between all the guys in the boys club and my character anyway , so when that happened it was sort of like , " Oh yeah , you wouldn 't be intimidated , uh huh . OK , well , check this out . " 
 Following the announcement that the character had been written out of Grey 's Anatomy , Mary Macnamara wrote a critical LA Times editorial on the decision . She deemed Smith 's firing : " a grim reminder that certain prejudices are still ascendant in television " , writing that " most gay characters are allowed to have sex on network television only if they are part of a single @-@ episode story line , and all actively sexual lesbian characters must be <unk> , gorgeous and preferably under 30 . " She went on to assess that : " Smith probably got the boot not because her character wasn 't interesting enough or sympathetic enough but because she , especially when paired with Ramirez , just didn 't fit the visual template of " Grey 's " or indeed , of most of network television . She is a character actress , not a tabloid star . In other words , and they are words I deeply regret , Ramirez , with all her <unk> <unk> , may be beautiful enough to be bi , but Smith is not beautiful enough to be gay . At least not on network TV . Some ground , it would appear , is too calcified to be broken . " After Ellen 's Dorothy Snarker was similarly critical of the decision , explaining that : " Smith ’ s dismissal means the loss of American broadcast TV ’ s only lesbian / bisexual couple in primetime . It was also the first significant gay relationship portrayed on the hit ABC series . The handful of remaining lesbian / bisexual relationships on TV are on cable , premium channels and daytime television . " Detailing the decision to also change a new character 's orientation from bisexual to heterosexual , Snarker added : " Besides striking a serious blow for queer women ’ s visibility on the small screen , the moves seem to signal a significant setback in the industry ’ s acceptance of mainstream gay and lesbian storylines . " She concluded that : " While Callie had fleeting moments of gay panic where she slept with friend and fellow surgeon Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , the interaction between the two women was both organic and romantic . Callie and Erica 's relationship stood out as one of the few bright spots for lesbian and bisexual characters on primetime TV . Now it seems all we ’ re left with is taillights . " 
 = Harpy Tomb = 
 The Harpy Tomb is a marble chamber from a pillar tomb that stands in the abandoned city of Xanthos , capital of ancient Lycia , a region of southwestern Anatolia in what is now Turkey . Dating to approximately 480 – 470 BC , the chamber topped a tall pillar and was decorated with marble panels carved in bas @-@ relief . It may be the tomb of Kybernis , a king of Xanthos . 
 The marble chamber is carved in the Greek Archaic style . Along with much other material in Xanthos it is heavily influenced by Greek art , but there are also indications of non @-@ Greek influence in the carvings . The monument takes its name from the four carved female winged figures , resembling Harpies . The identities of the carved figures and the meaning of the scenes depicted are uncertain , but it is generally now agreed that the winged creatures are not Harpies . The Lycians absorbed much of Greek mythology into their own culture and the scenes may represent Greek deities , but it is also possible they are unknown Lycian deities . An alternative interpretation is that they represent scenes of judgement in the afterlife and scenes of supplication to Lycian rulers . 
 The carvings were removed from the tomb in the 19th century by archaeologist Charles Fellows and taken to England . Fellows visited Lycia in 1838 and reported finding the remains of a culture that until then was virtually unknown to Europeans . After obtaining permission from the Turkish authorities to remove stone artefacts from the region , Fellows collected a large amount of material from Xanthos under commission from the British Museum in London , where the reliefs are now on display . 
 = = Lycian culture = = 
 Lycian culture was at one time viewed as a branch of Greek culture by scholars , especially from the Classical period onwards , when Lycian architecture and sculpture were very much in the Classical Greek style . But the Lycians had a distinct culture of their own , and their religious and <unk> rites can be distinguished from the Greek . The Lycian language , although it is Indo @-@ European , is related to Hittite and most probably directly descended from the related Luwian language . Several groups speaking Hittite @-@ related languages continued to exist in Asia Minor for many centuries after the Hittite Empire had passed into history . 
 Lycia occupied a strategic position between Europe and the Near East . The Greek and Persian worlds met in Lycia , and the Lycians were heavily influenced by both . At one period Persian influence would dominate and at another , Greek , resulting in Lycian culture being an amalgam of both . 
 Greek influence is found in Lycia from an early date . The Lycian alphabet is derived from Rhodian Greek , with borrowings from other alphabets , possibly Phoenician . The country was conquered by Harpagus in 540 BC , who was acting for the Persians . Lycia 's culture was influenced by its annexation into the Persian Empire , but also by its neighbours , the Ionian Greeks . The influence of Greek culture increased after Xerxes ' army was defeated at the Battle of Plataea by Greek forces in 479 BC . Kybernis , for whom the Harpy Tomb is thought to have been built , may have died as a consequence of wounds he received in the defeat of Xerxes , either at Plataea or the naval battle of Salamis . He was succeeded by <unk> , and then <unk> , who took an Iranian name and appeared to be pro @-@ Persian . After Alexander the Great 's conquest of the country rapid Hellenisation took place in Lycia , and its culture became subsumed in the Greek . 
 = = = Mythology = = = 
 Lycia features heavily in Greek mythology . The Titan goddess Leto fled to Lycia after giving birth , or in order to give birth , to Apollo and Artemis . The Lycians play a part in the Iliad , under their leader Sarpedon , as allies of Troy . Bellerophon killed the fire @-@ breathing monster <unk> which was ravaging Lycia . 
 These stories may well not have originally been part of Lycian mythology , but may have been borrowed from the Greek . The Greek goddess Leto , for example , may have been equated with the Lycian mother goddess . Having incorporated Leto into their pantheon , the rest of the Greek stories followed naturally . Certainly , the temple to Leto was of some importance in Xanthos . It would appear that the Lycians actively encouraged this synthesis in order to promote themselves as part of the Greek family . 
 Another story from Greek mythology concerns the origin of the name of the country . According to the myth , Lycia is named after Lycus , the son of Pandion , king of Athens . Prior to Lycus becoming their leader , the Lycians were known as <unk> . Lycus was later to help remove the usurper <unk> from the throne of Athens . The real origin of the name , however , would appear to be a derivation of <unk> , the name of the country found in Hittite records . 
 = = = Lycian sculpture = = = 
 Lycian architecture and sculpture are on the same level as Greek , but to the Greeks , the Lycians , along with other non @-@ Greek peoples of S.W. Anatolia , were often viewed as barbarians . From c . 550 BC Greek pottery is found in quantity in Lycia ; the Lion Tomb , Pillar of the Wrestlers , and the pillars at <unk> and <unk> are all distinctly Greek in style with little eastern symbolism . 
 Pillar tombs are the earliest form of tomb found in Lycia and go back to the sixth century BC , first appearing c . 540 BC . The pillar tombs appear to be reserved for leading dynasts . House tombs and sarcophagi appear from the mid @-@ 5th century BC onwards . Xanthos has 43 monumental tombs of which 17 are sculptured and 35 are pillar tombs , usually to a high standard of workmanship . 
 The Harpy Tomb belongs to the Late Archaic Greek style . The Archaic Style introduced an element of realism that was developed to its fullest in the later Classical Style , but retained some of the formalism of the earlier Geometric Style in its rules of symmetry . Of the many tombs at Xanthos , the Harpy Tomb is unique in period and style . Other well @-@ known sculptures from Xanthos include the earlier Lion Tomb and the later Tomb of <unk> and Nereid Monument . 
 = = Tomb = = 
 Xanthos lies in the Antalya Province of modern Turkey . The Harpy Tomb is in the Acropolis of Xanthos to the north of where the Roman theatre now stands and on its west side . It would have originally stood on the edge of the marketplace . The original pillar is still in place ; Fellows took only the sculptures , which have been replaced with cement casts of the originals . 
 The tomb is the only Late Archaic tomb in Xanthos to have survived the extensive redevelopment of the acropolis in the Roman period , and was left standing as an isolated historical artefact . Many other Lycian tombs survive in Xanthos , but there are no others from this particular period . 
 The space inside the tomb was later occupied by an early Christian hermit . Fellows noted that the backs of the reliefs still bore the remains of the hermit 's religious paintings and monograms . Fellows speculates that this man was a disciple of Simeon Stylites ( 390 – 459 AD ) , one of the eponymously named Christian ascetics known as <unk> , who lived on the top of tall columns . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The tomb is a large square of carved marble panels . Each side is 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) in length and 3 feet 3 inches ( 1 @.@ 0 m ) in height . It was originally set upon a large oblong stone pedestal , 17 feet ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) high , making it an example of a pillar tomb . The top of the pillar has a hollowed out chamber creating a space inside the tomb 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) tall from the bottom of the hollow to the top of the reliefs . All four sides are carved with similar relief panels in one of which ( the south side ) is a small opening to allow a body to be placed in the tomb . This aperture may originally have been closed with a stele . The tomb is roofed with what appear to be three large slabs , one above the other . In fact , the capstone is one single piece , weighing 15 to 20 tons , carved to give the appearance of three layers . Each false slab overlaps the ones below to form an entablature . All the parts , except the sculptured reliefs , are made from local grey @-@ blue limestone . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 The tomb , along with many other artefacts from Lycia of the period , is in the Greek Archaic style . If the dating is accurate ( 480 – 470 BC ) the Archaic style continued in Lycia for some time after it had become unfashionable in Greece . The sculptures may have been carved by Ionian Greek craftsmen , if not they are heavily influenced by them . There are some features of the carvings that definitely suggest a non @-@ Greek origin . The female faces have a sensuous look with full lips and large eyes that are typically Lycian . 
 = = Reliefs = = 
 The reliefs show seated figures receiving gifts from standing figures . At the left and right edges on the north and south sides are winged female creatures with bird bodies ( the " Harpies " ) . The winged creatures are carrying away small childlike figures . 
 Between the winged creatures on the north side is a seated figure receiving a helmet from a standing warrior ; under the chair is a bear . Under the winged creature on the right is a kneeling female supplicant . Between the winged creatures on the south side is a seated figure of uncertain sex receiving a dove from a standing female . The seated figure is holding a pomegranate in the left hand and an unidentified object ( possibly fruit or an egg ) in the right hand . 
 On the west side are two females seated on thrones and facing each other . Their breasts are large and the nipples and areolae can be seen through their thin clothing . The one on the right holds in her right hand a flower and in her left a pomegranate . The one on the left holds in her right hand a <unk> . The opening for insertion of the body is in front of this figure . Above the opening is a cow suckling its calf . This design is also seen on coins from the reign of <unk> ( 475 to 469 BC ) . On the right of the opening three female figures advance towards the seated figures . The second advancing female holds in her right hand a fruit and in her left a pomegranate flower . The third holds in her raised right hand an object , possibly an egg . 
 On the east side is a male figure seated on a throne , holding in his right hand a pomegranate flower and being offered a cock by a smaller standing figure . Behind the small standing figure is a male holding in his left hand a staff and advancing with a dog . Behind the seated figure are two advancing females , the first holding in her left hand a pomegranate . 
 It is thought the carvings on the monument were originally brightly painted . At the time of Fellows ' discovery of the monument , the remains of blue paint were found in the backgrounds of the reliefs . Traces of red paint have also been found on other parts . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 The seated figures are thought to be Lycian gods or deified ancestors . Among the possible identities for the seated figures on the north and south sides are Harpagus , the Median general who became the founder of the Lycian dynasty , and Kybernis , a later king of Lycia . Kybernis is proposed as a possible identity of the occupant of the tomb . Another view is that they are generalised scenes of judgement in Hades rather than earthly rulers . Consistent with this view is the interpretation of the south figure as Persephone , the Queen of the Underworld . The figures to the left and right of the opening may be the goddesses Demeter and Persephone respectively . 
 The repeated use of the pomegranate in the symbolism is not accidental . Not just in Lycia , but throughout Asia Minor , the Greek world , and Palestine , the pomegranate was widely recognised as a symbol of fructification and procreation . Conversely , it is also a symbol of change and death . This symbolism can be helpful in identifying the deities in the reliefs . The pomegranate is a suitable gift for a goddess of sexuality such as Aphrodite who herself planted the original pomegranate on Cyprus . It is not a suitable gift for an intellectual goddess such as Athena . The pomegranate can have an overtly sexual meaning ; Demeter complains that her daughter <unk> was " forced to eat the seed of a pomegranate " in the underworld , by which it is understood that she was raped . 
 The winged creatures are likely not Harpies , but this misidentification has stuck in the name of the monument . A better match is to the Sirens but many sources doubt either of these claims . The small figures they are carrying away may represent the souls of the dead . Another suggestion for the small figures are that they are the daughters of the hero <unk> who were carried away to become the Furies . 
 = = Removal of the sculptures = = 
 The sculpted reliefs were taken to England by Charles Fellows , who had been commissioned by the British Museum to bring back artefacts after they learned of his 1838 exploration of the region . Until then , Lycian culture was virtually unknown in Western Europe . The tomb was ( and still is , minus its reliefs ) located in the Acropolis of Xanthos . 
 Fellows received permission in October 1841 from the Ottoman Sultan to remove stone artefacts from the region . A Royal Navy ship , HMS Beacon commanded by Captain Graves , was tasked with recovering and transporting the items identified by Fellows . The ship sailed from Malta on 30 October but did not arrive on site until 26 December , delayed largely by unanticipated and protracted negotiations with the Turkish authorities . Fellows ' documents did not give him the permissions he thought they did ( he had not had them translated ) , and some of the British Government 's requests were seen as unreasonable , such as removing stones from the walls of operational military fortresses . 
 A further delay was caused by a disagreement with Graves . It transpired that the ship had not brought suitable tackle for lifting the heavier pieces . Fellows wanted Graves to return to Malta immediately to fetch the necessary equipment , but Graves requested further orders from his superiors before doing so , which took some time to arrive . The Beacon did not finally return until March 1842 . 
 To remove the sculptures of the Harpy Tomb the capstone , which may have weighed as much as twenty tons and was resting on the sculptured sides , had to be lifted off , causing the sides of the tomb to fall in . Fellows , who had left the sailors to carry out this task in their own way , remarked " but the sculptured parts did not receive more injury than they probably would have done from a more scientific operation " . The sculptures of another monument at Xanthos , the Horse Tomb , were left in situ because they were so large that they could only be handled if first sawn into pieces . This Fellows would have done , but the stone @-@ sawyers arrived from Malta with Graves so late in the season that they immediately succumbed to malaria and the task was abandoned . Nevertheless , 80 tons of material were put on board . 
 = A Thousand Splendid Suns = 
 A Thousand Splendid Suns is a 2007 novel by Afghan @-@ American author Khaled Hosseini . It is his second , following his bestselling 2003 debut , The Kite Runner . Mariam is an illegitimate child , and suffers from both the stigma surrounding her birth along with the abuse she faces throughout her marriage . Laila , born a generation later , is comparatively privileged during her youth until their lives intersect and she is also forced to accept a marriage proposal from Rasheed , Mariam 's husband . 
 Hosseini has remarked that he regards the novel as a " mother @-@ daughter story " in contrast to The Kite Runner , which he considers a " father @-@ son story " . It continues some of the themes used in his previous work , such as the familial aspects , but focuses primarily on female characters and their roles in Afghan society . 
 A Thousand Splendid Suns was released on May 22 , 2007 , and received favorable <unk> reviews from Kirkus , Publishers Weekly , Library Journal , and Booklist , becoming a number one New York Times bestseller for fifteen weeks following its release . During its first week on the market , it sold over one million copies . Columbia Pictures purchased film rights in 2007 and confirmed intentions to create a movie adaption of the book . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Title = = = 
 The title of the book comes from a line in the Josephine Davis translation of the poem " Kabul " , by the 17th @-@ century Iranian poet Saib <unk> : 
 " Every street of Kabul is enthralling to the eye 
 Through the bazaars , caravans of Egypt pass 
 One could not count the moons that shimmer on her roofs 
 And the thousand splendid suns that hide behind her walls " 
 In an interview , Khaled Hosseini explains , " I was searching for English translations of poems about Kabul , for use in a scene where a character bemoans leaving his beloved city , when I found this particular verse . I realized that I had found not only the right line for the scene , but also an evocative title in the phrase ' a thousand splendid suns , ' which appears in the next @-@ to @-@ last stanza . " 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 When asked what led him to write a novel centered on two Afghan women , Hosseini responded : 
 " I had been entertaining the idea of writing a story of Afghan women for some time after I 'd finished writing The Kite Runner . That first novel was a male @-@ dominated story . All the major characters , except perhaps for Amir 's wife Soraya , were men . There was a whole facet of Afghan society which I hadn 't touched on in The Kite Runner , an entire landscape that I felt was fertile with story ideas ... In the spring of 2003 , I went to Kabul , and I recall seeing these burqa @-@ clad women sitting at street corners , with four , five , six children , begging for change . I remember watching them walking in pairs up the street , trailed by their children in ragged clothes , and wondering how life had brought them to that point ... I spoke to many of those women in Kabul . Their life stories were truly heartbreaking ... When I began writing A Thousand Splendid Suns , I found myself thinking about those resilient women over and over . Though no one woman that I met in Kabul inspired either Laila or Mariam , their voices , faces , and their incredible stories of survival were always with me , and a good part of my inspiration for this novel came from their collective spirit . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Hosseini disclosed that in some ways , A Thousand Splendid Suns was more difficult to write than his first novel , The Kite Runner . This is partly because when he penned The Kite Runner , " no one was waiting for it . " He also found his second novel to be more " ambitious " than the first due to its larger number of characters , its dual focus on Mariam and Laila , and its covering of a multi @-@ generational @-@ period of nearly forty @-@ five @-@ years . However , he stated , " As I began to write , as the story picked up pace and I found myself immersed in the world of Mariam and Laila , these apprehensions vanished on their own . The developing story captured me and enabled me to tune out the background noise and get on with the business of inhabiting the world I was creating . " The characters " took on a life of their own " at this point and " became very real for [ him ] " . 
 Similar to The Kite Runner , the manuscript had to be extensively revised ; Hosseini divulged that he ultimately wrote the book five times before it was complete . The novel 's anticipated release was first announced in October 2006 , when it was described as a story about " family , friendship , faith and the salvation to be found in love " . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The novel centers around two women , Mariam and Laila , how their lives become intertwined after a series of drastic events , and their subsequent friendship and support for each other in the backdrop of Kabul in the 20th and 21st century . It is split into four parts that focus on individual stories : Part one is about Mariam , part two is on Laila , part three is on the relationship between the two women , and Laila 's life with Tariq is in part four . The last section also happens to be the only part written in the present tense . 
 Mariam lives in a <unk> on the outskirts of Herat with her embittered mother . Jalil , her father , is a wealthy businessman who owns a cinema and lives in the town with three wives and nine children . Mariam is his illegitimate daughter , and she is prohibited to live with them , but Jalil visits her every Thursday . On her fifteenth birthday , Mariam wants her father to take her to see Pinocchio at his movie theater , against the pleas of her mother . When he does not show up , she hikes into town and goes to his house . He refuses to see her , and she ends up sleeping on the street . In the morning , Mariam returns home to find that her mother has committed suicide out of fear that her daughter had deserted her . Mariam is then taken to live in her father 's house . Jalil arranges for her to be married to Rasheed , a shoemaker from Kabul who is thirty @-@ years her senior . In Kabul , Mariam becomes pregnant seven successive times , but is never able to carry a child to term . This is a sad , disquieting reality for both Rasheed and Mariam . Ultimately Rasheed grows more and more despondent over his wife 's inability to have a child and particularly a son . As their marriage wears on Rasheed gradually becomes more and more abusive . 
 Part Two introduces Laila . She is a girl growing up in Kabul who is close friends with Tariq , a boy living in her neighborhood . They eventually develop a romantic relationship despite being aware of the social boundaries between men and women in Afghan society . War comes to Afghanistan , and Kabul is bombarded by rocket attacks . Tariq 's family decides to leave the city , and the emotional farewell between Laila and Tariq culminates with them making love . Laila 's family also decides to leave Kabul , but as they are packing a rocket destroys the house , killing her parents and severely injuring Laila . Laila is subsequently taken in by Rasheed and Mariam . 
 After recovering from her injuries , Laila discovers that she is pregnant with Tariq 's child . After being informed by Abdul Sharif that Tariq has died , she agrees to marry Rasheed , a man eager to have a young and attractive second wife in hopes of having a son with her . When Laila gives birth to a daughter , Aziza , Rasheed is displeased and suspicious . This results in him becoming abusive towards Laila . Mariam and Laila eventually become confidants and best friends . They plan to run away from Rasheed and leave Kabul but are caught at the bus station . Rasheed beats them and deprives them of water for several days , almost killing Aziza . 
 A few years later , Laila gives birth to Zalmai , Rasheed 's son . The Taliban has risen to power and imposed harsh rules on the Afghan population , prohibiting women from appearing in public without a male relative . There is a drought , and living conditions in Kabul become poor . Rasheed 's workshop burns down , and he is forced to take jobs for which he is ill @-@ suited . He sends Aziza to an orphanage . Laila endures a number of beatings from the Taliban when caught alone on the streets in attempts to visit her daughter . 
 Then one day Tariq appears outside the house , and he and Laila are reunited . Laila realizes that Rasheed had hired Abdul Sharif to inform her about Tariq 's fake death , so that he could marry her . When Rasheed returns home from work , Zalmai tells his father about the visitor . Rasheed starts to savagely beat Laila . He nearly strangles her , but Mariam intervenes and kills Rasheed with a shovel . Afterwards , Mariam confesses to killing Rasheed in order to draw attention away from Laila and Tariq . Mariam is publicly executed , allowing Laila and Tariq to leave for Pakistan with Aziza and Zalmai . They spend their days working at a guest house in Murree , a summer retreat . 
 After the fall of the Taliban , Laila and Tariq return to Afghanistan . They stop in the village where Mariam was raised , and discover a package that Mariam 's father left behind for her : a videotape of Pinocchio , a small sack of money , and a letter . Laila reads the letter and discovers that Jalil had regretted sending Mariam away . Laila and Tariq return to Kabul and use the money to fix up the orphanage , where Laila starts working as a teacher . Laila is pregnant with her third child , and if it is a girl , Laila has already named her Mariam . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Mariam is an ethnic Tajik born in Herat , 1959 . She is the illegitimate child of Jalil and Nana . She suffers shame throughout her childhood because of the circumstances of her birth . Khaled Hosseini described her portrayal : " The key word with Mariam is that she is isolated in every sense of the word . She is a woman who is detached from the day @-@ to @-@ day norms of human existence . Really , she just wants connection with another human being . " Despite initially resenting Laila , she becomes a " friend and a doting alternative mother " to her through the " common hardship " of being married to the " abusive , psychologically imposing " Rasheed . 
 Laila is an ethnic Tajik . Born in 1978 , to Hakim and Fariba , she is a beautiful and intelligent girl coming from a family in which the father is university @-@ educated and a teacher . Hosseini states that compared to Mariam , Laila " had a much more fulfilling relationship with her father , her girlfriends and her childhood friend , Tariq . She expected to finish school and is looking for personal fulfillment . These are two very different representations of women . " Her life becomes tied to Mariam 's when she becomes the second wife of Rasheed , Mariam 's husband . This originally draws resentment from Mariam , who " [ feels ] her territory infringed upon " . Despite this , " Laila becomes her daughter for all practical purposes " due to Mariam 's childlessness , struggles , and abuse they both face during the marriage . Towards the end of the novel she becomes a schoolteacher at the orphanage where Aziza had stayed . 
 Rasheed is an ethnic Pashtun , a shoemaker , and the antagonist of the novel . He marries Mariam through an arrangement with Jalil , and later marries Laila as well . After suffering years of domestic abuse at his hands , Mariam bludgeons Rasheed to death with a shovel during a violent struggle . Hosseini stated that he hoped to create a multi @-@ layered character in Rasheed , saying , " Rasheed 's the embodiment of the patriarchal , tribal character . In writing him , I didn 't want to write him as an irredeemable villain . He is a reprehensible person , but there are moments of humanity , such as his love for his son . " He identified an encounter with an Afghan man four years earlier as the foundation for this character ; the man " had a very sweet , subservient wife " and had not yet informed her that he was planning to marry again . 
 Tariq , an ethnic Pashtun born in 1976 , is a boy who grew up in Kabul with Laila . He lost a leg to a land mine at the age of five . They eventually evolve from best friends to lovers ; after a decade of separation they are married and expecting a child by the end of the novel . 
 Nana is Mariam 's mother and a former servant of Jalil . Mariam 's birth is the result of an affair between Nana and Jalil . Jalil 's favoritism towards his wives and legitimate children leaves Nana bitter towards Jalil . She hangs herself when Mariam is fifteen after Mariam journeys to Jalil 's house on her birthday . Nana perceives this to be betrayal and regards as an act of desertion . 
 Mullah <unk> , a Sufi , is Mariam 's elderly Koran teacher and friend . He dies of natural causes in 1989 . 
 Jalil is Mariam 's father , a wealthy man who had three wives before he fathered Mariam . He marries Mariam to Rasheed after Nana 's death , but later regrets sending her away . He dies in 1987 . 
 Hakim is Laila 's father . He is a well @-@ educated and a progressive schoolteacher . He is killed in a rocket explosion along with Fariba . 
 Fariba is Laila 's mother . In Part One , during her brief meeting with Mariam , she is depicted as cheerful , but her happy nature is disrupted when her two sons , Ahmad and Noor , leave home to go to war and are later killed . She spends nearly all of her time in bed mourning her sons until the Mujahideen are victorious , and is later killed in a rocket explosion along with Hakim . 
 Aziza , born in the spring of 1993 , is the daughter of Laila and Tariq , conceived when Laila was fourteen . When the news of Tariq 's alleged death arrives , in order to hide the child 's illegitimacy and provide for herself , Laila decides to marry Rasheed . Aziza 's birth marks the beginning of Laila 's fall from favor with Rasheed and the friendship between Mariam and Laila . 
 Zalmai , born in September 1997 , to Laila and Rasheed . He serves as a redeeming facet of Rasheed , idolizing him despite the abuse to his mother and Mariam . Zalmai remains unaware of the fact that Mariam killed Rasheed and continuously asks Laila about him , who lies by saying that he simply left for some time . After initially blaming Tariq for his father 's mysterious disappearance , he comes to accept Tariq as a father @-@ figure . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 When asked about common themes in The Kite Runner and A Thousand Splendid Suns , Khaled Hosseini replied : 
 " Both novels are multigenerational , and so the relationship between parent and child , with all of its manifest complexities and contradictions , is a prominent theme . I did not intend this , but I am keenly interested , it appears , in the way parents and children love , disappoint , and in the end honor each other . In one way , the two novels are corollaries : The Kite Runner was a father @-@ son story , and A Thousand Splendid Suns can be seen as a mother @-@ daughter story . " 
 He ultimately considers both novels to be " love stories " in that it is love that " draws characters out of their isolation , that gives them the strength to transcend their own limitations , to expose their vulnerabilities , and to perform devastating acts of self @-@ sacrifice " . 
 = = = Women in Afghanistan = = = 
 Hosseini visited Afghanistan in 2003 , and " heard so many stories about what happened to women , the tragedies that they had endured , the difficulties , the gender @-@ based violence that they had suffered , the discrimination , the being barred from active life during the Taliban , having their movement restricted , being banned essentially from practicing their legal , social rights , political rights " . This motivated him to write a novel centered on two Afghan women . 
 Washington Post writer Jonathan Yardley suggests that " the central theme of A Thousand Splendid Suns is the place of women in Afghan society " , pointing to a passage in which Mariam 's mother states , " Learn this now and learn it well , my daughter : Like a compass needle that points north , a man 's accusing finger always finds a woman . Always . You remember that , Mariam . " 
 In the book , both Mariam and Laila are forced into accepting a marriage to Rasheed , who requires them to wear a burqa before it is implemented by law under the Taliban . He later becomes increasingly abusive . A Riverhead Trades Weekly review states that the novel consistently shows the " patriarchal despotism where women are agonizingly dependent on fathers , husbands and especially sons , the bearing of male children being their sole path to social status . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In the first week following its release , A Thousand Splendid Suns sold over one million copies , becoming a number @-@ one New York Times bestseller for fifteen weeks . Time magazine 's Lev Grossman placed it at number three in the Top 10 Fiction Books of 2007 , and praised it as a " dense , rich , pressure @-@ packed guide to enduring the unendurable . " Jonathan Yardley said in the Washington Post " Book World " , " Just in case you 're wondering whether Khaled Hosseini 's A Thousand Splendid Suns is as good as The Kite Runner , here 's the answer : No . It 's better . " 
 A Thousand Splendid Suns received significant praise from reviewers , with Publishers Weekly calling it " a powerful , harrowing depiction of Afghanistan " and USA Today describing the prose as " achingly beautiful " . Lisa See of The New York Times attributed the book 's success to Hosseini " [ understanding ] the power of emotion as few other popular writers do " . Natasha Walter from The Guardian wrote , " Hosseini is skilled at telling a certain kind of story , in which events that may seem unbearable - violence , misery and abuse - are made readable . He doesn 't gloss over the horrors his characters live through , but something about his direct , explanatory style and the sense that you are moving towards a redemptive ending makes the whole narrative , for all its tragedies , slip down rather easily . " 
 Cathleen Medwick gave the novel a highly positive review in O , the Oprah Magazine : 
 " Love may not be the first thing that comes to mind when you consider the war @-@ ravaged landscape of Afghanistan . But that is the emotion — subterranean , powerful , beautiful , illicit , and infinitely patient — that suffuses the pages of Khaled Hosseini 's A Thousand Splendid Suns . As in his best @-@ selling first novel , The Kite Runner , Hosseini movingly examines the connections between unlikely friends , the fissures that open up between parents and children , the intransigence of quiet hearts . " 
 The New York Times writer Michiko Kakutani wrote a more critical review , describing the opening as " heavy @-@ handed " and early events in the novel as " soap @-@ opera @-@ ish " . Despite these objections , she concluded , " Gradually , however , Mr. Hosseini 's instinctive storytelling skills take over , mowing down the reader 's objections through sheer momentum and will . He succeeds in making the emotional reality of Mariam and Laila 's lives tangible to us , and by conjuring their day @-@ to @-@ day routines , he is able to give us a sense of what daily life was like in Kabul — both before and during the harsh reign of the Taliban . " Similarly , Yvonne Zipp of The Christian Science Monitor concluded that A Thousand Splendid Suns was ultimately " a little shaky as a work of literature " . 
 The depictions of the lead female characters , Mariam and Laila , were praised by several commentators . John Freeman from The Houston Chronicle found them " enormously winning " while Carol Memmott from USA Today further described them as " stunningly heroic characters whose spirits somehow grasp the dimmest rays of hope " . Medwick summed up the portrayals : " Mariam , branded as a <unk> , or bastard , and forced into an abusive marriage at the age of fifteen , and Laila , a beauty groomed for success but shrouded almost beyond recognition by repressive sharia law and the husband she and Mariam share . The story , epic in scope and spanning three decades , follows these two indomitable women whose fortunes mirror those of their beloved and battered country — ' nothing pretty to look at , but still standing ' — and who find in each other the strength they need to survive . " 
 Jennifer Reese from Entertainment Weekly dubbed Rasheed " one of the most repulsive males in recent literature " . Lisa See said that , with the exception of Tariq , " the male characters seem either unrelentingly evil or pathetically weak " and opinionated , " If a woman wrote these things about her male characters , she would probably be labeled a man @-@ hater . " 
 = = Film = = 
 Columbia Pictures owns the movie rights to the novel . Steven Zaillian finished writing the first draft of the screenplay in 2009 and is also slated to direct ; Scott Rudin has signed on as a producer . In May 2013 , studios confirmed a tentative release date of 2015 . 
 = Apple River Fort = 
 Apple River Fort , today known as the Apple River Fort State Historic Site , was one of many frontier forts hastily completed by settlers in northern Illinois and southern Wisconsin following the onset of the 1832 Black Hawk War . Located in present @-@ day Elizabeth , Illinois , United States , the fort at the Apple River settlement was built in less than a week . It was one of the few forts attacked during the war and the only one attacked by a band led by Black Hawk himself . At the Battle of Apple River Fort , a firefight of about an hour ensued , with Black Hawk 's forces eventually withdrawing . The fort suffered one militia man killed in action , and another wounded . After the war , the fort stood until 1847 , being occupied by squatters before being sold to a private property owner who dismantled the building . 
 Today , a replica of the fort stands next to the site of the original Apple River Fort . Constructed between 1996 and 1997 by a non @-@ profit organization , the replica was based on earlier archaeological investigations of the site which revealed information about the layout and settlement at the fort . In 1997 the Apple River Fort Site was listed on the National Register of Historic Places , and in 2001 the state of Illinois took over operations of the site and designated it the Apple River Fort State Historic Site . Apple River Fort was one of numerous Illinois historic sites slated to close October 1 , 2008 due to cuts in the Illinois budget by Governor Rod Blagojevich . After Blagojevich was impeached and removed from office , new Illinois Governor Pat Quinn reopened the site in May 2009 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The earliest settlers in the vicinity of Apple River Fort , probably miners , likely arrived more than a decade before the fort 's construction . The miners settled the site and built log cabins around and near the Kellogg 's Trail , a route from Galena to Dixon 's Ferry ; they obtained fresh water from a nearby spring . 
 = = = Black Hawk War background = = = 
 The fort 's construction was motivated by the Black Hawk War , which was a consequence of an 1804 treaty between the Governor of the Indiana Territory and a council of leaders from the Sauk and Fox Native American tribes . The treaty , regarding land settlement , ceded 50 million acres ( 200 @,@ 000 km2 ) of Sauk and Fox land to the United States for $ 2 @,@ 234 @.@ 50 and an annual annuity of $ 1 @,@ 000 . The treaty was controversial , Sauk Chief Black Hawk , and others disputed its validity because they said that the full tribal councils were not consulted and the council that negotiated the treaty did not have the authority to cede land . The treaty also allowed the Sauk and Fox to remain on their land until it was sold . 
 After the discovery of lead in and around Galena , Illinois during the 1820s , miners began moving into the area ceded in the 1804 treaty . When the Sauk and Fox returned from the winter hunt in 1829 they found their land occupied by white settlers and were forced to return west of the Mississippi River . Angered by the loss of his birthplace , between 1830 – 31 Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi , but was persuaded to return west each time without bloodshed . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British , he again moved his so @-@ called " British Band " of around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and non @-@ combatants crossed the river into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return to Iowa , but the undisciplined Illinois militia 's actions led to the Battle of Stillman 's Run . After the first clash at Stillman 's Run , construction at the Apple River Fort site advanced quickly . A number of other engagements followed , and the militias of Michigan Territory and Illinois were then mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's Band . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The Apple River Fort was constructed by the early settlers in the region in present @-@ day Elizabeth , Illinois for protection during the 1832 Black Hawk War . At the onset of the Black Hawk War , settlers in southern Wisconsin and northern Illinois constructed a series of forts , stockades , and fortified homes ; Apple River Fort was one of the forts erected after the Illinois Militia 's defeat at Stillman 's Run on May 14 . The Galenian newspaper reported that the blockhouse was finished on May 22 , 1832 , with the stockade completed several days later . A militia company was formed from among the local families and single men and boys . This unit elected local surveyor and land @-@ owner Clack Stone , as <unk> and commander of the settlement 's militia contingent . The Apple River settlement , at the time of the fort 's completion , was home to several families who had traveled long distances : the <unk> , the Armstrongs , and others . Some families , like the <unk> , the Howards , and <unk> and others took up residence in nearby cabins . The Murdock family already resided in a homestead near the new fort . Relatively few contemporary descriptions of the fort exist . One of the more complete later descriptions — and the only one to mention the blockhouse in detail — is found in the 1878 post @-@ Black Hawk War text The History of Jo Daviess County : 
 Trees were felled , and dragged to the area to be enclosed . A three foot trench was dug along the proposed stockade <unk> each post was raised into place and back @-@ filled to hold the timber erect and projecting about twelve feet high , One corner of the fort was formed by using two walls of an existing log house in which one of the settlers had lived . In the opposite corner , was built a " block house , " of two stories , with the upper story most likely constructed on top of an existing agricultural outbuilding . The second story projecting over the other about two feet , so that the Indians could not come up near to the building for the purpose of setting it on fire , without being exposed to the guns of the settlers , from above . On one side of the yard were two extant long cabins , for dwelling purposes , and in the two corners not occupied by houses , elevated benches were built into " bastions " or outward projections in the log wall . These were made to stand upon and reconnoitre . 
 = = = Battle of Apple River Fort = = = 
 The fort was attacked by Black Hawk on the afternoon of June 24 , 1832 by the Sac warrior Black Hawk and a 200 @-@ man war @-@ party . The fort was defended bu about thirty men and boys , along with about 40 women children and infants . One man , a courier named Edmund Welch , was wounded in the hip early in the action . Though a firefight lasting about an hour ensued , the Illinois Militia at Apple River Fort suffered just one fatality , George W. Harkleroad , and one man wounded , Josiah Nutting . During the battle , several women rose to the occasion to aid in the defence of the fort . Elizabeth Armstrong was singled out for her bravery as she motivated the fort 's settlers , especially the women , to support the defenders . The number of casualties absorbed by Black Hawk 's force is unknown . 
 = = = After the war = = = 
 After the war ended , the fort remained standing into the 1840s ; in the immediate aftermath of the war 's conclusion the site was occupied by two squatters . In 1847 George Bainbridge purchased the land and the fort from the United States federal government . Bainbridge salvaged what logs were usable from the fort , dismantling it in the process , and used them to construct a barn on his property . The fort site remained relatively undisturbed in the ensuing years . In 1994 the non @-@ profit Apple River Historical Foundation was organized and archaeological investigation was conducted in 1995 . In June 1997 a reconstruction effort ended , and today a replica of the fort stands to the south of the original site , which remains undisturbed to preserve its archaeological integrity . 
 The state historic site at the Apple River Fort Site was set to close October 1 , 2008 because of cuts in the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency 's budget by Illinois governor Rod Blagojevich . Supporters of the historic site in Elizabeth , led by the Apple River Fort Foundation , appealed in protest to legislators and the governor against the closing , lamenting the economic impact the fort 's closing will have on the community . After delay , the proposal to close seven state parks and a dozen state historic sites , including Apple River Fort , went ahead on November 30 , 2008 . After the impeachment of Illinois Governor Blagojevich , new governor Pat Quinn reopened the closed state parks in February . In March 2009 Quinn announced he is committed to reopening the state historic sites by June 30 , 2009 . 
 = = Archeology = = 
 The Apple River Fort Historic Foundation began attempting to locate the original site of the fort in the spring of 1995 . Local tales told of the fort being situated on a hill not far from Main Street in Elizabeth . The group , unable to determine the veracity of the tale , hired an archaeologist to determine the location of the old frontier fortification . 
 The archaeological digs and investigation at the site were led by Floyd <unk> of Fever River Research , in consultation with the Illinois Historic Preservation Agency , during the summer of 1995 . The first portion of the investigation was an initial walkover of the site , which yielded some pre @-@ Civil War artifacts . Subsequently , the research team " lightly <unk> " the site to perform a " controlled surface collection . " The surface collection yielded a wide range of artifacts including different types of glass , ceramics , personal items , and small amounts of brick and stone structural materials . The items retrieved during the collection strongly suggested that occupation of the Apple River Fort site occurred during the early 19th century , probably not extending beyond 1860 , and was short @-@ term . The archeology at the site uncovered the original footprint of the fort , a smaller than estimated 50 foot ( 15 m ) by 70 foot ( 21 m ) area , and made significant contributions to the understanding of the nature of the early Apple River settlement . 
 The archaeologists ' efforts at the fort site allowed for the construction of a replica beginning in 1996 . Volunteers built the fort , using the same tools and materials settlers would have used . Logs were stripped and split by hand , shingles were split by hand , and a trench dug to connect the two cabin replicas on the interior . The stockade walls were built using 14 and 15 foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) long logs . In addition , volunteers completed a blockhouse and firing stands with hand @-@ hewn ladders . 
 = = Design = = 
 During the archaeological investigation at the site , Apple River Fort was found to display a nearly identical construction pattern to that of Fort Blue Mounds , another Black Hawk War frontier fort near present @-@ day Blue Mounds , Wisconsin . The major difference between the two structures was in the placement of buildings within the stockade walls . The digs at Apple River uncovered a dozen original features of Apple River Fort . The remains of four cellars were found within the fort , one in southeast corner of the fort may have been used for food storage or as a dairy @-@ processing pit . In the northwest corner of the fort , there were two more cellars , just west of one of the fort 's log buildings . The largest cellar was located beneath the fort 's blockhouse , in its southeast corner , and was used as a trash pit into the 1840s . The blockhouse cellar yielded the earliest archaeological material collected at the site . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The Apple River Fort played a role in the 1832 Black Hawk War , being one of the few forts that was attacked during the conflict , and the only fort attacked by a band led by Black Hawk himself . The site of the original fort still holds the potential to yield significant sub @-@ surface archaeological artifacts and data . For its military and archaeological significance , the Apple River Fort Site was added to the U.S. National Register of Historic Places on November 7 , 1997 . On January 1 , 2001 the state of Illinois took over operation of the reconstructed Apple River Fort and its interpretive center . The state now operates the area as the Apple River Fort State Historic Site . Illinois ' purchase was funded , in part , through a US $ 160 @,@ 000 Illinois FIRST grant . 
 = The Boat Race 1970 = 
 The 116th Boat Race took place on 28 March 1970 . Held annually , it is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . It was won by Cambridge who passed the finishing post three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead of Oxford , securing Cambridge 's third consecutive victory . The race was particularly notable for the " unorthodox " steering of the Oxford cox Ashton Calvert . 
 In the reserve race , Goldie beat Isis , and in the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge were victorious . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the boat clubs of University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , as of 2014 it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having beaten Oxford by four lengths in the previous year 's race , and held the overall lead , with 63 victories to Oxford 's 51 . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 The race was umpired by the former Cambridge University Boat Club president and rower Alan Burrough who took part in Cambridge 's two losses in the 1937 and 1938 races and their victory in the 1939 race . Burrough had also umpired the 1966 race . Oxford were coached by their former boat club president Iain Elliott who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1960 and 1961 races , and the Olympic rower " Jumbo " Edwards who had represented Oxford in the 1926 race . Lou Barry coached the Cambridge crew . Czechoslovakian international rower Bob Janoušek assessed both crews as " extremely fit " but " far from expert in rowing " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 9 @.@ 25 lb ( 86 @.@ 5 kg ) , 1 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . The Light Blues featured just one former Blue in president David <unk> . However the Cambridge boat also included five members of the successful 1969 Goldie crew . Oxford saw the return of five former Blues , including the boat club president , Ashton Calvert , who coxed the boat . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , from which every crew had won since the 1961 race . The race commenced five minutes later than the scheduled <unk> start time , with Oxford delaying their arrival at the stakeboat . Cambridge made the better start and took an early lead . The Light Blues were half @-@ a @-@ length up within a minute , and had doubled that by the time they passed Beverley Brook . Oxford 's stroke Lonsdale increased their rating in an attempt to stay with Cambridge around the long Surrey bend and temporarily succeeded . Still a length up at Harrods Furniture Depository , the Cambridge cox steered wide and Oxford began to close the gap . At Hammersmith Bridge , Oxford were no more than a length behind , and " unorthodox tactics " employed by Ashton Calvert , the cox , ensured an " exciting tactical battle " followed . Calvert steered the Dark Blue boat inside the Cambridge line and " made for the Surrey shore " in a manoeuvre which Donald Legget , writing in The Observer described as " the most extraordinary sight I have ever witnessed while rowing or coaching " . Ignoring the umpire 's warnings , Calvert continued on this path for two minutes before returning to the Middlesex side of the river . Despite remaining stroke for stroke , at Chiswick Eyot Cambridge pushed away and held a lead of nine seconds by Chiswick Steps . The lead had increased by two seconds at Barnes Bridge and Cambridge passed the finishing post eleven seconds ahead . Cambridge won by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 20 minutes 22 seconds . 
 In the reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie beat Oxford 's Isis by fourteen lengths , a record distance , in their fourth consecutive victory . In the 25th running of the Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge triumphed , their eighth consecutive victory . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Calvert stated after the race : " I could see it was murder in those waves ... I decided to try to panic Cambridge by close contact steering , breaking their rhythm and attacking when the stations levelled out beyond Chiswick Steps . " Opinion was divided on Calvert 's tactics : The Observer 's Legget claimed that Calvert " adopted quite the wrong tactics " , while Jim Railton of The Times suggested " Calvert 's move may well prove to be the future tactics of other crews behind but in contact at Hammersmith Bridge on the Middlesex station in similar conditions . " He went on to say " Calvert 's tactics nearly paid off and in the circumstances I consider he was justified in his actions . " John Rodda of The Guardian described Calvert 's steering as " zig @-@ zag " and while acknowledging the " bold imagination " involved , claimed the cox 's manoeuvres were " futile " . 
 = Absolute Garbage = 
 Absolute Garbage is the first greatest hits album by American rock band Garbage , released on July 23 , 2007 . The album was compiled and released by Geffen 's imprint Almo Sounds through Universal Music Enterprises back catalogue division in North America and by A & E Records throughout the rest of the world . It was released while Garbage were on " hiatus " following the band 's one @-@ off reformation to perform at a benefit concert early in the same year . 
 The album includes remastered versions of 16 of the band 's singles which run chronologically in the track listing , as well as a brand @-@ new track , specially recorded for the compilation , " Tell Me Where It Hurts " , which preceded the album as its lead single . Absolute Garbage was released on CD and a special edition two @-@ CD set which included a second disc of remixes . A DVD compilation rounded out the formats ; among the 16 Garbage music videos featured is an hour @-@ long documentary film titled Thanks for Your Uhh , Support , containing footage filmed backstage and behind the scenes , archive live performances , and interviews spanning the band 's entire career . 
 = = Background = = 
 The band 's drummer , Butch Vig felt that Absolute Garbage would be " a full stop on part of our career " , marking the group 's movement to a new part of their development , rather than simply a contractual obligation , while guitarist Duke Erikson stated that " putting out a collection of our singles would be a good way to stay busy without working so hard " . However , singer Shirley Manson revealed in 2012 that the compilation emerged from a demand by the band 's UK label A & E Records in order to meet their quarterly requirements . 
 When Garbage began to collate the material for Absolute Garbage , it transpired that the analog masters of their eponymous debut album had been lost . Neither of the band 's record labels had them , and after further searching , the band established that none of the mastering facilities they had used had stored them either . Vig and audio engineer Billy Bush were able to track down an archived , but rather incomplete and damaged , set of 16bit <unk> safety DAT mixes . Despite the backups being far from an optimal situation , mastering engineer Emily Lazar at The Lodge in New York City was able to reverse engineer the missing songs from the damaged archive . Lazar used some alternate versions of the songs when completing the final master . Her assistant , Joe <unk> , mastered and edited the remixes for the special edition . 
 Eschewing the Midwestern location of their Wisconsin @-@ based Smart Studios , Garbage chose to record new material for the album in GrungeIsDead , Vig 's California @-@ located home recording studio . The band members had been sharing ideas over the internet prior to the sessions , and were keen to record them ; vocalist Shirley Manson had came up with the song title " Tell Me Where It Hurts " a few years previously , and had matched newly written lyrics with a Burt Bacharach @-@ style string arrangement that the band had created via email correspondence . After producing an electric guitar @-@ heavy version of " Tell Me Where It Hurts " , Garbage recorded a second mix of the track with more emphasis on the strings and recruited their former touring bassist , Daniel Shulman , to perform bass guitar on the song . The band completed another three songs during the sessions , including " Betcha " ( Vig : " it 's fuzzed up " ) , " Girls Talk Shit " ( " pretty cool sounding , lots of fast pizzicato guitars and cellos " ) , and " All the Good in This Life " , which Vig described as " kinda Pink Floyd @-@ y " . 
 Vig had created a new version of their song " Bad Boyfriend " , which had opened their Bleed Like Me album , when he had been updating his home studio the previous year . Keeping to the Garbage formula of incorporating non @-@ musical sounds in their work , Vig used a digital recorder to capture the sound of his baby daughter 's swing in motion as a percussive loop . Thinking that the compilation would benefit from the inclusion of a new remix , Vig presented his rework to Manson and Erikson who had been unaware of the new version . Both agreed that " Bad Boyfriend " should be included , but rather than solicit an outside producer , Vig spent a few days finishing the mix . Inversely , Garbage recruited production team Jeremy Wheatley and Brio <unk> to create a new version of Bleed Like Me track " It 's All Over but the Crying " ; the band hoped the song would be a possible second single . A rock version of Version 2 @.@ 0 's " Push It " was completed by producer Chris Sheldon . 
 The group argued over the albums running order , eventually dropping a few of their singles , including " Androgyny " ( from Beautiful Garbage ) after Manson objected to its inclusion , before finalizing on the 18 tracks that the group believed represented their best work . Vig oversaw the liner notes and thanks list for the album : " It 's been a burden because we 're encompassing what we 've done over the last 10 years in one short paragraph " ; music journalist Peter Murphy composed a biography on the band 's history for the booklet , while the album artwork was designed by Tom Hingston Studio — a foil blocked silkscreen image photographed by David Hughes . The booklet also compiled a number of promotional photographs of the group taken over the course of their career by Stéphane Sednaoui , Ellen von Unwerth , Rankin , Pat Pope , Warwick Saint , and Joseph <unk> . 
 The band compiled an hour @-@ long documentary titled Thanks for Your Uhh , Support for the DVD format , featuring footage filmed backstage and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes , and archive live performances and interviews spanning the band 's entire career . As well as interviews with the members of Garbage , the documentary also features Duke Erikson 's daughter Roxy , Madison club owner and friend Jay Moran , engineer Billy Bush , former touring bassists Daniel Shulman and Eric Avery , Foo Fighters ' Dave Grohl and Taylor Hawkins , White Stripes ' Jack White , and former MTV News anchor Kurt Loder . Region 0 pressings of the DVD contained all 16 music videos to accompany the singles featured on the CD formats , with the exception of " # 1 Crush " , for which there was no clip filmed . Region 1 releases did not include the video for " Tell Me Where It Hurts " . 
 Garbage later said that the album was released as a contractual obligation to Warner Music : " This was the final straw that broke our backs " , recalled Manson five years later . " The record company we had been sold to in the U.K. demanded that we release a " greatest hits " in order to meet their quarterly requirements . We were not in a position to stop it . As a result , they shoved this collection out with no promotion whatsoever . It was right there and then that we realized how crazy and out of whack things had gotten . " Garbage remained on hiatus for a further three years until regrouping to record their fifth studio album , Not Your Kind of People , released in 2012 . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 At the end of 2005 's Bleed Like Me World Tour , Garbage disbanded to go on a " hiatus " . A month later , music retailer HMV 's UK website listed a Greatest Hits compilation for release the following year . By January 2006 , the title changed to Absolute Garbage . On November 10 , a press release from Warner Music Group announced a March 19 , 2007 UK release date for the album , while the NME reported that the album would be preempted by a single on March 5 . In January 2007 , Vig became the first band member to publicly confirm the project : " We 've been working on Absolute Garbage for a while " . On May 11 , the band 's website unveiled the artwork for Absolute Garbage , and on May 22 , confirmed the album 's track listing , physical formats and an initial July 16 – 17 street date . The date was later moved back a week due to " production issues " concerning the North American DVD . 
 The launch of the Absolute Garbage promotional campaign began at the end of May 2007 , when Geffen Records updated Garbage 's Myspace profile streaming audio player to include the album 's lead single " Tell Me Where It Hurts " and the remix of " Bad Boyfriend " , while the music video for " Tell Me Where It Hurts " was premiered on UK Channel 4 's Video Exclusive slot . Radio edits of the Guitars Up and Orchestral versions of " Tell Me Where It Hurts " were distributed to radio at the beginning of June . In the United Kingdom , the song was playlisted by XFM Scotland Upfront , Radio Forth and was C @-@ Listed on BBC Radio 2 for five weeks . The alternative rock remix of " Push It " was playlisted by XFM for three weeks . " Tell Me Where It Hurts " was released by A & E Records on 7 " vinyl , DVD and CD single ( featuring " Betcha " as the B @-@ side ) on July 16 in the United Kingdom , where it debuted at number 50 on the UK Singles Chart . Manson complained that the release was " shoved out with no promotion whatsoever " , declaring that it was the moment the band " realized how crazy and out of whack things had gotten " , inspiring them to work independently afterwards . 
 On July 23 , 2007 , Absolute Garbage was released in the United Kingdom , with the North American street date following a day later . The digital download format includes " All the Good in This Life " as an iTunes exclusive bonus track . In 2012 , Absolute Garbage was superseded by a reconfigured greatest hits set titled The Absolute Collection , which was released in Australia and New Zealand on November 2 via Liberator Music . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Absolute Garbage received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Slant Magazine 's Sal <unk> gave a positive overview of the compilation , writing that the album " serves as an anthropological study of the musical relics of a bygone era " , while Laila Hassani of Heat summed up her five @-@ star review by writing , " Few modern female @-@ fronted rock bands stand the test of time , but this reminds you why , along with Gwen Stefani 's No Doubt , Garbage are one of them . " A reviewer for Instinct wrote " this hits collection is loaded with songs best described as massive ... you 'll find something to love here " . Jaime Gill , in a review for BBC Music , felt that " Absolute Garbage is a fine legacy , the sound of a briefly brilliant and always interesting band " and that overall the album " sounds like no other greatest hits you own . " Digital Spy 's Nick Levine wrote , " By wrapping their nut @-@ grabbing hooks and transcendent melodies in layers of gutsy guitars , Garbage managed to make pop music for people who thought they didn 't like pop music . For that reason , whatever happens next , they deserve to be remembered fondly . " A reviewer for the Daily Mail described it as " a slick blend of grunge @-@ rock power and sultry girl @-@ group harmonies " and added , " [ Absolute Garbage ] already sounds dated , but the songs stand up well . " 
 Many reviewers felt that the chronological running order put more emphasis on the band 's well @-@ regarded earlier periods . " The selection of songs perhaps indicates Garbage view their career the same way many fans do " , wrote Victoria Durham of Rock Sound , and " that they never quite managed [ to match ] the brilliance of their early work . " Johnny Dee of Classic Rock expressed , " The later material here sounds formulaic , however , new song " Tell Me Where It Hurts " adds strings to the dynamic and sits well alongside their peerless early material " . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine considered that despite ignoring 2000s singles such as " Run Baby Run " , " it already seems that the comp has lingered far longer than necessary on the last stage of Garbage 's career " , in contrast to the debut album singles " still sounding sleek and alluring . " Kerrang ! magazine 's Tom <unk> also felt that Garbage 's work had dated , expounding , " Something that was once so much a part of the Zeitgeist has remained rooted to the era it marked , untranslatable across the millennial divide . Still , songs like ' Stupid Girl ' and ' Only Happy When It Rains ' [ from the debut ] maintain an urgency and spite that sees their intent remain intact . " Billboard writer Kerri Mason praised the choice of remixes on the special edition : " the band continually brought the best of dance 's best producers , not one of the thirteen tracks is a throwaway . " Ben Hogwood of musicOMH called the compilation a " deserved retrospective " , further noting that " the best way to get to know Garbage is through their albums , which demonstrate their strength in depth . In particular the self @-@ titled debut and Version 2 @.@ 0 withstand a heavy hammering on any stereo . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Absolute Garbage debuted at number 68 on the Billboard 200 , selling 11 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . As of August 2008 , it had sold 66 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . The album debuted at number 11 on the UK Albums Chart with 13 @,@ 372 units sold in its first week . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Garbage , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the special edition of Absolute Garbage . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = C and D @-@ class destroyer = 
 The C and D class was a group of 14 destroyers built for the Royal Navy in the early 1930s . As in previous years , it was originally intended to order a complete flotilla comprising eight destroyers — plus a flotilla leader as the ninth unit — in each year . However , only four ships — plus a leader — were ordered under the 1929 – 30 Programme as the C class . The other four ships planned for the C class were never ordered as an economy measure and disarmament gesture by the Labour government of Ramsay Macdonald . A complete flotilla — the ' D ' class — was ordered under the 1930 – 31 Programme . 
 The five ships of the C class were assigned to Home Fleet upon their completion , although they reinforced the Mediterranean Fleet during the Italian invasion of Abyssinia of 1935 – 36 and enforced the Non @-@ Intervention Agreement during the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 39 . They were transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy ( RCN ) in 1937 – 39 and spent most of their time during World War II on convoy escort duties in the Atlantic Ocean . Crescent was sunk when she was accidentally rammed by the British cruiser HMS Calcutta in 1940 . Crusader was sunk by a German submarine in 1942 , though she had sunk an Italian submarine in 1940 . The other ships of the class sank three German submarines during the war . They were all worn out by the end of the war and were scrapped in 1946 – 47 . 
 The D @-@ class destroyers were initially assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet upon commissioning , but were transferred to the China Station in 1935 . Like the C class , most were temporarily deployed in the Red Sea when the Italians invaded Abyssinia , but returned to the China Station when that was over . They were still there when the war began , but reinforced the Mediterranean Fleet shortly afterwards . Five ships were transferred to Home Fleet in December 1939 , but Duchess was sunk en route when she was accidentally rammed by the battleship HMS Barham , and Duncan was badly damaged when she collided with a merchant ship , requiring lengthy repairs . Daring was sunk by a German submarine in February 1940 . The other two participated in the Norwegian Campaign of April – June , but Delight was sunk by German aircraft in July and Diana was transferred to the RCN as a replacement for the Crescent after she was sunk by the cruiser Calcutta . However , she too was rammed and sunk several months later by a freighter that she was escorting . 
 The four ships that remained with the Mediterranean Fleet sank three Italian submarines in 1940 while escorting Malta convoys and larger warships of the fleet . Several participated in the Battles of Calabria and Cape Spartivento that year . Duncan joined Force H at Gibraltar in October and escorted that group . Dainty was sunk by German bombers in February 1941 and Diamond in April while evacuating Allied personnel from Greece . Defender had to be scuttled in July when she was crippled by a German bomber when returning from escorting a convoy to Tobruk . Duncan and Decoy remained on escort duties for the rest of the year before being transferred to the Eastern Fleet in early 1942 . They returned to the UK late in the year to begin conversions to escort destroyers . Decoy was transferred to the RCN in early 1943 , but both became convoy escorts in the Atlantic . They sank two German submarines before being assigned to the UK to protect Allied shipping during Operation Overlord . They sank three more submarines before the end of the war and were paid off in 1945 . Duncan was scrapped 1945 – 49 and Decoy during 1946 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 These ships were based on the preceding B class , but were enlarged to increase their endurance and to allow for the inclusion of a QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt anti @-@ aircraft gun . This class introduced a director control tower for British destroyers . The ' C ' class were unique in having a split bridge , with the compass platform and wheelhouse separated from the chartroom and director tower . This unusual layout was not repeated . As per Admiralty policy in alternating Two @-@ Speed Destroyer Sweep ( TSDS ) minesweeping gear and ASDIC ( sonar ) capability between destroyer flotillas , the C class lacked ASDIC and were designed to carry only six depth charges . The D class were repeats of the C 's , except that the TSDS was replaced by storage for up to 30 depth charges and ASDIC . 
 The C and D class destroyers displaced 1 @,@ 375 long tons ( 1 @,@ 397 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 865 long tons ( 1 @,@ 895 t ) at deep load . The ships had an overall length of 329 feet ( 100 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 33 feet ( 10 @.@ 1 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 m ) . They were powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 36 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 27 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers that operated at a pressure of 300 psi ( 2 @,@ 068 kPa ; 21 kgf / cm2 ) and a temperature of 600 ° F ( 316 ° C ) . The destroyers carried a maximum of 473 long tons ( 481 t ) of fuel oil that gave them a range of 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . Their complement was 145 officers and men . 
 Kempenfelt , leader of the C class , displaced 15 long tons ( 15 t ) more than her destroyers and carried an extra 30 personnel who formed the staff of the Captain ( D ) , commanding officer of the flotilla . Unique among the C and D @-@ class ships , she had three Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers that operated at a pressure of 310 psi ( 2 @,@ 137 kPa ; 22 kgf / cm2 ) . Duncan , leader of the ' D ' class , displaced 25 long tons ( 25 t ) more than her destroyers and also carried an extra 30 personnel . 
 All of the ships of the class mounted four 45 @-@ calibre 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , they had a single QF 3 @-@ inch 20 cwt AA gun between her funnels . The C @-@ class ships carried two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on the aft end of their forecastle deck . The D @-@ class destroyers had been intended to carry the new QF 0 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) Mk III machine gun in quadruple mountings on the bridge wings , but these were not initially available , so the old 2 @-@ pounder guns were retained in Daring , Diana , Diamond and Defender . The 3 @-@ inch AA gun was removed in 1936 – 37 , and the 2 @-@ pounders were relocated between the funnels on platforms The ships were fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple mount for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . 
 The main guns were controlled by an Admiralty Fire Control Clock Mk I that used data derived from the director and the rangefinder . They had no capability for anti @-@ aircraft fire and the anti @-@ aircraft guns were aimed solely by eye . 
 When purchased by Canada in 1937 – 38 , the four C @-@ class destroyers were refitted to meet Canadian specifications , including the installation of Type 124 ASDIC . It is not clear how much Kempenfelt had been modified when she was turned over in October 1939 , other than steam heating had yet been fitted . 
 = = = Wartime modifications = = = 
 Beginning in May 1940 , the after bank of torpedo tubes was removed and replaced with a QF 12 @-@ pounder Mk V anti @-@ aircraft gun , the after mast and funnel being cut down to improve the gun 's field of fire . Four to six QF 20 mm Oerlikon cannons were added to the surviving ships , usually replacing the 2 @-@ pounder or .50 @-@ calibre machine gun mounts between the funnels . One pair of these was added to the bridge wings and the other pair was mounted on the searchlight platform . Early in the war , depth charge stowage increased to 33 in the C class , while the D class carried 38 . ' Y ' gun on the quarterdeck was removed on many ships to allow for additional depth charge stowage as was the 12 @-@ pounder . On at least one ship , this latter gun replaced ' X ' gun . Most ships had either ' A ' or ' B ' gun replaced by a Hedgehog anti @-@ submarine spigot mortar , although Duncan retained both and received a split Hedgehog that was mounted on either side of ' A ' gun . Some ships that received the Hedgehog in ' B ' position also mounted two old QF 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns for use against U @-@ boats at very close range . 
 Most ships had their director @-@ control tower and rangefinder above the bridge removed in exchange for a Type 271 target @-@ indication radar . A Type 286 short @-@ range surface search radar , adapted from the Royal Air Force 's ASV radar , was also added . The early models , however , could only scan directly forward and had to be aimed by turning the entire ship . Some ships also received a Huff @-@ Duff radio direction finder on a short mainmast . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = Service = = 
 All five of the C class were assigned to the 2nd Destroyer Flotilla of the Home Fleet upon commissioning during 1932 . Following the Italian invasion of Abyssinia , the entire flotilla was sent to the Red Sea in August 1935 to monitor Italian warship movements until April 1936 . Refitted upon their return , they were deployed to Spanish waters during the Spanish Civil War in 1936 – 37 to intercept shipping carrying contraband goods to Spain and to protect British @-@ flagged ships . Crescent and Cygnet were sold to the Royal Canadian Navy in 1937 and Comet and Crusader in 1938 . Kempenfelt was bought in 1939 , but the Royal Navy did not turn her over until enough auxiliary anti @-@ submarine ships had been commissioned to replace her after World War II had started . All four ' C ' -class ships were stationed at Esquimalt in British Columbia when the war began , but only Fraser and St. Laurent were immediately recalled to begin convoy escort duties on the Atlantic Coast , the other two following in November . Assiniboine was sent to the Caribbean for local escort duties in December where she assisted in the capture of the blockade runner MV Hannover in March 1940 . Fraser , St. Laurent , and Restigouche were transferred to the UK in late May and helped to evacuate refugees from France . Fraser was sunk on 25 June 1940 in a collision with the anti @-@ aircraft cruiser HMS Calcutta in the Gironde estuary while the other two were assigned to the Western Approaches Command for escort duties . 
 The remaining ships spent most of the rest of the war escorting convoys in the North Atlantic , based in either Canada or the UK . Ottawa assisted the British destroyer Harvester in sinking the Italian submarine Comandante Faà di Bruno on 7 November 1940 . She was sunk by the German submarine U @-@ 91 on 14 September 1942 while escorting Convoy ON 127 . St. Laurent had her first victory on 27 December 1942 when she was credited with sinking U @-@ 356 while defending Convoy ON 154 . Together with the destroyer HMS Forester , and the frigates HMCS Owen Sound and HMCS Swansea , she sank U @-@ 845 . While escorting Convoy SC 94 on 3 August 1942 , Assiniboine rammed and sank U @-@ 210 . Restigouche never sank a submarine , but she and St. Laurent were transferred to the UK to protect the shipping mustering for Operation Overlord in May 1944 and Assiniboine followed in July . They saw some action against German patrol boats in the Bay of Biscay , but Restigouche and St. Laurent were in poor shape by this time and were sent back to Canada for lengthy refits in late 1944 . They remained in Canada after the completion of their refits in early 1945 , while Assiniboine remained in the UK until June . All three ships transported Canadian troops home after VE Day until they were decommissioned in late 1945 . All three were broken up in 1946 – 47 . 
 Upon commissioning in 1932 – 33 , the D class formed the 1st Destroyer Flotilla assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet . The flotilla toured the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea in September – November 1933 . After refitting in the UK during 1934 , the flotilla was transferred to the China Station , arriving at Hong Kong in January 1935 and renumbered as the 8th Destroyer Flotilla . Most of the flotilla was sent to the Red Sea during the Italian invasion of Abyssinia in 1935 – 36 . They returned to the Hong Kong in mid @-@ 1936 and remained there until World War II began . Diamond was in the midst of a refit that lasted until November , but the rest of the flotilla was immediately transferred to the Mediterranean Fleet . Daring was kept in the Red Sea for escort duties until November , but the rest of the flotilla was used on contraband patrol duties upon arrival . They all needed repairs which were made before the end of the year . 
 Duncan , Diana , Duchess , Delight and Daring were transferred to the Home Fleet in December 1939 , although Duchess was rammed and sunk on 10 December by the battleship Barham that she was escorting . Duncan was so badly damaged in a collision with a merchant ship in January 1940 that her repairs required six months to complete . Daring was sunk by the German submarine U @-@ 23 on 18 February while escorting a convoy from Norway . Diana and Delight were assigned to convoy escort duties in early 1940 , before participating in the Norwegian Campaign in April – June . While attempting to sail through the English Channel in daylight , contrary to orders , Delight was sunk by German aircraft on 29 July . After a brief refit in July – August , Diana was transferred to the RCN to replace HMCS Fraser which had been sunk in a collision by a Royal Navy cruiser . Recommissioned on 6 September and renamed HMCS Margaree , the ship was assigned to convoy escort duties in the North Atlantic . On 22 October , she was sunk in a collision with the freighter MV Port Fairy . 
 The remaining four ships of the flotilla were briefly assigned to Freetown , West Africa in early 1940 to escort convoys passing through the area and to search for German commerce raiders . They were all recalled to the Mediterranean in April – May in anticipation of Italian entry into the war . Decoy , Defender , and Dainty sank two Italian submarines , Dainty sinking one more with the destroyer Ilex in June , before they participated in the Battle of Calabria early the following month . Diamond joined her sisters in late July and all four ships escorted convoys and the ships of the Mediterranean Fleet for the rest of the year . Duncan joined Force H at Gibraltar in October and participated in the inconclusive Battle of Cape Spartivento together with Diamond and Defender in November . Decoy had been damaged by aircraft earlier that month and was under repair until February 1941 . 
 While patrolling the North African coast on 24 February with the destroyer Hasty , Dainty was sunk by German bombers . Duncan , Diamond and Defender continued to provide escorts as needed in early 1941 , although Duncan was transferred to Freetown in March . Decoy , Defender and Diamond evacuated Allied troops from Greece and Crete in April – May , although Diamond was sunk by German aircraft on 27 April while doing so . After Defender participated in the invasion of Vichy French @-@ controlled Syria and Lebanon in June , she joined Decoy in escorting convoys to Tobruk and was badly damaged when returning from one of these missions . The ship was attacked by a single German Junkers Ju 88 bomber on 11 July and had to be scuttled by her consort , the Australian destroyer Vendetta . Duncan rejoined Force H that same month and she escorted several major convoys to Malta before returning to the UK in October for a lengthy refit . Decoy was damaged in a collision in December and was repaired at Malta until February 1942 . 
 Decoy was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in March and was escorting Force B when the Japanese carriers attacked Ceylon . The Japanese never spotted Force B , and the ship remained with the fleet until ordered home in September to convert to an escort destroyer . After Duncan 's refit was completed in January 1942 , she rejoined Force H and escorted several missions to fly off Royal Air Force fighters from aircraft carriers to Malta before she was transferred to the Eastern Fleet in April to support Operation Ironclad , the invasion of Diego Suarez , in early May . She , too , was recalled to the UK to be modified as an escort destroyer . 
 Decoy was transferred to the Royal Canadian Navy on 1 March 1943 during her conversion and was recommissioned on 12 April with the new name of HMCS Kootenay ( the ship was gifted to the Canadians on 15 June ) . After working up , she was assigned to Escort Group C5 for convoy escort duties in the North Atlantic . In April , Duncan joined Escort Group B @-@ 7 . While defending Convoy ON @-@ 207 on 23 October , Duncan , together with the destroyer Vidette and a Consolidated B @-@ 24 Liberator of No. 224 Squadron RAF , sank U @-@ 274 . Later the same month , on 29 October , Duncan shared the sinking of U @-@ 282 with Vidette and the corvette Sunflower while protecting Convoy ON @-@ 208 . Both ships remained on escort duty until May 1944 when they were transferred to the UK in preparation for Operation Overlord . Duncan was assigned to the Western Approaches Command , conducting anti @-@ submarine operations , for the rest of the war . Kootenay was tasked to protect Allied shipping in the English Channel and the Bay of Biscay and , together with other ships , she sank U @-@ 678 in the English Channel on 7 July 1944 , U @-@ 621 in the Bay of Biscay on 18 August , and , two days later , U @-@ 984 west of Brest . 
 After a lengthy refit in Canada from October 1944 to February 1945 , Kootenay returned to the UK and was assigned to the Western Approaches Command until the end of the war . She then transported returning troops in Canada until paid off in October . She was sold for scrap in 1946 . Duncan was paid off in May and sold in July although she was not completely broken up until 1949 . 
 = = See Also = = 
 List of ships of the Second World War 
 List of ship classes of the Second World War 
 = Typhoon Ivan = 
 Typhoon Ivan , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Narsing , was an intense tropical cyclone that existed simultaneously with another storm of the same intensity in October 1997 . Forming out of an area of disturbed weather on October 13 , Ivan gradually intensified into a typhoon as it tracked steadily to the west @-@ northwest . On October 15 , the storm underwent rapid intensification and reached an intensity corresponding to Category 5 status on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Late on October 17 , Ivan reached its peak strength with winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 905 hPa ( mbar ) . Shortly thereafter , the typhoon began to weaken as it approached the Philippines . Ivan eventually made landfall in northern Luzon with winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) on October 20 before weakening to a tropical storm the next day . The storm then curved northeastward and became extratropical on October 25 and dissipating the following day . 
 Although Ivan was a powerful storm at landfall , its effects were relatively minor compared to the storms ' intensity ; however , 14 people were killed during the storm and two others were listed as missing . Agricultural industries sustained the most severe damage , as thousands of animals drowned in the storm . Total damage was estimated at $ 9 @.@ 6 million ( 1997 USD ; $ 13 @.@ 1 million 2009 USD ) . A total of 1 @,@ 779 homes were destroyed , 13 @,@ 771 others were damaged and 4 @,@ 600 hectares of farmland were flooded by the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Ivan originated from an area of disturbed weather near the equator during the first week of October 1997 . Two equatorial troughs , one in the Northern Hemisphere and one in the Southern Hemisphere developed from this system . Three resultant areas of low pressure formed ; one in the Southern Hemisphere developed into Tropical Cyclone Lusi on October 8 , and two north of the equator steadily tracked westward . The eastern low developed into Typhoon Joan , while the western cyclone became the system that would intensify into Typhoon Ivan . Situated in an environment without significant convective activity , this system initially struggled to become organized . However , the disturbance began to mature , and by October 11 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) discovered a low @-@ level circulation center , prompting the issuance of a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert the following day . 
 The system quickly tracked toward the west @-@ northwest at a forward speed of 33 km / h ( 21 mph ) . The JTWC issued their first advisory on the storm early on October 13 , designating it Tropical Depression 27W . Around this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) also classified the cyclone as a tropical depression . 
 Convective banding features developed late on October 13 . The JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and gave it the name Ivan . Early the next day , the JMA also upgraded Ivan to a tropical storm . Later on October 14 , Ivan passed roughly 100 km ( 65 mi ) south of Guam and subsequently intensified . Several hours afterwards , the JMA upgraded Ivan to a typhoon . During a 24 @-@ hour span , Ivan 's winds increased from 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) to 270 km / h ( 165 mph ) , making it a Category 5 super typhoon , the eighth of the season . Late on October 17 , Ivan attained its peak intensity with winds of 295 km / h ( 185 mph ) and an official barometric pressure of 905 hPa ( mbar ) . However , the JTWC reported an unofficial pressure of 872 hPa ( mbar ) , which would tie Ivan for the second strongest tropical cyclone worldwide with Typhoons Gay , Angela , Joan , Keith and Zeb . 
 Due to the storm 's proximity to Typhoon Joan , forecast models anticipated Ivan to re @-@ curve before reaching the Philippines ; however , the storm maintained its track and did not take the northward turn until impacting the country . The typhoon began to slow and weaken , and on October 20 , its center made landfall in extreme northern Luzon with winds of 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . After emerging into the Luzon Strait , Ivan turned to the north @-@ northeast and weakened to a tropical storm . On October 22 , the storm briefly re @-@ attained typhoon status before accelerating in forward speed . The system steadily weakened and the JTWC issued their final advisory on the storm on October 24 . The JMA continued to monitor Ivan as a tropical cyclone for another day before classifying it as extratropical . The remnants of the powerful typhoon eventually dissipated on October 26 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Thousands of people evacuated from northern areas of the Philippines as Ivan approached . Power was shut off prior to the storm to reduce the risk of electrocution . Four flights were cancelled in Taiwan , Hong Kong , and the Philippines due to the storm . Residents in Taiwan were advised to take precautions for Typhoon Ivan , though autumn typhoons are rare in the island . Vessels were urged to stay at port due to rough seas throughout the Philippines . Disaster agencies were put on high alert ; relief supplies were then stockpiled , the navy was placed on standby , and military search and rescue vehicles were prepped . 
 On October 20 , Ivan made landfall in the northern Philippines , producing torrential rains that triggered waist @-@ deep flooding in localized areas . Severe crop losses were reported throughout northern Luzon . One person drowned in floodwaters in Cagayan . Elsewhere in the country , two other people drowned in floodwaters . Numerous power lines and trees were downed throughout the region , rain @-@ triggered landslides blocked several roads . Throughout the country , a total of 14 people were killed and two others were listed as missing . Poultry farms and fisheries sustained significant damage ; an estimated $ 3 @.@ 6 million in losses resulted from lost stocks in the two businesses . Several thousand animals drowned during the storm . Total damage was estimated at $ 9 @.@ 6 million ( 1997 USD ; $ 13 @.@ 1 million 2009 USD ) . A total of 1 @,@ 779 homes were destroyed , 13 @,@ 771 others were damaged and 4 @,@ 600 hectares of croplands were inundated by Typhoon Ivan . Rainfall from the storm was considered to be helpful as the area impacted had been suffering from below average rainfall for several months . Minor damage was also reported in the Marshall Islands . The island of Tiyan recorded 5 @.@ 26 in ( 134 mm ) of precipitation , contributing to above @-@ average rainfall during the month of October . 
 = Disney bomb = 
 The Disney Bomb , also known as the Disney <unk> , officially the 4500 lb Concrete Piercing / Rocket Assisted bomb was a rocket @-@ assisted bunker buster bomb developed during the Second World War by the British Royal Navy to penetrate hardened concrete targets , such as submarine pens , that could resist conventional free @-@ fall bombs . Devised by Royal Navy Captain Edward Terrell , the bomb was fitted with solid @-@ fuel rockets to accelerate its descent , giving it an impact speed of 990 miles per hour ( 1 @,@ 590 km / h ) — substantially beyond the 750 miles per hour ( 1 @,@ 210 km / h ) gravity @-@ propulsion impact velocity of the 5 tonne Tallboy munition for comparable purposes — and hence the ability to penetrate 16 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) of solid concrete before detonating . The name is attributed to a propaganda film produced by the Walt Disney Studios , that provided the inspiration for the design . 
 The Disney bomb saw limited use by the United States Army Air Forces in Europe from February to April 1945 . Although technically successful , it initially lacked the pinpoint accuracy required for bunker targets . It was deployed late in the war and had little effect on the Allied bombing campaign against Germany . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Second World War , Barnes Wallis developed two large " earthquake " bombs for the Royal Air Force : the five @-@ tonne Tallboy and the ten @-@ tonne Grand Slam , for use against targets too heavily protected to be affected by conventional high explosive bombs . These enormous weapons were designed to strike close by their target , to penetrate deeply into the earth , and to cause major structural damages , making repair uneconomic , by the shock waves transmitted through the ground . In practice , they proved capable of penetrating a significant thickness of concrete if they scored a direct hit despite not being designed for that purpose by Wallis , who had to work within the accuracy limitations of current bombsights and the resulting low accuracy of the bombings . 
 The Disney bomb , by contrast , was designed from the start to directly penetrate the thick concrete roofs of fortified bunkers . Whereas the earthquake bomb 's target was the bunker itself , the Disney bomb 's target was the bunker 's contents . To this end , the warhead was composed of an unusually thick steel shell , containing a comparatively small amount of explosive . It was shaped to be much slimmer than was usual for aircraft @-@ dropped bombs and a cluster of booster rockets accelerated the weapon as it fell , so it struck the target with a velocity much greater than its free @-@ fall , terminal velocity . These features accord with Newton 's approximation for impact depth , and the empirical design equation known as Young 's equation that state that the deepest target penetration is achieved by a projectile that is dense , long and thin ( i.e. has a large sectional density ) , and strikes with a high velocity . 
 = = Description = = 
 The CP / RA Disney bombs were 16 ft 6 in ( 5 @.@ 03 m ) long and weighed 4 @,@ 500 pounds ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ) . The diameter of the body of the bomb was 11 in ( 280 mm ) , while the diameter at the tail was 17 in ( 430 mm ) . They were composed of three sections . The forward section was the warhead — an explosive charge of 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) of <unk> , contained within an armour @-@ piercing casing of thick steel and fitted with two British <unk> MK I tail Pistol fuzes at the base ( i.e. furthest from the nose ) . The second section was made up of nineteen rocket motors from the 3 inches ( 76 mm ) Rocket Projectile - essentially metal tubes filled with cordite . In the third rear section , a tail cone contained the circuit that ignited the rockets . This was powered by a small generator with a vane spun by the airstream going past the falling bomb . Rocket ignition was controlled either by a time @-@ delay switch , or a barometric switch . There were six small fins at the rear of the bomb for its stabilisation . The bomb was suspended from the aircraft by two weight @-@ bearing lugs . Three arming wires also connected the bomb and the aircraft ; as the bomb dropped , a brief tug from the wires would arm the warhead fuzes and the rocket @-@ ignition circuit , and unlock the electrical generator , allowing it to spin freely . 
 For accuracy , the bombs had to be dropped precisely from a pre @-@ determined height , usually 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . They would free @-@ fall for around 30 seconds until , at 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) , the rockets were ignited , causing the tail section to be expelled . The rocket burn lasted for three seconds and added 300 feet per second ( 91 m / s ) to the bomb 's speed , giving a final impact speed of 1 @,@ 450 feet per second ( 440 m / s ) , equivalent to 990 miles per hour ( 1 @,@ 590 km / h ) or approximately Mach 1 @.@ 29 . Post @-@ war tests demonstrated the bombs were able to penetrate a 14 @-@ foot @-@ 8 @-@ inch ( 4 @.@ 47 m ) thick concrete roof , with the predicted ( but untested ) ability to penetrate 16 feet 8 inches ( 5 @.@ 08 m ) of concrete . 
 = = Development and testing = = 
 According to an anecdote , the idea arose after a group of Royal Navy officers saw a similar , but fictional , bomb depicted in the 1943 Walt Disney animated propaganda film Victory Through Air Power , and the name Disney was consequently given to the weapon . The Royal Navy developed the bomb even though the Fleet Air Arm operated no aircraft capable of carrying it . The navy 's interest in a concrete penetrating weapon can be explained by the German navy 's extensive use of fortified submarine pens to protect their U @-@ boats and E @-@ boats from air attack while docked . 
 The Disney Bomb was devised by a British naval officer , Captain Edward Terrell of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve , who served in the Directorate of Miscellaneous Weapons Development . Before the war , he had been a lawyer and the Recorder of Newbury . However , he was also an enthusiastic inventor and had filed several patents pre @-@ war , including ones for a vegetable peeling knife and a bottle for fountain pen ink . 
 The bomb 's development began in September 1943 . Although there was support for the idea at the highest levels within the Admiralty , production of the weapon would have to come under the Ministry of Aircraft Production ( MAP ) . The Road Research Laboratory provided theoretical formula for penetration from US data on the performance of 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) shells against reinforced concrete and the Chief Engineer of Armament Development at Fort Halstead prepared a preliminary design to present to the MAP . In the face of opposition , the First Sea Lord prepared a memorandum for the Anti @-@ U @-@ Boat Committee of which Churchill was the Chairman . Terrell visited Churchill 's scientific adviser Lord Cherwell to convince him that it was feasible technically . Due to the Prime Minister 's absence through illness , it was not until January 1944 that Churchill expressed a desire that the bomb should be considered by the committee . Due to the number of departments involved there were meetings involving large numbers of technicians and scientists to confirm the technical feasibility . 
 Through the Air Technical Section of the USAAC , Terrell received support and was able to show the Admiralty a mockup under the wing of a Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress . The Air Ministry was still opposed to its development on several technical grounds and it took a meeting of the War Cabinet in May ( which Terrell attended ) to decide in its favour giving it " P plus " priority . A side effect of the meeting was it focused attention on the issue of the U @-@ boat shelters and the RAF were directed to make attacks on them — dropping 26 Tallboys in August that year . 
 Despite being a British weapon , Disneys were used only by the United States Army Air Force , with the bombs becoming a joint project between the American Eighth Air Force and the British Royal Navy ; they were never used by RAF Bomber Command . The 92nd Bombardment Group was initially tasked with their use . The bombs would also be dropped by the 305th Bombardment Group and 306th Bombardment Group . The 94th Bombardment Group prepared to use the bombs , but flew no operations with them before the war in Europe ended . The B @-@ 17 Flying Fortresses operated by these units carried the bombs in pairs ; one was slung under each wing as they were too long to be carried in the B @-@ 17 's bomb bay . The Disneys were carried from the same external mounting that was used for the Aeronca GB @-@ 1 glide bomb . Cameras were also fitted to the aircraft so the bombs ' trajectory and effect could be recorded . 
 Testing of the Disney bombs began in early 1945 . Bombs were initially dropped on a bombing range near Southampton to photographically record their trajectory and calibrate bombsights . This was necessary as the flight @-@ path of a rocket @-@ accelerated bomb differed considerably from that of a free – falling bomb . Test drops were then conducted on the Watten bunker , German codename Kraftwerk Nord West ( now known as the Blockhaus d 'Éperlecques ) , a large German concrete bunker near Watten in northern France . This was ideal for the purpose as the area had been captured by Allied forces in September 1944 , so damage to the structure could be inspected after bomb tests . Four bombs , carried by two B @-@ 17s , were used and two hits scored on the target . The resultant damage was considered satisfactory by Royal Navy observers on the ground . 
 = = Combat = = 
 The first Disney attack was against the port of IJmuiden , Netherlands . This was the site of two separate fortified pens used by the German navy to house their <unk> ( fast torpedo boats , known to the Allies as " E @-@ boats " ) and Biber midget submarines . The older structure , codename Schnellbootbunker AY ( <unk> ) , was protected by a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) thick concrete roof . The newer one , codename Schnellbootbunker BY ( <unk> ) , had 10 – 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 7 m ) of concrete , with a further 2 – 4 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 61 – 1 @.@ 22 m ) layer separated by an air – gap . 
 The E @-@ boats laid up in the shelters during the day , safe from air – attack , and put to sea under cover of night to attack Allied shipping . The pens were priority targets as the torpedo boats they protected were a considerable threat to the supply lines serving Allied forces in western Europe . Since August 1944 , the two bunkers had been attacked four times by No. 9 Squadron and No. 617 Squadron of the RAF , with a total of 53 of the five – ton , Tallboy earthquake bombs . There had been numerous other attacks from bombers carrying smaller , conventional bombs . 
 Nine aircraft of the 92nd Bomb Group , carrying 18 Disneys , attacked Schnellbootbunker BY ( <unk> ) on 10 February 1945 . Royal Navy intelligence learned the concrete had been penetrated , but the pens had been empty at the time of the attack . The 92nd therefore carried out an attack on the <unk> pen , again with nine aircraft , on 14 March . 
 On 30 March , 36 aircraft from the US Eighth Air Force , including 12 from the 92nd Bomb Group , attacked the Valentin submarine pens , a massive , bomb – hardened concrete shelter under construction at the small port of Farge , near Bremen in Germany ( location : 53 ° 13 ′ 00 ″ N 8 ° 30 ′ 15 ″ E ) with Disney bombs . The shelter was nearing completion and was to be a factory for the assembly of Type XXI U @-@ boats . Construction had been under way since 1943 , using the forced labour of 10 @,@ 000 concentration – camp prisoners , prisoners – of – war and foreign civilians ( <unk> ) who suffered a high death rate because of the horrific conditions they worked under . 
 Valentin 's 4 @.@ 5 @-@ metre ( 15 ft ) -thick roof had already been penetrated by two 10 @-@ ton Grand Slam bombs dropped by the RAF three days earlier , on 27 March . During the Eighth Air Force attack , more than sixty Disneys were launched but only one hit the target with little effect , although installations around the bunker received considerable damage . After the bombing , the Germans made limited attempts to carry out repairs before abandoning the complex ; the area was captured by the British Army four weeks later . 
 On 4 April 1945 , 24 B @-@ 17s attacked fortified targets in Hamburg . The target was obscured by cloud so radar guidance was used to launch the bombs . A further mission in May 1945 was cancelled . A total of 158 bombs were dropped before the end of the war . No aircraft or aircrew were lost during the four Disney combat missions . 
 = = Post @-@ war development = = 
 In June 1945 , the Air Council wrote to the Lords of the Admiralty expressing " their appreciation " of the work that had been done on the " rocket bomb " . The RAF initiated bombing tests of the Disney in June 1945 , using the Watten bunker as a target . The actual bombing was carried by the US 8th Air Force on behalf of the RAF . However , Watten proved too small to be a satisfactory target , and the French objected to continued bombing of their territory in peace @-@ time . 
 Further testing took place as part of Project Ruby . This was a 1946 , joint Anglo @-@ American programme to test a range of concrete penetrating bombs against a wartime German bunker on the small island of Heligoland and the Valentin submarine pens . Bombs tested included the Tallboy and the Grand Slam ( both British and US @-@ made versions ) , the American 22 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 10 @,@ 000 kg ) Amazon and 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) <unk> SAP bombs , and the Disney . The bombs dropped on Valentin were inert , as the objective was not to observe the effects of bomb explosions , but rather to test concrete penetration and the strength of the bomb casings . Also , with the resumption of peace , the safety of civilians living around Valentin had become a consideration . 
 Heligoland was uninhabited at the time as its small population had been evacuated during the war . It was the site of a U @-@ boat pen with a 10 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) thick roof . This was used to test bombs loaded with explosive ( but with inert detonators ) to make sure the explosives used were not shock sensitive and would not prematurely detonate upon impact with the target . 
 This peace @-@ time testing of the bomb was far more extensive than could be carried out prior to its wartime deployment . A total of 76 Disneys were dropped on Heligoland , loaded with a variety of explosive charges , composed of <unk> , RDX , TNT or <unk> . Thirty @-@ four Disneys were dropped on Valentin , 12 with the rockets inactivated and 22 with the rockets firing . A further four had been previously dropped on a bomb range at Orford Ness to test their accuracy , and to make sure none would land outside the safety exclusion zone that was set up around Valentin during the trials . 
 The penetration performance ( 14 feet 8 inches ( 4 @.@ 47 m ) of concrete ) of the Disney was found to be satisfactory , with a predicted maximum penetration of 16 feet 8 inches ( 5 @.@ 08 m ) . One of the bombs penetrated both Valentin 's concrete roof , and its 3 @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) thick concrete floor , coming to rest completely buried in the sand under structure 's foundations . However , there were problems with the bombs . The reliability of the rocket booster ignition was considered unsatisfactory , with a failure rate of around 37 % during the trials . Also , some bombs broke up on impact with the target due to flaws in the steel casing and bombs struck at an angle , increasing the effective thickness of concrete they had to penetrate . Furthermore , it was noted that the warhead of the bomb was comparatively small so a very large bunker complex , such as Valentin , would have required many penetrating hits to be sure of destroying all the contents . 
 In comparison , the effective concrete penetration of the Tallboy and Grand Slams was similar to the Disney ( around 14 feet ) . However , these bombs directly penetrated only around seven feet of concrete , and the remaining thickness was blown in by the detonation of the bomb 's enormous explosive charge . The roof of Valentin had been penetrated by two Grand Slams before the war ended . But , as no detonation occurred inside the bunker , post @-@ war examination revealed little damage to the complex aside from the large holes in the roof ; installations inside the bunker remained comparatively unscathed . The conclusion of Project Ruby was that none of the bombs tested was completely suitable and the development of a new , concrete – penetrating bomb was recommended . However , the Disney 's rocket @-@ assist was viewed as a worthwhile feature that should be incorporated into any new bomb designs , as target penetration increases with strike velocity , but it was found this only increases marginally if a bomb is dropped from higher than 20 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 100 m ) . 
 On 27 January 2009 , the body of an inactive Disney bomb , with its 500 @-@ pound ( 230 kg ) explosive charge , was extracted from the roof of Watten bunker ( by now a private museum ) , where it had embedded itself during one of the 1945 test @-@ drops . The bomb was transferred to the ammunition depot at La <unk> d <unk> – two kilometres from the centre of Vimy – where recovered chemical ammunition and equipment from the First World War is processed . 
 = Elastic Love = 
 " Elastic Love " is a song recorded by American recording artist Christina Aguilera , taken from her sixth studio album , Bionic ( 2010 ) . The song was written by Aguilera , M.I.A. , John Hill and Switch , while production was handled by the latter two . Originally , " Elastic Love " was recorded by M.I.A. , but later it was given to Aguilera . However , M.I.A. was disappointed when Aguilera didn 't want to do her " trademark warbling " in the studio . " Elastic Love " is an electro and electropop song with strong elements from 1980s new wave music . Lyrically , Aguilera compares her love to office supplies , from <unk> to rubber @-@ bands . 
 Upon its release , " Elastic Love " received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised the track 's composition , its musical style and M.I.A. ' s appearance on the song . Most of them praised it as the stand @-@ out track on Bionic , while some of whom compared Aguilera 's vocals on " Elastic Love " to those of M.I.A. and Gwen Stefani . The track was listed as the twelfth best song of 2010 by Amazon.com. Following the release of Bionic , " Elastic Love " peaked on the Gaon International Digital Chart and the Gaon International Download Chart at number 78 and 59 on June 6 , 2010 , respectively . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 On the Asian leg of Aguilera 's Back to Basics Tour during the summer of 2007 , Aguilera revealed that her upcoming album would be " short , sweet and completely different " from her previous long @-@ play Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . After the birth of her son , Aguilera stated in an interview with Ryan Seacrest that her forthcoming album would include a totally new aspect of herself as an artist , because of the pregnancy with her son . During an interview with People in 2008 , Aguilera stated that she was going to start recording new material for her forthcoming album at her home in Beverly Hills . On the album , which was titled Bionic , Aguilera was inspired by electronica music , which she heard a lot during her pregnancy . 
 British @-@ Tamil recording artist M.I.A. was one of the songwriters of " Elastic Love " . According to her , " Elastic Love " was the first track that she recorded , even before she started working on her debut album . She added , " It 's the one I made in @-@ between taking time out and having a baby and starting mine " . When was asked about why she agreed to work with Aguilera , M.I.A. revealed , " Other people were involved who I respect like Peaches and it was like a sea of women coming together to write this new thing . Christina had also had a baby , you know , so it was kind of an interesting situation " . Aguilera 's decision not to perform her " trademark warbling " while recording the song disappointed M.I.A. , as she detailed in an interview with MTV News UK : 
 I really thought I was going to be able to go in there and get her vocals on to the next level and she didn 't want to do it . She was like ' You might think that 's great because it 's not what you do , but to me I 'm really bored of it ' . It 's interesting getting to work with people who can do things vocally that you can 't ... but yeah I only heard the song for the first time when everyone else did . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Elastic Love " was written by Christina Aguilera , M.I.A. , John Hill and Switch . Production of the song was handled by the two latter , who also played all musical instruments in it . The track was recorded at <unk> in Los Angeles , California . Aguilera 's vocals were recorded at The Red Lips Room in Beverly Hills , California . " Elastic Love " lasts for a duration of 3 : 33 ( three minutes and 33 seconds ) . It is an electro and electropop song which incorporates strong elements from 1980s new wave music . Its rhymes was described as " swapping sing @-@ song @-@ y " with " playground " chants . The track features " pulsating synth ping @-@ backs " and an " 808 @-@ esque backbeat " and Aguilera 's " robotic " vocals . The melody of the track has been described as a " darker " tune and " unique " . Aguilera 's vocals on the track received comparisons to those of M.I.A. and Gwen Stefani . 
 Lyrically , Aguilera compares her love to office equipment , from <unk> to rubber @-@ bands , as a metaphor for a relationship . The lyric " A rubber band is what I call your love for me , cause it comes and goes and pins me like a trampoline " was spoken by Aguilera at the beginning . The part " If I was a ruler I 'd try to set you straight , but your love is like a <unk> , it really grates " was praised by several critics , while the lines " A rubber band was an analogy , you can even say it 's a metaphor " were described by others as unnecessary , with Becky Bain for Idolator calling it " dumber @-@ than @-@ dumb " . Toward the closing moments , she sings , " Paper clips they couldn 't even hold us together ... when your love hits , it sticks me like a stapler . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Elastic Love " received positive reviews from most music critics . Becky Bain of Idolator provided a positive review , writing it " fresh " , " bouncy " and " interestingly bereft of Aguilera 's power notes " . Ray Roa for Consequence of Sound wrote that " it sounds like a something that could make the stiffest indie @-@ wallflowers bob their heads " , while labeling it as " another <unk> of what looks to be one of the summer 's best pop releases " . HitFix 's Melinda Newman wrote that the track is hypnotic with " adorably inane " lyrics , like " a nursery rhyme for adults set to the most infectious , trance track you can imagine " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine for AllMusic picked " Elastic Love " as one of the four best tracks on Bionic and commented that the song has a " glassy chill " . UK newspaper The Scotsman called it " eccentric " , while Leah Greenblatt from Entertainment Weekly named it a " squiggly , hypnotic banger " . Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune wrote that " Elastic Love " has the best moments of the album , with the electro beats and psychedelic arcade of sound effects . 
 Richard Wink from Drowned in Sound deemed it a " wonderful " track , which " makes up for the poor beginning to the album " . He continued , " Aguilera dramatically simplifying her usual histrionic vocal delivery , which leads to some surprising results . The lyrics are throwaway , but clever like a dunce who has a happy knack of making a lucky guess " . The Village Voice editor Drew Hinshaw wrote that her and M.I.A. ' s lyrical chemistry acts as a " the real amorous game " , calling it " a fun duet , suggesting a two @-@ girls @-@ at @-@ play theme that doubles in size " . Alexis Petridis from The Guardian deemed it the best song from the album , praising M.I.A. ' s " incredible pop melody " and " off @-@ kilter backing of squelching electronics and sub @-@ bass " and observed how her instrumentation " has also uniquely managed to calm down Aguilera 's usual attention @-@ all @-@ shipping vocal approach into something weirder : dead @-@ eyed , thickly smeared with dubby echo " . At the end of 2010 , " Elastic Love " was listed at number 12 on the list of the year 's best songs by Amazon.com. 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Bionic , " Elastic Love " debuted and peaked at number 78 on the Gaon International Digital Chart on the chart issue dated June 6 , 2010 , with a total of 303 @,@ 768 streams . It also peaked at number 59 on the Gaon International Download Chart during the same week . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording locations 
 Recording – <unk> , Los Angeles , California 
 Vocals recording – The Red Lips Room , Beverly Hills , California . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bionic , RCA Records . 
 = Mason Raymond = 
 Mason Evan Raymond ( born September 17 , 1985 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey winger , who currently plays for the Anaheim Ducks of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . Born in Cochrane , Alberta , but growing up in Calgary , Alberta , he played Junior A in the Alberta Junior Hockey League ( AJHL ) for two seasons , where he captured league and regional titles with the Camrose Kodiaks , while also being named league MVP in 2005 . He then joined the college ranks with the Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association ( WCHA ) for a two @-@ year tenure there , as well . He earned WCHA All @-@ Rookie honours in 2006 , WCHA First Team All @-@ Star honours in 2007 , and was also named the Bulldogs ' most valuable player in 2007 . Raymond was drafted by the Canucks in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft in the second round , 51st overall . After spending parts of two seasons with their American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose , he joined the club full @-@ time in 2007 – 08 . He is known as a fast @-@ skating offensive player . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college = = = 
 After playing AAA midget with the Strathmore Bisons of the Foothills Bisons Hockey Association , Raymond began a two @-@ year Junior A career with the Camrose Kodiaks of the AJHL in 2003 – 04 . Raymond had been hesitant about pursuing his career due to a lack of interest from major junior teams , but his friend Dan Bertram encouraged him to play with him in Camrose . Bertram also played midget with Raymond and went on to be a Chicago Blackhawks draft pick , three selections after him . 
 Raymond posted a team @-@ high 27 goals and 62 points as a rookie , including six game winning goals . Following his first junior season , Raymond was recruited by the Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association ( WCHA ) . Having earned an athletic scholarship , he had the choice of playing one more season with Camrose or to make the jump to the college ranks . He consulted with Kodiaks head coach Boris <unk> and was challenged to improve at the Junior A level before moving to Minnesota @-@ Duluth . As a result , Raymond remained in Camrose , signing a letter of intent in November 2004 to join the Minnesota @-@ Duluth the following year for the 2005 – 06 season . Several other National Collegiate Athletics Association ( NCAA ) schools had recruited Raymond as well , including the University of Denver , Western Michigan University and the University of Alaska @-@ Fairbanks . He chose the Bulldogs because he knew that , with 11 seniors leaving their team the following season , he would have the biggest role with that club . 
 Raymond went on to lead the AJHL in scoring with 41 goals and was named league MVP in 2004 – 05 . He added 20 points in 15 post @-@ season games as the Kodiaks captured the Rogers Wireless Cup as league champions to advance to the 2005 Doyle Cup , Canada 's Pacific Junior A regional championship . During the competition , Raymond was hospitalized with fatigue and dehydration that decreased his weight to 150 pounds . Though he missed the final against the British Columbia Hockey League 's Surrey Eagles , the Kodiaks won without him and advanced to the 2005 Royal Bank Cup , Canada 's national Junior A tournament . Raymond returned to action as the Kodiaks advanced to the national level at the 2005 Royal Bank Cup . He led the tournament in scoring with 10 points ( 4 goals and 6 assists ) over 5 games as Camrose finished as runner @-@ up to the tournament host Weyburn Red Wings of the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League . The Kodiaks later retired Raymond 's number 9 prior to their season @-@ opening game against the Okotoks Oilers on September 10 , 2010 . 
 Raymond was selected in the 2005 NHL Entry Draft by the Vancouver Canucks in the second round , 51st overall . He was draft @-@ eligible in 2004 , but opted out due to his low ranking at the time . He was scouted by Canucks general manager Dave Nonis as a fast skater with the puck who needed to work on his strength . 
 Following his draft , he joined the Minnesota @-@ Duluth Bulldogs . Scoring 11 goals and 28 points over 40 games , he was named to the WCHA All @-@ Rookie Team for the 2005 – 06 season . In his sophomore campaign , Raymond led the Bulldogs in scoring with 14 goals , 32 assists and 46 points . Raymond 's points total was good for second in league scoring behind Jonathan Toews . He received WCHA Player of the Week honours twice and was awarded the Mike Seiler Award , as the Bulldogs ' Most Valuable Player . His college career ended after the Bulldogs were eliminated by the St. Cloud State Huskies in the second round of the WCHA playoffs . 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks = = = 
