 Raymond chose to forgo his final two years of college eligibility to turn professional and signed an amateur tryout contract with the Canucks ' minor league affiliate , the Manitoba Moose of the AHL . He scored his first AHL goal in his debut with the Moose on March 23 , 2007 . The goal was the game winner against goaltender Stefan Liv with four minutes remaining in a 3 – 2 victory against the Grand Rapids Griffins . Following his second AHL game , the Canucks signed him to an NHL contract . He completed his 11 @-@ game regular season in the AHL with two goals and two assists . In the subsequent 2007 playoffs , he added an assist in 13 games , as the Moose were eliminated by the Hamilton Bulldogs in the second round . 
 The following season , Raymond made the Canucks ' roster out of training camp and made his NHL debut on the team 's top line with Henrik and Daniel Sedin . He picked up his first NHL point , an assist , in the season @-@ opener against the San Jose Sharks on October 5 , 2007 . Soon thereafter , he was sent down to the Moose for a two @-@ day assignment after having been a healthy scratch . He returned to the Canucks on October 18 , 2007 , and was later returned to the Moose at the end of the month for a longer assignment . 
 Succeeding at the AHL level , Raymond recorded a five @-@ point game with a hat trick and two assists during a match against the Rochester Americans on November 21 , 2007 . The Canucks recalled him the following month on December 11 following injuries to forwards Brendan Morrison and Brad Isbister . The next day , he scored his first NHL goal in his first game back against goaltender Jean @-@ Sébastien Giguère of the Anaheim Ducks . The goal came assisted on a one @-@ timer pass from Moose teammate Jason Jaffray , who had been called up from Manitoba the same day as Raymond . Later that game , he also assisted Jaffray 's first NHL goal in the third period . The Canucks went on to win the game , 3 – 2 . 
 Known for his skating ability , Raymond won the fastest skater segment of the Canucks ' 2008 SuperSkills Competition with a time of 14 @.@ 283 seconds . A week later , he was reassigned to the Moose one last time on January 13 , 2008 , for three days , before remaining with the Canucks . On March 17 , 2008 , he suffered an injury after a knee @-@ on @-@ knee collision with defenceman Keith Ballard in a game against the Phoenix Coyotes , sidelining him for the final eight games of the season . He finished his rookie NHL campaign with 21 points in 49 games with the Canucks , while also recording seven goals and 17 points in 20 games with the Moose . 
 Raymond had a quick start to his second season in 2008 – 09 , scoring 10 points in his first 13 games , but trailed off to add just 13 points for the remainder of the campaign . Midway through the season , he was named to the 2009 YoungStars Game in Montreal , helping the sophomores beat the rookie team 9 – 5 . He finished his second NHL season with 11 goals and 12 assists in 72 games . In the ensuing 2009 playoffs , where the Canucks entered as the third seed in the Western Conference , Raymond scored his first NHL post @-@ season goal in game three of the second round against the Chicago Blackhawks , a 3 – 1 win for the Canucks . Vancouver went on to be eliminated by the Blackhawks in six games . Raymond finished with two goals and an assist in 10 post @-@ season contests . 
 Midway through the 2009 – 10 season , Raymond recorded his first NHL hat trick with the game 's final three goals in a 5 – 1 win against the Calgary Flames on December 27 , 2009 . Raymond enjoyed a breakout campaign in his third NHL season , playing regularly on the Canucks ' second line with centre Ryan Kesler and newly acquired winger Mikael Samuelsson . He finished with a career @-@ high 25 goals , 28 assists and 53 points . Prior to the final game of the regular season , he was voted by the Canucks ' booster club to receive the Fred J. Hume Award as the team 's " unsung hero " . The Canucks entered the 2010 playoffs as the third seed for the second consecutive year . Raymond contributed three goals and an assist over 12 post @-@ season games as Vancouver was eliminated once again in the second round by the Blackhawks . 
 Becoming a restricted free agent on July 1 , 2010 , Raymond filed for salary arbitration after initially failing to come to terms with the Canucks . However , the two sides later agreed to a two @-@ year , $ 5 @.@ 1 million contract on July 26 , 2010 , before their arbitration hearing scheduled for the same day . The deal pays Raymond $ 2 @.@ 5 million in the first year and $ 2 @.@ 6 million in the second – a raise from his $ 760 @,@ 000 salary from the previous season . It was reported the Canucks had proposed an annual $ 2 @.@ 3 million salary , while Raymond had wanted $ 3 @.@ 6 million . Several months into the 2010 – 11 season , he suffered a broken thumb and missed 10 games in December 2010 . Raymond struggled in the first year of his new contract and he was often demoted off of the second line . As a result , he finished with diminished season totals of 15 goals , 24 assists and 39 points over 70 games . On a team basis , the Canucks won their first @-@ ever Presidents ' Trophy , having accomplished the best regular @-@ season record in the NHL that year . Entering the 2011 playoffs as the first seed in the West , they eliminated the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks in the first three rounds to advance to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in 17 years . During his first shift of Game 6 against the Boston Bruins , Raymond suffered a fractured vertebra after getting hit by opposing defenceman Johnny Boychuk . With Raymond 's body twisted to try to retrieve a loose puck , he was engaged by Boychuk , who proceeded to hit him into the boards after the puck had gone by . Bent over at the time of the hit , Raymond collided with the boards tailbone @-@ first . He was taken to the hospital after initially being helped off the ice . Raymond later described the injury as " the most pain [ he 's ] been in ever . " No penalty was called on the play nor did Boychuk receive any discipline from the league following the game , which drew public criticism from Canucks general manager Mike Gillis . 
 Vancouver went on to lose Games 6 and 7 as Boston won the Stanley Cup . Raymond made an appearance in Rogers Arena prior to the final game of the series . Wearing a plastic corset to support his back , he waved to the crowd , who gave him a standing ovation . 
 While the injury did not require surgery , Raymond retained the back brace for six weeks and was largely immobile for two months . In late July , he received a text message from Boychuk , explaining that his intention was not to injure with the hit . Unable to train on the ice or with weights , Raymond spent the 2011 off @-@ season largely inactive , with the exception of cardiovascular workouts . Five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months after sustaining his back injury , Raymond was set to return to the Canucks ' lineup for a game against the Predators on December 1 , 2011 . However , the team failed to file the proper paperwork to the NHL by the 5 p.m. deadline , delaying Raymond 's return until the following game . He recorded six points ( three goals and three assists ) in his first seven games back , but struggled to produce offensively for the remainder of the season . In March 2012 , he was made a healthy scratch for the first time in three years . 
 On December 26 , 2012 , Swedish second @-@ league team Örebro HK presented Raymond on an 11 @-@ game contract , starting on January 3 , 2013 . He has as of January 6 , 2013 , made 1 point , the 1 – 0 goal against IK Oskarshamn on January 5 . 
 = = = Toronto and Calgary = = = 
 In September 2013 , Raymond signed a try @-@ out contract with the Toronto Maple Leafs then a one @-@ year contract with the club . He experienced a " bounce @-@ back season " in 2013 – 14 , scoring 19 goals and 45 points in 82 games , his best statistics since the 2009 – 10 season with the Vancouver Canucks . 
 The Calgary Flames declined an opportunity to sign Raymond when he was a free agent in 2013 , but the departure of Michael Cammalleri in 2014 left the team in need of a veteran forward . Calgary signed Raymond to a three @-@ year contract worth $ 9 @.@ 5 million . In the second game of the 2014 – 15 season , Raymond scored the 100th goal of his NHL career as part of this third career hat trick to lead the Flames to a 5 – 2 victory over the Edmonton Oilers . 
 On the eve of the 2015 – 16 season , Raymond was placed on waivers , for the purpose of being sent down to the AHL . He cleared the following day and was assigned to the Stockton Heat . During the season , Raymond appeared in 29 games with the Flames , contributing with 5 points . Despite producing at a point @-@ per @-@ game in the AHL with Stockton , at the conclusion of the year , Raymond was placed on waivers by the Calgary Flames on June 29 , 2016 , and was bought @-@ out from the final year of his contract the following day . 
 = = = Anaheim Ducks = = = 
 On July 4 , 2016 , Raymond signed a one @-@ year contract as a free agent with the Anaheim Ducks . 
 = = International play = = 
 Following his 2010 playoff run with the Canucks , Raymond was added to Team Canada 's roster for the 2010 IIHF World Championship in Germany , his first international tournament . Joining the team midway through the tournament during the qualification round , he recorded his lone point of the tournament , an assist , on a goal by Matt Duchene during a 3 – 2 loss to the Czech Republic . The following game , Canada was eliminated in the quarterfinal by Russia , losing the game 5 – 2 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Raymond was born in Cochrane , Alberta , a town west of Calgary , to parents Carol and Terry Raymond . He began skating when he was four on his family 's backyard rink . Growing up , he was a Calgary Flames fan . He left home as a teenager for the 2003 – 04 season to play Junior A with the Camrose Kodiaks in Camrose , Alberta . 
 Raymond married Megan ( née Murray ) in the summer of 2008 . Megan gave birth to their son , Max , on April 8 , 2012 . The Raymonds welcomed a second child , a daughter named Grace , on February 28th 2015 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = AJHL = = = 
 = = = NCAA = = = 
 = = = University of Minnesota @-@ Duluth team awards = = = 
 = = = Vancouver Canucks team awards = = = 
 = Banksia ilicifolia = 
 Banksia ilicifolia , commonly known as holly @-@ leaved banksia , is a tree in the family Proteaceae . Endemic to southwest Western Australia , it belongs to Banksia subg . Isostylis , a subgenus of three closely related Banksia species with inflorescences that are dome @-@ shaped heads rather than characteristic Banksia flower spikes . It is generally a tree up to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) tall with a columnar or irregular habit . Both the scientific and common names arise from the similarity of its foliage to that of the English holly Ilex aquifolium ; the glossy green leaves generally have very prickly serrated margins , although some plants lack toothed leaves . The inflorescences are initially yellow but become red @-@ tinged with maturity ; this acts as a signal to alert birds that the flowers have opened and nectar is available . 
 Robert Brown described Banksia ilicifolia in 1810 . Although Banksia ilicifolia is variable in growth form , with low coastal shrubby forms on the south coast near Albany , there are no recognised varieties as such . Distributed broadly , the species is restricted to sandy soils . Unlike its close relatives which are killed by fire and repopulate from seed , Banksia ilicifolia regenerates after bushfire by regrowing from epicormic buds under its bark . It is rarely cultivated . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia ilicifolia is a variable species . It usually grows as an erect tree up to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) in height , but some populations along the south coast consist of small trees or even spreading shrubs . It is generally a 5 metres ( 16 ft ) high small tree in the Margaret River region . The leaves arising from many short branchlets make a dense foliage close to the trunk and branches . 
 Banksia ilicifolia has a stout trunk up to 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , and rough , fibrous , grey bark which is up to 2 cm ( 1 in ) thick . New growth takes place mainly in summer . Young branchlets are covered in hair which they lose after two or three years . Leaves grow on stems less than two years of age , and are arranged in a scattered pattern along the stems although crowded at the apices ( branchlet tips ) . Resembling those of holly , its leaves are a dark shiny green colour , and variously obovate ( egg @-@ shaped ) , elliptic , truncate or undulate ( wavy ) in shape , and 3 – 10 cm ( 1 – 4 in ) long . Generally serrated , the leaf edges have up to 14 prickly " teeth " separated by broad <unk> to u @-@ shaped sinuses along each side , although some leaves have margins lacking teeth . The leaves sit atop petioles 0 @.@ 3 – 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 39 in ) in length . The upper and undersurface of the leaves are initially covered in fine hairs but become smooth with maturity . Flowering takes place from late winter to early summer . The inflorescences are dome @-@ shaped flower heads rather than spikes as many other banksias , and arise from stems that are around a year old . No lateral branchlets grow outwards from the node where the flower head arises . The flower heads measure 7 – 9 cm ( 3 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) in diameter , and bear 60 to 100 individual flowers . The inflorescences pass through three colour phases , being initially yellow , then pink , then finally red , before falling away from the head . One to three follicles develop from fertilised flowers , and remain embedded in the woody base of the flower head . Each follicle bears one or two seeds . 
 The cotyledon leaves are a dull green with no visible nerves or markings . <unk> elliptic in shape , they measure 8 to 13 mm long by 12 to 18 mm wide and range from convex to concave . The pointed spreading auricles are 1 @.@ 5 mm long . The cotyledon leaves sit atop the stout hypocotyl , which is green and smooth . The seedling leaves are crowded above the cotyledons . Resembling those of B. coccinea , they are lined with triangular lobes or " teeth " ( with a u- or v @-@ shaped sinus ) and obovate to broadly lanceolate in shape . The first set of leaves measure 1 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 to 0 @.@ 98 in ) in length and around 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) in width , with three or four lobes in each margin . Both upper and lower seedling leaf surfaces are covered in spreading hairs , as is the seedling stem . Juvenile leaves are obovate to truncate or mucronate with triangular lobes and measure 4 to 10 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 to 4 in ) long by 1 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 59 to 1 @.@ 38 in ) wide . These lobes are smaller toward the petiole and apex of the leaf . 
 In the Margaret River region , Banksia ilicifolia has been confused with Banksia sessilis var. cordata as both have prickly foliage and domed flowerheads . However , the former grows on deep sand while the latter grows on grey sand over limestone ridges . The embedded follicles of B. ilicifolia compared with the loose ones of B. sessilis are another distinguishing feature . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Specimens of B. ilicifolia were first collected by Scottish surgeon Archibald Menzies during the visit of the Vancouver Expedition to King George Sound in September and October 1791 , but this collection did not result in the description of the species . It was next collected by Robert Brown in December 1801 , during the visit of HMS Investigator to King George Sound . The species was also drawn by the expedition 's botanical artist Ferdinand Bauer . Like nearly all of Bauer 's field drawings of Proteaceae , the original field sketch of B. ilicifolia was destroyed in a Hofburg fire in 1945 . A painting based on the drawing survives , however , at the Natural History Museum in London . 
 Brown eventually published the species in his 1810 work On the natural order of plants called Proteaceae . The specific name is derived from the Latin words ilex " holly " and folium " leaf " , hence " holly @-@ leaved " . In 1810 , Brown published Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen in which he arranged the genus into two unranked groups . B. ilicifolia was placed alone in Isostylis because of its unusual dome @-@ shaped inflorescences . All other species were placed in Banksia verae , the " true banksias " , because they have the elongate flower spike then considered characteristic of Banksia . 
 The shrubby , coastal ecotype was published as a separate species Banksia aquifolium by John Lindley in his 1840 A Sketch of the Vegetation of the Swan River Colony , but this is now regarded as a taxonomic synonym of B. ilicifolia . A specimen collected by Ludwig Preiss on 13 April 1839 from coastal sands in Perth was described as Banksia ilicifolia var integrifolia in Bentham 's Flora Australiensis in 1870 , but has not been recognised since . B. ilicifolia is variable in form , although the variations are not consistent enough to warrant recognising infraspecific taxa . Adult leaf margins can be entire or serrate ( like holly ) , and can both be present on the one plant . Populations from the south coast have larger flowers and leaves , but some trees in the north of the range also have large flowers and leaves . 
 Otto Kuntze challenged Banksia L.f. on the grounds that Banksia J.R.Forst & G. Forst had been published before it , and transferred all Banksia taxa to the new name Sirmuellera . Thus , B. ilicifolia became Sirmuellera ilicifolia ( R.Br. ) Kuntze . Kuntze 's challenge did not gain wide acceptance , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved against future challenges in 1940 . 
 = = = Infrageneric placement = = = 
 The unranked group Isostylis , with its one species , was reclassified as a section in the 1856 arrangement of Carl Meissner , and 1870 arrangement of George Bentham . In his 1981 revision of the genus , Alex George reclassified the group as a subgenus — Banksia subg . Isostylis — defined by the dome @-@ shaped flower heads , with B. ilicifolia joined by newly described species B. cuneata and later B. oligantha . Banksia ilicifolia is the only common member of that subgenus ; the two other species are rare and threatened , and are protected under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 . Relationships between B. ilicifolia and the other members of B. subg . Isostylis still remain unclear . Although DNA studies found B. cuneata to be the most basal of the three species , a 2004 study of genetic divergence within the subgenus yielded both other possibilities : some analyses suggested B. ilicifolia as basal , while others suggested B. oligantha . Biogeographical factors suggest that B. ilicifolia would be the most basal of the three species : it occurs in the High Rainfall Zone where relictual species are most common , whereas the others are restricted to the Transitional Rainfall Zone , where more recently evolved species are most common . 
 A 1996 cladistic analysis of the genus by botanists Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges assumed the status B. subg . Isostylis as a subgenus and earliest offshoot within Banksia , so George 's placement of B. ilicifolia was retained in their arrangement . The placement of B. ilicifolia was unchanged in George 's 1999 arrangement , and can be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia ( 3 sections , 11 series , 73 species , 11 subspecies , 14 varieties ) 
 B. subg . Isostylis 
 B. ilicifolia 
 B. oligantha 
 B. cuneata 
 Since 1998 , American botanist Austin Mast and co @-@ authors have been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia and Dryandra . Their analyses suggest a phylogeny that differs greatly from George 's taxonomic arrangement . Banksia ilicifolia and B. oligantha form a clade , that is they are each other 's closest relative , with Banksia cuneata resolving as the next closest relative , suggesting a monophyletic B. subg . Isostylis ; but the clade appears fairly derived ( that it , it evolved relatively recently ) , suggesting that B. subg . Isostylis may not merit subgeneric rank . Early in 2007 , Mast and Thiele rearranged the genus Banksia by merging Dryandra into it , and published B. subg . Spathulatae for the taxa having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; thus B. subg . Banksia was redefined as encompassing taxa lacking spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. ilicifolia is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A relatively common species , the holly @-@ leaved banksia is widely distributed within south west Western Australia . It occurs within 70 km ( 43 mi ) of the coast , from Mount Lesueur to Augusta , and then east to the <unk> River east of Albany . In the Margaret River region , it grows on yellow sand plains behind the Leeuwin @-@ Naturaliste Ridge . Almost all occurrences are to the west ( seaward ) side of the Darling Scarp , although there are two outlying populations - one near Collie east of Bunbury and the other in the Tonbridge @-@ Lake Muir area near Manjimup . Along the south coast , there is one inland population at <unk> Nature Reserve near <unk> northwest of Albany . The annual rainfall over its distribution ranges from 600 to 1 @,@ 100 mm ( 24 to 43 in ) . 
 Banksia ilicifolia grows exclusively on sandy soils ; its range ends where heavy soils are evident . It especially favours low @-@ lying areas . It generally grows in open woodland alongside such trees as jarrah ( Eucalyptus marginata ) , candlestick banksia ( Banksia attenuata ) , firewood banksia ( B. menziesii ) and Western Australian Christmas tree ( Nuytsia floribunda ) . Along the south coast , it grows in heath , sometimes forming stands with bull banksia ( B. grandis ) . 
 The holly @-@ leaved banksia gives its name to the Banksia ilicifolia woodlands ( ' community type 22 ' ) , a possibly threatened ecological community found in the Bassendean and Spearwood systems in the central Swan Coastal Plain north of Rockingham . These are low @-@ lying areas which are seasonally waterlogged . The habitat is open woodland and with an open understorey , and such trees as B. ilicifolia , B. attenuata and stout paperbark ( Melaleuca preissiana ) . 
 Banksia ilicifolia is a component of the critically endangered Assemblage of Tumulus Springs ( organic mound springs ) of the Swan Coastal Plain community north of Perth , which is characterised by a permanently moist peaty soil . The dominant trees include M. preissiana , swamp banksia ( B. littoralis ) and flooded gum ( Eucalyptus rudis ) , with understorey ferns such as bracken ( Pteridium esculentum ) and <unk> interruptus , and shrubs swamp peppermint ( <unk> <unk> ) and <unk> fascicularis . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Banksia ilicifolia has been recorded as a source of nectar for the honey possum ( Tarsipes rostratus ) in winter to early summer ( May to December ) , from field studies in the Scott National Park , replaced by Adenanthos meisneri in the summer . Several honeyeater species visit and pollinate Banksia ilicifolia . The western spinebill ( Acanthorhynchus superciliosus ) in particular prefers this species over other banksias . 
 A field study carried out at Jandakot Airport south of Perth and published in 1988 found that birds and insects overwhelmingly preferred visiting yellow @-@ coloured flowerheads . The species recorded include several species of honeyeater , including the red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , western wattlebird ( A. lunulata ) , western spinebill , brown honeyeater ( Lichmera indistincta ) , New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , white @-@ cheeked honeyeater ( P. nigra ) , singing honeyeater , ( Lichenostomus virescens ) , as well as the twenty @-@ eight parrot ( Barnardius zonarius semitorquatus ) two species of native bee of the genus Leioproctus , a beetle of the genus <unk> , and ant species Iridomyrmex conifer . The yellow flowerheads are also the ones that bear the most nectar . 
 An analysis of the invertebrate population in the canopy of Banksia woodland found that mites and ticks ( Acari ) , beetles ( Coleoptera ) and ants , bees and wasps ( Hymenoptera ) predominated overall , with the three orders also common on B. ilicifolia , although outnumbered by thrips ( Thysanoptera ) . More arthropods on B. ilicifolia might be related to a higher nutrient ( potassium ) level in the leaves . Lower overall numbers of invertebrates on Banksia species were thought to be related to the presence of insectivorous birds . 
 Hand @-@ pollination experiments on wild populations near Perth showed that Banksia ilicifolia is self @-@ compatible , although progeny produced have less vigour and seed production is reduced . Further experiments show that seedlings of outcrossing with plants greater than 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) apart are more vigorous and adaptable , suggesting that plants breeding within small fragmented populations are subject to reduced vigour and genetic inbreeding . 
 Banksia ilicifolia regenerates after bushfire by regrowing from epicormic shoots under its bark . Follicles open and release seeds after several years . It is weakly serotinous , like eight other Banksia species , all of which tend to occur in Western Australia 's southwestern corner . The other two species of the subgenus Isostylis are killed by fire and regenerate by seed . 
 All banksias have developed proteoid or cluster roots in response to the nutrient @-@ poor conditions of Australian soils ( particularly lacking in phosphorus ) . The plant develops masses of fine lateral roots which form a mat @-@ like structure underneath the soil surface . These enable it to extract nutrients as efficiently possible out of the soil . A study of three co @-@ occurring species in Banksia woodland in southwestern Australia — Banksia menziesii , B. attenuata and B. ilicifolia — found that all three develop fresh roots in September after winter rainfall , and that the bacteria populations associated with the root systems of B. menziesii differ from the other two , and that they also change depending on the age of the roots . Along with its shallow lateral roots , Banksia ilicifolia sinks one or more deep taproots seeking the water table . It is an obligate phreatophyte , that is , it is reliant upon accessing groundwater for its survival ; it is more closely tied to the water table than the co @-@ occurring B. menziesii and B. attenuata , and must remain in areas where the depth of the water table is less than 8 m ( 26 ft ) below the surface . Recent falls of the water table on the Swan Coastal Plain from use of the Gnangara Mound aquifer for Perth 's water supply combined with years of below average rainfall have seen the population and vigour or Banksia ilicifolia fall considerably ( more so than other banksia species ) since the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 Like many Western Australian banksias , Banksia ilicifolia has been shown to be highly sensitive to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi . A study of Banksia attenuata woodland 400 km ( 250 mi ) southeast of Perth across 16 years and following a wave of P. cinnamomi infestation showed that B. ilicifolia populations were present but significantly reduced in diseased areas . Specimens in coastal dune vegetation were reported killed by Armillaria luteobubalina , with mycelial sheaths of the fungus beneath the bark of the root collar . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 Rarely cultivated , Banksia ilicifolia requires a sunny position and sandy well @-@ drained soil to do well . A slow @-@ growing plant , it takes up to ten years to flower from seed . The glossy green foliage and long flowering period , combined with prominently displayed flowers give it horticultural potential , although its prickly foliage makes fallen leaves a problem if planted near lawns or walkways . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 22 to 41 days to germinate . Difficulties in collection and low seed set make seed relatively expensive . Seeds are often eaten by insects before they can be collected . 
 = Battle of the Buffet = 
 The " Battle of the Buffet " is a name used by the British press to refer to a Premier League match played between Manchester United and Arsenal at Old Trafford , Manchester , on 24 October 2004 . The match saw a series of unprofessional fouls that were overlooked by referee Mike Riley , such as Rio Ferdinand on Fredrik Ljungberg in the 19th minute and striker Ruud van Nistelrooy 's studs @-@ up challenge on Ashley Cole . Arsenal dictated much of the play and created several openings , but as the game progressed Manchester United threatened . The home team were awarded a controversial penalty in the 73rd minute , as Wayne Rooney tumbled over Sol Campbell 's outstretched leg . Van Nistelrooy converted the penalty kick and late in the game Rooney scored for 2 – 0 . The result ended Arsenal 's record @-@ breaking 49 @-@ match unbeaten run . 
 In the tunnel after the match tempers boiled over between staff of both clubs . It was alleged that pizza had been thrown at Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson by an unidentified Arsenal player ; speculation later arose that it was Cesc Fàbregas , but this has never been confirmed . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger was furious in his post @-@ match briefing , criticising Riley for his performance and describing Van Nistelrooy as a cheat . His comments were investigated by The Football Association , who later fined him £ 15 @,@ 000 for improper conduct . Van Nistelrooy was retroactively banned for three matches as his challenge on Cole was missed by Riley . 
 The result was pivotal in the league season and in the rivalry between the two clubs . Arsenal 's form suffered as a result ; having entered the match as league leaders they found themselves five points behind Chelsea in December . Manchester United struggled for consistency and finished behind Arsenal in third . Both clubs later met each other in the Football League Cup and were FA Cup finalists . Ferguson , following his retirement in 2013 , said that he considered the " Battle of the Buffet " to be a watershed moment for Wenger as it disorientated his management and put a strain on their relationship . 
 = = Background = = 
 The appointment of Arsène Wenger as manager of Arsenal in 1996 brought about a successful period for the club . In Wenger 's first full season , 1997 – 98 , Arsenal won the Premier League and FA Cup to complete a domestic double . Though the club failed to win another trophy in the next three seasons , they vied for domestic honours with Sir Alex Ferguson 's Manchester United . Arsenal won their second double in 2001 – 02 , before Manchester United regained the league the following season . In 2003 – 04 , Arsenal won the league without a single defeat – a record of 26 wins and 12 draws . 
 Meetings between Arsenal and Manchester United were considered the pinnacle of English football during the 2000s ; journalist Paul Wilson wrote in his preview of the October 2004 match : " Their rivalry is not simply about winning trophies , it is an adornment to the wider game . " The matches were also popular amongst British viewers – a league game between the two in April 2003 was watched by 3 @.@ 4 million viewers in Britain , making it the top @-@ rated programme on multi @-@ channel television for that week . Sky Sports football summariser Andy Gray said of the encounters : " In some ways it 's maybe not surprising that our major clashes have been with United and Arsenal . They 've been the Premiership 's two dominant clubs and so the pressure is greatest on them . " 
 The equivalent fixture a year earlier was a goalless draw , notable for Manchester United striker Ruud van Nistelrooy missing a last @-@ minute penalty . A confrontation involving the striker and several Arsenal players , in particular Martin Keown , immediately occurred . The ill feeling was originally sparked by an incident between Van Nistelrooy and Patrick Vieira . Having been fouled by Van Nistelrooy , Vieira aimed a kick in retaliation ; although the kick did not make contact , he was still sent off for a second bookable offence . Van Nistelrooy was accused by both Vieira and Wenger of feigning contact to get his opponent sent off , while Ferguson defended his player and denied he had dived . In the wake of the match , four Arsenal players received bans after the incident and were given fines totalling £ 275 @,@ 000 by The Football Association ( FA ) . Two Manchester United players were also fined for improper conduct , with a third warned about his future behaviour . The 2003 match was originally labelled the " Battle of Old Trafford " by the British press . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Arsenal entered the match as league leaders , two points in front of second @-@ placed Chelsea . Their previous league outing was a 3 – 1 win against Aston Villa on 16 October 2004 . The victory extended Arsenal 's unbeaten league run to 49 matches , which set a new English football record . On the same day , Manchester United played out a 0 – 0 draw against Birmingham City . United sat in sixth position , 11 points behind their opponents . Their inconsistency was documented by several newspapers in the build @-@ up to the match ; David Lacey wrote in The Guardian of 23 October 2004 : " Manchester United , it is said , are in a period of transition but if by Christmas they have not begun to pick up , their critics will begin to wonder at what precise point does transition become decline . " 
 The significance of the fixture for the two clubs was increased by the fact that , had Arsenal avoided defeat , they would have extended their unbeaten league run to 50 matches . Wenger told reporters at his press conference that he felt no increased pressure , though added the team 's midweek draw in the UEFA Champions League at Panathinaikos increased expectation . He admitted his team 's behaviour in the fixture last season was unacceptable , but pointed out " ... the best response we gave was to win the fair play table . That meant we took responsibility for what we did and we have improved our attitude . " Wenger believed United 's strengths lay in creativity , and did not want to set his team out to nullify , rather to " ... play our game based on speed and technique . " 
 In the lead @-@ up to the match , Ferguson criticised Arsenal 's previous conduct at Old Trafford and likened their behaviour to that of a mob : " What Arsenal players did that day was the worst thing I 've seen in this sport . No wonder they were so delighted at the verdicts . " He described the game as must win given Arsenal 's points advantage , but highlighted it was still all to play for given the league leaders needed to play several top teams twice . Although Ferguson praised Arsenal 's unbeaten run , he disputed whether this heralded a shift of power in English football : " [ We ] are still the team every club wants to beat most of all – regardless of who is champions or unbeaten records . In that respect , our profile as the major club in the country is untouchable . That is obvious and will never change . " 
 Mike Riley was selected as the referee for the match ; the Yorkshire @-@ based official and England 's representative referee at Euro 2004 had sent off five players in his last six games . Such was the concern another brawl would take place , Greater Manchester Police officers spoke to Riley to underline the need for players to behave themselves . 
 The most recent meeting between the two teams was in the FA Community Shield on 8 August 2004 , when Arsenal won 3 – 1 . Manchester United beat Arsenal en route to winning the FA Cup the previous season and were undefeated against their league opponents in almost two years . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Manchester United were predicted to line up in a 4 – 4 – 1 – 1 formation , with Wayne Rooney positioned just behind Van Nistelrooy . Club captain Roy Keane was doubtful as he was recuperating from a virus which prevented him from training all week . Quinton Fortune and Ole Gunnar Solskjær were both ruled out with knee injuries . Arsenal were expected to line up slightly different to Manchester United , with Thierry Henry and José Antonio Reyes as the two centre @-@ forwards in a traditional 4 – 4 – 2 formation . Vieira was expected to return to the starting XI ; earlier in the week Wenger rated his chances of playing as " 80 per cent " after he sprained his ankle against Aston Villa . Gilberto Silva , Jérémie Aliadière , Gaël Clichy and Manuel Almunia were all ruled out by injury for Arsenal . 
 When the teamsheets were released , Wenger 's selection showed Dennis Bergkamp as the preferred striking partner to Henry ; Reyes was positioned on the left wing which meant Robert Pirès started the match on the substitutes ' bench . For Manchester United , there was no place for Keane in the squad , so Ferguson brought in Phil Neville to partner Paul Scholes in central midfield . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The match began as a scrappy affair , with plenty of challenges and little expansive football on show . The game 's first notable chance went to Rooney , but Kolo Touré intervened and blocked his effort . Rooney then played in Giggs , whose shot was closed down by Sol Campbell . It took a while before Arsenal gained composure and played their usual passing game , and a move involving Edu and Fredrik Ljungberg in the 19th minute resulted in Rio Ferdinand carelessly tackling the latter . Ferdinand was not shown a card for his challenge – the first controversial decision referee Riley made during the match , which surprised Arsenal as the defender made a professional foul to prevent Ljungberg running clear on goal . Bergkamp exchanged passes with Reyes to open up the United defence , but the Dutchman 's shot was saved by Roy Carroll . The United goalkeeper was on hand to save Henry 's low shot three minutes before the break , after the striker was put through by Edu . During the first half action , both Neville brothers ( Gary and Phil ) were booked for fouling Reyes . Ashley Cole also received a yellow card for his tackle on Rooney . The Arsenal defender was on the receiving end of a challenge by Van Nistelrooy minutes after , as he attempted to shield the ball and hold on to possession . Television replays showed Van Nistelrooy ran his studs down Cole 's shins , but the striker was not punished by Riley despite the action being in full view of his assistant at the touchline . 
 Arsenal continued to dominate possession once the second half got underway , but struggled to use it to their advantage . Lauren 's cross from the right was cleared away by the United defence and Henry moments later <unk> his effort aimed at goal . Moments later Ljungberg beat his marker and crossed the ball into the penalty area , only for Bergkamp to drag his shot wide . United threatened once the game reached the hour mark , winning duels and earning set @-@ pieces . Gabriel Heinze 's shot from about 20 yards tested Arsenal goalkeeper Jens Lehmann in the 65th minute . Five minutes later Wenger substituted Reyes off in place of Pirès . 
 The most controversial decision of the match came in the 73rd minute as it led to the opening goal . Touré 's clearance presented United the chance to break in numbers and Rooney , at the heart of their attack , reached the penalty area only to go down under Campbell 's challenge . Riley awarded United a penalty , despite Campbell seeming to withdraw from the tackle and Rooney " ... already heading for the turf as the defender pulled his foot away , " wrote Kevin McCarra in his match report for The Guardian . Van Nistelrooy converted his penalty kick , sending Lehmann the wrong way to give United the lead . Arsenal responded hastily , but looked more susceptible to United 's counter @-@ attacks . Cole 's sliding tackle on Cristiano Ronaldo near the penalty area was deemed acceptable by Riley , as he waved away appeals for another penalty . The defender came close to equalising minutes before the end , but for his shot to go wide . In stoppage time , United added their second goal of the match as substitutes Louis Saha and Alan Smith combined to set up Rooney , who finished a counter @-@ attacking move with a tap @-@ in past Lehmann . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 = = = Pizzagate = = = 
 Campbell was seen refusing to shake Rooney 's hand at the final whistle and there were no customary shirt swaps between both sets of players ; it was alleged that the Arsenal players wore T @-@ shirts emblazoned with " 50 not out " , though this has never been proven . Tempers boiled over in the players ' tunnel in front of police officers . Several Arsenal players were held back , one of whom was Henry , incensed that Ferdinand claimed the man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match award . The conflict sparked into life when Wenger confronted Van Nistelrooy as he was unhappy with the striker 's challenge on Cole . Ferguson intervened and told Wenger to leave his players alone , but the Arsenal manager faced him and said " What do you want to do about it ? " 
 There were accusations that certain foodstuffs – usually reported as pizza , but occasionally reported as coffee , tomato soup or pea soup – had been thrown at Ferguson by an unknown Arsenal player . Ferguson changed into the club tracksuit in order to carry out his television duties . Speculation that the player who threw the pizza was Cesc Fàbregas arose when Cole hinted that the culprit was neither English nor French . In his autobiography , Ferguson said : " They say it was Cesc Fàbregas who threw the pizza at me but , to this day , I have no idea who the culprit is . " 
 Manchester United refused to publicly criticise Arsenal 's behaviour , but the players and staff were said to be " shocked and disgusted . " Riley did not mention the tunnel fracas in his match report which was sent to the FA , but the governing body revealed their intention to shed light on the matter . An investigation however was made difficult given the fact that both clubs remained quiet over " Pizzagate " and no camera footage was made available . 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Wenger was highly critical of Riley 's performance , suggesting he " ... decided the game , like we know he can do at Old Trafford . " The Arsenal manager claimed that Rooney told his players that he felt no contact , but the referee made the decision to give Manchester United a penalty which he called the turning point of the match . Wenger used statistics to question Riley 's impartiality – of the referee 's last eight matches at Old Trafford , he awarded eight penalties to the home team . Wenger was not surprised at United 's rough treatment of Reyes – " That 's what they always try against us when they 're in a difficult situation " and accused Van Nistelrooy of being a cheat in his post @-@ match television interview . Vieira like his manager was disappointed in Riley 's handling of the match , but sought positives : " We 're still eight points clear of United and two points clear of Chelsea . We 're in a really good position and all the other teams would want to be in our position . " 
 Ferguson described the win as an important victory , and hoped it would mark a turning point in their season . Ferguson said he did not see whether Campbell brought down Rooney and sympathised with the referee as he was put under pressure : " The referee had an impossible job . It seemed like Patrick Vieira was in charge for much of the match , he was at the ref 's side so much . " When asked if Manchester United could close the gap on Arsenal , the Manchester United manager quipped " Yes , of course we can . " 
 The match attracted fervent debate amongst journalists , pundits and football players alike . Former referee Jeff Winter defended Riley 's performance and described fixtures between Manchester United and Arsenal as " impossible " to manage . Premier League refereeing chief Keith Hackett added : " We know this is one of the tough encounters of the season . Mike clearly had a game plan to try not to suppress the match . He wanted it to breathe and perhaps went in with the intention of getting through the game without having to dismiss any players . In the back of his mind was trying to get through a game without having a blow @-@ up and I think Mike did extremely well to keep a lid on things . " 
 Everton manager David Moyes and Liverpool midfielder Steven Gerrard analysed the match on Sky Sports , and both agreed Ferdinand was fortunate to remain on the pitch . Although Moyes believed there was minimal contact between Rooney and Campbell in the lead @-@ up to United 's penalty award , he sympathised with the referee 's decision as Campbell stuck his leg out . He added : " If the referee hadn 't given the penalty he might have had to book Wayne . He chose to give the penalty . " Alan Hansen suggested Arsenal 's defeat was a great result for their rivals , but felt they were strong favourites to win the league . He praised Ferguson for getting his tactics right , and lauded the performances of defenders Ferdinand and Campbell . On Match of the Day 2 , Hansen was critical of Van Nistelrooy 's tackle on Cole , calling it " nasty and cynical . " 
 Henry Winter writing for The Daily Telegraph gave a brief explanation as to why Arsenal did not perform – their striker Henry was " not at the races . " He was full of praise of United 's determination and summarised : " Yet though Arsenal had dominated possession , United had offered the more impressive individuals . " Matt Dickinson of The Times described the victory as huge for " Ferguson and his faltering squad , " regardless of the scoreline or indeed if Arsenal had played the better football in patches . The Guardian correspondent Kevin McCarra felt aggrieved in the manner Arsenal had ended their unbeaten run , but pointed out they were fortunate no action was taken when Cole fouled Ronaldo . He closed his piece with an illustration of how impressive Arsenal 's run was : " In those prior 49 games they had never even been behind in the closing 20 minutes . " 
 Two days after the match Van Nistelrooy was charged with serious foul play after his challenge on Cole went unnoticed by the referee . He pleaded guilty to the offence and received a three @-@ match ban for his conduct during the match . Wenger was found guilty of an improper conduct charge and later fined £ 15 @,@ 000 by the FA for his post @-@ match comments about Van Nistelrooy . Ferguson accused Henry of " serious foul play " on Heinze , but the striker escaped an FA investigation and probable three @-@ match ban as the manager 's compliant was not submitted on time . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 Arsenal struggled to regain the same level of consistency shown earlier in the season ; in the space of a month they fell five points behind leaders Chelsea , who went on to win the league . Manchester United remained inconsistent ; they lost to Portsmouth in their next game and ended the season in third place behind Arsenal , despite looking likely to finish runners @-@ up . 
 In the League Cup , the clubs met in the quarter @-@ final stage at Old Trafford in December and even though both sides fielded weakened teams , the match was not short of drama . David Bellion gave Manchester United the lead in just 19 seconds but it was not until the start of the second half , when tempers began to flare . A fracas between Robin van Persie and Kieran Richardson , following a late tackle on Richardson by Van Persie resulted in clashes from both sets of players , which concluded with both protagonists getting booked by match official Mark Halsey . The game finished 1 – 0 . 
 In January 2005 , both managers were embroiled in a new row over the events of " Pizzagate " . Ferguson said Wenger never apologised to his players for calling them cheats , or for his team 's behaviour , adding : " It 's a disgrace , but I don 't expect Wenger to ever apologise , he 's that type of person . " Wenger responded by claiming Ferguson was guilty of bringing the game into disrepute and telling reporters he would " never answer any questions any more about this man . " Under pressure from the police , the Sports Minister Richard <unk> and Premier League chairman Richard Scudamore , both managers later agreed to tone down their words . 
 Manchester United captain Roy Keane infamously confronted Vieira in the players tunnel before the return fixture later in the season , which United won 4 – 2 at Highbury . This came about by an incident during the pre @-@ game warm up when Vieira had allegedly pushed Gary Neville after confronting the player about the challenges Pirès suffered at Old Trafford earlier in the season . Once Keane found out back in the United locker room , he unleashed a verbal tirade on Vieira including telling the Arsenal skipper " I 'll see you out there " . The match that followed was another ill @-@ spirited affair with both sides guilty of poor challenges , which also saw Mikaël Silvestre sent off after a clash with Ljungberg . United went on to win the game , coming from behind twice before holding onto the lead , despite being reduced to 10 men for the last third of the match . 
 The teams then faced each other once more in the FA Cup Final at the end of the season . The match was largely uneventful as it finished 0 – 0 after normal and extra time thus taking it to a penalty shoot @-@ out , the first in cup final history . Scholes missed his penalty for Manchester United , and Vieira converted the decisive kick to win the cup for Arsenal . Reyes became the second player to be sent off in the Cup Final , after his second yellow card in the 120th minute . 
 The " Battle of the Buffet " is regarded as a historic moment in the rivalry between Manchester United and Arsenal . Ferguson in his autobiography reflected it as the point where his relationship with Wenger started to breakdown , and it was not until United 's Champions League semi @-@ final victory over Arsenal in 2009 that they were on talking terms . He added : " It seemed to me that losing the game scrambled Arsene 's brain . " When asked to recollect his version of events of " Pizzagate " , Wenger admitted his team 's conduct was aggressive and said : " I think on that day , [ Riley ] had not his best day and that brought a lot of frustration on . " The emergence of Chelsea and transitions undergone by the two clubs during the mid @-@ 2000s meant the rivalry became insignificant . Manchester United continued to compete for major honours under Ferguson , while Wenger at Arsenal made the decision to displace experienced first @-@ teamers in favour of youth and encourage a more fluid , less direct style of football . 
 = John Leverett = 
 John Leverett ( baptized 7 July 1616 – 16 March 1678 / 9 ) was an English colonial magistrate , merchant , soldier and governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony . Born in England , he came to Massachusetts as a teenager . He was a leading merchant in the colony , and served in its military . In the 1640s he went back to England to fight in the English Civil War . 
 He was opposed to the strict Puritan religious orthodoxy in the colony . He also believed the colonial government was not within the power of the English crown and government , a politically hardline position that contributed to the eventual revocation of the colonial charter in 1684 . His business and military activities were sometimes intermingled , leading some in the colony to view him unfavorably . However , he was popular with his troops , and was repeatedly elected governor of the colony from 1673 until his death in 1679 . He oversaw the colonial actions in King Philip 's War , and expanded the colony 's territories by purchasing land claims in present @-@ day Maine . 
 = = Early life = = 
 John Leverett was baptized 7 July 1616 at St Botolph 's Church in Boston , Lincolnshire . His father , Thomas Leverett , was a close associate of John Cotton , the church 's Puritan pastor , and served as one of the church 's elders . Nothing is known of his mother , Anne Fisher , beyond that she bore her husband 16 children . Of John Leverett 's youth nothing is known prior to the family 's departure for the New World in 1633 . By the early 1630s Leverett 's father was an alderman in Boston , and had acquired , in partnership with John Beauchamp of the Plymouth Council for New England , a grant now known as the Waldo Patent for land in what is now the state of Maine . When the family arrived in the Massachusetts Bay Colony it settled in the capital , also called Boston . Leverett married Hannah Hudson in 1639 . She bore him a son , Hudson , in 1640 , and died in 1643 . In 1640 Leverett was made a freeman . 
 In 1639 he joined the Artillery Company of Massachusetts . The Artillery Company was a focal point in the colony for people who disagreed with the orthodoxy of the colony 's Puritan leaders . Many of its leading members , Leverett among them , opposed the colonial crackdowns on religious dissenters . Its members also engaged in trade . Leverett frequently partnered with Edward Gibbons and Major General Robert Sedgwick in trading ventures . He was , for example , part owner with Gibbons of a ship lost off the Virginia coast . The mixture of military leadership and commercial enterprise sometimes led to conflicts of interest . In the 1640s , Gibbons convinced Governor John Winthrop to allow Massachusetts volunteers to assist French Acadian Governor Charles de la Tour in his dispute with Charles de Menou d 'Aulnay . Gibbons had negotiated exclusive trading privileges with la Tour in exchange for this help , and Leverett was also able to secure preferential trading privileges with the French . 
 = = English Civil War = = 
 In about 1644 Leverett went to England , where he fought in the Parliamentary cause for Oliver Cromwell in the English Civil War . He had a military command in the cavalry of Thomas Rainsborough , where he supposedly served with distinction . He returned home in 1645 , but may have gone back to England in the following years . He married Robert Sedgwick 's daughter Sarah in 1645 . The couple had 12 children , of whom only six survived to adulthood . 
 Leverett 's time in England brought him to a belief in the need for more religious tolerance . He would pursue the idea politically , often in the face of opposition from the conservative Puritan leadership of Massachusetts that opposed religious views that did not accord with their narrow views . He specifically opposed the Cambridge Platform describing New England church orthodoxy , and opposed punishments of nonconforming individuals when he sat as a deputy in the Massachusetts general court ( the colonial legislature ) . John Winthrop , in writing about the 1648 synod that adopted the platform , noted that those " who came lately from England " were strongly opposed to its resolutions . 
 = = Massachusetts politics = = 
 Leverett became active in local politics after becoming a freeman in 1640 . In 1642 Leverett and Edward Hutchinson were sent as diplomatic envoys to negotiate with the Narragansett chief Miantonomoh amid concerns that all of the local Indian tribes were conspiring to wage war on the English colonists . Miantonomoh came to Boston and convinced Governor Winthrop that the rumors they had heard were groundless . Leverett would be called on for diplomatic missions in future administrations as well . 
 Following his return from England , he resumed his political activities . He was elected as one of Boston 's two representatives in the colony 's general court in 1651 , and served a brief stint as Speaker of the House . Throughout the 1650s and 1660s he served five terms on the general court . 
 Leverett was a popular leader of the colonial militia , something that resulted in an unusual situation caused by the colony 's militia laws . The colony had voted to limit the size of its militia companies , and restricted their officers to hold only one post . In 1652 , when Leverett was captain of a Suffolk County company of horse , he was also elected as a captain of one of Boston infantry companies as well as captain of the Artillery Company of Massachusetts . The colonial magistrates refused to grant him an exemption from the rule , and he was required to give up the Boston post . He was , apparently , allowed to retain his captaincy of the Artillery Company as the company was exempt from regulations governing the militia . 
 Governor John Endecott in 1652 sent a survey party to determine the colony 's northern boundary , which was specified by the charter to be 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of the Merrimack River . This survey party discovered ( incorrectly ) that the northern limit of the Merrimack was near what is now known as Lake Winnipesaukee in New Hampshire . An east @-@ west boundary at this latitude was found to include a number small settlements in what is now southern Maine . Endecott sent Leverett as one of several commissioners to negotiate the inclusion of these settlements into the colonial government , which resulted in the eventual formation of York County , Massachusetts . Leverett became interested in developing more land in Maine as result of this and other official visits , and invested in a significant amount of land there , over and above the lands inherited from his father . 
 In 1655 he was formally appointed as the Massachusetts colony 's agent in England . It is unclear , given the overlap with his governance in Acadia , when he actually went to England , but he served in this capacity until 1662 . During the 1650s when Cromwell was Lord Protector the colony benefited from the relationship he had cultivated with Cromwell during the civil war . In particular , Cromwell took no steps to enforce the 1651 Navigation Act against the colony 's merchants , and also overlooked complaints about the colony 's repressive tactics against religious nonconformists . The latter occurred despite Leverett 's personal opposition to the colony 's extreme stance on religion . A common claim that Leverett was knighted by Charles II lacks a solid foundation in the documentary record . 
 = = Military rule of Acadia = = 
 In 1651 England and the Netherlands went to war . Word of this arrived in the New World in 1652 , and rumors flew around the English colonies of New England that the Dutch in New Amsterdam were conspiring with all of the region 's Indians to make war against them . Leverett and Robert Sedgwick both saw a significant benefit for their trading operations if the Dutch could be eliminated as competitors , and lobbied for military action against New Amsterdam , although religious moderates like Simon Bradstreet were opposed to it . New Amsterdam 's Director @-@ General Peter Stuyvesant invited a delegation from New England colonies to New Amsterdam to discuss the matter . Leverett was one of the commissioners sent in 1653 ; he took careful note of the colony 's defenses while he was there . The New Haven Colony petitioned the Commonwealth government of Oliver Cromwell for assistance against the Dutch threat , a position supported by Leverett , who went to England with Sedgwick in 1653 to press the colonial case for war . 
 Cromwell responded by giving Sedgwick a commission as military commander of the New England coast , and sent him and Leverett with several ships and some troops to make war on the Dutch . The fleet was to be augmented by a force of 500 New Englanders under Leverett 's command . By the time the New England force was raised in 1654 , peace had been made between the English and Dutch . Sedgwick took advantage of his commission to act instead against the French in neighboring Acadia , which was home to privateers who preyed on English shipping . He captured the principal Acadian ports of Port Royal and Fort <unk> in July 1654 . Sedgwick gave military command of the province to Leverett . Leverett governed Nova Scotia for three years , turning command over to Sir Thomas Temple in May 1657 . During this time he and Sedgwick enforced a virtual trade monopoly on French Acadia for their benefit , leading some in the colony to view Leverett as a predatory opportunist . Leverett funded much of the cost of the occupation himself , and then petitioned Cromwell 's government for reimbursement . Although Cromwell authorized payment , he made it contingent on the colony performing an audit of Leverett 's finances , which never took place . Leverett was consequently still petitioning for compensation after the Restoration ( 1660 ) . 
 = = Military command and governorship = = 
 From 1663 to 1673 he held the rank of major @-@ general of the Massachusetts militia , and was repeatedly elected as a deputy to the general court or to the council of assistants . During this time he oversaw the strengthening of Boston 's defenses . He was also again sent to the colonial settlements of New Hampshire and southern Maine , where some colonists had objected to Massachusetts rule and arrested colonial officials . 
 Following the restoration of Charles II to the throne , all of England 's colonies came under his scrutiny . In 1665 Charles sent four commissioners to Massachusetts . They were instructed to gain the colony 's agreement to terms demanded by Charles in a letter he sent to the colonial government in 1662 , in which he instructed the colony to adopt more tolerant religious laws , and to enforce the Navigation Acts . The arrival of the commissioners was of some concern to the government , and Leverett was placed on a committee to draft a petition to the king demanding the commission 's recall . The document they drafted characterized the commissioners as " agents of evil sent to Massachusetts to subvert its charter and destroy its independence . " 
 Leverett served as deputy governor under governor Richard Bellingham in 1671 – 1672 , and succeeded to his position after the governor 's death . His tenure as governor was chiefly notable because of King Philip 's War , and the rising threats to the colonial charter that culminated in its revocation in 1684 . The colony angered the king by purchasing the claims of Sir Ferdinando Gorges to portions of Maine in 1677 , a territory Charles had intended to acquire for his son , the Duke of Monmouth . Edward Randolph , sent by Charles to report on the New England colonies , reported in 1676 that Leverett believed the colony to be beyond the crown 's reach : " He freely declared to me that the laws made by your Majesty and your Parliament <unk> them in nothing but what consists with the interest of that colony " . 
 Although Leverett favored religious tolerance , there were still many in the colony who did not . Baptists were able to openly begin worship in Boston during his tenure , but he has also been criticized by Quaker historians for harsh anti @-@ Quaker laws passed in 1677 . ( The Baptists ' time in Boston did not last — they were thrown out in 1680 after Simon Bradstreet became governor . ) 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Leverett died in office , reportedly from complications of kidney stones , on 16 March 1678 / 9 , and was interred at the King 's Chapel Burying Ground in Boston . His descendants include his grandson John , the seventh President of Harvard College , and Leverett Saltonstall , a 19th @-@ century governor of Massachusetts . Leverett , Massachusetts is named for his grandson . 
 Cotton Mather wrote of Leverett that he was " one to whom the affections of the freemen were signalised his quick advances through the lesser stages of honor and office , unto the highest in the country ; and one whose courage had been as much recommended by martial actions abroad in his younger years , as his wisdom and justice were now at home in his elder . " 
 = Ruth Norman = 
 Ruth E. Norman ( born Ruth Nields ; August 18 , 1900 – July 12 , 1993 ) , also known as Uriel , was an American religious leader who co @-@ founded the Unarius Academy of Science , based in Southern California . Raised in California , Norman received little education and worked from an early age in a variety of jobs . In the 1940s , she developed an interest in psychic phenomena and past @-@ life regression . These pursuits led to her introduction to Ernest Norman , a self @-@ described psychic , in 1954 . He engaged in channeling , past @-@ life regression , and attempts at communication with extraterrestrials . She married Ernest , her fourth husband , in the mid @-@ 1950s . Together they published several books about his revelations and formed Unarius , an organization which later became known as the Unarius Academy of Science , to popularize his teachings . The couple discussed numerous details about their past lives and spiritual visits to other planets , forming a mythology from these accounts . 
 After Ernest died in 1971 , Ruth succeeded him as their group 's leader and primary channeler . She subsequently began publishing accounts of her experiences and revelations . In early 1974 , she predicted that a space fleet of benevolent extraterrestrials , the Space Brothers , would land on Earth later that year , which led the Unarius Academy to purchase a property to serve as the landing site . After the extraterrestrials failed to appear , Norman said that trauma she had suffered in a past life had caused her to make an inaccurate prediction . Undaunted , she rented a building for Unarius ' meetings and sought publicity for the movement , claiming to have united the Earth with an interplanetary confederation . She revised the Space Brothers ' expected landing date several times , before finally settling on 2001 . Her health declined in the late 1980s , prompting her students to try to heal her with rituals of past @-@ life regression . Despite predicting that she would live to see the extraterrestrials land , Norman died in 1993 . Unarius has continued to operate after her death , and formed a board of directors . Since the 2000s , leaders have concentrated on individual transformation leading to spiritual change in humankind . 
 = = Early life and marriages = = 
 Ruth Nields was born in Indianapolis , Indiana , on August 18 , 1900 . Three years later , her family moved to Pasadena , California , where her father worked as an upholsterer . She and her five siblings were reared there , receiving little education and working from a young age . As a teenager , she labored as a fruit packer and a maid . Most of her income went to her father , whom she later described as abusive . 
 In 1918 , she married a man named Frank ( his surname is unknown ) , and they had a daughter two years later . The couple divorced in the early 1920s ; Frank gained custody of their daughter , although Ruth had access as well . Little is definitively known about Ruth 's life from the mid @-@ 1920s to the 1940s , but she worked in a variety of jobs . She held positions in several restaurants and also worked as a model , real @-@ estate broker , resort manager , and nanny . In the 1940s , she enrolled at the Church of Religious Science , where she studied New Thought under Ernest Holmes , and was separately introduced to psychic healing in that decade . Over time , she also became interested in spiritualism , channeling , and past @-@ life regression . She married Benjamin Arnold in the 1940s ; the marriage lasted until his death in 1951 . Two years later , she remarried and settled in Lancaster , California . Her third husband , George Marian , owned a milk @-@ delivery business which Ruth helped him to manage . In the mid @-@ 1950s , she became interested in acting and earned the starring role in a local play . 
 = = Marriage to Ernest Norman = = 
 In 1954 , at a psychic event in California , Ruth was introduced to Ernest Norman , who told her that in a past life she had been the daughter of an Egyptian Pharaoh and had protected Moses . Members of the organization they later established , the Unarius Academy of Science , affirm that Ernest and Ruth married on the day they met , and the group celebrates their anniversary as February 14 , 1954 . However , Diana Tumminia of California State University , Sacramento , notes in her 2005 study of the group that Ruth was probably still married to George Marian in early 1954 and speculates that their divorce was a lengthy process ; Tumminia posits that Ernest and Ruth married in 1956 . 
 Ernest believed he could communicate with both extraterrestrials and historical figures , channeling messages from them . In 1954 , seeking to popularize his channeling , Ernest and Ruth formed an organization known as Unarius , operating from their home in California . After their marriage , Ruth served as Ernest 's typist , later claiming to have learned the skill while sleeping . She recorded the information he channeled , writing books about psychic healing and trips into the solar system . In the 1950s and 1960s , they attracted several followers , including two students whom they later taught to channel . One early trainee was Charles Spiegel , who later led the group . Many converts had previous involvement with New Age or mystic groups , making it easy for the Normans to convert them . 
 Converts were provided with elaborate details of Ernest and Ruth Norman 's purported spiritual visits to other planets . The couple believed that humans could learn from great teachers on these journeys ; Ernest said that this contact held the potential to educate and heal humanity . Ernest also spoke of the scientific advancements of other worlds . The couple also discussed revelations about their past lives , including Jesus and Mary of Bethany among their past identities . Ruth stated that she had lived about 50 lives over several million years ; she recalled being several well @-@ known and a few obscure people on Earth , as well as beings from other planets and an archangel . Their group developed a mythology from the accounts that Ernest and Ruth gave of these lives , including tales from their past incarnations in Atlantis and Lemuria . Some of their stories were similar to the plots of contemporary books and films , prompting Tumminia to cast their beliefs as a pastiche or bricolage of the surrounding culture . 
 Ernest and Ruth promoted millennialist teachings , holding that higher beings were to transform the Earth and bring devotees to a new level of existence ; the couple held that this growth would allow people to travel through space . Zeller compares their millennialist doctrines to those of Christian <unk> , noting their shared utopian views . 
 = = Leadership and death of Ernest = = 
 Ernest died in 1971 ; thereafter , Ruth led their organization and served as its primary channeler . Spiegel moved to San Diego to assist her . After Ernest died , Spiegel affirmed Ruth 's nascent belief that she was an archangel named Uriel from the " fourth dimension " . 
 In 1972 , Ruth Norman began publishing Tesla Speaks , a series of messages that she said were given to her by the American inventor and engineer Nikola Tesla from his dwelling in outer space ; she stated that he also relayed messages from scientists Albert Einstein and Louis Pasteur to her . Norman asserted that the Tesla Tower held secrets which were to be recovered by Unarius . The American journalist Alexander S. Heard argues that Tesla 's rumored interests in death rays and free energy drew the group to him . In 1973 , Norman recounted an experience in which she spiritually married the archangel Michiel at a lavishly decorated temple on another planet ; the event was said to have culminated with her being crowned the Queen of Archangels , Uriel , by the Archangel <unk> . She and Spiegel envisioned the events of the ceremony over several days , and she published their recollections later that year . Her students subsequently referred to her as Uriel , an acronym of " universal , radiant , infinite , eternal light " . She and Spiegel re @-@ enacted the ceremony for her followers , and the group celebrated the anniversary of the event annually . After her spiritual marriage , Norman increased her channeling of historical figures , including Plato , Tesla , and John F. Kennedy . 
 = = Prophecy and therapy = = 
 = = = First extraterrestrial prophecy = = = 
 In a volume published in March 1974 , Norman predicted that a <unk> of an " Intergalactic Confederation " was to land on Earth before December 1974 . In November 1974 , assisted by some of her students , Norman purchased a 67 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 27 km2 ) property near Jamul , California , to serve as a landing site for extraterrestrials , whom she referred to as the " Space Brothers " . At some point in 1974 , Norman revised the date at which she expected extraterrestrials to land to September 1975 , citing ongoing Confederation efforts to prepare humanity for their landing as the reason for the delay . She predicted that a single flying saucer would bring extraterrestrials to persuade humans of their teachings , after which another 33 vessels would arrive . These beings were to restore the lost teachings of Atlantis to the Earth , and their revelations were to free humanity from crime and disease , ushering in an era of learning . She believed that this information would be imparted by a thousand extraterrestrial scientists , who would also bring advances in technology , among which she specified crystal computers , to Earth . Norman presumed that Confederation leaders were to take her on a world tour after their arrival , and she bought herself a new wardrobe in preparation . In addition , she arranged a large banner to welcome them , made arrangements for buses to the landing site , and informed the National Enquirer , an American tabloid , of her expectations . In early September 1975 , she gave a farewell message , telling of her future home on a spaceship . On September 22 , however , she concluded that a landing would not occur and stated that she was reliving the trauma of a past life — in which she was Isis — when she was assassinated shortly before extraterrestrials were to land . She explained that the effects of this trauma had caused her to make an inaccurate prediction . Norman led the group in classes to teach them how to relive the event that had culminated in Isis ' assassination and took them to the expected landing site to stir their memories . They began to hold public meetings again in November . Several students doubted Norman 's explanation ; some of them left the group . 
 In 1975 , Norman used the proceeds of a home sale to rent a storefront for her group 's meetings , which they lavishly decorated . She purported to be the " Spirit of Beauty " and the " Goddess of Love " ; in this capacity , she claimed complete knowledge of truth and the ability to heal . After their new headquarters opened , Norman told her students — and the media — that she was an ambassador from the Interplanetary Confederation , and , in February 1975 , she opened the Academy of Parapsychology , Healing , and Psychic Science , which soon became known as the Unarius Academy of Science . The group celebrates the anniversary of the union of Earth and the confederation annually around October 12 . 
 = = = Past @-@ life therapy and subsequent prophecies = = = 
 Norman pioneered a form of past @-@ life therapy , teaching her disciples how to recall details of experiences from their past incarnations . These recollections contributed to the group 's mythology , which developed over time with student input . Unarius ' members occasionally recalled crimes that they had committed in past lives , including times they harmed incarnations of Ruth Norman . The students sometimes acted out and filmed scenes from their previous incarnations , an experience that participants found therapeutic ; they cited this benefit as proof that the events were real . Norman 's therapy , according to R. George Kirkpatrick of San Diego State University and Tumminia , differed from most New Age past @-@ life therapies in the way that it wove her followers into the group 's narrative . 
 In March 1976 , Norman publicly wagered $ 4 @,@ 000 with the British gambling firm Ladbrokes that extraterrestrials would land on Earth within one year , a prediction which attracted media attention . Tumminia states that Norman had " no public distress " over the failure of her prediction . Despite the negative publicity from the prophecy 's failure , new members were attracted to the group . After losing the wager , Norman changed the expected landing date to 2001 ; she taught that the close of the 20th century coincided with the beginning of a new cycle which would bring great benefits to humanity . Representatives of Unarius later stated that the prophecies had been misunderstood and that the Space Brothers had not visited because humanity was not yet ready for them . They have argued that Unarius ' teachings must be understood to correctly interpret Norman 's statements . Tumminia writes that they used " adaptive storytelling and continuous narrative invention " to explain the failure of the prophecy . 
 The group enjoyed publicity , and media outlets regularly covered them . Most journalists portrayed Unarius as a curiosity and accentuated its novel aspects . In the area near their headquarters , they were viewed as an unusual group with strict behavioral standards . One local writer published a sensationalist account of the group under the title " The Gods Must Be Crazy " . But , after interviewing Norman in 1976 , Brad Steiger , who has written extensively about the paranormal , gave a positive account of Unarius . Norman disliked academic writings about her organization , seeing them as unfairly negative . 
 = = 1980s and 90s = = 
 In 1979 , Norman claimed to have an unofficial following of more than 100 @,@ 000 . That year , she announced a spiritual promotion : she was no longer an archangel but , with Michiel , a " Lord of the Universe " and a " Prince of the Realm " . She renamed Spiegel as " Antares " in 1984 , stating that he had overcome the evil of his past incarnations ; he subsequently began to channel . As of 1986 , the group had about 450 regular students and charged $ 5 per class . At that time , Norman lived in a house in La Mesa , California , with two of her disciples . 
 Assisted by her followers , Norman recorded her teachings in about 80 books . She wrote educational materials designed to empower students by teaching them about subjects such as the " psychology of consciousness " and " self @-@ mastery " . Ernest and Ruth Norman 's writings are revered as scripture by members of the Unarius Academy . The group developed a set of six core sacred narratives about the past lives of its founders , describing key events on Earth and other planets . These myths featured tales of romance , war , and scientific advances in the Aries and Orion constellations and in ancient civilizations on Earth . Kirkpatrick and Tumminia state that the <unk> canon appears to be incoherent to outsiders , but is appreciated as a cohesive body of literature by the group 's members . 
 Norman wore a variety of brightly colored , elaborate costumes and was often photographed by media while wearing royal @-@ style gowns and wigs and holding a scepter . She stated that her habiliments mirrored the practices of extraterrestrials , whose attire she said was brighter and more radiant than clothing on Earth . At the group 's headquarters , she had a gold @-@ colored throne that was decorated with peacock feathers . Her assistants helped shepherd her media image ; Kirkpatrick and Tumminia speculate that her charisma was primarily responsible for gaining publicity for the group . 
 Followers of Norman held her in high regard : they occasionally fainted when she touched them , and some wept when allowed to meet with her . They painted several portraits of her , one of which they believed had healing powers . According to students , Norman healed them in their dreams and sometimes reported seeing visions of her . Several times , group members chose to forgo cancer treatment , trusting in Norman to heal them . Tumminia says that Norman was a clear example of the German sociologist Max Weber 's concept of charismatic authority . Norman sometimes had disagreements with students and excommunicated two senior assistants who questioned her , although she welcomed one back a few years later . If healing was unsuccessfully sought , the failure to receive it was sometimes attributed to disloyalty to leadership . Criticism of Norman was not tolerated by the group ; Tumminia describes Norman 's leadership style as " benign authoritarian " . 
 = = = Declining health and death = = = 
 In 1988 , Norman broke a hip and her health began to decline . Although she had promised to live until 2001 , her deteriorating condition made her followers suspect she would die before then , causing them some distress and denial . In an attempt to help her recover , students used past @-@ life regression to recall interactions with her , and some became very emotional after experiencing memories of events in which they had rejected and hurt her . Norman returned to leading services in February 1989 , making a quicker than expected recovery , which was attributed to the past @-@ life rituals . After a period of good health , her condition again deteriorated , prompting students to resume recounting their past crimes . Norman lost most of her hearing and experienced chronic pain ; she was admitted to a hospital in December 1989 , but by the summer she was well enough to be present at events . She was nearly bedridden in her last years and was attended to by some followers . In 1991 , she stated that the Space Brothers had given her permission to die before their expected arrival in 2001 . 
 Before her death , Norman met with each of her followers ; she died on July 12 , 1993 , and was cremated . In her will , she promised to return to Earth , accompanied by the Space Brothers , in eight years . Students , some of whom were surprised and confused by her death , were instructed by leaders not to grieve because she was in a celestial state . Some of them privately mourned , and a few left the group . Items of Norman 's were distributed to students , some of whom wore them at later events . 
 After Norman 's death , Antares took over as leader and channeled messages from her . Others later began channeling her , and recordings of her messages were replayed . Antares died in 1999 , and a board of directors assumed leadership of the organization and channeled . In the 2000s , Unarius ' leaders emphasized individual transformation , focusing on a gradual spiritual change in humanity . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Images of Norman have been used to attract attention by some outside of the Unarius Academy of Science . In 1996 , an MTV executive viewed a picture of Norman and decided to use her image in an advertising campaign for the MTV Music Video Awards . The network contacted the Unarius Academy of Science and received permission to use a look @-@ alike in their promotions . In 2000 , Norman was featured on the cover of Kooks : A Guide to the Outer Limits of Human Belief , a book about personalities with fringe beliefs . 
 After Norman 's death , public opinion of her organization was strongly influenced by the 1997 mass suicide of Heaven 's Gate , a UFO religion whose members occupied a house within 50 miles ( 80 km ) of the Unarius Academy of Science . In the suicides ' aftermath , some reporters and members of the anti @-@ cult movement described Unarius as a similar group . Tumminia disagreed with this portrayal , casting Unarius ' practices as no more dangerous than those of widely accepted religions . 
 = Hunlock Creek = 
 Hunlock Creek ( also known as <unk> Creek ) is a tributary of the Susquehanna River in Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 7 @.@ 8 miles ( 12 @.@ 6 km ) long and flows through Lehman Township and Hunlock Township . The watershed of the creek has an area of 32 @.@ 5 square miles ( 84 km2 ) and is situated in northwestern Luzerne County . It has one named tributary , which is known as Roaring Brook , and a number of unnamed and unofficially named tributaries , such as " West Branch Hunlock Creek " . 
 Hunlock Creek is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery and part of it is inhabited by wild trout . The annual rate of precipitation in the watershed is 35 to 45 inches ( 89 to 114 cm ) . Rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale are common in the vicinity of the creek . A number of bridges have been built over the creek and it was the site of a furnace in the 1800s . An area listed on the Luzerne County Natural Areas Inventory is located in the creek 's watershed . 
 = = Course = = 
 Hunlock Creek begins in a valley in Lehman Township , a short distance northwest of Lake Silkworth . It flows south for several tenths of a mile before turning south @-@ southeast for a similar distance and receiving an unnamed tributary from the left . The creek then turns south for approximately half a mile , exiting Lehman Township and entering Hunlock Township . It continues flowing generally southwards for more than a mile and its valley widens considerably . The creek receives another unnamed tributary from the left before its valley narrows again and it turns southwest . After approximately a mile , it receives Roaring Brook , its only named tributary , from the right . The creek then turns south @-@ southeast for a few miles , receiving one unnamed tributary from the left and one from the right . The creek turns east @-@ northeast for several tenths of a mile and receives another unnamed tributary from the left . It then turns southeast , passing through a water gap and crossing US Route 11 in the village of Hunlock Creek . A short distance further downstream , the creek reaches its confluence with the Susquehanna River . 
 Hunlock Creek joins the Susquehanna River 178 @.@ 21 miles ( 286 @.@ 80 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Hunlock Creek has one named tributary , which is known as Roaring Brook . Roaring Brook joins Hunlock Creek 3 @.@ 99 miles ( 6 @.@ 42 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 6 @.@ 17 square miles ( 16 @.@ 0 km2 ) . Hunlock Creek also has an unnamed tributary that is unofficially known as " West Branch Hunlock Creek " . This tributary is approximately 7 @.@ 60 miles ( 12 @.@ 23 km ) long . Additionally , it has a number of other unnamed tributaries . 
 = = Hydrology and climate = = 
 Hunlock Creek is not designated as an impaired waterbody , meaning that it attains standards for water quality . 
 The peak annual discharge of Hunlock Creek at its mouth has a 10 percent chance of reaching 2 @,@ 780 cubic feet per second ( 79 m3 / s ) . The discharge has a 2 percent chance of reaching 5 @,@ 600 cubic feet per second ( 160 m3 / s ) and a 1 percent chance of reaching 7 @,@ 400 cubic feet per second ( 210 m3 / s ) . It has a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 13 @,@ 900 cubic feet per second ( 390 m3 / s ) . 
 At the confluence of one of its tributaries with the main stem , the discharge of Hunlock Creek has a 10 percent chance of peaking at 2 @,@ 100 cubic feet per second ( 59 m3 / s ) in any given year . It has a 2 percent chance of peaking at 4 @,@ 300 cubic feet per second ( 120 m3 / s ) , a 1 percent chance of peaking at 5 @,@ 650 cubic feet per second ( 160 m3 / s ) , and a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of peaking at 10 @,@ 800 cubic feet per second ( 310 m3 / s ) . 
 The peak annual discharge of Hunlock Creek at the confluence of another one of its tributaries with the main stem has a 10 percent chance of reaching 1 @,@ 460 cubic feet per second ( 41 m3 / s ) . The discharge has a 2 percent chance of reaching 3 @,@ 050 cubic feet per second ( 86 m3 / s ) and a 1 percent chance of reaching 4 @,@ 050 cubic feet per second ( 115 m3 / s ) . It has a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 7 @,@ 900 cubic feet per second ( 220 m3 / s ) . 
 The average annual rate of precipitation in the watershed of Hunlock Creek is 35 to 45 inches ( 89 to 114 cm ) . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Hunlock Creek is 512 feet ( 156 m ) above sea level . The elevation near the creek 's source is between 1 @,@ 140 and 1 @,@ 160 feet ( 347 and 354 m ) above sea level . The creek 's elevation decreases at a rate of 79 @.@ 3 feet ( 24 @.@ 2 m ) per mile . 
 A high ridge runs from near Hunlock Creek westward to the Shickshinny Gap . This ridge is known as Shickshinny Mountain and is made from Pocono beds . Green sandstone and red shale occur along the creek . A sandstone formation containing red quartz pebbles also occurs in the area and at one point forms a 30 @-@ foot ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) high cliff along the creek . Additionally , shale of the Mauch Chunk Formation can be found in the vicinity of the creek . 
 Drift heaps cover the old channel of Hunlock Creek . 
 A 1921 report by the Water Supply Commission of Pennsylvania described the topography of the watershed of Hunlock Creek as " rough and hilly " . The creek cuts through a mountain range in its lower reaches . Swamps and glacial lakes occur in the watershed . The channel of the creek is sinuous and cuts through rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Hunlock Creek has an area of 32 @.@ 5 square miles ( 84 km2 ) . The creek 's mouth is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Nanticoke . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Harveys Lake . The watershed is in the northwestern part of Luzerne County . It is part of the Lower North Branch Susquehanna drainage basin . 
 Hunlock Creek is described as a " good @-@ sized creek " in the 1909 book A History of Wilkes @-@ Barré , Luzerne County , Pennsylvania , from Its First Beginnings to the Present Time . 
 = = History = = 
 Hunlock Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . 
 Johnathan Hunlock came to the vicinity of Hunlock Creek from Lower Smithfield Township in the early 1770s and constructed a plantation on the creek . On March 28 , 1780 , Asa <unk> and John Rogers were ambushed by Indians while making sugar near the mouth of Hunlock Creek . <unk> was killed and Rogers was captured . The 1893 book History of Luzerne County , Pennsylvania referred to this incident as " one of the bloody episodes in the days of Indian troubles " . 
 William Koons constructed a furnace on Hunlock Creek in the 1800s . This furnace was capable of producing 75 tons of pig metal per week . In the early 1900s , major communities in the watershed of Hunlock Creek included Hunlock Creek , Sweet Valley , and Silkworth . In 1921 , their populations were 310 , 190 , and 24 , respectively . Around this time , the main industry in the creek 's watershed was agriculture . 
 Two two @-@ span concrete tee beam bridges carrying State Route 4016 were built over Hunlock Creek in Hunlock Township in 1925 . The bridges are 65 @.@ 9 feet ( 20 @.@ 1 m ) and 58 @.@ 1 feet ( 17 @.@ 7 m ) long . Both bridges underwent repair work in 1983 . A concrete slab bridge carrying <unk> Road was built over the creek in 1937 . This bridge is 23 @.@ 0 feet ( 7 @.@ 0 m ) long . A masonry arch bridge carrying State Route <unk> / <unk> Road over the creek in Hunlock Township was built in 1938 and is 34 @.@ 1 feet ( 10 @.@ 4 m ) long . A concrete tee beam bridge carrying US Route 11 over Hunlock Creek was constructed in 1940 . It is 47 @.@ 9 feet ( 14 @.@ 6 m ) long . In 1974 , a prestressed box beam bridge was built over the creek near State Route 4003 . It is 35 @.@ 1 feet ( 10 @.@ 7 m ) long and carries Spring Hill Road . 
 Hunlock Creek is also known as <unk> Creek . This name appears on Patton 's Philadelphia and Suburbs Street and Road Map from 1984 . The creek was known as <unk> by the Native Americans . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The entire drainage basin of Hunlock Creek is classified as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery in Chapter 93 @.@ 9 of the Pennsylvania Code . Wild trout naturally reproduce in the creek from T @-@ 534 downstream to its mouth . This stretch is 3 @.@ 9 miles ( 6 @.@ 3 km ) long . They also naturally reproduce in the tributary Roaring Brook and in the unofficially named tributary West Branch Hunlock Creek . 
 The Shickshinny Mountain Slopes , which are listed as a Locally Significant Area in the Luzerne County Natural Areas Inventory , are located in the watershed of Hunlock Creek in Plymouth Township . These slopes are on the northern side of Shickshinny Mountain and contain second @-@ growth northern hardwood forests and some rock outcroppings with small seeps . The area contains a large number of wildflower species and some rare plants . The main tree species in this area include American basswood , sugar maple , white ash , white oak , black cherry , and eastern hemlock . 
 = Murder of Julia Martha Thomas = 
 The murder of Julia Martha Thomas , dubbed the " Barnes Mystery " or the " Richmond Murder " by the press , was one of the most notorious crimes in late 19th @-@ century Britain . Thomas , a widow in her 50s who lived in Richmond , Surrey , was murdered on 2 March 1879 by her maid Kate Webster , a 30 @-@ year @-@ old Irishwoman with a history of theft . Webster disposed of the body by dismembering it , boiling the flesh off the bones , and throwing most of the remains into the River Thames . It was alleged , although never proven , that she had offered the fat to neighbours and street children as dripping and lard . Part of Thomas ' remains were subsequently recovered from the river . Her severed head remained missing until October 2010 , when the skull was found during building works being carried out for Sir David Attenborough . 
 After the murder , Webster posed as Thomas for two weeks , but was exposed and fled back to Ireland and her uncle 's home at Killanne near Enniscorthy , County Wexford . She was arrested there on 29 March and was returned to London , where she stood trial at the Old Bailey in July 1879 . At the end of a six @-@ day trial , she was convicted and sentenced to death after a jury of matrons rejected her last @-@ minute attempt to avoid the death penalty by pleading pregnancy . She finally confessed to the murder the night before she was hanged , on 29 July at Wandsworth Prison . The case attracted huge public interest and was widely covered by the press in Great Britain and Ireland . Webster 's behaviour after the crime and during the trial further increased the notoriety of the murder . 
 = = Background = = 
 Julia Martha Thomas was a former schoolteacher who had been twice widowed . Since the death of her second husband in 1873 , she had lived on her own at 2 Mayfield Cottages ( also known as 2 Vine Cottages ) in Park Road in Richmond . The house was a two @-@ storey semi @-@ detached villa built in grey stone with a garden at the front and back . The area was not heavily populated at the time , although her house was close to a public house called The Hole in the Wall . 
 Thomas was described by her doctor George Henry Rudd as " a small , well @-@ dressed lady " who was about fifty @-@ four years old . Elliot O 'Donnell , summing up contemporary accounts in his introduction to a transcript of Webster 's trial , said that Thomas had an " excitable temperament " and was regarded by her neighbours as eccentric . She frequently travelled , leaving her friends and relatives unaware of her whereabouts for weeks or months at a time . She was a member of the lower middle class and as such was not wealthy , but she habitually dressed up and wore jewellery to give the impression of prosperity . Her desire to employ a live @-@ in domestic servant probably had as much to do with status as with practicality . However , she had a reputation for being a harsh employer and her irregular habits meant that she had difficulty finding and retaining servants . Before 1879 , she had only been able to keep one maid for any length of time . 
 On 29 January 1879 , Thomas took on Kate Webster as her servant . Webster had been born as Kate Lawler in Killanne in County Wexford in about 1849 . She was later described by The Daily Telegraph as " a tall , strongly @-@ made woman of about 5 feet 5 inches ( 165 cm ) in height with sallow and much freckled complexion and large and prominent teeth . " The details of her early life are unclear , as many of her later autobiographical statements proved unreliable , but she claimed to have been married to a sea captain called Webster by whom she had four children . According to her account , all of the children died , as did her husband , within a short time of each other . She was imprisoned for larceny in Wexford in December 1864 , when she was only about 15 years old , and came to England in 1867 . In February 1868 , she was sentenced to four years of penal servitude for committing larceny in Liverpool . 
 She was released from jail in January 1872 and , by 1873 , she had moved to Rose Gardens in Hammersmith , London where she became friends with a neighbouring family named Porter . On 18 April 1874 , she gave birth to a son whom she named John W. Webster in Kingston upon Thames . The identity of the father is unclear , as she named three different men at various times . One , a man named Strong , was her accomplice in further robberies and thefts . She later claimed to have been forced into crime , as she had been " forsaken by him , and committed crimes for the purpose of supporting myself and child " . She moved frequently around West London using various aliases , including Webb , Webster , Gibbs , Gibbons , and Lawler . While living in Teddington , she was arrested and convicted in May 1875 of 36 charges of larceny . She was sentenced to eighteen months in Wandsworth Prison . Not long after leaving prison , she was arrested again for larceny and was sentenced to another twelve months ' imprisonment in February 1877 . Her young son was cared for in her absence by Sarah Crease , a friend who worked as a charwoman for a Miss Loder in Richmond . 
 In January 1879 , Sarah Crease fell ill and Webster stood in for her as a temporary replacement at Loder 's house . Loder knew Julia Martha Thomas as a friend and was aware of her wish to find a domestic servant . She recommended Webster on the basis of the latter 's temporary work for her . When Thomas met Webster , she engaged her on the spot , though she did not appear to have made any inquiries about Webster 's character or past . After Webster was taken on by Thomas , the relationship between the two women appears to have deteriorated rapidly . Thomas disliked the quality of Webster 's work and frequently criticised it . Webster later said : 
 At first I thought her a nice old lady ... but I found her very trying , and she used to do many things to annoy me during my work . When I had finished my work in my rooms , she used to go over it again after me , and point out places where she said I did not clean , showing evidence of a nasty spirit towards me . 
 Webster in turn became increasingly resentful of Thomas , to the point that Thomas attempted to persuade friends to stay with her as she did not like to be alone with Webster . It was arranged that Webster would leave Thomas ' service on 28 February . Thomas recorded her decision in her last diary entry : " Gave Katherine warning to leave " . 
 = = Murder and the disposal of the body = = 
 Webster persuaded Thomas to keep her on for a further three days until Sunday 2 March . She had Sunday afternoons off as a half @-@ day and was expected to return in time to help Thomas prepare for evening service at the local Presbyterian church . On this occasion , however , Webster visited the local alehouse and returned late , delaying Thomas ' departure . The two women quarrelled and several members of the congregation later reported that Thomas had appeared " very agitated " on arriving at the church . She told a fellow congregant that she had been delayed by " the neglect of her servant to return home at the proper time " , and said that Webster had " flown into a terrible passion " upon being rebuked . Thomas returned home from church early , about 9 pm , and confronted Webster . According to Webster 's eventual confession : 
 Mrs. Thomas came in and went upstairs . I went up after her , and we had an argument , which ripened into a quarrel , and in the height of my anger and rage I threw her from the top of the stairs to the ground floor . She had a heavy fall , and I became agitated at what had occurred , lost all control of myself , and , to prevent her screaming and getting me into trouble , I caught her by the throat , and in the struggle she was choked , and I threw her on the floor . 
 The neighbours , a woman named Ives ( who was Thomas ' landlady ) and her mother , heard a single thump like that of a chair falling over but paid no heed to it at the time . Next door , Webster began disposing of the body by dismembering it and boiling it in the laundry copper and burning the bones in the hearth . She later described her actions : 
 I determined to do away with the body as best I could . I chopped the head from the body with the assistance of a razor which I used to cut through the flesh afterwards . I also used the meat saw and the carving knife to cut the body up with . I prepared the copper with water to boil the body to prevent identity ; and as soon as I had succeeded in cutting it up I placed it in the copper and boiled it . I opened the stomach with the carving knife , and burned up as much of the parts as I could . 
 The neighbours noticed an unusual , unpleasant smell . Webster spoke later of how she was " greatly overcome , both from the horrible sight before me and the smell " . However , the activity at 2 Mayfield Cottages did not seem to be out of the ordinary , as it was customary in many households for the washing to begin early on Monday morning . Over the next couple of days , Webster continued to clean the house and Thomas ' clothes and put on a show of normality for people who called for orders . Behind the scenes , she was packing Thomas ' dismembered remains into a black Gladstone bag and a corded wooden bonnet @-@ box . She was unable to fit the murdered woman 's head and one of the feet into the containers and disposed of them separately , throwing the foot onto a rubbish heap in Twickenham . The head was buried under the Hole in the Wall pub 's stables a short distance from Thomas ' house , where it was found 131 years later . 
 On 4 March , Webster travelled to Hammersmith to see her old neighbours the Porters , whom she had not seen for six years , wearing Thomas ' silk dress and carrying a Gladstone bag which she had filled with some of Thomas ' remains . Webster introduced herself to the Porters as " Mrs. Thomas " . She claimed that , since last meeting the Porters , she had married , had a child , been widowed , and had been left a house in Richmond by an aunt . She invited Porter and his son Robert to the Oxford and Cambridge Arms pub in Barnes . Along the way , she disposed of the bag that she was carrying , probably by dropping it into the River Thames , while the Porters were inside the pub drinking . It was never recovered . Webster then asked young Robert Porter if he could help her carry a heavy box from 2 Mayfield Cottages to the station . As they crossed Richmond Bridge , Webster dropped the box into the Thames . She was able to explain it away and did not arouse Robert 's suspicions . 
 The following day , however , the box was found washed up in shallow water next to the river bank about a mile downstream . It was spotted by Henry Wheatley , a coal porter who was driving his cart past Barnes Railway Bridge shortly before seven in the morning . He initially thought that the box might contain the proceeds of a burglary . He recovered the box and opened it , finding that it contained what looked like body parts wrapped in brown paper . The discovery was immediately reported to the police and the remains were examined by a doctor , who found that they consisted of the trunk ( minus entrails ) and legs ( minus one foot ) of a woman . The head was missing and was later assumed to have been thrown into the river separately by Webster . Around the same time , a human foot and ankle were found in Twickenham . It was clear that all of the remains belonged to the same corpse , but there was nothing to connect them with Thomas and no means to identify the remains . The doctor who examined the body parts erroneously attributed them to " a young person with very dark hair " . An inquest on 10 – 11 March resulted in an open verdict on the cause of death , and the unidentified remains were laid to rest in Barnes Cemetery on 19 March . The newspapers dubbed the unexplained murder the " Barnes Mystery " , amid speculation that the body had been used for dissection and anatomical study . 
 It was later alleged that Webster had offered two pots of lard to a neighbour , supposed to have been rendered from Thomas ' boiled fat . However , no evidence about this was offered at the subsequent trial and it seems likely that the story is merely a legend , particularly as several versions of the story appear to exist . The proprietress of a nearby pub claimed that Webster had visited her pub and tried to sell what she called " best dripping " there . Leonard Reginald Gribble , a writer on criminology , commented that " there is no acceptable evidence that such a repulsive sale was ever made , and it is more than possible that the episode belongs rightfully with the rest of the vast collection of apocryphal stories that has accumulated , not unnaturally , about the persons and deeds of famous criminals . " 
 Webster continued to live at 2 Mayfield Cottages while posing as Thomas , wearing her late employer 's clothes and dealing with tradesmen under her newly assumed identity . On 9 March , she reached an agreement with John Church , a local publican , to sell Thomas ' furniture and other goods to furnish his pub , the Rising Sun . He agreed to pay her £ 68 with an interim payment of £ 18 in advance . By the time that the removal vans arrived on 18 March , the neighbours were becoming increasingly suspicious , as they had not seen Thomas for nearly two weeks . Her next @-@ door neighbour Miss Ives asked the deliverymen who had ordered the goods removed . They replied " Mrs. Thomas " and indicated Webster . Realising that she had been exposed , Webster fled immediately , catching a train to Liverpool and travelling from there to her family home at Enniscorthy . Meanwhile , Church realised that he had been deceived . When he went through Thomas ' clothes in the delivery van , he found a letter addressed to the real Thomas . The police were called in and searched 2 Mayfield Cottages . There they discovered blood stains , burned finger @-@ bones in the hearth , and fatty deposits behind the copper , as well as a letter left by Webster giving her home address in Ireland . They immediately put out a " wanted " notice giving a description of Webster and her son . 
 Scotland Yard detectives soon discovered that Webster had fled back to Ireland aboard a coal steamer in the company of her young son . The head constable of the Royal Irish Constabulary ( RIC ) in Wexford realised that the woman being sought by Scotland Yard was the same person whom his force had arrested 14 years previously for larceny . The RIC were able to trace her to her uncle 's farm at Killanne near Enniscorthy and arrested her there on 29 March . She was taken to Kingstown ( modern Dún Laoghaire ) and travelled from there back to Richmond via Holyhead , in the custody of the Scotland Yard men . On hearing of the crime for which she was charged , her uncle refused to give shelter to her son , and the authorities sent the boy to the local workhouse until such time as a place could be found for him in an industrial school . 
 = = Webster 's trial and execution = = 
 The murder caused a sensation on both sides of the Irish Sea . When the news broke , many people travelled to Richmond to look at Mayfield Cottages . The crime was just as notorious in Ireland ; as Webster travelled under arrest from Enniscorthy to Dublin , crowds gathered to gawk and jeer at her at nearly every station between the two locations . The pre @-@ trial magistrates ' hearings were attended by " many privileged and curious persons ... including not a few ladies " , according to the Manchester Guardian . The Times reported that Webster 's first appearance at Richmond Magistrates ' Court was greeted by " an immense crowd yesterday around the building ... and very great excitement prevailed . " 
 Webster went on trial at the Central Criminal Court – the Old Bailey – on 2 July 1879 . In a sign of the great public interest aroused by the case , the prosecution was led by the Solicitor General , Sir Hardinge Giffard . Webster was defended by a prominent London barrister , Warner Sleigh , and the case was presided over by Mr. Justice Denman . The trial was just as well @-@ attended as the earlier hearings in Richmond and attracted intense interest from all levels of society ; on the fourth day of the trial , the Crown Prince of Sweden – the future King Gustaf V – turned up to watch the proceedings . 
 Over the course of six days , the court heard a succession of witnesses piecing together the complicated story of how Thomas had met her death . Webster had attempted before the trial to implicate the publican John Church and her former neighbour Porter , but both men had solid alibis and were cleared of any involvement in the murder . She pleaded not guilty and her defence sought to emphasise the circumstantial nature of the evidence and highlighted her devotion to her son as a reason why she could not have been capable of the murder . However , Webster 's public unpopularity , impassive demeanour and scanty defence counted strongly against her . A particularly damning piece of evidence came from a <unk> named Maria Durden who told the court that Webster had visited her a week before the murder and had said that she was going to Birmingham to sell some property , jewellery and a house that her aunt had left her . The jury interpreted this as a sign that Webster had premeditated the murder and convicted her after deliberating for about an hour and a quarter . 
 Shortly after the jury returned its verdict and just before the judge was about to pass sentence , Webster was asked if there was any reason why sentence of death should not be passed upon her . She pleaded that she was pregnant in an apparent bid to avoid the death penalty . The Law Times reported that " [ u ] pon this a scene of uncertainty , if not of confusion , ensued , certainly not altogether in harmony with the solemnity of the occasion . " The judge commented that " after thirty @-@ two years in the profession , he was never at an inquiry of this sort . " Eventually the Clerk of Assize suggested using the archaic mechanism of a jury of matrons , constituted from a selection of the women attending the court , to rule upon the question of whether Webster was " with quick child " . Twelve women were sworn in along with a surgeon named Bond , and they accompanied Webster to a private room for an examination that only took a couple of minutes . They returned a verdict that Webster was not " quick with child " , though this did not necessarily mean that she was not pregnant – a distinction that led the president of the Obstetrical Society of London to protest at the use of " the obsolete medical assumption that the unborn child is not alive until the so @-@ called ' quickening . ' " 
 A few days before Webster was due to be executed an appeal was submitted on her behalf to the Home Secretary , R. A. Cross . It was turned down with an official statement that after considering the arguments put forward , the Home Secretary had " failed to discover any sufficient ground to justify him in advising Her Majesty to interfere with the due course of the law . " 
 Before she was executed , Webster made two statements confessing to the crime . In her first , she implicated Strong , the purported father of her child , who she said had participated in the murder and was responsible for leading her into a life of crime . She recanted on 28 July , the night before she was due to be executed , making a further statement in which she took sole responsibility and exonerated Church , Porter and Strong of any involvement . She was hanged the following day at Wandsworth Prison at 9 am , where the hangman , William Marwood , used his newly developed " long drop " technique to cause instantaneous death . After her death was certified , she was buried in an unmarked grave in one of the prison 's exercise yards . The crowd waiting outside cheered as a black flag was raised over the prison walls , signifying that the death sentence had been carried out . 
 An auction of Thomas ' property was held at 2 Mayfield Cottages on the day after Webster 's execution . John Church , the publican , managed to obtain Thomas ' furniture after all , along with numerous other personal effects including her pocket @-@ watch and the knife with which Thomas had been dismembered . The copper in which Thomas ' body had been boiled was sold for five shillings . Other visitors contented themselves with taking small pebbles and twigs from the garden as souvenirs . The house itself remained unoccupied until 1897 , as nobody would live there after the murder . Even then , according to the occupant , servants were reluctant to work at such a notorious place . It was later rumoured that a " ghostly nun " could be seen hovering over the place where Thomas had been buried . To the surprise and disappointment of Elliott O 'Donnell , there was no sign that her house was haunted , and Guy Logan noted that the " neat and pretty " appearance of the property gave no hint of the crime that had been committed within : " anything less like the popular conception of a ' murder house ' it would be hard to imagine . " 
 = = Social impact of the murder = = 
 The murder had a considerable social impact on Victorian Britain and Ireland . It caused an immediate sensation and was widely reported in the press . Freeman 's Journal and Daily Commercial Advertiser of Dublin noted that what it called " one of the most sensational and awful chapters in the annals of human wickedness " had resulted in the press " teem [ ing ] with descriptions and details of the ghastly horrors of that crime " . Such was Webster 's notoriety that within only a few weeks of her arrest , and well before she had gone to trial , Madame Tussaud 's created a wax effigy of her and put it on display for those who wished to see the " Richmond Murderess " . It remained on display well into the twentieth century alongside other notorious killers such as Burke and Hare and Dr. Crippen . Within days of her execution an enterprising publisher on the Strand rushed into print a souvenir booklet for the price of a penny , " The Life , Trial and Execution of Kate Webster " , which was advertised as " <unk> [ ing ] Twenty Handsome Pages , containing her entire History , with Summing @-@ up , Verdict , and interesting particulars , together with her last words , and a FULL @-@ PAGE <unk> of the <unk> – Portraits , Illustrations & c . " The Illustrated Police News published a souvenir cover depicting an artist 's impression of the day of the execution . It depicted " the prisoner visited by her friends " , " the process of <unk> " , the final rites being said , " hoisting the black flag " , and finally " filling up the coffin with lime " . 
 The case was also commemorated , while it was still ongoing , by street ballads — musical narratives set to the tune of popular songs . H. Such , a printer and publisher in Southwark , issued a ballad entitled " Murder and Mutilation of an Old Lady near Barnes " shortly after Kate Webster had been arrested , set to the tune of " Just Before the Battle , Mother " , a popular song of the American Civil War . At the end of the trial Such issued another ballad , set to the tune of " Driven from Home " , announcing : 
 Webster herself was characterised as malicious , reckless and wilfully evil . Commentators saw her crime as both gruesome and scandalous . Servants were expected to be deferential ; her act of extreme violence towards her employer was deeply disquieting . At the time , about 40 % of the female labour force was employed as domestic servants for a very wide range of society , from the wealthiest to respectable working @-@ class families . Servants and employers lived and worked in close proximity , and the honesty and orderliness of servants was a constant cause of concern . Servants were very poorly paid and larceny was an ever @-@ present temptation . Had Webster succeeded in completing the deal with John Church to sell Thomas ' furniture , she stood to gain the equivalent of two to three years ' worth of wages . 
 Another cause of revulsion against Webster was her attempt to impersonate Thomas . She had managed to perpetrate the impersonation for two weeks , implying that middle @-@ class identity amounted to little more than cultivating the right demeanour and having the appropriate clothes and possessions , whether or not they had been earned . John Church , the publican whom Webster had attempted to implicate , was himself a former servant who had risen to lower middle @-@ class status and earned a measure of prosperity and effective management of his pub . His commitment to bettering himself through hard work was in keeping with the ethic of the time . Webster , in contrast , had simply stolen her briefly @-@ held middle @-@ class identity . 
 Exacerbating the crime in the minds of many <unk> was how Webster violated the expected norms of femininity by the standards of the Victorian era . Victorian ideals saw women as moral , passive and physically weak or restrained . Webster was seen as quite the opposite and was described in lurid ways that emphasised her lack of femininity . Elliott O 'Donnell , writing in his introduction to the trial transcript , described Webster as " not merely savage , savage and shocking ... but the grimmest of grim personalities , a character so uniquely sinister and barbaric as to be hardly human " . The newspapers described her as " gaunt , repellent , and <unk> @-@ looking " , though the reporter for The Penny Illustrated Paper and Illustrated Times commented that she was " not so ill @-@ favoured as she has been described . " 
 Webster 's appearance and behaviour were seen as key signs of her inherently criminal nature . Crimes were thought to be committed by a social " residuum " at the bottom of society who occupied themselves as " habitual criminals " , choosing to live a life of drink and theft rather than improving themselves through thrift and hard work . Her strong build , partly a result of the hard physical labour that was her livelihood , ran counter to the largely middle @-@ class notion that women were meant to be physically frail . Some commentators saw her facial features as indicative of criminality ; O 'Donnell commented upon her " obliquely set eyes " , which he declared " are not infrequently found in homicides ... this peculiarity , which I consider was sufficient in itself , as one of nature 's danger signals , to have warned people to steer clear of her " . 
 Webster 's behaviour in court and her sexual history also counted against her . She was widely described by reporters as " calm " and " stolid " in facing the court and only cried once during the trial , when her son was mentioned . This contradicted the expectation that " properly feminine " women should be penitent and emotional in such a situation . Her succession of male friends , one of whom had fathered her child outside wedlock , suggested promiscuous female sexuality — again , strongly counter to expected norms of behaviour . During her trial she attempted unsuccessfully to evoke sympathy by blaming Strong , the possible father of her child , for leading her astray : " I formed an intimate acquaintance with one who should have protected me and was led away by evil associates and bad companions . " This claim played on social expectations that women 's moral sense was inextricably linked with sexual chastity — " falling " sexually would lead to other forms of " ruin " — and that men who had sexual relations with women acquired social obligations that they were expected to fulfil . Webster 's attempt to implicate three innocent men also caused outrage ; O 'Donnell commented that " public opinion , as a whole , undoubtedly condemned Kate Webster , as much , perhaps , for her attempts to bring three innocent men to the scaffold as for the actual murder itself " . 
 According to Shani D <unk> of the Feminist Crime Research Network , the fact that she was Irish was a significant factor in the widespread revulsion felt towards Webster in Great Britain . Many Irish people had emigrated to England since the Great Famine of 1849 , but met widespread prejudice and persistent associations with criminality and drunkenness . The Irish were at worst depicted as bestial and subhuman , and there were repeated episodes of violence between Irish and English workers as well as attacks by Fenians ( Irish nationalists ) in England . The <unk> of Webster as " hardly human " , as O 'Donnell put it , was of a piece with the public and judicial perceptions of the Irish as innately criminal . 
 = = Discovery of Thomas ' skull = = 
 In 1952 , the naturalist David Attenborough and his wife Jane bought a house situated between the former Mayfield Cottages ( which still stand today ) and the Hole in the Wall pub . The pub closed in 2007 and fell into dereliction but was bought by Attenborough in 2009 to be redeveloped . 
 On 22 October 2010 , workmen carrying out excavation work at the rear of the old pub uncovered a " dark circular object " , which turned out to be a woman 's skull . It had been buried underneath foundations that had been in place for at least 40 years , on the site of the pub 's stables . It was immediately speculated that the skull was the missing head of Julia Martha Thomas , and the coroner asked Richmond police to carry out an investigation into the identity and circumstances of death of the skull 's owner . 
 Carbon dating carried out at the University of Edinburgh dated the skull to between 1650 and 1880 , while the fact that it had been deposited on top of a layer of Victorian tiles suggested that it belonged to the end of this era . The skull had fracture marks consistent with Webster 's account of throwing Thomas down the stairs , and it was found to have low collagen levels , consistent with it being boiled . In July 2011 , the coroner concluded that the skull was indeed that of Thomas . DNA testing was not possible as she had died childless and no relatives could be traced ; in addition , there was no record of where the rest of her body had been buried . 
 The coroner recorded a verdict of unlawful killing , superseding the open verdict recorded in 1879 . The cause of Thomas 's death was given as asphyxiation and a head injury . The police called the outcome " a good example of how good old @-@ fashioned detective work , historical records and technological advances came together to solve the ' Barnes Mystery ' . " 
 = Gay bathhouse = 
 Gay bathhouses , also known as gay saunas or <unk> , are commercial spaces for men to have sex with other men . In gay slang in some regions these venues are also known colloquially as " the baths " , " the sauna " or " the tubs " , but they should not be confused with public bathing . Gay baths are primarily for sex , not bathing . 
 Not all men who visit gay bathhouses consider themselves gay , regardless of their sexual behavior . Bathhouses offering similar opportunities for sex for women are rare , though some men 's bathhouses occasionally have " lesbian " or " women only " nights . 
 Bathhouses vary considerably in size and amenities – from small establishments with 10 or 20 rooms and a handful of lockers to multi @-@ story saunas with a variety of room styles or sizes and several steam baths , Jacuzzi tubs , and sometimes swimming pools . Most have a steam room ( or wet sauna ) , dry sauna , showers , lockers , and small private rooms . 
 Many bathhouses are , for legal reasons , " membership only " , though membership is generally open to any adult who seeks it , usually after paying a small fee . Unlike brothels , customers pay only for the use of the facilities . Sexual activity , if it occurs , is not provided by staff of the establishment but is between customers , and no money is exchanged . Many gay bathhouses , for legal reasons , explicitly prohibit or discourage prostitution and ban known prostitutes . 
 = = History = = 
 Records of men meeting for sex with other men in bathhouses date back to the 15th century . A tradition of public baths dates back to the 6th century BC , and there are many ancient records of homosexual activity in Greece . In the West , gay men have been using bathhouses for sex since at least the late 19th and early 20th centuries , a time when homosexual acts were illegal in most Western countries and men who were caught engaging in homosexual acts were often arrested and publicly humiliated . Men began frequenting cruising areas such as bathhouses , public parks , alleys , train and bus stations , movie theaters , public lavatories ( cottages or tearooms ) , and gym changing rooms where they could meet other men for sex . Some bathhouse owners tried to prevent sex between patrons while others , mindful of profits or prepared to risk prosecution , overlooked discreet homosexual activity . 
 = = = Early records = = = 
 1492 Florence 
 In Florence , Italy , in 1492 there was a purge against the " vice of sodomy " . The places used for homosexual acts were to be taverns , baths , and <unk> ( sheds or houses used for illicit sex and gambling ) . The Eight of Watch ( the city 's leading criminal court ) issued several decrees associated with sodomy and on April 11 , 1492 they warned the managers of bathhouses to keep out " suspect boys " on penalty of a fine . In the short period from April 1492 to February 1494 they convicted 44 men for homosexual relations not involving violence or aggravating circumstances . 
 1876 Paris 
 In France the first recorded police raid on a Parisian bathhouse was in 1876 in the Bains de <unk> on the Rue du Faubourg @-@ Poissonnière . Six men aged 14 to 22 were prosecuted for an offense against public decency and the manager and two employees for facilitating pederasty . 
 1903 New York 
 In the United States on February 21 , 1903 , New York police conducted the first recorded raid on a gay bathhouse , the Ariston Hotel Baths . 26 men were arrested and 12 brought to trial on sodomy charges ; 7 men received sentences ranging from 4 to 20 years in prison . 
 = = = Early gay bathhouses = = = 
 In New York City , the Everard ( nicknamed the Everhard ) was converted from a church to a bathhouse in 1888 and was patronized by gay men before the 1920s and by the 1930s had a reputation as the " classiest , safest , and best known of the baths " . It was damaged by fire on May 25 , 1977 , when nine men died and several others were seriously injured . The Everard closed in 1986 . Also popular in the 1910s were the Produce Exchange Baths and the Lafayette Baths ( 403 – 405 Lafayette Street , which from 1916 was managed by Ira & George Gershwin ) . American <unk> painter Charles Demuth used the Lafayette Baths as his favourite haunt . His 1918 homoerotic self @-@ portrait set in a Turkish bath is likely to have been inspired by it . The Penn Post Baths in a hotel basement ( The Penn Post Hotel , 304 West 31st Street ) was a popular gay location in the 1920s despite a seedy condition and the lack of private rooms . 
 The American composer Charles Griffes ( 1884 – 1920 ) wrote in his diaries about visits to the New York bathhouses and the YMCA . His biography states : So great was his need to be with boys , that though his home contained two pianos , he chose to practice at an instrument at the Y , and his favorite time was when the players were coming and going from their games . 
 When a friend with " little experience but great desire " confided his homosexual longings to Charles Griffes in 1916 , Griffes took him to the Lafayette so that he could meet other gay men and explore his sexual interests in a supportive environment : the friend was " astounded and fascinated " by what he saw there . The baths also encouraged more advanced forms of sexual experimentation . Griffes himself had had his first encounter with a man interested in sadomasochism at the Lafayette two years earlier ( he found the man " interesting " but the experience unappealing ) , and several men interviewed in the mid @-@ 1930s referred to experimenting in the baths and learning of new pleasures . 
 In London , the Savoy Turkish Baths at 92 Jermyn Street became a favorite spot ( opening in 1910 and remaining open until September 1975 ) . The journalist A.J. <unk> wrote : ... [ The baths at Jermyn Street ] represented a twilight arena for elderly men who came to sweat poisons from their systems and youths who came to strike beguiling poses in Turkish towels ... although they were closely overseen by attendants , they provided a discreet place to inspect a young man before offering a cup of tea at Lyons . Regulars included Rock Hudson . 
 In the 1950s the Bermondsey Turkish Baths were rated by Kenneth Williams as " quite fabulous " in his diaries . 
 <unk> in the 1930s : The <unk> that had been well known to me were those of East Ham , Greenwich and Bermondsey . In the first two it was frequently possible to indulge in what the Spartacus Guide coyly describes as ' action ' , but behaviour at all times had to be reasonably cautious . In the Grange Road baths in Bermondsey , however , all restraint could immediately be discarded with the small towels provided to cover your nakedness . 
 = = = Modern gay bathhouses = = = 
 In the 1950s exclusively gay bathhouses began to open in the United States . Though subject to vice raids , these bathhouses were " oasis of homosexual camaraderie " and were , as they remain today , " places where it was safe to be gay " , whether or not patrons themselves identified as homosexual . The gay baths offered a much safer alternative to sex in other public places . 
 In the late 1960s and 1970s , gay bathhouses – now primarily gay @-@ owned and operated – became fully licensed gay establishments which soon became major gay institutions . These bathhouses served as informal gay meeting places , places where friends could meet and relax . Gay bathhouses frequently threw parties for Pride Day and were usually open , and busy , on public holidays such as Thanksgiving and Christmas , when some gay men , particularly those who had been rejected by their families due to their sexual orientation , had nowhere to go . The American writer Truman Capote was a regular at New York City baths in the 1970s , in particular the sauna at West 58th Street . 
 Another service offered by the baths was voter registration . In the run @-@ up to the 1980 election , the New St. Mark 's Baths in New York City , with the assistance of the League of Women Voters , conducted a voter registration drive on its premises . 
 In Australia , the first gay steam bath was opened in Sydney in 1967 . This was the Bondi Junction Steam Baths at 109 Oxford Street . From 1972 through 1977 the following gay steam baths opened : Ken 's Karate Klub ( nicknamed " KKK " ) , now called Ken 's at Kensington ; No. 253 ; King Steam ; Silhouette American Health Centre ; Colt 107 Recreation Centre ; Barefoot Boy ; and Roman Bath ( nicknamed " Roman Ruins " ) . In Melbourne the first gay bathhouse was Steamworks in La Trobe Street , which opened in 1979 and closed 13 October 2008 . 
 Gay saunas , as they are more commonly known in Australia and New Zealand , were present in most large cities in those countries by the late 1980s . As homosexuality was decriminalised in New Zealand and most Australian states during the 1970s and 1980s , there was no criminal conduct occurring on the premises of such " sex on site venues " . 
 In Britain gay saunas were routinely raided by police up until the end of the 1980s ( for example raids in May 1988 on Brownies in Streatham , the owner getting a six @-@ month jail sentence and a £ 5 @,@ 000 fine , and the Brooklyn House Hotel sauna in Manchester ) . By the 1990s , with increasing scrutiny of the costs of such operations ( charges of gross indecency in a sauna normally needing the expense of undercover officers ) , a reduced likelihood of successful prosecution , concerns of being perceived as homophobic , and little public interest in victimless crime , gay saunas became free to operate without the risk of being raided by police . Also , police attitudes meant that they were more willing to turn a blind eye because they preferred such activity to take place in a contained environment rather than outdoors even though users were still committing the homosexual sexual offence of gross indecency , until gross indecency was wiped from the statute books following the Sexual Offences Act 2003 . 
 = = Bathhouses today = = 
 Gay bathhouses today continue to fill a similar function as they did historically . The community aspect has lessened in some territories , particularly those where gay men increasingly tend to come out . 
 Some men still use bathhouses as a convenient , safe place to meet other men for sex . In areas where homosexuality is more accepted , safety may no longer be a primary attraction . 
 Many bathhouses are open twenty @-@ four hours a day , seven days a week . There is typically a single customer entrance and exit . After paying at the main entrance , the customer is buzzed through the main door . This system allows establishments to screen potential troublemakers ; many bathhouses refuse entry to those who are visibly intoxicated , as well as known prostitutes . In some areas , particularly where homosexuality is illegal , considered immoral , or viewed with hostility , this is a necessary safety precaution . 
 Sexual encounters at bathhouses are frequently , but not always , anonymous . Some feel that the anonymity adds to the erotic excitement : that is what , for these patrons , one goes to the bathhouse for . Bathhouse encounters sometimes lead to relationships , but usually do not . Bathhouses are still used by men who have sex with men and do not identify as gay or bisexual , including those that are closeted or in heterosexual relationships . 
 In many bathhouses the customer has a choice between renting a room or a locker , often for fixed periods of up to 12 hours . A room typically consists of a locker and a single bed ( though doubles are sometimes available ) with a thin vinyl mat supported on a simple wooden box or frame , an arrangement that facilitates easy cleaning between patrons . In many bathhouses ( particularly those outside the United States ) , some or all of the rooms are freely available to all patrons . 
 Some bathhouses have areas designed to facilitate impersonal sex . These areas – rooms or hallways – are illuminated only by a ( dim ) red exit sign . It is possible to have sex , but not to see with whom . Other bathhouses , such as the Continental Baths in New York or the Club Baths in Washington , D.C. , have two or more <unk> in close proximity , in a public area . This provides a place to have sex for those who could afford only a locker , and facilitated exhibitionism and voyeurism for those so inclined . Baths often have a ( porn ) TV room or snack bar where patrons can recuperate between orgasms . 
 Some men use the baths as a cheaper alternative to hotels , despite the limitations of being potentially crowded public venues with only rudimentary rooms and limited or non @-@ existent pass out privileges . 
 These guys will actually call me at home or send me e @-@ mails and we will make a date and we will meet at the baths purely because the sling is there and it 's easier and we go for a beer afterwards . I use the bathhouse more as an ancient Greek , Roman social centre and also a fucking centre and a fisting centre as well , and there 's a lounge where I can sit and relax with a coffee and a cigarette . 
 Bathhouses are not always identifiable as such from the outside . Some bathhouses are clearly marked and well lit , others have no marking other than a street address on the door . Bathhouses sometimes display the rainbow flag , which is commonly flown by businesses to identify themselves as gay @-@ run or gay @-@ friendly . Bathhouses commonly advertise widely in the gay press and sometimes advertise in mainstream newspapers and other media . In 2003 Australia began airing possibly the world 's first television advertisements for a gay bathhouse when advertisements on commercial television in Melbourne promoted Wet on Wellington , a sauna in Wellington Street , Collingwood . 
 In many countries , being identified in such a sauna was still viewed by the press as scandalous . In Ireland in November 1994 , the Incognito sauna made mainstream press as the gay sauna where a priest had died of a heart attack and two other priests were on hand to help out . Scott Capurro is known for his deliberately provocative comedy material and often refers to gay sexual culture including gay bathhouses . 
 = = Layout and typical amenities = = 
 On being buzzed in , the customer receives a towel ( to wear , around the waist ) and the key for his room or locker . The customer undresses , storing his clothing in the locker provided , and is then free to wander throughout the public areas of the bathhouse , which typically include the amenities of a traditional bathhouse or <unk> ( Picture from the movie Hamam ) . 
 Many bathhouses also provide free condoms and lubricant . Some establishments require a piece of identification or an item of value to be left with the front desk on entry . <unk> emphasized the importance of the towel : 
 Visiting a downtown gay bath was in many ways like revisiting a high @-@ school gym – everyone wearing the same towel , in the same color , on the same part of the body . There was no status consciousness in the social @-@ stratification sense ; the towel or loincloth created a sort of equal @-@ status social group . 
 Bathhouses are designed with imagery and music to create surroundings that are arousing to the visitors . 
 Bathhouses are usually dimly lit and play music , although an outdoors , enclosed rooftop or pool area is not uncommon . They are often laid out in a manner that allows or encourages customers to wander throughout the establishment ; a space laid out in this way is often referred to as a " maze " . Some bathhouses have a space where random , anonymous sex is all that can occur . These spaces – rooms , hallways , or mazes , sometimes with glory holes – have as their only illumination a ( dim ) red " Exit " sign , so one can have sex but one cannot see with whom . Other clubs , such as the Continental Baths or the Club Baths of Washington , D.C. , would have two or more bunk beds placed near each other , in a public area , thus providing a place to have sex for those who can afford only to rent a locker , and also maximizing the chances of being watched , for the <unk> so inclined . Rooms are usually grouped together , as are lockers . Bathhouses are frequently decorated with posters of nude or semi @-@ nude men , and sometimes explicit depictions of sex . It is not uncommon to see pornographic movies playing on wall @-@ mounted televisions throughout the bathhouse . 
 Most men typically just wear the towel provided . According to bathhouse etiquette , it is perfectly acceptable , even friendly , to put one 's hand under someone else 's towel to feel his penis , which , if well received , is the first step in sexual intimacy . Some bathhouses permit and others not only permit but encourage total nudity . In some bathhouses nudity is forbidden in the common areas of the establishments . Some men may wear underwear or fetish @-@ wear , but it is unusual for customers to remain fully or even partially dressed in street clothes . Bare feet are customary , though some men prefer to wear flip flops or sandals , sometimes provided by the establishment , for foot protection . The room or locker key is usually suspended from an elastic band which can be worn around the wrist or ankle . 
 Some bathhouses require customers to purchase yearly memberships and many offer special entry rates to members , students , military , or other groups . In some countries , bathhouses can restrict entrance to men of certain age ranges ( apart from the general requirement of being an adult ) or physical types , although in other places this would be considered illegal discrimination . Some bathhouses hold occasional " leather " , " underwear " , or other theme nights . 
 In the 1970s bathhouses began to install " fantasy environments " which recreated erotic situations that were illegal or dangerous : 
 Orgy rooms . . . encouraged group sex , while glory holes recreated ( public ) toilets , and mazes took the place of bushes and undergrowth ( in public parks ) . Steam rooms and gyms were reminiscent of the <unk> YMCAs , while video rooms recreated the balconies and back rows of movie theaters . A popular Chicago bathhouse called Man ‘ s Country provided a full @-@ size model of an Everlast truck where visitors could have sex in the cab or in the rear , which served as an orgy room . . . Man 's Country also offered a . . . fake prison cell made of rubber bars . 
 Many bathhouses sell food and drinks , cigarettes , pornography , sex toys , lubricants , and toiletries . Some bathhouses also provide non @-@ sexual services such as massage and reflexology . Some bathhouses serve as venues where testing for sexually transmitted infections takes place , at regular pre @-@ announced times . 
 = = Etiquette = = 
 Customers typically divide their time between the showers / saunas / jacuzzis and the main areas of the establishment . Customers who have rented rooms have free access to their room . 
 Customers who have rooms may leave their room doors open to signal that they are available for sex . An open door can also be an invitation for others to watch or join in sexual activity that is already occurring . 
 When a room is occupied only by a single person , some men will position themselves to suggest what they might like from someone joining them in the room : those who would like to be penetrated anally ( " bottoms " ) will sometimes lie face down on the bed with the door open , while those who prefer to penetrate others ( " tops " ) or to receive fellatio might lie face up . 
 In the past , the baths served as community spaces for gay men . Even now , some men choose to go to the baths with their friends ( even though they may not necessarily have sex with each other ) . While many men talk to each other at the baths , even forming long @-@ lasting friendships or relationships , many others do not , preferring , for various reasons , anonymity . 
 But I ’ ve been to a sauna recently in New Zealand , where everyone just chatted away , which I found very strange . Um , but you know , that 's because I guess it was a smaller city and people generally knew each other . 
 In this highly sexualized environment a look or nod is frequently enough to express interest . In darkened areas of the establishment including the mazes , video rooms , group sex areas , and the saunas or hot tubs ( but not generally in the showers , toilets , hallways , gyms , café areas , and lounges ) , men are usually free to touch other patrons ; it is expected , and often welcomed . A shake of the head , or pushing away the other 's hand , means that the attention is not welcomed . 
 I normally find people with groping don ’ t go away . You really have to as they grope your crotch area grab their hand and push it away and there have been times when I ’ ve had to do that three , two or three or four times before they actually get the message . There 's also been times when I actually just had to say to them to fuck off . 
 Some establishments allow or encourage sex in specific group sex areas . In some jurisdictions such activity is prohibited , and sex must be confined to private rooms . Some forbid sex in pools for hygiene reasons . In the United Kingdom , the requirement is often set by the local authority 's Environmental Health department . 
 = = High @-@ risk behavior = = 
 = = = Sexually transmitted diseases = = = 
 From the mid @-@ 1980s onward there was lobbying against gay bathhouses blaming them for being a focus of infection encouraging the spread of sexually transmitted diseases ( STDs ) , in particular HIV , and this forced their closure in some jurisdictions ( see Legal issues , below ) . 
 In some countries , fears about the spread of STDs have prompted the closing of bathhouses – with their private rooms – in favour of sex clubs , in which all sexual activity takes place in the open , and can be observed by monitors whose job it is to enforce safe @-@ sex practices . However , proponents of bathhouses point out that closing these facilities does not prevent people from engaging in unsafe sex . 
 Neither the claim that bathhouses are responsible for the spread of sexually transmitted diseases , nor the claim that they are not , has been conclusively proved , but it is known that STDs are spread via unprotected sex , and as part of their membership agreement , or as a condition of entry , some bathhouses now require customers to affirm in writing that they will only practice safe sex on the premises , and venues frequently provide free condoms , latex gloves , and lubrication ( and / or have them available for purchase ) . In New Zealand and Australia , the New Zealand AIDS Foundation and constituent members of the Australian Federation of AIDS Organisations provide safe sex information for sex on site venue users . 
 Some anti @-@ bathhouse activists argue that these measures are not enough , especially given that it is virtually impossible to monitor sexual activity in a bathhouse ; however , while they acknowledge that closing gay bathhouses may force some men into unsafe or illegal situations in public parks and lavatories , they point out that they may be less likely to engage in anal or <unk> sex – both of which put participants at risk for contracting STDs – in such situations . 
 Others counter these claims by pointing out that bathhouses are a major source of safer sex information – they provide pamphlets and post safer sex posters prominently ( often on the walls of each room as well as in the common areas ) , provide free condoms and lubricants , and often require patrons to affirm that they will only have safer sex on the premises . In cities with larger gay populations , STD and HIV testing and counseling may be offered on @-@ site for no charge . 
 = = = Drugs and alcohol = = = 
 In some countries bathhouses are prohibited from selling alcohol . ( In Canada , where some bathhouses serve alcohol , a bathhouse holding a liquor license may be required to submit to liquor inspections , which activists claim are often a pretext for regulating gay sexual activity . ) Many bathhouses deny entry to those who are visibly intoxicated but do not – or cannot – regulate the consumption of drugs ( typically alcohol , marijuana , poppers , ecstasy , cocaine , and crystal meth ) by their patrons . The use of drugs and alcohol may make people more likely to engage in unsafe sex . Sex clubs with no private areas potentially find it easier to regulate consumption of drugs on their premises . 
 The use of crystal meth is also known to lead to riskier sexual behaviour , but since gay crystal meth users tend to seek out other users to engage in sexual activity , they often prefer to make such arrangements via the internet . 
 = = = Prostitution = = = 
 In some countries straight and gay bathhouses are used by rent boys to find customers by offering massage services , the " complete service " is often used as a euphemism for sex . 
 All interviewees were asked whether or not they used condoms , and all with the exception of Fabian , said they used them when having penetrative sex with clients . For fellatio , sometimes they used condoms and sometimes not ... For him ( Fabian ) , it was all the same whether he used a condom or not . He also talked about the drugs he had taken , pure alcohol , crack cocaine , and ‘ sometimes I inject , maybe 15 times I ’ ve injected , crystal , cocaine and sometimes heroin ’ . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Toronto bathhouse raids of 1981 
 On February 5 , 1981 , 150 police raided four gay bathhouses in Toronto , Ontario : the Club Baths , the Romans II Health and Recreation Spa , the Richmond Street Health Emporium , and The Barracks . The Richmond Health Emporium was so badly damaged in the raid that it never reopened . Nicknamed Operation Soap , the raid resulted in the arrests of 268 men . There was an immediate and angry response from both the gay and lesbian community and over 3 @,@ 000 people gathered in protest . A second demonstration which took place on February 20 , included over 4 @,@ 000 people who gathered at Queen 's Park and marched to Metro Toronto Police 's 52 Division . 
 Raid on Pussy Palace 
 In 2000 , Toronto police raided a women 's night at a bathhouse called Club Toronto . Police , almost all of them male , entered the establishment and walked around , taking the names and addresses of some 10 women and " aggressively questioned " volunteers . A Pussy Palace organizer stated “ [ m ] any women at the event were deeply angered and traumatized ” . A judge of the Ontario Court of Justice held that the police had violated the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms by using male police officers in the raid , describing the police actions as analogous to a strip search . 
 Raid on Goliath 's 
 In December 2002 , Calgary police raided Goliath 's resulting in charges against 19 men . Fifteen men were arrested in the raid . Thirteen customers were charged as " found @-@ ins " ( found in a common bawdy house without a legal excuse ) and two staff members were charged with the more serious offense of keeping a common bawdy house . The customers faced up to two years in prison . In addition , the owners of the bathhouse and a third staff member were later charged with keeping a common bawdy house . 
 On May 27 , 2004 , a judge ruled that the police had reasonable justification to raid Goliath 's . Defense lawyers countered that none of the anonymous information the police acted upon – for example that live sex shows were being staged and drugs sold on the premises – featured in the charges made against the seventeen men . They also pointed out that the police failed to call in the force 's gay community liaison officer . Goliath 's reopened a little more than a month after the raid . 
 In November 2004 , the Crown stayed the found @-@ in charge against the last remaining patron , saying it was no longer in the public interest to pursue the case . The case against the owners and managers of Goliath 's , however , was expected to come to trial in February 2005 . Terry Haldane , the only " found @-@ in " patron who was actively fighting the charge against him , accused the Crown of dropping the charge because Haldane and his lawyers had given notice of their plan to challenge the bawdy house law all the way to the Supreme Court . 
 In February 2005 , all remaining charges in the case were dropped . The court cited a lack of community support and evidence ( from a poll ) that the community supported the existence of gay bathhouses by a small margin . 
 Raid on Hamilton 's Warehouse Spa 
 On August 3 , 2004 , Hamilton 's Warehouse Spa and Bath was " inspected " by a task force of officers from the police , public health , the city 's building and licensing department , the fire department , and the alcohol and gaming commission . Two men were arrested and charged with committing indecent acts . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 In California the " <unk> Adult Sex Bill " , passed in January 1976 , made gay bathhouses and the sex that took place within them legal for the first time . During the 1970s , the two most popular gay bathhouses in San Francisco , both located in the SOMA neighborhood , were the Ritch Street Health Club at 330 Ritch St. , the interior of which was designed like a Minoan palace , and The Barracks , a BDSM bathhouse at 72 Hallam near Folsom in which each room was designed to accommodate a different BDSM sexual fantasy . In 1978 a group of police officers raided the Liberty Baths in the Polk Gulch neighborhood of San Francisco and arrested three patrons for " lewd conduct in a public place " , but the District Attorney 's office soon dropped the charges against them . In 1984 , however , fear of AIDS caused the San Francisco Health department , with the support of some gay activists such as Randy Shilts , and against the opposition of other gay activists , to ask the courts to close gay bathhouses in the city . The court , under Judge Roy Wonder , instead issued a court order that limited sexual practices and disallowed renting of private rooms in bathhouses , so that sexual activity could be monitored , as a public health measure . Some of the bathhouses tried to live within the strict rules of this court order , but many of them felt they could not easily do business under the new rules and closed . Eventually , the few remaining actual bathhouses succumbed to either economic pressures or the continuing legal pressures of the city and finally closed . Several sex clubs , which were not officially bathhouses , continued to operate indefinitely and operate to this day , though following strict rules under the court order and city regulations . Bathhouses themselves , however , operate just outside the city , thus outside of their laws , such as in Berkeley and San Jose . 
 In 1985 , the New York City Health Department ordered that the city 's gay bathhouses be closed . As a result , heterosexual sex clubs such as Plato 's Retreat had to shut down as well because the city had just passed a gay rights ordinance , and allowing the heterosexual clubs to remain open while closing the gay establishments would have been a violation of that ordinance . 
 Los Angeles , Chicago , Atlanta , Louisville , Seattle , Berkeley , San Jose , Cleveland , Portland , Reno , Las Vegas , Detroit , Indianapolis , Dallas , Houston , Denver , Tampa , Miami and Fort Lauderdale are some American cities that have bathhouses in operation . 
 = = = China = = = 
 In March 2008 a series of police raids in gay bathhouses and at gay meeting spots in Beijing have resulted in arrests and bathhouse closures . This included raids on two branches of the Oasis bathhouses , known to be the most popular in Beijing . In 2000 , police arrested 37 men in a Guangzhou gay spa on charges of prostitution . Homosexuality was decriminalized in China in 1997 . 
 = = = Germany , Austria and Switzerland = = = 
 The German @-@ speaking countries have a lot of gay bathhouses ( " <unk> Sauna " ) since homosexuality had been legalized in 1969 ( and later ) . The oldest ones are Vulcan @-@ Sauna in Hanover , another bathhouse in Cologne , Berlin and <unk> in Vienna . 
 = = = Japan = = = 
 See also Gay Bathhouse in Japan . 
 In Japan , there were " <unk> ( <unk> ) " " <unk> ( <unk> ) " " <unk> ( <unk> ) " in the 1950s . " Oban ( <unk> ) " " 24 Kaikan ( <unk> ) " " Jin @-@ ya ( <unk> ) " were built in the 1970s . 
 = = Notable patrons = = 
 Truman Capote 
 Gay author Truman Capote ( 1924 @-@ 1984 ) wrote about his visits to the Everard Baths . 
 Justin Fashanu 
 The first openly gay British footballer Justin Fashanu ( 1961 – 1998 ) spent his last night in Chariots Roman Spa . His suicide was due to press reports that the US authorities were planning to extradite him and charge him with sexual assault ( there was in fact no warrant ) . His suicide note claimed that the sexual encounter had been consensual and that the youth contacted police only after Fashanu refused to pay him blackmail . 
 Michel Foucault 
 The influential 20th @-@ century French philosopher Michel Foucault ( 1926 – 1984 ) visited bathhouses in California in the 1970s and early 1980s , and the Mineshaft in New York . He died of AIDS @-@ related causes in 1984 . 
 Jack <unk> 
 Gay erotic author and editor Jack <unk> ( 1939 – ) made hundreds of visits to the Mineshaft ( a bathhouse without the bath ) . 
 Charles Griffes 
 Gay composer Charles Griffes ( 1884 – 1920 ) wrote of his bathhouse visits ; two quotations are given above . 
 Mikhail Kuzmin 
 Russian poet , novelist and composer Mikhail Kuzmin ( 1872 – 1936 ) is known to have patronized bathhouses . Some of the bathhouses in St. Petersburg at the time became known as friendly to gay men and provided " attendants " , who might provide sexual services for a fee . In his diary , Kuzmin writes of one bathhouse visit : the evening I had the urge to go to a bathhouse simply to be stylish , for the fun of it , for cleanliness . 
 Harvey Milk 
 The openly gay American politician Harvey Milk ( 1930 – 1978 ) vowed to stop visiting gay bathhouses when he ran for supervisor in 1975 . 
 Rudolf Nureyev 
 The Russian dancer Rudolf Nureyev ( 1938 – 1993 ) was known to frequent the baths in New York . He did not get past the door of the Mineshaft . 
 Ned Rorem 
 The composer Ned Rorem ( 1923 – ) wrote of his visits to the Everard Baths . 
 Gore Vidal 
 Bisexual author Gore Vidal ( 1925 @-@ 2012 ) is a documented patron of the Everard Baths . 
 = = Celebrities and the Continental Baths = = 
 Singer Bette Midler is well known for getting her start at the famous Continental Baths in New York City in the early 1970s , where she earned the nickname Bathhouse Betty . It was there , accompanied by pianist Barry Manilow ( who , like the bathhouse patrons , sometimes wore only a white towel , ) that she created her stage persona " the Divine Miss M. " 
 On getting her start in bathhouses , Midler has remarked : 
 Despite the way things turned out [ with the AIDS crisis ] , I 'm still proud of those days [ when I got my start singing at the gay bathhouses ] . I feel like I was at the forefront of the gay liberation movement , and I hope I did my part to help it move forward . So , I kind of wear the label of ' Bathhouse Betty ' with pride . 
 Other famous performers who appeared at the Continental include Eleanor <unk> , Melba Moore , Labelle , Peter Allen , Cab Calloway , The Manhattan Transfer , John Davidson , and Wayland Flowers . 
 = 1915 Singapore Mutiny = 
 The 1915 Singapore Mutiny , also known as the 1915 Sepoy Mutiny , or Mutiny of the 5th Light Infantry was a mutiny involving up to half of 850 sepoys ( Indian soldiers ) against the British in Singapore during the First World War , linked with the 1915 Ghadar Conspiracy . The mutiny , on 15 February 1915 , lasted nearly seven days and resulted in the deaths of 47 British soldiers and local civilians , before it was finally quelled by British forces and Allied naval detachments . 
 = = History = = 
 The Ghadar party ( Ghadar is an Urdu , Hindi and Punjabi word for " mutiny " or " rebellion " ) was formed in the United States in 1913 by Har Dayal , with the aim of ousting the British from India , by armed revolution . The Ghadrites anticipated that Indian soldiers posted overseas would ally with them in their cause , and actively targeted them with propaganda , encouraging them to mutiny against the British . A few months after the outbreak of the First World War , the Ghadrites had attempted to incite elements of the 130th Baluchi Regiment at Bombay to mutiny , on 21 January 1915 . The authorities had become aware of the plan however , and had taken preventive action by reassigning the soldiers to other outposts . The Ghadrites then turned their attention to Singapore , whose regular garrison at this time consisted of only a single regiment of Indian soldiers plus a few British artillerymen and Royal Engineers , protecting British strategic interests . 
 = = = Indian 5th Light Infantry = = = 
 The 5th Light Infantry Regiment of the Indian Army arrived in Singapore from Madras in October 1914 . They had been sent to replace the King 's Own Yorkshire Light Infantry , which had been ordered to France . The regiment was a long established one dating from 1803 . Unusually for 1914 – 15 it was an entirely Muslim unit . The 5th Light Infantry mainly comprised <unk> ( Muslims of Rajput origin ) and Pathans , commanded by British and Indian officers . Poor communication between the sepoys and their officers , slack discipline and a weak leadership meant that the troops ' were disaffected , and propaganda from the Ghadar Party in India , campaigning for Indian independence from British rule , further disaffected the troops stationed in Singapore . 
 The specifically military grievances which led to the mutiny of the 5th Light Infantry centred on the personality of the commanding officer at the time , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel E. V. Martin . He had been promoted from major in the regiment , although the previous colonel had reported that he was unpopular with his fellow officers and that he inspired little respect among the men . His appointment led to disunity amongst the British officers , which was in turn reflected by division amongst the Indian officers over the promotion to commissioned rank of a colour @-@ havildar . These issues , which might under ordinary circumstances have been of limited impact , were aggregated by the disruptive external influences of the Ghadar Party propaganda noted above and the entry of Turkey into the war . 
 = = = Incitement = = = 
 Mehmed V , the Sultan of Turkey , who sided with Germany after the First World War broke out , was widely regarded as the leader of the Muslim world . When Britain declared war on Turkey , the Muslims , including those in Singapore , were urged to oppose the British by a fatwa issued by the Sultan . A pro @-@ Turkey Gujarati coffee @-@ shop owner , Kassim Mansur , visited the sepoys and even invited them to his home . Together with Nur Alum Shah , a religious leader , Mansur instilled anti @-@ British feelings in the sepoys , and told them it was their religious duty to rise up against the British . 
 = = = The mutiny = = = 
 On 27 January 1915 , Colonel Martin announced that the 5th Light Infantry was to be transferred to Hong Kong for further garrison duties , replacing another Indian regiment . However , rumours were circulated among the sepoys that they might instead be sent to Europe or to Turkey to fight against their Muslim co @-@ religionists . Three Indian officers , <unk> <unk> Khan , <unk> Christi Khan , and <unk> Ali Khan , were later to be identified by a court of enquiry as key conspirators in this matter . When the final order to sail to Hong Kong aboard the Nile arrived in February 1915 , these and other ring @-@ leaders amongst the sepoys decided that it was time to rebel . On the morning of 15 February , the General Officer Commanding Singapore addressed a farewell parade of the regiment , complimenting the sepoys on their excellent turn @-@ out and referring to their departure the next day , without mentioning Hong Kong as the destination . At 3 : 30 pm on the afternoon of the same day , four Rajput companies of the eight companies making up the 5th Light Infantry and 100 men of the Malay States Guides Mule Battery mutinied . The mostly Pathan sepoys of the remaining four companies did not join the mutiny , but scattered in confusion . Two British officers of the regiment were killed as they attempted to restore order . The mutineers divided themselves into three groups . A party of 100 went to obtain ammunition from Tanglin Barracks , where 309 Germans , including crew members from the German light cruiser SMS Emden , had been interned by the British . The mutineers fired on the camp guards and officers without warning , killing ten British guards , three Johore troops present in the camp and one German internee . Amongst the dead were 2nd Lieutenant J. Love @-@ Montgomerie , Rifles ; Sergeant G. Wald , ( Reserve ) Engineers ; Corporal D. McGilvray , Rifles ; Corporal G.O. Lawson , Cyclist Scouts ; Lance Corporal <unk> Harper , Rifles ; Private B.C. Cameron , Rifles ; Private F.S. Drysdale , Rifles ; Private <unk> Holt , Rifles and Stoker 1c CF Anscombe , HMS Cadmus . Three British and one German were wounded , but survived the attack , as did eight Royal Army Medical Corps personnel in the camp hospital , including one who managed to escape under heavy fire to raise the alarm . The mutineers tried to persuade the Germans to join them , but many of the latter were shaken by the sudden violence and reluctant to do so . Some German sailors and reservists wanted to join with the mutineers , but the majority adopted a neutral stance , refusing to accept rifles from the Indians . Thirty @-@ five Germans escaped but the rest remained in the barracks . 
 As it was the middle of the Chinese New Year , most of the Chinese Volunteers Corps were on leave , leaving Singapore almost defenceless against the mutiny . The British government was caught unprepared , and other mutineers went on a killing spree at Keppel Harbour and Pasir Panjang , killing 18 European and local civilians . Martial law was imposed and every available man from HMS Cadmus went ashore to join with British , Malay and Chinese Volunteer units and the small number of British regular troops forming part of the garrison . British Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Martyn Jerram sent a radio message requesting help from any allied warships nearby . 
 A group of mutineers laid siege to the bungalow of the commanding officer of the 5th Light Infantry , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel E. V. Martin , which effectively blocked the route into Singapore Town . Martin and a detachment of the hastily mobilised Malay States Volunteer Rifles held out through the night of the 15th under sporadic fire . Loyal sepoys who tried to join them were ordered to " go to a safe place " to prevent their being confused in the dark with mutineers . With daylight , the defenders were successful in retaking the regimental barracks at the cost of one killed and five wounded . The mutineers scattered , and despite sniper fire , the general population stayed calm while the volunteers , sailors and marines fought sporadic skirmishes with the mutineers . 
 = = = Allied forces = = = 
 On 17 February , the French cruiser Montcalm , followed by the Russian auxiliary cruiser Orel , and the Japanese warships Otowa and Tsushima arrived . Seventy @-@ five Japanese sailors , twenty @-@ two Russians and 190 French marines were landed to round up mutineers who had taken refuge in the jungle to the north of Singapore . They were joined in this operation by sixty soldiers of the 36th Sikhs who were passing through Singapore , plus Singaporean police , British sailors and Malay States Volunteer Rifles . Lacking strong leadership , the mutiny had started to lose direction – a large number of the mutineers surrendered immediately , and the rest scattered in small groups into the jungles . Many tried to cross the Strait of Johore , but were quickly rounded up by the Sultan of Johore 's army . While local media spoke of serious battles there were in fact only minor skirmishes between the allied landing parties and the now demoralized mutineers . By the evening of the 17th 432 mutineers had been captured . 
 On 20 February , companies of the 1st / 4th Battalion , King 's Shropshire Light Infantry ( Territorials ) arrived from Rangoon to relieve the sailors and the marines . They succeeded in quickly rounding up the last of the mutineers . 
 = = Trial and public executions = = 
 On 23 February 1915 , a court of inquiry was held , at first in secret , but then publicly , to ensure that a fair trial was seen to have been carried out in the crown colony . It lasted until 15 May 1915 . Although extensive discord amongst both officers and men of the 5th Light Infantry was identified , the cause of the mutiny was not conclusively established . However , the inquiry agreed that insidious agents had incited the mutineers , who were swayed either by nationalistic or religious sentiments , to band together to fight against their perceived injustice . 
 More than 200 sepoys were tried by court @-@ martial , and 47 were executed , including Kassim Mansoor . Nur Alam Shah was not put on trial , although he was exposed as an active Indian nationalist with links to Ghadar . Instead , he was detained and deported , as the British did not want to stir up trouble among their Muslim subjects . Sixty @-@ four mutineers were transported for life , and 73 were given terms of imprisonment ranging from 7 to 20 years . The public executions by firing squad took place at Outram Prison , and were witnessed by an estimated 15 @,@ 000 people . The Straits Times reported : 
 An enormous crowd , reliably estimated at more than 15 @,@ 000 people , was packed on the slopes of Sepoy Lines looking down on the scene . The square as before was composed of regulars , local volunteers and Shropshire under the command of Colonel Derrick of the Singapore Volunteer Corps ( SVC ) . The firing party consisted of men from the various companies of SVC under Captain Tongue and Lieutenant Blair and Hay . 
 The remnants of the 5th Light Infantry , numbering 588 sepoys plus seven British and Indian officers , left Singapore on 3 July 1915 to see active service in the Cameroons and German East Africa . They were not accompanied by Colonel Martin , who was heavily criticised by a court of inquiry and then retired from the Army . In 1922 the 5th Light Infantry was disbanded . Much the same fate befell the Malay States Guides ; they were sent to Kelantan in Malaya to quell Tok <unk> 's uprising at Pasir Puteh in April 1915 . Afterwards the Guides were sent to fight in Africa and were disbanded in 1919 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The episode persuaded much of the British community in Singapore that they could no longer depend on Indian soldiers to garrison the colony . Although Japanese , French and Russian sailors and marines had helped to suppress the mutiny there was increasing doubt as to whether reliance could be placed on Britain 's wartime allies for future help in the perpetuation of their empire . Subsequently , all Indian nationals in Singapore were required to register , causing ill @-@ feelings amongst a predominantly loyal community . 
 To enhance Singapore 's internal security , the British passed the " Reserve Force and Civil Guard Ordinance " in August 1915 , requiring compulsory military service from all male subjects between 15 and 55 years of age who were not in the armed forces , volunteers or police . 
 It has been argued that the mutiny was an event that not only caught the British off @-@ guard but also shook the foundation of British rule in Singapore . However the absence of involvement by the population of Singapore in an affair involving a battalion from India on temporary garrison duty in the colony makes this a doubtful contention . 
 Sensing weakness in Britain 's handling of the mutiny , extreme Indian revolutionaries began to court overseas sepoys more aggressively , and cultivated a friendship with Japan for the overthrow of the British in India . Their plans bore fruit with the formation of the Indian National Army , led by Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose , during the Second World War Japanese occupation of Singapore . 
 = = = Commemoration = = = 
 To commemorate the event and those British soldiers and civilians killed during the mutiny , two memorial tablets were erected at the entrance of the Victoria Memorial Hall and four plaques in St Andrew 's Cathedral . In addition , two roads were later named in memory of two of the casualties as Harper Road and Holt Road , after Corporal J. Harper and Private <unk> Holt respectively . 
 = Italian ironclad Ancona = 
 Ancona was an ironclad warship , the last member of the Regina Maria Pia class built in French shipyards for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1860s . Ancona was laid down in August 1862 , was launched in October 1864 , and completed in April 1866 . She and her three sister ships were broadside ironclads , mounting a battery of four 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns on the broadside . 
 Ancona was quickly readied for combat when Italy declared war against the Austrian Empire in the Third Italian War of Independence in June 1866 . The following month , she joined the Italian fleet at the Battle of Lissa . She was stationed in the van of the Italian fleet , which became separated from the rest of the fleet . Ancona was damaged by Austrian shellfire , including one shell that started a fire . Her career was uneventful after the war , resulting from a combination of the emergence of more modern ironclads and a severe reduction in the Italian naval budget following their defeat at Lissa . She was rebuilt as a central battery ship some time after Lissa , and was eventually sold for scrapping in 1903 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Ancona was 81 @.@ 8 meters ( 268 ft ) long overall ; she had a beam of 15 @.@ 16 m ( 49 @.@ 7 ft ) and an average draft of 6 @.@ 35 m ( 20 @.@ 8 ft ) . She displaced 4 @,@ 157 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 091 long tons ; 4 @,@ 582 short tons ) normally and up to 4 @,@ 619 t ( 4 @,@ 546 long tons ; 5 @,@ 092 short tons ) at full load . She had a crew of 480 – 485 officers and men . Ancona was a broadside ironclad , and she was initially armed with a main battery of four 8 in ( 203 mm ) guns and twenty @-@ two 164 mm ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) guns , though her armament changed throughout her career . The ship was protected by iron belt armor that was 4 @.@ 3 in ( 109 mm ) thick and extended for the entire length of the hull at the waterline . The side armor extended up to the battery deck with the same thickness of iron plate . 
 Her propulsion system consisted of one single @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , rectangular boilers . Her engine produced a top speed of 13 @.@ 74 knots ( 25 @.@ 45 km / h ; 15 @.@ 81 mph ) from 2 @,@ 548 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 900 kW ) , making her the fastest member of her class . She could steam for 2 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 800 km ; 3 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The ship was initially schooner @-@ rigged to supplement the steam engine , though her masts were later reduced to a barque rig . Ultimately , she lost her sailing rig completely , having it replaced with a pair of military masts with fighting tops . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ancona was laid down at the Arman Brothers shipyard in Bordeaux , France on 11 August 1862 , the last member of her class to begin construction . She was launched on 17 October 1864 and completed in April 1866 . Two months later , in June , Italy declared war on Austria , as part of the Third Italian War of Independence , which was fought concurrently with the Austro @-@ Prussian War . The Italian fleet commander , Admiral Carlo Pellion di Persano , initially adopted a cautious course of action ; he was unwilling to risk battle with the Austrian Navy , despite the fact that the Austrian fleet was much weaker than his own . Persano claimed he was simply waiting on the ironclad ram Affondatore , en route from Britain , but his inaction weakened morale in the fleet , with many of his subordinates openly accusing him of cowardice . 
 Rear Admiral Wilhelm von Tegetthoff brought the Austrian fleet to Ancona on June 27 , in attempt to draw out the Italians . At the time , many of the Italian ships were in disarray ; several ships did not have their entire armament , and several others had problems with their engines . Ancona , having entered service only two months before , was not yet ready for combat . Persano held a council of war aboard the ironclad Principe di Carignano to determine whether he should sortie to engage Tegetthoff , but by that time , the Austrians had withdrawn , making the decision moot . The Minister of the Navy , Agostino Depretis , urged Persano to act and suggested the island of Lissa , to restore Italian confidence after their defeat at the Battle of Custoza the previous month . On 7 July , Persano left Ancona and conducted a sweep into the Adriatic , but encountered no Austrian ships and returned on the 13th . 
 = = = Battle of Lissa = = = 
 On 16 July , Persano took the Italian fleet out of Ancona , bound for Lissa , where they arrived on the 18th . With them , they brought troop transports carrying 3 @,@ 000 soldiers ; the Italian warships began bombarding the Austrian forts on the island , with the intention of landing the soldiers once the fortresses had been silenced . In response , the Austrian Navy sent the fleet under Tegetthoff to attack the Italian ships . Ancona was at that time assigned to the 1st Division , commanded by Admiral Giovanni Vacca , along with the ironclads Castelfidardo and Principe di Carignano , the divisional flagship . After arriving off Lissa on the 18th , Persano ordered the 1st Division to bombard the Austrian fortresses protecting the island , but Vacca informed him that his ships ' guns could not elevate high enough to hit the high fortifications . Persano then sent Vacca 's division to Vis to force the harbor defenses , but by the time they arrived , night was approaching , and so he cancelled the attack . 
 The next morning , Persano ordered the ironclad Formidabile to enter the harbor Vis and attack the Madonna battery , supported by Ancona and the rest of the 1st Division . Vacca found it impossible to employ his ships in the confined waters , and so he left Formidabile to handle the battery . With the day 's attacks again having yielded no results , Persano decided to make another attempt on the 20th . Vacca would take his three ships to patrol to the north @-@ east of the island while the rest of the fleet would again try to land the soldiers . Before the Italians could begin the attack , the dispatch boat Esploratore arrived , bringing news of Tegetthoff 's approach . Persano 's fleet was in disarray ; Vacca 's ships were three miles to the northeast from Persano 's main force , and three other ironclads were further away to the west . Persano immediately ordered his ships to form up with Vacca 's , first in line abreast formation , and then in line ahead formation . Ancona was the third ship in the Italian line . 
 Shortly before the action began , Persano left his flagship , Re d 'Italia , and transferred to the turret ship Affondatore , though none of his subordinates on the other ships were aware of the change . They there thus left to fight as individuals without direction . More dangerously , by stopping Re d 'Italia , he allowed a significant gap to open up between Vacca 's three ships and the rest of the fleet . Tegetthoff took his fleet through the gap between Vacca 's and Persano 's ships , in an attempt to split the Italian line and initiate a melee . He failed to ram any Italian vessels on the first pass , so he turned back toward Persano 's ships , and took Re d 'Italia , San Martino , and Palestro under heavy fire . Vacca turned his division to port , taking them away from the Austrian ships hammering Persano 's division . He briefly attempted to engage the Austrian wooden ships under Anton von Petz in the rear , but was driven off by heavy fire from three steam frigates . 
 By this time , Re d 'Italia had been badly damaged , and she attempted to close up with Ancona . While she reversed course to meet Ancona , the ship was rammed and sunk by the Austrian flagship , SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max . Ancona was set on fire by Austrian shells , but her crew quickly put them out . Ancona then rallied with the coastal defense ship Varese to make another attack on von Petz 's unarmored ships , but the two Italian vessels collided and became entangled . While their crews worked to free the ships , the Austrians were able to escape . Persano broke off the engagement to consolidate his forces , but his ships , low on coal and ammunition , and with badly demoralized crews , could not be rallied by Persano 's half @-@ hearted attempt to launch an attack . The Italian fleet began to withdraw , followed by the Austrians ; as night began to fall , the opposing fleets disengaged completely , heading for Ancona and Pola , respectively . In the course of the battle , Ancona had been hit many times , with several of her iron plates having been dislodged . An Austrian shell managed to enter one of her gun ports and explode inside . 
 After the battle , Vacca replaced Persano ; he was ordered to attack the main Austrian naval base at Pola , but the war ended before the operation could be carried out . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 For the rest of her long career , Ancona served in a variety of roles , both in the main fleet and in Italy 's colonial empire . After the end of the war , the government lost confidence in the fleet and drastically reduced the naval budget . The cuts were so severe that the fleet had great difficulty in mobilizing its ironclad squadron to attack the port of Civitavecchia in September 1870 , as part of the wars of Italian unification . Instead , the ships were laid up and the sailors conscripted to man them were sent home . Some time after 1866 , the ship was rebuilt as a central battery ship , with most of her guns located in a central , armored casemate . Two other guns were placed in the bow as chase guns , with a third mounted as a stern chaser . At around 1871 , her armament was also revised , to two 10 in ( 250 mm ) guns in the bow and eight 8 in guns , four on each broadside and the last in the stern . Later , her armament was changed again , to eight 6 in ( 150 mm ) guns , six 4 @.@ 7 in ( 120 mm ) guns , four 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) quick firing ( QF ) guns , and two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) Hotchkiss revolver cannons . Ancona was stricken from the naval register in 1903 and then broken up for scrap . 
 = Raptor Red = 
 Raptor Red is a 1995 American novel by paleontologist Robert T. Bakker . The book is a third @-@ person account of dinosaurs during the Cretaceous Period , told from the point of view of Raptor Red , a female Utahraptor . Raptor Red features many of Bakker 's theories regarding dinosaurs ' social habits , intelligence , and the world in which they lived . 
 The book follows a year in Raptor Red 's life as she loses her mate , finds her family , and struggles to survive in a hostile environment . Bakker drew inspiration from Ernest Thompson Seton 's works that look at life through the eyes of predators , and said that he found it " fun " to write from a top predator 's perspective . Bakker based his portrayals of dinosaurs and other prehistoric wildlife on fossil evidence , as well as studies of modern animals . 
 When released , Raptor Red was generally praised : Bakker 's anthropomorphism was seen as a unique and positive aspect of the book , and his writing was described as folksy and heartfelt . Criticisms of the novel included a perceived lack of characterization and average writing . Some scientists , such as paleontologist David B. Norman , took issue with the scientific theories portrayed in the novel , fearing that the public would accept them as fact , while Discovery Channel host Jay Ingram defended Bakker 's creative decisions in an editorial . 
 = = Background = = 
 Paleontologist Robert T. Bakker originally suggested the genus name Utahraptor for a new dinosaur specimen that had been found by an amateur bone @-@ hunter in Utah . Bakker was at the time consulting with the designers of the Jurassic Park film , whose largest portrayed Velociraptor — called the " big female " in the script — was coincidentally the same size as the newly discovered Utahraptor . Bakker was motivated to write the book by both his interest in dinosaur behavior and his desire to marry science and entertainment , saying that " nature is a drama . It is the most ripping yarn ever written . You 've got life and death and sex and betrayal and the best way to approach it is through individual animals . " According to Bakker , " It was fun to put myself in the mind of a raptor , especially since being a top predator is so challenging ... much harder than [ being ] a herbivore . " He credited the turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton 's works that focused on life from the perspectives of grizzly bears and wolves as having inspired him to write the novel from the dinosaur 's point of view . 
 Raptor Red was an attempt to introduce Utahraptor to the public , as well as explain some of Bakker 's theories regarding dinosaur behavior . Bakker 's raptors are shown as monogamous , relatively intelligent and social creatures , an assertion he defends , saying " the life of dinosaurian hunters was hard . Most skeletons we excavate have clear marks of old wounds . To survive and raise their young , the predators needed more than sharp teeth and strong claws . They needed social bonds . " Bakker also advances his controversial theory that an asteroid impact did not kill the dinosaurs in the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event , but rather a disease spread through migration . 
 Another of the novel 's goals was to dispel the common perception of predators as evil and portray them as creatures to be admired and empathized with . " Being a top predator is difficult , " Bakker said , noting that fossils of big predators often show multiple broken and healed bones , as well as signs of serious infections , all evidence of a harsh lifestyle . He continued , " Most predators had some trauma , they had been beaten up — for a simple reason : Dinner fights back . " The behavior of the raptors and other animals featured in the novel was based on a combination of fossil evidence and observations of modern animals , such as chimpanzees and alligators . 
 Bakker received a large advance for the novel from Bantam Books , rumored to be in the six @-@ figure range . The book was prominently featured at the American Booksellers ' Convention in Chicago , alongside Michael Crichton 's The Lost World . Coverage of the event noted that both novels were on the trailing end of the dinosaur fad fueled by Jurassic Park , as the new trend in American books was shifting toward politics in the aftermath of the 1994 US elections . 
 Raptor Red was initially published as a mass @-@ market paperback and hardcover book , and was later released as an audiobook by Simon & Schuster Audio , read by Megan Gallagher . Bakker 's audiobook royalties — at least $ 34 @,@ 000 by November 1995 — were donated to the Tate Museum in Casper , Wyoming , where he was curator . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 Raptor Red takes place approximately 120 million years ago , in the Early Cretaceous period of the Mesozoic . At the time , a land bridge had formed between Asia and the Americas , this allowed groups of foreign dinosaurs to invade present @-@ day Utah ; one of these foreign species is Utahraptor . Raptor Red 's name comes from the symbols the dinosaur learns as a hatchling to self @-@ identify with . Bakker gives an individual view of each species of dinosaur or ancient creature in the same style as Red 's experiences ; these include a baby Gastonia who instinctively attacks what it does not understand with its clubbed tail , and a whip @-@ tailed diplodocid who enjoys beating up predators . Bakker prominently features the adventures of a " fur @-@ ball " ( mammal ) , Aegialodon ; according to the author , the emphasis was added because the Aegialodon is on the direct ancestral line to humans . Aegialodon , however , did not live in the same time and place as Utahraptor , hailing from England about 136 million years ago . Some of the other animals featured in the novel were closer in time and place to Utahraptor but not strictly contemporary . For example , fossils attributable to Acrocanthosaurus and Deinonychus are known from the same rock formation as Utahraptor ( the Cedar Mountain Formation ) , but from sediments about five million years younger . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 In the book 's opening , the title character and her mate ambush a herd of Astrodon , which are large herbivorous sauropods . The Astrodon are surprised , thinking that their bulk deters smaller predators . Utahraptor , however , are much larger than any resident raptor , and proceed to take down an Astrodon with teamwork . When Red 's mate climbs onto the dead Astrodon , the corpse rolls in the mud , trapping the male under the bulk of the animal . Despite Red 's best efforts , her mate suffocates . Despondent , Red wanders around the floodplain , nearly starving since a Utahraptor cannot successfully hunt big game on its own . 
 Red follows a familiar scent and is reunited with her sister , a single mother with three chicks . The two hunt together and bring food back to the nest for the young . A white pterosaur , one Red has seen since she hatched , helps the two by finding carrion and prey in exchange for a helping of meat . On one hunting expedition , when the two adult Utahraptor are stalking a herd of Iguanodon , Red spies a young male Utahraptor that is watching their prey . He begins a courtship dance for Red , but Red 's sister chases him off , hissing . Her growls agitate the Iguanodon , who stampede ; the male hastily leaves . After climbing into a tree to escape a flash flood , Red encounters the male raptor again , who performs a courtship dance while hanging onto the tree branches . Red 's sister begrudgingly allows the male to stay with them , provided he steers clear of her chicks . 
 For a while , Red and her pack are happy , feeding off the plentiful carrion left by receding flood waters , but the pack 's way of life is upset by an invasion of large Acrocanthosaurus , huge meat @-@ eating dinosaurs . The added competition for food puts strain on the pack , as does the unexpected death of one of the chicks . A fight erupts between the male raptor and Red 's sister . Red , torn between a prospective mate and her kin , tries to defuse the situation . Two Acrocanthosaurus watch the commotion and take the opportunity to attack the Utahraptor . Meanwhile , a <unk> ambushes one of the chicks on the beach . Seeing the danger , Red lures the female Acrocanthosaurus into deep water where the larger predator is dragged under by the <unk> . Red saves her family , but at a price — her consort is forced away by Red 's sister . 
 Facing continual threats from the Acrocanthosaurus , Red , her sister and the chicks are forced up into the mountains . They encounter ice and snow for the first time , and kill a <unk> in a cave , turning the den into their nest . The older chick accompanies the two adults on hunting expeditions . One day the raptors encounter a strange creature they have never seen — a whip @-@ tailed diplodocid who inflicts wounds on Red and her sister ; the older chick is forced to set off alone and find the pack 's food . This calamity coincides with the arrival of a large pack of smaller raptors known as Deinonychus . Sensing the weakness of the Utahraptor pack , they surround the nest and wait for the wounded raptors to become weak enough to attack . 
 Red 's sister dies , and Red is crippled and defenseless against the smaller dinosaurs . The Deinonychus close in and wait for Red to die , but are driven back by a sudden attack — the older Utahraptor chick returns with Red 's consort to defend the nest , driving back the Deinonychus . Some time later , the old white pterosaur circles over Red 's mountain stronghold , and finds the pack has grown considerably . Both Red and the older chick have found mates and have chicks , who are having fun rolling down a hill . The satisfied pterosaur leaves with a mate and offspring of his own . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Raptor Red was favorably received by critics and the mainstream press . Much praise was given to Bakker 's <unk> of the dinosaurs ; a reviewer for the Toronto Star said that " Raptor Red does for dinosaurs what some nature writing does for creatures alive today : it turns data into stories . And stories are what all of us need to make these animals — even dinosaurs — come alive . " Mark Nichols of Maclean 's said that Bakker 's success lay in making the reader hope that the dinosaurs were indeed creatures as Bakker portrayed . 
 In contrast to this positive reception , Entertainment Weekly felt that the <unk> of the dinosaurs veered close to " a Disney cartoon . " Other criticisms from the press included a lack of character needed for truly engrossing fiction . Reviewers described Bakker 's work as " thoroughly heartfelt , " despite flaws such as inconsistent writing ; Men 's News Daily , a site which focuses on social values , suggested that Bakker 's raptors " possess a quaint , special appeal in today 's social climate " . Megan Gallagher 's narration of the audiobook , combined with continuous sound effects and dramatic music to create an " aural picture , " was also praised . Entertainment Weekly gave Raptor Red its " Best of Breed Award " for a " captivating novel about animal life " . 
 Many critical reviews of the work came from scientists who objected to Bakker 's looseness with scientific fact . The paleontologist Thomas Holtz noted that Bakker combined fauna in ways not directly supported by the fossil record ; for example , several of the dinosaurs featured in the books lived millions of years after Utahraptor died out . Michael Taylor , curator of vertebrate paleontology at the National Museums of Scotland , panned the book , saying that " Raptor Red is an accurate portrayal only within the context of uncertainties over the reconstruction of fossil animals as living forms ... Bakker 's postscript never really admits these uncertainties . " David B. Norman criticized the book as " no more than a children 's adventure story — and a rather poorly written one at that ... The merging of science and fantasy is at its worst in books like Raptor Red because none but the experts can disentangle fact from fiction ; this type of nonsense turns an uninformed reader into a misinformed one . " Jay Ingram , from the Discovery Channel , published a rebuttal , saying , " The most important point is that Bakker 's portrayal of the dinosaurs in Raptor Red is vivid — vivid in a way few museum displays or factual accounts can be . And if it turns out in the long run that some of the speculation is unwarranted , who cares ? Bob Bakker has given us a unique window onto the era of dinosaurs . " 
 According to Bakker , the novel 's success led to interest in a movie deal from Hollywood . According to Daily Variety in 1996 , producer Robert <unk> Sr. made deals with Jim Henson 's Creature Shop for film adaptations of Animal Farm and Raptor Red . No official project has been announced . 
 = Sean Bennett = 
 William Sean Bennett ( born November 9 , 1975 ) is a former professional American and Canadian football running back . He was drafted by the New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) in the fourth round of the 1999 NFL Draft . He played college football for the Evansville Purple Aces , Illinois Fighting Illini and Northwestern Wildcats . 
 Bennett began his collegiate career as a baseball and football player at the University of Illinois , but transferred to the University of Evansville after one year . At Evansville he was an All @-@ American two – times but had to transfer due to the school dropping football as a sport . Bennett then attended Northwestern University where he was a fullback and was mainly a blocker but did get a few rushing attempts . 
 Since he was a senior after his single season at Northwestern , he elected to enter the 1999 NFL Draft and surprised many by being selected by the New York Giants in the fourth round . He played four seasons in New York but ended up injured each season and was released after 2002 . He then joined the New York Jets but was released before the season began . After his failed stints in New York he played for the Canadian Football League 's Ottawa Renegades and Toronto Argonauts ; and the Evansville BlueCats of the Indoor Football League . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Sean Bennett was born on November 9 , 1975 in Evansville , Indiana . In high school , Bennett played baseball and football and was hoping to become a professional baseball player . In football he played wide receiver and was named All – State and in baseball his batting average was .425 over four years . 
 Following his senior season in high school , Bennett accepted a baseball and football scholarship at the University of Illinois . However at the end of his freshman year he decided to drop baseball and transfer to the University of Evansville . When asked why he dropped baseball , Bennett responded , " I couldn 't hit . " At Evansville , his hometown , Bennett converted to running back after mainly playing wide receiver before that . As a sophomore and junior , he was a two @-@ time All @-@ American and set school records in rushing and touchdowns . However , after his junior season the school decided to drop football forcing Bennett to transfer to Northwestern University . At Northwestern , Bennett became the starting fullback . In his only year he had 32 rushes and 160 yards . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2003 = = = 
 On March 10 , 1999 , when some National Football League ( NFL ) scouts came to work out D <unk> Bates and Barry Gardner , Bennett decided to join the workout . When he ran the 40 yard dash in 4 @.@ 45 seconds , scouts were reportedly , " doing double @-@ takes " . 
 Bennett was selected by the New York Giants in the fourth round of the 1999 National Football League Draft . As a rookie in 1999 , Bennett missed seven games due to a knee injury . After undergoing surgery on the knee , he missed all of the 2000 season . In 2001 , New York expected Bennett to work in tandem with Tiki Barber but after suffering a hamstring injury , he was released on September 3 , 2001 . After multiple injuries to their running backs , the Giants became interested in re @-@ signing Bennett but because of NFL rules they were unable to do so until January 2002 . During this time period , he was offered contracts by the Philadelphia Eagles and Miami Dolphins but rejected both hoping to return to the Giants . He re @-@ signed with the Giants on January 16 , 2002 . During the season , Bennett was returned to the wide receiver position he played in high school , due to multiple injuries suffered by the Giants players in that position . He was waived on December 4 , 2002 . 
 On April 1 , 2003 , the New York Jets signed Bennett . He was released on August 23 , 2003 . 
 = = = 2004 – 2007 = = = 
 Bennett signed with the Ottawa Renegades on March 3 , 2004 . He was cut at the end of training camp . On June 16 , 2004 , after he was cut he signed with the Evansville BlueCats of the Indoor Football League . Bennett left the BlueCats and was re @-@ signed to the Renegades practice roster . On July 27 , he was activated and played in three games for Ottawa . In 2005 , he played in five games recording 76 yards on four catches . With Ottawa , Bennett returned to playing fullback which he played at Northwestern . After the season he re @-@ joined Evansville for one season . After Ottawa folded at the end of 2005 , he entered the CFL Dispersal Draft and was selected by the Toronto Argonauts . When he was drafted he was playing once again for the Evansville BlueCats , but left the team in favor of Toronto . During his only season in Toronto , Bennett suffered a finger injury that allowed him to play in only three games . The Argonauts won all three games Bennett played for them . 
 After leaving the game of football in 2007 , Bennett became a trainer at Tri @-@ State Athletic Club in Evansville . 
 = Fences and Windows = 
 Fences and Windows : Dispatches from the Front Lines of the Globalization Debate is a 2002 book by Canadian journalist Naomi Klein and editor Debra Ann Levy . The book is a collection of newspaper articles , mostly from The Globe and Mail , with a few magazine articles from The Nation and speech transcripts . The articles and speeches were all written by Klein in the 30 months after the publication of her first book , No Logo ( 1999 ) , from December 1999 to March 2002 . The articles focus upon the anti @-@ globalization movement , including protest events and responses by law enforcement . The book was published in North America and the United Kingdom in October 2002 . 
 The imagery of fences and windows appear throughout the work . The fences represent exclusion and barriers , while the windows are opportunities for expressing alternative ideas . The book garnered both positive and negative reviews . Two of the articles were singled out as exceptional by several reviewers : " America is not a Hamburger " discusses the US State Department 's attempt to re @-@ brand America 's image overseas ; " The Brutal Calculus of Suffering " discusses media portrayals of war . 
 = = Background = = 
 The unexpected success of her first book , No Logo ( 1999 ) , extended author and journalist Naomi Klein 's book tour beyond its original two @-@ week schedule . She spent the next 30 months traveling the world promoting the book as well as writing newspaper articles covering the anti @-@ globalization movement . Most of her articles were originally published in the Canadian national newspaper The Globe and Mail , while some were published by The Nation , The New York Times , and The Guardian . During this time she resisted her publisher 's urgings to write a new book , and the pressure to match No Logo 's success was bearing down upon her . She relented to the pressure for another publication by collecting the best of the articles and speeches she had written since No Logo . She did not intend this new book to be a sequel or follow @-@ up , but rather a stand alone collection of writing . 
 = = Content = = 
 The first section , entitled " Windows of Dissent " , begins with an article written for The New York Times , wherein she covers the 1999 Seattle protests , which she calls the coming @-@ out party of the anti @-@ globalization movement . The remaining five articles in the section come from The Globe and Mail , with one from The Nation ; they cover the World Bank , International Monetary Fund , and World Trade Organization ( WTO ) protests in Washington , D.C. , Prague , and Toronto from April to September 2000 . She describes the protesters as hundreds of decentralized groups with various independent interests , leaderless but organized , and searching for a strategy . 
 The next section , " Fencing in Democracy " , consists of articles from The Globe and Mail and the transcript of a speech . The section is divided into two sub @-@ sections . The first explores some of the impacts that economic globalization has had on communities , focusing on Mexico and Argentina , and misconceptions that supporters of the WTO @-@ associated organizations have of the anti @-@ globalization movement . The second focuses on the co @-@ opting of the commons , such as genetics , culture , and public sector infrastructure , for private economic gains . 
 The third section , " Fencing in the Movement " , chronicles the escalation of security tactics to counter protesters . Klein finds that police have been removing the distinction between civil disobedience and violence and purposefully normalizing violence so it is the expected outcome , not a rare event . She matches the decline of civil liberties and freedom of speech with the rise of free speech zones , indiscriminate use of tear gas and pepper spray , plain clothes officers , surveillance , and pre @-@ emptive arrests . The fourth section , " Capitalizing on Terror " , discusses opportunism that used the September 11 attacks to further political and economic objectives . In an editorial piece for the Los Angeles Times , Klein argues that the US has sold its image too well as the land of opportunity and plenty and that rising anti @-@ Americanism was the result of the US inability to share this . 
 The final section , " Windows to Democracy " , contains two articles written for The Nation , two for The Globe and Mail and one for The Guardian . These articles examine potential directions for the movement to take , focusing upon the World Social Forum , Mexican Zapatistas , and political parties . The final article calls upon the movement to shift from attacking symbols of globalization at protests and use the decentralized local groups to provide alternatives : define themselves as fighting for , rather than against , something . 
 Most of the book 's content is freely and legally available in the form of individual articles on Klein 's website . It should be noted , however , that the printed text has often been edited or reworked , in some cases very heavily . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The book takes the form of an anthology of news and magazine articles , along with the transcripts of several speeches , all written by Klein between December 1999 and March 2002 . With the help of Debra Ann Levy , the articles were edited to fit them better together in the book . A preface , with original writing , is used by Klein to introduce her background on how she came to write the articles , provide context for the content , and set up the themes . The two most predominant themes are the two title images , " fences " and " windows " . The fences represent exclusion and are portrayed , both literally and metaphorically , as the barriers that keep protesters away from the economic meetings , the walls between factories and neighbouring impoverished communities , and the restrictions on intellectual property or the commons . The windows are opportunities where dissenting or alternative voices and ideas can be expressed . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 Fences and Windows was published as a trade paperback by Picador in the US , Vintage Canada in Canada , and Flamingo in the UK . It was released in October 2002 with little promotion . The resulting sales were lower than expected . A portion of the book 's proceeds was given to a legal defense fund for activists and for education concerning global democracy . Just after the book 's release , a debate on the topic of <unk> was held between Klein and The Economist journalist <unk> Ahmad in New York . 
 Reception to the book was mixed . Reviewers found that the collection of re @-@ printed journalistic articles made the book sometimes repetitive , lacking details , historical context and analysis of its subjects . Some reviewers criticized the book 's silence on alternatives to globalization or the democracy that lead to globalization . The writing was variously described as choppy , colourful , engaging , and straightforward . Singled out as being exceptionally well done was Klein 's Los Angeles Times article " America is not a Hamburger " , which described the American attempt to re @-@ brand itself by believing that the escalating anti @-@ Americanism was a misunderstanding rather than a reaction to American policy directions . Klein 's October 2001 speech at a journalism conference in Stockholm was also singled out as being very well done . Entitled " The Brutal Calculus of Suffering " , it contrasted the media depictions of American versus non @-@ American deaths . 
 The reviewer for the feminist magazine <unk> wrote , " Fences and Windows was written to be read and shared and talked about and carried around in your bag . It is a book that begs you to write in the margins , and highlight relevant quotes because it 's filled with stories , insights , shocking statistics , inspiring anecdotes and refreshing critiques . It 's small , it 's smart and it 's jammed with information and ideas that inspire hope and motivate action . " Similarly , reviewing for The Guardian , Stuart Christie wrote , " This is a book to be savoured and referred to every so often , even if just to recharge one 's moral batteries . " In The Globe and Mail , Stan Persky wrote , " What I like about Klein 's reflections on the nascent movement that she both participates in and analyzes is that she indulges in minimal rhetorical rah @-@ rah . Nor does she fudge the shortcomings and <unk> of the fledgling activists . " 
 The reviews in The Economist and Books in Canada , the latter written by Shane Neilson , were very negative . Neilson called the work " idiocy " , " intellectual sloppiness that approaches dishonesty " , maintaining that " the ideological failure of this book is total . " He argued that Klein assumed , rather than proved , that the international organizations which were being protested against were guilty of the protesters ' charges . The Economist 's review criticized Klein for ignoring the benefits of globalization , like " lifting people out of poverty " , and for failing to present a coherent alternative . The reviewer called Klein " an angry adolescent " and opined that her reporting was assisting " a cause that can only harm the people she claims to care most about " . 
 = Hurricane Cindy ( 1963 ) = 
 Hurricane Cindy was the first hurricane to form in the Gulf of Mexico since 1960 . The third named storm of the 1963 Atlantic hurricane season , Cindy developed within a trough as a tropical storm in the Gulf of Mexico on 16 September . The disturbance swiftly intensified to hurricane strength , with a distinct eye becoming visible on satellite imagery as it drifted north @-@ northwestwards toward the Texas coastline . Despite favorable conditions , with high sea surface temperatures , the storm only intensified into a Category 1 hurricane . After peaking with 1 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , it made landfall at High Island on the morning of 17 September as a slightly weaker system with an atmospheric pressure of 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) . Cindy remained nearly stationary for almost a day , dropping copious rainfall over the Texas coastal plain , before finally turning west @-@ southwestward and dissipating west of Corpus Christi on 20 September . 
 Hurricane watches and warnings were issued prior to Cindy 's landfall , hastening evacuations in coastal areas of Louisiana and Texas , with many refugees seeking safety in local shelters . Although tide and wind damage was minimal , extreme rainfall totaling upwards of 23 @.@ 50 in ( 597 mm ) resulted in severe flooding in many areas of the Texas coastal plain ; 4 @,@ 000 homes were inundated in Jefferson , Orange , and Newton counties , many of them after a levee ruptured in Port Acres . Dozens of residents were forced to flee in rising flood waters , and many streets and roadways became impassable as a result of Cindy 's flooding . Strong winds shattered glass windows , and schools throughout southeastern Texas were closed due to the hurricane . Widespread crop damage was observed , with rice , cotton , and pecan harvests suffering the worst . Overall , damage amounted to $ 12 @.@ 5 million ( 1963 USD ) , and three deaths were recorded . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cindy can be traced to a low @-@ pressure area which formed within a trough positioned approximately 200 mi ( 320 km ) east @-@ northeast of Brownsville , Texas on 16 September , though inclement weather had been reported in the Gulf of Mexico the previous two days . The disturbance soon strengthened into a tropical storm , developing a well @-@ defined circulation near 1800 UTC . By the afternoon , it had become well @-@ organized enough to prompt the New Orleans Weather Bureau office to initiate advisories on the storm , christening it Cindy . A distinct eye was noted on radar around 2000 UTC , and around then a possibly inaccurate maritime report issued by the SS Sabine documented winds of hurricane intensity . The compact storm meandered northward at 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) throughout the rest of the day without any observable increase in wind speeds , despite being situated over an area of warm sea surface temperatures . As Cindy made its gradual approach towards Galveston that evening , only slightly heightened wind speeds were observed , peaking at 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . 
 Despite its favorable environment , Cindy remained disorganized , featuring an asymmetric 20 mi ( 32 km ) -wide eye ; little further strengthening occurred over the course of the night . Upon Cindy 's landfall at High Island the following morning , its atmospheric pressure was measured at 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 41 inHg ) , and winds reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . Soon after moving ashore , Cindy became nearly stationary for 18 hours , maintaining Category 1 intensity before weakening to first to a tropical storm at 0600 UTC on 18 September then a tropical depression six hours later . The remnants of Cindy gradually turned westward @-@ to @-@ southwestward and decreased in strength during 18 and 19 September . As a result of its abnormally slow movement and deterioration , extremely heavy rains were recorded over Texas and Louisiana , especially in the storm 's northeastern quadrant . Cindy finally dissipated on 20 September while situated west of Corpus Christi . It was the first hurricane to form in the Gulf of Mexico since 1960 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 In advance of Cindy 's arrival , a hurricane watch was issued between Freeport , Texas and Grand Isle , Louisiana on 16 September . The New Orleans Weather Bureau office imposed a hurricane warning between Galveston , Texas and Vermilion Bay , Louisiana three hours later , and additionally replaced the earlier hurricane watch with a gale warning . After making landfall on the morning of 17 September , the hurricane warning for Cindy was discontinued , though flood warnings and small craft warnings remained in effect for coastal areas of southeastern Texas . Mandatory evacuations were ordered for low @-@ lying areas along a 300 mi ( 480 km ) arc , and five buses were sent to help in evacuation efforts in Sabine County , Texas . Meanwhile , the Texas civil defense and disaster relief agency and other related organizations prepared for the storm as governor of Texas John Connally declared a state of emergency . In Cameron Parish , Louisiana , approximately 5 @,@ 000 individuals left the area prior to the storm , while 6 @,@ 000 fled in the state as a whole ; in neighboring Texas , 3 @,@ 600 individuals living along the state 's shoreline heeded the Weather Bureau 's warnings , evacuating to higher ground . Emergency shelters opened along the Gulf Coast , with 1 @,@ 500 taking refuge in Port Arthur , Texas , 525 in Beaumont , 1 @,@ 078 in Galveston , 300 in Port Bolivar , and 475 total in Texas City , Hitchcock , and Lamarque . A state of emergency was declared in the city of Lake Charles , Louisiana , where officials prepared to feed up to 10 @,@ 000 refugees as the Salvation Army and other relief agencies ' volunteers were deployed to the region . 
 One shrimp boat was initially reported missing and the tug Myra White transmitted a distress signal as its engines failed near an oil rig off of Galveston . High winds shattered glass windows at Port Arthur , Texas City , and Galveston , while schools were shut down in Galveston , Lamarque , Texas City , Alvin , and most of Galveston and Jefferson counties . Despite a brief power outage at Lamarque , electricity was quickly restored after the storm . Powerful gusts downed branches , electrical poles , and tore off shingles in Port Arthur and Galveston , but damage was minimal at High Island , where Cindy made landfall . The U.S. Coast Guard responded to four requests for assistance at Galveston , and nine vessels attempted to seek refuge at Port Arthur ; the Coast Guard eventually permitted six to enter , and the other three apparently traveled to Galveston . Meanwhile , to the northwest , the port of Houston was closed for the duration of the storm . Trucks and boats were dispatched by civil defense officials in Jefferson County after declaring a state of emergency following numerous requests for assistance by residents of flooded homes . Two children , initially unaccounted for , were later found safe under a bridge abutment . 
 In Amelia , a suburb of Beaumont , officials helped residents in low @-@ lying neighborhoods to higher ground , and in Beaumont proper , flooding inundated streets , rendering some impassible . The hurricane partially defoliated palm trees , leaving palm fronds on streets and roadways , and several structures were toppled or damaged along the coast . Overall damage , however , was minimal . An 8 ft ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) levee sheltering Port Acres ruptured , forcing residents to stack 11 @,@ 000 sandbags and dump sand to protect the suburb . There , storm waters inundated homes up to roof level , and after carp were swept into local farm fields , many locals fished for them with clubs ; nearby , industrial complexes in Jefferson and Orange counties endured severe damage as well . Boats were tossed into the streets of Beaumont , and numerous highways were unusable for travel due to high water ; the widespread flooding forced police to rescue 30 residents in the Beaumont area . The storm inundated rice , cotton , and pecan crops , with rice harvests suffering the worst impacts . Two men left stranded on a burning fishing boat 50 mi ( 80 km ) off of Morgan City , Louisiana were later rescued by the U.S. Coast Guard without issue . 
 Tides and winds resulted in few problems , with flooding causing the majority of Cindy 's damage ; storm surge reached 3 to 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 52 m ) above normal levels , enough to destroy only a few piers and damage several boats . The hurricane 's abnormally slow trajectory over the Texas coastal plain led to extremely high rainfall totals being measured in parts of Jefferson , Orange , and Newton counties in Texas , where storm waters inundated 4 @,@ 000 homes , and Calcasieu and Vermilion parishes in Louisiana . The most extreme rainfall totals were measured in Deweyville , Texas , where 23 @.@ 50 in ( 597 mm ) of precipitation fell over a three @-@ day period , with 20 @.@ 60 in ( 523 mm ) alone falling in 24 hours . Farther north , Cindy inundated 25 businesses and 35 homes in Guthrie , Oklahoma , where up to 2 @.@ 5 ft ( 0 @.@ 76 m ) of water forced 300 residents to flee . Upwards of $ 11 @.@ 7 million ( 1963 USD ) in property damage was noted , and crop damage reached $ 500 @,@ 000 in Texas and $ 360 @,@ 000 in Louisiana ; one man drowned after falling overboard on a boat taking oil rig personnel back to land , while two others drowned under high waters at Port Acres . Overall , Cindy inflicted $ 12 @.@ 5 million in damage and three deaths . 
 = Utah State Route 279 = 
 State Route 279 is a state highway in the U.S. state of Utah . The highway was constructed in 1962 – 1963 to service the Cane Creek potash mine and processing plant southwest of Moab . The highway was named one of the most beautiful highways opened to traffic in 1963 . The entire length of SR @-@ 279 has been designated the Potash – Lower Colorado River Scenic Byway by the Utah State Legislature , however is known locally as Potash Road . 
 This highway was intended to be part of a longer highway , State Route 278 , that was to scale the canyon walls between Moab and Dead Horse Point State Park . Only the connection to the potash mine was constructed before the project was cancelled . Although the highway was constructed to aid the mining industry of southeastern Utah , the road is popular with tourists and four wheel drive enthusiasts . The jeep trails beginning where SR @-@ 279 ends are used to access Canyonlands National Park and Dead Horse Point . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway begins just north of Moab at a junction with U.S. Route 191 near the southern boundary of Arches National Park . The road follows the north bank of the Colorado River to the potash mine . The road is legislatively designated north – south , but actually serpentines for most of its length . The highway loosely parallels a spur of the Denver and Rio Grande Railroad built at the same time and for the same purpose of serving the potash mine . The route of the railroad features a 1 @.@ 59 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 56 km ) tunnel that bypasses most of the serpentine bends in the Colorado River between Moab and the potash plant . While in the Colorado River canyon , the highway passes by dinosaur footprints , Indian petroglyphs and jeep trails leading to Canyonlands National Park and Dead Horse Point State Park . The highway also passes by three named natural arches , Corona Arch , Bow Tie Arch , and Jug Handle Arch . 
 = = History = = 
 The State Road Commission approved a new State Route 279 in 1960 , connecting US @-@ 160 ( now US @-@ 191 ) northwest of Moab with Dead Horse Point State Park . The route would be mostly new construction , following the right ( northwest ) bank of the Colorado River to Day Canyon , where it would climb to the southwest onto the plateau containing the park . Within the park , an existing roadway , then its primary access road , would become part of SR @-@ 279 . The state legislature approved this highway in 1961 . Later that year , the commission added a second route — State Route 278 — that would continue south alongside the river from SR @-@ 279 to the Grand @-@ San Juan County line . However , when it approved the addition in 1963 , the legislature made it part of SR @-@ 279 , renumbering the spur to the park through Day Canyon as SR @-@ 278 . In addition , the south end of SR @-@ 279 was changed to Potash , a point north of the county line where the Texas Gulf Sulphur Company was building a potash plant . SR @-@ 279 was soon built , but the road through Day Canyon was never constructed . In 1975 , the legislature deleted SR @-@ 278 in favor of a new SR @-@ 313 , which followed the existing county road to Dead Horse Point through Sevenmile Canyon . 
 In 1963 , Parade Magazine held the third of an annual competition for most scenic highway that opened to traffic that year . SR @-@ 279 was one of four finalists in the competition . The others finalists were I @-@ 93 between Windham and Londonderry in New Hampshire , I @-@ 84 near Southington , Connecticut and I @-@ 405 near Sepulveda Pass in Los Angeles , California . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Grand County . 
 = Stanley plan = 
 The Stanley plan was a package of 13 statutes adopted in September 1956 by the U.S. state of Virginia designed to ensure racial segregation in that state 's public schools despite the unanimous ruling of the Supreme Court of the United States in Brown v. Board of Education , 347 U.S. 483 ( 1954 ) that school segregation was unconstitutional . The legislative program was named for Governor Thomas B. Stanley , who proposed the program and successfully pushed for its enactment . The Stanley plan was a critical element in the policy of " massive resistance " to the Brown ruling advocated by U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd , Sr. The plan also included measures designed to curb the Virginia state chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) , which many Virginia segregationists believed was responsible for " stirring up " litigation to integrate the public schools . 
 The plan was enacted by the Virginia Assembly on September 22 , 1956 , and signed into law by Governor Stanley on September 29 . A federal court struck down a portion of the Stanley plan as unconstitutional in January 1957 . By 1960 , nearly all of the major elements of the plan ( including the litigation curbs aimed at the NAACP ) had been struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court and other federal and state courts . The constitutional invalidity of the Stanley plan led new governor of Virginia , James Lindsay Almond , Jr . , to propose " passive resistance " to school integration in 1959 . The Supreme Court declared portions of " passive resistance " unconstitutional in 1964 and again in 1968 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On May 17 , 1954 , the U.S. Supreme Court handed down its ruling in Brown v. Board of Education , in which the unanimous court held that separate public schools for black and white students was unconstitutional . Although agitation for an end to racial segregation in schools ( and society at large ) had been building in the United States since the end of World War II , Brown sparked the modern American civil rights movement . 
 The initial reaction of most Virginia politicians and newspapers to the Brown decision was restrained . From the 1920s to the late 1960s , Virginia politics had been dominated by the Byrd Organization , a political machine led by Senator Harry F. Byrd , Sr. ( who was also a former governor of Virginia ) . Top leaders in the Byrd Organization , such as Governor Thomas B. Stanley and then @-@ Attorney General James Lindsay Almond , Jr . , were also at first reserved in their reaction to the Brown ruling . 
 However , this changed when James J. Kilpatrick , editor of The Richmond News Leader in Richmond , Virginia , quickly adopted a defiant and unyielding opposition to racial integration of public schools . Kilpatrick adopted the pre @-@ American Civil War constitutional theory of interposition , and began publicly pushing for the state of Virginia to actively oppose the Supreme Court . Kilpatrick 's hardening position , historian Joseph J. Thorndike has written , " likely ... helped stiffen the resolve of several key figures , especially Byrd . " On June 18 , 1954 , political leaders in Virginia 's Southside ( a collection of counties in the south @-@ central region of the state ) met and agreed to ask for vigorous state opposition to Brown . They began calling themselves the Defenders of State Sovereignty and Civil Liberties , and members included U.S. Congressmen William Munford Tuck and Watkins Abbitt as well as state senators Charles Moses and Garland Gray . They selected Farmville businessman Robert B. Crawford as their president . Stanley , himself from the Southside , was deeply influenced by the strong segregationist sentiments expressed at this meeting . Six days later , Governor Stanley announced he would " use every legal means at my command to continue segregated schools in Virginia . " 
 = = = The Gray Commission = = = 
 On August 30 , 1954 , Governor Stanley announced the appointment of a commission , chaired by State Senator Garland Gray , to recommend a legislative response to Brown . Officially titled the Virginia Public Education Commission , it was more popularly known as the Gray Commission . In October 1954 , a pro @-@ segregation group called the Defenders of State Sovereignty and Individual Liberties ( widely known as " the Defenders " ) formed . The Defenders not only demanded that state legislators pledge not to support racial integration , but in June 1955 called for legislation to be enacted which barred state funds from being spent on school desegregation . Although limited primarily to the Southside and numbering no more than 15 @,@ 000 members , the Defenders proved highly influential in state politics . 
 The crisis over school desegregation worsened throughout 1955 . On May 31 , 1955 , the Supreme Court in Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka ( known as Brown II ) ordered that school desegregation occur with " all deliberate speed " . Two weeks later , Governor Stanley and the Virginia State Board of Education announced that state policy would be to continue to operate the state 's public schools on a segregated basis . Then , in a seemingly unrelated case , the Supreme Court of Virginia ruled on November 7 , 1955 , in Almond v. Day that providing state funds to private schools violated Article 141 of the state constitution . ( In 1954 , the Virginia General Assembly had enacted legislation providing educational vouchers to underage dependents of veterans who were wounded or had died in World War I. ) Kilpatrick and several Virginia political leaders had supported vouchers as a way of circumventing desegregation , and the Almond decision struck directly at this proposal . The Gray Commission issued its report just five days after the Virginia Supreme Court 's decision in Almond . The report , which wholeheartedly supported racial segregation in schools and denounced the Supreme Court 's 1954 Brown decision , made a number of recommendations . Two stood out . First , the Commission proposed that the state constitution be amended to permit education vouchers to be given to those parents who did not want their children attending integrated schools , or to those children who lived in counties where public schools had been abolished . Second , the Commission advised amending state education law to permit local school boards to assign students to schools on the basis of factors ( such as aptitude , availability of facilities , health , and transportation needs ) other than race . 
 Stanley proposed enacting all the proposals recommended by the Gray Commission , with the exception of the pupil assignment provision . The governor also sought an amendment to state law authorizing and directing the governor to withhold state funding from any public school district when the " public interest , or safety , or welfare " required it . The plan would also permit a local school district to close its public schools ( in which case every child would get a tuition voucher to attend a private school ) or opt to not take state funding . 
 = = = Legislative maneuvering and the rise of " massive resistance " = = = 
 Governor Stanley called the General Assembly into special session on November 30 , 1955 , to consider adopting the Gray Commission 's report ( although not its actual recommendations ) . During what one newspaper called a " hasty , almost hysterical four @-@ day session " , the General Assembly " adopted " the Gray Commission 's recommendations — although it did not enact them into law . The legislature did approve a referendum for January 9 , 1956 , to call a state constitutional convention . A number of individuals and organizations came out against the Gray Commission 's proposals as too moderate , however . Among these were Representative ( and former Governor ) William M. Tuck , Virginia House Speaker E. Blackburn Moore ( a close friend of Byrd 's ) , the Defenders , Kilpatrick , and even Gray himself . For nearly three weeks in late November and early December , Kilpatrick wrote almost daily in the pages of the Richmond News Leader in favor of interposition . 
 In near @-@ record numbers , Virginia voters turned out on January 9 to approve the call for a constitutional convention by a 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 margin . 
 After the referendum , Kilpatrick and now Byrd , too , began pressing for an even stronger legislative response , based on the constitutional justification of interposition . The Virginia General Assembly opened its 60 @-@ day legislative session on January 11 , 1956 . Almost immediately , Byrd 's supporters in the legislature demanded that the Assembly support interposition , and a resolution to adopt the legal theory as state policy passed on February 1 , 1956 . On February 25 , Byrd called for " massive resistance " by Southern states against the Brown ruling . 
 But a fracture in the pro @-@ segregation movement prevented much legislation from moving forward during the remainder of the regular legislative session . Hopes were initially high when , on March 6 , 1956 , the Virginia constitutional convention voted 39 @-@ to @-@ 1 to approve the constitutional amendment to permit educational vouchers . Five days later , 96 members of the United States Congress sponsored a resolution ( introduced by Senator Byrd ) called the " Southern Manifesto " , which denounced the Brown decision and encouraged states to " resist forced integration by any means . " But moderate segregationist forces ( which supported the Gray Commission plan ) opposed the more extreme segregationists ( who believed that public opinion was becoming more and more inflamed against Brown ) . Byrd cautioned Virginia state legislators to " go slow " ( a now @-@ famous political phrase ) . Byrd and the other extreme segregationists hoped that public opinion would continue to harden against Brown , allowing political leaders to adopt interposition rather than a more moderate response . But the moderate segregationists , too , had some early successes . A resolution declaring the Brown decision null and void was defeated by the state house on January 18 . 
 As moderates battled extremists in the General Assembly and time wore on , many state legislators began to feel ( with school budgets due in just 60 days on May 30 ) that there was not enough time to pass the Gray Commission plan . The two sides began to fight over whether to delay a year before passing any new school legislation . Moderate segregationists began to worry that public education would be destroyed by tuition vouchers , and were not willing to implement such a plan even if it meant saving segregation . House Speaker Moore introduced a resolution which would require school districts to remain segregated for the coming 1956 @-@ 1957 school year while the legislature worked on a legislative end @-@ run of Brown . But state Attorney General Almond argued the bill left the state legally exposed , and advocated instead a special session of the legislature in the summer in order to meet the " good faith " requirement of the Brown II decision . The Moore resolution was defeated , as was the Gray Commission 's proposal to allow local school boards to assign students to schools on factors other than race . Three days before the legislature adjourned , Governor Stanley proposed a plan to deny state funds to any school district which integrated . But this plan was also defeated . The legislative session ended on March 12 , 1956 . 
 = = The Stanley plan = = 
 Although calls for a special session of the legislature had been made in February and March , Governor Stanley was not initially receptive to the idea at the beginning of April . In mid @-@ April , Virginia Lieutenant Governor Gi Stevens urged Stanley to call a special session of the General Assembly to reconsider the Gray Commission proposals . In May , at least one state delegate urged the General Assembly to call itself into special session . 
 During the spring and into the summer , Stanley began meeting with Senator Byrd , State Senator Gray , and others to strategize about a course of action . Byrd was concerned that one or more local school districts might integrate , creating a domino effect that would lead to integration across the entire South . Preventing this from happening became the preeminent concern of Stanley , Byrd , and the others . Stanley called the Gray Commission back into session in late May 1956 , but the group was unable to immediately come up with any new recommendations . Attorney General Almond publicly urged Stanley to call a special session of the legislature on May 31 , but House Speaker Moore demanded to know what proposals Almond felt the legislature should pass before any special session was called . On June 4 , the Gray Commission again reported to the governor that it had not been able to improve on its November proposals , but it , too , advised the governor to call a special session of the legislature . The following day , Governor Stanley announced he would call the legislature into special session in late August . 
 Governor Stanley 's reversal of position regarding the special session seemed inexplicable , especially in light of the lack of new legislative proposals , but events had transpired which had changed his mind . In part , Stanley himself had come around to the " massive resistance " viewpoint . Various court decisions of the previous spring had convinced him that the federal courts ( and the federal government ) would not compromise on the issue of segregation . Additionally , Stanley felt emboldened by a change in his status within the Byrd Organization . Initially , Senator Byrd had kept Stanley out of his inner circle 's legislative discussions . But by late spring Byrd began including Stanley in these talks . Byrd and his close political allies were pressing for extreme measures ( such as closing schools ) in response to integration , and Stanley realized that action had to be taken soon or integration would occur before these measures could be enacted . In this regard , Stanley was going against the Byrd Organization , which believed that public opinion would become even more extreme during the summer and give the organization greater political capital and freedom of movement . 
 = = = Crafting the Stanley plan = = = 
 There had also been changes in the legislative approach to be taken , changes which had occurred behind closed doors . The Gray Commission 's public claim on May 28 that it had nothing new to report was not truthful . In fact , a secret meeting of the Gray Commission 's executive committee had occurred on May 27 which Representative Howard W. Smith , Representative Watkins Moorman Abbitt , Representative Burr Harrison , Tuck , and other outsiders had attended . The group approved of Stanley 's March 9 proposal to cut off all state funds for any school district which integrated , and discussed a number of other proposals ( including a pupil assignment plan , whether to require local approval of integration or local approval of taxes to support integration , and repeal of state laws permitting school districts to be sued ) . Although the full Gray Commission met publicly the following day , they were secretly joined in executive session by Governor Stanley . Stanley announced that he was going to support a special session of the legislature , and that if the Gray Commission could not come up with any new proposals then he himself would craft bills for the General Assembly to consider . Although no plan was formally agreed upon , the Gray Commission asked its counsel David J. Mays to craft proposals along six lines : 1 ) Cutting off state funds to any school district which integrated ; 2 ) Allowing local referenda to veto the appropriation of local funds for integration ; 3 ) Repeal of state laws allowing school districts to be sued ; 4 ) Allowing the state to invoke its police power to prevent integration ( under the assumption that integration would lead to public unrest and disorder ) ; 5 ) Enacting a pupil assignment plan to be implemented solely by the governor ( under the assumption that no court would jail the governor ) ; and 6 ) Enacting a pupil assignment plan to be implemented solely by the General Assembly ( under the assumption that no court would jail the entire legislature ) . No action was taken on these proposals at the Gray Commission 's meeting on June 4 . 
 With discussions on a legislative program at a standstill , on June 11 Gray called together the seven members of the Gray Commission most in favor of " massive resistance . " They agreed to support a legislative program in favor of " massive resistance " and met with Governor Stanley that night . Stanley said he was willing " to go to any extreme that may be necessary to prevent integration anywhere in Virginia . " 
 The basic legislative proposals of the " Stanley plan , " the Washington Post reported , were worked out at a secret meeting on July 2 in the United States House Committee on Rules hearing room in the United States Capitol . At the meeting were Abbitt , Byrd , Gray , Smith , Tuck , Stanley , and seven Southside state legislators . The group agreed to a five @-@ point legislative program : 1 ) No public school integration would be tolerated in Virginia ; 2 ) School districts which integrated would lose state funding ; 3 ) The state law permitting school districts to be sued would be repealed ; 4 ) The power to assign students to schools would be taken away from local school boards and transferred to the governor ; and 5 ) The governor would have the power to close any school district which integrated . Despite the group 's many public statements supporting local control of schools , Tuck later remarked that the purpose of the plan was to prevent integration anywhere in Virginia : " If they [ other Virginia areas ] won 't stand with us then I say make ' em . We cannot compromise . ... If you ever let them integrate anywhere the whole state will be integrated in a short time . " Byrd in particular was a vocal supporter of the school closing proposal , and helped draft the other proposals in the plan . 
 The Stanley plan had the support of the more extreme segregationists in Virginia as well . The first week of July , the Defenders promoted a plan that would withdraw the legal basis for lawsuits against school districts , permit state takeovers of school districts which integrated , and deny state funds to school districts which integrated . The Defenders opposed any pupil assignment plan as too moderate a response . Accommodating this extremist sentiment , the pupil assignment plan approved at the July 2 meeting was fairly weak . After the meeting , Gray independently asked Mays to draft a stronger pupil assignment proposal . 
 Events soon polarized the state of Virginia on the school segregation issue . On July 12 , Judge John Paul , Jr . , of the Western District Court of Virginia ordered the racial integration of public schools in Charlottesville , Virginia . On July 31 , Eastern District Court of Virginia Judge Albert V. Bryan , Sr. , ordered the racial integration of public schools in Arlington County , Virginia . The rulings sparked additional lawsuits against segregated school districts across Virginia . The rulings also widened the split in the pro @-@ segregation forces , with the more extremist supporters now arguing that the Gray Commission proposals were no longer an option and that only " massive resistance " and a plan implementing interposition were <unk> . 
 Governor Stanley released his legislative proposal to implement " massive resistance " on July 23 , 1956 , and set August 27 , 1956 , as the start of the General Assembly 's special session . He made it clear that he would not permit desegregation . " There shall be no mixing of the races in the public schools , anywhere in Virginia , " he said on July 23 . 
 = = = Drafting the legislation = = = 
 The Stanley plan split the Executive Committee of the Gray Commission . Attorney General Almond ( not a Byrd Organization insider and privately already seeking the governorship ) drafted a substitute school closing bill on July 25 that limited the conditions under which the governor could close schools but which Almond thought was more likely to pass constitutional muster . On July 26 , Southside politicians attempted to force a vote through the Gray Commission which endorsed the Stanley plan ( as redrafted by Almond ) , but the vote failed . The commission did vote , however , to have Mays draft legislation to implement the proposals contained in the Gray Commission report as well as the governor 's recommendations . 
 Mays spent most of July 31 drafting this legislation with four others : Almond ; Mays ' associate Henry T. Wickham ; Commission staffer John B. <unk> , Jr . ; and George McIver " Mack " Lapsley ( Director of the Division of Statutory Research and Drafting for the General Assembly ) . They considered a number of different ways to implement the pupil assignment plan , and decided to bring the various alternatives before the Gray Commission . Wickham was given the task of putting into legislative language the decisions the group made . That same day , Judge Bryan ordered Arlington County public schools desegregated . Mays told the drafting group that Bryan 's decision invited a pupil assignment program and suggested it might pass constitutional muster . Almond agreed , and on August 1 told the press that Judge Bryan 's decision left open the possibility of implementing a pupil assignment plan that would be neutral on its face but which could keep schools segregated . 
 Mays , Lapsley , Almond , Wickham , and <unk> spent August 6 engaged in additional legislative drafting . That same day , Governor Stanley withdrew his school funding bill from consideration by the drafting committee and asked that Almond draft a stronger version which permitted a funding cut @-@ off whether a district integrated voluntarily or not . Kenneth Patty , Assistant Attorney General , ended up drafting the revised bill for the governor . After four days of work , Patty finished his draft of the funding cut @-@ off legislation on August 13 . 
 On August 14 , Governor Stanley announced publicly that the main thrust of his legislative proposal would be to withhold funds from any local school district which integrated . In response , Gray called a meeting of the Gray Commission to consider the governor 's proposal . Stanley said he would not oppose the Gray Commission 's proposal to assign students on the basis of factors other than race ( which might lead to some integration ) . Stanley 's concession , the Washington Post reported , was made because it was widely assumed that the Gray Commission was assumed to be strongly in favor of the pupil assignment plan and the tuition grant proposal . 
 There was intense pressure on Stanley to make good on his concession of August 14 . In a closed @-@ door meeting with Assembly delegates attending the 1956 Democratic National Convention , Stanley again insisted on the authority to withhold state funds from any school district which integrated . But Delegate <unk> Davis of Norfolk ( the state 's largest city ) said his city would likely operate its schools without state funds if ordered to integrate . By mid @-@ August , 18 local school districts had placed their budgets on a month @-@ to @-@ month basis so they could close schools on short notice if ordered to desegregate . But wealthy districts such as Arlington and Norfolk let it be known that they would defy state control and integrate . Outside of the Southside , there seemed little support for Stanley 's plan . This lack of support led to a shift in Stanley 's legislative proposals . Originally , the governor had sought discretionary authority to withhold funds from integrated school districts ; now the goal became automatic cut @-@ off . 
 The revised Stanley plan was presented to the Gray Commission on August 22 . The Commission reconsidered its own proposals as well as the Stanley plan and those of other legislators ( such as the Boothe @-@ Dalton and McCue plans ; see below for descriptions ) . Before the vote , Governor Stanley said he would not insist on the provision in the funding cut @-@ off bill which would deny funds to all public schools statewide if a single local jurisdiction integrated . Also speaking before the group , Attorney General Almond said the McCue plan would not stop integration lawsuits and probably would violate the state constitution . At the end of its meeting , the Gray Commission voted 19 @-@ to @-@ 12 to abandon its original proposals and support the Stanley plan . The meeting and vote were contentious . According to local news media , " the Commission capitulated to tremendous pressure from state leaders to junk its own pupil assignment plan " . The Commission also approved a program to provide tuition grants to students in shuttered school districts so they could attend a nonsectarian school of their choice . ( The original Gray Commission plan awarded tuition grants only to parents in an integrated school system who did not want their child attending an integrated school , or to parents in localities which voluntarily closed their school system to avoid integration . ) Thirteen of the 15 Southside legislators on the Gray Commission voted for the Stanley plan . Of the 12 commissioners who voted against the Stanley plan , two were from Arlington County , two were from Richmond , and one was from Norfolk . At the end of the session , Arlington 's State Senator Charles Fenwick and delegate C. Harrison Mann proposed a series of bills designed to harass the Virginia NAACP , which Fenwick and others believed had instigated the desegregation lawsuits . 
 After the meeting , Governor Stanley told the press that his plan would make Virginia school systems immune to any integrationist litigation . The onus of school closures , he said , would be on African Americans who " force themselves into a school of another race " . 
 In the days before the start of the special session , it became clear that a major battle was brewing between the moderate segregationists and the extreme segregationists . Delegates from Northern Virginia openly opposed the Stanley plan as well as calls for even more radical legislation . Although most moderate segregationists had joined with the extremists in initially supporting the Gray Commission plan and the call for a constitutional convention , the moderates largely did not support interposition . The moderate segregationists also joined with many ( such as leading educators , urban leaders from Northern Virginia , former state superintendent of public schools Dabney Lancaster , several General Assembly delegates , and Gray Commission vice chairman Harry B. Davis ) who felt that the tuition voucher proposal would undermine public education . 
 Many state legislators also seemed unsure about whether to support the Stanley plan . A press poll of the state House Appropriations Committee showed an 8 @-@ to @-@ 7 split against the plan , with two members undecided . Support for Stanley 's plan came almost exclusively from the Southside and counties around it , the Tidewater counties , and portions of Southwest Virginia . Much of the lack of support focused on whether the plan would actually pass court muster as well as halt desegregation . Delegate James McIlhany Thomson , an ardent segregationist , said he believed the Stanley plan would not pass without a pupil assignment program . But on August 24 , Garland Gray ( whose own position had moved rightward ) abandoned support for the pupil assignment plan because it permitted limited integration . Governor Stanley , however , was adamant that the Assembly enact his legislative program implementing " massive resistance . " " If we accept admission of one Negro child into a white school , it 's all over , " he said on August 24 . 
 = = Enacting the Stanley plan = = 
 = = = Other plans = = = 
 The Stanley plan was not the only segregationist legislative package introduced at the special session of the Assembly . On July 31 , Charlottesville State Senator E.O. McCue offered his own proposal . The McCue plan would : 1 ) Place all public schools under the control of the Virginia Assembly ; 2 ) <unk> the Virginia State Board of Education to operate the schools in the name of the Assembly ; 3 ) Make all local and county school personnel employees of the Assembly ; 4 ) Bar lawsuits against local school districts unless initiated by the state Attorney General ; 5 ) Require that a school district be immediately taken over by the Assembly if any current school district or school board member is the subject of an integrationist lawsuit , until such time as the Assembly desires to reestablish the local school system ; 6 ) Vest all power to admit and / or assign students to schools in the hands of the Assembly ; and 7 ) Require the Assembly to assign pupils to the schools they currently attend , and require that the assignment of any new pupils or changes to assignments be approved by the Assembly . ( At the time , it was estimated that 125 @,@ 000 pupil assignments were made each year in the state . ) 
 Another legislative package was introduced by State Senators Armistead Boothe and Ted Dalton . The Boothe @-@ Dalton plan was less ambitious in scope . It proposed a plan in which : 1 ) Student school assignments would be made on factors other than race ; 2 ) Parents unhappy with their child 's school assignment would have access to an administrative appeals system ; and 3 ) Teachers could transfer schools only as conditions warranted . The key element of the Boothe @-@ Dalton plan was in how it differed from the Gray Commission student assignment plan . The Gray Commission plan assigned students on the basis of student welfare , availability of facilities and transportation , health , and aptitude , whereas the Boothe @-@ Dalton plan expanded the list of factors to include school attendance areas , academic background , student personality , and student needs . Additionally , the Boothe @-@ Dalton plan provided for an administrative appeal process , which the Gray Commission plan did not . It also identified a very specific , time @-@ consuming process for assignment appeals ( to the local school board , the state board of education , state circuit courts , state supreme court , and eventually the U.S. Supreme Court ) . Finally , it contained a " local option " that would allow racial integration in public schools " where localities are ready " ( according to Boothe ) . 
 The Mann @-@ Fenwick plan , sponsored by Arlington Delegate C. Harrison Mann and Senator Charles R. Fenwick , was a third major proposal . Their plan established a three @-@ member " School Assignment Board " in each school district whose members would be appointed by the governor . The plan adopted the assignment factors listed by the Gray Commission , but also borrowed language from Supreme Court ruling in Brown v. Board of Education ( which some legislators felt would help the statute pass court scrutiny ) . The Mann @-@ Fenwick plan also permitted any parent to protest the assignment of a new pupil to their school ( a process designed to give white parents the legal right to protest the assignment of a black student to an all @-@ white school ) . 
 = = = Opening of the special session = = = 
 Governor Stanley opened the Assembly 's special session on August 27 by declaring that Virginia faced " the gravest problem since 1865 " . Stanley said his goal was to have the legislature declare that mixing of races in public schools posed a clear and present danger to the operation of an " efficient " public school system ( as required by the Virginia constitution ) . He also asserted that in order to protect the health and welfare of the people , integration must be opposed . He made it clear that he intended to stop all integration . He said he believed that if even one school integrated , integration would sweep over all of Virginia . 
 The Stanley plan had two main aspects , the governor stated . The first was the funds withholding provision . But he pointed out that his plan ( which had now been modified even further since late August ) would cut off funds only to portions of school districts . ( For example , if an elementary school in a district integrated , the legislation would require funds to be cut off to all elementary schools in that district — but not to secondary schools . ) He also noted that this portion of his legislative program would expire on June 30 , 1958 . Stanley said the second major provision of his program was the tuition grant plan , offered to parents in districts where schools closed . ( <unk> by the governor was a provision in his tuition grant plan that would require school districts which lost state funds to provide tuition grants . ) All legislators should get behind this legislative program for massive resistance , Stanley concluded , because all Virginians of all races had concluded over the past eight months that there should be no mixing of the races anywhere in the state . 
 Fifty @-@ eight bills about school desegregation were filed for consideration by the Virginia Assembly . The administration immediately entered into negotiations to amend the Stanley plan to allow parents to sue a school district to force it to accept state funds ( and <unk> ) . The Boothe @-@ Dalton and McCue plans were also filed . Backers of the Gray Commission plan filed 14 bills to implement the Commission 's proposals , but the Gray plan 's supporters said they would abandon their pupil assignment plan in favor of the Mann @-@ Fenwick pupil assignment plan . Delegate C.W. <unk> introduced a bill to prohibit school districts from raising private money to operate integrated schools , Senator Eugene <unk> introduced a bill to allow residents to vote on whether integrated schools should be closed and whether closed schools should be reopened as segregated , and Delegate Griffith Purcell introduced a bill to require a statewide referendum in November 1956 on whether school segregation should be state policy . 
 The Assembly recessed on August 28 for the Labor Day holiday , and did not come back into session until September 4 . The same day , Governor Stanley conferred with Rep. Smith , Delegate Gray , and House Speaker Moore . Their discussion focused on the Stanley plan 's lack of an appeals process for pupil assignments . Stanley agreed to a compromise that would allow an administrative appeal ( through an as @-@ yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ worked @-@ out process ) , followed by a required appeal to state courts and lower federal courts before any appeal could be taken to the U.S. Supreme Court . The Stanley plan seemed to suffer a serious blow the following day , however , when the Virginia State Board of Education voted not to endorse the plan . Four members strongly opposed withholding state funds from integrated schools , which led to the negative vote . The board also voted to publicly support the original Gray Commission plan . Meeting with the board after the vote , Governor Stanley discussed the possibility of merging his plan with some sort of pupil assignment plan , so that pupil assignment would be permitted but funds would still be withheld if assignment failed to segregate the schools . Another blow to the Stanley plan came when Colgate W. Darden , Jr . , the former governor of Virginia who was now president of the University of Virginia , announced he opposed the Stanley plan and supported the Gray Commission 's original proposals . 
 = = = Post @-@ recess maneuvering = = = 
 By the time the special session resumed on September 4 , the number of bills filed for consideration by the Assembly had risen to more than 70 . Stanley 's supporters led off the debate in both chambers of the Assembly , but Stanley 's political position had weakened and media observers felt that he was close to compromising even further on his program . On September 6 , Stanley 's backers introduced a new bill in the Assembly which would give the governor the power to make pupil assignments . The new bill expanded on the limited criteria previously proposed by the governor by declaring that pupil assignment would be made in order to ensure " efficient " ( e.g. , <unk> ) operation of the schools and to reduce a clear and present danger to the public safety of citizens in those districts which integrated . In an effort to strengthen the Stanley plan 's interposition elements , the bill also authorized circuit courts to file injunctions against any school district which violated the assignment decrees — which invited the prospect of pitting state courts against federal ones . Delegate Thomson introduced a bill to establish a seven @-@ member Assembly committee to investigate any group seeking to influence public opinion in the state , teacher quality , uniformity of courses and curriculum in the public schools , and the effects of integration on public education . 
 From September 4 to 7 , the Assembly heard numerous witnesses testify for and against the various plans . State Senator Harry F. Byrd , Jr . ( son of U.S. Senator Harry F. Byrd , Sr. ) endorsed the Stanley plan . He also said that if it were struck down , the Byrd Organization intended to keep enacting plans to thwart desegregation forever . Testifying against the various segregationist plans were members of the NAACP and several Northern Virginia legislators . As the hearings ended , Delegates Lucas Phillipps and Frank Moncure introduced a bill to bar the Virginia State Board of Education from denying accreditation to any private school because its building did not meet state standards . ( Many legislators believed that if the public schools closed , " white academies " would spring up to offer segregated private education . These schools , however , would be forced to occupy buildings which did not meet state educational codes , and the Phillipps @-@ Moncure bill was intended to solve this problem . ) 
 By September 9 , however , it was clear that the Stanley plan was only holding onto a minority of legislative voters . 
 = = = The anti @-@ NAACP bills = = = 
 On September 10 , Delegate C. Harrison Mann introduced 16 bills aimed at curbing the NAACP in Virginia . Five of the bills expanded the state 's definitions of barratry , champerty , and maintenance . The eleven other bills collectively required the following groups to file a financial report and membership list annually with state : any group which promotes or opposes state legislation aimed at any race ; any organization attempting to influence public opinion on behalf of any race ; or any group raising funds to employ legal counsel in connection with racial litigation . 
 = = = Compromise and passage = = = 
 By September 13 , a bloc of 17 state senators had formed to oppose any segregationist plan which did not contain an option for local school districts to integrate . Faced with defeat in the Senate , Governor Stanley introduced a new version of his plan on September 12 that would : 
 Make all local school district employees agents of the Assembly . 
 Require that if a school official assigned a black pupil to a white school , that official would be suspended and the governor would become the agent of the Assembly . 
 Give the governor the authority to investigate assignment of black pupils to white schools , and ask black students to return to their original all @-@ black school . 
 Allow the closure of either a single classroom in a white school or the entire school itself , if integration occurred . 
 Give the governor the authority to reassign students to new schools if a school was ordered to integrate or voluntarily integrated . 
 Create tuition grants to encourage black students to leave white schools . 
 Permit the governor to withhold state funds from any school district where segregation had failed . 
 The new plan drew extensive criticism . Southside legislators feared that only all @-@ white schools would close . Stanley asserted that his plan would permit him to close black schools as well as white ones if an all @-@ white school was forced to integrate ( although no one seemed able to find this provision in his newly introduced bills ) . Attorney General Almond voiced his opinion that the new plan would not stop integrationist lawsuits , and that making the governor an agent of the legislature was clearly unconstitutional . When Speaker Moore later in the day proposed a pupil assignment plan that did not permit local integration , Stanley abandoned his new plan and supported Moore 's proposal . 
 Stanley suffered a significant setback in the House Appropriations Committee on September 14 , when supporters of a local option won a narrow vote to amend the Stanley plan to permit local districts to integrate . The amended plan was reported to the House floor . Stanley immediately proposed yet another new plan which automatically cut off funds to any or all portions of a school district which integrated . Under the new Stanley plan , however , a school board could petition to have the schools reopened , although this would require that the Assembly take over the district , the governor to act as the Assembly 's agent , and the governor to implement a segregationist pupil assignment plan . The governor 's opponents , however , countered with their own plan in which each school board would retain the right to make pupil assignments ( although pupil assignments could now be appealed a three @-@ member " pupil assignment board " ) . Any parents with children in a school could challenge the assignment of a child to that school . Appeals would be required to go through the state court system after leaving the pupil assignment board ; in the meantime , the child would remain at their original school ( a process intended to delay the assignment of a black student to an all @-@ white school ) . To ensure that the plan was a " local option , " both the school board and the local pupil assignment board would need to adopt a pupil assignment plan , or state funds would be cut off . A cut @-@ off could be avoided if 10 percent of the school district 's voters signed a petition calling for a referendum , and voters approved implementation of a pupil assignment plan ( a process intended to allow voters to bypass an integrationist school board ) . Local communities were also permitted to drop the pupil assignment plan if 25 percent of school district voters signed a petition calling for a referendum on the issue and voters approved the referendum . 
 Debate over the competing proposals in the House began on September 17 , and was highly contentious . The House subsequently passed the governor 's latest proposal . In the Senate , however , the governor 's proposal was amended to establish a statewide pupil assignment board appointed by the governor . A conference committee to reconcile the two different bills collapsed . A second conference committee won House members ' approval of the three @-@ member statewide pupil assignment committee , while Senate members agreed to allow appeals to go directly to the governor before heading to state courts . When the conference bill came onto the House and Senate floors , legislators from districts under court order to integrate and legislators from districts with small African American populations tried to amend the bill to include a local pupil assignment option but failed . The conference bill passed the Virginia House 62 @-@ to @-@ 37 . After three hours of debate late in the evening of September 21 , the Virginia Senate defeated the local option amendment 21 @-@ to @-@ 17 . The conference bill passed the Senate by a vote of 22 @-@ to @-@ 16 . ( Although the Virginia Senate has 40 seats , there were only 38 senators present at the time . One senator had recently died . One senator was ill but ready to leave the hospital and cast a deciding vote against the Stanley plan if needed . ) The final vote was not taken until 2 : 00 AM on September 22 , and the Virginia Assembly adjourned at 2 : 30 AM . 
 Among the bills passed in the final hours of the session were six " legal business " bills designed to curb the NAACP . They were significantly amended in committee to meet the constitutional concerns of a number of legislators . The bills were merged so that only five were reported from the committee and passed by the Assembly . A final bill passed on the last day of the special session created a racial issues investigative committee . This legislation established a 10 @-@ member Assembly committee composed of six delegates and four senators . The committee was charged with investigating the effect of integration on public schools , racial matters in the state in general , and the effectiveness of racial legislation . The committee was to issue a report and make recommendations ( if any ) to the Assembly by November 1 , 1957 . 
 Due to the number of last @-@ minute changes and the lateness of the hour during the final votes , the Assembly held a " cleaning up " day on Saturday , September 22 , to make technical clarifications to the final bills . After this session , the Assembly adjourned sine die . 
 Governor Stanley signed the school segregation and legal business bills into law on September 29 , 1956 . The funding cut @-@ off bill and legal business bills went into effect immediately , while the remaining school segregation bills took effect 90 days later . 
 = = Stanley Plan as enacted = = 
 Much of the Stanley plan was designed so that the governor or the Assembly would be the focus of the courts , and not local school districts or school district officials and employees . The concept was that local officials felt powerless in the face of the federal courts and could not risk fines or jail . It was believed that federal courts would be reluctant to fine or jail the governor or Assembly , allowing the state to effectively " interpose " itself between the citizenry and federal government . 
 The elements of the Stanley plan , as enacted , were : 
 Pupil assignment to maintain racially segregated schools — Pupil assignment was no longer a local matter under the new legislation . Pupil assignment was now under the authority of a state @-@ level three @-@ member pupil assignment board , whose members were appointed by the governor . The state board made assignments on the basis of race as well as a wide range of other factors , including " sociological , psychological , and like intangible social scientific factors as will prevent , as nearly as possible , a condition of socio @-@ economic class consciousness among pupils . " Appeals of pupil assignment were made directly to the governor . Students and their parents were required to appeal the governor 's decision through the state courts before seeking to move the appeal to the federal courts . 
 Automatic closure of public schools which racially integrate — The legislation required that any school which integrated ( voluntarily or not ) must be immediately and automatically closed . However , the governor was given the discretion to take over integrated school ( s ) and reopen the school ( s ) on a segregated basis rather than close the entire district . Integrated schools did not have to stay closed , however . A school district could petition the governor to take over one or more schools ( or the entire district ) that had closed and reopen them as segregated schools . Whether exercising his discretion or acting on a petition from the school district , the governor was authorized to act only as an agent of the Assembly . The governor was also required to try to persuade the African American child to return to his or her racially segregated school , so that the schools could reopen on a segregated basis . 
 State reassignment and reopening of public schools — If the governor was unsuccessful in persuading African American children to return to their racially integrated school ( s ) , the governor was authorized to reassign the student to a racially segregated all @-@ black school . At any time , however , a school district could request that the governor stop administering the local public schools . However , if the schools reopened on an integrated basis , all state funding would be cut off . ( This constituted the local option . ) 
 Funding cut @-@ off — The cut @-@ off of state funding occurred if a school district exercised the local option . The governor had no discretion in this area ; the Virginia constitution required that the state operate " efficient " public schools , and the legislature had defined " efficient " to mean segregated schools . The funds cut @-@ off was automatic , not discretionary . However , funds could be cut off only to integrated elementary or secondary schools or the entire school district ( as warranted ) . 
 Tuition grants — School districts were required to offer tuition grants to all students in closed schools . Where schools were integrated , the school district was also required to offer a tuition grant to any pupil who objected to being educated in an integrated school . ( The amount of the grant was unclear . One bill passed in the final hours of the special session limited the grant to $ 350 a semester , while another required the grant to be the average amount each school district spent per pupil . ) Funds for the tuition grants were to come from any withheld state school funds , as well local funds . ( Oddly , there was no restriction on the use of the grants , other than that they be used for nonsectarian education . This meant a tuition grant could be used to attend an integrated school . ) 
 = = Aftermath of the Stanley plan = = 
 On December 25 , 1956 , Governor Stanley made his appointments to the state Pupil Assignment Board . The members were : Hugh White , superintendent of the Nansemond County public school system ; Beverly H. Randolph , Jr . , a Charles City County lawyer who later became a Richmond delegate ; and Andrew Farley , owner of the Danville Register & Bee in Danville , Virginia , and a local Democratic Party leader . All three men resided in the Southside . Just three days later , the Pupil Assignment Board delegated its powers to local school superintendents and local school boards , reserving the right to approve assignments and deal with special cases or appeals . 
 The first legal blow to the Stanley plan came on January 11 , 1957 , when the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia held in Adkins et al. v. School Board of the City of Newport News , that the pupil assignment plan was unconstitutional . Numerous other federal courts also struck down the pupil assignment law over the next two years . The Pupil Assignment Board , however , continued to claim jurisdiction and legal authority over pupil assignments , leading to widespread confusion among Virginia 's school boards . In November 1957 , Almond was elected Governor of Virginia . Convinced that " massive resistance " was doomed to failure , Almond pushed to abolish the statewide pupil assignment board , and in April 1959 won passage of a new law which returned control over pupil assignment to local school districts . Angry about the new law , the three members of the assignment board quit on February 24 , 1960 . On June 28 , 1960 , the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed Adkins and ruled the state pupil assignment board was unconstitutional . During its three @-@ year existence , the state board made 450 @,@ 000 pupil assignments but had never permitted an African American child to attend school with whites . 
 The school closure portion of the Stanley plan was not challenged until after it was invoked , and no school closures occurred until September 1958 . In August 1958 , federal courts were nearing decisions on the integration of school systems in Charlottesville , Norfolk , and Warren County . On September 4 , Governor Almond stripped all local school boards and school district superintendents throughout the state of their authority to assign pupils , and ordered the school boards of the three jurisdictions to refuse to assign any black students to white schools . A day later , a federal court ordered the immediate integration of Warren County public schools . On September 11 , invoking the Stanley plan 's school closure provisions , Governor Almond closed the Warren County public school system . Charlottesville schools were closed on September 17 , and Norfolk schools closed September 30 . Parents of African American students immediately sued to have the school closure laws invalidated . On January 18 , 1959 , the Supreme Court of Virginia held in Harrison v. Day , that the school closing law violated Section 129 of the Virginia constitution ( which required the state to " maintain an efficient system of public free schools throughout the State . " ) . The very same day , the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia held in James v. Almond , that the school closing statute violated the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution . 
 Faced with overwhelming court opposition to the Stanley plan , Almond announced a major policy shift . Almond had first signaled that he intended to abandon " massive resistance " in September 1958 after the first wave of school closings . But public opinion had yet to coalesce against " massive resistance . " By January , with even Virginia courts siding against the state and citizens increasingly angry that their children 's education was being sacrificed to maintain segregation , Almond concluded that the Stanley plan was no longer viable . 
 On January 28 , 1959 , speaking before a special joint session of the Virginia Assembly , Governor Almond announced that Virginia was powerless to prevent school desegregation . Speaking slowly from a typewritten script and with obvious deep emotion , Almond declared " Virginia has not surrendered and does not surrender now " , but then said he would not use the police power of the state to try to force schools to stay segregated . ( This was an obvious reference to the incident in which Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus called out the Arkansas National Guard to bar nine African American students from enrolling at Little Rock Central High School in 1957 . The students were admitted only after President Dwight Eisenhower placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control , and had the students escorted into the high school by the United States Army 's 101st Airborne Division . ) Almond asked the legislature to repeal all aspects of the Stanley plan which had been overturned by the courts , repeal the state 's compulsory school attendance law , adopt a $ 3 million tuition grant program to allow students to attend segregated private schools of their choice , and strengthen the penalty for threatening to bomb a church , school , or other meeting place . Almond also announced a study of Section 129 of the Virginia Constitution , a political gesture that was never seriously pursued . Almond 's program became known by some as " passive resistance " and " freedom of choice " ( although it is also sometimes called " tokenism " or " containment " ) , a legislative approach intended to shift Virginia toward desegregation in the face of a hostile electorate . 
 On February 2 , 1959 , Governor Almond refused to intervene as 17 African American students in Norfolk and four in Arlington County peacefully enrolled in formerly all @-@ white schools . Historians generally list this date as the end of " massive resistance . " 
 Almond later said of his time as governor : " I lived in hell . " 
 = = = " Passive resistance " and the end of legal segregation in Virginia = = = 
 " Passive resistance " greatly slowed the pace of school desegregation in Virginia . Legislation enacted by the Assembly placed the burden on often @-@ poor African American parents to " prove " that their child should be enrolled in an all @-@ white school . ( For example , a black family had to prove that the all @-@ white school was physically closer than the all @-@ black school their child was enrolled in . An actual , physical measurement had to be submitted . ) By the time Almond left office in 1962 , only 1 percent of Virginia 's schools had integrated . By 1964 , it had risen to just 5 percent . 
 The last vestiges of the Stanley plan were swept aside by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1964 . The case involved the Prince Edward County public school system . Prince Edward County was one of the Southside counties . In 1951 , the NAACP filed suit on behalf of African American children in Prince Edward County demanding racial integration of the public schools . The U.S. Supreme Court consolidated the case , Davis v. County School Board of Prince Edward County , with Brown v. Board of Education , and as part of its ruling in Brown ordered that the Prince Edward County public schools integrate . By 1959 , a second lawsuit was working its way through the federal court system in Virginia , and this suit seemed likely to force the county 's schools to integrate in time for the 1959 @-@ 1960 school term . On June 3 , 1959 , Prince Edward County officials voted to defund and close their public school system . It became the first school system in the nation to close rather than integrate . White parents subsequently contributed funds to establish an all @-@ white private school , the Prince Edward County Free School . Poor African American parents were unable ( and unwilling ) to establish a similar school , and sued to have the public schools reopened . On January 6 , 1964 , the U.S. Supreme Court finally agreed to hear their case . The United States Department of Justice , citing the " extraordinary history " of the Prince Edward County case , intervened to support the black parents . On May 25 , 1964 , the U.S. Supreme unanimously held in Griffin v. County School Board of Prince Edward County , that Prince Edward County 's school closure violated the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and ordered the public schools reopened immediately . The high court also struck down the tuition grants program , concluding that providing the grants while schools were closed violated the 14th Amendment . On June 1 , the Supreme Court agreed to send its order to the district court in Richmond immediately , rather than through normal procedures ( which would have delayed action by three weeks ) . On June 2 , the federal district court in Richmond ordered the schools opened . Prince Edward County officials refused to obey the court 's orders , and on June 17 the district court threatened to have county officials imprisoned . Prince Edward County officials bowed to the court 's authority , and agreed to reopen the county 's public schools on June 23 , 1964 . 
 The pace of desegregation in Virginia quickened significantly after the Supreme Court 's ruling in Griffin . Passage of the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 also greatly assisted this process . On May 27 , 1968 , the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously held in Green v. County School Board of New Kent County , that Almond 's " freedom of choice " plan violated the 14th Amendment . The ruling led to the collapse of " passive resistance " and to the integration of nearly all public schools throughout the state . 
 = = = The NAACP cases = = = 
 The legal business statutes enacted as part of the Stanley plan did not survive either . 
 The Virginia NAACP filed suit in federal court in 1956 to have the five barratry , champerty , and maintenance laws thrown out as an unconstitutional infringement of the 1st Amendment rights of freedom of speech and freedom of assembly . A three @-@ judge panel of a U.S. District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia agreed that three of the laws were unconstitutional , but reserved judgment on the other two laws pending interpretation by state courts ( which had not yet ruled on the laws ' legality ) . Both the state and the NAACP appealed . In Harrison v. NAACP , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled 6 @-@ to @-@ 3 that the district court should have withheld judgment until state courts had considered the issue first . 
 The NAACP then brought suit challenging all five laws in state court . A state circuit court held three of the laws unconstitutional , but upheld the barratry law and the law prohibiting advocacy of lawsuits against the state . On appeal , the Virginia Supreme Court struck down the anti @-@ advocacy law as well , but upheld the barratry law . In a 6 @-@ to @-@ 3 ruling in 1963 that gave broad protection to public interest legal organizations , the U.S. Supreme Court in NAACP v. Button , held that all five of the barratry , champerty , and maintenance laws violated the 1st and 14th Amendments to the constitution . 
 = = = Thomson committee = = = 
 The Stanley plan also established a committee to investigate race relations and integration in Virginia . This committee was officially titled the Virginia Committee on Law Reform and Racial Activities , but was publicly known as the " Thomson Committee " after its chair , Delegate James McIlhany Thomson . In 1954 , David Scull ( a printer in Annandale , Virginia ) began publishing pro @-@ integration literature on behalf of a number of organizations in Virginia . The Fairfax Citizens ' Council , a group opposed to desegregation , publicized Scull 's role in the printing of the literature in 1957 . Scull was subpoenaed to appear before the Thomson Committee , and subjected to an aggressive series of questions ( many of which did not pertain to the committee 's legal charge ) . Scull refused to answer some of these questions , and the committee went to court to force him to answer . A state circuit court ruled against Scull and ordered him to answer the questions . He refused , and was convicted of contempt of court . 
 Scull appealed his conviction to the U.S. Supreme Court . In a unanimous ruling in May 1959 , the high court held in Scull v. Virginia ex rel . <unk> on Law Reform and Racial Activities that the conviction violated Scull 's 14th Amendment rights to due process because the committee 's inquiry was so vague and so confusing that Scull could not tell what he was being asked . 
 = The Beatles ( album ) = 
 The Beatles , also known as the White Album , is the ninth studio album by English rock group the Beatles , released on 22 November 1968 . A double album , its plain white sleeve has no graphics or text other than the band 's name embossed , and was intended as a direct contrast to the vivid cover artwork of the band 's earlier Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . Although no singles were issued from The Beatles in Britain and the United States , the songs " Hey Jude " and " Revolution " originated from the same recording sessions and were issued on a single in August 1968 . The album 's songs range in style from British blues and ska to tracks influenced by Chuck Berry and by Karlheinz Stockhausen . 
 Most of the songs on the album were written during March and April 1968 at a Transcendental Meditation course in Rishikesh , India . The group returned to EMI Studios in May with recording lasting through to October . During these sessions , arguments broke out among the Beatles , and witnesses in the studio saw band members quarrel over creative differences . The feuds intensified when Lennon 's new partner , Yoko Ono , started attending the sessions . After a series of problems , including producer George Martin taking a sudden leave of absence and engineer Geoff Emerick quitting , Ringo Starr left the band briefly in August . The same tensions continued throughout the following year , leading to the eventual break @-@ up of the Beatles in April 1970 . 
 On release , The Beatles received mixed reviews from music journalists . Most critics found its satirical songs unimportant and apolitical amid a turbulent political and social climate , although some praised Lennon and McCartney 's writing . The band and Martin have since debated whether the group should have released a single album instead . Nonetheless , The Beatles reached number one on the charts in both the United Kingdom and the United States and has since been viewed by some critics as one of the greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1968 , the Beatles had achieved commercial and critical success . The group 's previous album , Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , was number one in the UK the previous year and charted for 27 weeks , selling 250 @,@ 000 copies in the first week after release . Time magazine had written in 1967 that Sgt. Pepper 's constituted a " historic departure in the progress of music – any music " while the American writer Timothy Leary thought that the band were prototypes of " evolutionary agents sent by God , endowed with mysterious powers to create a new human species . " The band received a negative critical response for the film Magical Mystery Tour , but fan response was nevertheless positive . 
 Most of the songs for The Beatles were written during a Transcendental Meditation course with Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in Rishikesh , India , between February and April 1968 . The retreat involved long periods of meditation , conceived by the band as a spiritual respite from all worldly endeavours – a chance , in John Lennon 's words , to " get away from everything " . Both Lennon and Paul McCartney quickly re @-@ engaged themselves in songwriting , often meeting " clandestinely in the afternoons in each other 's rooms " to review their new work . " Regardless of what I was supposed to be doing , " Lennon would later recall , " I did write some of my best songs there . " Beatles author Ian MacDonald said Sgt Pepper was " shaped by LSD " , but the Beatles took no drugs with them to India aside from marijuana , and their clear minds helped the group with their songwriting . The stay in Rishikesh proved especially fruitful for George Harrison as a songwriter , coinciding with his re @-@ engagement with the guitar after two years studying the sitar . The musicologist Walter Everett likens Harrison 's development as a composer in 1968 to that of Lennon and McCartney five years before , although he notes that Harrison became " privately prolific " , given his customary junior status in the group . 
 The Beatles left Rishikesh before the end of the course . Ringo Starr was the first to leave , as he could not stomach the food ; McCartney departed in mid @-@ March , while Harrison and Lennon were more interested in Indian religion and remained until April . According to the author Geoffrey Giuliano , Lennon left Rishikesh because he felt personally betrayed after hearing rumours that the Maharishi had behaved inappropriately towards women who accompanied the Beatles to India , though McCartney and Harrison later discovered this to be untrue and Lennon 's wife Cynthia reported there was " not a shred of evidence or justification " . 
 Collectively , the group wrote around 40 new compositions in Rishikesh , 26 of which would be recorded in very rough form at Kinfauns , Harrison 's home in Esher , in May 1968 . Lennon wrote the bulk of the new material , contributing 14 songs . Lennon and McCartney brought home @-@ recorded demos to the session , and worked on them together . Some home demos and group sessions at Kinfauns were later released on the 1996 compilation Anthology 3 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 The Beatles was recorded between 30 May and 14 October 1968 , largely at Abbey Road Studios in London , with some sessions at Trident Studios . The group block @-@ booked time at Abbey Road through to July , and their times at Rishikesh were soon forgotten in the atmosphere of the studio , with sessions occurring at irregular hours . The group 's self @-@ belief that they could do anything led to the formation of a new multimedia business corporation Apple Corps , an enterprise that drained the group financially with a series of unsuccessful projects . The open @-@ ended studio time led to a new way of working out songs . Instead of tightly rehearsing a backing track , as had happened in previous sessions , the group would simply record all the rehearsals and jamming , then add overdubs to the best take . Harrison 's song " Not Guilty " was left off the album despite recording 102 takes . 
 The sessions for The Beatles marked the first appearance in the studio of Lennon 's new domestic and artistic partner , Yoko Ono , who accompanied him to Abbey Road to work on " Revolution 1 " and who would thereafter be a more or less constant presence at all Beatles sessions . Ono 's presence was highly unorthodox , as prior to that point , the Beatles had generally worked in isolation . McCartney 's girlfriend at the time , Francie Schwartz , was also present at some sessions , as were the other two Beatles ' wives , Pattie Harrison and Maureen Starkey . 
 During the The Beatles sessions , the band upgraded from 4 @-@ track recording to 8 @-@ track . As work began , Abbey Road Studios possessed , but had yet to install , an 8 @-@ track machine that had supposedly been sitting in a storage room for months . This was in accordance with EMI 's policy of testing and customising new gear extensively before putting it into use in the studios . The Beatles recorded " Hey Jude " and " Dear Prudence " at Trident because it had an 8 @-@ track recorder . When they learned that EMI also had one , they insisted on using it , and engineers Ken Scott and Dave Harries took the machine ( without authorisation from the studio chiefs ) into Abbey Road Studio 2 for the band 's use . 
 The author Mark Lewisohn reports that the Beatles held their first and only 24 @-@ hour session at Abbey Road near the end of the creation of The Beatles , which occurred during the final mixing and sequencing for the album . The session was attended by Lennon , McCartney and producer George Martin . Unlike most LPs , there was no customary three @-@ second gap between tracks , and the master was edited so that songs segued together , via a straight edit , a crossfade , or an incidental piece of music . 
 = = = Personal issues = = = 
 The studio efforts on The Beatles captured the work of four increasingly individualised artists who frequently found themselves at odds . Lewisohn notes that several backing tracks do not feature the full group , and overdubs tended to be limited to whoever wrote the song . Sometimes McCartney would record in one studio for prolonged periods of time , while Lennon would record in another , each man using different engineers . Late in the sessions , Martin , whose influence over the band had waned , spontaneously left to go on holiday , leaving Chris Thomas in charge of production . Lennon 's devotion to Ono over the other Beatles , and the pair 's addiction to heroin , made working conditions difficult as he became prone to bouts of temper . 
 The recording engineer Geoff Emerick , who had worked with the group since Revolver in 1966 , had become disillusioned with the sessions . At one point , while recording " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " , Emerick overheard Martin criticising McCartney 's lead vocal performance , to which McCartney replied , " Well you come down and sing it " . On 16 July , Emerick announced that he was no longer willing to work with them and left . 
 Within the band , according to the author Peter Doggett , " the most essential line of communication ... between Lennon and McCartney " had been broken by Ono 's presence on the first day of recording . While echoing this view , Beatles biographer Philip Norman comments that , from the start , each of the group 's two principal songwriters shared a mutual disregard for the other 's new compositions : Lennon found McCartney 's songs " cloyingly sweet and bland " , while McCartney viewed Lennon 's as " harsh , <unk> and deliberately provocative " . In a move that Lewisohn highlights as unprecedented in the Beatles ' recording career , Harrison and Starr chose to distance themselves part @-@ way through the project , flying to California on 7 June so that Harrison could film his scenes for the Ravi Shankar documentary Raga . Lennon , McCartney and Harrison 's involvement in individual musical projects outside the band during 1968 was further evidence of the group 's fragmentation . In Lennon 's case , the cover of his experimental collaboration with Ono , Two Virgins , featured the couple fully naked – a gesture that his bandmates found bewildering and unnecessary . 
 On 20 August , Lennon and Starr , working on overdubs for " Yer Blues " in Studio 3 , visited McCartney in Studio 2 , where he was working on " Mother Nature 's Son " . The positive spirit of the session disappeared immediately , and the engineer Ken Scott later claimed : " you could cut the atmosphere with a knife " . On 22 August , during the session for " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , Starr abruptly left the studio , feeling that his role in the group was peripheral compared to the other members , and was upset at McCartney 's constant criticism of his drumming on the track . Abbey Road staff later commented that Starr frequently turned up to the sessions and sat waiting in the reception area for the others to turn up . In his absence , McCartney played the drums on " Dear Prudence " . Lewisohn also reports that , in the case of " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , the three remaining Beatles each made contributions on bass and drums , with the result that those parts may be composite tracks played by Lennon , McCartney or Harrison . 
 Lennon , McCartney and Harrison pleaded with Starr to reconsider . He duly returned on 5 September to find his drum kit decorated with flowers , a welcome @-@ back gesture from Harrison . McCartney described the sessions for The Beatles as a turning point for the group , saying " there was a lot of friction during that album . We were just about to break up , and that was tense in itself " , while Lennon later said " the break @-@ up of the Beatles can be heard on that album " . Of the album 's 30 tracks , only 16 have all four band members performing . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The Beatles contains a wide range of musical styles , which the authors Barry Miles and Gillian Gaar each view as the most diverse of any of the group 's albums . These styles include rock and roll , blues , folk , country , reggae , avant @-@ garde , hard rock and music hall . The production aesthetic ensured that the album 's sound was scaled @-@ down and less reliant on studio innovation , relative to all the Beatles ' releases since Revolver . The author Nicholas Schaffner viewed this as reflective of a widespread departure from the LSD @-@ inspired psychedelia of 1967 , an approach that was initiated by Bob Dylan and the Beach Boys and similarly adopted in 1968 by artists such as the Rolling Stones and the Byrds . 
 The only western instrument available to the group during their Indian visit was the acoustic guitar , and thus many of the songs on The Beatles were written and first performed on that instrument . Some of these songs remained acoustic on The Beatles and were recorded solo , or only by part of the group ( including " Wild Honey Pie " , " Blackbird " , " Julia " , " I Will " and " Mother Nature 's Son " ) . 
 = = = Side one = = = 
 McCartney wrote " Back in the U.S.S.R. " as a surreal parody of Chuck Berry 's song " Back in the U.S.A. " A field recording of an aeroplane taking off and landing was used at the start of the track , and intermittently throughout it , while the backing vocals were sung by Lennon and Harrison in the style of the Beach Boys at the request of Mike Love , who had accompanied the group to India . The track became widely bootlegged in the Soviet Union and became an underground hit . McCartney subsequently recorded a cover album the title of which , <unk> в СССР , is Russian for " Back in the U.S.S.R. " 
 " Dear Prudence " was one of the songs recorded at Trident . The style is typical of the acoustic songs written in Rishikesh , using guitar arpeggios . Lennon wrote the track about Mia Farrow 's sister Prudence , who rarely left her room during the stay in commitment to the meditation . 
 " Glass Onion " was the first backing track recorded as a full band since Starr 's brief departure . MacDonald claimed Lennon deliberately wrote the lyrics to mock fans who claimed to find " hidden messages " in songs , and referenced other songs in the Beatles catalogue – " The Walrus was Paul " refers back to " I Am the Walrus " ( which itself refers to " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " ) . McCartney , in turn , overdubbed a recorder part after the line " I told you about the Fool on the Hill " , as a deliberate parody of the earlier song . A string section was added to the track in October . 
 " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " was written by McCartney as a pastiche of ska music . The track took a surprising amount of time to complete , with McCartney demanding perfectionism that annoyed his colleagues . Jimmy Scott , a friend of McCartney , suggested the title and played bongos on the initial take . He demanded a cut of publishing when the song was released , but the song was credited to " Lennon @-@ McCartney " . After working for three days on the backing track , the work was scrapped and replaced with a new recording . Lennon hated the song , calling it " granny music shit " , while engineer Richard Lush recalled that Starr disliked having to record the same backing track repetitively , and pinpoints this session as a key indication that the Beatles were going to break up . McCartney attempted to remake the backing track for a third time , but this was abandoned after a few takes and the second version was used as the final mix . The group , save for McCartney , had lost interest in the track by the end of recording , and refused to release it as a single . Marmalade recorded a version that became a number one hit . In 2004 , an online poll by Mars ranked the song as the worst ever . 
 McCartney recorded " Wild Honey Pie " on 20 August at the end of the session for " Mother Nature 's Son " . It is typical of the brief snippets of songs he recorded between takes during the album sessions . 
 " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " was written by Lennon after an American visitor to Rishikesh left for a few weeks to hunt tigers . It was recorded as an audio vérité exercise , featuring vocal performances from almost everyone who happened to be in the studio at the time . Ono sings one line and co @-@ sings another , while Chris Thomas played the mellotron , including improvisations at the end of the track . The opening flamenco guitar flourish was a recording included in the Mellotron 's standard tape library . 
 " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was written by Harrison during a visit he made to his parents ' home in Cheshire . He first recorded the song as a solo performance , on acoustic guitar , on 25 July – a version that remained unreleased until Anthology 3 . He was unhappy with the group 's first attempt to record the track , and so invited his friend Eric Clapton to come and play on it . Clapton was unsure about guesting on a Beatles record , but Harrison said the decision was " nothing to do with them . It 's my song . " Clapton 's solo was treated with automatic double tracking to attain the desired effect ; he gave Harrison the guitar he used , which Harrison later named " Lucy " . 
 " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " evolved out of song fragments that Lennon wrote in Rishikesh . According to MacDonald , this working method was inspired by the Incredible String Band 's songwriting . The basic backing track ran to 95 takes , due to the irregular time signatures and variations in style throughout the song . The final version consisted of the best half of two takes edited together . Lennon later described the song as one of his favourites , while the rest of the band found the recording rejuvenating , as it forced them to re @-@ hone their skills as a group playing together to get it right . Apple 's press officer Derek Taylor made an uncredited contribution to the song 's lyrics . 
 = = = Side two = = = 
 McCartney got the title of " Martha My Dear " from his sheepdog , but the lyrics are otherwise unrelated . The entire track is played by him backed with session musicians , and features no other Beatles . Martin composed a brass band arrangement for the track . 
 " I 'm So Tired " was written in India when Lennon was having difficulty sleeping . It was recorded at the same session as " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " . The lyrics make reference to Walter Raleigh , calling him a " stupid get " for introducing tobacco to Europe ; while the track ends with Lennon mumbling " Monsieur , monsieur , how about another one ? " This became part of the Paul is Dead conspiracy theory , when fans claimed that when the track was reversed , they could hear " Paul is dead man , miss him miss him " . 
 " Blackbird " features McCartney solo , accompanying himself on acoustic guitar . According to Lewisohn , the ticking in the background is a metronome , although Emerick recalls capturing the sound via a microphone placed beside McCartney 's shoes . The birdsong on the track was taken from the Abbey Road sound effects collection , and was recorded on one of the first EMI portable tape recorders . 
 Harrison wrote " Piggies " as an attack on greed and materialism in modern society . His mother and Lennon helped him complete the lyrics . Thomas played harpsichord on the track , while Lennon supplied a tape loop of pigs grunting . 
 " Rocky Raccoon " evolved from a jam session between Lennon and Donovan in Rishikesh . The song was taped in a single session , and was one of the tracks that Martin felt was " filler " and only put on because the album was a double . 
 " Don 't Pass Me By " was Starr 's first solo composition for the band ; he had been toying with the idea of writing a self @-@ reflective song for some time , possibly as far back as 1963 . It went by the working titles of " Ringo 's Tune " and " This Is Some Friendly " . The basic track consisted of Starr drumming while McCartney played piano . Martin composed an orchestral introduction to the song but it was rejected as being " too bizarre " and left off the album . Instead , Jack Fallon played a bluegrass fiddle part . 
 " Why Don 't We Do It in the Road ? " was written by McCartney in India after he saw two monkeys copulating in the street and wondered why humans were too civilised to do the same . He played all the instruments except drums , which were contributed by Starr . The simple lyric was very much in Lennon 's style , and Lennon was annoyed about not being asked to play on it . McCartney suggested it was " tit for tat " as he had not contributed to " Revolution 9 " . 
 " I Will " was written and sung by McCartney , with Lennon and Starr accompanying on percussion . In between numerous takes , the three Beatles broke off to busk some other songs . A snippet of a track known as " Can You Take Me Back ? " was put between " Cry Baby Cry " and " Revolution 9 " , while recordings of Cilla Black 's hit " Step Inside Love " and a joke number , " Los Paranoias " , were released on Anthology 3 . 
 " Julia " was the last track to be recorded for the album and features Lennon on solo acoustic guitar which he played in a style similar to McCartney 's on " Blackbird " . This is the only Beatles song on which Lennon performs alone and it was a tribute to his mother Julia Lennon , who was killed in 1958 in a road accident while Lennon was only seventeen , and the lyrics deal with the loss of his mother and his relationship with Ono , the " ocean child " referred to in the lyrics . Ono helped with the lyrics , but the song was still credited to Lennon @-@ McCartney as expected . 
 = = = Side three = = = 
 According to McCartney , the authorship of " Birthday " was " 50 – 50 John and me , made up on the spot and recorded all on the same evening " . He and Lennon were inspired to write the song after seeing the first UK showing of the rock 'n'roll film The Girl Can 't Help It on television , and sang the lead vocal in the style of the film 's musical star , Little Richard . After the Beatles had taped the track , Ono and Pattie Harrison added backing vocals . 
 " Yer Blues " was written by Lennon in India . Despite meditating and the tranquil atmosphere , he still felt unhappy , which was reflected in the lyrics . The style was influenced by the British Blues Boom of 1968 , which included groups such as Fleetwood Mac and Chicken Shack . The backing track was recorded in a small room next to the Studio 2 control room at Abbey Road . Unusually for a Beatles recording , the four @-@ track source tape was edited directly , resulting in an abrupt cut @-@ off at 3 ' 17 " into the start of another take ( which ran into the fade out ) . 
 McCartney wrote " Mother Nature 's Son " in India , and worked on it in isolation from the other members of the band . He performed the track solo alongside a Martin @-@ scored brass arrangement . 
 " Everybody 's Got Something to Hide Except Me and My Monkey " evolved from a jam session , and was originally untitled . The final mix was sped up by mixing the tape running at 43 hertz instead of the usual 50 . Harrison claimed the title came from one of the Maharishi 's sayings ( with " and my monkey " added later ) . 
 " Sexy Sadie " was written as " Maharishi " by Lennon , shortly after he decided to leave Rishikesh . In a 1980 interview , Lennon acknowledged that the Maharishi was the inspiration for the song : " I just called him ' Sexy Sadie ' . " 
 " Helter Skelter " was written by McCartney and was initially recorded in July as a blues number . The initial takes were performed by the band live and included long passages during which they jammed on their instruments . Because these takes were too long to practically fit on an LP , the song was shelved until September , when a new , shorter , version was made . By all accounts , the session was chaotic , but nobody dared suggest to any of the Beatles that they were out of control . Harrison reportedly ran around the studio while holding a flaming ashtray above his head , " doing an Arthur Brown " . The stereo version of the LP includes almost an extra minute of music compared to the mono , which culminates in Starr infamously shouting " I 've got blisters on my fingers ! " Charles Manson was unaware that helter skelter is the British name for a spiral slide found on a playground or funfair , and assumed the track had something to do with hell . This was one of the key tracks that led Manson to believe the album had coded messages referring to apocalyptic war , and led to his movement of the same name . 
 The final song on side three is Harrison 's " Long , Long , Long " , part of the chord progression for which he took from Bob Dylan 's " Sad Eyed Lady of the Lowlands " . MacDonald describes the song as Harrison 's " touching token of exhausted , relieved reconciliation with God " and considered it to be his " finest moment on The Beatles " . The recording session for the basic track was one of the longest the Beatles ever undertook , running from the afternoon of 7 October through the night until 7 am the next day . McCartney played Hammond organ on the track , and an " eerie rattling " effect at the end was created by a note causing a wine bottle on top of the organ 's Leslie speaker to resonate . 
 = = = Side four = = = 
 " Revolution 1 " was the first track recorded for the album , with sessions for the backing track starting on 30 May . The initial takes were recorded with the aim of it being a possible single , but as the session progressed , the arrangement became slower , with more of a laid @-@ back groove . The group ended the chosen take with a six @-@ minute improvisation that had further overdubs added , before being cut to the length heard on the album . The brass arrangement was added later . 
 " Honey Pie " was written by McCartney as a pastiche of the flapper dance style from the 1920s . The opening section of the track had the sound of an old 78 RPM record overdubbed while Martin arranged a saxophone and clarinet part in the same style . Lennon played the guitar solo on the track , but later said he hated the song , calling it " beyond redemption " . 
 " Savoy Truffle " was named after one of the types of chocolate found in a box of Mackintosh 's Good News , which Clapton enjoyed eating . The track featured a saxophone sextet arranged by Thomas , who also played keyboards . Harrison later said that Derek Taylor helped him finish the lyrics . 
 Lennon began writing " Cry Baby Cry " in late 1967 and the lyrics were partly derived from a tagline for an old television commercial . Martin played harmonium on the track . 
 " Revolution 9 " evolved from the overdubs from the " Revolution 1 " coda . Lennon , Harrison and Ono added further tape collages and spoken word extracts , in the style of Karlheinz Stockhausen . The track opens with an extract from a Royal Schools of Music examination tape , and ends with Ono 's infamous comment , " you become naked " . Ono was heavily involved in the production , and advised Lennon on what tape loops to use . McCartney did not contribute to the track , and was reportedly unhappy on it being included , though he had led similar tape experiments such as " Carnival of Light " in January 1967 . The track has attracted both interest and disapproval from fans and music critics over the years . 
 " Good Night " was a lullaby written by Lennon for his son Julian , and he specifically wanted Starr to sing it . The early takes featured just Lennon on acoustic guitar and Starr singing . Martin scored an orchestral and choral arrangement that replaced the guitar in the final mix , and also played the celesta . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Hey Jude " was recorded at the end of July 1968 during the sessions for The Beatles , but was issued separately as a single nearly three months before the album 's release . ( It would , however , make its LP debut in the US two years later as the title cut of the compilation album Hey Jude ) The B @-@ side , " Revolution " , was a different version of the album 's " Revolution 1 " . Lennon had wanted the original version of " Revolution " to be released as a single , but the other three Beatles objected on the grounds that it was too slow . Instead , the single featured a new , faster version , with heavily distorted guitar and an electric piano solo from Nicky Hopkins . This was the first release on Apple Records and went on to be the band 's most successful single , with world sales of over 5 million by the end of 1968 and 7 @.@ 5 million by October 1972 . 
 The convention amongst record companies in the 1960s was that singles and albums were distinct entities and should not duplicate songs . However , though no singles were taken from The Beatles in either Britain or America , " Ob @-@ La @-@ Di , Ob @-@ La @-@ Da " backed with " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " was a commercial success in several countries , including Australia ( where it spent five weeks at number one in the Go Set charts ) , Japan , Austria and Switzerland . 
 = = = Unreleased material = = = 
 Some songs that the Beatles were working on individually during this period were revisited for inclusion on the group 's subsequent albums , while others were eventually released on the band members ' solo albums . According to the bootlegged album of the demos made at Kinfauns , the latter of these two categories includes Lennon 's " Look at Me " and " Child of Nature " ( eventually reworked as " Jealous Guy " ) ; McCartney 's " Junk " ; and Harrison 's " Not Guilty " and " Circles " . In addition , Harrison gave " Sour Milk Sea " to the singer Jackie Lomax , whose recording , produced by Harrison , was released in August 1968 as Lomax 's debut single on Apple Records . Lennon 's " Mean Mr. Mustard " and " Polythene Pam " would be used for the medley on Abbey Road the following year . 
 The Lennon @-@ written " What 's the New Mary Jane " was demoed at Kinfauns and recorded formally ( by Lennon , Harrison and Ono ) during the 1968 album sessions . McCartney taped demos of two compositions at Abbey Road – " <unk> " and " The Long and Winding Road " – the last of which the Beatles recorded in 1969 for their album Let It Be . The White Album versions of " Not Guilty " and " What 's the New Mary Jane " , and a demo of " Junk " , were ultimately released on Anthology 3 . 
 " Revolution ( Take 20 ) " , a previously uncirculated recording , surfaced in 2009 on a bootleg . This ten @-@ minute take was later edited and overdubbed to create two separate tracks : " Revolution 1 " and the avant @-@ garde " Revolution 9 " . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Beatles was issued on 22 November 1968 in Britain , with a US release following three days later . The album 's working title , A Doll 's House , had been changed when the English progressive rock band Family released the similarly titled Music in a Doll 's House earlier that year . Schaffner wrote in 1977 of the name that was adopted for the Beatles ' double album : " From the day of release , everybody referred to The Beatles as ' the White Album . ' " 
 The Beatles was the third album to be released by Apple Records , following Harrison 's Wonderwall Music , and Two Virgins . Martin has said that he was against the idea of a double album at the time and suggested to the group that they reduce the number of songs to form a single album featuring their stronger work , but that the band decided against this . Interviewed for the Beatles Anthology television series in the 1990s , Starr said that he now felt that it should have been released as two separate albums ( that he nicknamed " The White Album " and " The Whiter Album " ) . Harrison felt on reflection that some tracks could have been released as B @-@ sides , but " there was a lot of ego in that band . " He also supported the idea of the double album , to clear out the backlog of songs that the group had at the time . By contrast , McCartney said that it was fine as it was , adding : " It 's the bloody Beatles ' White Album . Shut up ! " 
 = = = Mono version = = = 
 The Beatles was the last Beatles album to be mixed separately for stereo and mono , though the mono version was issued only in the UK and a few other countries . All but one track exist in official mono mixes ; the exception is " Revolution 9 " , which was a direct reduction of the stereo master . The Beatles had not been particularly interested in stereo until this album , but after receiving mail from fans stating they bought both stereo and mono mixes of earlier albums , they decided to make the two different . Several mixes have different track lengths ; the mono mix / edit of " Helter Skelter " eliminates the fade @-@ in at the end of the song ( and Starr 's ending scream ) , and the fade out of " Yer Blues " is 11 seconds longer on the mono mix . 
 In the US , mono records were already being phased out ; the US release of The Beatles was the first Beatles LP to be issued in stereo only . In the UK , the following album , Yellow Submarine , was the last to be shipped in mono . The mono version of The Beatles was made available worldwide on 9 September 2009 , as part of The Beatles in Mono CD boxed set . A reissue of the original mono LP was released worldwide in September 2014 . 
 = = = Packaging = = = 
 The album 's sleeve was designed by pop artist Richard Hamilton , in collaboration with McCartney . Hamilton 's design was in stark contrast to Peter Blake 's vivid cover art for Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , and consisted of a plain white sleeve . The band 's name was discreetly embossed slightly below the middle of the album 's right side , and the cover also featured a unique stamped serial number , " to create " , in Hamilton 's words , " the ironic situation of a numbered edition of something like five million copies " . In 2008 , an original pressing of the album with serial number <unk> sold for £ 19 @,@ 201 on eBay . In 2015 , Ringo Starr 's personal copy number 0000001 sold for world record $ 790 @,@ 000 on auction . 
 Later vinyl record releases in the US showed the title in grey printed ( rather than embossed ) letters . The album included a poster comprising a montage of photographs , with the lyrics of the songs on the back , and a set of four photographic portraits taken by John Kelly during the autumn of 1968 that have themselves become iconic . The photographs for the poster were assembled by Hamilton and McCartney , and sorted them in a variety of ways over several days before arriving at the final result . 
 Tape versions of the album did not feature a white cover . Instead , cassette and 8 @-@ track versions ( issued on two cassettes / cartridges in early 1969 ) contained cover artwork that featured high contrast black and white ( with no grey ) versions of the four Kelly photographs . These 2 @-@ tape cassettes were both contained in a black outer cardboard slipcase cover that stated " The Beatles " and an Apple logo in gold print . A reel @-@ to @-@ reel tape release of the album by Ampex ( in two separate volumes , and again using the Kelly cover artwork ) features edits on eight tracks . 
 During 1978 and 1979 , for the album 's tenth anniversary , EMI reissued the album pressed on limited edition white vinyl in several countries . In 1981 , Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab ( <unk> ) issued a unique half @-@ speed master variation of the album using the sound from the original master recording . The discs were pressed on high @-@ quality virgin vinyl . 
 The album was reissued , along with the rest of the Beatles catalogue , on compact disc in 1987 . It was reissued again on CD in 1998 as part of a 30th anniversary series for EMI , featuring a scaled @-@ down replication of the original artwork . This was part of a reissue series from EMI that included albums from other artists such as the Rolling Stones and Roxy Music . 
 A painting of the band by John Byrne was at an earlier point under consideration to be used as the album 's cover . The piece was later used for the sleeve of the compilation album The Beatles ' Ballads , released in 1980 . In 2012 the original artwork was put up for auction . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 On release , The Beatles gained highly favourable reviews from the majority of music critics . Others bemoaned its length or found that the music lacked the adventurous quality that had distinguished Sgt. Pepper . According to the author Ian Inglis : " Whether positive or negative , all assessments of The Beatles drew attention to its fragmentary style . However , while some complained about the lack of a coherent style , others recognized this as the album 's raison d 'être . " 
 In The Observer , Tony Palmer wrote that " if there is still any doubt that Lennon and McCartney are the greatest songwriters since Schubert " , the album " should surely see the last vestiges of cultural snobbery and bourgeois prejudice swept away in a deluge of joyful music making " . Richard Goldstein of The New York Times considered the double album to be " a major success " and " far more imaginative " than Sgt. Pepper or Magical Mystery Tour , due to the band 's improved songwriting and their relying less on the studio tricks of those earlier works . In The Sunday Times , Derek Jewell hailed it as " the best thing in pop since Sgt. Pepper " and concluded : " Musically , there is beauty , horror , surprise , chaos , order . And that is the world ; and that is what The Beatles are on about . Created by , creating for , their age . " Although he dismissed " Revolution 9 " as a " pretentious " example of " idiot immaturity " , the NME 's Alan Smith declared " God Bless You , Beatles ! " to the majority of the album . Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone called it " the history and synthesis of Western music " , and the group 's best album yet . Wenner contended that they were allowed to appropriate other styles and traditions into rock music because their ability and identity were " so strong that they make it uniquely theirs , and uniquely the Beatles . They are so good that they not only expand the idiom , but they are also able to penetrate it and take it further . " 
 Among the less favourable critiques , Time magazine 's reviewer wrote that The Beatles showcased the " best abilities and worst tendencies " of the Beatles , as it is skilfully performed and sophisticated , but lacks a " sense of taste and purpose " . William Mann of The Times opined that , in their over @-@ reliance on pastiche and " private jokes " , Lennon and McCartney had ceased to progress as songwriters , yet he deemed the release to be " The most important musical event of the year " and acknowledged : " these 30 tracks contain plenty to be studied , enjoyed and gradually appreciated more fully in the coming months . " In his review for The New York Times , Nik Cohn considered the album " boring beyond belief " and said that over half of its songs were " profound mediocrities " . In a 1971 column , Robert Christgau of The Village Voice described the album as both " their most consistent and probably their worst " , and referred to its songs as a " pastiche of musical exercises " . Nonetheless , he ranked it as the tenth best album of 1968 in his ballot for Jazz & Pop magazine 's annual critics poll . 
 = = = Retrospective assessments = = = 
 In a 2003 appraisal of the album , for Mojo magazine , Ian MacDonald wrote that The Beatles regularly appears among the top ten in critics ' " best albums of all time " lists , yet it was a work that he deemed " eccentric , highly diverse , and very variable [ in ] quality " . Rob Sheffield , writing in The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , commented that its songs ranged from the Beatles ' " <unk> tunes since Revolver " to " self @-@ indulgent filler " , and while he derided tracks such as " Revolution 9 " and " Helter Skelter " , he acknowledged that picking personal highlights was " part of the fun " for listeners . Writing for MusicHound in 1999 , Guitar World editor Christopher Scapelliti described the album as " self @-@ indulgent and at times unlistenable " but identified " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " , " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " and " Helter Skelter " as " fascinating standouts " that made it a worthwhile purchase . 
 According to Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson , The Beatles is a rarity among the band 's recorded works , in that it " resists reflexive canonisation , which , along with society 's continued fragmentation , keeps the album fresh and surprising " . In his review for AllMusic , Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that because of its wide variety of musical styles , the album can be " a frustratingly scattershot record or a singularly gripping musical experience , depending on your view " . He concludes : " None of it sounds like it was meant to share album space together , but somehow The Beatles creates its own style and sound through its mess . " 
 Among reviews of the 2009 remastered album , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph found that even its worst songs work within the context of such an eclectic and unconventional collection , which he rated " one of the greatest albums ever made " . Writing for Paste , Mark Kemp refuted the White Album 's reputation as " three solo works in one ( plus a Ringo song ) " ; instead , he said , it " benefits from each member 's wildly different ideas " and demonstrates Lennon and McCartney 's considerable versatility as composers , in addition to offering " two of Harrison 's finest moments " . In his review for The A.V. Club , Chuck Klosterman wrote that the album found the band at their best and rated it " almost beyond an A + " . 
 In 2003 , Rolling Stone ranked The Beatles at number 10 on its list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . On the 40th anniversary of the album 's release , Vatican newspaper L 'Osservatore Romano wrote that it " remains a type of magical musical anthology : 30 songs you can go through and listen to at will , certain of finding some pearls that even today remain unparalleled " . In 2011 , Kerrang ! placed the album at number 49 on a list of " The 50 Heaviest Albums Of All Time " . The magazine praised the guitar work in " Helter Skelter " . 
 = = Cultural responses = = 
