 According to MacDonald , the counterculture of the 1960s analysed The Beatles above and beyond all of the band 's previous releases . The album 's lyrics progressed from being vague to open @-@ ended and prone to misinterpretation , such as " Glass Onion " ( e.g. , " the walrus was Paul " ) and " Piggies " ( " what they need 's a damn good whacking " ) . The release also coincided with public condemnation of Lennon 's treatment of Cynthia , and of his and Ono 's joint projects , particularly Two Virgins . The British authorities similarly displayed a less tolerant attitude towards the Beatles , when London Drug Squad officers arrested Lennon and Ono in October 1968 for marijuana possession , a charge that he claimed was false . In the case of " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , the words were interpreted by Christian evangelist David <unk> as further proof of the Beatles ' compliance in a Communist plot to brainwash American youth . 
 Lennon 's lyrics on " Revolution 1 " were misinterpreted with messages he did not intend . In the album version , he advises those who " talk about destruction " to " count me out " . Lennon then follows the sung word " out " with the spoken word " in " . At the time of the album 's release – which followed , chronologically , the up @-@ tempo single version of the song , " Revolution " – that single word " in " was taken by the radical political left as Lennon 's endorsement of politically motivated violence , which followed the May 1968 Paris riots . However , the album version was recorded first . 
 Further to the betrayal they had felt at Lennon 's non @-@ activist stance in " Revolution " , New Left commentators condemned The Beatles for its failure to offer a political agenda . The Beatles themselves were accused of using eclecticism and pastiche as a means of avoiding important issues in the turbulent political and social climate . Jon Landau , writing for the Liberation News Service , argued that , particularly in " Piggies " and " Rocky Racoon " , the band had adopted parody because they were " afraid of confronting reality " and " the <unk> of the moment " . Like Landau , many writers among the New Left considered the album outdated and irrelevant ; instead , they heralded the Rolling Stones ' concurrent release , Beggars Banquet , as what Lennon biographer Jon Wiener terms " the ' strong solution , ' a musical turning outward , toward the political and social battles of the day " . 
 Charles Manson first heard the album not long after it was released . He had already claimed to find hidden meanings in songs from earlier Beatles albums , but in The Beatles he interpreted prophetic significance in several of the songs , including " Blackbird " , " Piggies " ( particularly the line " what they need 's a damn good whacking " ) , " Helter Skelter " , " Revolution 1 " and " Revolution 9 " , and interpreted the lyrics as a sign of imminent violence or war . He played the album repeatedly to his followers , the Manson family , and convinced them that it was an apocalyptic message predicting an uprising of oppressed races , drawing parallels with chapter 9 of the Book of Revelation . 
 Sociologists Michael <unk> and Wesley <unk> write that the album 's release created " a collective appreciation of it as a ' state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art ' rendition of the current pop , rock , and folk @-@ rock sounds " . The majority of music critics categorize the White Album as postmodern , emphasizing aesthetic and stylistic features of the album Other scholars situate all Beatles ' work within a modernist stance , based either on their " artificiality " or their ideological stance of progress through love and peace . Scapelliti cites it as the source of " the freeform nihilism echoed … in the punk and alternative music genres " . 
 In early 2013 , the Recess Gallery in New York City 's SoHo neighbourhood presented We Buy White Albums , an installation by artist Rutherford Chang . The piece was in the form of a record store in which nothing but original pressings of the LP was on display . Chang created a recording in which the sounds of one hundred copies of side one of the LP were overlaid . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 As it was their first studio album in almost eighteen months ( and coming after the success of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band ) expectations were high at the time of the release of The Beatles . The album debuted at number 1 in the UK on 7 December 1968 . It spent seven weeks at the top of the UK charts ( including the entire competitive Christmas season ) , until it was replaced by the Seekers ' Best of the Seekers on 25 January 1969 , dropping to number 2 . However , the album returned to the top spot the next week , spending an eighth and final week at number 1 . The album was still high in the charts when the Beatles ' follow @-@ up album , Yellow Submarine , was released , which reached number 3 . In all , The Beatles spent 22 weeks on the UK charts , far fewer than the 149 weeks for Sgt. Pepper . In September 2013 after the British Phonographic Industry changed their sales award rules , the album was declared as having gone platinum , meaning sales of at least 300 @,@ 000 copies . 
 In the United States , the album achieved huge commercial success . Capitol Records sold over 3 @.@ 3 million copies of the White Album to stores within the first four days of the album 's release . It debuted at number 11 on 14 December 1968 , jumped to number 2 , and reached number 1 in its third week on 28 December , spending a total of nine weeks at the top . In all , The Beatles spent 155 weeks on the Billboard 200 . The album has sold over 9 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States alone and according to the Recording Industry Association of America , The Beatles is the Beatles ' most @-@ certified album at 19 @-@ times platinum . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Lennon – McCartney , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The Beatles 
 John Lennon – lead , harmony and background vocals ; acoustic , lead , rhythm and bass guitars ; piano , Hammond organ , harmonium , Mellotron ; harmonica , tenor saxophone ; extra drums and assorted percussion ( tambourine , handclaps and vocal percussion ) , tapes , tape loops and sound effects ( electronic and home @-@ made ) 
 Paul McCartney – lead , harmony and background vocals ; acoustic , lead , rhythm and bass guitars ; acoustic and electric pianos , Hammond organ ; assorted percussion ( timpani , tambourine , cowbell , hand shake bell , handclaps , foot taps and vocal percussion ) ; drums ( on " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , " Dear Prudence " , " Wild Honey Pie " and " Martha My Dear " ) ; recorder and flugelhorn ; 
 George Harrison – lead , harmony and background vocals ; lead , rhythm , acoustic and bass guitars ; Hammond organ ( on " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " ) ; extra drums and assorted percussion ( tambourine , handclaps and vocal percussion ) and sound effects 
 Ringo Starr – drums and assorted percussion ( tambourine , bongos , cymbals , maracas and vocal percussion ) ; piano and sleigh bell ( on " Don 't Pass Me By " ) ; lead vocals ( on " Don 't Pass Me By " and " Good Night " ) and backing vocals ( on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " ) 
 Guest musicians 
 Eric Clapton – lead guitar on " While My Guitar Gently Weeps " 
 Mal Evans – backing vocals and handclaps on " Dear Prudence " , handclaps on " Birthday " , trumpet on " Helter Skelter " 
 Jack Fallon – violin on " Don 't Pass Me By " 
 Pattie Harrison – backing vocals on " Birthday " 
 Jackie Lomax – backing vocals and handclaps on " Dear Prudence " 
 Maureen Starkey – backing vocals on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " 
 Yoko Ono – backing vocals , lead vocals and handclaps on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " , backing vocals on " Birthday " , speech , tapes and sound effects on " Revolution 9 " 
 Session musicians 
 Ted Barker – trombone on " Martha My Dear " 
 Leon Calvert – trumpet and flugelhorn on " Martha My Dear " 
 Henry <unk> , Eric Bowie , Norman Lederman and Ronald Thomas – violin on " Glass Onion " 
 Bernard Miller , Dennis McConnell , Lou <unk> and Les Maddox – violin on " Martha My Dear " 
 Reginald Kilby – cello on " Glass Onion " and " Martha My Dear " 
 Eldon Fox – cello on " Glass Onion " 
 Frederick Alexander – cello on " Martha My Dear " 
 Harry Klein – saxophone on " Savoy Truffle " and " Honey Pie " 
 Dennis Walton , Ronald Chamberlain , Jim Chest and Rex Morris – saxophone on " Honey Pie " 
 Raymond Newman and David Smith – clarinet on " Honey Pie " 
 Art Ellefson , Danny Moss and Derek Collins – tenor sax on " Savoy Truffle " 
 Ronnie Ross and Bernard George – baritone sax on " Savoy Truffle " 
 Alf Reece – tuba on " Martha My Dear " 
 The Mike Sammes Singers – backing vocals on " Good Night " 
 Stanley Reynolds and Ronnie Hughes – trumpet on " Martha My Dear " 
 Chris Shepard – <unk> fiddle on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " 
 Tony Tunstall – French horn on " Martha My Dear " 
 John Underwood and Keith Cummings – viola on " Glass Onion " 
 Leo Birnbaum and Henry <unk> – viola on " Martha My Dear " 
 Production team 
 Geoff Emerick – engineer , speech on " Revolution 9 " 
 George Martin – producer , executive producer ; string , brass , clarinet , orchestral arrangements and conducting ; piano on " Rocky Raccoon " 
 Ken Scott – engineer and mixer 
 Barry Sheffield – engineer ( Trident Studio ) 
 Chris Thomas – producer ; Mellotron on " The Continuing Story of Bungalow Bill " , harpsichord on " Piggies " , piano on " Long , Long , Long " , electric piano , organ and saxophone arrangement on " Savoy Truffle " 
 = = Certifications = = 
 BPI certification awarded only for sales since 1994 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Take a Bow ( Leona Lewis song ) = 
 " Take a Bow " is a song recorded by British singer Leona Lewis for her debut studio album Spirit ( 2007 ) . It was written by Jordon Omley , Michael Mani , Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello and Ryan Tedder . Tedder explained that he wanted to create an edgy song for Lewis so that it would not be boring or predictable . A Contemporary R & B and urban song , the lyrics focus the failure of a relationship . Its composition features an Ebb and Flo groove and received several comparisons to " Cry Me a River " by Justin Timberlake . 
 " Take a Bow " received positive reviews from music critics . Most praised the production as unexpected and different but one felt it overshadowed Lewis ' vocals . Upon the release of Spirit , the song debuted at number 97 on the UK Singles Chart due to strong digital download sales . Lewis performed " Take a Bow " at the Rock in Rio festival and on her 2010 concert tour , The Labyrinth . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " Take a Bow " was conceived during recording sessions for Lewis ' debut studio album , Spirit , which was released in November 2007 . It was written by Jordon Omley , Michael Mani , Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello and Ryan Tedder , and was produced by The Runaways , Sam Watters , Wilkins , Biancaniello and Tedder . The music production , keyboards and programming were carried out by Wilkins , Biancaniello and Tedder , while vocal production was helmed by Watters . Lewis performs the lead vocals , and <unk> Brown performs background vocals . " Take a Bow " was recorded and mixed by Biancaniello , Mani , Watters and Omley at The Record Plant , Hollywood , California . As reported by Digital Spy , Tedder revealed that the types of songs that people expected to hear on Spirit , such as powerful vocal performance ballads , needed to be different and stand out rather than conventional , " if you 're going to push that kind of music [ these days ] - big ballads and big songs - you have to be edgier ; they can 't be clean and polished . " 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Take a Bow " is a contemporary R & B and urban music song , which lasts for a duration of 3 : 54 , and appears as the sixth track on the standard and deluxe versions of the album . On the North American track listing , the song appears as the eleventh track and last for a duration of 3 : 53 . Its instrumentation consists of " daring , machine @-@ made " pan pipes , " melodramatic " synths , a piano and a guitar . It features an Ebb and Flo groove , and was composed in the key of A minor using common time at 70 beats per minute . Lewis ' vocal range spans over two octaves from low note of A3 to the high note of <unk> . The song 's opening lyrics are " The flowers are faded now , along with your letters . " Chad Grischow for IGN and Sarah Rodman for The Boston Globe compared the song 's production to Justin Timberlake 's song " Cry Me a River " ( 2002 ) . The lyrics of " Take A Bow " pertain to a failed relationship , which Nick Levine for Digital Spy described as " admirably stark . " 
 " Take a Bow " garnered a positive response from music critics . Nick Levine for Digital Spy described the track as " unexpected " due to its urban edge . Sarah Rodman for The Boston Globe wrote it was a " contender " to be released as a single because of how it is a mix of " classic and au courant " music . Linda McGee for RTÉ was complimentary of Lewis decision to experiment with the song instead of taking a " slushy ballad " approach and remaining in her comfort zone . She continued to write that it is for this reason that she is more suited to " the Beyoncé end of the market than the Mariah end . " Kitty Empire for The Guardian noted that all of the songs on Spirit are love songs , but only " Take a Bow " feels like it is from the 21st century . Chad Grischow for IGN wrote that the " Take a Bow " ' s production distracted from Lewis ' vocal performance . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Lewis performed " Take a Bow " at the Rock in Rio festival held in Lisbon on 22 May 2010 . " Take a Bow " was included as the fifth song on the set list of her debut concert tour , called The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) . It was later included on the tour 's DVD release The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 . Lewis performed the song in the first section of the set list , along with " Brave " as the opener , " Don 't Let Me Down " , " Better in Time " and " Whatever It Takes " . The set was decorated in the style of a castle ; acrobats performed as they were hanging from the ceiling on large pieces of fabric while Lewis wore a gold sequined dress and thigh high boots . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Spirit standard / deluxe edition 
 " Take a Bow " – 3 : 54 
 Spirit United States standard / deluxe version 
 " Take a Bow " – 3 : 53 
 The Labyrinth Tour : Live from the O2 
 " Take a Bow " ( Live from the 02 ) – 5 : 41 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded and mixed at The Record Plant , Hollywood , California . 
 Personnel 
 Lead vocals – Leona Lewis 
 Background vocals – <unk> Brown 
 Songwriting – Jordon Omley , Michael Mani , Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello , Ryan Tedder 
 Production – The Runaways , Sam Watters , Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello , Ryan " Alias " Tedder 
 Music production – Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello , Ryan " Alias " Tedder 
 Recording and mixing – Louis Biancaniello , Michael Mani , Sam Watters , Jordon Omley 
 Vocal production – Sam Watters 
 Keyboards and programming – Wayne Wilkins , Louis Biancaniello , Ryan " Alias " Tedder 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Spirit . 
 = = Chart = = 
 Upon the release of Spirit , " Take a Bow " debuted at number 97 on the strength of digital download sales in the chart issue released on 24 November 2007 . 
 = Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia ( 1899 – 1918 ) = 
 Grand Duchess Maria Nikolaevna of Russia ( Maria Nikolaevna Romanova ; Russian : Великая Княжна Мария Николаевна , June 26 ( 27th starting in 1900 ) [ O.S. June 14 ] 1899 – July 17 , 1918 ) was the third daughter of Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and Tsarina Alexandra Fyodorovna ( Alix of Hesse ) . In 1900 and later , her birthday came on June 27 new style . Her murder following the Russian Revolution of 1917 resulted in her canonization as a passion bearer by the Russian Orthodox Church . 
 During her lifetime , Maria , too young to become a Red Cross nurse like her elder sisters during World War I , was patroness of a hospital and instead visited wounded soldiers . Throughout her lifetime she was noted for her interest in the lives of the soldiers . The flirtatious Maria had a number of innocent crushes on the young men she met , beginning in early childhood . She hoped to marry and have a large family . 
 She was an elder sister of the famous Grand Duchess Anastasia Nikolaevna of Russia , whose alleged escape from the assassination of the imperial family was rumored for nearly 90 years . However , it was later proven that Anastasia did not escape . In the 1990s , it was suggested that Maria might have been the grand duchess whose remains were missing from the Romanov grave that was discovered near Yekaterinburg , Russia and exhumed in 1991 . However , further remains were discovered in 2007 , and DNA analysis subsequently proved that the entire Imperial family had been murdered in 1918 . 
 = = Life and characteristics = = 
 Contemporaries described Maria as a pretty , flirtatious girl , broadly built , with light brown hair and large blue eyes that were known in the family as " Marie 's saucers " . Her French tutor Pierre Gilliard said Maria was tall and well @-@ built , with rosy cheeks . Tatiana <unk> thought the expression in Maria 's eyes was " soft and gentle . " As an infant and toddler , her physical appearance was compared to one of Botticelli 's angels . Grand Duke Vladimir Alexandrovich of Russia nicknamed her " The <unk> Baby " because of her good nature . 
 As a toddler , little Maria once escaped from her bath and ran naked up and down the palace corridor while her distracted Irish nurse , Margaretta Eagar , who loved politics , discussed the Dreyfus Affair with a friend . " Fortunately , I arrived just at that moment , picked her up and carried her back to Miss Eagar , who was still talking about Dreyfus , " recalled her aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia . Her older sisters objected to including Maria in their games and once referred to Maria as their " stepsister " because she was so good and never got into trouble , recalled Margaretta Eagar in her own memoirs . However , on occasion the sweet @-@ natured Maria could be mischievous . Once , as a little girl , she stole some biscuits from her mother 's tea table . As a punishment for her surprising behavior , the governess and Alexandra suggested she be sent to bed ; however Nicholas objected , stating , " I was always afraid of the wings growing . I am glad to see she is only a human child . " Eagar noted that Maria 's love for her father was " marked " and she often tried to escape from the nursery to " go to Papa . " When the Tsar was ill with typhoid , the little girl covered a miniature portrait of him with kisses every night . 
 Maria 's siblings were Grand Duchess Olga of Russia , Grand Duchess Tatiana of Russia , Grand Duchess Anastasia of Russia , and Tsarevich Alexei of Russia . Maria 's Russian title ( Velikaya Knyazhna Великая Княжна ) is most precisely translated as " Grand Princess " , meaning that Maria , as an " Imperial Highness " was higher in rank than other Princesses in Europe who were " Royal Highnesses " . " Grand Duchess " is the most widely used English translation of the title . However , in keeping with her parents ' desire to raise Maria and her siblings simply , even servants addressed the Grand Duchess by her first name and patronym , Maria Nikolaevna . She was also called by the French version of her name , " Marie , " or by the Russian nicknames " Masha " or " <unk> " . 
 Maria and her younger sister Anastasia were known within the family as " The Little Pair . " The two girls shared a room , often wore variations of the same dress , and spent much of their time together . Their older sisters Olga and Tatiana also shared a room and were known as " The Big Pair . " The four girls sometimes signed letters using the nickname OTMA , which was derived from the first letters of their first names . 
 Maria and Anastasia were dressed similarly for special occasions , when they wore variations of the same dress . She tended to be dominated by her enthusiastic and energetic younger sister . When Anastasia tripped people who walked by , teased others or caused a scene with her dramatics , Maria always tried to apologize , though she could never stop her younger sister . Maria had simple tastes and was so kind @-@ hearted that she was sometimes taken advantage of by her sisters , who nicknamed her " fat little bow @-@ wow . " In 1910 , her fourteen @-@ year @-@ old sister Olga persuaded ten @-@ year @-@ old Maria to write their mother a letter asking that Olga be given her own room and be allowed to let down her dresses . Maria tried to persuade her mother that it was her own idea to write the letter . Her mother 's friend , Lili Dehn , said that while Maria was not as lively as her three sisters , she knew her own mind . Maria had a talent for drawing and sketched well , always using her left hand , but was generally uninterested in her schoolwork . She was surprisingly strong and sometimes amused herself by demonstrating how she could lift her tutors off the ground . Though usually sweet @-@ natured , Maria could also be stubborn and occasionally lazy . Her mother complained in one letter that Maria was grumpy and " bellowed " at the people who irritated her . Maria 's moodiness coincided with her menstrual period , which the Tsarina and her daughters referred to as a visit from " Madame Becker . " 
 Young Maria enjoyed innocent flirtations with the young soldiers she encountered at the palace and on family holidays . She particularly loved children and , had she not been a Grand Duchess , would have loved nothing more than to marry a Russian soldier and raise a large family . Maria was fond of soldiers from a very early age , according to Margaretta Eagar : 
 Until his own assassination in 1979 , her first cousin , Louis Mountbatten , 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma , kept a photograph of Maria beside his bed in memory of the crush he had upon her . 
 Alexandra 's letters reveal that Maria , the middle child of the family , sometimes felt insecure and left out by her older sisters and feared she wasn 't loved as much as the other children . Alexandra reassured her that she was as dearly loved as her siblings . At age eleven , Maria apparently developed a painful crush on one of the young men she had met . " Try not to let your thoughts dwell too much on him , that 's what our Friend said , " Alexandra wrote to her on December 6 , 1910 . Alexandra advised her third daughter to keep her feelings hidden because others might say unkind things to her about her crush . " One must not let others see what one feels inside , when one knows it 's considered not proper . I know he likes you as a little sister and would like to help you not to care too much , because he knows you , a little Grand Duchess , must not care for him so . " 
 Maria , like all her family , doted on the long @-@ awaited heir Tsarevich Alexei , or " Baby , " who suffered frequent complications of hemophilia and nearly died several times . Her mother relied on the counsel of Grigori Rasputin , a Russian peasant and wandering starets or " holy man " and credited his prayers with saving the ailing Tsarevich on numerous occasions . Maria and her siblings were also taught to view Rasputin as " Our Friend " and to share confidences with him . In the autumn of 1907 , Maria 's aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia was escorted to the nursery by the Tsar to meet Rasputin . Maria , her sisters and brother Alexei were all wearing their long white nightgowns . " All the children seemed to like him , " Olga Alexandrovna recalled . " They were completely at ease with him . " 
 Rasputin 's friendship with the imperial children was evident in the messages he sent to them . " My Dear Pearl M ! " Rasputin wrote the nine @-@ year @-@ old Maria in one telegram in 1908 . " Tell me how you talked with the sea , with nature ! I miss your simple soul . We will see each other soon ! A big kiss . " In a second telegram , Rasputin told the child , " My Dear M ! My Little Friend ! May the Lord help you to carry your cross with wisdom and joy in Christ . This world is like the day , look it 's already evening . So it is with the cares of the world . " In February 1909 , Rasputin sent all of the imperial children a telegram , advising them to " Love the whole of God 's nature , the whole of His creation in particular this earth . The Mother of God was always occupied with flowers and needlework . " 
 One of the girls ' governesses , Sofia Ivanovna Tyutcheva , was horrified in 1910 because Rasputin was permitted access to the nursery when the four girls were in their nightgowns . Tyutcheva wanted Rasputin barred from the nurseries . In response to Tyutcheva 's complaints , Nicholas did ask Rasputin to end his nursery visits . " I am so afr ( aid ) that S.I. can speak ... about our friend something bad , " Maria 's twelve @-@ year @-@ old sister Tatiana wrote to her mother on March 8 , 1910 , after begging Alexandra to forgive her for doing something she didn 't like . " I hope our nurse will be nice to our friend now . " Alexandra eventually had Tyutcheva fired . 
 Tyutcheva took her story to other members of the family , who were scandalized by the reports , though Rasputin 's contacts with the children were by all accounts completely innocent . Nicholas 's sister Grand Duchess Xenia Alexandrovna of Russia was horrified by Tyutcheva 's story . She wrote on March 15 , 1910 that she couldn 't understand " ... the attitude of Alix and the children to that sinister Grigory ( whom they consider to be almost a saint , when in fact he 's only a khlyst ! ) He 's always there , goes into the nursery , visits Olga and Tatiana while they are getting ready for bed , sits there talking to them and caressing them . They are careful to hide him from Sofia Ivanovna , and the children don 't dare talk to her about him . It 's all quite unbelievable and beyond understanding . " 
 Another of the nursery governesses claimed in the spring of 1910 that she was raped by Rasputin . Maria Ivanovna Vishnyakova had at first been a devotee of Rasputin , but later was disillusioned by him . The empress refused to believe Vishnyakova " and said that everything Rasputin does is holy . " Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna was told that Vishnyakova 's claim had been immediately investigated , but " they caught the young woman in bed with a Cossack of the Imperial Guard . " Vishnyakova was dismissed from her post in 1913 . 
 It was whispered in society that Rasputin had seduced not only the Tsarina but also the four grand duchesses . Rasputin had released ardent letters written to him by the Tsarina and the four grand duchesses . The letters circulated throughout society , fueling the rumors . Pornographic cartoons also circulated that depicted Rasputin having sexual relations with the empress , with her four daughters and Anna Vyrubova nude in the background . Nicholas ordered Rasputin to leave St. Petersburg for a time , much to Alexandra 's displeasure , and Rasputin went on a pilgrimage to Palestine . Despite the scandal , the imperial family 's association with Rasputin continued until Rasputin was murdered on December 17 , 1916 . " Our Friend is so contented with our girlies , says they have gone through heavy ' courses ' for their age and their souls have much developed , " Alexandra wrote to Nicholas on December 6 , 1916 . In his memoirs , A. A. Mordvinov reported that the four grand duchesses appeared " cold and visibly terribly upset " by Rasputin 's death and sat " huddled up closely together " on a sofa in one of their bedrooms on the night they received the news . Mordvinov reported that the young women were in a gloomy mood and seemed to sense the political upheaval that was about to be unleashed . Rasputin was buried with an icon signed on its reverse side by Maria , her sisters , and mother . Maria attended Rasputin 's funeral on December 21 , 1916 and her family planned to build a church over his grave site . 
 Maria , like her mother , was likely a carrier of the hemophilia gene and might have passed on the disease to another generation if she had survived to have the children she dreamed of . One of Alexandra 's brothers and two of her nephews , as well as one of her maternal uncles and two children of one of her first cousins were all hemophiliacs , as was Maria 's brother Alexei . Maria herself reportedly hemorrhaged in December 1914 during an operation to remove her tonsils , according to her paternal aunt Grand Duchess Olga Alexandrovna of Russia , who was interviewed later in her life . The doctor performing the operation was so unnerved that he had to be ordered to continue by Maria 's mother , Tsarina Alexandra . Olga Alexandrovna said she believed all four of her nieces bled more than was normal and believed they were carriers of the hemophilia gene like their mother . Symptomatic carriers of the gene , while not hemophiliacs themselves , can have symptoms of hemophilia including a lower than normal blood clotting factor that can lead to heavy bleeding during childbirth or surgical procedures such as a tonsillectomy . DNA testing on the remains of the royal family proved in 2009 that Alexei suffered from hemophilia B , a rarer form of the disease . The same testing proved that his mother and one of the four Grand Duchesses were carriers . Russians identify the grand duchess who carried the gene as Anastasia , but American scientists identified the young woman as Maria . 
 Like her younger sister Anastasia , Maria visited wounded soldiers at a private hospital on the grounds of the palace at Tsarskoye Selo during World War I. The two teenagers , who were too young to become nurses like their mother and elder sisters , played games of checkers and billiards with the soldiers and attempted to uplift their spirits . A wounded soldier named Dmitri signed Maria 's commonplace book and addressed her by one of her nicknames : " the famous <unk> " . 
 During the war , Maria and Anastasia also paid a visit to a nurses ' school and helped to tend to the children . She wrote her father that she thought of him when she was feeding the children and cleaned the gruel running down their chins with a spoon . For a break during the war , Maria , her sisters and mother sometimes visited the Tsar and Tsarevich Alexei at the war headquarters in Mogilev . During these visits , Maria developed an attraction to Nikolai Dmitrievich Demenkov , an officer of the day at the Tsar 's Headquarters . When the women returned to Tsarskoye Selo , Maria often asked her father to give her regards to Demenkov and sometimes jokingly signed her letters to the Tsar " Mrs. Demenkov . " 
 = = Revolution and captivity = = 
 Revolution broke out in St. Petersburg in the spring of 1917 . At the height of the chaos , Maria and her siblings were stricken with measles . The Tsarina was reluctant to move the children to the safety of the imperial residence at Gatchina , even though she was advised to do so . Maria was the last of the five to fall ill and , while she was still healthy , was a major source of support to her mother . Maria went outside with her mother on the night of March 13 , 1917 to plead with the soldiers to remain loyal to the imperial family . Shortly afterwards , the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old fell ill with measles and virulent pneumonia and nearly died . She was not told that her father had abdicated the throne until after she began to recover . 
 The family was arrested and imprisoned , first in their home at Tsarskoye Selo and later at residences in Tobolsk and Yekaterinburg in Siberia . Maria attempted to befriend her guards both at Tsarskoye Selo and Tobolsk and soon learned their names and details about their wives and children . Unaware of her danger , she commented at Tobolsk that she would be happy to live there indefinitely if only she could take a walk outside without being guarded continuously . Still , she was aware that she was being watched constantly . Maria and her sister Anastasia burned their letters and diaries in April 1918 because they feared their possessions would be searched . 
 Tsarina Alexandra chose Maria to accompany Tsar Nicholas II and herself to Yekaterinburg when the family was briefly separated in April 1918 . Maria had grown from a child to a woman during the years of captivity , according to the Baroness Sophie <unk> , a lady in waiting , and the Tsarina felt she could depend upon her third daughter to help her as she could not rely upon the deeply depressed Olga or Anastasia , who was still a child . Level @-@ headed Tatiana was needed to watch over her ill brother . They were forced to leave their other children behind in Tobolsk because Maria 's brother Alexei was ill . The four other children joined their family in Yekaterinburg several weeks later . 
 In her letters to her siblings in Tobolsk , Maria described her unease at the new restrictions on the family at Yekaterinburg . She and her parents were searched by guards at the Ipatiev House and were warned they would be subject to further searches . A wooden fence was installed around the house , limiting their view of the street . " Oh , how complicated everything is now , " she wrote on May 2 , 1918 . " We lived so peacefully for eight months and now it 's all started again . " Maria passed the time by attempting to befriend members of the Ipatiev House Guard . She showed them pictures from her photo albums and talked with them about their families and her own hopes for a new life in England if she was released . Alexander Strekotin , one of the guards , recalled in his memoirs that she " was a girl who loved to have fun . " Another of the guards recalled Maria 's buxom beauty with appreciation and said she didn 't assume an air of grandeur . One former sentry recalled that Maria was often scolded by her mother in " severe and angry whispers , " apparently for being too friendly with the guards at Yekaterinburg . Strekotin wrote that their conversations always began with one of the girls saying , " We 're so bored ! In Tobolsk there was always something to do . I know ! Try to guess the name of this dog ! " The teenage girls walked by the sentries , whispering and giggling in a manner that the guards considered flirtatious . 
 In his memoirs , one guard recalled that on one occasion another guard forgot himself and told an off @-@ color joke to the grand duchesses during one of these meetings . The offended Tatiana ran from the room , " pale as death . " Maria eyed the man and said , " Why are you not disgusted with yourselves when you use such shameful words ? Do you imagine that you can woo a well @-@ born woman with such witticisms and have her be well disposed towards you ? Be refined and respectable men and then we can get along . " Ivan <unk> , a 21 @-@ year @-@ old guard , declared that he intended to marry one of the grand duchesses and if her parents said no he would rescue her from the Ipatiev House himself . 
 Ivan Skorokhodov , yet another of the guards , smuggled in a birthday cake to celebrate Maria 's nineteenth birthday on June 26 , 1918 . Maria slipped away from the group with Ivan Skorokhodov for a private moment and they were discovered together in a compromising position when two of his superiors conducted a surprise inspection of the house . Skorokhodov was removed from his position after his actions and friendliness towards the grand duchess were discovered by his commanding officers . In their memoirs , several guards reported that both the Tsarina and her older sister Olga appeared angry with Maria in the days following the incident and that Olga avoided her company . After this incident , a new command was installed , the family was forbidden from fraternizing with the officers and the conditions of their imprisonment became even more strict . 
 On July 14 , 1918 , local priests at Yekaterinburg conducted a private church service for the family and reported that Maria and her family , contrary to custom , fell on their knees during the prayer for the dead . The following day , on July 15 , Maria and her sisters appeared in good spirits as they joked with one another and moved the beds in their room so visiting cleaning women could scrub the floor . They got down on their hands and knees to help the women and whispered to them when the guards weren 't looking . All four young women wore long black skirts and white silk blouses , the same clothing they had worn the previous day . Their short hair was " tumbled and disorderly . " They boasted that Maria was so strong she could lift Alexei and told the women how much they enjoyed physical exertion and wished there was more of it for them to do in the Ipatiev House . On the afternoon of July 16 , 1918 , the last full day of her life , Maria walked in the garden with her father and sisters and the guards observed nothing unusual in the family 's spirits . As the family was eating dinner that night , Yakov Yurovsky , the head of the detachment , came in and announced that the family 's kitchen boy and Alexei 's playmate , 14 @-@ year @-@ old Leonid Sednev , must gather his things and go to a family member . The boy had actually been sent to a hotel across the street because the guards did not want to kill him along with the rest of the Romanov party . The family , unaware of the plan to kill them , was upset and unsettled by Sednev 's absence , which came after five other members of their detachment had already been sent away . Dr. Botkin and Tatiana went that evening to Yurovsky 's office , for what was to be the last time , to ask for the return of the kitchen boy who kept Alexei amused during the long hours of captivity . Yurovsky placated them by telling her the boy would return soon , but the family was unconvinced . 
 Late that night , on the night of July 16 , the family was awakened and told to come down to the lower level of the house because there was unrest in the town at large and they would have to be moved for their own safety . The family emerged from their rooms carrying pillows , bags , and other items to make Alexandra and Alexei comfortable . Anastasia carried one of the family 's three dogs , a <unk> named Jimmy . The family paused and crossed themselves when they saw the stuffed mother bear and cubs that stood on the landing , perhaps as a sign of respect for the dead . Nicholas told the servants and family " Well , we 're going to get out of this place . " They asked questions of the guards but did not appear to suspect they were going to be killed . Yurovsky , who had been a professional photographer , directed the family to take different positions as a photographer might . Alexandra , who had requested chairs for herself and Alexei , sat to her son 's left . The Tsar stood behind Alexei , Dr. Botkin stood to the Tsar 's right , Maria and her sisters stood behind Alexandra along with the servants . They were left for approximately half an hour while further preparations were made . The group said little during this time , but Alexandra whispered to the girls in English , violating the guard 's rules that they must speak in Russian . Yurovsky came in , ordered them to stand , and read the sentence of execution . Maria and her family had time only to utter a few incoherent sounds of shock or protest before the death squad under Yurovsky 's command began shooting . It was the early hours of July 17 , 1918 . 
 The first volley of gunfire killed the Tsar , the Empress and two male servants , and wounded the family 's doctor and the empress ' maidservant . Maria tried to escape through the doors at the rear of the room , which led to a storage area , but the doors were nailed shut . The noise as she rattled the doors attracted the attention of the drunken military commissar Peter Ermakov . A heavy layer of smoke had accumulated in the room from the gunfire and from plaster dust released from the walls by errant bullets , and the gunmen could see only the lower bodies of those who were still alive . Ermakov fired at Maria , and his bullet struck her in the thigh . She fell to the floor with Anastasia and Demidova and lay there moaning . The assassins then left the room for several minutes to let the haze clear , and when they returned they killed Dr Botkin , Tsarevich Alexei and Grand Duchesses Olga and Tatiana . Ermakov then turned on the wounded Maria and Anastasia , who was still unharmed . He struggled with Maria and tried to stab her with a bayonet . The jewels sewn into her clothes protected her , and he said he finally shot her in the head . But the skull that is almost certainly Maria 's has no bullet wound . Perhaps the drunken Ermakov inflicted a scalp wound , knocking her unconscious and producing a considerable flow of blood , leading Ermakov to think he had killed her . He then struggled with Anastasia , whom he also claimed he shot in the head . As the bodies were being removed from the house , Maria regained consciousness and screamed . Ermakov tried to stab her again but failed , and struck her in the face until she was silent . The facial area of Maria 's skull was indeed destroyed , but Yurovsky wrote that the victims ' faces were shattered with rifle butts at the burial site . Though Maria unquestionably died with her family , the exact cause of her death remains a mystery . 
 = = Rediscovery and reports of survival = = 
 According to the accounts of some of the guards , there may have been an opportunity for one or more of the guards to rescue a survivor . Yurovsky demanded that the guards come to his office and turn over items they had stolen following the assassinations . There was reportedly a span of time when the bodies of the victims were left largely unattended in the truck , in the basement , and in the corridor of the house . Some guards who had not participated in the murders and had been sympathetic to the grand duchesses were left in the basement with the bodies . 
 At least two of the Grand Duchesses were said to have survived the initial attack on the Imperial Family . Two of the Grand Duchesses , Maria and Anastasia , " sat up screaming " when they were being carried out to a waiting truck . They were then attacked again . There have been claims made that Maria was the Grand Duchess who survived . A man named Alex <unk> claimed to be Maria 's grandson " Prince Alexis d 'Anjou de Bourbon @-@ Condé Romanov @-@ <unk> . " He said Maria had escaped to Romania , married and had a daughter , Olga @-@ Beata . Olga @-@ Beata then allegedly married and had a son named " Prince Alexis " . <unk> was sentenced to 18 months in prison by a Belgian court after he was sued in 1971 by the <unk> family and the Association of Descendants of the Russian Nobility of Belgium . Two young women claiming to be Maria and her sister Anastasia were taken in by a priest in the Ural Mountains in 1919 , where they lived as nuns until their deaths in 1964 . They were buried under the names Anastasia and Maria Nikolaevna . 
 More recently , Gabriel Louis Duval wrote a book , A Princess in the Family , claiming that his foster grandmother " Granny Alina " might have been the Grand Duchess Maria . According to Duval , Granny Alina married a man named Frank and emigrated to South Africa . She later lived with his family before dying in 1969 . Her body was exhumed , but DNA was too degraded to be useful in determining whether she shared DNA with the imperial family . Most historians discount the claims that Maria or another member of the family survived the killings . Until his own assassination in 1979 , her first cousin , Louis Mountbatten , 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma , kept a photograph of Maria beside his bed in memory of the crush he had upon her . 
 In 1991 , bodies believed to be those of the Imperial Family and their servants were finally exhumed from a mass grave in the woods outside Yekaterinburg . The grave had been found nearly a decade earlier , but was kept hidden by its discoverers from the Communists who still ruled Russia when the grave was originally found . Once the grave was opened , the excavators realized that instead of eleven sets of remains ( Tsar Nicholas II , Tsarina Alexandra , Tsarevitch Alexei , the four Grand Duchesses , Olga , Tatiana , Maria and Anastasia ; the family 's doctor , Yevgeny Botkin ; their valet , Alexei Trupp ; their cook , Ivan <unk> ; and Alexandra 's maid , Anna Demidova ) the grave held only nine . Alexei and , according to the late forensic expert Dr. William Maples , Anastasia were missing from the family 's grave . Russian scientists contested this , however , and claimed it was Maria 's body that was missing . The Russians identified Anastasia by using a computer program to compare photos of the youngest Grand Duchess with the skulls of the victims from the mass grave . They estimated the height and width of the skulls where pieces of bone were missing . American scientists found this method inexact . A Russian forensic expert said none of the skulls attributed to the Grand Duchesses had a gap between the front teeth as Maria did . 
 American scientists thought the missing body to be Anastasia because none of the female skeletons showed the evidence of immaturity , such as an immature collarbone , undescended wisdom teeth , or immature vertebrae in the back , that they would have expected to find in the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Anastasia . In 1998 , when the bodies of the Imperial Family were finally interred , a body measuring approximately 5 feet 7 inches was buried under the name of Anastasia . Photographs taken of the four sisters up until six months before the murders demonstrate that Maria was several inches taller than Anastasia and was also taller than her sister Olga . However , the heights of the skeletons had to be estimated because some of the bones had been cut and portions of the skeletons were missing . Since teeth and large portions of the jaw were missing in several of the skeletons , the Russian scientists ' assertion that Anastasia 's remains rather than those of Maria were in the grave because none of the skeletons had a gap between the front teeth also appeared questionable to American scientists . 
 The mitochondrial DNA from the skeletons was compared against mitochondrial DNA from relatives of the imperial family in the maternal line of descent , including the Tsarina 's great @-@ nephew Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , and was found to be a match . Scientists believed that the matching DNA was enough to identify the remains of the Imperial Family and their servants . The " Yurovsky Note " , a report filed by commander Yakov Yurovsky with his superiors following the murders , stated that two of the bodies were removed from the main grave and cremated at an undisclosed area . If the Whites ever discovered the grave , Yurovsky believed they would doubt the grave belonged to the Tsar and his retinue because the body count would be incorrect . Some forensic experts believe the complete burning of two bodies in so short a time would have been impossible given the environment and materials possessed by Yurovsky and his men . Initial searches of the area in subsequent years failed to turn up a cremation site or the remains of the two missing Romanov children . 
 However , on August 23 , 2007 , a Russian archaeologist announced the discovery of two burned , partial skeletons at a bonfire site near Yekaterinburg that appeared to match the site described in Yurovsky 's memoirs . The archaeologists said the bones were from a boy who was roughly between the ages of ten and thirteen years at the time of his death and of a young woman who was roughly between the ages of eighteen and twenty @-@ three years old . Maria was nineteen years , one month old at the time of the assassinations while her sister Anastasia was seventeen years , one month old and her brother Alexei was two weeks shy of his fourteenth birthday . Maria 's elder sisters Olga and Tatiana were twenty @-@ two and twenty @-@ one years old at the time of the assassinations . Along with the remains of the two bodies , archaeologists found " shards of a container of sulfuric acid , nails , metal strips from a wooden box , and bullets of various caliber . " The bones were found using metal detectors and metal rods as probes . 
 Preliminary testing indicated a " high degree of probability " that the remains belong to the Tsarevich Alexei and to one of his sisters , Russian forensic scientists announced on January 22 , 2008 . The testing began in late December 2007 . On April 30 , 2008 , Russian forensic scientists announced that DNA testing proves that the remains belong to the Tsarevich Alexei and to a young woman the Russians continue to identify as Maria . Eduard Rossel , governor of the region 900 miles east of Moscow , said tests done by a U.S. laboratory had identified the shards as those of Alexei and Maria . In March 2009 , results of the DNA testing were published , confirming that the two bodies discovered in 2007 were those of Tsarevich Alexei and one of the four Grand Duchesses . 
 " This has confirmed that indeed it is the children , " he said . " We have now found the entire family . " 
 = = Sainthood = = 
 For more information , see Romanov sainthood 
 In 2000 , Maria and her family were canonized as passion bearers by the Russian Orthodox Church . The family had previously been canonized in 1981 by the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad as holy martyrs . The bodies of Tsar Nicholas II , Tsarina Alexandra , and three of their daughters were finally interred at St. Peter and Paul Cathedral in St. Petersburg on July 17 , 1998 , eighty years after they were murdered . 
 = = Murder Case Reopened = = 
 On September 11 , 2015 it was announced that the remains of Maria and Alexei , which had been sitting in storage in the state archives for 8 years , are to be buried alongside their family on October 15 , 2015 . However , the Russian Government has given the Russian Orthodox Church permission to do one last DNA test of the two Romanov children against DNA from a blood stained cloth from their great @-@ grandfather Emperor Alexander II , who was killed by a bomb and their aunt Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna . 
 Nicholas II and Alexandra Fyodorovna ( Alix of Hesse ) are to be exhumed from their tombs in September 2015 for testing and new discovered material are to be brought into the investigation . This test will be done so the Church and a branch of the Romanov line can set aside their doubts . The burial of what now are considered to be Maria 's and Alexei 's remains , to be with those of the family , was planned for 2015 but has been delayed mainly due to the insistence of the Russian Orthodox Church on more DNA @-@ testing . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Compsognathus = 
 Compsognathus ( / <unk> / ; Greek <unk> / <unk> ; " elegant " , " refined " or " dainty " , and <unk> / <unk> ; " jaw " ) is a genus of small , bipedal , carnivorous theropod dinosaurs . Members of its single species Compsognathus longipes could grow to the size of a turkey . They lived about 150 million years ago , the Tithonian age of the late Jurassic period , in what is now Europe . Paleontologists have found two well @-@ preserved fossils , one in Germany in the 1850s and the second in France more than a century later . Today , C. longipes is the only recognized species , although the larger specimen discovered in France in the 1970s was once thought to belong to a separate species and named C. <unk> . 
 Many presentations still describe Compsognathus as " chicken @-@ sized " dinosaurs because of the small size of the German specimen , which is now believed to be a juvenile . Compsognathus longipes is one of the few dinosaur species for which diet is known with certainty : the remains of small , agile lizards are preserved in the bellies of both specimens . Teeth discovered in Portugal may be further fossil remains of the genus . 
 Although not recognized as such at the time of its discovery , Compsognathus is the first theropod dinosaur known from a reasonably complete fossil skeleton . Until the 1990s , it was the smallest known non @-@ avialan dinosaur ; earlier it was incorrectly thought to be the closest relative of Archaeopteryx . 
 = = Description = = 
 For decades , Compsognathus were famed as the smallest dinosaurs known ; the first specimen collected was around 1 m ( 3 ft ) in length . However , dinosaurs discovered later , such as <unk> , Microraptor and <unk> , were even smaller . The largest Compsognathus specimen is estimated to have weighed somewhere between 0 @.@ 83 and 3 @.@ 5 kg ( 1 @.@ 8 and 7 @.@ 7 lb ) . 
 Compsognathus were small , bipedal animals with long hind legs and longer tails , which they used for balance during locomotion . The forelimbs were smaller than the hindlimbs and featured three digits equipped with solid claws suited for grasping prey . Their delicate skulls were narrow and long , with tapered snouts . The skull had five pairs of fenestrae ( skull openings ) , the largest of which was for the orbit ( eye socket ) . The eyes were large in proportion to the rest of the skull . 
 The lower jaw was slender and had no mandibular fenestra , a hole in the side of the lower jawbone commonly seen in archosaurs . The teeth were small but sharp , suited for its diet of small vertebrates and possibly other small animals , such as insects . Its frontmost teeth ( those on the premaxilla ) were unserrated , unlike those further back in the jaw which were flattened and more strongly recurved . Scientists have used these dental characteristics to identify Compsognathus and its closest relatives . <unk> and Wuttke ( 2012 ) described the taphonomical phenomena of the German specimen of Compsognathus . 
 The Compsognathus specimen discovered in Germany in the 19th century featured only two digits on each forelimb , leading scientists to conclude that this was how the creature appeared in life . However , the fossil discovered later in France revealed the manus ( hands ) to have had three digits , similar to other members of compsognathid genera . The fossilization of the German Compsognathus had simply failed to preserve the specimen 's hands completely . Bidar supposed that the French specimen had webbed hands , which would look like flippers in life . In the 1975 book The Evolution and Ecology of the Dinosaurs , L. B. Halstead depicts the animal as an amphibious dinosaur capable of feeding on aquatic prey and swimming out of reach of larger predators . Ostrom debunked this hypothesis by showing conclusively that the French specimen was nearly identical to the German specimen in every aspect but its size . Peyer confirmed these conclusions . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Some relatives of Compsognathus , namely Sinosauropteryx and <unk> , have been preserved with the remains of simple feathers covering the body like fur , promoting some scientists to suggest that Compsognathus might have been feathered in a similar way . Consequently , many depictions of Compsognathus show them with coverings of downy proto @-@ feathers . However , no feathers or feather @-@ like covering have been preserved with Compsognathus fossils , in contrast to Archaeopteryx , which are found in the same sediments . Karin Peyer , in 2006 , reported skin impressions preserved on the side of the tail starting at the 13th tail vertebra . The impressions showed small bumpy tubercles , similar to the scales found on the tail and hind legs of Juravenator . Additional scales had in 1901 been reported by Von Huene , in the abdominal region of the German Compsognathus , but Ostrom subsequently disproved this interpretation ; in 2012 they were by Achim <unk> seen as plaques of <unk> , corpse wax . 
 Like Compsognathus , and unlike Sinosauropteryx , a patch of fossilized skin from the tail and hindlimb of the possible relative Juravenator <unk> shows mainly scales , though there is some indication that simple feathers were also present in the preserved areas . This may mean that a feather covering was not ubiquitous in this group of dinosaurs . 
 = = Discovery and species = = 
 Compsognathus is known from two almost complete skeletons , one from Germany that is 89 cm ( 35 in ) long and another from France that is 125 cm ( 49 in ) long . The physician and fossil collector Joseph <unk> acquired the German specimen ( BSP AS I 563 ) in 1859 , discovered about the same year in the lithographic limestone deposits in the <unk> @-@ <unk> region of Bavaria , in the Jurassic part of a lagoonal region known as the Solnhofen archipelago . The limestone of this area has also yielded such well @-@ preserved fossils as Archaeopteryx with feather impressions and some pterosaurs with imprints of their wing membranes . The German Compsognathus fossil itself most likely came from the <unk> Formation of the <unk> locality , specifically dated to the uppermost Kimmeridgian stage ( 150 @.@ 8 million years ago ) ; however , alternative possibilities include quarries near <unk> or Goldberg , both from the Tithonian , to which stage Compsognathus has traditionally been dated . Johann A. Wagner discussed the specimen briefly in 1859 , when he coined the name Compsognathus longipes , and described it in detail in 1861 . In early 1868 , Thomas Huxley compared the two species and , following earlier suggestions by Karl <unk> and Edward Drinker Cope , concluded that , apart from its arms and feathers , the Archaeopteryx skeleton was closely similar to Compsognathus , and that the proto @-@ bird was related to the dinosaurs . In 1896 , Othniel Marsh recognized the fossil as a true member of the Dinosauria . John Ostrom thoroughly redescribed the species in 1978 , making it one of the best @-@ known small theropods at that time . The German specimen is on display at the Bayerische <unk> für Paläontologie und historische <unk> ( Bavarian State Institute for Paleontology and Historical Geology ) in Munich , Germany , which bought the fossil from <unk> in 1865 . 
 The larger French specimen ( MNHN <unk> 79 ) was discovered by quarry owner Louis <unk> around 1971 in the <unk> lithographic limestone of <unk> near Nice in southeastern France . It dates to the lower Tithonian . Although Alain Bidar originally described the specimen as a separate species called Compsognathus <unk> , Ostrom , Jean @-@ Guy <unk> and others have since relabeled it as another example of Compsognathus longipes . Quimby identified the smaller German specimen as a juvenile of the same species . In 1983 , the National Museum of Natural History in Paris acquired the French Compsognathus fossil ; <unk> thoroughly studied it there . 
 Collector Heinrich Fischer had originally labeled a partial foot , from the Solnhofen area , as belonging to Compsognathus longipes . Though this identification was rejected by Wilhelm <unk> Dames in 1884 , Friedrich von Huene nevertheless in 1925 provisionally referred the specimen to Compsognathus . However , Ostrom 's study of 1978 has disproven this . Jens Zinke in 1998 assigned forty @-@ nine teeth from the Kimmeridgian <unk> formation of Portugal to the genus . These were not identical to those of C. longipes , having serrations on the front edge , but were because of general similarities in form referred to a Compsognathus sp . 
 In 1997 Virginia Morell renamed a related Chinese form , Sinosauropteryx prima , into a Compsognathus prima ; this has found no general acceptance . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The genus Compsognathus gives its name to the family Compsognathidae , a group composed mostly of small dinosaurs from the late Jurassic and early Cretaceous periods of China , Europe and South America . For many years it was the only member known ; however in recent decades paleontologists have discovered several related genera . The clade includes Aristosuchus , <unk> , <unk> , Sinosauropteryx , and perhaps Juravenator and <unk> . At one time , Mononykus was proposed as a member of the family , but this was rejected by Chen and coauthors in a 1998 paper ; they considered the similarities between Mononykus and the compsognathids to be an example of convergent evolution . The position of Compsognathus and its relatives within the coelurosaur group is uncertain . Some , such as theropod expert Thomas Holtz Jr. and co @-@ authors Ralph Molnar and Phil Currie in the landmark 2004 text Dinosauria , hold the family as the most basal of the coelurosaurs , while others as part of the Maniraptora . 
 For almost a century , Compsognathus longipes was the only well @-@ known small theropod species . This led to comparisons with Archaeopteryx and to suggestions of an especially close relationship with birds . In fact , Compsognathus , rather than Archaeopteryx , piqued Huxley 's interest in the origin of birds . The two animals share similarities in shape and proportions , so many in fact that two specimens of Archaeopteryx , the " Eichstätt " and the " Solnhofen " , were for a time misidentified as those of Compsognathus . Many other types of theropod dinosaurs , such as maniraptorans , are now known to have been more closely related to birds . 
 Below is a simplified cladogram placing Compsognathus in Compsognathidae by Senter et al. in 2012 . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 In a 2001 study conducted by Bruce Rothschild and other paleontologists , nine foot bones referred to Compsognathus were examined for signs of stress fracture , but none were found . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The remains of a lizard in the German specimen 's thoracic cavity show that Compsognathus preyed on small vertebrates . Marsh , who examined the specimen in 1881 , thought that this small skeleton in the Compsognathus belly was an embryo , but in 1903 , Franz Nopcsa concluded that it was a lizard . Ostrom identified the remains as belonging to a lizard of the genus <unk> , which he concluded was a fast and agile runner owing to its long tail and limb proportions . This in turn led to the conclusion that its predators , Compsognathus , must have had sharp vision and the ability to rapidly accelerate and outrun the lizard . The <unk> is in a single piece , indicating that the Compsognathus must have swallowed its prey whole . The French specimen 's gastric contents consist of unidentified lizards or <unk> . 
 = = = Possible eggs = = = 
 The plate of the German Compsognathus shows several circular irregularities 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) in diameter near the skeletal remains . Peter Griffiths interpreted them as immature eggs in 1993 . However , later researchers have doubted their connection to the genus because they were found outside the body cavity of the animal . A well @-@ preserved fossil of a Sinosauropteryx , a genus related to Compsognathus , shows two oviducts bearing two unlaid eggs . These proportionally larger and less numerous eggs of Sinosauropteryx cast further doubt on the original identification of the purported Compsognathus eggs . In 1964 German geologist Karl Werner Barthel had explained the discs as gas bubbles formed in the sediment because of the putrefaction of the carcass . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 During the late Jurassic , Europe was a dry , tropical archipelago at the edge of the Tethys Sea . The fine limestone in which the skeletons of Compsognathus have been found originated in calcite from the shells of marine organisms . Both the German and French areas where Compsognathus specimens have been preserved were lagoons situated between the beaches and coral reefs of the Jurassic European islands in the Tethys Sea . Contemporaries of Compsognathus longipes include the early avialan Archaeopteryx lithographica and the pterosaurs Rhamphorhynchus <unk> and Pterodactylus antiquus . The same sediments in which Compsognathus have been preserved also contain fossils of a number of marine animals such as fish , crustaceans , echinoderms and marine mollusks , confirming the coastal habitat of this theropod . No other dinosaur has been found in association with Compsognathus , indicating that these little dinosaurs might in fact have been the top land predator in these islands . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Children 's dinosaur books commonly feature Compsognathus . For a long time they were unique in their small size , as most other small dinosaurs were discovered and described a century or more later . These animals have appeared in the movies The Lost World : Jurassic Park and Jurassic Park III . In The Lost World : Jurassic Park , one of the characters incorrectly identifies the species as " Compsognathus <unk> " , combining the genus name of Compsognathus longipes with the specific name of <unk> <unk> , a distantly related small carnivore featured in the Jurassic Park novels . 
 = Forest Highway 16 = 
 Federal Forest Highway 16 ( FFH 16 ) is a forest highway in the western Upper Peninsula of the US state of Michigan . This road runs through the Ottawa National Forest in Iron , Houghton and Ontonagon counties . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) has erroneously marked it as H @-@ 16 on their official state map . FFH 16 is designated by the US Forest Service ( USFS ) with maintenance shared by the county road commissions ( ICRC , <unk> , <unk> , respectively ) . Although the MDOT maps would suggest that it is a part of the County @-@ Designated Highway System ( CDH system ) , it is not . The three counties in question do not participate in the system , and the roadway falls in the middle of the G zone for numbering purposes . 
 = = Route description = = 
 FFH 16 starts at an intersection with County Road 436 ( CR 436 , Smokey Lake Road ) near Horseshoe Lake in rural Iron County 's Stambaugh Township . The roadway runs north from this location east of Smokey Lake through forest lands that are part of the Ottawa National Forest . Near Golden Lake and the Golden Lake National Forest Campground , FFH 16 and US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) intersect . FFH 16 continues north and curves to the northwest around the end of Golden Lake . The routing of the road provides access to several more lakes in rural Iron County such as Paint , Silk and <unk> lakes , as well as an older routing of US 2 , before crossing into southern Houghton County . 
 In Houghton County , FFH 16 and M @-@ 28 meet in the Duncan Township community of Kenton . The former roadway turns east and runs concurrently along the latter one for approximately a quarter mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) before turning northward again , leaving town near the cemetery . The forest highway tracks due north until Bob Lake . There the roadway meanders through the area near another National Forest campground and crosses into eastern Ontonagon County . FFH 16 crosses back into Houghton County one last time . Immediately after crossing the county like , the forest highway terminates at an intersection with M @-@ 38 west of the community of Nisula . 
 = = History = = 
 A new county @-@ designated highway appeared on maps for the first time in 1983 , H @-@ 16 ; it was marked as running between US 2 and M @-@ 28 only . This designation was removed in the 1985 edition of the map . The H @-@ 16 label reappeared in 1992 ; this time it was shown continuing south toward the Wisconsin state line and north to M @-@ 38 , along the routing of FFH @-@ 16 . The roadway is part of the Forest Highway System that is funded and administered by the US Forest Service and the Federal Highway Administration ; the system was created by the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1921 . The highway has never been included in the CDH system as Iron , Houghton and Ontonagon counties do not participate in the system , and the Upper Peninsula east of US 41 is the G zone , not the H zone . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = La Fleche ( horse ) = 
 e 
 La Fleche ( 1889 – 1916 ) was a British Thoroughbred racehorse and broodmare . After being sold for a world record price as a yearling in 1890 , she was undefeated as a two @-@ year @-@ old in 1891 , winning races against her own sex and defeating some of the year 's leading colts . She went on to become the dominant British three @-@ year @-@ old of 1892 , claiming the Fillies ’ Triple Crown by winning the 1000 Guineas at Newmarket , the Oaks at Epsom and the St Leger at Doncaster . Her only defeat of the year came when she was beaten when starting favourite for the Epsom Derby . 
 La Fleche remained in training for a further two seasons , winning important races such as the 1893 Liverpool Autumn Cup , the 1894 Ascot Gold Cup , and the Champion Stakes on her final appearance . In all , she won sixteen times in twenty @-@ four racecourse appearances . After her retirement from racing she became a successful and influential broodmare . 
 = = Background = = 
 La Fleche ( French for The Arrow ) , a brown mare standing just under 16 hands high was bred by the Royal Studs at Hampton Court and was foaled on 10 March 1889 . She was an exceptionally well @-@ bred and " beautiful " filly and attracted much attention when she was sent to be auctioned as a yearling on 28 June 1890 at the Bushey Paddocks . She was bought by Lord Marcus Beresford on behalf of the financier Baron Maurice de Hirsch for a sum of 5 @,@ 500 guineas , outbidding the Duke of Portland and John Porter and breaking the record for a yearling sold at auction , which had stood since 1876 . 
 Her sire , St. Simon was an unbeaten racehorse who was beginning to prove himself as an outstanding sire . By the time La Fleche was sold in 1890 he was on the way to the first of his nine sires ’ championships , having sired the first two of his ten Classic winners . Her dam , Quiver produced La Fleche ’ s full @-@ sister Memoir , who won the Epsom Oaks and the St Leger as well as the influential broodmares Maid Marian and Satchel . 
 La Fleche was trained for her first two seasons by John Porter at Kingsclere . At the end of her three @-@ year @-@ old season she was moved to the Egerton House stable of Richard Marsh at Newmarket , Suffolk . 
 Attempts by anglophone writers to spell her name resulted in variations including La <unk> , <unk> , La Flèche ( the " correct " version ) , and La <unk> . 
 = = Racing career = = 
 = = = 1891 : two @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 La Fleche won all four of her races as a two @-@ year @-@ old . She made her first appearance on July 16 at Newmarket in the Chesterfield Stakes , for which she started 6 / 4 favourite . Although she had not grown as much as might have been expected from her yearling days , she was reported to be deceptively powerful , being described by one observer as " all wire and whipcord . " Ridden by George Barrett , she led from the start and shook off he rivals " without an effort " to win by two lengths , in an impressive time of 1 : 04 @.@ 2 . The third placed finisher , a colt called Bonavista ( or Bona Vista ) , went on to win the following year 's 2000 Guineas . On 29 July , La Fleche was sent to Goodwood for the five furlong Lavant Stakes in which she met Priestess , another filly whose sale price ( £ 4 @,@ 000 ) had attracted comment . La Fleche tracked Priestess , who set a strong pace , before moving ahead in the final furlong to win " very cleverly " by a length . Two days later , she reappeared at the same course for the <unk> Stakes and recorded another easy win , beating Adoration by one and a half lengths . At Doncaster in September she won the Champagne Stakes to take her earnings for the year to £ 3 @,@ 415 . 
 La Fleche 's stable companion , Orme , was regarded as the best of the year 's two @-@ year @-@ old colts , and there was speculation as to which of the two was the better . It was also generally believed that La Fleche would have the Derby as her principal target for the following year . 
 = = = 1892 : three @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 = = = = Spring = = = = 
 1892 began with a scare for La Fleche 's owners as the filly slipped and injured her knees at her stable . Initial fears that her career could be over however , proved to be unfounded as the damage was superficial . Confidence in the filly grew steadily over the winter and early spring , and by late April she had supplanted Orme as Derby favourite . Her position at the head of the market was strengthened when Orme was poisoned – unsubstantiated rumours blamed the filly 's supporters – and ruled out for the first half of the season . 
 On 6 May 1892 La Fleche started 1 / 2 favourite in a field of seven for the 1000 Guineas . Her price might have been even shorter but for fears that she too could have been " got at " . Ridden by George Barrett she raced in second place as Adoration set the pace before moving easily into the lead a furlong out . She won by a length from The Smew and Adoration in a time of 1 : 52 @.@ 4 , which was 1 @.@ 6 seconds faster than the time recorded by Bona Vista in winning the 2000 Guineas over the same course . 
 = = = = Summer = = = = 
 At Epsom on 1 June La Fleche started 11 / 10 favourite for the Derby on a " gloriously fine " day . She was saddled and paraded separately from the colts for reasons that correspondents chose not to <unk> . The French @-@ trained colt Bucentaur led the field into the straight where he was overtaken by the 40 / 1 outsider Sir Hugo . La Fleche then produced her challenge but after a " splendid finish " in which she was cheered on by the crowd , she failed to overhaul the colt and finished second , beaten three quarters of a length . There were later claims that La Fleche ’ s defeat had been a fluke and Barrett was criticised for giving her a " most erratic ride " . This version of events is not supported by contemporary accounts , which state that the filly was in a " capital position " throughout the race . 
 Two days after her defeat in the Derby , La Fleche ran against fillies in the Oaks . Although some regarded her as a certainty , her odds drifted from 2 / 5 to 8 / 11 before the start . In the race she tracked the leader Broad Corrie before taking the lead in the straight apparently poised for an easy victory . In the final furlong however , she was closely pressed by The Smew , a filly she had dealt with easily in the 1000 Guineas , and Barrett had to ride a vigorous finish to win the race by a short head . On 29 July at Goodwood , La Fleche won the Nassau Stakes in which , despite looking less than fully fit , she quickened impressively to bear Broad Corrie by a length and a half . 
 = = = = Autumn = = = = 
 On 7 September La Fleche ran in the St Leger on a wet day at Doncaster . Orme , who had returned from his problems to win the Eclipse Stakes started favourite , with La Fleche , ridden on this occasion by John Watts , strongly supported at 7 / 2 . Watts settled the filly in the early stages as Orme set off in front . Just after the turn into the straight , La Fleche , travelling strongly , moved alongside her stable companion and then pulled clear . She won easily by two lengths from the fast @-@ finishing Sir Hugo , with Orme fading into fifth . On 24 September , La Fleche ran against older and younger horses in the £ 10 @,@ 000 Lancashire Plate over one mile at Manchester Racecourse . Ridden by Barrett , she tracked the leaders until the straight , where she accelerated impressively to win by three lengths from Orvieto , with Sir Hugo unplaced . 
 At Newmarket five days later she faced only one opponent , a colt called Dunure , in the Grand Duke Michael Stakes . She started at odds of 1 / 40 and won the £ 1 @,@ 000 prize in a predictable canter . In the Newmarket Oaks on October 11 she ran lazily but won very easily by a length from Golconda , to whom she was conceding nineteen pounds . 
 She was then sent for the Cambridgeshire Handicap 26 October , for which she was assigned a weight of 122 pounds . La Fleche started 7 / 2 favourite in a field of thirty runners and was ridden by Barrett . The closing stages of the nine furlong race developed into a contest between La Fleche and Pensioner , a colt who was carrying only 88 pounds . The filly showed " fire and resolution " at the finish to pull away from the colt and win by one and a half lengths . The win took her earnings for the season to £ 23 @,@ 848 , all of which was donated to charity by Hirsch . 
 At the end of the season La Fleche , and all of Maurice de Hirsch ’ s other horses were moved from the yard of John Porter to that of Richard Marsh . The move followed a disagreement between Hirsch 's racing manager , Marcus Beresford , and another of Porter 's important patrons , the Duke of Westminster 
 = = = 1893 : four @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 In early 1893 , La Fleche was reported to be wonderfully " fresh and well " although she showed no signs of having grown . She did not appear in public however , until 14 July , when she ran in the Eclipse Stakes at Sandown . She started evens favourite against five opponents , most notably Orme , who started on 2 / 1 . Barrett moved the filly up to challenge in the straight , but she soon came under pressure and although she ran on " gamely " she could finish only third behind Orme and Medicis . Two weeks later at Goodwood , Orme again proved superior , beating the filly by a neck in the Gordon Stakes , despite veering sharply left inside the last furlong . 
 In Autumn La Fleche attempted to win a second Manchester Plate , but finished third to the three @-@ year @-@ colts Raeburn , and Isinglass . The race had been expected to lie between La Fleche and Isinglass , and their respective jockeys focused their attentions on each other , allowing Raeburn to emerge almost unseen to take the race in the closing stages . For this race , La Fleche carried a weight of 154 pounds . On 25 October she found a weight of 133 pound too much when finishing unplaced in the Cambridgeshire . She won the Lowther Stakes at Newmarket in October . On 10 November she ran in the Liverpool Autumn Cup , carrying a weight of 132 pounds and won in impressive style by one and a quarter lengths from The Prisoner . Later in November , she was beaten under 137 pounds in the Manchester November Handicap . 
 = = = 1894 : five @-@ year @-@ old season = = = 
 Before the start of the 1894 season , La Fleche was covered by the Gold Cup winner <unk> , and raced in foal ( pregnant ) for the rest of the year . At Royal Ascot on 15 June she started 2 / 5 favourite for the two and a half mile Ascot Gold Cup , in which her biggest danger appeared to be the French colt <unk> . Watts held the mare up at the back of the field before moving her up to challenge <unk> entering the straight . She soon went clear and won " in splendid style " by three lengths . One day later she ran in the Hardwicke Stakes and started the 1 / 5 favourite . In the straight however , she was never able to get on terms with the colt Ravensbury , and finished second , beaten half a length . The Prince of Wales reportedly lost heavily on the race . 
 On her final start of the year she met Ravensbury again in the Champion Stakes at Newmarket on 9 October . As the owners of Isinglass had turned down a challenge to run his horse against La Fleche , they were the only two runners and the mare , ridden by Watts started at odds of 1 / 3 . La Fleche opened up a clear lead in the early stages and was never in danger of defeat , winning " in a canter " by eight lengths . As the mare galloped up the hill with her ears pricked , she was given an enthusiastic reception from the Newmarket crowd who knew they were witnessing her final race . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 After her win in the St Leger , La Fleche was described as " one of the best fillies that ever raced in England . " Her earnings of £ 25 @,@ 635 were by far the highest for any horse in 1892 and by the end of her second season , she had already earned more in prize money than any other filly . On her retirement it was said that she had been " nothing short of an Idol " with the public . 
 = = Stud career = = 
 As noted above , La Fleche was already in foal when racing in 1894 and produced her first foal , a filly called La <unk> in 1895 . In 1896 Maurice de Hirsch died and all his bloodstock , including La Fleche and La <unk> were put up for auction . She was sold for £ 12 @,@ 600 to Marcus Beresford , acting on this occasion on behalf the Sykes family and was sent to their Sledmere Stud in Yorkshire . Sir Tatton Sykes , who was reportedly horrified by the price , initially refused to acknowledge the mare ’ s arrival , and left her in a railway box for two weeks before he was persuaded to accept the deal . La Fleche ’ s best runner was John O ’ Gaunt , who finished second in the Derby and sired Swynford . Her daughter Baroness La Fleche produced the 1000 Guineas winner Cinna and the successful stallion Beau Pere . La Fleche was retired from breeding in 1911 , and she died at Sledmere in late April 1916 at the age of twenty @-@ seven . 
 = = Pedigree = = 
 = Migraine = 
 Migraine is a primary headache disorder characterized by recurrent headaches that are moderate to severe . Typically , the headaches affect one half of the head , are pulsating in nature , and last from two to 72 hours . Associated symptoms may include nausea , vomiting , and sensitivity to light , sound , or smell . The pain is generally made worse by physical activity . Up to one @-@ third of people have an aura : typically a short period of visual disturbance which signals that the headache will soon occur . Occasionally , an aura can occur with little or no headache following it . 
 Migraines are believed to be due to a mixture of environmental and genetic factors . About two @-@ thirds of cases run in families . Changing hormone levels may also play a role , as migraines affect slightly more boys than girls before puberty and two to three times more women than men . The risk of migraines usually decreases during pregnancy . The underlying mechanisms are not fully known . It is , however , believed to involve the nerves and blood vessels of the brain . 
 Initial recommended treatment is with simple pain medication such as ibuprofen and paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) for the headache , medication for the nausea , and the avoidance of triggers . Specific medications such as triptans or <unk> may be used in those for whom simple pain medications are not effective . Caffeine may be added to the above . A number of medications are useful to prevent attacks including metoprolol , valproate , and topiramate . 
 Globally , approximately 15 % of people are affected by migraines . It most often starts at puberty and is worst during middle age . In some women they become less common following menopause . An early description consistent with migraines is contained in the Ebers papyrus , written around 1500 BCE in ancient Egypt . The word " migraine " is from the Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) , " pain on one side of the head " , from <unk> ( <unk> ) , " half " , and <unk> ( <unk> ) , " skull " . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Migraines typically present with self @-@ limited , recurrent severe headache associated with autonomic symptoms . About 15 – 30 % of people with migraines experience migraines with an aura and those who have migraines with aura also frequently have migraines without aura . The severity of the pain , duration of the headache , and frequency of attacks are variable . A migraine lasting longer than 72 hours is termed status <unk> . There are four possible phases to a migraine , although not all the phases are necessarily experienced : 
 The prodrome , which occurs hours or days before the headache 
 The aura , which immediately precedes the headache 
 The pain phase , also known as headache phase 
 The <unk> , the effects experienced following the end of a migraine attack 
 = = = Prodrome phase = = = 
 Prodromal or premonitory symptoms occur in about 60 % of those with migraines , with an onset that can range from two hours to two days before the start of pain or the aura . These symptoms may include a wide variety of phenomena , including altered mood , irritability , depression or euphoria , fatigue , craving for certain food ( s ) , stiff muscles ( especially in the neck ) , constipation or diarrhea , and sensitivity to smells or noise . This may occur in those with either migraine with aura or migraine without aura . 
 = = = Aura phase = = = 
 An aura is a transient focal neurological phenomenon that occurs before or during the headache . <unk> appear gradually over a number of minutes and generally last less than 60 minutes . Symptoms can be visual , sensory or motor in nature and many people experience more than one . Visual effects occur most frequently ; they occur in up to 99 % of cases and in more than 50 % of cases are not accompanied by sensory or motor effects . 
 Vision disturbances often consist of a scintillating <unk> ( an area of partial alteration in the field of vision which flickers and may interfere with a person 's ability to read or drive ) . These typically start near the center of vision and then spread out to the sides with zigzagging lines which have been described as looking like fortifications or walls of a castle . Usually the lines are in black and white but some people also see colored lines . Some people lose part of their field of vision known as hemianopsia while others experience blurring . 
 Sensory <unk> are the second most common type ; they occur in 30 – 40 % of people with auras . Often a feeling of pins @-@ and @-@ needles begins on one side in the hand and arm and spreads to the nose – mouth area on the same side . <unk> usually occurs after the tingling has passed with a loss of position sense . Other symptoms of the aura phase can include speech or language disturbances , world spinning , and less commonly motor problems . Motor symptoms indicate that this is a hemiplegic migraine , and weakness often lasts longer than one hour unlike other auras . Auditory hallucinations or delusions have also been described . 
 = = = Pain phase = = = 
 Classically the headache is unilateral , throbbing , and moderate to severe in intensity . It usually comes on gradually and is aggravated by physical activity . In more than 40 % of cases , however , the pain may be bilateral and neck pain is commonly associated with it . Bilateral pain is particularly common in those who have migraines without an aura . Less commonly pain may occur primarily in the back or top of the head . The pain usually lasts 4 to 72 hours in adults , however in young children frequently lasts less than 1 hour . The frequency of attacks is variable , from a few in a lifetime to several a week , with the average being about one a month . 
 The pain is frequently accompanied by nausea , vomiting , sensitivity to light , sensitivity to sound , sensitivity to smells , fatigue and irritability . In a basilar migraine , a migraine with neurological symptoms related to the brain stem or with neurological symptoms on both sides of the body , common effects include a sense of the world spinning , light @-@ headedness , and confusion . Nausea occurs in almost 90 % of people , and vomiting occurs in about one @-@ third . Many thus seek a dark and quiet room . Other symptoms may include blurred vision , nasal stuffiness , diarrhea , frequent urination , pallor , or sweating . Swelling or tenderness of the scalp may occur as can neck stiffness . Associated symptoms are less common in the elderly . 
 Rarely , an aura occurs without a subsequent headache . This is known as an <unk> migraine or silent migraine ; however , it is difficult to assess the frequency of such cases because people who do not experience symptoms severe enough to seek treatment may not realize that anything unusual is happening to them and pass it off without reporting any problems . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The migraine <unk> could be defined as that constellation of symptoms occurring once the acute headache has settled . Many report a sore feeling in the area where the migraine was , and some report impaired thinking for a few days after the headache has passed . The person may feel tired or " hung over " and have head pain , cognitive difficulties , gastrointestinal symptoms , mood changes , and weakness . According to one summary , " Some people feel unusually refreshed or euphoric after an attack , whereas others note depression and malaise . " For some individuals this can vary each time . 
 = = Cause = = 
 The underlying causes of migraines are unknown . However , they are believed to be related to a mix of environmental and genetic factors . They run in families in about two @-@ thirds of cases and rarely occur due to a single gene defect . While migraines were once believed to be more common in those of high intelligence , this does not appear to be true . A number of psychological conditions are associated , including depression , anxiety , and bipolar disorder , as are many biological events or triggers . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Studies of twins indicate a 34 % to 51 % genetic influence of likelihood to develop migraine headaches . This genetic relationship is stronger for migraines with aura than for migraines without aura . A number of specific variants of genes increase the risk by a small to moderate amount . 
 Single gene disorders that result in migraines are rare . One of these is known as familial hemiplegic migraine , a type of migraine with aura , which is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion . Four genes have been shown to be involved in familial hemiplegic migraine . Three of these genes are involved in ion transport . The fourth is an axonal protein associated with the exocytosis complex . Another genetic disorder associated with migraine is <unk> syndrome or cerebral autosomal dominant <unk> with subcortical <unk> and leukoencephalopathy . 
 = = = Triggers = = = 
 Migraines may be induced by triggers , with some reporting it as an influence in a minority of cases and others the majority . Many things have been labeled as triggers , however the strength and significance of these relationships are uncertain . Most people with migraines report to experience triggers . A trigger may be encountered up to 24 hours prior to the onset of symptoms . 
 = = = = Physiological aspects = = = = 
 Common triggers quoted are stress , hunger , and fatigue ( these equally contribute to tension headaches ) . Psychological stress has been reported as a factor by 50 to 80 % of people . Migraines have also been associated with post @-@ traumatic stress disorder and abuse . Migraines are more likely to occur around menstruation . Other hormonal influences , such as menarche , oral contraceptive use , pregnancy , perimenopause , and menopause , also play a role . These hormonal influences seem to play a greater role in migraine without aura . Migraines typically do not occur during the second and third trimesters or following menopause . 
 = = = = Dietary aspects = = = = 
 Between 12 and 60 % of people report foods as triggers . Evidence for dietary triggers , however , mostly relies on self @-@ reports and is not rigorous enough to prove or disprove any particular triggers . A clear explanation for why food might trigger migraines is also lacking . 
 Regarding specific agents there does not appear to be evidence for an effect of <unk> on migraine , and while monosodium glutamate ( MSG ) is frequently reported as a dietary trigger , evidence does not consistently support this . 
 = = = = Environmental aspects = = = = 
 A review on potential triggers in the indoor and outdoor environment concluded that there is insufficient evidence to confirm environmental factors as causing migraines . They nevertheless suggested that people with migraines take some preventive measures related to indoor air quality and lighting . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Migraines are believed to be a neurovascular disorder with evidence supporting its mechanisms starting within the brain and then spreading to the blood vessels . Some researchers believe neuronal mechanisms play a greater role , while others believe blood vessels play the key role . Others believe both are likely important . One theory is related to increased excitability of the cerebral cortex and abnormal control of pain neurons in the trigeminal nucleus of the brainstem . High levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin , also known as 5 @-@ <unk> , are believed to be involved . 
 = = = Aura = = = 
 Cortical spreading depression , or spreading depression according to Leão , is bursts of neuronal activity followed by a period of inactivity , which is seen in those with migraines with an aura . There are a number of explanations for its occurrence including activation of NMDA receptors leading to calcium entering the cell . After the burst of activity the blood flow to the cerebral cortex in the area affected is decreased for two to six hours . It is believed that when depolarization travels down the underside of the brain , nerves that sense pain in the head and neck are triggered . 
 = = = Pain = = = 
 The exact mechanism of the head pain which occurs during a migraine is unknown . Some evidence supports a primary role for central nervous system structures ( such as the brainstem and diencephalon ) while other data support the role of peripheral activation ( such as via the sensory nerves that surround blood vessels of the head and neck ) . The potential candidate vessels include dural arteries , <unk> arteries and extracranial arteries such as those of the scalp . The role of <unk> of the extracranial arteries , in particular , is believed to be significant . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of a migraine is based on signs and symptoms . Neuroimaging tests are not necessary to diagnose migraine , but may be used to find other causes of headaches in those whose examination and history do not confirm a migraine diagnosis . It is believed that a substantial number of people with the condition remain undiagnosed . 
 The diagnosis of migraine without aura , according to the International Headache Society , can be made according to the following criteria , the " 5 , 4 , 3 , 2 , 1 criteria " : 
 Five or more attacks — for migraine with aura , two attacks are sufficient for diagnosis . 
 Four hours to three days in duration 
 Two or more of the following : 
 Unilateral ( affecting half the head ) ; 
 Pulsating ; 
 Moderate or severe pain intensity ; 
 <unk> by or causing avoidance of routine physical activity 
 One or more of the following : 
 Nausea and / or vomiting ; 
 Sensitivity to both light ( photophobia ) and sound ( <unk> ) 
 If someone experiences two of the following : photophobia , nausea , or inability to work or study for a day , the diagnosis is more likely . In those with four out of five of the following : pulsating headache , duration of 4 – 72 hours , pain on one side of the head , nausea , or symptoms that interfere with the person 's life , the probability that this is a migraine is 92 % . In those with fewer than three of these symptoms the probability is 17 % . 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 Migraines were first comprehensively classified in 1988 . The International Headache Society most recently updated their classification of headaches in 2004 . According to this classification migraines are primary headaches along with tension @-@ type headaches and cluster headaches , among others . 
 Migraines are divided into seven subclasses ( some of which include further subdivisions ) : 
 Migraine without aura , or " common migraine " , involves migraine headaches that are not accompanied by an aura . 
 Migraine with aura , or " classic migraine " , usually involves migraine headaches accompanied by an aura . Less commonly , an aura can occur without a headache , or with a <unk> headache . Two other varieties are familial hemiplegic migraine and sporadic hemiplegic migraine , in which a person has migraines with aura and with accompanying motor weakness . If a close relative has had the same condition , it is called " familial " , otherwise it is called " sporadic " . Another variety is basilar @-@ type migraine , where a headache and aura are accompanied by difficulty speaking , world spinning , ringing in ears , or a number of other brainstem @-@ related symptoms , but not motor weakness . This type was initially believed to be due to spasms of the basilar artery , the artery that supplies the brainstem . 
 Childhood periodic syndromes that are commonly precursors of migraine include cyclical vomiting ( occasional intense periods of vomiting ) , abdominal migraine ( abdominal pain , usually accompanied by nausea ) , and benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood ( occasional attacks of vertigo ) . 
 Retinal migraine involves migraine headaches accompanied by visual disturbances or even temporary blindness in one eye . 
 Complications of migraine describe migraine headaches and / or auras that are unusually long or unusually frequent , or associated with a seizure or brain lesion . 
 Probable migraine describes conditions that have some characteristics of migraines , but where there is not enough evidence to diagnose it as a migraine with certainty ( in the presence of concurrent medication overuse ) . 
 Chronic migraine is a complication of migraines , and is a headache that fulfills diagnostic criteria for migraine headache and occurs for a greater time interval . Specifically , greater or equal to 15 days / month for longer than 3 months . 
 = = = Abdominal migraine = = = 
 The diagnosis of abdominal migraines is controversial . Some evidence indicates that recurrent episodes of abdominal pain in the absence of a headache may be a type of migraine or are at least a precursor to migraines . These episodes of pain may or may not follow a migraine @-@ like prodrome and typically last minutes to hours . They often occur in those with either a personal or family history of typical migraines . Other syndromes that are believed to be precursors include cyclical vomiting syndrome and benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 Other conditions that can cause similar symptoms to a migraine headache include temporal arteritis , cluster headaches , acute glaucoma , meningitis and subarachnoid hemorrhage . Temporal arteritis typically occurs in people over 50 years old and presents with tenderness over the temple , cluster headaches presents with one @-@ sided nose stuffiness , tears and severe pain around the orbits , acute glaucoma is associated with vision problems , meningitis with fevers , and subarachnoid hemorrhage with a very fast onset . Tension headaches typically occur on both sides , are not pounding , and are less disabling . 
 Those with stable headaches which meet criteria for migraines should not receive neuroimaging to look for other intracranial disease . This requires that other concerning findings such as papilledema ( swelling of the optic disc ) are not present . People with migraines are not at an increased risk of having another cause for severe headaches . 
 = = Prevention = = 
 Preventive treatments of migraines include medications , nutritional supplements , lifestyle alterations , and surgery . Prevention is recommended in those who have headaches more than two days a week , cannot tolerate the medications used to treat acute attacks , or those with severe attacks that are not easily controlled . 
 The goal is to reduce the frequency , <unk> , and / or duration of migraines , and to increase the effectiveness of abortive therapy . Another reason for prevention is to avoid medication overuse headache . This is a common problem and can result in chronic daily headache . 
 = = = Medication = = = 
 Preventive migraine medications are considered effective if they reduce the frequency or severity of the migraine attacks by at least 50 % . Guidelines are fairly consistent in rating topiramate , <unk> / sodium valproate , propranolol , and metoprolol as having the highest level of evidence for first @-@ line use . Recommendations regarding effectiveness varied however for gabapentin . <unk> is also effective for migraine prevention and in reducing migraine attack frequency and severity , while <unk> is effective for prevention of menstrual migraine . 
 <unk> and venlafaxine are probably also effective . Angiotensin inhibition by either an angiotensin @-@ converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor antagonist may reduce attacks . Botulinum toxin ( Botox ) has been found to be useful in those with chronic migraines but not those with episodic ones . 
 = = = Alternative therapies = = = 
 While acupuncture may be effective , " true " acupuncture is not more efficient than sham acupuncture , a practice where needles are placed randomly . Both have a possibility of being more effective than routine care , with fewer adverse effects than preventative medications . Chiropractic manipulation , physiotherapy , massage and relaxation might be as effective as propranolol or topiramate in the prevention of migraine headaches ; however , the research had some problems with methodology . The evidence to support spinal manipulation is poor and insufficient to support its use . 
 Tentative evidence supports the use of stress reduction techniques such as cognitive behavioral therapy , biofeedback , and relaxation techniques . Of the alternative medicines , butterbur has the best evidence for its use . 
 = = = Devices and surgery = = = 
 Medical devices , such as biofeedback and <unk> , have some advantages in migraine prevention , mainly when common anti @-@ migraine medications are contraindicated or in case of medication overuse . Biofeedback helps people be conscious of some physiological parameters so as to control them and try to relax and may be efficient for migraine treatment . <unk> uses implantable <unk> similar to pacemakers for the treatment of intractable chronic migraines with encouraging results for severe cases . A transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation device is approved in the United States for the prevention of migraines . Migraine surgery , which involves decompression of certain nerves around the head and neck , may be an option in certain people who do not improve with medications . 
 = = Management = = 
 There are three main aspects of treatment : trigger avoidance , acute symptomatic control , and pharmacological prevention . Medications are more effective if used earlier in an attack . The frequent use of medications may result in medication overuse headache , in which the headaches become more severe and more frequent . This may occur with triptans , <unk> , and analgesics , especially narcotic analgesics . Due to these concerns simple analgesics are recommended to be used less than three days per week at most . 
 = = = Analgesics = = = 
 Recommended initial treatment for those with mild to moderate symptoms are simple analgesics such as non @-@ steroidal anti @-@ inflammatory drugs ( NSAIDs ) or the combination of paracetamol , aspirin , and caffeine . Several NSAIDs , including diclofenac and ibuprofen have evidence to support their use . Aspirin can relieve moderate to severe migraine pain , with an effectiveness similar to sumatriptan . <unk> is available in an intravenous formulation . 
 Paracetamol ( also known as acetaminophen ) , either alone or in combination with metoclopramide , is another effective treatment with a low risk of adverse effects . Metoclopramide is also effective by itself . In pregnancy , paracetamol and metoclopramide are deemed safe as are NSAIDs until the third trimester . 
 = = = Triptans = = = 
 Triptans such as sumatriptan are effective for both pain and nausea in up to 75 % of people . When sumatriptan is taken with naproxen it works better . They are the initially recommended treatments for those with moderate to severe pain or those with milder symptoms who do not respond to simple analgesics . The different forms available include oral , injectable , nasal spray , and oral dissolving tablets . In general , all the triptans appear equally effective , with similar side effects . However , individuals may respond better to specific ones . Most side effects are mild , such as flushing ; however , rare cases of myocardial ischemia have occurred . They are thus not recommended for people with cardiovascular disease , who have had a stroke , or have migraines that are accompanied by neurological problems . In addition , triptans should be prescribed with caution for those with risk factors for vascular disease . While historically not recommended in those with basilar migraines there is no specific evidence of harm from their use in this population to support this caution . They are not addictive , but may cause medication overuse headaches if used more than 10 days per month . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> and <unk> are older medications still prescribed for migraines , the latter in nasal spray and injectable forms . They appear equally effective to the triptans , are less expensive , and experience adverse effects that typically are benign . In the most severe cases , such as those with status <unk> , they appear to be the most effective treatment option . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Intravenous metoclopramide or intranasal lidocaine are other potential options . Metoclopramide is the recommended treatment for those who present to the emergency department . <unk> may also be useful in this group . A single dose of intravenous dexamethasone , when added to standard treatment of a migraine attack , is associated with a 26 % decrease in headache recurrence in the following 72 hours . Spinal manipulation for treating an ongoing migraine headache is not supported by evidence . It is recommended that opioids and barbiturates not be used due to questionable efficacy and the risk of rebound headache . 
 = = = Children = = = 
 Ibuprofen improves pain in children with migraines . Paracetamol does not appear to be effective in providing pain relief . Triptans are effective , though there is a risk of causing minor side effects like taste disturbance , nasal symptoms , dizziness , fatigue , low energy , nausea , or vomiting . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Long term prognosis in people with migraines is variable . Most people with migraines have periods of lost productivity due to their disease ; however typically the condition is fairly benign and is not associated with an increased risk of death . There are four main patterns to the disease : symptoms can resolve completely , symptoms can continue but become gradually less with time , symptoms may continue at the same frequency and severity , or attacks may become worse and more frequent . 
 Migraines with aura appear to be a risk factor for ischemic stroke doubling the risk . Being a young adult , being female , using hormonal birth control , and smoking further increases this risk . There also appears to be an association with cervical artery dissection . Migraines without aura do not appear to be a factor . The relationship with heart problems is inconclusive with a single study supporting an association . Overall however migraines do not appear to increase the risk of death from stroke or heart disease . Preventative therapy of migraines in those with migraines with auras may prevent associated strokes . People with migraines , particularly women , may develop higher than average numbers of white matter brain lesions of unclear significance . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Worldwide , migraines affect nearly 15 % or approximately one billion people . It is more common in women at 19 % than men at 11 % . In the United States , about 6 % of men and 18 % of women get a migraine in a given year , with a lifetime risk of about 18 % and 43 % respectively . In Europe , migraines affect 12 – 28 % of people at some point in their lives with about 6 – 15 % of adult men and 14 – 35 % of adult women getting at least one yearly . Rates of migraines are slightly lower in Asia and Africa than in Western countries . Chronic migraines occur in approximately 1 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 2 % of the population . 
 These figures vary substantially with age : migraines most commonly start between 15 and 24 years of age and occur most frequently in those 35 to 45 years of age . In children , about 1 @.@ 7 % of 7 year olds and 3 @.@ 9 % of those between 7 and 15 years have migraines , with the condition being slightly more common in boys before puberty . During adolescence migraines become more common among women and this persists for the rest of the lifespan , being two times more common among elderly females than males . In women migraines without aura are more common than migraines with aura , however in men the two types occur with similar frequency . 
 During perimenopause symptoms often get worse before decreasing in severity . While symptoms resolve in about two thirds of the elderly , in between 3 and 10 % they persist . 
 = = History = = 
 An early description consistent with migraines is contained in the Ebers papyrus , written around 1500 BCE in ancient Egypt . In 200 BCE , writings from the Hippocratic school of medicine described the visual aura that can precede the headache and a partial relief occurring through vomiting . 
 A second @-@ century description by Aretaeus of Cappadocia divided headaches into three types : <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Galen of Pergamon used the term <unk> ( half @-@ head ) , from which the word migraine was eventually derived . He also proposed that the pain arose from the meninges and blood vessels of the head . Migraines were first divided into the two now used types - migraine with aura ( migraine <unk> ) and migraine without aura ( migraine <unk> ) in 1887 by Louis Hyacinthe Thomas , a French Librarian . 
 Trepanation , the deliberate drilling of holes into a skull , was practiced as early as 7 @,@ 000 BCE . While sometimes people survived , many would have died from the procedure due to infection . It was believed to work via " letting evil spirits escape " . William Harvey recommended trepanation as a treatment for migraines in the 17th century . 
 While many treatments for migraines have been attempted , it was not until 1868 that use of a substance which eventually turned out to be effective began . This substance was the fungus ergot from which ergotamine was isolated in 1918 . <unk> was developed in 1959 and the first <unk> , sumatriptan , was developed in 1988 . During the 20th century with better study design effective preventative measures were found and confirmed . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 Migraines are a significant source of both medical costs and lost productivity . It has been estimated that they are the most costly neurological disorder in the European Community , costing more than € 27 billion per year . In the United States direct costs have been estimated at $ 17 billion . Nearly a tenth of this cost is due to the cost of <unk> including $ 15 billion in indirect costs , of which missed work is the greatest component . In those who do attend work with a migraine , effectiveness is decreased by around a third . Negative impacts also frequently occur for a person 's family . 
 = = Research = = 
 <unk> gene related peptides ( <unk> ) have been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of the pain associated with migraine . <unk> receptor antagonists , such as <unk> and <unk> , have been investigated both in vitro and in clinical studies for the treatment of migraine . In 2011 , Merck stopped phase III clinical trials for their investigational drug <unk> . Transcranial magnetic stimulation shows promise as has transcutaneous supraorbital nerve stimulation . 
 = CrimethInc . = 
 CrimethInc . — also known as CWC , which stands for either " CrimethInc . Ex @-@ Workers Collective " or " CrimethInc Ex @-@ Workers Ex @-@ Collective " — is a decentralized anarchist collective of autonomous cells . CrimethInc. emerged in the mid @-@ 1990s , initially as the hardcore zine Inside Front , and began operating as a collective in 1996 . It has since published widely read articles and zines for the anarchist movement and distributed posters and books of its own publication . 
 CrimethInc. cells have published books , released records , and organized national campaigns against globalization and representative democracy in favor of radical community organizing . Less public splinter groups have carried out direct action ( including arson and hacktivism ) , hosted international conventions and other events , maintained local chapters , sparked riots , and toured with multimedia performance art or hardcore anarcho @-@ punk musical ensembles . The collective has received national media and academic attention , as well as criticism and praise from other anarchists for its activities and philosophy . CrimethInc. has an association with the North American anarcho @-@ punk scene due to its relationship with artists in the genre and its publishing of Inside Front . It has since expanded into the contemporary anti @-@ capitalist movement . 
 = = Activities = = 
 Activities by CrimethInc. cells have included publishing radical literature and music , while less @-@ public splinter groups have carried out direct action , hosted international conventions and other events , maintained local chapters , sparked riots and toured with multimedia performance art and / or hardcore anarcho @-@ punk musical ensembles . In 2002 , a cell in Olympia , Washington staged a five @-@ day film festival with skill @-@ sharing workshops and screenings . Cells have also supported various large @-@ scale campaigns with publicity work , including the " Unabomber for President " and the " Don 't Just ( Not ) Vote " election campaigns as well as the protests against the Free Trade Area of the Americas of 2003 in Miami , Florida . Individuals adopting the CrimethInc. nom de guerre have included convicted ELF arsonists , as well as hacktivists who successfully attacked the websites of DARE , Republican National Committee and sites related to U.S. President George W. Bush 's 2004 re @-@ election campaign . These activities have earned the collective irregular attention from the mainstream news media . In 2010 , several CrimethInc. cells worked in collaboration with other anti @-@ capitalists and anarchists to launch international Steal Something From Work Day , which coincides with the United States Tax Day . 
 = = = Publications = = = 
 The creation of propaganda has been described as the collectives ' core function . Among their best @-@ known publications are the books Days of War , Nights of Love , Expect Resistance , Evasion , Recipes for Disaster : An Anarchist Cookbook the pamphlets To Change Everything : an anarchist appeal ( available in paper , PDF and video form ) and Fighting For Our Lives ( of which , to date , they claim to have printed 600 @,@ 000 copies ) , the hardcore punk / political zine Inside Front , and the music of hardcore punk bands . Several websites are maintained by individual cells , including <unk> , operated by the Far East Cell , which hosts propaganda , excerpts from available publications , and a blog of the activities of other cells . CrimethInc. is connected to publishing collectives / organizations with similar ideas , notably the Curious George Brigade , which has written a number of publications including Anarchy in the Age of Dinosaurs . In 2005 , they began publishing a half @-@ gloss journal , Rolling Thunder , with the byline " An Anarchist Journal of Dangerous Living " , which released its eighth issue in 2009 . CrimethInc. texts have received wide coverage in the anarchist media and in academic publications , and have been used as reading materials for university courses on anarchism . 
 In 2011 numerous publications were released , including Jesus Sepulveda 's The Garden of <unk> , from its South African based cell . These publications formed part of a project entitled the Missing Shelf , in which otherwise regular book stores were able to stock DIY produced radical literature . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Since the summer of 2002 , CrimethInc. has hosted annual conventions , termed " convergences " , open to anyone . Typically featuring the performances of traveling theatrical troupes , musicians , direct @-@ action and mutual @-@ aid workshops from individual participants , the few @-@ days @-@ long camping trips have attracted coverage in newspaper articles , initiated multiple Reclaim the Streets actions , mobilized large Critical Mass events , and catalyzed many other activities . 
 The 2007 convergence in Athens , Ohio , saw an impromptu street party which resulted in arrests on minor charges . The Athens News characterized the convergence as " a sort of networking , resume @-@ swapping opportunity for would @-@ be radicals , free @-@ thinkers , Levellers , Diggers , Neo @-@ Luddites and other assorted malcontents . " It is typical of these gatherings to demand that all attendees have something to contribute to the momentum : whether it is bringing food or equipment to share , leading a discussion group , or providing materials with which to write to political prisoners . There has been a pattern of promoting convergences as festivals , reminiscent of barnstorming flying circuses and travelling sideshows . 
 Harper 's journalist Matthew Power described the 2006 convergence in Winona , Minnesota as follows : 
 Several hundred young anarchists from around the country had train @-@ hopped and hitchhiked there to attend the annual event known as the CrimethInc Convergence ... Grimy and feral @-@ looking , the CrimethInc kids squatted in small groups around a clearing .... [ they ] were in the middle of several days of self @-@ organized workshops , seminars , and discussions , ranging from the mutualist banking theories of the nineteenth @-@ century anarchist philosopher Pierre @-@ Joseph Proudhon , to an introductory practicum on lock @-@ picking , to a class on making one 's own menstrual pads .... CrimethInc 's adherents had come together there because they wanted to live their lives as some sort of solution . They saw ' the revolution ' not as a final product but as an ongoing process ; they wanted not just to destroy the capitalist system but to create something livable in its place . 
 These convergences have been hosted by different groups within the collective each time , typically based on the initiative of local enthusiasts . Every year a different set of policy requests is released from locals in the field , typically encouraging a sober , consensus @-@ based space in which no financial transactions are made . The one firm rule has been " No police informants , " a regulation which has been ignored by the FBI . Information gathered by FBI informants at CrimethInc. convergences ( in 2004 , 2005 , and 2008 ) contributed to the convictions of Eric McDavid and his associates , as well as 2008 Republican National Convention protester Matthew DePalma . 
 In 2010 , CrimethInc. announced the We Are Everywhere campaign of national tours and events in lieu of the traditional convergence . In 2015 , CrimethInc. embarked on the similar To Change Everything two @-@ month tour of the United States . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 <unk> is not any ideology or value system or lifestyle , but rather a way of challenging all ideologies and value systems and lifestyles — and , for the advanced agent , a way of making all ideologies , value systems , and lifestyles challenging . 
 CrimethInc as a loose association represents a variety of political views ; the CrimethInc . FAQ asserts that it has " no platform or ideology except that which could be generalized from the similarities between the beliefs and goals of the individuals who choose to be involved — and that is constantly in flux . " " CrimethInc . " is an anonymous tag , a means of constructing dynamic networks of support and communication within the anarchist movement , and as such anyone can publish under the name or create a poster using the logo ; each agent or group of agents operate autonomously . As well as the traditional anarchist opposition to the state and capitalism , agents have , at times , advocated a straight edge lifestyle , the total supersession of gender roles , violent insurrection against the state , and the refusal of work . 
 CrimethInc. is influenced by the Situationist International , and has been described by scholar Martin <unk> as " inheritors of the political avant @-@ garde " , Ken <unk> has criticized CrimethInc. for presenting simplistic and in some cases false accounts of history in their manifesto Days of War , Nights of Love , and for mythologizing themselves as " a pole of international subversion " . For their part , the authors of the book criticized the " exclusive , anti @-@ subjective " nature of history as " paralyzing " , advocating in its place a non @-@ superstitious myth . The collective has expressed a strident anti @-@ copyright stance and advocacy of the appropriation of texts and ideas of others , which has attracted criticism from academic philosopher George MacDonald Ross as an endorsement of plagiarism . 
 The active participants of CrimethInc. characterize it as a mindset and a way of life first and foremost , rather than as an organization per se . Its main goal is to inspire people to take more active control of their own lives , becoming producers of culture and history instead of passive consumers . Those who ascribe to the CrimethInc. philosophy advocate radical ways of living one 's life to the end of eliminating the perceived inequities and tyrannies within society . Contributors to publications are generally not credited in respect of an anonymity asserted by participants to be one of the organization 's primary values . The name " CrimethInc . " itself is a satirical self @-@ criticism about the hypocrisy of revolutionary propaganda ( and other " margin @-@ walking between contradictions " ) and a direct reference to the concept of " <unk> " developed in George Orwell 's Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four . 
 = = = Cells = = = 
 <unk> — maintained by the <unk> . Far East cell 
 CrimethInc . Great Lakes 
 CrimethInc . West Coast 
 CrimethInc . International 
 <unk> — based in Prague , Czech Republic 
 Guerrilla Latina CrimethInc . 
 <unk> in Spanish 
 = = = Other = = = 
 " Rethinking CrimethInc . " — pseudonymous critical consideration published by <unk> 
 Interview with self @-@ identified CrimethInc. operative by Erika Ransom of the Bay Area Anarchist <unk> 
 French translations of some of CrimethInc 's writings on <unk> 
 = Siege of Vyborg ( 1710 ) = 
 The Siege of Viborg took place in the spring of 1710 during the Great Northern War ( 1700 – 1721 ) , as a second attempt by the Russians to capture the fortress town of Viborg after a failed attempt in 1706 . After the outbreak of the war , Swedish forces had fortified themselves in the port of Viborg . In order to assure safety for the newly founded city of Saint Petersburg , Peter the Great ordered the Swedish fort to be secured . A first unsuccessful attempt was made in 1706 . Later plans were put on hold because of other ongoing conflicts but , after the Russian success at the Battle of Poltava in June 1709 , the men and resources were available to capture the town . 
 Thirteen thousand troops under General @-@ Admiral Fyodor Apraksin marched to Viborg and laid siege on 22 March 1710 . Magnus <unk> , the Swedish commander at the fort , waited in vain for Swedish assistance , while a stalemate ensued because the Russians lacked sufficient artillery . In April , Peter the Great managed to bring through a fleet of 250 ships to deliver guns and supplies , and to help perform a final assault on Swedish positions . After these Russian attacks , the Swedish garrison surrendered on 12 June 1710 . 
 = = Background = = 
 After the victory at the Battle of Poltava , the Russian army was able to proceed with further offensive actions in the northwestern theater of operations . In 1710 , the Russian army undertook an offensive in two directions : on the Baltic coast ( where , in the fall in 1710 , Riga was besieged ) and in Finland , with attacks on Viborg and Kexholm . The selection of the command staff destined for the siege of Viborg led to the main authority being given to General @-@ Admiral Fyodor Apraksin , while his subordinates were Major @-@ Generals Robert Bruce and Wilhelm Bergholtz . Before the siege , Bruce and Bergholtz had operated mainly in defensive roles , chiefly in the defense of Saint Petersburg . They would later lead the offensive into Finland . They were chosen because , at that time , the commanders most experienced in siege warfare ( including Boris Sheremetev , Jacob Bruce , and <unk> Repnin ) were concentrated around Riga . Consequently , it was considered a possibility that Peter the Great himself would command forces at Viborg , so that he would not have to reassign the experienced generals and thus jeopardize the attacks on Riga . 
 = = = Fortifications at Viborg = = = 
 In 1709 , the main fort at Viborg consisted of five frontal bastions named Holtz , <unk> , Klein @-@ Platform , <unk> and Eleonora , connected by the Viborg town wall , in the eastern section of the town . The western part of the town , connected to the main section , had three bastions named <unk> , <unk> , and Europa . To the west of the wall between <unk> and Europa , there was a ravelin and two caponiers , and to the west of the wall between <unk> and Eleonora was another ravelin . Both ravelins were , apparently , earthen , but inside the main eastern fort , all structures were stone . Most of the structures in the western part of the fort were wooden , with the exception of the stone guard tower , named the Petersburg tower . Separate from these fortifications , on the small central island east of the town ( now the <unk> Island ) , was Schloss ( Castle ) Viborg , which stands to this day . The fort had 151 guns at its defense . 
 By this time , the fortifications had fallen into disrepair because the Swedish command did not pay much attention to these territories , and funds that were allotted for renovation were insignificant . In addition , the forts at <unk> and <unk> were considered sufficient to provide defense for the region . In 1702 , however , some repairs were completed under the supervision of Captain L. <unk> . 
 According to Yuri <unk> , a modern historian , the garrison at Viborg in 1710 stood at 6000 men ; other modern historians B. <unk> and A. I. <unk> put the number at 4000 . Since 1702 , the commander there had been Zacharias <unk> , who was old and in poor health . For that reason , in February 1710 , Colonel Magnus <unk> officially replaced him ; he had de facto headed the efforts to fortify the city . 
 = = = Previous attempts = = = 
 Russia had made a previous attempt to capture Viborg ; in October 1706 , a siege corps was sent there under the command of Robert ( Roman ) Bruce . On 22 October , mortars were placed and the bombardment began , which continued for four days and caused five fires in the fort at Viborg . After the bombardment , Russian forces retreated to Saint Petersburg after commanders realized that a siege could not be carried out without naval support and larger cannon . Also , autumn was not considered a suitable time for siege operations . The idea to reattempt a capture of Viborg was first proposed by Peter the Great in 1708 , but rejected by the military due to the recent Swedish offensive . 
 = = Russian attack = = 
 Peter 's plan for the second siege of Viborg involved a combination of land and sea forces , and the fort was to be taken by a prolonged siege . By February 1710 , a specialized siege corps had been assembled on Kotlin Island . This time , the Russian attack came in two stages . On 2 March 1710 , General Apraksin received orders to attack Viborg , and he planned to move out by 15 March . However , on 16 March , he was still on Kotlin Island , from where he wrote to Robert Bruce that he was departing on " the day of tomorrow " . In fact , he only set out on 21 March , arriving with the cavalry on that same day at Vyborg ; the infantry and cannon arrived the next day . 
 = = = Russian forces arrive = = = 
 When the siege corps arrived at Viborg on the 22nd , they occupied the town 's outskirts and countryside , forcing the Swedes to regroup behind the town 's inner stone wall . The Swedes had attempted to burn down the part of the town outside of the stone walls to prevent it from falling into Russian hands , but failed to do so before they were driven into their fortifications . On that same day , as Apraksin reported to the czar : 
 " We neared the fort itself in approaches , which took a great effort , since at that time there was great cold , and in addition to that the situation around the fort is rocky , which caused significant upturn ; however , despite the difficulty , the approaches have brought us to the sea strait , which is right under the city itself , at the distance of a musket 's shot , with which bags full of fur were very helpful , where there were bare rocks . And for the other side ... to perform the approaches , Major @-@ General Bergholtz was sent out with six regiments , which were also nearing the city with approaches . " 
 These advances took place under Swedish artillery fire . From 21 March until 29 March ( when , according to Aleksander <unk> , the Russians began firing their artillery ) , 66 bombs and 1 @,@ 200 round shots were released by Swedish artillery . Also , the Swedes attempted a ground assault , but were driven back into the fort . 
 = = = = Number of artillery pieces = = = = 
 Estimates of the number of artillery pieces taken to Viborg differ widely according to the various sources . In most sources , including Journal ... of Emperor Peter the Great from 1698 to the Treaty of Nystad , " Report on the capture of Vyborg " , " The Life and Affairs of the Great Sovereign " , and The Vyborg Fortress : Chronicles from 1710 to 1872 , it is said that there were ten 12 @-@ pounder guns and three mortars . N. G. <unk> believed that there were ten 12 @-@ pounders and five mortars , M. M. <unk> counted 24 cannon and four mortars , and M. V. Vasiliev 12 cannon and four mortars , although none of these historians give their sources for their figures . A letter from Fyodor Apraksin to Peter the Great dated 2 April 1710 stated that " the enemy has constructed three batteries against us ; they shoot powerfully and accurately : one of our cannon , they have broken , another blew up from frequent firing ; we have , remaining , 10 cannon in our batteries . " ( This was the only recorded time during the siege when Swedish artillery managed to disable Russian equipment . ) Thus , <unk> concluded that there were originally 12 cannon brought to Viborg , but only ten of them were used in the siege , as two of them were disabled . There were probably three mortars , although there are no primary sources to validate this . 
 In any case , there was not enough artillery , but new pieces could not be brought in . This was because it was very difficult to move them over land , and there was not enough ice to bring them over the sea . 
 = = = Initial bombardment = = = 
 It is not certain on what day the Russians began shelling the fort . Based on reports by Apraksin to Peter and on Peter the Great 's journal , Russian artillery opened fire on 1 April . However , Apraksin reported to the czar that he " began bombarding Viborg and the castle on 30 March , and on the first day 130 bombs were planted , and 90 on the second . " Furthermore , Aleksander <unk> published a " List of how many shots were fired from mortars and cannon at Viborg from 21 March to 9 April , and how many of them hit the city . " There , it claims that shelling began on 29 March , when 150 mortar shots and 60 cannon shots were fired . It continues , saying that during the next three days only the mortars were used , firing 100 shots per day . In total , during the first period of the siege , the attackers fired 2 @,@ 975 shots from mortars and 1 @,@ 531 from cannon , and the Swedes fired 399 mortar shots and 7 @,@ 464 cannon shots ; thus the Swedish fire outweighed the Russian fire . On 5 April , Apraksin noted that " our cannon are doing little to help us , for they are rather small and light ; when we begin firing , the opponent shoots one out of ten . " However , the mortars inflicted great damage upon Vyborg and the fort , forcing citizens to find cover in cellars . Despite this , soldiers had to remain positioned on the mounds , and suffered heavy casualties . 
 Soon , Major @-@ Generals Bruce and Bergholtz turned to Apraksin with a proposal to assault the fort , not waiting for " the production of an opening " . Their reasoning was that they could end up losing more soldiers from injuries and disease than they would during an assault . Peter , having found out about this from a letter by Apraksin , decided it to be " very significant , but also very dangerous . " In the end he left the decision up to General Apraksin who , not wanting to bear the responsibility for a failure , decided to wait for reinforcements to arrive by sea once the ice had opened up . 
 Small Swedish garrison placed their hopes on the support from the Royal Swedish Navy which was bound to arrive once the ice opened up . Russians on the other had were also running low on food and ammunition and with roads between Viborg and Saint Petersburg ruined by thaw only route for their support and supplies to arrive was also via sea route . With neither side able to make headway both sides waiting for their respective naval force . The side whose naval forces arrived first would have decisive advantage in the siege . 
 = = = Reinforcements arrive = = = 
 Meanwhile , in Saint Petersburg , preparations were already underway for an amphibious attack on Vyborg . The tools needed for the siege were taken from the Peter and Paul Fortress . On 4 April , Cyril Naryshkin , the first Commandant of Saint Petersburg , received orders for twenty 18 @-@ pounder guns to be sent to Viborg from Narva ( through Saint Petersburg ) , " by land or by sea , whichever path is more convenient , " and 9 @,@ 000 cannonballs along with them . However , Naryshkin could not gather the artillery fast enough , and only on 25 April did he send the cannon to Kotlin Island , where Captain <unk> received them . 
 Peter did not wait for the cannon and , on 30 April , set out with his fleet to sea . He could not postpone his sailing due to a shortage of ammunition and provisions at Viborg . Because the ice had not completely melted , the trip to Viborg was very difficult . When the ice was particularly thick , crews had to resort to " hauling a small cannon onto the bowsprit and dropping it onto the ice " to break it . Many provision transport ships were driven off course by winds or ice , and they were barely rescued . When Peter 's fleet finally arrived on 9 May , the Russian troops had only three days of provisions left . Russian forces also formed defenses to <unk> ( ru : <unk> , fi : <unk> ) to blockade the town from sea . 
 Swedish squadron consisting of seven ships of the line and three frigates and their assorted support ships under Admiral Gustav <unk> had been delayed by the easterly winds arrived only after the Russian fleet had already left back for Saint Petersburg . Since they were unable to approach the town due to Russian defenses the Swedish squadron chose to arrange blockade of their own outside of <unk> to trap the few Russian ships left behind . However due to the late arrival of the squadron the town had in effect already been lost and its surrender was only matter of time . 
 Upon arriving at Viborg , Peter immediately inspected Swedish fortifications and devised " Instructions on preparations for an assault on Viborg " . In it were plans for constructing two cannon batteries and three mortar batteries , with a total of 60 cannon and 18 mortars directed toward the Viborg fort . It was also ordered that 140 light mortars be placed to knock enemy troops from walls during a final assault and to perform nighttime bombardments . Peter noted that that left 20 cannon , ten mortars and 50 light mortars in reserve , which could be used during a full barrage of the fort . He also proposed using fire ships from the sea , although they were never used . 
 Construction on the batteries mentioned in Peter 's " Instructions " began on 17 May , and some of them were finished by 24 May . The Vyborg Fortress : Chronicles from 1710 to 1872 mentions that during the construction , a truce @-@ bearer was sent out from the Vyborg fort with a request to Russian forces to allow passage for a courier to deliver letters to the Swedish general Georg <unk> , but the request was denied . There are also records that show a Swedish fleet arriving at Viborg and being beaten back by the Russians . However , other sources do not mention the truce @-@ bearer or the naval battle ; Fyodor Apraksin even wrote to the czar saying that he " could not imagine " how a Swedish fleet could be sent to Viborg , although he did take precautions . During this time , Ivan <unk> was sent out with a fleet of galleys to block access to the bay , thus completely blockading the town and fort of Vyborg . 
 = = = Final barrage and Swedish surrender = = = 
 In a letter on 29 May , Fyodor Apraksin noted that work on the artillery batteries on his side of Viborg were finished , and that there was still progress to be made toward completing the batteries on Bergholtz 's side ( although ten mortars were already in place ) , because of " great swamps and rocky [ soil ] " . He asked Peter whether to wait for Bergholtz to finish building his batteries or proceed in the barrage without him ; Apraksin himself was leaning toward the latter option , because he did not want to lose time and supplies , and because that side of the fortress was too heavily fortified for Bergholtz 's guns . The czar agreed that there was no reason to wait , and ordered that the bombardment start as soon as possible . However , this led to another problem : it was impossible to quietly transport artillery over the rocky soil . There was also more daylight by that time of the year , and due to Viborg 's location in the northern latitudes , the sun only set around 9 : 00 pm . This meant that twilight lasted almost all night , and Swedish defensive fire could continue for longer , inflicting further casualties . 
 Nevertheless , the second barrage of the fort began on 1 June ; by then , Bergholtz had 13 additional cannon at his disposal . The barrage lasted until 6 June , as a result of which " there was made a great breach , that two battalions were lined up on either side to take the city " . During those six days , there were a total of 2 @,@ 975 mortar shots and 1 @,@ 539 from cannon . The Swedish fired 7 @,@ 464 shots from cannon and 394 from mortars . Both the first and second barrages had a similar number of shots fired , but the second barrage was a lot more devastating to the Swedish . This was due to several factors ; the shots fired during the second bombardment used higher @-@ caliber ammunition and did greater damage per round , and the rate of fire was much more intense . The first bombardment took a month , whereas the second only took six days . 
 On 6 June , the decision was made to make a final assault on the fort . The next two days were spent in preparation , and those who would lead the " storm " were already chosen . However , on 9 June , the Swedish side sent out another truce @-@ bearer , who said they were ready to surrender . On 13 June , the garrison at Viborg officially surrendered before any direct assault took place . The surrendered Swedish garrison numbered 3 @,@ 880 men , including 156 officers and 3 @,@ 274 soldiers of lower rank . Swedish losses were estimated at around 2 @,@ 500 . Contrary to what had been agreed in surrender documents Russians took all the healthy men left in the garrison when it surrendered as prisoners while 877 wounded men as well as 169 women and group of children were transported to Helsinki aboard the ships of Admiral <unk> . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In his letters announcing the capture of Viborg , Peter the Great wrote that from now on the " final security of Saint Petersburg has been achieved . " The czar said that Viborg should become a " firm cushion " to the new capital . By capturing Viborg , several important strategic goals were achieved . The Russian Empire now had vastly improved access to the Baltic Sea , from which they could launch further attacks against Finland , and a powerful fort that would defend the new capital of Saint Petersburg . The czar ordered the fort to be renovated with the help of a special army division and local peasants . 
 Attempt to retake the town was made under the leadership of the new Swedish Governor @-@ General of Finland Carl Nieroth with 10 000 men strong army supported by naval squadron led by Admiral Olof <unk> consisting of 6 ships of the line , 3 frigates and 3 <unk> . Swedish light infantry had started the harassing operations already in the spring of 1711 and naval blockade had been place for most of the summer . Swedish manpower had been sapped by a plague which had struck Finland in late 1710 killing amongst others nearly a thousand in Helsinki alone - half the population at the time . Same plague had struck Karlskrona making it difficult for the Swedish to equip their naval squadron Finland and it took until late June before it was able to sail delaying all Swedish operations . Actual siege by land forces was started in the autumn . However as king refused to release more troops and supplies from Sweden for the besieging forces the siege was doomed to fail . On 2 December 1711 freezing waters and harsh weather forced the naval force to retire and by the Christmas also the land forces had to withdraw . Nieroth who had invigorated the whole of Finland perished suddenly on 25 January 1712 and was succeeded by weak Georg Henrik <unk> . 
 = = = Strategic significance = = = 
 With the loss of Viborg , the Swedes lost an important naval and land base , and their activities in the Gulf of Finland were restricted . Russia 's occupation of Viborg allowed the creation of a base to supply troops and build ships , and expanded the zone of action of the Baltic Fleet . Viborg demonstrated this importance as a key military base from 1712 to 1714 , when full @-@ scale Russian land operations began in Finland . Thus , in effect , the capture of Viborg and Karelia served to determine the outcome of the Great Northern War by establishing a staging area for further military actions . 
 During peace talks with Sweden , the " Viborg question " was debated , and Peter the Great told his representative , Andrey Osterman , to pressure Sweden to cede Viborg and Riga regardless of the situation . Thus , after the Treaty of Nystad , Viborg officially became incorporated into the Russian Empire as " Vyborg " . This began a new period in the city 's multinational history , where Russian influences would mix with the city 's Swedish , Finnish , and German culture . 
 = 2005 FA Community Shield = 
 The 2005 FA Community Shield was the 83rd staging of the FA Community Shield , an annual football match contested by the reigning champions of the Premier League and the holders of the FA Cup . It was held at the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff on 7 August 2005 . The game was played between Chelsea , champions of the 2004 – 05 Premier League and Arsenal , who beat Manchester United on penalties to win the 2005 FA Cup Final . Chelsea won the match 2 – 1 in front of a crowd of 58 @,@ 014 . 
 This was Chelsea 's fifth Community Shield appearance to Arsenal 's 19th . Relations between the two clubs were hostile before the match , given Chelsea 's illicit attempts to sign Arsenal defender Ashley Cole . In the game Chelsea took the lead when striker Didier Drogba scored in the eighth minute . He scored again in the second half , before Cesc Fàbregas replied for Arsenal with a goal in the 64th minute . José Mourinho praised Chelsea in his post @-@ match interview and felt the team looked comfortable in defence . Opposing manager Arsène Wenger admitted Drogba had presented problems for Arsenal and likened his opponents to a long ball team , who on the day played " very direct " . 
 = = Background and pre @-@ match = = 
 Founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield , the FA Community Shield began as a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , although in 1913 , it was played between an Amateurs XI and a Professionals XI . In 1921 , it was played by the league champions of the top division and FA Cup winners for the first time . Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium was hosting the Shield for the fifth time ; it took over as the venue for the event while Wembley Stadium underwent a six @-@ year renovation between 2001 and 2006 . 
 Chelsea qualified for the 2005 FA Community Shield as winners of the 2004 – 05 FA Premier League . It was their first league title in 50 years , remembered for the records broken such as the most wins , fewest goals conceded in a league season and most points accumulated . The other Community Shield place went to Arsenal , who beat Manchester United on penalties to win the final of the 2004 – 05 FA Cup . Arsenal was making its 19th Community Shield appearance and held the Shield after beating Manchester United 3 – 1 a year previously . By contrast this was Chelsea 's fifth appearance , their first since 2000 . It was also the first meeting between both sides in the Shield . 
 Chelsea manager José Mourinho described relations between the two clubs as " non @-@ existent " , given his club 's approach to sign ( tapping up ) Arsenal defender Ashley Cole . The player had met Mourinho and chief executive Peter Kenyon at a London hotel in January 2005 , without Arsenal 's consent . Chelsea , Mourinho and Cole were all later found guilty by an independent commission and fined accordingly ; the club was charged the most amount – £ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 The ownership of Chelsea by Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich also caused friction between both clubs . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger said in May 2005 : " They are a financially doped club . They have enhancement of performances through financial resources which are unlimited . For me , it 's a kind of doping because it 's not in any way linked to their resources . It puts pressure on the market that is not very healthy . They can go to Steven Gerrard or Rio Ferdinand and ' say how much do you earn , we 'll give you twice as much . ' " Wenger admitted this put Arsenal at a disadvantage in the transfer market ; in the case of Shaun Wright @-@ Phillips , a long @-@ term target , Chelsea 's interest meant Arsenal needed to wait before making a bid . The player eventually joined Chelsea from Manchester City for £ 21 million . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Chelsea fielded a full @-@ strength team , which lined up in a 4 – 3 – 3 formation ; an attacking three of Didier Drogba , Damien Duff and Arjen Robben . Asier Del Horno was named as left back , which meant William Gallas moved to central defence . Wright @-@ Phillips began the match on the substitute bench . Arsenal 's line up by contrast was relatively inexperienced in midfield – Gilberto Silva was on the bench and Mathieu Flamini partnered Cesc Fàbregas in the centre . Up front Dennis Bergkamp started alongside striker Thierry Henry . The team played in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 The stadium observed a period of silence in memory of the victims of the July bombings in London , and a mark of respect to Arsenal fan Anthony Walker , killed on Merseyside the previous week . Arsenal in their away strip of yellow kicked off the match ; they won a corner after four minutes , but their threat was averted by Chelsea . In the eighth minute Del Horno hit a long pass to the edge of Arsenal ’ s right area . Drogba controlled the ball with his chest and went beyond his marker Philippe Senderos . He shot the ball past goalkeeper Jens Lehmann in the Arsenal goal to give Chelsea a 1 – 0 lead . Arsenal began to dominate proceedings , but struggled to make use of their advantage . A slip by Senderos in the 20th minute invited Robben to make a run down the right side of the pitch , but the chance for Chelsea was brief as Senderos won the ball back . Four minutes later Fàbregas and Claude Makélélé were each shown a yellow card for clashing with one another . Arsenal in the 36th minute fashioned their best chance of the game through Kolo Touré , whose shot forced goalkeeper Petr Čech to save in an acrobatic manner . Six minutes before the interval Drogba was ruled offside , but continued to run in the direction of Arsenal ’ s goal . He went down on a challenge from Lauren and proceeded to roll around Arsenal ’ s penalty area once Lehmann got involved – the " farce " was brought to a close after words from the referee . 
 Arsenal made a host of changes before the match restarted – Gilberto , Robin van Persie and Alexander Hleb were substituted on for Bergkamp , Robert Pirès and Flamini . Robben made a run down the right side of the pitch , but failed to get past Senderos in what was the first notable action of the second half . Moments after , Fredrik Ljungberg 's attempt on goal was cleared by the Chelsea defence following good play by Van Persie . In the 57th minute Chelsea increased their lead . A long pass found Drogba , who once more held off Senderos in pursuit of the ball . He was forced wide by Lehmann , but on the turn shot the ball through the net to score his second goal of the game . Drogba was then replaced by Hernán Crespo , and Tiago came on for Eiður Guðjohnsen . Arsenal scored in the 64th minute ; Ljungberg crossed the ball from the left and Fàbregas evaded the Chelsea defence to slot it past Čech in the goal . Both clubs made mass substitutions in the final third of the game , notably Wright @-@ Phillips coming on for his Chelsea debut in place of Robben . Arsenal continued to push for an equaliser the longer the match went on , which meant they were culpable to Chelsea countering . A free @-@ kick by Van Persie was saved by Čech and it was not until the 86th minute that Henry fashioned his first chance of the half – it too was dealt with by Čech . Chelsea continued to withstand Arsenal ’ s pressure in injury time and came close to scoring a third goal , but for Touré ’ s intervention . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match and aftermath = = 
 Mourinho believed his team deserved to win and said after scoring the first goal , " we looked comfortable and solid in the defence and good on the counter @-@ attack . " He did not believe the result would have any consequences for either team , but said " ... it is better to win than to lose and we can go home happy and with a smile on our faces . " John Terry described the victory as a " perfect start " , and added it gave Chelsea a psychological edge over Arsenal . Drogba felt the result was good for the team 's confidence , though confessed Chelsea did not play well – particularly in midfield . 
 Reflecting on Arsenal 's defeat , Wenger felt that " [ it ] is not too important . We have won four Community Shields and no @-@ one regards it as a trophy so I do not mind anymore . " He felt Chelsea 's game plan was " very direct " and admitted Drogba gave his team " a hard time on the long balls " . Wenger absolved Senderos of any blame for the two goals – " it would be unfair " – and believed Fàbregas showed why he was a capable replacement for Patrick Vieira , who left in the summer : " He controlled the game and for me was outstanding . " When asked if he was worried about Chelsea , Wenger retorted : " Did you see the game today ? You can be worried if you are a Chelsea supporter , " an indirect reference to their style of football . 
 Two weeks after the Community Shield match , both teams played each other in the league at Chelsea 's home ground , Stamford Bridge . Drogba scored the only goal of the game , which marked Arsenal 's first league defeat against their opponents in ten years . Chelsea also beat Arsenal away from home and went on to retain the Premier League . Whereas Arsenal 's league form was indifferent and the team finished fourth ( outside of the top two for the first time under Wenger ) , their performances in the UEFA Champions League were appreciable . They became the first London team to participate in a European Cup final , though lost 2 – 1 to Barcelona in the Stade de France , Paris . 
 = Russian battleship Potemkin = 
 The Russian battleship Potemkin ( Russian : Князь Потёмкин Таврический , Kniaz Potemkin Tavricheskiy , " Prince Potemkin of Tauris " ) was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Russian Navy 's Black Sea Fleet . She became famous when the crew rebelled against the officers in June 1905 ( during that year 's revolution ) , now viewed as a first step towards the Russian Revolution of 1917 . The mutiny later formed the basis of Sergei Eisenstein 's 1925 silent propaganda film The Battleship Potemkin . 
 After the mutineers sought asylum in Constanța , Romania , and the Russians recovered the ship , her name was changed to Panteleimon . She accidentally sank a Russian submarine in 1909 and was badly damaged when she ran aground in 1911 . During World War I , Panteleimon participated in the Battle of Cape Sarych in late 1914 . She covered several bombardments of the Bosphorus fortifications in early 1915 , including one where she was attacked by the Turkish battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim – Panteleimon and the other Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts present drove her off before she could inflict any serious damage . The ship was relegated to secondary roles after the first dreadnought battleship entered service in late 1915 . She was by then obsolete and was reduced to reserve in 1918 in Sevastopol . 
 Panteleimon was captured when the Germans took Sevastopol in May 1918 and was handed over to the Allies after the Armistice in November 1918 . Her engines were destroyed by the British in 1919 when they withdrew from Sevastopol to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using them against the White Russians . She was abandoned when the Whites evacuated the Crimea in 1920 and was finally scrapped by the Soviets in 1923 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Planning began in 1895 for a new battleship that would utilize a slipway slated to become available at the Nikolayev Admiralty Shipyard in 1896 . The Naval Staff and the commander of the Black Sea Fleet , Vice Admiral K. P. <unk> , agreed on a copy of the Peresvet @-@ class battleship design , but they were overruled by General Admiral Grand Duke Alexei Alexandrovich . The General Admiral decided that the long range and less powerful 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) guns of the Peresvet class were inappropriate for the narrow confines of the Black Sea , and ordered the design of an improved version of the battleship Tri Sviatitelia instead . The improvements included a higher forecastle to improve the ship 's seakeeping qualities , Krupp cemented armour and Belleville boilers . The design process was complicated by numerous changes demanded by various departments of the Naval Technical Committee . The ship 's design was finally approved on 12 June 1897 , although design changes continued to be made that slowed the ship 's construction . 
 = = = Construction and sea trials = = = 
 Construction of Potemkin began on 27 December 1897 and she was laid down at the Nikolayev Admiralty Shipyard on 10 October 1898 . She was named in honour of Prince Grigory Potemkin , a Russian soldier and statesman . The ship was launched on 9 October 1900 and transferred to Sevastopol for fitting out on 4 July 1902 . She began sea trials in September 1903 and these continued , off and on , until early 1905 when her gun turrets were completed . 
 = = Description = = 
 Potemkin was 371 feet 5 inches ( 113 @.@ 2 m ) long at the waterline and 378 feet 6 inches ( 115 @.@ 4 m ) long overall . She had a beam of 73 feet ( 22 @.@ 3 m ) and a maximum draught of 27 feet ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) . She displaced 12 @,@ 900 long tons ( 13 @,@ 100 t ) , 420 long tons ( 430 t ) more than her designed displacement of 12 @,@ 480 long tons ( 12 @,@ 680 t ) . Potemkin 's crew consisted of 26 officers and 705 enlisted men . 
 = = = Power = = = 
 The ship had a pair of three @-@ cylinder vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each of which drove one propeller , that had a total designed output of 10 @,@ 600 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 900 kW ) . Twenty @-@ two Belleville boilers provided steam to the engines at a pressure of 15 atm ( 1 @,@ 520 kPa ; 220 psi ) . The eight boilers in the forward boiler room were oil @-@ fired and the remaining 14 were coal @-@ fired . During her sea trials on 31 October 1903 , she reached a top speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . Leaking oil caused a serious fire on 2 January 1904 that caused the navy to convert her boilers to coal firing at a cost of 20 @,@ 000 rubles . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 100 t ) of coal at full load that provided a range of 3 @,@ 200 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 900 km ; 3 @,@ 700 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The main armament consisted of four 40 @-@ calibre 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns mounted in twin gun turrets fore and aft of the superstructure . The electrically operated turrets were derived from the design of those used by the Petropavlovsk @-@ class battleships . These guns had a maximum elevation of + 15 ° and their rate of fire was very slow , only one round every four minutes during gunnery trials . They fired a 745 @-@ pound ( 337 @.@ 7 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 792 ft / s ( 851 m / s ) . At an elevation of + 10 ° the guns had a range of 13 @,@ 000 yards ( 12 @,@ 000 m ) . Potemkin carried 60 rounds for each gun . 
 The sixteen 45 @-@ calibre , six @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) Canet Pattern 1891 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) guns were mounted in casemates . Twelve of these were placed on the sides of the hull and the other four were positioned at the corners of the superstructure . They fired shells that weighed 91 @.@ 4 lb ( 41 @.@ 46 kg ) with a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 600 ft / s ( 792 m / s ) . They had a maximum range of 12 @,@ 602 yards ( 11 @,@ 523 m ) when fired at an elevation of + 20 ° . The ship stowed 160 rounds per gun . 
 Smaller guns were carried for close @-@ range defence against torpedo boats . These included fourteen 50 @-@ calibre Canet QF 75 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns : four in hull embrasures and the remaining 10 mounted on the superstructure . The ship carried 300 shells for each gun . They fired an 11 @-@ pound ( 4 @.@ 9 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ( 820 m / s ) to a maximum range of 7 @,@ 005 yards ( 6 @,@ 405 m ) . She also mounted six 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns . Four of these were mounted in the fighting top and two on the superstructure . They fired a 2 @.@ 2 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 00 kg ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . 
 Potemkin had five underwater 15 @-@ inch ( 381 mm ) torpedo tubes : one in the bow and two on each broadside . She carried three torpedoes for each tube . While the model of torpedo in use changed over time , the first torpedo that the ship would have been equipped with was the <unk> . It had a warhead weight of 150 pounds ( 70 kg ) and a speed of 33 knots ( 61 km / h ; 38 mph ) with a maximum range of 870 yards ( 800 m ) . 
 In 1907 , telescopic sights were fitted for the 12 @-@ inch and 6 @-@ inch guns . Either later that year , or in 1908 , 2 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 8 ft 2 in ) rangefinders were installed . The bow torpedo tube was removed in 1910 – 11 as was the fighting top . The following year , the main gun turret machinery was upgraded and the guns were modified to improve their rate of fire to one round every 40 seconds . 
 Two 57 @-@ millimetre ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were mounted on the ship 's superstructure on 3 – 6 June 1915 and they were supplemented by two 75 mm AA guns , one on top of each turret , probably during 1916 . In February of that year , the ship 's four remaining torpedo tubes were removed . At some point during World War I , her 75 mm guns were also removed . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 The maximum thickness of the Krupp cemented armour waterline belt was nine inches ( 229 mm ) which reduced to eight inches ( 203 mm ) abreast the magazines . It covered 237 feet ( 72 @.@ 2 m ) of the ship 's length and two @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) plates protected the waterline to the ends of the ship . The belt was 7 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) high , of which 5 feet ( 2 m ) was below the waterline , and tapered down to a thickness of five inches ( 127 mm ) at its bottom edge . The main part of the belt terminated in seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) transverse bulkheads . 
 Above the belt was the upper strake of six @-@ inch armour that was 156 feet ( 47 @.@ 5 m ) long and closed off by six @-@ inch transverse bulkheads fore and aft . The upper casemate protected the six @-@ inch guns and was five inches thick on all sides . The sides of the turrets were ten inches ( 254 mm ) thick and they had a two @-@ inch roof . The conning tower 's sides were nine inches thick . The nickel @-@ steel armour deck was two inches thick on the flat amidships , but 2 @.@ 5 inches ( 64 mm ) thick on the slope connecting it to the armour belt . Fore and aft of the armoured citadel , the deck was three inches ( 76 mm ) to the bow and stern . In 1910 – 11 , additional one @-@ inch ( 25 mm ) armour plates were added fore and aft ; their exact location is unknown , but they were probably used to extend the height of the two @-@ inch armour strake at the ends of the ship . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = The mutiny = = = 
 During the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 05 , many of the Black Sea Fleet 's most experienced officers and enlisted men were transferred to the ships in the Pacific to replace losses . This left the fleet with primarily raw recruits and less capable officers . With the news of the disastrous Battle of Tsushima in May 1905 morale dropped to an all @-@ time low , and any minor incident could be enough to spark a major catastrophe . Taking advantage of the situation , plus the disruption caused by the ongoing riots and uprisings , the Central Committee of the Social Democratic Organization of the Black Sea Fleet , called " Tsentralka " , had started preparations for a simultaneous mutiny on all of the ships of the fleet , although the timing had not been decided . 
 On 27 June 1905 , Potemkin was at gunnery practice near Tendra Island off the Ukrainian coast when many enlisted men refused to eat the borscht made from rotten meat partially infested with maggots . The uprising was triggered when <unk> Giliarovsky , the ship 's second in command , allegedly threatened to shoot crew members for their refusal . He summoned the ship 's marine guards as well as a tarpaulin to protect the ship 's deck from any blood in an attempt to intimidate the crew . Giliarovsky was killed after he mortally wounded Grigory Vakulinchuk , one of the mutiny 's leaders . The mutineers killed seven of the Potemkin 's eighteen officers , including Captain Evgeny Golikov , and captured the torpedo boat Ismail ( No. 627 ) . They organized a ship 's committee of 25 sailors , led by Afanasi Matushenko , to run the battleship . 
 The committee decided to head for Odessa flying a red flag and arrived there later that day at 22 : 00 . A general strike had been called in the city and there was some rioting as the police tried to quell the strikers . The following day the mutineers refused to land armed sailors to help the striking revolutionaries take over the city , preferring instead to await the arrival of the other battleships of the Black Sea Fleet . Later that day the mutineers aboard the Potemkin captured a military transport , <unk> , that had arrived in the city . The riots continued as much of the port area was destroyed by fire . On the afternoon of 29 June , Vakulinchuk 's funeral turned into a political demonstration and the army attempted to ambush the sailors who participated in the funeral . In retaliation , the ship fired two six @-@ inch shells at the theatre where a high @-@ level military meeting was scheduled to take place , but missed . 
 The government issued an order to send two squadrons to Odessa either to force the Potemkin crew to give up or sink the battleship . Potemkin sortied on the morning of 30 June to meet the three battleships Tri Sviatitelia , Dvenadsat Apostolov , and Georgii Pobedonosets of the first squadron , but the loyal ships turned away . The second squadron arrived with the battleships Rostislav and Sinop later that morning , and Vice Admiral Aleksander Krieger , acting commander of the Black Sea Fleet , ordered the ships to proceed to Odessa . Potemkin sortied again and sailed through the combined squadrons as Krieger failed to order his ships to fire . Captain Kolands of Dvenadsat Apostolov attempted to ram Potemkin and then detonate his ship 's magazines , but he was thwarted by members of his crew . Krieger ordered his ships to fall back , but the crew of Georgii Pobedonosets mutinied and joined Potemkin . 
 The following morning , loyalist members of Georgii Pobedonosets retook control of the ship and ran it aground in Odessa harbor . The crew of Potemkin , together with Ismail , decided to sail for Constanța later that day where they could restock food , water and coal . The Romanians refused to provide the supplies , backed by the presence of their small protected cruiser Elisabeta , so the ship 's committee decided to sail for the small , barely defended port of Theodosia in the Crimea where they hoped to resupply . The ship arrived on the morning of 5 July , but the city 's governor refused to give them anything other than food . The mutineers attempted to seize several barges of coal the following morning , but the port 's garrison ambushed them and killed or captured 22 of the 30 sailors involved . They decided to return to Constanța that afternoon . 
 Potemkin reached its destination at 23 : 00 on 7 July and the Romanians agreed to give asylum to the crew if they would disarm themselves and surrender the battleship . Ismail 's crew decided the following morning to return to Sevastopol and turn themselves in , but Potemkin 's crew voted to accept the terms . Captain Negru , commander of the port , came aboard at noon and hoisted the Romanian flag and then allowed the ship to enter the inner harbor . Before the crew disembarked , Matushenko ordered that the Potemkin 's Kingston valves be opened so Potemkin would sink to the bottom . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 When Rear Admiral <unk> reached Constanța on the morning of 9 July , he found the Potemkin half sunk in the harbor and flying the Romanian flag . After several hours of negotiations with the Romanian Government , the battleship was handed over to the Russians . Later that day , the Saint Andrew 's flag was raised over the battleship . She was then easily refloated by the navy , but the salt water had damaged her engines and boilers . She left Constanța on 10 July , having to be towed back to Sevastopol , where she arrived on 14 July . The ship was renamed Panteleimon ( Russian : <unk> ) , after Saint Pantaleon , on 12 October 1905 . Some members of Panteleimon 's crew joined a mutiny that began aboard the cruiser Ochakov in November , but it was easily suppressed as both ships had been earlier disarmed . 
 Panteleimon received an experimental underwater communications set in February 1909 . Later that year , she accidentally rammed and sank the submarine Kambala at night on 11 June , killing the 16 crewmen aboard the submarine . 
 While returning from a port visit to Constanța in 1911 , Panteleimon ran aground on 2 October . It took several days to refloat her and make temporary repairs , and the full extent of the damage to her bottom was not fully realized for several more months . The ship participated in training and gunnery exercises for the rest of the year ; a special watch was kept to ensure that no damaged seams were opened while firing . Permanent repairs , which involved replacing her boiler foundations , plating , and a large number of her hull frames , lasted from 10 January to 25 April 1912 . The navy took advantage of these repairs to overhaul her engines and boilers . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Panteleimon , flagship of the 1st Battleship Brigade , accompanied by the pre @-@ dreadnoughts Evstafi , Ioann Zlatoust , and Tri Sviatitelia , covered the pre @-@ dreadnought Rostislav while she bombarded Trebizond on the morning of 17 November 1914 . They were intercepted the following day by the Ottoman battlecruiser Yavuz Sultan Selim ( the ex @-@ German SMS Goeben ) and the light cruiser <unk> on their return voyage to Sevastopol in what came to be known as the Battle of Cape Sarych . Despite the noon hour the conditions were foggy ; the capital ships initially did not spot each other . Although several other ships opened fire , hitting the Goeben once , Panteleimon held fire because her turrets could not see the German ships before they disengaged . 
 Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav bombarded Ottoman fortifications at the mouth of the Bosphorus on 18 March 1915 , the first of several attacks intended to divert troops and attention from the ongoing Gallipoli Campaign , but fired only 105 rounds before sailing north to rejoin Panteleimon , Ioann Zlatoust and Evstafi . Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav were intended to repeated the bombardment the following day , but were hindered by heavy fog . On 3 April , Yavuz Sultan Selim and several ships of the Turkish navy raided the Russian port at Odessa ; the Russian battleship squadron sortied to intercept them . The battleships chased Yavuz Sultan Selim the entire day , but were unable to reach effective gunnery range and were forced to break off the chase . On 25 April Tri Sviatitelia and Rostislav repeated their bombardment of the Bosporus forts . Tri Sviatitelia , Rostislav and Panteleimon bombarded the forts again on 2 and 3 May . This time a total of 337 main gun rounds were fired in addition to 528 six @-@ inch shells between the three battleships . 
 On 9 May 1915 , Tri Sviatitelia and Panteleimon returned to bombard the Bosphorus forts , covered by the remaining pre @-@ dreadnoughts . Yavuz Sultan Selim intercepted the three ships of the covering force , although no damage was inflicted by either side . Tri Sviatitelia and Pantelimon rejoined their consorts and the latter scored two hits on Yavuz Sultan Selim before she broke off the action . The Russian ships pursued her for six hours before giving up the chase . On 1 August , all of the Black Sea pre @-@ dreadnoughts were transferred to the 2nd Battleship Brigade , after the more powerful dreadnought Imperatritsa Mariya entered service . On 1 October the new dreadnought provided cover while Ioann Zlatoust and Pantelimon bombarded Zonguldak and Evstafi shelled the nearby town of Kozlu . The ship bombarded Varna twice in October 1915 ; during the second bombardment on 27 October , she entered Varna Bay and was unsuccessfully attacked by two German submarines stationed there . 
 Panteleimon supported Russian troops in early 1916 as they captured Trebizond and participated in an anti @-@ shipping sweep off the northwestern Anatolian coast in January 1917 that destroyed 39 Ottoman sailing ships . On 13 April 1917 , after the February Revolution , the ship was renamed Potemkin @-@ Tavricheskiy ( Russian : Потёмкин @-@ Таврический ) , and then on 11 May renamed Borets za svobodu ( Russian : <unk> за <unk> – Freedom Fighter ) . 
 = = = Reserve and decommissioning = = = 
 She was placed in reserve in March 1918 and was captured by the Germans at Sevastopol in May . They handed the ship over to the Allies in December 1918 after the Armistice . The British wrecked her engines on 19 April 1919 when they left the Crimea to prevent the advancing Bolsheviks from using her against the White Russians . Thoroughly obsolete by this time , the ship was captured by both sides during the Russian Civil War , but was abandoned by the White Russians when they evacuated the Crimea in November 1920 . Borets za svobodu was scrapped beginning in 1923 , although she was not stricken from the Navy List until 21 November 1925 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The immediate effects of the mutiny are difficult to assess . It may have influenced Tsar Nicholas II 's decisions to end the Russo @-@ Japanese War and accept the October Manifesto , as the mutiny demonstrated that his régime no longer had the unquestioning loyalty of the military . The mutiny 's failure did not stop other revolutionaries from inciting insurrections later that year , including the Sevastopol Uprising . Vladimir Lenin , leader of the Bolshevik Party , called the 1905 Revolution , including the Potemkin mutiny , a " dress rehearsal " for his successful revolution in 1917 . The Communists seized upon it as a propaganda symbol for their party and unduly emphasized their role in the mutiny . In fact , Matushenko explicitly rejected the Bolsheviks because he and the other leaders of the mutiny were Socialists of one type or another and cared nothing for Communism . 
 The mutiny was memorialized most famously by Sergei Eisenstein in his 1925 silent film Battleship Potemkin , although the French silent film " La Révolution en Russe " ( " Mutiny on a Man @-@ of @-@ War in Odessa " or " Revolution in Odessa " , 1905 ) , directed by Ferdinand Zecca or Lucien <unk> ( or both ) , was the first film to depict the mutiny , preceding Eisenstein 's far more famous film by 20 years . Filmed shortly after the Bolshevik victory in the Russian Civil War of 1917 – 22 , with the derelict battleship Dvenadsat Apostolov standing in for the broken @-@ up Potemkin , Eisenstein recast the mutiny into a predecessor of the November Revolution of 1917 that swept the Bolsheviks to power . He emphasized their role , and implied that the mutiny failed because Matushenko and the other leaders were not better Bolsheviks . Eisenstein made other changes to dramatize the story , ignoring the major fire that swept through Odessa 's dock area while Potemkin was anchored there , combining the many different incidents of rioters and soldiers fighting into a famous sequence on the steps ( today known as Potemkin Stairs ) , and showing a tarpaulin thrown over the sailors to be executed . 
 In accordance with the Marxist doctrine that history is made by collective action , not individuals , Eisenstein <unk> to single out any person in his film , but rather focused on the " mass protagonist " . Soviet film critics hailed this approach , including the dramaturge and critic , Adrian Piotrovsky , writing for the Leningrad newspaper " <unk> <unk> " : 
 The hero is the sailors ' battleship , the Odessa crowd , but characteristic figures are snatched here and there from the crowd . For a moment , like a conjuring trick , they attract all the sympathies of the audience : like the sailor Vakulinchuk , like the young woman and child on the Odessa Steps , but they emerge only to dissolve once more into the mass . This signifies : no film stars but a film of real @-@ life types . 
 Similarly , theatre critic Alexei <unk> wrote in the journal Artistic Life ( Zhizn <unk> ) : " In Potemkin there is no individual hero as there was in the old theatre . It is the mass that acts : the battleship and its sailors and the city and its population in revolutionary mood . " 
 = Seamount = 
 A seamount is a mountain rising from the ocean seafloor that does not reach to the water 's surface ( sea level ) , and thus is not an island . Seamounts are typically formed from extinct volcanoes that rise abruptly and are usually found rising from the seafloor to 1 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 – 13 @,@ 100 ft ) in height . They are defined by oceanographers as independent features that rise to at least 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) above the seafloor , characteristically of conical form . The peaks are often found hundreds to thousands of meters below the surface , and are therefore considered to be within the deep sea . During their evolution over geologic time , the largest seamounts may reach the sea surface where wave action erodes the summit to form a flat surface . After they have subsided and sunk below the sea surface such flat @-@ top seamounts are called " guyots " or " <unk> " 
 A total of 9 @,@ 951 seamounts and 283 guyots , covering a total of 8 @,@ 796 @,@ 150 km2 ( 3 @,@ 396 @,@ 210 sq mi ) have been mapped but only a few have been studied in detail by scientists . Seamounts and guyots are most abundant in the North Pacific Ocean , and follow a distinctive evolutionary pattern of eruption , build @-@ up , subsidence and erosion . In recent years , several active seamounts have been observed , for example Loihi in the Hawaiian Islands . 
 Because of their abundance , seamounts are one of the most common oceanic ecosystems in the world . Interactions between seamounts and underwater currents , as well as their elevated position in the water , attract plankton , corals , fish , and marine mammals alike . Their <unk> effect has been noted by the commercial fishing industry , and many seamounts support extensive fisheries . There are ongoing concerns on the negative impact of fishing on seamount ecosystems , and well @-@ documented cases of stock decline , for example with the orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ) . 95 % of ecological damage is done by bottom trawling , which scrapes whole ecosystems off seamounts . 
 Because of their large numbers , many seamounts remain to be properly studied , and even mapped . Bathymetry and satellite altimetry are two technologies working to close the gap . There have been instances where naval vessels have collided with uncharted seamounts ; for example , Muirfield Seamount is named after the ship that struck it in 1973 . However , the greatest danger from seamounts are flank collapses ; as they get older , extrusions seeping in the seamounts put pressure on their sides , causing landslides that have the potential to generate massive tsunamis . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Seamounts can be found in every ocean basin in the world , distributed extremely widely both in space and in age . A seamount is technically defined as an isolated rise in elevation of 1 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) or more from the surrounding seafloor , and with a limited summit area , of conical form . If small knolls , ridges and hills less than 1 @,@ 000 m in height are included there are over 100 @,@ 000 seamounts in the world ocean . 
 Most seamounts are volcanic in origin , and thus tend to be found on oceanic crust near mid @-@ ocean ridges , mantle plumes , and island arcs . Overall , seamount and guyot coverage is greatest as a proportion of seafloor area in the North Pacific Ocean , equal to 4 @.@ 39 % of that ocean region . The Arctic Ocean has only 16 seamounts and no guyots , and the Mediterranean and Black seas together have only 23 seamounts and 2 guyots . The 9 @,@ 951 seamounts mapped cover an area of 8 @,@ 088 @,@ 550 km2 ( 3 @,@ 123 @,@ 010 sq mi ) . Seamounts have an average area of 790 km2 ( 310 sq mi ) , with the smallest seamounts found in the Arctic Ocean and the Mediterranean and Black Seas , whilst the largest mean seamount size occurs in the Indian Ocean 890 km2 ( 340 sq mi ) . The largest seamount has an area of 15 @,@ 500 km2 ( 6 @,@ 000 sq mi ) and it occurs in the North Pacific . <unk> cover a total area of 707 @,@ 600 km2 ( 273 @,@ 200 sq mi ) and have an average area of 2 @,@ 500 km2 ( 970 sq mi ) , more than twice the average size of seamounts . Nearly 50 % of guyot area and 42 % of the number of guyots occur in the North Pacific Ocean , covering 342 @,@ 070 km2 ( 132 @,@ 070 sq mi ) . The largest three guyots are all in the North Pacific : the <unk> Guyot ( estimated 24 @,@ 600 km2 ( 9 @,@ 500 sq mi ) ) , Suiko Guyot ( estimated 20 @,@ 220 km2 ( 7 @,@ 810 sq mi ) ) and the Pallada Guyot ( estimated 13 @,@ 680 km2 ( 5 @,@ 280 sq mi ) ) . 
 = = = Grouping = = = 
 " Seamount chain " redirects here ; for a broader coverage related to this topic , see Undersea mountain range . 
 Seamounts are often found in groupings or submerged archipelagos , a classic example being the Emperor Seamounts , an extension of the Hawaiian Islands . Formed millions of years ago by volcanism , they have since subsided far below sea level . This long chain of islands and seamounts extends thousands of kilometers northwest from the island of Hawaii . 
 There are more seamounts in the Pacific Ocean than in the Atlantic , and their distribution can be described as comprising several elongate chains of seamounts superimposed on a more or less random background distribution . Seamount chains occur in all three major ocean basins , with the Pacific having the most number and most extensive seamount chains . These include the Hawaiian ( Emperor ) , Mariana , Gilbert , <unk> and Austral Seamounts ( and island groups ) in the north Pacific and the Louisville and Sala y Gomez ridges in the southern Pacific Ocean . In the North Atlantic Ocean , the New England Seamount chain extends from the eastern coast of the United States to the mid @-@ ocean ridge . Craig and Sandwell noted that clusters of larger Atlantic seamounts tend to be associated with other evidence of hotspot activity , such as on the Walvis Ridge , Bermuda Islands and Cape Verde Islands . The mid @-@ Atlantic ridge and spreading ridges in the Indian Ocean are also associated with abundant seamounts . Otherwise , seamounts tend not to form distinctive chains in the Indian and Southern Oceans , but rather their distribution appears to be more or less random . 
 Isolated seamounts and those without clear volcanic origins are less common ; examples include <unk> Seamount , Eratosthenes Seamount , Axial Seamount and Gorringe Ridge . If all known seamounts were collected into one area , they would make a landform the size of Europe . Their overall abundance makes them one of the most common , and least understood , marine structures and biomes on Earth , a sort of exploratory frontier . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Geochemistry and evolution = = = 
 Most seamounts are built by one of two volcanic processes , although some , such as the Christmas Island Seamount Province near Australia , are more enigmatic . Volcanoes near plate boundaries and mid @-@ ocean ridges are built by decompression melting of rock in the upper mantle . The lower density magma rises through the crust to the surface . Volcanoes formed near or above subducting zones are created because the subducting tectonic plate adds volatiles to the overriding plate that lowers its melting point . Which of these two process involved in the formation of a seamount has a profound effect on its eruptive materials . Lava flows from mid @-@ ocean ridge and plate boundary seamounts are mostly basaltic ( both tholeiitic and alkalic ) , whereas flows from subducting ridge volcanoes are mostly calc @-@ alkaline lavas . Compared to mid @-@ ocean ridge seamounts , subduction zone seamounts generally have more sodium , alkali , and volatile abundances , and less magnesium , resulting in more explosive , viscous eruptions . 
 All volcanic seamounts follow a particular pattern of growth , activity , subsidence and eventual extinction . The first stage of a seamount 's evolution is its early activity , building its flanks and core up from the sea floor . This is followed by a period of intense volcanism , during which the new volcano erupts almost all ( e.g. 98 % ) of its total magmatic volume . The seamount may even grow above sea level to become an oceanic island ( for example , the 2009 eruption of <unk> Tonga ) . After a period of explosive activity near the ocean surface , the eruptions slowly die away . With eruptions becoming infrequent and the seamount losing its ability to maintain itself , the volcano starts to erode . After finally becoming extinct ( possibly after a brief rejuvenated period ) , they are ground back down by the waves . Seamounts are built in a far more dynamic oceanic setting than their land counterparts , resulting in horizontal subsidence as the seamount moves with the tectonic plate towards a subduction zone . Here it is subducted under the plate margin and ultimately destroyed , but it may leave evidence of its passage by carving an indentation into the opposing wall of the subduction trench . The majority of seamounts have already completed their eruptive cycle , so access to early flows by researchers is limited by late volcanic activity . 
 Ocean @-@ ridge volcanoes in particular have been observed to follow a certain pattern in terms of eruptive activity , first observed with Hawaiian seamounts but now shown to be the process followed by all seamounts of the ocean @-@ ridge type . During the first stage the volcano erupts basalt of various types , caused by various degrees of mantle melting . In the second , most active stage of its life , ocean @-@ ridge volcanoes erupt tholeiitic to mildly alkalic basalt as a result of a larger area melting in the mantle . This is finally capped by alkalic flows late in its eruptive history , as the link between the seamount and its source of volcanism is cut by crustal movement . Some seamounts also experience a brief " rejuvenated " period after a hiatus of 1 @.@ 5 to 10 million years , the flows of which are highly alkalic and produce many xenoliths . 
 In recent years , geologists have confirmed that a number of seamounts are active undersea volcanoes ; two examples are Lo ‘ <unk> in the Hawaiian Islands and <unk> 'u in the Manu 'a Group ( Samoa ) . 
 = = = Lava types = = = 
 The most apparent lava flows at a seamount are the eruptive flows that cover their flanks , however igneous intrusions , in the forms of dikes and sills , are also an important part of seamount growth . The most common type of flow is pillow lava , named so after its unusual shape . Less common are sheet flows , which are glassy and marginal , and indicative of larger @-@ scale flows . <unk> sedimentary rocks dominate shallow @-@ water seamounts . They are the products of the explosive activity of seamounts that are near the water 's surface , and can also form from mechanical wear of existing volcanic rock . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 Seamounts can form in a wide variety of tectonic settings , resulting in a very diverse structural bank . Seamounts come in a wide variety of structural shapes , from conical to flat @-@ topped to complexly shaped . Some are built very large and very low , such as Koko Guyot and Detroit Seamount ; others are built more steeply , such as Loihi Seamount and Bowie Seamount . Some seamounts also have a carbonate or sediment cap . 
 Many seamounts show signs of intrusive activity , which is likely to lead to inflation , steepening of volcanic slopes , and ultimately , flank collapse . There are also several sub @-@ classes of seamounts . The first are guyots , seamounts with a flat top . These tops must be 200 m ( 656 ft ) or more below the surface of the sea ; the diameters of these flat summits can be over 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . Knolls are isolated elevation spikes measuring less than 1 @,@ 000 meters ( 3 @,@ 281 ft ) . Lastly , pinnacles are small pillar @-@ like seamounts . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Ecological role of seamounts = = = 
 Seamounts are exceptionally important to their biome ecologically , but their role in their environment is poorly understood . Because they project out above the surrounding sea floor , they disturb standard water flow , causing eddies and associated hydrological phenomena that ultimately result in water movement in an otherwise still ocean bottom . Currents have been measured at up to 0 @.@ 9 knots , or 48 centimeters per second . Because of this upwelling seamounts often carry above @-@ average plankton populations , seamounts are thus centers where the fish that feed on them aggregate , in turn falling prey to further predation , making seamounts important biological hotspots . 
 Seamounts provide habitats and spawning grounds for these larger animals , including numerous fish . Some species , including black <unk> ( <unk> niger ) and <unk> cardinalfish ( <unk> nigrofasciatus ) , have been shown to occur more often on seamounts than anywhere else on the ocean floor . Marine mammals , sharks , tuna , and cephalopods all congregate over seamounts to feed , as well as some species of seabirds when the features are particularly shallow . 
 Seamounts often project upwards into shallower zones more hospitable to sea life , providing habitats for marine species that are not found on or around the surrounding deeper ocean bottom . Because seamounts are isolated from each other they form " undersea islands " creating the same biogeographical interest . As they are formed from volcanic rock , the substrate is much harder than the surrounding sedimentary deep sea floor . This causes a different type of fauna to exist than on the seafloor , and leads to a theoretically higher degree of endemism . However , recent research especially centered at Davidson Seamount suggests that seamounts may not be especially endemic , and discussions are ongoing on the effect of seamounts on endemicity . They have , however , been confidently shown to provide a habitat to species that have difficulty surviving elsewhere . 
 The volcanic rocks on the slopes of seamounts are heavily populated by suspension feeders , particularly corals , which capitalize on the strong currents around the seamount to supply them with food . This is in sharp contrast with the typical deep @-@ sea habitat , where deposit @-@ feeding animals rely on food they get off the ground . In tropical zones extensive coral growth results in the formation of coral atolls late in the seamount 's life . 
 In addition soft sediments tend to accumulate on seamounts , which are typically populated by polychaetes ( annelid marine worms ) oligochaetes ( <unk> worms ) , and gastropod mollusks ( sea slugs ) . <unk> have also been found . They tend to gather small particulates and thus form beds , which alters sediment deposition and creates a habitat for smaller animals . Many seamounts also have hydrothermal vent communities , for example <unk> and Loihi seamounts . This is helped by geochemical exchange between the seamounts and the ocean water . 
 Seamounts may thus be vital stopping points for some migratory animals , specifically whales . Some recent research indicates whales may use such features as navigational aids throughout their migration . For a long time it has been surmised that many pelagic animals visit seamounts as well , to gather food , but proof of this aggregating effect has been lacking . The first demonstration of this conjecture was published in 2008 . 
 = = = Fishing = = = 
 The effect that seamounts have on fish populations has not gone unnoticed by the commercial fishing industry . Seamounts were first extensively fished in the second half of the 20th century , due to poor management practices and increased fishing pressure seriously depleting stock numbers on the typical fishing ground , the continental shelf . Seamounts have been the site of targeted fishing since that time . 
 Nearly 80 species of fish and shellfish are commercially harvested from seamounts , including spiny lobster ( <unk> ) , mackerel ( <unk> and others ) , red king crab ( <unk> <unk> ) , red snapper ( Lutjanus <unk> ) , tuna ( <unk> ) , Orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ) , and perch ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The ecological conservation of seamounts is hurt by the simple lack of information available . Seamounts are very poorly studied , with only 350 of the estimated 100 @,@ 000 seamounts in the world having received sampling , and fewer than 100 in depth . Much of this lack of information can be attributed to a lack of technology , and to the daunting task of reaching these underwater structures ; the technology to fully explore them has only been around the last few decades . Before consistent conservation efforts can begin , the seamounts of the world must first be mapped , a task that is still in progress . 
 Overfishing is a serious threat to seamount ecological welfare . There are several well @-@ documented cases of fishery exploitation , for example the orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ) off the coasts of Australia and New Zealand and the pelagic <unk> ( <unk> richardsoni ) near Japan and Russia . The reason for this is that the fishes that are targeted over seamounts are typically long @-@ lived , slow @-@ growing , and slow @-@ maturing . The problem is confounded by the dangers of trawling , which damages seamount surface communities , and the fact that many seamounts are located in international waters , making proper monitoring difficult . Bottom trawling in particular is extremely devastating to seamount ecology , and is responsible for as much as 95 % of ecological damage to seamounts . 
 Corals from seamounts are also vulnerable , as they are highly valued for making jewellery and decorative objects . Significant harvests have been produced from seamounts , often leaving coral beds depleted . 
 Individual nations are beginning to note the effect of fishing on seamounts , and the European Commission has agreed to fund the OASIS project , a detailed study of the effects of fishing on seamount communities in the North Atlantic . Another project working towards conservation is <unk> , a Census of Marine Life project formed in 2005 . <unk> is intended to provide the framework needed to prioritise , integrate , expand and facilitate seamount research efforts in order to significantly reduce the unknown and build towards a global understanding of seamount ecosystems , and the roles they have in the biogeography , biodiversity , productivity and evolution of marine organisms . 
 Possibly the best ecologically studied seamount in the world is Davidson Seamount , with six major expeditions recording over 60 @,@ 000 species observations . The contrast between the seamount and the surrounding area was well @-@ marked . One of the primary ecological havens on the seamount is its deep sea coral garden , and many of the specimens noted were over a century old . Following the expansion of knowledge on the seamount there was extensive support to make it a marine sanctuary , a motion that was granted in 2008 as part of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary . Much of what is known about seamounts ecologically is based on observations from Davidson . Another such seamount is Bowie Seamount , which has also been declared a marine protected area by Canada for its ecological richness . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 The study of seamounts has been stymied for a long time by the lack of technology . Although seamounts have been sampled as far back as the 19th century , their depth and position meant that the technology to explore and sample seamounts in sufficient detail did not exist until the last few decades . Even with the right technology available , only a scant 1 % of the total number have been explored , and sampling and information remains biased towards the top 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) . New species are observed or collected and valuable information is obtained on almost every submersible dive at seamounts . 
 Before seamounts and their oceanographic impact can be fully understood , they must be mapped , a daunting task due to their sheer number . The most detailed seamount mappings are provided by multibeam <unk> ( sonar ) , however after more than 5000 publicly held cruises , the amount of the sea floor that has been mapped remains minuscule . Satellite altimetry is a broader alternative , albeit not as detailed , with 13 @,@ 000 catalogued seamounts ; however this is still only a fraction of the total 100 @,@ 000 . The reason for this is that uncertainties in the technology limit recognition to features 1 @,@ 500 m ( 4 @,@ 921 ft ) or larger . In the future , technological advances could allow for a larger and more detailed catalogue . 
 Observations from CryoSat @-@ 2 combined with data from other satellites has shown thousands of previously uncharted seamounts , with more to come as data is interpreted . 
 = = Deep @-@ sea mining = = 
 Seamounts are a possible future source of economically important metals . Even though the ocean makes up 70 % of Earth 's surface area , technological challenges with deep sea mining have severely limited its extent . But with the constantly decreasing supply on land , many see oceanic mining as the destined future , and seamounts stand out as candidates . 
 Seamounts are abundant , and all have metal resource potential because of various enrichment processes during the seamount 's life . An example for <unk> gold mineralization on the seafloor is Conical Seamount , located about 8 km south of <unk> Island in Papua New Guinea . Conical Seamount has a basal diameter of about 2 @.@ 8 km and rises about 600 m above the seafloor to a water depth of 1050 m . Grab samples from its summit contain the highest gold concentrations yet reported from the modern seafloor ( max . 230 g / t Au , avg . 26 g / t , n = 40 ) . Iron @-@ manganese , hydrothermal iron oxide , sulfide , sulfate , sulfur , hydrothermal manganese oxide , and phosphorite ( the latter especially in parts of Micronesia ) are all mineral resources that are deposited upon or within seamounts . However , only the first two have any potential of being targeted by mining in the next few decades . 
 = = Dangers = = 
 Some seamounts have not been mapped and thus pose a navigational danger . For instance , Muirfield Seamount is named after the ship that hit it in 1973 . More recently , the submarine USS San Francisco ran into an uncharted seamount in 2005 at a speed of 35 knots ( 40 @.@ 3 mph ; 64 @.@ 8 km / h ) , sustaining serious damage and killing one seaman . 
 One major seamount risk is that often , in the late of stages of their life , extrusions begin to seep in the seamount . This activity leads to inflation , over @-@ extension of the volcano 's flanks , and ultimately flank collapse , leading to submarine landslides with the potential to start major tsunamis , which can be among the largest natural disasters in the world . In an illustration of the potent power of flank collapses , a summit collapse on the northern edge of <unk> Seamount resulted in a pronounced headwall scarp and a field of debris up to 6 km ( 4 mi ) away . A catastrophic collapse at Detroit Seamount flattened its whole structure extensively . Lastly , in 2004 , scientists found marine fossils 61 m ( 200 ft ) up the flank of Kohala mountain in Hawaii ( island ) . <unk> analysis found that at the time of their deposition , this would have been 500 m ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) up the flank of the volcano , far too high for a normal wave to reach . The date corresponded with a massive flank collapse at the nearby Mauna Loa , and it was theorized that it was a massive tsunami , generated by the landslide , that deposited the fossils . 
 = Elizabeth II = 
 Elizabeth II ( Elizabeth Alexandra Mary ; born 21 April 1926 ) is , and has been since her accession in 1952 , Queen of the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand , and Head of the Commonwealth . She is also Queen of 12 countries that have become independent since her accession : Jamaica , Barbados , the Bahamas , Grenada , Papua New Guinea , Solomon Islands , Tuvalu , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Belize , Antigua and Barbuda , and Saint Kitts and Nevis . 
 Elizabeth was born in London to the Duke and Duchess of York , later King George VI and Queen Elizabeth , and was the elder of their two daughters . She was educated privately at home . Her father acceded to the throne on the abdication of his brother Edward VIII in 1936 , from which time she was the heir presumptive . She began to undertake public duties during World War II , serving in the Auxiliary Territorial Service . In 1947 , she married Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , with whom she has four children : Charles , Anne , Andrew , and Edward . 
 Elizabeth 's many historic visits and meetings include a state visit to the Republic of Ireland and reciprocal visits to and from the Pope . She has seen major constitutional changes , such as devolution in the United Kingdom , Canadian patriation , and the decolonisation of Africa . She has also reigned through various wars and conflicts involving many of her realms . She is the world 's oldest reigning monarch as well as Britain 's longest @-@ lived . In 2015 , she surpassed the reign of her great @-@ great @-@ grandmother , Queen Victoria , to become the longest @-@ reigning British monarch and the longest @-@ reigning queen regnant in world history . 
 Times of personal significance have included the births and marriages of her children , grandchildren and great grandchildren , her coronation in 1953 , and the celebration of milestones such as her Silver , Golden and Diamond Jubilees in 1977 , 2002 , and 2012 , respectively . Moments of sadness for her include the death of her father , aged 56 ; the assassination of Prince Philip 's uncle , Lord Mountbatten ; the breakdown of her children 's marriages in 1992 ( her annus horribilis ) ; the death in 1997 of her son 's ex @-@ wife , Diana , Princess of Wales ; and the deaths of her mother and sister in 2002 . Elizabeth has occasionally faced republican sentiments and severe press criticism of the royal family but support for the monarchy remains high , as does her personal popularity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Elizabeth was born at 02 : 40 ( GMT ) on 21 April 1926 , during the reign of her paternal grandfather , King George V. Her father , Prince Albert , Duke of York ( later King George VI ) , was the second son of the King . Her mother , Elizabeth , Duchess of York ( later Queen Elizabeth ) , was the youngest daughter of Scottish aristocrat Claude Bowes @-@ Lyon , 14th Earl of Strathmore and Kinghorne . She was delivered by Caesarean section at her maternal grandfather 's London house : 17 Bruton Street , Mayfair . She was baptised by the Anglican Archbishop of York , Cosmo Gordon Lang , in the private chapel of Buckingham Palace on 29 May , and named Elizabeth after her mother , Alexandra after George V 's mother , who had died six months earlier , and Mary after her paternal grandmother . Called " Lilibet " by her close family , based on what she called herself at first , she was cherished by her grandfather George V , and during his serious illness in 1929 her regular visits were credited in the popular press and by later biographers with raising his spirits and aiding his recovery . 
 Elizabeth 's only sibling , Princess Margaret , was born in 1930 . The two princesses were educated at home under the supervision of their mother and their governess , Marion Crawford , who was casually known as " <unk> " . Lessons concentrated on history , language , literature and music . Crawford published a biography of Elizabeth and Margaret 's childhood years entitled The Little Princesses in 1950 , much to the dismay of the royal family . The book describes Elizabeth 's love of horses and dogs , her orderliness , and her attitude of responsibility . Others echoed such observations : Winston Churchill described Elizabeth when she was two as " a character . She has an air of authority and reflectiveness astonishing in an infant . " Her cousin Margaret Rhodes described her as " a jolly little girl , but fundamentally sensible and well @-@ behaved " . 
 = = Heir presumptive = = 
 During her grandfather 's reign , Elizabeth was third in the line of succession to the throne , behind her uncle Edward , Prince of Wales , and her father , the Duke of York . Although her birth generated public interest , she was not expected to become queen , as the Prince of Wales was still young . Many people believed that he would marry and have children of his own . When her grandfather died in 1936 and her uncle succeeded as Edward VIII , she became second @-@ in @-@ line to the throne , after her father . Later that year Edward abdicated , after his proposed marriage to divorced socialite Wallis Simpson provoked a constitutional crisis . Consequently , Elizabeth 's father became king , and she became heir presumptive . If her parents had had a later son , she would have lost her position as first @-@ in @-@ line , as her brother would have been heir apparent and above her in the line of succession . 
 Elizabeth received private tuition in constitutional history from Henry Marten , Vice @-@ Provost of Eton College , and learned French from a succession of native @-@ speaking governesses . A Girl Guides company , the 1st Buckingham Palace Company , was formed specifically so that she could socialise with girls her own age . Later , she was enrolled as a Sea Ranger . 
 In 1939 , Elizabeth 's parents toured Canada and the United States . As in 1927 , when her parents had toured Australia and New Zealand , Elizabeth remained in Britain , since her father thought her too young to undertake public tours . Elizabeth " looked tearful " as her parents departed . They corresponded regularly , and she and her parents made the first royal transatlantic telephone call on 18 May . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 In September 1939 , Britain entered the Second World War , which lasted until 1945 . During the war , many of London 's children were evacuated to avoid the frequent aerial bombing . The suggestion by senior politician Lord Hailsham that the two princesses should be evacuated to Canada was rejected by Elizabeth 's mother , who declared , " The children won 't go without me . I won 't leave without the King . And the King will never leave . " Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret stayed at Balmoral Castle , Scotland , until Christmas 1939 , when they moved to Sandringham House , Norfolk . From February to May 1940 , they lived at Royal Lodge , Windsor , until moving to Windsor Castle , where they lived for most of the next five years . At Windsor , the princesses staged pantomimes at Christmas in aid of the Queen 's Wool Fund , which bought yarn to knit into military garments . In 1940 , the 14 @-@ year @-@ old Elizabeth made her first radio broadcast during the BBC 's Children 's Hour , addressing other children who had been evacuated from the cities . She stated : " We are trying to do all we can to help our gallant sailors , soldiers and airmen , and we are trying , too , to bear our share of the danger and sadness of war . We know , every one of us , that in the end all will be well . " 
 In 1943 , at the age of 16 , Elizabeth undertook her first solo public appearance on a visit to the Grenadier Guards , of which she had been appointed colonel the previous year . As she approached her 18th birthday , parliament changed the law so that she could act as one of five Counsellors of State in the event of her father 's incapacity or absence abroad , such as his visit to Italy in July 1944 . In February 1945 , she joined the Women 's Auxiliary Territorial Service as an honorary second subaltern with the service number of <unk> . She trained as a driver and mechanic and was promoted to honorary junior commander five months later . 
 At the end of the war in Europe , on Victory in Europe Day , Princesses Elizabeth and Margaret mingled anonymously with the celebratory crowds in the streets of London . Elizabeth later said in a rare interview , " We asked my parents if we could go out and see for ourselves . I remember we were terrified of being recognised ... I remember lines of unknown people linking arms and walking down Whitehall , all of us just swept along on a tide of happiness and relief . " 
 During the war , plans were drawn up to quell Welsh nationalism by affiliating Elizabeth more closely with Wales . Proposals , such as appointing her Constable of Caernarfon Castle or a patron of Urdd Gobaith Cymru ( the Welsh League of Youth ) , were abandoned for various reasons , which included a fear of associating Elizabeth with conscientious objectors in the Urdd , at a time when Britain was at war . Welsh politicians suggested that she be made Princess of Wales on her 18th birthday . Home Secretary , Herbert Morrison supported the idea , but the King rejected it because he felt such a title belonged solely to the wife of a Prince of Wales and the Prince of Wales had always been the heir apparent . In 1946 , she was inducted into the Welsh Gorsedd of Bards at the National Eisteddfod of Wales . 
 In 1947 , Princess Elizabeth went on her first overseas tour , accompanying her parents through southern Africa . During the tour , in a broadcast to the British Commonwealth on her 21st birthday , she made the following pledge : " I declare before you all that my whole life , whether it be long or short , shall be devoted to your service and the service of our great imperial family to which we all belong . " 
 = = = Marriage and family = = = 
 Elizabeth met her future husband , Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark , in 1934 and 1937 . They are second cousins once removed through King Christian IX of Denmark and third cousins through Queen Victoria . After another meeting at the Royal Naval College in Dartmouth in July 1939 , Elizabeth – though only 13 years old – said she fell in love with Philip and they began to exchange letters . She was 21 when their engagement was officially announced on 9 July 1947 . 
 The engagement was not without controversy : Philip had no financial standing , was foreign @-@ born ( though a British subject who had served in the Royal Navy throughout the Second World War ) , and had sisters who had married German noblemen with Nazi links . Marion Crawford wrote , " Some of the King 's advisors did not think him good enough for her . He was a prince without a home or kingdom . Some of the papers played long and loud tunes on the string of Philip 's foreign origin . " Later biographies reported that Elizabeth 's mother initially opposed the union , dubbing Philip " The Hun " . In later life , however , the Queen Mother told biographer Tim Heald that Philip was " an English gentleman " . 
 Before the marriage , Philip renounced his Greek and Danish titles , converted from Greek Orthodoxy to Anglicanism , and adopted the style Lieutenant Philip Mountbatten , taking the surname of his mother 's British family . Just before the wedding , he was created Duke of Edinburgh and granted the style His Royal Highness . 
 Elizabeth and Philip were married on 20 November 1947 at Westminster Abbey . They received 2500 wedding gifts from around the world . Because Britain had not yet completely recovered from the devastation of the war , Elizabeth required ration coupons to buy the material for her gown , which was designed by Norman Hartnell . In post @-@ war Britain , it was not acceptable for the Duke of Edinburgh 's German relations , including his three surviving sisters , to be invited to the wedding . The Duke of Windsor , formerly King Edward VIII , was not invited , either . 
 Elizabeth gave birth to her first child , Prince Charles , on 14 November 1948 . One month earlier , the King had issued letters patent allowing her children to use the style and title of a royal prince or princess , to which they otherwise would not have been entitled as their father was no longer a royal prince . A second child , Princess Anne , was born in 1950 . 
 Following their wedding , the couple leased Windlesham Moor , near Windsor Castle , until July 1949 , when they took up residence at Clarence House in London . At various times between 1949 and 1951 , the Duke of Edinburgh was stationed in the British Crown Colony of Malta as a serving Royal Navy officer . He and Elizabeth lived intermittently , for several months at a time , in the hamlet of <unk> , at Villa <unk> , the rented home of Philip 's uncle , Lord Mountbatten . The children remained in Britain . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Accession and coronation = = = 
 During 1951 , George VI 's health declined and Elizabeth frequently stood in for him at public events . When she toured Canada and visited President Harry S. Truman in Washington , D.C. , in October 1951 , her private secretary , Martin Charteris , carried a draft accession declaration in case the King died while she was on tour . In early 1952 , Elizabeth and Philip set out for a tour of Australia and New Zealand by way of Kenya . On 6 February 1952 , they had just returned to their Kenyan home , Sagana Lodge , after a night spent at <unk> Hotel , when word arrived of the death of the King and consequently Elizabeth 's immediate accession to the throne . Philip broke the news to the new Queen . Martin Charteris asked her to choose a regnal name ; she chose to remain Elizabeth , " of course " . She was proclaimed queen throughout her realms and the royal party hastily returned to the United Kingdom . She and the Duke of Edinburgh moved into Buckingham Palace . 
 With Elizabeth 's accession , it seemed probable that the royal house would bear her husband 's name , becoming the House of Mountbatten , in line with the custom of a wife taking her husband 's surname on marriage . The British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , and Elizabeth 's grandmother , Queen Mary , favoured the retention of the House of Windsor , and so on 9 April 1952 Elizabeth issued a declaration that Windsor would continue to be the name of the royal house . The Duke complained , " I am the only man in the country not allowed to give his name to his own children . " In 1960 , after the death of Queen Mary in 1953 and the resignation of Churchill in 1955 , the surname Mountbatten @-@ Windsor was adopted for Philip and Elizabeth 's male @-@ line descendants who do not carry royal titles . 
 Amid preparations for the coronation , Princess Margaret informed her sister that she wished to marry Peter Townsend , a divorcé ‚ 16 years Margaret 's senior , with two sons from his previous marriage . The Queen asked them to wait for a year ; in the words of Martin Charteris , " the Queen was naturally sympathetic towards the Princess , but I think she thought — she hoped — given time , the affair would peter out . " Senior politicians were against the match and the Church of England did not permit remarriage after divorce . If Margaret had contracted a civil marriage , she would have been expected to renounce her right of succession . Eventually , she decided to abandon her plans with Townsend . In 1960 , she married Antony Armstrong @-@ Jones , who was created Earl of Snowdon the following year . They divorced in 1978 ; she did not remarry . 
 Despite the death of Queen Mary on 24 March , the coronation on 2 June 1953 went ahead as planned , as Mary had asked before she died . The ceremony in Westminster Abbey , with the exception of the anointing and communion , was televised for the first time . Elizabeth 's coronation gown was embroidered on her instructions with the floral emblems of Commonwealth countries : English Tudor rose ; Scots thistle ; Welsh leek ; Irish shamrock ; Australian wattle ; Canadian maple leaf ; New Zealand silver fern ; South African <unk> ; lotus flowers for India and Ceylon ; and Pakistan 's wheat , cotton , and jute . 
 = = = Continuing evolution of the Commonwealth = = = 
 From Elizabeth 's birth onwards , the British Empire continued its transformation into the Commonwealth of Nations . By the time of her accession in 1952 , her role as head of multiple independent states was already established . In 1953 , the Queen and her husband embarked on a seven @-@ month round @-@ the @-@ world tour , visiting 13 countries and covering more than 40 @,@ 000 miles by land , sea and air . She became the first reigning monarch of Australia and New Zealand to visit those nations . During the tour , crowds were immense ; three @-@ quarters of the population of Australia were estimated to have seen her . Throughout her reign , the Queen has made hundreds of state visits to other countries and tours of the Commonwealth ; she is the most widely travelled head of state . 
 In 1956 , the British and French prime ministers , Sir Anthony Eden and Guy Mollet , discussed the possibility of France joining the Commonwealth . The proposal was never accepted and the following year France signed the Treaty of Rome , which established the European Economic Community , the precursor to the European Union . In November 1956 , Britain and France invaded Egypt in an ultimately unsuccessful attempt to capture the Suez Canal . Lord Mountbatten claimed the Queen was opposed to the invasion , though Eden denied it . Eden resigned two months later . 
 The absence of a formal mechanism within the Conservative Party for choosing a leader meant that , following Eden 's resignation , it fell to the Queen to decide whom to commission to form a government . Eden recommended that she consult Lord Salisbury , the Lord President of the Council . Lord Salisbury and Lord Kilmuir , the Lord Chancellor , consulted the British Cabinet , Winston Churchill , and the Chairman of the backbench 1922 Committee , resulting in the Queen appointing their recommended candidate : Harold Macmillan . 
 The Suez crisis and the choice of Eden 's successor led in 1957 to the first major personal criticism of the Queen . In a magazine , which he owned and edited , Lord Altrincham accused her of being " out of touch " . Altrincham was denounced by public figures and slapped by a member of the public appalled by his comments . Six years later , in 1963 , Macmillan resigned and advised the Queen to appoint the Earl of Home as prime minister , advice that she followed . The Queen again came under criticism for appointing the prime minister on the advice of a small number of ministers or a single minister . In 1965 , the Conservatives adopted a formal mechanism for electing a leader , thus relieving her of involvement . 
 In 1957 , she made a state visit to the United States , where she addressed the United Nations General Assembly on behalf of the Commonwealth . On the same tour , she opened the 23rd Canadian Parliament , becoming the first monarch of Canada to open a parliamentary session . Two years later , solely in her capacity as Queen of Canada , she revisited the United States and toured Canada . In 1961 , she toured Cyprus , India , Pakistan , Nepal , and Iran . On a visit to Ghana the same year , she dismissed fears for her safety , even though her host , President Kwame Nkrumah , who had replaced her as head of state , was a target for assassins . Harold Macmillan wrote , " The Queen has been absolutely determined all through ... She is impatient of the attitude towards her to treat her as ... a film star ... She has indeed ' the heart and stomach of a man ' ... She loves her duty and means to be a Queen . " Before her tour through parts of Quebec in 1964 , the press reported that extremists within the Quebec separatist movement were plotting Elizabeth 's assassination . No attempt was made , but a riot did break out while she was in Montreal ; the Queen 's " calmness and courage in the face of the violence " was noted . 
 Elizabeth 's pregnancies with Princes Andrew and Edward , in 1959 and 1963 , mark the only times she has not performed the State Opening of the British parliament during her reign . In addition to performing traditional ceremonies , she also instituted new practices . Her first royal walkabout , meeting ordinary members of the public , took place during a tour of Australia and New Zealand in 1970 . 
 = = = Acceleration of decolonisation = = = 
 The 1960s and 1970s saw an acceleration in the decolonisation of Africa and the Caribbean . Over 20 countries gained independence from Britain as part of a planned transition to self @-@ government . In 1965 , however , the Rhodesian Prime Minister , Ian Smith , in opposition to moves toward majority rule , declared unilateral independence from Britain while still expressing " loyalty and devotion " to Elizabeth . Although the Queen dismissed him in a formal declaration , and the international community applied sanctions against Rhodesia , his regime survived for over a decade . As Britain 's ties to its former empire weakened , the British government sought entry to the European Community , a goal it achieved in 1973 . 
 In February 1974 , the British Prime Minister , Edward Heath , advised the Queen to call a general election in the middle of her tour of the Austronesian Pacific Rim , requiring her to fly back to Britain . The election resulted in a hung parliament ; Heath 's Conservatives were not the largest party , but could stay in office if they formed a coalition with the Liberals . Heath only resigned when discussions on forming a coalition foundered , after which the Queen asked the Leader of the Opposition , Labour 's Harold Wilson , to form a government . 
 A year later , at the height of the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis , the Australian Prime Minister , Gough Whitlam , was dismissed from his post by Governor @-@ General Sir John Kerr , after the Opposition @-@ controlled Senate rejected Whitlam 's budget proposals . As Whitlam had a majority in the House of Representatives , Speaker Gordon Scholes appealed to the Queen to reverse Kerr 's decision . She declined , stating that she would not interfere in decisions reserved by the Constitution of Australia for the governor @-@ general . The crisis fuelled Australian republicanism . 
 = = = Silver Jubilee = = = 
 In 1977 , Elizabeth marked the Silver Jubilee of her accession . Parties and events took place throughout the Commonwealth , many coinciding with her associated national and Commonwealth tours . The celebrations re @-@ affirmed the Queen 's popularity , despite virtually coincident negative press coverage of Princess Margaret 's separation from her husband . In 1978 , the Queen endured a state visit to the United Kingdom by Romania 's communist dictator , Nicolae Ceaușescu , and his wife , Elena , though privately she thought they had " blood on their hands " . The following year brought two blows : one was the unmasking of Anthony Blunt , former Surveyor of the Queen 's Pictures , as a communist spy ; the other was the assassination of her relative and in @-@ law Lord Mountbatten by the Provisional Irish Republican Army . 
 According to Paul Martin , Sr. , by the end of the 1970s the Queen was worried that the Crown " had little meaning for " Pierre Trudeau , the Canadian Prime Minister . Tony Benn said that the Queen found Trudeau " rather disappointing " . Trudeau 's supposed republicanism seemed to be confirmed by his antics , such as sliding down banisters at Buckingham Palace and pirouetting behind the Queen 's back in 1977 , and the removal of various Canadian royal symbols during his term of office . In 1980 , Canadian politicians sent to London to discuss the patriation of the Canadian constitution found the Queen " better informed ... than any of the British politicians or bureaucrats " . She was particularly interested after the failure of Bill C @-@ 60 , which would have affected her role as head of state . <unk> removed the role of the British parliament from the Canadian constitution , but the monarchy was retained . Trudeau said in his memoirs that the Queen favoured his attempt to reform the constitution and that he was impressed by " the grace she displayed in public " and " the wisdom she showed in private " . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 During the 1981 Trooping the Colour ceremony , six weeks before the wedding of Charles , Prince of Wales , and Lady Diana Spencer , six shots were fired at the Queen from close range as she rode down The Mall on her horse , Burmese . Police later discovered that the shots were blanks . The 17 @-@ year @-@ old assailant , Marcus Sarjeant , was sentenced to five years in prison and released after three . The Queen 's composure and skill in controlling her mount were widely praised . 
 From April to September 1982 , the Queen was anxious but proud of her son , Prince Andrew , who was serving with British forces during the Falklands War . On 9 July , the Queen awoke in her bedroom at Buckingham Palace to find an intruder , Michael Fagan , in the room with her . Remaining calm and through two calls to the Palace police switchboard , she spoke to Fagan while he sat at the foot of her bed until assistance arrived seven minutes later . After hosting US President Ronald Reagan at Windsor Castle in 1982 and visiting his California ranch in 1983 , the Queen was angered when his administration ordered the invasion of Grenada , one of her Caribbean realms , without informing her . 
 Intense media interest in the opinions and private lives of the royal family during the 1980s led to a series of sensational stories in the press , not all of which were entirely true . As Kelvin MacKenzie , editor of The Sun , told his staff : " Give me a Sunday for Monday splash on the Royals . Don 't worry if it 's not true — so long as there 's not too much of a fuss about it afterwards . " Newspaper editor Donald <unk> wrote in The Observer of 21 September 1986 : " The royal soap opera has now reached such a pitch of public interest that the boundary between fact and fiction has been lost sight of ... it is not just that some papers don 't check their facts or accept denials : they don 't care if the stories are true or not . " It was reported , most notably in The Sunday Times of 20 July 1986 , that the Queen was worried that Margaret Thatcher 's economic policies fostered social divisions and was alarmed by high unemployment , a series of riots , the violence of a miners ' strike , and Thatcher 's refusal to apply sanctions against the apartheid regime in South Africa . The sources of the rumours included royal aide Michael Shea and Commonwealth Secretary @-@ General <unk> <unk> , but Shea claimed his remarks were taken out of context and embellished by speculation . Thatcher reputedly said the Queen would vote for the Social Democratic Party – Thatcher 's political opponents . Thatcher 's biographer John Campbell claimed " the report was a piece of journalistic mischief @-@ making " . Belying reports of acrimony between them , Thatcher later conveyed her personal admiration for the Queen , and the Queen gave two honours in her personal gift – membership in the Order of Merit and the Order of the Garter – to Thatcher after her replacement as prime minister by John Major . Former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney said Elizabeth was a " behind the scenes force " in ending apartheid . 
 In 1987 , in Canada , Elizabeth publicly supported politically divisive constitutional amendments , prompting criticism from opponents of the proposed changes , including Pierre Trudeau . The same year , the elected Fijian government was deposed in a military coup . As monarch of Fiji , Elizabeth supported the attempts of the Governor @-@ General , Ratu Sir <unk> <unk> , to assert executive power and negotiate a settlement . Coup leader <unk> <unk> deposed <unk> and declared Fiji a republic . By the start of 1991 , republican feeling in Britain had risen because of press estimates of the Queen 's private wealth – which were contradicted by the Palace – and reports of affairs and strained marriages among her extended family . The involvement of younger members of the royal family in the charity game show It 's a Royal Knockout was ridiculed , and the Queen was the target of satire . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 In 1991 , in the wake of coalition victory in the Gulf War , the Queen became the first British monarch to address a joint meeting of the United States Congress . 
 In a speech on 24 November 1992 , to mark the 40th anniversary of her accession , Elizabeth called 1992 her annus horribilis , meaning horrible year . In March , her second son , Prince Andrew , Duke of York , and his wife , Sarah , separated ; in April , her daughter , Princess Anne , divorced Captain Mark Phillips ; during a state visit to Germany in October , angry demonstrators in Dresden threw eggs at her ; and , in November , a large fire broke out at Windsor Castle , one of her official residences . The monarchy came under increased criticism and public scrutiny . In an unusually personal speech , the Queen said that any institution must expect criticism , but suggested it be done with " a touch of humour , gentleness and understanding " . Two days later , the Prime Minister , John Major , announced reforms to the royal finances planned since the previous year , including the Queen paying income tax from 1993 onwards , and a reduction in the civil list . In December , Prince Charles and his wife , Diana , formally separated . The year ended with a lawsuit as the Queen sued The Sun newspaper for breach of copyright when it published the text of her annual Christmas message two days before it was broadcast . The newspaper was forced to pay her legal fees and donated £ 200 @,@ 000 to charity . 
 In the years to follow , public revelations on the state of Charles and Diana 's marriage continued . Even though support for republicanism in Britain seemed higher than at any time in living memory , republicanism was still a minority viewpoint , and the Queen herself had high approval ratings . Criticism was focused on the institution of the monarchy itself and the Queen 's wider family rather than her own behaviour and actions . In consultation with her husband and the Prime Minister , John Major , as well as the Archbishop of Canterbury , George Carey , and her private secretary , Robert Fellowes , she wrote to Charles and Diana at the end of December 1995 , saying that a divorce was desirable . 
 In 1997 , a year after the divorce , Diana was killed in a car crash in Paris . The Queen was on holiday with her extended family at Balmoral . Diana 's two sons by Charles – Princes William and Harry – wanted to attend church and so the Queen and Prince Philip took them that morning . After that single public appearance , for five days the Queen and the Duke shielded their grandsons from the intense press interest by keeping them at Balmoral where they could grieve in private , but the royal family 's seclusion and the failure to fly a flag at half @-@ mast over Buckingham Palace caused public dismay . Pressured by the hostile reaction , the Queen agreed to return to London and do a live television broadcast on 5 September , the day before Diana 's funeral . In the broadcast , she expressed admiration for Diana and her feelings " as a grandmother " for the two princes . As a result , much of the public hostility evaporated . 
 = = = Golden Jubilee = = = 
 In 2002 , Elizabeth marked her Golden Jubilee . Her sister and mother died in February and March respectively , and the media speculated whether the Jubilee would be a success or a failure . She again undertook an extensive tour of her realms , which began in Jamaica in February , where she called the farewell banquet " memorable " after a power cut plunged the King 's House , the official residence of the governor @-@ general , into darkness . As in 1977 , there were street parties and commemorative events , and monuments were named to honour the occasion . A million people attended each day of the three @-@ day main Jubilee celebration in London , and the enthusiasm shown by the public for the Queen was greater than many journalists had expected . 
 Though generally healthy throughout her life , in 2003 she had keyhole surgery on both knees . In October 2006 , she missed the opening of the new Emirates Stadium because of a strained back muscle that had been troubling her since the summer . 
 In May 2007 , The Daily Telegraph , citing unnamed sources , reported that the Queen was " exasperated and frustrated " by the policies of the British Prime Minister , Tony Blair , that she was concerned the British Armed Forces were overstretched in Iraq and Afghanistan , and that she had raised concerns over rural and countryside issues with Blair . She was , however , said to admire Blair 's efforts to achieve peace in Northern Ireland . On 20 March 2008 , at the Church of Ireland St Patrick 's Cathedral , Armagh , the Queen attended the first Maundy service held outside England and Wales . At the invitation of the Irish President , Mary McAleese , the Queen made the first state visit to the Republic of Ireland by a British monarch in May 2011 . 
 The Queen addressed the United Nations for a second time in 2010 , again in her capacity as Queen of all Commonwealth realms and Head of the Commonwealth . The UN Secretary General , Ban Ki @-@ moon , introduced her as " an anchor for our age " . During her visit to New York , which followed a tour of Canada , she officially opened a memorial garden for the British victims of the September 11 attacks . The Queen 's visit to Australia in October 2011 – her sixteenth visit since 1954 – was called her " farewell tour " in the press because of her age . 
 = = = Diamond Jubilee and beyond = = = 
 Her Diamond Jubilee in 2012 marked 60 years on the throne , and celebrations were held throughout her realms , the wider Commonwealth , and beyond . In a message released on Accession Day , Elizabeth wrote : 
 In this special year , as I dedicate myself anew to your service , I hope we will all be reminded of the power of togetherness and the convening strength of family , friendship and good neighbourliness ... I hope also that this Jubilee year will be a time to give thanks for the great advances that have been made since 1952 and to look forward to the future with clear head and warm heart . 
 She and her husband undertook an extensive tour of the United Kingdom , while her children and grandchildren embarked on royal tours of other Commonwealth states on her behalf . On 4 June , Jubilee beacons were lit around the world . On 18 December , she became the first British sovereign to attend a peacetime Cabinet meeting since George III in 1781 . 
 The Queen , who opened the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal , also opened the 2012 Summer Olympics and Paralympics in London , making her the first head of state to open two Olympic Games in two different countries . For the London Olympics , she played herself in a short film as part of the opening ceremony , alongside Daniel Craig as James Bond . On 4 April 2013 , she received an honorary BAFTA for her patronage of the film industry and was called " the most memorable Bond girl yet " at the award ceremony . 
 On 3 March 2013 , Elizabeth was admitted to the King Edward VII 's Hospital as a precaution after developing symptoms of gastroenteritis . She returned to Buckingham Palace the following day . Because of her age and the need for her to limit travelling , in 2013 she chose not to attend the biennial meeting of Commonwealth heads of government for the first time in 40 years . She was represented at the summit in Sri Lanka by her son , Prince Charles . 
 The Queen surpassed her great @-@ great @-@ grandmother , Queen Victoria , to become the longest @-@ lived British monarch in December 2007 , and the longest @-@ reigning British monarch on 9 September 2015 . She was celebrated in Canada as the " longest @-@ reigning sovereign in Canada 's modern era " . ( King Louis XIV of France reigned over part of Canada for longer . ) She is the longest @-@ reigning queen regnant in history , the world 's oldest reigning monarch and second @-@ longest @-@ serving current head of state after King Bhumibol Adulyadej of Thailand . 
 The Queen does not intend to abdicate , though Prince Charles is expected to take on more of her workload as Elizabeth , who celebrated her ninetieth birthday in 2016 , carries out fewer public engagements . 
 = = Public perception and character = = 
 Since Elizabeth rarely gives interviews , little is known of her personal feelings . As a constitutional monarch , she has not expressed her own political opinions in a public forum . She does have a deep sense of religious and civic duty , and takes her coronation oath seriously . Aside from her official religious role as Supreme Governor of the established Church of England , she is personally a member of that church and the national Church of Scotland . She has demonstrated support for inter @-@ faith relations and has met with leaders of other churches and religions , including five popes : Pius XII , John XXIII , John Paul II , Benedict XVI and Francis . A personal note about her faith often features in her annual Christmas message broadcast to the Commonwealth . In 2000 , she spoke about the theological significance of the millennium marking the 2000th anniversary of the birth of Jesus : 
 To many of us , our beliefs are of fundamental importance . For me the teachings of Christ and my own personal accountability before God provide a framework in which I try to lead my life . I , like so many of you , have drawn great comfort in difficult times from Christ 's words and example . 
 She is patron of over 600 organisations and charities . Her main leisure interests include equestrianism and dogs , especially her Pembroke Welsh Corgis . Her lifelong love of corgis began in 1933 with Dookie , the first corgi owned by her family . Scenes of a relaxed , informal home life have occasionally been witnessed ; she and her family , from time to time , prepare a meal together and do the washing up afterwards . 
 In the 1950s , as a young woman at the start of her reign , Elizabeth was depicted as a glamorous " fairytale Queen " . After the trauma of the Second World War , it was a time of hope , a period of progress and achievement heralding a " new Elizabethan age " . Lord Altrincham 's accusation in 1957 that her speeches sounded like those of a " priggish schoolgirl " was an extremely rare criticism . In the late 1960s , attempts to portray a more modern image of the monarchy were made in the television documentary Royal Family and by televising Prince Charles 's investiture as Prince of Wales . In public , she took to wearing mostly solid @-@ colour overcoats and decorative hats , which allow her to be seen easily in a crowd . 
 At her Silver Jubilee in 1977 , the crowds and celebrations were genuinely enthusiastic , but in the 1980s , public criticism of the royal family increased , as the personal and working lives of Elizabeth 's children came under media scrutiny . Elizabeth 's popularity sank to a low point in the 1990s . Under pressure from public opinion , she began to pay income tax for the first time , and Buckingham Palace was opened to the public . Discontent with the monarchy reached its peak on the death of Diana , Princess of Wales , though Elizabeth 's personal popularity and support for the monarchy rebounded after her live television broadcast to the world five days after Diana 's death . 
 In November 1999 , a referendum in Australia on the future of the Australian monarchy favoured its retention in preference to an indirectly elected head of state . Polls in Britain in 2006 and 2007 revealed strong support for Elizabeth , and in 2012 , her Diamond Jubilee year , approval ratings hit 90 percent . Referenda in Tuvalu in 2008 and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in 2009 both rejected proposals to become republics . 
 Elizabeth has been portrayed in a variety of media by many notable artists , including painters Lucian Freud , Peter Blake , Juliet Pannett , <unk> <unk> @-@ Roy , Terence Cuneo , Tai @-@ Shan <unk> and Pietro <unk> . Notable photographers of Elizabeth have included Cecil Beaton , Yousuf Karsh , Lord Lichfield , Terry O 'Neill , Annie Leibovitz and John Swannell . The first official portrait of Elizabeth was taken by Marcus Adams in 1926 . 
 = = = Finances = = = 
 Elizabeth 's personal fortune has been the subject of speculation for many years . Jock Colville , who was her former private secretary and a director of her bank , Coutts , estimated her wealth in 1971 at £ 2 million ( equivalent to about £ 25 million today ) . In 1993 , Buckingham Palace called estimates of £ 100 million " grossly overstated " . She inherited an estimated £ 70 million estate from her mother in 2002 . The Sunday Times Rich List 2015 estimated her private wealth at £ 340 million , making her the 302nd richest person in the UK . 
 The Royal Collection , which includes thousands of historic works of art and the Crown Jewels , is not owned by the Queen personally but is held in trust , as are her official residences , such as Buckingham Palace and Windsor Castle , and the Duchy of Lancaster , a property portfolio valued in 2014 at £ 442 million . Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle are privately owned by the Queen . The British Crown Estate – with holdings of £ 9 @.@ 4 billion in 2014 – is held in trust by the sovereign and cannot be sold or owned by Elizabeth in a private capacity . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 Elizabeth has held many titles and honorary military positions throughout the Commonwealth , is Sovereign of many orders in her own countries , and has received honours and awards from around the world . In each of her realms she has a distinct title that follows a similar formula : Queen of Jamaica and her other realms and territories in Jamaica , Queen of Australia and her other realms and territories in Australia , etc . In the Channel Islands and Isle of Man , which are Crown dependencies rather than separate realms , she is known as Duke of Normandy and Lord of Mann , respectively . Additional styles include Defender of the Faith and Duke of Lancaster . When in conversation with the Queen , the practice is to initially address her as Your Majesty and thereafter as Ma 'am . 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 From 21 April 1944 until her accession , Elizabeth 's arms consisted of a lozenge bearing the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom differenced with a label of three points argent , the centre point bearing a Tudor rose and the first and third a cross of St George . Upon her accession , she inherited the various arms her father held as sovereign . The Queen also possesses royal standards and personal flags for use in the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , New Zealand , Jamaica , Barbados , and elsewhere . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = U.S. Route 161 = 
 U.S. Highway 161 ( US 161 ) was a U.S. Highway in Iowa that ran from Keokuk to Dubuque by way of Cedar Rapids . It was designated in 1925 and signed in 1926 along two primary highways . The route began at the Missouri River with US 61 southwest of Keokuk ran north through Mount Pleasant and Iowa City to Cedar Rapids . There , it turned to the northeast through Anamosa and Monticello towards Dubuque . The route ended at US 61 in Key West , a few miles west of Dubuque . 
 The route changed very little while it was in service . It was paved from end to end by the summer of 1932 . In January 1938 , it was removed from the US Highway System . From Keokuk to Cedar Rapids , it was replaced by US 218 , which was extended southward . From Cedar Rapids to Key West it was replaced by US 151 , which was extended westward . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 161 began on the US 61 bridge over the Des Moines River , which represents the border between Missouri and Iowa . The two routes ran concurrently within one @-@ half mile ( 800 m ) of the Mississippi River until they reached Keokuk , where the two routes turned to the northeast and turned away from the river . As the highway curved to the north , it passed the now @-@ unincorporated towns of <unk> and <unk> . Southwest of Montrose , US 61 split off to the northeast to run along the banks of the Mississippi . 
 After the US 61 split , US 161 continued northeast towards <unk> along Main Street where it met Iowa Highway 3 ( Iowa 3 ) . North of <unk> , the highway diverted away from the Keokuk and Northwestern Railroad , which the highway had theretofore closely paralleled the railway . As the highway headed due north towards Mount Pleasant , it passed many small communities , but did not enter any of them . West of West Point , it intersected Iowa 103 , which served as a shortcut to Fort Madison until 2003 . Iowa 16 intersected the highway in northern Lee County . 
 Shortly after it entered Henry County , US 161 intersected Iowa 125 , a short spur highway that connected Salem to the primary highway system . The road headed due north , jogging to the east only slightly to cross the Skunk River . In Mount Pleasant , it intersected US 34 and Iowa 133 . Further north , it briefly overlapped Iowa 78 near Olds . 
 In Washington County , US 161 only intersected two primary highways : Iowa 2 near Ainsworth and Iowa 22 near Riverside . In Johnson County , the highway entered the Iowa City area from the south . Iowa 1 joined US 161 from the southwest and the two routes briefly headed north together . At the banks of the Iowa River , they were joined by US 6 , and all three routes crossed the river . US 6 split away from the two routes near the University of Iowa <unk> . A few blocks north of campus , Iowa 1 split away to the east . A few more blocks north was the southern end of Iowa 261 . North of Iowa City , the highway crossed back over the Iowa River and headed to the northwest towards North Liberty , where it intersected Iowa 153 . 
 US 161 continued to the northwest before turning north at its last Iowa River crossing . It passed through <unk> and entered Linn County . It entered the Cedar Rapids area from the southwest side , where it intersected US 30 and Iowa 64 . The three highways headed to the northeast towards and crossed the Cedar River before entering downtown . East of downtown , US 30 split away to the east near the intersection with Iowa 11 . US 161 and Iowa 64 continued northeast towards Marion , where they met Iowa 94 near its downtown . Outside of Marion , they intersected Iowa 13 . 
 Southwest of Anamosa , the two routes met the northern end of Iowa 261 . Closer to Anamosa , they crossed the Wapsipinicon River before Iowa 64 split away to the east . Now heading northeast , US 161 traversed the farmland of Jones County . In Monticello , it met the ends of Iowa 38 and Iowa 113 . It crossed the South Fork <unk> River and headed towards Cascade , where it crossed the north fork of the river . At Cascade , US 161 met the ends of Iowa 136 and Iowa 188 . Now in Dubuque County , the highway continued northeast past the New <unk> Abbey . The route ended at an intersection with US 61 in Key West , a few miles west of Dubuque . 
 = = History = = 
 US 161 was an original U.S. Highway ; it and the rest of the system were designated in 1925 and were signed by the summer of 1926 . US 161 replaced parts of two primary roads in eastern Iowa – Primary Road No. 40 , which was known as the Red Ball Route , from Keokuk to Cedar Rapids , and Primary Road No. 28 , parts of which were known as the Red X Route . The northernmost forty miles ( 64 km ) of US 161 were a part of a territorial and military road from Dubuque to Iowa City . This road , authorized by President Martin Van Buren in 1839 , was known as Dillon 's Furrow , named after the Dubuque merchant Lyman Dillon who surveyed the route and marked it with a furrow . 
 Upon designation , only a small portion of US 161 was paved , all of which was located in and around Cedar Rapids . A short section in Keokuk and the remainder of the route north of Cedar Rapids was graveled , but not paved . A $ 100 million bond bill ( $ 1 @.@ 38 billion in 2016 dollars ) passed and approved by a plebiscite in 1928 allowed paving to commence in earnest . The entire routing of US 161 was to be completed within six years . Paving work progressed faster in some counties than it did in others . By 1930 , a hard @-@ surfaced road existed from the Missouri state line to Olds in Henry County ( 55 mi or 89 km ) and from Iowa City to northeast of Cascade in Dubuque County ( 75 mi or 121 km ) . All 185 miles ( 298 km ) of the route were paved by June 1932 . 
 In January 1938 , US 161 was removed from the U.S. Highway System . From Keokuk to Cedar Rapids , it was replaced by US 218 , which had previously ended at US 30 south of Vinton . US 218 was extended eastward along US 30 and then southward towards Keokuk . From Cedar Rapids to Key West , it was replaced by US 151 , which had previously only existed in Wisconsin . US 151 was routed westward from Madison along US 18 to <unk> , then along US 118 to <unk> , then along US 61 into Iowa to Key West , and then along US 161 to Cedar Rapids . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Michael Rankine = 
 Michael Lee Rankine ( born 15 January 1985 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a striker for National League club Guiseley . 
 Rankine began his career with the Doncaster Rovers youth system , before playing for Armthorpe Welfare and Barrow in non @-@ League football . He moved to Football League team Scunthorpe United in 2004 but after only scoring one goal for them he signed for Alfreton Town . He joined Conference National team Rushden & Diamonds in 2006 , where he played for three seasons , before signing for divisional rivals York City in 2009 . He played for them in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final before signing for Aldershot Town in 2011 . He spent two seasons at Aldershot and during that time had loan spells with Grimsby Town and York . After a season with Hereford United he joined Gateshead in 2014 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Born in Doncaster , South Yorkshire , Rankine started his career in the youth system of hometown club Doncaster Rovers . He played for Armthorpe Welfare on work experience in 2002 and was released by Doncaster at the end of the 2002 – 03 season after failing to progress into their first team . He joined Northern Premier League Premier Division side Barrow in the summer of 2003 after impressing against them for Armthorpe during a pre @-@ season friendly . He was unable to play for them in the opening game of 2003 – 04 after suffering whiplash following a car crash . He made 47 appearances and scored nine goals in 2003 – 04 . 
 = = = Scunthorpe United = = = 
 Rankine signed for League Two team Scunthorpe United on non @-@ contract terms on 15 September 2004 , following a trial after being recommended to the club by Barrow manager Lee Turnbull . The move came having made 11 appearances and scored three goals for Barrow up to that point during 2004 – 05 . He scored the winning goal for Scunthorpe away at Bury on his debut with a close range finish from Andy Crosby 's knock @-@ down in the 89th minute , which gave his team a 1 – 0 victory . He started for Scunthorpe in a 3 – 1 defeat to eventual FA Premier League champions Chelsea in the FA Cup third round in January 2005 , after which he was given the shirt of striker Didier Drogba . He scored one goal for Scunthorpe in 2004 – 05 , in which he made 24 appearances , as they won promotion into League One as League Two runners @-@ up . He signed a new six @-@ month contract with the club in June 2005 . 
 Rankine rejoined former club Barrow on a one @-@ month loan in August 2005 , and after scoring two goals , the loan was extended for a second month in September . During the second month , he was recalled by Scunthorpe , due to injuries at the club , meaning he finished the loan period with 11 appearances and three goals . He was reported to have joined Lincoln City on trial in December , but this claim was rejected by Lincoln manager Keith Alexander . Following the expiry of his Scunthorpe contract on 9 December 2005 , he later joined Conference National team Altrincham on trial and scored for their reserve team . 
 = = = Alfreton Town and Rushden & Diamonds = = = 
 After his contract at Scunthorpe expired , he had a period with former club Armthorpe Welfare to help his fitness , before joining Alfreton Town of the Conference North in January 2006 . He finished 2005 – 06 with 22 appearances and three goals for Alfreton , after which he was offered a new contract in May 2006 . However , Rankine joined Conference National team Rushden & Diamonds on a one @-@ year contract on 24 July 2006 , after being on trial for three weeks . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat to Crawley Town on 12 August 2006 , which was followed by his first goal in the following game three days later , converting a Glenn Wilson cross in a 3 – 1 defeat to Grays Athletic . He next scored with two goals in a 3 – 1 victory over League One team Yeovil Town in the FA Cup first round in November . He signed a new two @-@ year contract with Rushden in March 2007 , which contracted him at the club until the summer of 2009 , with the option of a further two years . He scored two goals in the last five minutes against Weymouth on 3 April to help Rushden to a 4 – 1 victory . He finished 2006 – 07 with 46 appearances and 10 goals for Rushden . 
 Rankine played for Rushden in the Conference League Cup Final against Aldershot Town on 3 April 2008 , and scored a goal during the first minute of stoppage time in extra time , ensuring a 3 – 3 draw and a penalty shoot @-@ out , which Rushden lost 4 – 3 . He finished 2007 – 08 with 52 appearances and 15 goals for Rushden . He joined League Two team Bournemouth on a one @-@ month loan on 8 October 2008 , after having made eight appearances for Rushden up to that point during 2008 – 09 . He made his debut in a 0 – 0 draw with Rotherham United three days later before finishing the loan period with four appearances . Bournemouth were hoping to extend the loan , but Rushden wanted him to return . He scored two goals for Rushden in a 9 – 0 victory over Weymouth on 20 February 2009 , who had been forced to field a youth team . He finished 2008 – 09 with 38 appearances and eight goals for Rushden . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 He joined Conference Premier rivals York City on a two @-@ year contract on 12 June 2009 for a fee of £ 10 @,@ 000 , with York 's Craig Farrell moving in the opposite direction . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat to Oxford United on 8 August 2009 . He scored his first goal for York after winning and scoring a penalty kick in a 2 – 0 victory over Forest Green Rovers on 15 August . He played in both legs of York 's play @-@ off semi @-@ final victory over Luton Town , which finished 2 – 0 on aggregate . He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley Stadium on 16 May 2010 , being substituted on 70 minutes , which was lost 3 – 1 to Oxford . He finished 2009 – 10 with 55 appearances and 10 goals for York . 
 Rankine made his first appearance of 2010 – 11 in the opening game , a 2 – 1 defeat to Kidderminster Harriers on 14 August 2010 , entering the game as a substitute in the 65th minute and scoring a penalty in the 86th minute . His first goals of the season from open play came after scoring twice in a 3 – 0 victory over Altrincham on 28 August 2010 . Rankine finished the season as York 's top scorer with 14 goals in 48 appearances . 
 = = = Aldershot Town = = = 
 He rejected a new contract with York during 2010 – 11 and manager Gary Mills confirmed he was to leave the club to sign for League Two side Aldershot Town . He agreed to sign for Aldershot on a free transfer on 12 May 2011 . 
 Rankine signed for Conference Premier club Grimsby Town on a one @-@ month loan deal on 23 November 2012 . He made his debut a day later as a 66th @-@ minute substitute in Grimsby 's 0 – 0 home draw with Buxton in the FA Trophy first round . Rankine returned to Aldershot on 4 January 2013 as he wanted a more long @-@ term extension to his loan at Grimsby , who were only offering a one @-@ month extension . He had made six appearances for Grimsby . Rankine returned to former club York , by this time playing in League Two , on loan until the end of 2012 – 13 on 12 February 2013 . He made his first appearance since returning later that day , playing in York 's 0 – 0 home draw with Gillingham . Rankine was sent back to Aldershot on 4 April 2013 having been deemed surplus to requirements by new manager Nigel Worthington . He had made eight appearance for York . He finished the season with two goals in 28 games for Aldershot as they were relegated into the Conference Premier . 
 = = = Hereford United = = = 
 He joined Tamworth on trial in July 2013 , scoring in the club 's 2 – 0 friendly win over Atherstone Town . Shortly afterwards he joined Conference Premier club Hereford United on a one @-@ year contract following a trial . He made his debut in Hereford 's 1 – 1 draw at home to Braintree Town in the opening match of 2013 – 14 on 10 August 2013 . Rankine scored his first goal for Hereford with the equalising goal in the 70th minute of a 2 – 2 draw away to Hyde on 17 August 2013 . He scored an 88th @-@ minute winner for Hereford in a 2 – 1 away win over Aldershot , a result that saw the club avoid relegation on goal difference . However , Hereford were later expelled from the Football Conference and he commented that the situation at the club was " embarrassing " and a " disgrace " . He had made 34 appearances and scored seven goals for Hereford in the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = = Gateshead = = = 
 Rankine signed for Conference Premier club Gateshead , managed by his former Alfreton and York manager Mills , on a one @-@ year contract 30 June 2014 . He made his debut on 13 September 2014 as a 61st @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 win against Dartford , and scored his first goal for the club with a close @-@ range finished from a Carl Finnigan cross in the 86th minute of a 2 – 2 extra time draw to Wrexham in the FA Trophy third round on 7 February 2015 , with Gateshead losing 5 – 3 in a penalty shoot @-@ out . Rankine made 36 appearances and scored five goals in 2014 – 15 as Gateshead finished 10th in the Conference Premier . 
 = = = Altrincham = = = 
 Rankine signed for National League side Altrincham on 3 June 2015 , leaving Gateshead as he was unhappy with how regularly he was playing there . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 home defeat to Forest Green on 8 August 2015 and scored his first goal with a looping header from a James Lawrie cross in the 29th @-@ minute of a 2 – 1 home victory over Tranmere Rovers on 29 August . Rankine finished 2015 – 16 with 15 goals from 45 appearances as Altrincham were relegated in 22nd @-@ place in the National League . 
 = = = Guiseley = = = 
