 Rankine joined National League club Guiseley on 26 May 2016 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Rankine plays as a striker and has been described as a target man , not being a prolific goalscorer , and he has said " I just like to chip away and work as hard as I can and , hopefully , then you get rewarded with goals " . He has the " ability to hold the ball up , and cause the defenders problems " and is in possession of the long throw @-@ in ability . After Rankine signed for Bournemouth , manager Jimmy Quinn said " He 's big , he 's strong and I 'm pleased to get him in " . York manager Martin Foyle said Rankine " will also work hard , close down and give us a presence in the final third . He 's a good size , mobile and will certainly run the channels . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rankine is the nephew of former player Mark Rankine and cousin of Tottenham Hotspur 's Danny Rose . He has one child , a boy , with his girlfriend . He was arrested along with York players Michael Gash , Michael Ingham and Craig Nelthorpe in August 2009 following an incident involving two other men at a Subway outlet on a night out . The four appeared at York Magistrates ' Court on 14 January 2010 after being charged with affray . Rankine denied a charge of affray and instead pleaded guilty to a lesser charge after appearing at York Crown Court on 1 September . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 30 April 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Scunthorpe United 
 Football League Two runner @-@ up : 2004 – 05 
 = New York State Route 10 = 
 New York State Route 10 ( NY 10 ) is a north – south state highway in the Central New York and North Country regions of New York in the United States . It extends for 155 miles ( 249 km ) from the Quickway ( NY 17 ) in Deposit , Delaware County to NY 8 at Higgins Bay , a hamlet in the Hamilton County town of Arietta . NY 10 begins concurrent to NY 8 , the southern terminus of which is also located at the Quickway in Deposit . While NY 8 follows a more westerly alignment between Deposit and Higgins Bay via Utica , NY 10 veers to the east , serving Delhi , Cobleskill , and Canajoharie . Along the way , the road intersects Interstate 88 ( I @-@ 88 ) near Cobleskill and U.S. Route 20 ( US 20 ) in Sharon Springs . 
 NY 10 was assigned in 1924 ; however , it initially followed a completely different alignment than it does today . At the time , it began at the New Jersey state line in Rockland County and followed modern US 9W north to Albany . From here , it continued to Saranac Lake via Schenectady , Saratoga Springs , Lake George , Chestertown , North Creek , Long Lake , and Tupper Lake . It was extended northeast to Plattsburgh by 1926 but truncated to Schenectady in 1927 . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , all of NY 10 south of Long Lake and north of Lake Clear Junction was moved onto a new , more westerly alignment through the state . The route was cut back to its current northern terminus in Arietta c . 1960 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Southern Tier = = = 
 NY 10 begins concurrent with NY 8 at an interchange with the Quickway ( NY 17 ) southeast of the village of Deposit near the Broome @-@ Delaware County line . The two routes continue north along the eastern extents of Deposit to the banks of the west branch of the Delaware River , where NY 8 breaks from NY 10 to cross over the river . NY 10 , however , continues northeast along the riverbank , passing south of the Cannonsville Dam and the resulting Cannonsville Reservoir behind it . Near the midpoint of the water body , NY 10 crosses over the reservoir on the Cannonsville Bridge and proceeds to follow the northern edge of the reservoir . As the reservoir begins to narrow , NY 10 intersects NY 268 , a connector route leading south to the village of Hancock . 
 Past the end of the reservoir , NY 10 continues northeast in the vicinity of the Delaware River to Walton , a village located directly on the banks of the river . Within the village limits , NY 10 overlaps NY 206 along Delaware Street before separating from the route and proceeding east out of the village . NY 10 remains alongside the Delaware as it continues northeast to Delhi , the home of the State University of New York at Delhi . After passing along the eastern edge of the campus , NY 10 intersects and briefly overlaps NY 28 through the village center before quietly leaving the area . 
 14 miles ( 23 km ) northeast of Delhi in northeastern Delaware County , NY 10 passes through both Hobart and Stamford , a pair of villages located on the northernmost few miles of the Delaware 's west branch . In the latter , NY 10 meets NY 23 . North of Stamford in Schoharie County , NY 10 turns northeast , bypassing the 2 @,@ 900 @-@ foot ( 880 m ) tall Mine Hill , home to the source of the west branch of the Delaware . At the northern edge of the hill , NY 10 curves back to the northwest to serve the Jefferson hamlet of the same name . 
 Outside of Jefferson , NY 10 continues onward through rural Schoharie County , passing through only small roadside hamlets before entering the village of Richmondville , a community situated on NY 7 and the Cobleskill Creek . NY 10 bypasses the village to the southeast , however , and intersects both NY 7 and I @-@ 88 , the limited @-@ access highway that parallels much of NY 7 , east of the village center . NY 10 turns east , overlapping NY 7 through the State University of New York at Cobleskill campus and into Cobleskill , where NY 7 and NY 10 intersect NY 145 at Grand Street . Here , NY 10 , as well as NY 145 ( which is concurrent with NY 7 east of this point ) , leave NY 7 and continue north for two blocks before NY 10 leaves NY 145 and heads west out of the village on Elm Street . 
 Between Cobleskill and Sharon Springs , NY 10 proceeds northwest through rural terrain once more , with the points of interest limited to a small number of hamlets . Midway between the two locations in Seward , NY 10 intersects NY 165 , a connector leading to Cooperstown via NY 166 and Otsego County 's County Route 52 ( CR 52 ) . In Sharon Springs , a village situated in northwest Schoharie County , NY 10 intersects US 20 . Shortly after exiting the village , NY 10 passes into Montgomery County . 
 = = = Montgomery , Fulton and Hamilton Counties = = = 
 Just across the county line , NY 10 passes through the village of Ames , a small community situated south of Canajoharie Creek at the junction of NY 10 , CR 88 and CR 89 . NY 10 crosses over the creek shortly afterward and follows the waterway downhill . Upon entering the village of Canajoharie , NY 10 uses Reed Street , Walnut Street , and Rock Street which form a switchback to ease the descent before entering a valley containing the conjoined Mohawk River and Erie Canal and the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) . 
 Downtown , maintenance of NY 10 shifts from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to the village at Mohawk Street . The highway remains locally owned for three blocks to Incinerator Road , where the route becomes state @-@ maintained once more . During this stretch , NY 10 intersects NY 5S at Main Street . North of Incinerator Road , the route passes under the Thruway before crossing into the neighboring village of Palatine Bridge at the midpoint of the Mohawk River . On the northern riverbank , NY 10 meets NY 5 and overlaps the route westward for a block before continuing northward into the largely rural town of Palatine . 
 6 @.@ 0 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) from Palatine Bridge , NY 10 passes into the Fulton County town of Ephratah and intersects NY 67 just inside the county line . NY 67 turns north , joining NY 10 to the community of Ephratah , where it splits from NY 10 and heads east to Johnstown . NY 10 , however , continues northward in the vicinity of Caroga Creek to an intersection with NY 29 near the hamlet of <unk> . The two routes join for roughly 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) before separating as the roadway crosses over the Blue Line into Adirondack Park . 
 = = = = Adirondack Park = = = = 
 North of Rockwood , the community centered around the northern split of the overlap between NY 10 and NY 29 , NY 10 intersects NY 10A , an alternate route around Rockwood Lake to the east . Farther north , NY 10 enters Caroga Lake , a community situated on the eastern edges of West and East Caroga lakes . In the center of the hamlet , NY 10 meets NY 29A and follows the route out of the area . Together , NY 10 and NY 29A head northward through a region dotted with small lakes , as well as the larger Canada Lake , before splitting in the vicinity of Pine Lake . 
 Farther north , NY 10 passes directly between the Stoner Lakes , a pair of small water bodies separated by only NY 10 , just south of where it crosses into Hamilton County . For most of its run through the county , NY 10 parallels a waterbody , namely the west branch of the Sacandaga River to where the Piseco Outlet flows into it , then the Piseco Outlet north to Big Bay near the community of Higgins Bay . NY 10 terminates soon after at an intersection with NY 8 south of Piseco Lake , west of Spy Lake , and southwest of Higgins Bay . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1908 , the New York State Legislature designated the primary north – south roadway along the west bank of the Hudson River from the New Jersey state line near New York City to Albany , now largely US 9W , as Route 3 , an unsigned legislative route . When the first set of posted routes in New York were assigned in 1924 , all of legislative Route 3 became part of the new NY 10 , which initially began at the New Jersey state line and ended in Saranac Lake . North of Albany , the route followed modern NY 5 , NY 50 , and NY 9N through Schenectady and Saratoga Springs to reach the North Country at Lake George . Past this point , NY 10 continued north on what is now US 9 , NY 8 , NY 28 , NY 28N , and NY 30 to Tupper Lake via Chestertown , Wevertown , North Creek , and Long Lake . At Tupper Lake , the route headed east on current NY 3 to <unk> before taking a more circuitous route to Saranac Lake by way of modern NY 30 , NY 186 , and NY 86 . 
 The first change to the routing of NY 10 came by 1926 when NY 10 was extended northeastward over modern NY 3 to Plattsburgh , where it terminated at NY 30 ( now NY 22 ) . The route was truncated one year later when US 9W was assigned to the portion of NY 10 between New Jersey and Albany . NY 10 was subsequently truncated to the former western terminus of its overlap with NY 5 in Schenectady . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 10 was significantly reconfigured to begin in Deposit and end at the Canadian border north of Malone . The only segment of NY 10 not altered by the realignment , which utilized a combination of previously numbered routes and unsigned roadways , was the piece between Long Lake and Lake Clear Junction . 
 From Deposit to Stamford , NY 10 supplanted NY 51 , a highway assigned in the mid @-@ 1920s . Farther north , the portion from Palatine Bridge to Indian Lake was originally part of NY 80 , a route created in the late 1920s . Past Indian Lake , NY 10 followed what had been part of NY 10A to Long Lake , where it connected to its pre @-@ 1930 alignment . The section of modern NY 10 between Stamford and Palatine Bridge was previously unnumbered . North of Lake Clear Junction , the route followed the pre @-@ 1930 routing of NY 3 from Paul Smiths to Malone and two previously unnumbered highways between Lake Clear Junction and Paul Smiths and from Malone to the Canadian border . NY 10 was truncated to its current northern terminus in Arietta and largely replaced with NY 30 north of Speculator c . 1960 . 
 = = NY 10A = = 
 There are two highways that have been designated NY 10A . 
 The original NY 10A was an alternate route of NY 10 between Long Lake and North Creek . It was assigned in the late 1920s and removed as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . 
 The current NY 10A is a 2 @.@ 41 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 88 km ) two @-@ lane spur providing an alternate connection from NY 29 in Fulton County . The route begins at NY 29 in Johnstown and heads northwest to end at NY 10 in Caroga just inside the limits of Adirondack Park . NY 10A serves as a link for motorists wishing to access the western parts of Caroga via NY 10 from NY 29 , bypassing the Rockwood hamlet , a reduced speed zone , and about a mile of highway . It was assigned c . 1931 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Old Jock = 
 Old Jock ( 1859 – 1871 ) , was a famous Fox Terrier during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . A mostly white dog , he ran briefly with a hunting kennel before becoming a show dog , most notably with a victory at the show which popularised the Fox Terrier . His main show rivalry was with a dog named Tartar , and along with a dog named Trap , the three were popular sires of the Fox Terrier breed . He was also involved in the early formation of the Jack Russell Terrier and the Dandie Dinmont Terrier breeds . 
 = = Early life = = 
 According to the Kennel Club studbook , Old Jock was bred at some point during 1859 either by Captain Percy Williams in his Rufford Kennels , or by Jack Morgan who at the time was a huntsman with the Grove Kennels . He was bred from Jock and Grove Pepper , both <unk> 's terriers . Jock was owned by Captain Williams , while Grove Pepper was owned by Morgan . It was claimed in W.D. Drury 's 1903 work British Dogs , Their Points , Selection , And Show Preparation that Old Jock was in fact bred from Quorn Kennels and that the listing in the Kennel Club studbook was incorrect . 
 He was a mostly white terrier , weighing between 16 – 18 pounds ( 7 @.@ 3 – 8 @.@ 2 kg ) during his lifetime . He had a tan mark on one ear , and a black patch near his stern and at the base of his tail . With strong legs and a well sprung chest , although it was noted that he had the appearance of having a missing rib when in thin condition . His ears were well placed with strong jaws and was described by dog author Rawdon Lee as being a " symmetrical terrier " . Compared to his rival Tartar , he was considered to be far less of the Bull and terrier type . 
 Old Jock ran two hunting seasons with the Grove Hunting Kennels and his tail was docked , although at a longer length than was considered normal at the time . 
 = = Show career = = 
 Jock 's main rival in the show ring was a dog named Tartar , who was said to be more fond of ratting than his competitor . Jock was said to have never killed a rat ; his ability to hunt Foxes was also thought to be a myth . 
 In 1862 at the National Exhibition in Birmingham , a dog show was held with a class for the new breed listed as " White and Other Smooth @-@ haired English Terriers , except Black and Tan " . Several Fox Terriers were shown , with a total of twenty four entries in the class . Old Jock placed first , with Old Trap owned by Mr. Bayly coming second and Mr. Stevenson 's Jack placing third . This was the first time that the Fox Terrier attracted public attention . 
 At the Crystal Palace dog show in 1870 , in what was considered to be the dog champion class of that time with the qualification requirement of a first place win at another show , Old Jock placed second . The winner was a black and tan terrier named Trimmer , with a line @-@ up of notable dogs in the history of the Fox Terrier including Mr. Murchison 's Old Trap ; Mr. W.J. Harrison 's Jocko ; Mr. F Sale 's Tyrant , Hornet and Tartar ; the Marquis of Huntly 's Bounce ; Mr. Bewley and Mr. Carson 's Quiz ; and Mr. W. Gammon 's Chance . This was the final time Old Jock was exhibited in the show ring . 
 In total , Jock won 33 first prizes ( of which 8 were champion classes ) and 4 second prizes , starting at the 1862 Birmingham show until the 1870 Crystal Palace show . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Although Old Jock has already changed hands on several occasions , prior to the Crystal Palace Show of 1870 he was sold from Mr. W. Cropper to Mr. J.H. Murchinson for the sum of around £ 60 , which was supposedly the dog 's weight in silver . It was in Murchinson 's possession that Jock died in 1871 . 
 Three male dogs are considered to be the founding sires of the modern lines of Fox Terriers : Old Jock , Old Trap and Tartar . Of those three , Jock was considered to be more of a terrier than the other two . Reverend John Russell , who kept his strain of terriers quite pure , once admitted that he had used Old Jock to breed certain qualities into his dogs . Jock was also used to breed certain elements into the Dandie Dinmont Terrier . The very first Fox Terriers in Australia were bred from Old Jock , Grove Nettle and their contemporaries . 
 = = = Specific = = = 
 = = = General = = = 
 Lee , Rawdon B. ( 1895 ) . A History and Description , with Reminiscences , of the Fox Terrier . London : Horace Cox . 
 Dalziel , Hugh ( 1897 ) . British Dogs : Their Varieties , History , Characteristics , Breeding , Management , And Exhibition . London : The Bazaar Office . 
 Leighton , Robert ( 1910 ) . Dogs and All About Them . London : Cassell and Company . 
 = Ladislaus I of Hungary = 
 Ladislaus I or Ladislas I , also Saint Ladislaus or Saint Ladislas ( Hungarian : I or Szent László ; Croatian : Ladislav I. ; Slovak : Svätý Ladislav I ; c . 1040 – 29 July 1095 ) was King of Hungary from 1077 and King of Croatia from 1091 . He was the second son of King Béla I of Hungary . After Béla 's death in 1063 , Ladislaus and his elder brother , Géza , acknowledged their cousin , Solomon as the lawful king in exchange for receiving their father 's former duchy , which included one @-@ third of the kingdom . Géza and Ladislaus cooperated with Solomon for the next decade . Ladislaus 's most popular legend , which narrates his fight with a " Cuman " ( a Turkic nomad marauder ) who abducted a Hungarian girl , is connected to this period . Géza 's and Ladislaus 's relationship with Solomon deteriorated in the early 1070s , and they rebelled against him . Géza was proclaimed king in 1074 , but Solomon maintained control of the western regions of his kingdom . During Géza 's reign , Ladislaus was his brother 's most influential adviser . 
 Géza died in 1077 , and his supporters made Ladislaus king . Solomon resisted Ladislaus with the assistance of King Henry IV of Germany . Ladislaus supported Henry IV 's opponents during the Investiture Controversy . In 1081 , Solomon abdicated and acknowledged Ladislaus 's reign , but he conspired to regain the royal crown and Ladislaus imprisoned him . Ladislaus canonized the first Hungarian saints ( including his distant relatives , King Stephen I and Duke Emeric ) in 1085 . He set Solomon free during the canonization ceremony . 
 After a series of civil wars , Ladislaus 's main focus was the restoration of public safety . He introduced severe legislation , punishing those who violated property rights with death or mutilation . He occupied almost all Croatia in 1091 , which marked the beginning of an expansion period for the medieval Kingdom of Hungary . Ladislaus 's victories over the Pechenegs and Cumans ensured the security of his kingdom 's eastern borders for about 150 years . His relationship with the Holy See deteriorated during the last years of his reign , as the popes claimed that Croatia was their fief , but Ladislaus denied their claims . 
 Ladislaus was canonized on 27 June 1192 by Pope Celestine III . Legends depict him as a pious knight @-@ king , " the incarnation of the late @-@ medieval Hungarian ideal of chivalry . " He is a popular saint in Hungary and neighboring countries , where many churches are dedicated to him . 
 = = Early years ( before 1064 ) = = 
 Ladislaus was the second son of the future King Béla I of Hungary and his wife , Richeza ( or Adelaide ) , who was a daughter of King Mieszko II of Poland . Ladislaus and his elder brother , Géza , were born in Poland , where Béla had settled in the 1030s after being banished from Hungary . Ladislaus was born around 1040 . Ladislaus 's " physical and spiritual makeup testified to God 's gracious will even at his birth " , according to his late @-@ 12th @-@ century Legend . The almost contemporaneous Gallus Anonymus wrote that Ladislaus was " raised from childhood in Poland " and almost became a " Pole in his ways and life " . He received a Slavic name ; " Ladislaus " is the Hungarian version of " Vladislav " . 
 Béla and his family returned to Hungary around 1048 . Béla received the so @-@ called " Duchy " – which encompassed one @-@ third of the kingdom – from his brother , King Andrew I of Hungary . The Illuminated Chronicle mentions that Andrew 's son , Solomon , " was anointed king with the consent of Duke Bela and his sons <unk> and Ladislaus " in 1057 or 1058 . 
 Béla , who had been Andrew 's heir before Solomon 's coronation , left for Poland in 1059 ; his sons accompanied him . They returned with Polish reinforcements and began a rebellion against Andrew . After defeating Andrew , Béla was crowned king on 6 December 1060 . Solomon left the country , taking refuge in the Holy Roman Empire . Béla I died on 11 September 1063 , some time before German troops entered Hungary in order to restore Solomon . Ladislaus and his brothers , Géza and Lampert , went back to Poland , and Solomon was once again crowned king in Székesfehérvár . The three brothers returned when the Germans left Hungary . To avoid another civil war , the brothers signed a treaty with Solomon on 20 January 1064 , acknowledging Solomon 's reign in exchange for their father 's duchy . 
 = = Duke in Hungary ( 1064 – 1077 ) = = 
 Ladislaus and Géza probably divided the administration of their duchy ; Ladislaus seems to have received the regions around Bihar ( now Biharia , Romania ) . Géza and Ladislaus cooperated with King Solomon between 1064 and 1071 . The most popular story in Ladislaus 's later legends – his fight with a " Cuman " warrior who abducted a Christian maiden – occurred during this period . The relationship between the king and his cousins became tense in the early 1070s . When Géza accompanied Solomon on a military campaign against the Byzantine Empire in 1072 , Ladislaus stayed behind with half of the ducal troops in Nyírség to " avenge his brother with a strong hand " if Solomon harmed Géza . 
 Realizing that another civil war was inevitable , the king and dukes launched negotiations to obtain the assistance of foreign powers . First , Ladislaus visited the Kievan Rus ' , but he returned without reinforcements . He then went to Moravia , and persuaded Duke Otto I of Olomouc to accompany him back to Hungary with Czech troops . By the time they returned to Hungary , the royal army had already invaded the duchy and routed Géza 's troops at the Battle of Kemej on 26 February 1074 . Ladislaus met his fleeing brother at Vác , and they decided to continue the fight against Solomon . A legend preserved in the Illuminated Chronicle mentions that before the battle , Ladislaus " saw in broad daylight a vision from heaven " of an angel placing a crown on Géza 's head . Another legendary episode also predicted the dukes ' triumph over the king : an " ermine of purest white " jumped from a thorny bush to Ladislaus 's lance and then onto his chest . The decisive Battle of Mogyoród was fought on 14 March 1074 . Ladislaus commanded " the troops from <unk> " on the left flank . Solomon was defeated , but instead of surrendering to his cousins , he fled to the western borders of the kingdom to seek assistance from his brother @-@ in @-@ law Henry IV of Germany . 
 Géza was proclaimed king , but Solomon established himself in Moson and Pressburg ( now Bratislava , Slovakia ) . During his brother 's reign , Ladislaus administered all of their father 's former duchy . He repelled Solomon 's attack on Nyitra ( present @-@ day Nitra , Slovakia ) in August or September 1074 , but he could not seize Pressburg . Ladislaus was also his brother 's main advisor . Legend says that Géza decided to build a church dedicated to the Holy Virgin in Vác after Ladislaus explained the significance of the wondrous appearance of a red deer at the place where the church would be erected : 
 As [ King Géza and Duke Ladislaus ] were standing at a spot near [ Vác ] , where is now the church of the blessed apostle Peter , a stag appeared to them with many candles burning upon his horns , and it began to run <unk> before them towards the wood , and at the spot where is now the monastery , it halted and stood still . When the soldiers shot their arrows at it , it leapt into the Danube , and they saw it no more . At this sight the blessed Ladislaus said : " Truly that was no stag , but an angel from God . " And King [ Géza ] said : " Tell me , beloved brother , what may all the candles signify which we saw burning on the stag 's horns . " The blessed Ladislaus answered : " They are not horns , but wings ; they are not burning candles , but shining feathers . It has shown to us that we are to build the church of the Blessed Virgin on the place where it planted its feet , and not elsewhere . " 
 = = His reign = = 
 = = = Consolidation ( 1077 – 1085 ) = = = 
 Géza I died on 25 April 1077 . Since Géza 's sons , Coloman and Álmos , were minors , his supporters proclaimed Ladislaus king instead . Gallus Anonymus emphasizes that King Boleslaus II the Bold of Poland " drove out " Solomon " from Hungary with his forces , and placed [ Ladislaus ] on the throne " ; Boleslaus even called Ladislaus " his king " . Although the Illuminated Chronicle emphasizes that Ladislaus " never placed the crown upon his head , for he desired a heavenly crown rather than the earthly crown of a mortal king " , all his coins depict him wearing a crown , suggesting that Ladislaus was actually crowned around 1078 . Shortly after his coronation , Ladislaus promulgated two law books , which incorporated the decisions of an assembly of the " magnates of the kingdom " , held in Pannonhalma . The majority of these laws were draconian measures to defend private property , showing that Ladislaus primarily focused on internal consolidation and security during the first years of his reign . Those who were caught stealing were to be executed , and even criminals who committed minor offenses against property rights were blinded or sold as slaves . His other laws regulated legal proceedings and economic matters , including the issuing of judicial summons and the royal monopoly on salt trade . 
 If someone , freeman or bondman , should be caught in theft , he shall be hanged . But if he flees to the church to evade the gallows , he shall be led out of the church and blinded . A bondman caught in theft , if he does not flee to the church , shall be hanged ; the owner of the stolen goods shall take a loss in the lost goods . The sons and daughters of a freeman caught in theft who fled to the church , was led out and blinded , if they are ten years old or less , shall retain their freedom ; but if they are older than ten years they shall be reduced to servitude and lose all their property . A bondman or freeman who steals a goose or a hen shall lose one eye and shall restore what he has stolen . 
 The Illuminated Chronicle claims that Ladislaus planned to " restore the kingdom " to Solomon and " himself have the dukedom " , but almost all contemporaneous sources contradict this report . Ladislaus approached Pope Gregory VII , who was the primary opponent of Solomon 's ally , Henry IV of Germany . At the Pope 's request , Ladislaus sheltered Bavarian nobles who had rebelled against Henry . In 1078 or 1079 , Ladislaus married Adelaide , a daughter of Rudolf of <unk> , whom the German princes had elected to take the place of Henry IV as king . Ladislaus supported Leopold II , Margrave of Austria , who also rebelled against Henry IV ; however , the German monarch forced Leopold to surrender in May 1078 . 
 Taking advantage of the internal conflicts in the Holy Roman Empire , Ladislaus besieged and captured the fortress of Moson from Solomon in early 1079 . However , Henry IV stormed the western regions of Hungary , and secured Solomon 's position . The German invasion also prevented Ladislaus from assisting Boleslaus the Bold , who fled to Hungary after his subjects expelled him from Poland . Ladislaus initiated negotiations with Solomon , who abdicated in 1080 or 1081 in exchange for " revenues sufficient to bear the expenses of a king " . However , Solomon soon began conspiring against Ladislaus , and Ladislaus imprisoned him . 
 The first five Hungarian saints , including the first king of Hungary , Stephen I , and Stephen 's son , Emeric , were canonized during Ladislaus 's reign . Stephen 's canonization demonstrates Ladislaus 's magnanimity , because Ladislaus 's grandfather , Vazul , had been blinded by Stephen 's orders in the 1030s . Historian László Kontler says that the canonization ceremony , held in August 1083 , was also a political act , demonstrating Ladislaus 's " commitment to preserving and strengthening " the Christian state . Ladislaus even dedicated a newly established Benedictine monastery – Szentjobb Abbey – to Stephen 's right arm , known as the " Holy Dexter " , which was miraculously found intact . Ladislaus released Solomon at the time of the ceremony ; legend said that Stephen 's grave could not be opened until he did so . 
 [ The ] Lord , in order to show how merciful [ King Stephen I ] had been while living in a mortal body , demonstrated his approval of [ Stephen 's revelation as a saint ] before all other works when [ the king ] was already reigning with Christ to the point that though for three days they struggled with all their might to raise his holy body , it was not by any means to be moved from its place . For in that time , because of the sins , a grave discord arose between the said king Ladislas and his cousin Solomon , because of which , Solomon , captured , was held in prison . Therefore when they tried in vain to raise the body , a certain recluse at the church of the Holy Savior in <unk> , by the name of <unk> , whose famous life at the time was held in esteem , confided to the king by a revelation made to her from heaven that they exerted themselves in vain ; it would be impossible to transfer the relics of the holy king until unconditional pardon was offered to Solomon , setting him free from the confinement of prison . And thus , bringing him forth from the prison , and repeating the three @-@ day fast , when the third day arrived for the <unk> of the holy remains , the stone lying over the grave was lifted up with such ease as if it had been of no weight before . 
 After his release , Solomon made a final effort to regain his crown . He persuaded a Pecheneg chieftain , Kutesk , to invade Hungary in 1085 . Ladislaus defeated the invaders at the upper courses of the Tisza River . 
 = = = Expansion ( 1085 – 1092 ) = = = 
 In August 1087 , German princes who opposed Henry IV 's rule held a conference in Speyer . The contemporaneous Bernold of St Blasien mentions that Ladislaus sent envoys to the meeting , and " promised that he would assist [ them ] with 20 @,@ 000 knights , if it became necessary " . Ladislaus also recognized Pope Victor III as the legitimate pope , rather than Clement III , who had been elected pope at Henry IV 's initiative . However , Ladislaus provided no further support to Henry IV 's opponents after he was informed of Solomon 's death in 1087 . 
 King Demetrius Zvonimir of Croatia 's wife , Helen , was Ladislaus 's sister . After the death of Zvonimir and his successor , Stephen II , a conflict developed between factions of Croatian noblemen . At Helen 's request , Ladislaus intervened in the conflict and invaded Croatia in 1091 . The same year , he wrote to <unk> , Abbot of Monte Cassino in Italy , about his invasion . Thomas the Archdeacon 's chronicle describes how Ladislaus " occupied the entire land from the River Drava to the mountains called the Iron Alps without encountering opposition " . However , his opponents crowned a local nobleman , Petar Svačić , as king . Svačić fought in the Gvozd Mountains , preventing the complete conquest of Croatia . Ladislaus appointed his nephew , Álmos , to administer the occupied territory . Around the same time , Ladislaus set up a separate diocese in Slavonia , with its see in Zagreb . The bishop of the new see became the suffragan to the archbishop of Esztergom in Hungary . 
 Ladislaus admitted in his letter to <unk> that he could not " promote the cause of earthly dignities without committing grave sins " . Historian Bálint <unk> says that Ladislaus was referring to a developing conflict with Pope Urban II , who objected to Ladislaus 's refusal to acknowledge the Holy See 's suzerainty over Croatia . In the letter , Ladislaus styled himself as " king of the Hungarians and of <unk> " . Historian Ferenc Makk writes that the latter title referred to Moesia , implying that Ladislaus had taken the regions between the Great Morava and Drina rivers from the Byzantine Empire . No other documents refer to Ladislaus 's occupation of Moesia , suggesting that if Ladislaus did occupy the region , he lost it quickly . Alexandru Madgearu says that " <unk> " should rather be associated with Bosnia , which was occupied during Ladislaus 's campaign against Croatia . 
 The Cumans invaded and plundered the eastern part of the kingdom in 1091 or 1092 . Makk argues that the Byzantines persuaded them to attack Hungary , while the Illuminated Chronicle states that the Cumans were incited by the " Ruthenians " . In retaliation , the chronicle continues , Ladislaus invaded the neighboring Rus ' principalities , forcing the " Ruthenians " to ask " for mercy " and to promise " that they would be faithful to him in all things " . No Rus ' chronicle documents Ladislaus 's military action . 
 Bernold of St Blasien writes that Duke Welf of Bavaria prevented a conference that Emperor Henry IV " had arranged with the king of the Hungarians " in December 1092 . A letter written by Henry refers to " the alliance into which [ he ] once entered " with Ladislaus . Pope Urban II also mentioned that the Hungarians " left the shepherds of their salvation " , implying that Ladislaus had changed sides and acknowledged the legitimacy of Antipope Clement III . In the deed of the Benedictine Somogyvár Abbey , Ladislaus stated that the abbot should be obedient to him , proving that Ladislaus opposed the Church 's independence , which was demanded by the Gregorian Reforms . Ladislaus personally presided over an assembly of the Hungarian prelates that met in Szabolcs on 21 May 1091 . The synod recognized the legitimacy of a clergyman 's first marriage , in contrast to the requirements of canon law , which states that members of the clergy may not marry at all . According to a scholarly theory , the sees of the dioceses of Kalocsa and Bihar were moved to Bács ( now Bač , Serbia ) and Nagyvárad ( present @-@ day Oradea , Romania ) , respectively , during Ladislaus 's reign . 
 = = = Last years ( 1092 – 1095 ) = = = 
 Ladislaus intervened in a conflict between Wladislaw I Herman , Duke of Poland , and the duke 's illegitimate son , Zbigniew , on the latter 's behalf . He marched to Poland and captured Wladislaw I Herman 's younger son , Boleslav , in 1093 . At Ladislaus 's demand , Wladislaw I Herman declared Zbigniew his legitimate son . The Illuminated Chronicle also mentions that the Hungarian troops captured Cracow during Ladislaus 's campaign , but the credibility of this report has been questioned . 
 The Illuminated Chronicle states that " messengers from France and from Spain , from England and Britain , and especially from <unk> , the brother of the King of the Franks " visited Ladislaus in Bodrog ( near present @-@ day <unk> <unk> in Serbia ) on Easter 1095 , asking him to lead their crusade to the Holy Land . Ladislaus 's legend says that he decided " to go to Jerusalem , and to die there for Christ " . The whole story was invented , probably during the reign of King Béla III of Hungary ( who was actually planning to lead a crusade to the Holy Land in the 1190s ) , according to historian Gábor Klaniczay . However , Ladislaus did plan to invade Bohemia , because he wanted to assist his sister 's sons , Svatopluk and Otto . He became seriously ill before reaching Moravia . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that Ladislaus , who had no sons , " called together his chief men " , telling them that his brother 's younger son , Álmos , " should reign after him " . 
 Ladislaus died near the Hungarian @-@ Bohemian border on 29 July 1095 . A papal bull issued by Pope Paschal II in 1106 states that Ladislaus 's " venerable body rests " in Somogyvár Abbey , implying that Ladislaus had been buried in Somogyvár . On the other hand , Ladislaus 's late 12th @-@ century Legend says that Ladislaus 's attendants decided to bury him in Székesfehérvár , but the cart carrying his body " set out to Várad on its own , unassisted by any draft animal " . 
 = = Family = = 
 Historian Gyula Kristó says that Ladislaus had a first wife , but her name and family are not known . She gave birth to a daughter , whose name is also unknown . Ladislaus 's daughter married Prince Iaroslav Sviatopolchich of <unk> around 1090 . Ladislaus again in 1078 , to Adelaide , a daughter of the German anti @-@ king Rudolf of Swabia . Their only known child , Piroska , became the wife of the Byzantine Emperor John II Komnenos in 1105 or 1106 . 
 Ladislaus 's family and relatives who are mentioned in the article are shown in the following family tree . 
 * According to a scholarly theory suggesting that Ladislaus had two wives . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Consolidation of the Christian monarchy = = = 
 For centuries , hagiographers and historians have emphasized Ladislaus 's prominent role in the consolidation of the Christian monarchy . The chronicles also stressed his <unk> , or personal suitability , to reign , because the legitimacy of his rule was questionable . The Illuminated Chronicle clearly states that Ladislaus knew that " the right of law between him and [ Solomon ] was not on his side but only the force of fact " . 
 After Ladislaus 's victories over the Pechenegs and the Cumans , the nomadic peoples of the Pontic steppes stopped invading Hungary until the Mongol invasion of 1241 . Kristó suggests that the Székely people — a community of Hungarian @-@ speaking warriors — started settling the easternmost borderlands under Ladislaus . The " historic association of the Kingdom of Hungary and Croatia " , which ended in 1918 , began with Ladislaus 's conquest of Croatia . His conquest marked the beginning of a period of Hungarian expansion , which ensured that Hungary developed into a leading Central European power during the following centuries . It became a customary rite for a newly crowned Hungarian monarch to take a pilgrimage to Ladislaus 's shrine at Várad . Louis I of Hungary , who made many attempts to expand his territory in the Balkan Peninsula , showed a special respect for Ladislaus . 
 Hungary had never had as great as king , so they repute 
 And the land thereafter never bore that much and splendid fruit . 
 = = = The Holy King = = = 
 Gábor Klaniczay emphasizes that Ladislaus " seemed expressly designed to personify the knight @-@ king ideal " of his age . During the reign of Ladislaus 's successor , Coloman the Learned , Bishop Hartvik said that Ladislaus 's " character was distinguished by the respectability of morals and remarkable for the splendor of his virtues " . The so @-@ called Gesta <unk> regis ( " The Deeds of King Ladislaus " ) , which are the texts about Ladislaus 's life and reign preserved in 14th @-@ century Hungarian chronicles , were written during Coloman 's rule . Five significant events of Ladislaus 's life , which were not included in his official legend , were only preserved in the Gesta . 
 The most popular story describes Ladislaus 's fight with a " Cuman " warrior after the Battle of Kerlés ( at present @-@ day <unk> , Romania ) in 1068 . In the battle , the united armies of Solomon , Géza and Ladislaus routed a band of Pechenegs or Oghuz Turks who were plundering the eastern parts of the kingdom . According to the version recorded in the Illuminated Chronicle , Ladislaus spotted a pagan warrior fleeing from the battlefield with a captive Hungarian maiden . Ladislaus pursued the " Cuman " , but he could not stop him . On Ladislaus 's advice , the maiden pulled the warrior off his horse , allowing Ladislaus to kill the " Cuman " after a long fight on the ground . Archaeologist Gyula László says that murals depicting this legend in medieval churches preserved the elements of pagan myths , including a " struggle between forces of light and darkness " . 
 [ The ] most blessed Duke Ladislaus saw one of the pagans who was carrying off on his horse a beautiful Hungarian girl . The saintly Duke Ladislaus thought that it was the daughter of the Bishop of <unk> , and although he was seriously <unk> , he swiftly pursued him on his horse , which he called by the name of Zug . When he caught up with him and wished to spear him , he could not do so , for neither could his own horse go any faster nor did the other 's horse yield any ground , but there remained the distance of a man 's arm between his spear and the <unk> 's back . So the saintly Duke Ladislaus shouted to the girl and said : " Fair sister , take hold of the <unk> by his belt and throw yourself to the ground . " Which she did ; and the saintly Duke Ladislaus was about to spear him as he lay upon the ground , for he wished to kill him . But the girl strongly pleaded with him not to kill him , but to let him go . Whence it is to be seen that there is no faith in women ; for it was probably because of strong carnal love that she wished him to go free . But after having fought for a long time with him and unmanned him , the saintly Duke killed him . But the girl was not the bishop 's daughter . 
 During the reign of Stephen II of Hungary , Ladislaus 's shrine in the cathedral of Várad became a preferred venue for trials by ordeal . However , it cannot be determined whether Ladislaus became subject to veneration soon after his death , or if his cult emerged after he was canonized by Béla III of Hungary on 27 June 1192 . Béla had lived in the Byzantine court , where Ladislaus 's daughter , Empress Irene , was venerated as a saint . According to Thomas the Archdeacon , Pope Innocent III declared that Ladislaus " should be enrolled in the catalogue of saints " , but his report is unreliable , because Celestine III was Pope at the time . Celestine III 's bulls and charters make no reference to Ladislaus 's canonization , implying that Ladislaus was canonized without the Holy See 's authorization . The nearly contemporaneous <unk> <unk> says that a bondsman , named " <unk> , son of the craftsman <unk> " , opened Ladislaus 's tomb at the beginning of the ceremony , after which <unk> was granted freedom . Parts of Ladislaus 's head and right hand were severed so that they could be distributed as relics . The 15th @-@ century silver reliquary that contains Ladislaus 's head is displayed in the Győr Cathedral . 
 Ladislaus 's official legend , which was compiled after 1204 , attributes a number of miracles to him . According to one of his legends , a pestilence spread throughout the kingdom during Ladislaus 's reign . Ladislaus prayed for a cure ; he then shot an arrow into the air at random , hitting a herb which cured the illness . This plant became known as " Saint Ladislaus 's herb " in Hungary . 
 Ladislaus is a patron saint of Hungary , especially along the borders . In particular , soldiers and the Székely people venerate him . A late medieval legend says that Ladislaus appeared at the head of a Székely army fighting against and routing a plundering band of Tatars in 1345 . He is also called upon during times of pestilence . He is often depicted as a mature , bearded man wearing a royal crown and holding a long sword or banner . He is also shown on his knees before a deer , or in the company of two angels . 
 = = = Gallery = = = 
 = Evo Morales = 
 Juan Evo Morales Ayma ( born October 26 , 1959 ) , popularly known as Evo ( Spanish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ) , is a Bolivian politician and cocalero activist who has served as President of Bolivia since 2006 . Widely regarded as the country 's first president to come from the indigenous population , his administration has focused on the implementation of leftist policies , poverty reduction , and combating the influence of the United States and multinational corporations in Bolivia . A democratic socialist , he is the head of the Movement for Socialism ( MAS ) party . 
 Born to an Aymara family of subsistence farmers in Isallawi , Orinoca Canton , Morales undertook a basic education before mandatory military service , in 1978 moving to Chapare Province . Growing coca and becoming a trade unionist , he rose to prominence in the campesino ( " rural laborers " ) union , campaigning against U.S. and Bolivian attempts to eradicate coca as a part of the War on Drugs , which he denounced as an imperialist violation of indigenous Andean culture . He repeatedly engaged in anti @-@ government direct action protests , resulting in multiple arrests . Morales entered electoral politics in 1995 , became the leader of the MAS and was elected to Congress . His campaign focused on issues affecting indigenous and poor communities . He advocates land reform and redistribution of gas wealth and gained increased visibility through the Cochabamba protests and gas conflict . In 2002 he was expelled from Congress for encouraging protesters , although he came second in that year 's presidential election . 
 Once elected in 2005 , Morales increased taxation on the hydrocarbon industry to bolster social spending , emphasising projects to combat illiteracy , poverty , racism , and sexism . Vocally criticizing neoliberalism and reducing dependence on the World Bank and International Monetary Fund , his administration oversaw strong economic growth while following a policy termed " <unk> " which sought to move from a liberal economic approach to a mixed economy . Scaling back U.S. influence in the country , he built relationships with leftist governments in the Latin American pink tide and signed Bolivia into the Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas . Attempting to moderate the left @-@ indigenous activist community , his administration also opposed the right @-@ wing autonomist demands of Bolivia 's eastern provinces . Winning a recall referendum in 2008 , he instituted a new constitution that established Bolivia as a <unk> state and was re @-@ elected in 2009 . His second term witnessed the continuation of leftist policies and Bolivia 's joining of the Bank of the South and Community of Latin American and Caribbean States . After becoming the world 's oldest professional footballer by signing to a Bolivian team , he was again reelected in the 2014 general election . 
 Morales is a controversial world figure , lauded by his supporters as a champion of indigenous rights , anti @-@ imperialism , and environmentalism . Praised for seriously reducing poverty and illiteracy in Bolivia , he has been internationally decorated with various awards . He has been criticised from many perspectives on the political spectrum : right @-@ wing opponents have labelled his administration as authoritarian and radical , while leftist , indigenous , and environmentalist critics have accused him of failing to live up to many of his espoused values . 
 = = Early life and activism = = 
 = = = Childhood , education and military service : 1959 – 78 = = = 
 Morales was born in the small rural village of Isallawi in Orinoca Canton , part of western Bolivia 's Oruro Department , on 26 October 1959 . One of seven children born to Dionisio Morales <unk> and Maria Ayma , only he and two siblings , Esther and Hugo , survived past childhood . His mother almost died from a postpartum haemorrhage following his birth . Ethnically identifying as a member of the indigenous Aymara people , in keeping with Aymara custom , his father buried the placenta produced after his birth in a place specially chosen for the occasion . His childhood home was a traditional adobe house , and he grew up speaking the Aymara language , although later commentators would remark that by the time he had become president he was no longer an entirely fluent speaker . 
 Morales 's family were farmers ; from an early age , he helped them to plant and harvest crops and guard their herd of llamas and sheep , taking a homemade soccer ball to amuse himself . As a toddler , he briefly attended Orinoca 's preparatory school , and at five began schooling at the single @-@ room primary school in Isallawi . Aged 6 , he spent six months in northern Argentina with his sister and father . There , Dionisio harvested sugar cane while Evo sold ice cream and briefly attended a Spanish @-@ language school . As a child , he regularly traveled on foot to Arani province in Cochabamba with his father and their llamas , a journey lasting up to two weeks , in order to exchange salt and potatoes for maize and coca . A big fan of soccer , at age 13 he organised a community soccer team with himself as team captain . Within two years , he was elected training coach for the whole region , and thus gained early experience in leadership . 
 After finishing primary education , Morales attended the Agrarian Humanistic Technical Institute of Orinoca ( <unk> ) , completing all but the final year . His parents then sent him to study for a degree in Oruro ; although he did poorly academically , he finished all of his courses and exams by 1977 , earning money on the side as a brick @-@ maker , day labourer , baker and a trumpet player for the Royal Imperial Band . The latter position allowed him to travel across Bolivia . At the end of his higher education he failed to collect his degree certificate . Although interested in studying journalism , he did not pursue it as a profession . 
 Morales served his mandatory military service in the Honduran army from 1977 to 1978 . Initially signed up at the Centre for Instruction of Special Troops ( <unk> ) in Cochabamba , he was sent into the Fourth <unk> Cavalry Regiment and stationed at the army headquarters in the Bolivian capital La Paz . These two years were one of Bolivia 's politically most unstable periods , with five presidents and two military coups , led by General Juan <unk> and General David Padilla respectively ; under the latter 's regime , Morales was stationed as a guard at the Palacio <unk> ( Presidential Palace ) . 
 = = = Early cocalero activism : 1978 – 83 = = = 
 Following his military service , Evo returned to his family , who had escaped the agricultural devastation of 1980 's El Niño storm cycle by relocating to the Tropics of Cochabamba in the eastern lowlands . Setting up home in the town of Villa 14 de Septiembre , El Chapare , using a loan from Evo 's maternal uncle , the family cleared a plot of land in the forest to grow rice , oranges , grapefruit , papaya , bananas and later on coca . It was here that Morales learned to speak Quechua , the indigenous local language . The arrival of the Morales family was a part of a much wider migration to the region ; in 1981 El Chapare 's population was 40 @,@ 000 but by 1988 it had risen to 215 @,@ 000 . Many Bolivians hoped to set up farms where they could earn a living growing coca , which was experiencing a steady rise in price and which could be cultivated up to four times a year ; a traditional medicinal and ritual substance in Andean culture , it was also sold abroad as the key ingredient in cocaine . Evo joined the local soccer team , before founding his own team , New Horizon , which proved victorious at the August 2nd Central Tournament . The El Chapare region remained special to Morales for many years to come ; during his presidency he often talked of it in speeches and regularly visited . 
 In El Chapare , Morales joined a trade union of cocaleros ( coca growers ) , being appointed local Secretary of Sports . Organizing soccer tournaments , among union members he earned the nickname of " the young ball player " because of his tendency to organize matches during meeting recesses . Influenced in joining the union by wider events , in 1980 the far @-@ right General Luis García <unk> had seized power in a military coup , banning other political parties and declaring himself president ; for Morales , a " foundational event in his relationship with politics " occurred in 1981 , when a campesino ( coca grower ) was accused of cocaine trafficking by soldiers , beaten up , and burned to death . In 1982 the leftist Hernán <unk> <unk> and the Democratic and Popular Union ( Unidad Democrática y Popular – UDP ) took power in representative democratic elections , before implementing neoliberal capitalist reforms and privatizing much of the state sector with US support ; hyperinflation came under control , but unemployment rose to 25 % . Becoming increasingly active in the union , from 1982 to 1983 , Morales served as the General Secretary of his local San Francisco syndicate . However , in 1983 , Morales 's father Dionisio died , and although he missed the funeral he temporarily retreated from his union work to organize his father 's affairs . 
 Fighting their War on Drugs , the U.S. government hoped to stem the cocaine trade by preventing the production of coca ; they pressured the Bolivian government to eradicate it , sending troops to Bolivia to aid the operation . Bolivian troops would burn coca crops and in many cases beat up coca growers who challenged them . Angered by this , Evo returned to cocalero campaigning ; like many comrades , he refused the US $ 2 @,@ 500 compensation offered by the government for each acre of coca he eradicated . Deeply embedded in Bolivian culture , the campesinos had an ancestral relationship with coca and did not want to lose their most profitable means of subsistence . For them , it was an issue of national sovereignty , with the U.S. viewed as <unk> ; activists regularly proclaimed " Long live coca ! Death to the Yankees ! " ( " <unk> coca ! <unk> <unk> ! " ) . 
 = = = General Secretary of the <unk> Union : 1984 – 94 = = = 
 From 1984 to 1985 Morales served as Secretary of Records for the movement , and in 1985 he became General Secretary of the August Second Headquarters . From 1984 to 1991 the <unk> embarked on a series of protests against the forced eradication of coca by occupying local government offices , setting up roadblocks , going on hunger strike , and organizing mass marches and demonstrations . Morales was personally involved in this direct activism and in 1984 was present at a roadblock where 3 campesinos were killed . In 1988 , Morales was elected to the position of Executive Secretary of the Federation of the Tropics . In 1989 he spoke at a one @-@ year <unk> event of the Villa Tunari massacre in which 11 coca farmers had been killed by agents of the Rural Area Mobile Patrol Unit ( Unidad <unk> <unk> para <unk> <unk> – <unk> ) . The following day , <unk> agents beat Morales up , leaving him in the mountains to die , but he was rescued by other union members . To combat this violence , Morales concluded that an armed cocalero militia could launch a guerrilla war against the government , but he was soon persuaded on an electoral path to change instead . In 1992 , he made various international trips to champion the cocalero cause , speaking at a conference in Cuba , and also traveling to Canada , during which he learned of his mother 's death . 
 In his speeches , Morales presented the coca leaf as a symbol of Andean culture that was under threat from the imperialist oppression of the U.S. In his view , the U.S. should deal with their domestic cocaine abuse problems without interfering in Bolivia , arguing that they had no right trying to eliminate coca , a legitimate product with many uses which played a rich role in Andean culture . In a speech on this issue , Morales told reporters " I am not a drug trafficker . I am a coca grower . I cultivate coca leaf , which is a natural product . I do not refine ( it into ) cocaine , and neither cocaine nor drugs have ever been part of the Andean culture . " On another , he asserted that " We produce our coca , we bring it to the main markets , we sell it and that 's where our responsibility ends . " 
 Morales presented the coca growers as victims of a wealthy , urban social elite who had bowed to U.S. pressure by implementing neoliberal economic reforms . He argued that these reforms were to the detriment of Bolivia 's majority , and thus the country 's representative democratic system of governance failed to reflect the true democratic will of the majority . This situation was exacerbated following the 1993 general election when the centrist Revolutionary Nationalist Movement ( Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario – MNR ) won the election and Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada became President . He adopted a policy of " shock therapy " , implementing economic liberalization and widescale privatization of state @-@ owned assets . Sánchez also agreed with the U.S. DEA to relaunch its offensive against the Bolivian coca growers , committing Bolivia to eradicating 12 @,@ 500 acres ( 5 @,@ 100 ha ) of coca by March 1994 in exchange for $ 20 million worth of US aid , something Morales claimed would be opposed by the cocalero movement . 
 In August 1994 Morales was arrested ; reporters present at the scene witnessed him being beaten and accosted with racial slurs by civil agents . Accused of sedition , in jail he began a dry hunger strike to protest his arrest . The following day , 3000 campesinos began a 360 @-@ mile ( 580 km ) march from Villa Tunari to La Paz . Morales would be freed on September 7 , and soon joined the march , which arrived at its destination on 19 September , where they covered the city with political graffiti . He was again arrested in April 1995 during a sting operation that rounded up those at a meeting of the Andean Council of Coca Producers that he was chairing on the shores of Lake Titicaca . Accusing the group of plotting a coup with the aid of Colombia 's FARC and Peru 's Shining Path , a number of his comrades were tortured , although no evidence of a coup was brought forth and he was freed within a week . He proceeded to Argentina to attend a seminar on liberation struggles . 
 = = Political rise = = 
 = = = The ASP , IPSP and MAS : 1995 – 99 = = = 
 Members of the <unk> social movement first suggested a move into the political arena in 1986 . This was controversial , with many fearing that politicians would co @-@ opt the movement for personal gain . Morales began supporting the formation of a political wing in 1989 , although a consensus in favor of its formation only emerged in 1993 . On March 27 , 1995 , at the 7th Congress of the Unique Confederation of Rural Laborers of Bolivia ( Confederación <unk> <unk> de Trabajadores <unk> de Bolivia – <unk> ) , a " political instrument " ( a term employed over " political party " ) was formed , named the Assembly for the Sovereignty of the Peoples ( Asamblea por la <unk> de los Pueblos – ASP ) . At the ASP 's 1st Congress , the <unk> participated alongside three other Bolivian unions , representing miners , peasants and indigenous peoples . In 1996 , Morales was appointed chairman of the Committee of the Six Federations of the Tropics of Cochabamba , a position that he retained until 2006 . 
 Bolivia 's National Electoral Court ( Corte Nacional Electoral – CNE ) refused to recognize the ASP , citing minor procedural infringements . The coca activists circumvented this problem by running under the banner of the United Left ( IU ) , a coalition of leftist parties headed by the Communist Party of Bolivia ( Partido <unk> <unk> – PCB ) . They won landslide victories in those areas which were local strongholds of the movement , producing 11 mayors and 49 municipal councilors . Morales was elected to the National Congress as a representative for El Chapare , having secured 70 @.@ 1 % of the local vote . In the national elections of 1997 , the IU / ASP gained four seats in Congress , obtaining 3 @.@ 7 % of the national vote , with this rising to 17 @.@ 5 % in the department of Cochabamba . The election resulted in the establishment of a coalition government led by the right @-@ wing Nationalist Democratic Action ( Acción Democrática Nacionalista – ADN ) , with Hugo Banzer as President ; Morales lambasted him as " the worst politician in Bolivian history " . 
 Rising electoral success was accompanied by factional in @-@ fighting , with a leadership contest emerging in the ASP between the incumbent Alejo <unk> and Morales , who had the electoral backing of the social movement 's bases . The conflict led to a schism , with Morales and his supporters splitting to form their own party , the Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples ( <unk> <unk> por la <unk> de los Pueblos – IPSP ) . The movement 's bases defected en masse to the IPSP , leaving the ASP to crumble and <unk> to join the centre @-@ right New Republican Force ( Nueva Fuerza Republicana – NFR ) , for which Morales denounced him as a traitor to the cocalero cause . Continuing his activism , in 1998 Morales led another cocalero march from El Chapare to la Paz , and came under increasing criticism from the government , who repeatedly accused him of being involved in the cocaine trade and mocked him for how he spoke and his lack of education . 
 Morales came to an agreement with David <unk> Pedraza , the leader of a defunct yet still registered party named the Movement for Socialism ( MAS ) ; under this agreement , Morales and the Six <unk> could take over the party name , with <unk> stipulating the condition that they must maintain its own acronym , name and colors . Thus the defunct right wing MAS became the flourishing left wing vehicle for the coca activist movement known as the Movement for Socialism – Political Instrument for the Sovereignty of the Peoples . The MAS would come to be described as " an indigenous @-@ based political party that calls for the nationalization of industry , legalization of the coca leaf ... and fairer distribution of national resources . " The party lacked the finance available to the mainstream parties , and so relied largely on the work of volunteers in order to operate . It was not structured like other political parties , instead operating as the political wing of the social movement , with all tiers in the movement involved in decision making ; this form of organisation would continue until 2004 . In the December 1999 municipal elections , the MAS secured 79 municipal council seats and 10 mayoral positions , gaining 3 @.@ 27 % of the national vote , although 70 % of the vote in Cochabamba . 
 = = = Cochabamba protests : 2000 – 02 = = = 
 In 2000 , the Tunari Waters corporation doubled the price at which they sold water to Bolivian consumers , resulting in a backlash from leftist activist groups , including the cocaleros . Activists clashed with police and armed forces , in what was dubbed " the Water War " , resulting in 6 dead and 175 wounded . Responding to the violence , the government removed the contract from Tunari and placed the utility under cooperative control . In ensuing years further violent protests broke out over a range of issues , resulting in more deaths both among activists and law enforcement . Much of this unrest was connected with the widespread opposition to economic liberalization across Bolivian society , with a common perception that it only benefited a small minority . In the Andean High Plateau , a cocalero group launched a guerrilla uprising under the leadership of Felipe Quispe ; an ethnic separatist , he and Morales disliked each other , with Quispe considering Morales to be a traitor and an opportunist for his willingness to cooperate with White Bolivians . Morales had not taken a leading role in these protests , but did use them to get across his message that the MAS was not a single @-@ issue party , and that rather than simply fighting for the rights of the cocalero it was arguing for structural change to the political system and a redefinition of citizenship in Bolivia . 
 In August 2001 , Banzer resigned due to terminal illness , and Jorge Quiroga took over as President . Under U.S. pressure , Quiroga sought to have Morales expelled from Congress . To do so , he claimed that Morales ' inflammatory language had caused the deaths of two police officers in <unk> near Cochabamba , however was unable to provide any evidence of Morales ' culpability . 140 deputies voted for Morales ' expulsion , which came about in 2002 . Morales asserted that " This was a trial against Aymara and <unk> " , while MAS activists interpreted it as evidence of the pseudo @-@ democratic credentials of the political class . 
 The MAS gained increasing popularity as a protest party , relying largely on widespread dissatisfaction with the existing mainstream political parties among Bolivians living in rural and poor urban areas . Morales recognized this , and much of his discourse focused on differentiating the MAS from the traditional political class . Their campaign was successful , and in the 2002 presidential election the MAS gained 20 @.@ 94 % of the national vote , becoming Bolivia 's second largest party , being only 1 @.@ 5 % behind the victorious MNR , whose candidate , Gonzalo Sánchez de Lozada , became President . They won 8 seats in the Senate and 27 in the Chamber of Deputies . Now the leader of the political opposition , Morales focused on criticising government policies rather than outlining alternatives . He had several <unk> meetings with Lozada , but also met with Venezuela 's democratic socialist President Hugo Chávez for the first time . 
 Bolivia 's U.S. embassy had become publicly highly critical of Morales ; just prior to the election , the U.S. ambassador to Bolivia Manuel Rocha issued a statement declaring that U.S. aid to Bolivia would be cut if MAS won the election . However , exit polls revealed that Rocha 's comments had served to increase support for Morales . Following the election , the U.S. embassy maintained this critical stance , characterising Morales as a criminal and encouraging Bolivia 's traditional parties to sign a broad agreement to oppose the MAS ; Morales himself began alleging that the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency was plotting to assassinate him . 
 = = = Rise to power : 2003 – 05 = = = 
 In 2003 , the Bolivian gas conflict broke out as activists – including coca growers – protested against the privatization of the country 's natural gas supply and its sale to U.S. companies below the market value . Activists blocked off the road into La Paz , resulting in clashes with police . 80 were killed and 411 injured , among them officers , activists , and civilians , including children . Morales did not take an active role in the conflict , instead traveling to Libya and Switzerland , there describing the uprising as a " peaceful revolution in progress . " The government accused Morales and the MAS of using the protests to overthrow Bolivia 's parliamentary democracy with the aid of organised crime , FARC , and the far left governments of Venezuela , Cuba and Libya . 
 Morales led calls for President Sánchez de Lozada to step down over the death toll , gaining widespread support from the MAS , other activist groups , and the middle classes ; with pressure building , Sánchez resigned and fled to Miami , Florida . He was replaced by Carlos Mesa , who tried to strike a balance between U.S. and cocalero demands , but whom Morales mistrusted . In November , Morales spent 24 hours with Cuban President Fidel Castro in Havana , and then met Argentinian President Nestor Kirchner . In the 2004 municipal election , the MAS became the country 's largest national party , with 28 @.@ 6 % of all councilors in Bolivia . However , they had failed to win the mayoralty in any big cities , reflecting their inability to gain widespread support among the urban middle @-@ classes . In Bolivia 's wealthy Santa Cruz region , a strong movement for autonomy had developed under the leadership of the Pro Santa Cruz Committee ( Comite Pro Santa Cruz ) . Favorable to neoliberal economics and strongly critical of the cocaleros , they considered armed insurrection to secede from Bolivia should MAS take power . 
 In March 2005 , Mesa resigned , citing the pressure of Morales and the cocalero road blocks and riots . Amid fears of civil war , Eduardo Rodríguez became President of a transitional government , preparing Bolivia for a general election in December 2005 . Hiring the Peruvian Walter Chávez as its campaign manager , the MAS electoral campaign was based on Salvador Allende 's successful campaign in the Chilean presidential election , 1970 . Measures were implemented to institutionalize the party structure , giving it greater independence from the social movement ; this was done to allow Morales and other MAS leaders to respond quickly to new developments without the lengthy process of consulting the bases , and to present a more moderate image away from the bases ' radicalism . Although he had initially hoped for a female running mate , Morales eventually chose Marxist intellectual Álvaro García <unk> as his Vice Presidential candidate , with some Bolivian press speculating as to a romantic relationship between the two . MAS ' primary opponent was Jorge Quiroga and his center @-@ right Social and Democratic Power , whose campaign was centered in Santa Cruz and which advocated continued neo @-@ liberal reform ; Quiroga accused Morales of promoting the legalization of cocaine and being a puppet for Venezuela . 
 With a turnout of 84 @.@ 5 % , the election saw Morales gain 53 @.@ 7 % of the vote , while Quiroga came second with 28 @.@ 6 % ; Morales ' was the first victory with an absolute majority in Bolivia for 40 years . Given that he was the sixth self @-@ described leftist president to be elected in Latin America since 1998 , his victory was identified as part of the broader regional pink tide . Becoming president elect , Morales was widely described as Bolivia 's first indigenous leader , at a time when around 62 % of the population identified as indigenous ; political analysts therefore drew comparisons with the election of Nelson Mandela to the South African Presidency in 1994 . This resulted in widespread excitement among the approximately 40 million indigenous people in the Americas , particularly those of Bolivia . However , his election caused concern among the country 's wealthy and landowning classes , who feared state expropriation and nationalisation of their property , as well as far @-@ right groups , who claimed it would spark a race war . He traveled to Cuba to spend time with Castro , before going to Venezuela , and then on tour to Europe , China and South Africa ; he significantly avoided the U.S. In January 2006 , Morales attended an indigenous spiritual ceremony at <unk> where he was crowned Apu <unk> ( Supreme Leader ) of the Aymara , receiving gifts from indigenous peoples across Latin America . He thanked the goddess <unk> for his victory and proclaimed that " With the unity of the people , we 're going to end the colonial state and the neo @-@ liberal model . " 
 = = Presidency = = 
 = = = First presidential term : 2006 – 09 = = = 
 Morales ' inauguration took place on January 22 in La Paz . It was attended by various heads of state , including Kirchner , Chávez , Brazil 's Lula da Silva , and Chile 's Ricardo Lagos . Morales wore an <unk> suit designed by fashion designer Beatriz <unk> Patiño , and gave a speech that included a minute silence in memory of cocaleros and indigenous activists killed in the struggle . He condemned Bolivia 's former " colonial " regimes , likening them to South Africa under apartheid and stating that the MAS ' election would lead to a " refoundation " of the country , a term that the MAS consistently used over " revolution " . Morales repeated these views in his convocation of the Constituent Assembly . 
 In taking office , Morales emphasized nationalism , anti @-@ imperialism , and anti @-@ neoliberalism , although did not initially refer to his administration as socialist . In what was widely termed a populist act , he immediately reduced both his own presidential wage and that of his ministers by 57 % to $ 1 @,@ 875 a month , also urging members of Congress to do the same . Morales gathered together a largely inexperienced cabinet made up of indigenous activists and leftist intellectuals , although over the first three years of government there was a rapid turnover in the cabinet as Morales replaced many of the indigenous members with trained middle @-@ class leftist politicians . This process would increase to the point in 2012 when only 3 of the 20 cabinet members identified as indigenous . 
 = = = = Economic program = = = = 
 Upon his election to the presidency , Bolivia was South America 's poorest nation . Morales ' government did not initiate any fundamental change in Bolivia 's economic structure , and in their National Development Plan ( <unk> ) for 2006 – 10 , they adhered largely to the country 's previous liberal economic model . Bolivia 's economy was based largely on the extraction of natural resources , with the nation having South America 's second largest reserves of natural gas . As per his election pledge , Morales took increasing state control of this hydrocarbon industry with Supreme Decree <unk> ; previously , corporations paid 18 % of their profits to the state , but Morales symbolically reversed this , so that 82 % of profits went to the state and 18 % to the companies . The oil companies threatened to take the case to the international courts or cease operating in Bolivia , but ultimately relented . Thus , where Bolivia had received $ 173 million from hydrocarbon extraction in 2002 , by 2006 they received $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . Although not technically a form of nationalization , Morales and his government referred to it as such , resulting in criticism from sectors of the Bolivian left . However , in June 2006 , Morales announced his desire to nationalize mining , electricity , telephones , and railroads , and in February 2007 nationalized the <unk> metallurgy plant , refusing to compensate <unk> , whom the government asserted had obtained the contract illegally . Although the <unk> miners ' federation called for the government to nationalise the mines , the government did not do so , instead stating that any transnational corporations operating in Bolivia legally would not be expropriated . 
 Under Morales , Bolivia experienced unprecedented macroeconomic strength , resulting in the increase in value of its currency , the <unk> . His first year in office ended with no fiscal deficit ; the first time this had happened in Bolivia for 30 years , while during the global financial crisis of 2007 – 08 it maintained some of the world 's highest levels of economic growth . Such economic strength led to a nationwide boom in construction , and allowed the state to both build up strong financial reserves . Although the levels of social spending were increased , they remained relatively conservative , with a major priority being placed on constructing paved roads , as well as community spaces such as soccer fields and union buildings . In particular , the government focused on rural infrastructure improvement , to bring roads , running water , and electricity to areas that lacked them . 
 Their stated intention was to reduce Bolivia 's most acute poverty levels from 35 % to 27 % of the population , and moderate poverty levels from 58 @.@ 9 % to 49 % over five years . Welfare provision was expanded , as characterized by the introduction of non @-@ contributory old @-@ age pensions and payments to mothers provided their babies are taken for health checks and that their children attend school . Hundreds of free tractors were also handed out . The prices of gas and many foodstuffs were controlled , and local food producers were made to sell in the local market rather than export . A new state @-@ owned body was also set up to distribute food at subsidized prices . All these measures helped to curb inflation , while the economy ( partly because of rising public spending ) grew strongly , accompanied by stronger public finances which brought economic stability . 
 During Morales ' first term , Bolivia broke free of the domination of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) which had characterised previous regimes by refusing their financial aid and connected regulations . In May 2007 , it became the world 's first country to withdraw from the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes , with Morales asserting that the institution had consistently favored multinational corporations in its judgments ; Bolivia 's lead was followed by other Latin American nations . Despite being encouraged to do so by the U.S. , Bolivia refused to join the Free Trade Area of the Americas , deeming it a form of U.S. imperialism . In December 2015 a new Bolivian partnership with the World Bank , with which establishes medium term objectives to eradicate extreme poverty and translate growth into well @-@ being . 
 A major dilemma faced by Morales ' administration was between the desire to expand extractive industries in order to fund social programs and provide employment , and to protect the country 's environment from the pollution caused by those industries . Although his government professed an environmentalist ethos , expanding environmental monitoring and becoming a leader in the voluntary Forest Stewardship Council , Bolivia continued to witness rapid deforestation for agriculture and illegal logging . Economists on both the left and right expressed concern over the government 's lack of economic diversification . Many Bolivians opined that Morales ' government had failed to bring about sufficient job creation . 
 = = = = ALBA and international appearances = = = = 
 Morales ' administration sought to build strong links with the hard left governments of Cuba and Venezuela . In April 2005 Morales traveled to Havana for knee surgery , there meeting with the two nations ' presidents , Castro and Chávez . In April 2006 , Bolivia agreed to join Cuba and Venezuela in founding the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas ( ALBA ) , with Morales attending ALBA 's conference in May , at which they initiated with a Peoples ' Trade Agreement ( PTA ) . Meanwhile , his administration became " the least US @-@ friendly government in Bolivian history " . In September Morales visited the U.S. for the first time to attend the UN General Assembly , where he gave a speech condemning U.S. President George W. Bush as a terrorist for launching the War in Afghanistan and Iraq War , and called for the UN Headquarters to be moved out of the country . In the U.S. , he met with former presidents Bill Clinton and Jimmy Carter and with Native American groups . Relations were further strained between the two nations when in December Morales issued a Supreme Decree requiring all U.S. citizens visiting Bolivia to have a compulsory visa . His government also refused to grant legal immunity to U.S. soldiers in Bolivia ; hence the U.S. cut back their military support to the country by 96 % . 
 In December 2006 , he attended the first South @-@ South conference in Abuja , Nigeria , there meeting Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi , whose government had recently awarded Morales the Al @-@ Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights . Morales proceeded straight to Havana for a conference celebrating Castro 's life , where he gave a speech arguing for stronger links between Latin America and the Middle East to combat U.S. imperialism . Under his administration , diplomatic relations were established with Iran , with Morales praising Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as a revolutionary comrade . In April 2007 he attended the first South American Energy Summit in Venezuela , arguing with many allies over the issue of biofuel , which he opposed . He had a particularly fierce argument with Brazilian President Lula over Morales ' desire to bring Bolivia 's refineries – which were largely owned by Brazil 's <unk> – under state control . In May , Bolivia purchased the refineries and transferred them to the Bolivian State Petroleum Company ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = = Social reform = = = = 
 Morales ' government sought to encourage a model of development based upon the premise of vivir bien , or " living well " . This entailed seeking social harmony , consensus , the elimination of discrimination , and wealth redistribution ; in doing so , it was rooted in communal rather than individual values and owed more to indigenous Andean forms of social organization than Western ones . 
 Upon Morales ' election , Bolivia 's illiteracy rate was at 16 % , the highest in South America . Attempting to rectify this with the aid of far left allies , Bolivia launched a literacy campaign with Cuban assistance , while Venezuela invited 5000 Bolivian high school graduates to study in Venezuela for free . By 2009 , UNESCO declared Bolivia free from illiteracy , although the World Bank claimed that it had only declined by 5 % . Cuba also aided Bolivia in the development of its medical care , opening <unk> centres in the country to treat 100 @,@ 000 Bolivians for free per year , and offering 5000 free scholarships for Bolivian students to study medicine in Cuba . The government sought to expand state medical facilities , opening twenty hospitals by 2014 , and increasing basic medical coverage up to the age of 25 . Their approach sought to utilise and harmonise both mainstream Western medicine and Bolivia 's traditional medicine . The 2006 Bono <unk> Pinto program provided US $ 29 per month to poor families for every young child that they had , while 2008 's Renta <unk> initiative provided around $ 344 per month to low @-@ income citizens over 60 . 2009 's Bono Juana <unk> program offered cash transfers to uninsured mothers to improve their likelihood of seeking medical care . Conservative critics of Morales ' regime claimed that these measures were simply designed to buy off the poor and ensure continued support for the government . 
 Morales announced that one of the top priorities of his government was to eliminate racism against the country 's indigenous population . To do this , he announced that all civil servants were required to learn one of Bolivia 's three indigenous languages , Quechua , Aymara , or Guaraní , within two years . His government encouraged the development of indigenous cultural projects , and sought to encourage more indigenous people to attend university ; by 2008 , it was estimated that half of the students enrolled in Bolivia 's 11 public universities were indigenous , while three indigenous @-@ specific universities had been established , offering subsidized education . In 2009 , a Vice Ministry for Decolonization was established , which proceeded to pass the 2010 Law against Racism and Discrimination banning the espousal of racist views in private or public institutions . Various commentators noted that there was a renewed sense of pride among the country 's indigenous population following Morales ' election . Conversely , the opposition accused Morales ' administration of aggravating racial tensions between indigenous , white , and mestizo populations , with some non @-@ indigenous Bolivians feeling that they were now experiencing racism . 
 On International Workers ' Day 2006 , Morales issued a presidential decree undoing aspects of the <unk> of labor which had been implemented by previous neoliberal governments ; this was seen as a highly symbolic act for labor rights in Bolivia . In 2009 his government put forward suggested reforms to the 1939 labor laws , although lengthy discussions with trade unions hampered the reforms ' progress . Morales ' government increased the legal minimum wage by 50 % , and reduced the pension age from 65 to 60 , and then in 2010 reduced it again to 58 . While policies were brought in to improve the living conditions of the working classes , conversely many middle @-@ class Bolivians felt that they had seen their social standing decline , with Morales personally mistrusting the middle @-@ classes , deeming them fickle . A 2006 law reallocated state @-@ owned lands , with this agrarian reform entailing distributing land to traditional communities rather than individuals . In 2010 , a law was introduced permitting the formation of recognised indigenous territories , although the implementation of this was hampered by bureaucracy and contesting claims over ownership . Morales ' regime also sought to improve women 's rights in Bolivia . In 2010 , it founded a Unit of <unk> to oversee this <unk> . Further seeking to provide legal recognition and support to LGBT rights , it declared June 28 to be Sexual Minority Rights Day in the country , and encouraged the establishment of a gay @-@ themed television show on the state channel . 
 Adopting a policy known as " Coca Yes , Cocaine No " , Morales ' administration ensured the legality of coca growing , but also introduced measures to regulate the production and trade of the crop . In 2007 , they announced that they would permit the growing of 50 @,@ 000 acres of coca in the country , primarily for the purposes of domestic consumption , with each family being restricted to the growing of one <unk> ( 1600 metres squared ) of coca . A social control program was implemented whereby local unions took on responsibility for ensuring that this quota was not exceeded ; in doing so , they hoped to remove the need for military and police intervention , and thus stem the violence of previous decades . Measures were implemented to ensure the industrialization of coca production , with Morales inaugurating the first coca industrialization plant in <unk> , which produced and packaged coca and <unk> tea ; the project was primarily funded through a $ 125 @,@ 000 donation from Venezuela under the PTA scheme . 
 However , these industrialization measures proved largely unsuccessful given that coca remained illegal in most nations outside Bolivia , thus depriving the growers of an international market . Campaigning against this , in 2012 Bolivia withdrew from the UN 1961 Convention which had called for global criminalisation of coca , and in 2013 successfully convinced the UN Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs to declassify coca as a narcotic . The U.S. State Department criticised Bolivia , asserting that it was regressing in its counter @-@ narcotics efforts , and dramatically reduced aid to Bolivia to $ 34 million to fight the narcotics trade in 2007 . Nevertheless , the number of cocaine seizures in Bolivia increased under Morales ' government , as they sought to encourage coca growers to report and oppose cocaine producers and traffickers . However , high levels of police corruption surrounding the illicit trade in cocaine remained a continuing problem for Bolivia . 
 Morales ' government also introduced measures to tackle Bolivia 's endemic corruption ; in 2007 , he used a presidential decree to create the Ministry of Institutional Transparency and Fight Against Corruption . However , critics highlighted that MAS members were rarely prosecuted for the crime , the main exception being <unk> head Santos Ramírez , who was sentenced to twelve years imprisonment for corruption in 2008 . Conversely , a 2009 law that permitted the retroactive prosecution for corruption led to legal cases being brought against a number of opposition politicians for alleged corruption in the pre @-@ Morales period ; many fled abroad to avoid standing trial . 
 = = = = Domestic unrest and the new constitution = = = = 
 During his presidential campaign , Morales had supported calls for regional autonomy for Bolivia 's departments . As president , he changed his position , viewing the calls for autonomy – which came from Bolivia 's four eastern departments of Santa Cruz , Beni , Pando , and Tarija – as an attempt by the wealthy bourgeoisie living in these regions to preserve their economic position . He nevertheless agreed to a referendum on regional autonomy , held in July 2006 ; the four eastern departments voted in favor of autonomy , but Bolivia as a whole voted against it by 57 @.@ 6 % . In September , autonomy activists launched strikes and blockades across eastern Bolivia , resulting in violent clashes with MAS activists . In January 2007 , clashes in Cochabamba between activist groups led to fatalities , with Morales ' government sending in troops to maintain the peace . The left @-@ indigenous activists formed a Revolutionary Departmental Government , but Morales denounced it as illegal and continued to recognise the legitimacy of right @-@ wing departmental head Manfred Reyes Villa . 
 In July 2006 , an election to form a Constitutional Assembly was held , which saw the highest ever electoral turnout in the nation 's history . MAS won 137 of its 255 seats , after which the Assembly was inaugurated in August . In November , the Assembly approved a new constitution , which converted the Republic of Bolivia into the <unk> State of Bolivia , describing it as a " <unk> communal and social unified state " . The constitution emphasized Bolivian sovereignty of natural resources , separated church and state , forbade foreign military bases in the country , implemented a two @-@ term limit for the presidency , and permitted limited regional autonomy . It also enshrined every Bolivians ' right to water , food , free health care , education , and housing . In enshrining the concept of <unk> , one commentator noted that it suggested " a profound reconfiguration of the state itself " by recognising the rights to self @-@ determination of various nations within a single state . 
 In May 2008 , the eastern departments pushed for greater autonomy , but Morales ' government rejected the legitimacy of their position . They called for a referendum on recalling Morales , which saw an 83 % turnout and in which Morales was ratified with 67 @.@ 4 % of the vote . Unified as the National Council for Democracy ( <unk> ) , these groups – financed by the wealthy agro @-@ industrialist , petroleum , and financial elite – embarked on a series of <unk> campaigns to unseat Morales ' government . Unrest then broke out across eastern Bolivia , as radicalized autonomist activists established blockades , occupied airports , clashing with pro @-@ government demonstrations , police , and armed forces . Some formed paramilitaries , bombing state companies , indigenous NGOs , and human rights organisations , also launching armed racist attacks on indigenous communities , culminating in the Pando Massacre of MAS activists . The autonomists gained support from some high @-@ ranking politicians ; Santa Cruz Governor Rubén Costas lambasted Morales and his supporters with racist epithets , accusing the president of being an Aymara fundamentalist and a totalitarian dictator responsible for state terrorism . Amid the unrest , foreign commentators began speculating on the possibility of civil war . 
 After it was revealed that USAID 's Office of Transition Initiatives had supplied $ 4 @.@ 5 million to the pro @-@ autonomist departmental governments of the eastern provinces , in September 2008 Morales accused the U.S. ambassador to Bolivia , Philip Goldberg , of " conspiring against democracy " and encouraging the civil unrest , ordering him to leave the country . The U.S. government responded by expelling Bolivian ambassador to the U.S. , Gustavo Guzman . Bolivia subsequently expelled the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) from the country , while the U.S. responded by withdrawing their Peace Corps . Chávez stood in solidarity with Bolivia by ordering the U.S. ambassador Patrick Duddy out of his country and withdrawing the Venezuelan ambassador to the U.S. The Union of South American Nations ( <unk> ) convened a special meeting to discuss the Bolivian situation , expressing full support for Morales ' government . 
 Although unable to quell the autonomist violence , Morales ' government refused to declare a state of emergency , believing that the autonomists were attempting to provoke them into doing so . Instead , they decided to compromise , entering into talks with the parliamentary opposition . As a result , 100 of the 411 elements of the Constitution were changed , with both sides compromising on certain issues . Nevertheless , the governors of the eastern provinces rejected the changes , believing it gave them insufficient autonomy , while various <unk> and leftist members of MAS felt that the amendments conceded too much to the political right . The constitution was put to a referendum in January 2009 , in which it was approved by 61 @.@ 4 % of voters . 
 Following the approval of the new Constitution , the 2009 general election was called . The opposition sought to delay the election by demanding a new biometric registry system , hoping that it would give them time to form a united front against MAS . Many MAS activists reacted violently against the demands , and attempting to prevent this , Morales went on a five @-@ day hunger strike in April 2009 to push the opposition to rescind their demands . He also agreed to allow for the introduction of a new voter registry , but insisted that it was rushed through so as not to delay the election . Morales and the MAS won with a landslide majority , polling 64 @.@ 2 % , while voter participation had reached an all @-@ time high of 90 % . His primary opponent , Reyes Villa , gained 27 % of the vote . The MAS won a two @-@ thirds majority in both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate . Morales notably increased his support in the east of the country , with MAS gaining a majority in Tarija . In response to his victory , Morales proclaimed that he was " obligated to accelerate the pace of change and deepen socialism " in Bolivia , seeing his re @-@ election as a mandate to further his reforms . 
 = = = Second presidential term : 2009 – 14 = = = 
 During his second term , Morales began to speak openly of " communitarian socialism " as the ideology that he desired for Bolivia 's future . He assembled a new cabinet which was 50 % female , a first for Bolivia , although by 2012 , that had dropped to a third . In April 2010 , the departmental elections saw further gains for MAS . In 2013 , the government passed a law to combat domestic violence against women . 
 In December 2009 , Morales attended the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen , Denmark , where he blamed climate change on capitalism and called for a financial transactions tax to fund climate change mitigation . Ultimately deeming the conference to have been a failure , he oversaw the World 's People Conference on Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth outside of Cochabamba in April 2010 . 
 Following the victory of Barack Obama and the Democratic Party in the 2008 U.S. presidential election , relations between Bolivia and the U.S. improved slightly , and in November 2009 the countries entered negotiations to restore diplomatic relations . After the U.S. backed the 2011 military intervention in Libya by NATO forces , Morales condemned Obama , calling for his Nobel Peace Prize to be revoked . The two nations restored diplomatic relations in November 2011 , although Morales refused to allow the DEA back into the country . 
 In October 2012 , the government passed a Law of Mother Earth that banned genetically modified organisms ( GMOs ) being grown in Bolivia ; although praised by environmentalists , it was criticised by the nation 's soya growers , who claimed that it would make them less competitive on the global market . 
 On 2 July 2013 , Bolivia 's foreign minister said that the diversion of Morales 's presidential plane ( FAB @-@ 001 , a Dassault Falcon <unk> ) , when Portuguese , French , Spanish and Italian authorities denied access to their airspace due to suspicions that Edward Snowden was on board the aircraft , had put the president 's life at risk . Latin American leaders describe the incident as a " stunning violation of national sovereignty and disrespect for the region " . Morales himself described the incident as a " hostage " situation . France apologized for the incident the next day . The presidents of Argentina , Ecuador , Suriname , Uruguay and Venezuela , Morales 's political allies in the region , gathered to demand an explanation of the incident . 
 In 2014 , Morales became the oldest active professional soccer player in the world after signing a contract for 200 dollars a month with Sport Boys Warnes . 
 = = = = Domestic protests = = = = 
 Morales ' second term was heavily affected by infighting and dissent from within his own support base , as indigenous and leftist activists came to oppose a number of the governments ' reforms . In May 2010 , Morales ' government announced a 5 % rise in the minimum wage . The Bolivian Workers ' Central ( COB ) felt this insufficient given the rise in the cost of living , and called a general strike . Protesters clashed with police , although the government refused to increase the rise , accusing protesters of being pawns of the right . In August 2010 , violent protests then broke out in southern Potosí over widespread unemployment and a lack of investment in infrastructure . In December 2010 , the government then decreed that it would cut government subsidies for gasoline and diesel fuels , which had proved to be a major area of social spending ; this resulted in a hike in prices of fuel and transport costs . Protests broke out across the country , and Morales soon agreed to nullify the decree , stating that he " ruled by obeying " . 
 The following year , the government announced plans to construct a highway connecting Beni to Cochabamba , in order to better integrate the isolated departments of Beni and Pando with the rest of the country and to facilitate hydrocarbons exploration . The highway however would go straight through the <unk> <unk> National Park and Indigenous Territory ( <unk> ) , and thus came under staunch criticism from environmentalists and members of the indigenous communities living in the park , who believed that it would encourage illegal settlement and deforestation and that it further violated both the constitution and United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples . In August 2011 , 800 protesters embarked on a protest march from Trinidad to La Paz , on the way facing violent conflict from police and those who supported the road , with many being injured . The controversy caused two government officials and various other high @-@ ranking officials to resign in protest , while Morales begged forgiveness but blamed the U.S. and Bolivia 's right @-@ wing for stirring up the unrest . In October 2011 , he passed Law 180 , prohibiting further road construction , although the government proceeded with a consultation , eventually gaining the consent of 55 of the 65 communities in <unk> to allow the highway to be built , albeit with a variety of concessions ; construction was scheduled to take place after the 2014 general election . In May 2013 , the government then announced that it would permit hydrocarbon exploration in the nation 's 22 national parks , to widespread condemnation from environmentalists . 
 Further protests broke out in June 2012 , this time from the Bolivian police , who objected to government reforms designed to combat widespread corruption in the force . Police broke into their own offices to burn all disciplinary case records , and demanded salary increases . Morales ' government relented , cancelling many of the proposed reforms and agreeing to the salary increase . 
 = = = Third presidential term : 2014 – present = = = 
 In 2008 , Morales had vowed that he would not stand for re @-@ election in the 2014 general election . However , he successfully did so and after proclaiming victory in the election , Morales declared it " a triumph of the anti @-@ colonialists and anti @-@ imperialists " and dedicated his win to both Castro and Chávez . On the basis of this victory , the Financial Times remarked that Morales represented " one of the world 's most popular leaders " . On October 17 , 2015 , Morales surpassed Andrés de Santa Cruz 's nine years , eight months , and twenty @-@ four days in office and became Bolivia 's longest serving president . Writing in The Guardian , Ellie Mae O 'Hagan attributes his enduring popularity not to anti @-@ imperialist rhetoric but his " extraordinary socio @-@ economic reforms , " which resulted in poverty and extreme poverty declining by 25 % and 43 % respectively . 
 In early February 2016 there were rumors that Morales had had a child with a woman , Gabriela Zapata Montaño , and had granted favors to the Chinese company for which she worked . Morales admitted that they had had a son ( who had died in infancy ) , but denied vehemently any granting of favors and said he had not been in contact with Zapata Montaño since 2007 . 
 On February 21 , 2016 , a referendum was held on the question of whether Morales should be allowed to run for a fourth term when his third term would expire in 2020 which he narrowly lost . His approval rating had been damaged by the allegations concerning his relationship with Gabriela Zapata Montaño . 
 = = Political ideology = = 
 Figures in the Morales government have described the President 's approach to politics as " <unk> " or " <unk> " . From 2009 , Morales has advocated " communitarian socialism " , while political scientist Sven Harten characterized Morales 's ideology as " eclectic " , drawing ideas from " various ideological currents " . Harten noted that whilst Morales uses fierce anti @-@ imperialist and leftist rhetoric , he is neither " a hardcore anti @-@ globalist nor a Marxist , " not having argued for the violent and absolute overthrow of capitalism or U.S. involvement in Latin America . 
 Economically , Morales ' policies have sometimes been termed " <unk> " and have focused on creating a mixed economy . Morales ' presidential discourse has revolved around distinguishing between " the people " , of whom he sees himself as a representative , and the oppressive socio @-@ economic elite and the old political class , whom he believes have mistreated " the people " for centuries . Morales sought to make Bolivia 's representative democracy more direct and communitarian , through the introduction of referendums and a citizen @-@ led legislative initiative . George Philip and Francisco <unk> claimed that like his allies Correa and Chávez , Morales should be categorized as a populist , because he appealed " directly to the people against their countries ' political and economic order , divided the social field into antagonistic camps and promised redistribution and recognition in a newly founded political order . " 
 Various far left commentators have argued against categorizing the Morales administration as socialist . Bolivia 's Marxist Vice President Álvaro García <unk> asserts that Bolivia lacks the sufficiently large industrialized working class , or proletariat , to enable it to convert into a socialist society in the Marxist understanding of the word . Instead , he terms the government 's approach " Andean and Amazonian capitalism " . Marxist American sociologist James Petras has argued that Morales ' government is neither socialist nor anti @-@ imperialist , instead describing Morales as a " radical conservative " for utilizing socialist rhetoric while continuing to support foreign investment and the economic status of Bolivia 's capitalist class , while British Trotskyite academic Jeffery R. Webber asserted that Morales was no socialist but that his regime was " reconstituting neoliberalism " , thereby rejecting " neoliberal <unk> " but retaining a " core faith in the capitalist market as the principal engine of growth and industrialization . " Similarly , Aymara activist Felipe Quispe characterised Morales ' government as " neoliberalism with an Indian [ i.e. indigenous ] face " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Morales identifies as ethnically Aymara , and has been widely described as Bolivia 's first democratically @-@ elected President from the indigenous majority . Although Morales has sometimes been described as the first indigenous president to be democratically elected in Latin America , this description in fact goes to Benito Juárez , a Mexican of the Zapotec ethnic group , who was elected President of Mexico in 1858 . Biographer Martín <unk> described Morales as " incorruptible , charismatic , and combative " , also noting that he had a " friendly style " and could develop a good rapport with journalists and photographers , in part because he could " articulate his opinions with simplicity " . He places a great emphasis on trust , and relies on his intuition , sometimes acting on what he considers omens in his dreams . Harten noted that Morales " can be a forceful leader , one who instills great respect and , sometimes , a reluctance in others to contradict him , but he has also learnt to listen and learn from other people . " <unk> and Kohl characterised Morales as a " charismatic populist " of a kind common in Latin American history , who prioritized " a direct relationship " between the population and the leader . 
 Morales is not married and upon becoming president selected his older sister , Esther Morales Ayma , to adopt the role of First Lady . He has three children from different mothers . They are Eva Liz Morales Alvarado ( born 1994 ) , Álvaro Morales Paredes ( born 1995 ) , and Ernesto Fidel Morales Zapata ( born 2007 and allegedly died in infancy ) . Politician Juan del Granado is Eva Liz 's godfather . Morales ' romantic relationship with Ernesto 's mother Gabriela Zapata Montaño , from 2005 to 2007 , remained unknown publicly until 2016 . 
 Morales has commented that he is only a Roman Catholic in order " to go to weddings " , and when asked if he believed in God , responded that " I believe in the land . In my father and my mother . And in <unk> @-@ <unk> . " 
 Morales is also an association football enthusiast and plays the game frequently , often with local teams . 
 Morales 's unorthodox behavior contrasts with the usual manners of dignitaries and other political leaders in Latin America . During speeches he made use of personal stories and anecdotes , and used coca as " a potent political symbol " , wearing a coca leaf garland around his neck and a hat with coca leaves in it when speaking to crowds of supporters . Following his election , he wore striped jumpers rather than the suits typically worn by politicians . It became a symbol of Morales , with copies of it selling widely in Bolivia . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Morales has been described as " the most famous Bolivian ever " , whose personality has become " fixed in the global imagination " . Morales ' government has been seen as part of the pink tide of left @-@ leaning Latin American governments , becoming particularly associated with the hard left current of Venezuela and Cuba . It has been widely praised for its pro @-@ socialist stance among the international left , who have taken an interest in Bolivia under his leadership as a " political laboratory " or " a living workshop " for the development of an alternative to capitalism . Domestically , Morales ' support base has been among Bolivia 's poor and indigenous communities . For these communities , who have widely felt marginalized in Bolivian politics for decades , Morales " invokes a sense of dignity and destiny " in a way that no other contemporary politician has done . He has received the support of many democratic socialists and social democrats , as well as sectors of Bolivia 's liberal movement , who have been critical of Morales but favoured him over the right @-@ wing opposition . 
 Opposition to Morales ' governance has centered in the wealthy eastern lowland province of Santa Cruz . His policies often antagonized middle @-@ class Bolivians , who deemed them too radical and argued that they threatened private property . Morales ' discourse of " the people " against the socio @-@ economic elites has brought a spotlight on the deep social polarization in Bolivia . His most vociferous critics have been from Bolivia 's conservative movement , although he has also received criticism from the country 's far left , who believe his reformist policies have been insufficiently radical or socialist . Critics , particularly in the U.S. government , have varyingly termed him " a left @-@ wing radical , a partner of narco @-@ traffickers and a terrorist " . His regime has also faced many of the same complaints directed at previous Bolivian administrations , revolving around such issues as " concentration of power , corruption , incompetent bureaucracies , and disrespect for civil liberties " . However , poverty and inequality have been greatly reduced since Morales was first elected . 
 = Hurricane Frances = 
 Hurricane Frances was the sixth named storm , the fourth hurricane , and the third major hurricane of the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season . The system crossed the open Atlantic during mid @-@ to @-@ late August , moving to the north of the Lesser Antilles while strengthening . Its outer bands affected Puerto Rico and the British Virgin Islands while passing north of the Caribbean sea . The storm 's maximum sustained wind speeds peaked at 145 miles per hour ( 233 km / h ) , achieving Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . As the system slowed down its forward motion , the eye passed over San Salvador Island and very close to Cat Island in the Bahamas . Frances was the first hurricane to impact the entire Bahamian archipelago since 1928 , and led to the nearly complete destruction of their agricultural economy . 
 Frances then passed over the central sections of the state of Florida in the U.S. only three weeks after Hurricane Charley , causing significant damage to the state 's citrus crop , closing major airports , schools and canceling a collegiate football game . The storm then moved briefly offshore Florida into the northeast Gulf of Mexico and made a second U.S. landfall at the Florida Panhandle before accelerating northeast through the eastern United States near the Appalachians into Atlantic Canada while weakening . A significant tornado outbreak accompanied the storm across the eastern United States , nearly equaling the outbreak from Hurricane Beulah . Very heavy rains fell in association with this slow moving and relatively large hurricane , which led to floods in Florida and North Carolina . A total of 49 lives were lost from the cyclone . Damages totaled US $ 12 billion ( 2004 dollars ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A strong tropical wave moved off the west coast of Africa on August 21 . Moving under the base of the subtropical ridge , it moved westward for several days , remaining disorganized despite favorable conditions . Thunderstorms associated with the wave finally began organizing early on August 24 , and the system became a tropical depression that evening . Good upper @-@ level outflow was observed in all but the eastern quadrants as the depression continued on its path , and the depression strengthened to tropical storm status on August 25 , approximately 1 @,@ 420 miles ( 2 @,@ 290 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . 
 The tropical storm , now named Frances , further intensified on August 26 in an environment of low vertical wind shear as its track bent to the west @-@ northwest . Frances rapidly intensified , developing an eye and reaching hurricane strength late that afternoon . An approaching upper level trough caused Frances to move more northwesterly on August 27 . The cyclone reached its primary peak intensity of 135 miles per hour ( 217 km / h ) on August 28 . The hurricane turned back to its original westward motion on August 29 , as the upper trough moved away the region and the subtropical ridge strengthened to Frances ' north . 
 Over the next day , the hurricane underwent an eyewall replacement cycle , during which the maximum sustained winds decreased to 115 miles per hour ( 185 km / h ) . This weakening trend was short lived , and the storm reintensified during the afternoon of August 30 , as vertical wind shear remained low . The storm continued strengthening as it turned west @-@ northwestward , reaching its peak intensity of 145 miles per hour ( 233 km / h ) on September 2 while 555 miles ( 893 km ) east @-@ southeast of West Palm Beach , Florida . On September 2 , Frances entered the Bahamas , passing directly over San Salvador Island and very close to Cat Island . The storm weakened to a Category 3 hurricane by 2 pm , which was initially attributed to inner core processes , but increasing westerly winds aloft , and the resultant vertical wind shear , was later determined to be the cause . On September 3 , Frances passed into the vicinity of Abaco Island and directly over Grand Bahama while continuing to slowly weaken . The storm regained Category 2 hurricane intensity prior to passing over Grand Bahama Island and also slowed in forward speed due to a weakness in the subtropical ridge to its north . Parts of South Florida began to be affected by squalls and the outer rainbands of the hurricane at this time . Gusts from 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) to as high as 87 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) were reported from Jupiter Inlet to Miami . 
 Frances moved slowly , between 5 to 10 miles per hour ( 8 @.@ 0 to 16 @.@ 1 km / h ) , as it crossed the warm Gulf Stream between the Bahamas and Florida , leading to the concern that it could restrengthen . However , Frances remained stable at Category 2 intensity with 105 miles per hour ( 169 km / h ) maximum sustained winds while it battered the east coast of Florida between Fort Pierce and West Palm Beach for much of September 4 . At 11 pm , the western edge of Frances ' eyewall began moving onshore . Because of Frances ' large eye , which was roughly 80 miles ( 130 km ) across , and its slow forward motion , the center of circulation remained offshore for several more hours . At 1 am EDT on September 5 ( 0500 UTC ) , the center of the broad eye of Frances made landfall along the Florida coast , at the southern end of Hutchinson Island , near Sewall 's Point , Jensen Beach and Port Salerno , Florida . Late on September 5 , Frances picked up speed due to a strengthening high pressure system to its north and crossed the Florida Peninsula , emerging over the Gulf of Mexico near Tampa as a tropical storm . After a short trip over the Gulf of Mexico , Frances made a second landfall near St. Marks , Florida . Frances headed inland , weakening to a tropical depression and causing heavy rainfall over the southern and eastern United States . As Tropical Depression Frances turned northeast , United States meteorologists at the Hydrometeorological Prediction Center continued issuing advisories on the system until it crossed the Canada – United States border into Quebec , where heavy rainfall also fell . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 A tropical storm watch was issued for Frances for the Leeward Islands during the afternoon of August 29 , which was upgraded to a warning that night and expanded to include the islands of Anguilla , Antigua , Barbuda , Nevis , Saba , St. Kitts , St. Eustatius , and St. Maarten . A hurricane watch was issued during the night of August 29 for the northern British Virgin Islands , the northern United States Virgin Islands , Culebra , and Vieques . On the morning of August 30 , the hurricane watch for Vieques was downgraded to a tropical storm watch . That afternoon , hurricane watches were changed to tropical storm warnings across Puerto Rico , Culebra , Vieques , British Virgin Islands , and the northern U. S. Virgin Islands while a tropical storm watch was issued for St. Croix while all remaining hurricane watches were dropped . That night , tropical storm watches were issued for eastern portions of the northern coast of the Dominican Republic while a tropical storm warning was issued for Guadeloupe . 
 Early on the morning of August 31 , tropical storm warnings were dropped for Antigua , Barbuda , Nevis , and St. Kitts while hurricane watches were issued for the southeast Bahamas as well as the Turks and Caicos Islands . Hurricane watches were upgraded to hurricane warnings later that morning . Toward noon , tropical storm warnings were issued for the remainder of the northern coast of the Dominican Republic , a hurricane watch was issued for the central Bahamas , while all watches and warnings were dropped for northeast portion of the Dominican Republic and portions of the Lesser Antilles south of the British Virgin Islands . That afternoon , tropical storm warnings were dropped from Puerto Rico eastward . On the morning of September 1 , a hurricane watch was issued for the northwest Bahamas while the watch for the central Bahamas was upgraded to a warning . That afternoon , warnings were dropped for the Dominican Republic . 
 On the evening of September 1 , hurricane warnings were issued for the northwest Bahamas while hurricane watches were issued for the lower east coast of Florida and tropical storm watches were issued for the Florida Keys . There was the potential for catastrophic damage along Florida 's heavily populated east coast , with warnings that damages from Frances could exceed the insured losses of Hurricane Andrew . These damage estimates were in anticipation that Frances would strike Florida as a strong Category Four hurricane . Preparations for the storm were stepped up in Florida on September 1 . Governor Jeb Bush declared a state of emergency , Kennedy Space Center closed down , and evacuations of 500 @,@ 000 people were initially ordered . Eventually 41 counties received evacuation orders , covering 2 @.@ 8 million residents , the largest evacuation in Florida 's history . The state education system also responded to the pending crisis . Many universities across Florida canceled classes . Both the University of Central Florida and the University of North Florida told all students to leave their dorms . Evacuation at the University of South Florida was performed on a dorm @-@ by @-@ dorm basis . Florida Atlantic University was closed for a week and a half . Most schools were shut down from southern Miami @-@ Dade County to just south of Melbourne two days before the hurricane . The annual Florida State University @-@ University of Miami college football game was rescheduled for the following week . 
 Early during the morning of September 2 , hurricane watches were extended southward to Craig Key . Later that morning , hurricane watches were upgraded to hurricane warnings for the lower east coast of Florida while a hurricane watch and tropical storm warning was raised for most of the Florida Keys and Florida Bay . Hurricane warnings were dropped for the Turks and Caicos Islands late on the morning of September 1 and for the Southeast Bahamas late that night . Late on the morning of September 3 , hurricane watches were issued for the northeast coast of Florida , while early that afternoon tropical storm warnings were issued for the same area . Hurricane warnings were dropped for the central Bahamas that afternoon . That night , tropical storm warnings were issued for the southwest coast of the Florida peninsula with watches issued for the northwest Florida peninsula . On the morning of September 4 , tropical storm warnings were extended northward to Anna Maria Island and along the Georgia coast . Tropical storm watches were extended northward to St. Marks . That afternoon , hurricane watches were dropped for most of the northwest Bahamas while warnings were extended up the coast to St. Marks , Florida , and watches were extended westward to Panama City , Florida . 
 Early on morning of September 5 , hurricane warnings were downgraded to tropical storm warnings south of Deerfield Beach , Florida while tropical storm warnings were extended westward through the western Florida Keys . Later that morning , hurricane warnings were issued for most of the northwest Florida coast while hurricane watches were lowered for northeast Florida and hurricane warnings were dropped for the remainder of the northwest Bahamas . That afternoon , all warnings were dropped for southeast Florida south of Jupiter Inlet , while the remaining hurricane warnings along the east Florida coast were downgraded to tropical storm warnings . Hurricane warnings along the coast of western Florida were extended southward to Anna Maria Island . Late that night , tropical storm warnings were dropped south of Bonita Beach including all the Florida Keys . Early on the morning of September 6 , all warnings were dropped in Florida south of Englewood and Cocoa Beach . Later that morning , hurricane warnings were downgraded to tropical storm warnings between Indian Pass and Destin as well as between Anna Maria Island and the Suwannee River while all remaining warnings were dropped south of Anna Maria Island , as well as the Florida east coast and the Georgia coast . That afternoon , all hurricane warnings were downgraded to tropical storm warnings , with all warnings dropped between west of St. Marks and south of the Suwannee river . On the night of September 6 , all remaining tropical cyclone warnings were dropped . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The economic effect was felt early , as the storm struck during Labor Day weekend , traditionally the final summer vacation weekend in the United States . Many hotel reservations from South Carolina to Florida were cancelled as people , seeing the destruction caused weeks earlier by Hurricane Charley , decided to avoid the coastal areas for safety . One death in the Bahamas , one in Ohio , and five in Florida were directly attributed to the storm . 42 more deaths - 32 in Florida , eight in Georgia , one in the Bahamas and one in Ohio , are indirectly attributed to Frances . 
 The total civilian damage from Frances was determined to be approximately US $ 8 @,@ 830 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 ( 2004 dollars ) . Add in the estimated US $ 100 million damage ( 2004 dollars ) done to space and military facilities at Kennedy Space Center , Cape Canaveral Air Force Station , and Patrick Air Force Base , Florida and the total damage was estimated to be about US $ 9 billion ( 2004 dollars ) , making it the fourth costliest hurricane in United States history at that time , behind Hurricane Andrew of 1992 and Hurricanes Charley and Ivan of 2004 . At the time , adjusted for inflation , it became the seventh costliest hurricane for the lower 48 United States . Flooding was also reported in Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . Minor flooding happened along the banks of the three rivers and more damage was associated with river tributaries . 
 = = = Bahamas = = = 
 About 75 % of the island chain lost power for a few hours during the storm . Damage occurred to downed trees and wooden homes . Between 13 and 17 percent of the non @-@ native Australian pine on San Salvador Island experienced damage , primarily from snapping , though some browning from salt spray was noted . Several feet of water flooded the international airport at Freeport . In the Bahamas , insurers and <unk> estimated industry insured losses at about $ 300 million ( 2004 dollars ) . All cool @-@ season vegetable plantings , and the entire banana crop , were lost during Frances . The pineapple crop was significantly impacted by wind damage in Eleuthera , while the entire fruit crop was lost for similar reasons . The corn crop in Long Island and Cat Island was completely lost . Significant poultry losses were experienced . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Near the point of its first landfall , few structures were destroyed and ocean overwash across the barrier island was limited , though the extent of the damage far exceeded that of Hurricane Charley . Wind damage to citrus groves led to a near total loss near the coast of east @-@ central Florida between West Palm Beach and Melbourne , with lesser damage farther to the west across the Kissimmee River basin . Between Hurricane Charley and Frances , citrus losses totaled $ 2 billion ( 2004 dollars ) . Significant tree damage was reported within golf courses along the Treasure Coast , with an average of 300 @-@ 500 trees experiencing damage per course . 
 Some areas of Florida received over 13 inches ( 330 mm ) of rain as the system moved slowly through the state . Heavy rains caused a large sinkhole to develop on Interstate 95 in Palm Beach County , which closed the highway to traffic . Similar to Hurricane Charley earlier in the month , the Florida citrus crops took large amounts of damage . Frances caused heavy damage to the large Vehicle Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space Center , ripping off over a thousand 4 @-@ by @-@ 10 foot aluminum panels used to clad the building . While Charley caused $ 700 @,@ 000 damage ( 2004 dollars ) , Frances damage was significantly greater . Two external fuel tanks for the space shuttle were in the building but seemed undamaged . The Space Shuttle Discovery 's hangar was without power . The total damage to space and military facilities around Cape Canaveral , Florida was reported at about $ 100 million ( 2004 dollars ) . Orlando , Florida 's theme parks closed Sunday — only the third time Walt Disney World closed for a hurricane , but the second time in a month . 
 = = = Georgia = = = 
 Frances dropped significant rain on Florida , Georgia , Alabama , and North and South Carolina . The passage of tropical depression Frances into Georgia dumped up to 5 inches ( 130 mm ) of rain onto the state and caused the closings of schools in 56 counties . Across Georgia , winds of 30 to 40 miles per hour ( 48 to 64 km / h ) , with gusts to 50 miles per hour ( 80 km / h ) led to the downing of tree branches and power lines . At one point on September 7 , a total of 380 @,@ 000 residences were without power . Significant crop damage was seen , particularly to the cotton and the peanut crops . On average , 30 percent of the crops were lost during Frances . 
 = = = Carolinas = = = 
 Flooding was reported even in the mid @-@ Atlantic and Northeast states , particularly along the Appalachian Mountains . A strip of upslope @-@ induced rainfall along the Blue Ridge escarpment produced as much as 23 inches ( 580 mm ) of rain in some areas of western North Carolina as the warm tropical air surged up and over the mountains . The flooding from this along the Swannanoa River near Asheville , North Carolina caused a major break in the Asheville 's water distribution system , leaving the city without water for several days . Significant crop damage was seen into North Carolina , which reported $ 55 million in crop damage . Frances also spawned 101 tornadoes from Florida to as far north as Virginia , shy of the single storm tornado record set during Hurricane Beulah . Power outages affected up to six million people . Over 20 airports closed during the storm . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 As an extratropical cyclone , Frances passed through southern Ontario . The storm dropped up to 5 @.@ 39 inches ( 137 mm ) , washing out roads and causing localized flooding in Quebec , New Brunswick , and Newfoundland . This rainfall smashed all @-@ time rainfall records in a 24 @-@ hour period ( most of the rain fell in a 6 to 8 hour @-@ period ) . Ottawa 's O @-@ Train Trillium Line was halted because of a landslide that obstructed the railroad corridor . Several major roads in Gatineau and Ottawa were under several inches of water , locally chest @-@ high . More than $ 45 million ( 2004 CAD ; $ 41 million USD ) in insured damage was reported in Ontario . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Bahamas = = = 
 Frances is the first hurricane to impact the entire archipelago since 1866 . On September 4 , teams from the Ministry of Works , the Department of Environmental Health Services , the Royal Bahamas Defence Force and the Royal Bahamas Police Force were used to clear roadways of tree debris while utilities attempted to restore power and water in New Providence . The Family Islands were surveyed on September 5 and 6 , when it was noted that major damage occurred within the island group . Telecommunications were restored to most of the island chain within 24 hours . As of September 21 , electricity had been restored to half of the Bahamians who had lost power . Western sections of Grand Bahama Island remained without power into Hurricane Jeanne , which was the most significantly impacted island . The onion crop was expected to be late in 2005 due to the loss of <unk> and seedlings during the storm . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 In the aftermath of the storm , many colleges and school districts across Florida remained closed . President George W. Bush declared all of Florida a federal disaster area . Kennedy Space Center did not restore its complete work force until September 13 due to relief operations , as well as a lack of gasoline , ice , and water in the area . A total of 8000 members of the National Guard helped out with recovery efforts soon after the storm left the Florida peninsula . Residents in the areas of impact after the storm were under a boil water order , because of the lack of electricity to area water systems . Churches prepared meals for those without power and food themselves . Federal employees were granted excused absences if they helped with law enforcement and the cleanup . Thousands of portable generators were sent to the state by Home Depot and Lowe 's home improvement stores . The United States Army Corps of Engineers installed blue tarpaulins on 41 @,@ 556 damaged roofs statewide . Damage to the Florida citrus crop caused orange futures to rise four cents a pound due to Frances . 
 = = = Georgia and the Carolinas = = = 
 On September 24 , the southern two @-@ thirds of Georgia was declared a disaster by President Bush . The state lost 50 percent of its pecan crop due to Frances , which led to a price rise in pecans by late October . Lost peach trees were expected to lower output during 2005 , and increase peach prices . A disaster declaration was made for the northeast section of South Carolina on October 7 . On September 10 , President Bush declared 34 counties within North Carolina a disaster area , making them eligible for US $ 6 @.@ 5 million ( 2004 dollars ) in public assistance . A Wildlife Commission removed its North Carolina Mountain State Fair exhibit due to Frances midway through the fair . Over 100 @,@ 000 trout were lost due to the storm in the Pisgah , Table Rock , Marion , and Armstrong state fish hatcheries . Red Cross volunteers distributed over 200 @,@ 000 gallons of water by its 600 volunteers in four days . After Frances and Hurricane Ivan , Asheville determined that it needed $ 14 million in order to buy out willing businesses and homes within the floodplain . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Because of its effects in the United States , the name Frances was retired in the spring of 2005 by the World Meteorological Organization , and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced with Fiona for the 2010 season . Due to a request by France in the 2003 WMO Meeting , the name Frances was to be removed from the rotating cyclone lists after the 2004 hurricane season , even if Frances wasn 't as destructive , but the destruction caused by Frances in the United States was enough to warrant retirement on its own merit . 
 = Elizabeth Campbell , Duchess of Argyll = 
 Elizabeth Georgiana Campbell , Duchess of Argyll CI VA ( née Leveson @-@ Gower ; 30 May 1824 – 25 May 1878 ) was a British noblewoman and abolitionist . Born into the wealthy Sutherland @-@ Leveson @-@ Gower family , she was the eldest daughter of the 2nd Duke of Sutherland by his wife , the political hostess Lady Harriet Howard . In 1844 Elizabeth married George Campbell , Marquess of Lorne , eldest son and heir to the 7th Duke of Argyll . She became the Duchess of Argyll in 1847 when her husband succeeded his father . 
 Like her mother , the Duchess of Argyll was a prominent opponent of slavery . The pair helped write a letter titled An Affectionate and Christian Address of Many Thousands of Women of Great Britain and Ireland to Their Sisters , the Women of the United States of America , calling for an end of slavery ; it attracted signatures from 562 @,@ 848 British women . The two often hosted the American abolitionist and author Harriet Beecher Stowe when she visited England . Lady Campbell and Beecher Stowe were friends and maintained a correspondence . 
 The Duchess of Argyll succeeded the Duchess of Wellington as Mistress of the Robes to Queen Victoria , holding the position from 1868 to 1870 when she resigned due to ill health . Soon after being appointed a member of the newly created Order of the Crown of India , she died in 1878 whilst eating with William Ewart Gladstone in London . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Lady Elizabeth Georgiana Leveson @-@ Gower was raised amidst great wealth . Her paternal grandmother , the great heiress Elizabeth Gordon , was suo jure Countess of Sutherland , overseeing estates that spanned 800 @,@ 000 to one million acres of Scottish Highlands . The Sutherland lands were further augmented with Gordon 's 1785 marriage to George Leveson @-@ Gower ( later 1st Duke of Sutherland ) . In 1823 , their son George married Lady Harriet Howard , daughter of George Howard , 6th Earl of Carlisle . Lady Elizabeth Leveson @-@ Gower was born the following year as their eldest daughter , on 30 May 1824 . Three brothers and two sisters followed . 
 With family estates in Scotland and England , Elizabeth 's upbringing involved much travel . Their main residence was the lavish Stafford House , London , which they acquired in 1827 ; they also resided on many country estates . The couple , especially Harriet , led vibrant social lives . She was a political hostess known for her friendship and position as Mistress of the Robes to the young Queen Victoria . In 1833 , the 1st Duke died and Elizabeth 's father succeeded as 2nd Duke of Sutherland , inheriting extensive property . The historian Eric Richards writes that the first half of the nineteenth century saw the height of the House of Sutherland 's social and economic influence , with its wealth being derived from rents , various stocks , and dividends from transportation firms . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 While accompanying Queen Victoria to Taymouth Castle in 1842 , Lady Elizabeth met George Douglas Campbell , Marquess of Lorne , the eldest son of the 7th Duke of Argyll . They married at the Leveson @-@ Gower estate Trentham Hall on 31 July 1844 . The Archbishop of York , Edward Venables @-@ Vernon @-@ Harcourt , presided over the wedding . The Argyll estate was in debt , so Elizabeth 's wealth was much needed . Their union resulted in the further joining of two of Scotland 's largest landowning families . 
 The young couple was given Rosneath by his father at the time of their marriage . Deeply religious , Elizabeth had been raised in the Anglican faith but converted to the Church of Scotland upon her marriage , taking her first communion in the faith later that year . Like many of her predecessors , Elizabeth was a strong supporter of the Scottish Episcopal Church in the Diocese of Argyll and The Isles . The couple possessed similar interest in liberal politics . Elizabeth was dignified and cultured , and Lorne found in his new wife " more than all that had been told me by her numerous friends ... On some subjects , excepting philosophy and the natural sciences , she was more widely read than I was at the time . " 
 = = Duchess of Argyll = = 
 Lorne succeeded his father as 8th Duke of Argyll on 25 April 1847 , whereupon Elizabeth became Duchess of Argyll . The family 's primary estates included Argyll Lodge in London , the family seat of Inveraray Castle in Argyllshire , and Rosneath . Their first child , John , was born within a year of their marriage . They would have an additional four sons and seven daughters . The Argyll household was sober , proper , and driven by routine with prescribed times for prayer , breakfast , lunch , and dinner . The children were not expected to show emotion such as crying , except for " real causes " like the death of a family pet . The Scottish scholar John Stuart Blackie enjoyed the solemnity of the couple 's lifestyle and visited them often ; he dedicated his 1876 work Language and Literature of the Scottish Highlands to Elizabeth . 
 The historian Anne Jordan writes that Lady Campbell was " old before her time , " having given birth to twelve children . She suffered from ill health , in part due to a 1868 stroke which left her partially incapacitated ; this forced much of the children 's upbringing to be overseen by her husband . Her third daughter Lady Victoria , who also suffered from ill health due to a contraction of poliomyelitis , nursed her mother . Once adults , the children 's marriage settlements were a drain on the family 's resources , with all but one eventually marrying . Their eldest son John married the Queen 's fourth daughter Princess Louise in 1871 , and became the Governor General of Canada in 1878 . 
 Like her mother the Duchess of Sutherland , the Duchess of Argyll was a prominent supporter of the abolitionist movement . Elizabeth was one of many Englishwomen affected by the 1852 anti @-@ slavery novel Uncle Tom 's Cabin . The following year at her mother 's house , the Duchess helped draft a letter titled An Affectionate and Christian Address of Many Thousands of Women of Great Britain and Ireland to Their Sisters , the Women of the United States of America . The letter , eventually signed by 562 @,@ 848 women , called for an end to slavery because the institution did not recognise slave marriages , led to parent @-@ children separations , and prevented slaves from receiving Christian educations . It was sent to the author of Uncle Tom 's Cabin , the American abolitionist author Harriet Beecher Stowe ; she and the Duchess of Argyll became friends , and maintained a correspondence . Harriet Beecher Stowe would often visit the duchesses of Sutherland and Argyll when she travelled to England and benefited from their connections to senior politicians . The Duke and Duchess of Argyll were also friends with American politician and anti @-@ slavery leader Charles Sumner , leading historian Amanda Foreman to write that the " relationship between [ the Duke of Argyll ] and Sumner would prove to be one of the most important friendships of the Civil War . " 
 In December 1868 , Lady Campbell was appointed Mistress of the Robes to Queen Victoria , succeeding Elizabeth Wellesley , Duchess of Wellington as a member of William Ewart Gladstone 's first ministry . She resigned the position in 1870 due to ill health , and was succeeded by her sister @-@ in @-@ law Anne Sutherland @-@ Leveson @-@ Gower , Duchess of Sutherland . In December 1877 , Queen Victoria created the Order of the Crown of India and conferred it upon the Duchess of Argyll and dozens of other royal and noblewomen . She was also a member of the Royal Order of Victoria and Albert , Second Class . The Duchess of Argyll died on 25 May 1878 , whilst eating with Gladstone in London . She is buried at Kilmun Parish Church . 
 Three years later her widower remarried to Amelia Maria , daughter of Thomas <unk> , Bishop of St Albans . 
 = = Issue = = 
 The Duke and Duchess of Argyll had the following issue : 
 John Campbell , 9th Duke of Argyll ( 6 August 1845 – 2 May 1914 ) ; married Princess Louise of the United Kingdom in 1871 
 Lord Archibald Campbell ( 18 December 1846 – March 29 , 1913 ) ; married Janey Callendar and had issue including Niall Campbell , 10th Duke of Argyll 
 Lord Walter Campbell ( 30 July 1848 – 2 May 1889 ) ; married Olivia Clarkson <unk> in 1874 , and was the grandfather of Ian Campbell , 11th Duke of Argyll 
 Lady Edith Campbell ( 1849 – 1913 ) ; married Henry Percy , 7th Duke of Northumberland in 1868 
 Lord George Granville Campbell ( 25 December 1850 – ) ; married Sybil Alexander in 1879 
 Lady Elizabeth Campbell ( b . 1852 ) ; married Lt.-Col. Edward Harrison Clough @-@ Taylor in 1880 
 Lord Colin Campbell ( 1853 – 1895 ) ; married Gertrude Elizabeth Blood in 1881 
 Lady Victoria Campbell ( 22 May 1854 – 6 July 1910 ) 
 Lady Evelyn Campbell ( b . 1855 ) ; married James Baillie @-@ Hamilton in 1886 
 Lady Frances Campbell ( 22 February 1858 – 25 February 1931 ) ; married the architect Eustace Balfour , brother of the Prime Minister Arthur Balfour 
 Lady Mary Emma Campbell ( 1859 – 1947 ) ; married Edward Carr Glyn , Bishop of Peterborough 
 Lady Constance Harriett Campbell ( 11 November 1864 – 9 February 1922 ) ; married Charles Emmott in 1891 
 = Rainbow / PUSH = 
 Rainbow / PUSH is a non @-@ profit organization formed as a merger of two non @-@ profit organizations founded by Jesse Jackson — Operation PUSH ( People United to Save Humanity ) and the National Rainbow Coalition . The organizations pursue social justice , civil rights and political activism . 
 In December 1971 , Jackson resigned from Operation Breadbasket after clashing with Rev. Ralph Abernathy and founded Operation PUSH . Jackson founded the National Rainbow Coalition in 1984 which merged with PUSH in 1996 . The combined organization keeps its national headquarters on the South Side of Chicago and has branches in Washington , D.C. , New York City , Los Angeles , Detroit , Houston , Atlanta , the Silicon Valley , and New Orleans and Boston . 
 Operation PUSH was successful at raising public awareness to initiate corporate action and government sponsorship . The National Rainbow coalition became a prominent political organization that raised public awareness on numerous political issues and consolidated a large voting block . The merged entity has undertaken numerous social initiatives . 
 = = PUSH = = 
 Operation PUSH , an acronym for People United to Save ( later Serve ) Humanity , was an organization which advocated black self @-@ help and achieved a broad audience for its liberal stances on issues of social justice and civil rights . 
 The origins of Operation PUSH can be traced to a factional split in Operation Breadbasket , an affiliate of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference . In 1966 , Martin Luther King Jr . , the head of the SCLC , appointed Jackson to head the Chicago chapter of Operation Breadbasket , which became a coalition of black ministers and entrepreneurs . 
 After 1968 , however , Jackson increasingly clashed with King 's successor at SCLC , Rev. Ralph Abernathy . The break became complete in December 1971 when Abernathy suspended Jackson for “ administrative improprieties and repeated acts of violation of organizational policy . ” Jackson resigned from Operation Breadbasket , called together his allies , and Operation PUSH was born . 
 From its inception , Jackson referred to its membership as a " Rainbow Coalition . " The name " Rainbow Coalition " was originated in 1968 by Chicago Black Panther leader Fred Hampton to describe the multi @-@ ethnic revolutionary federation he founded . Jackson was not part of the Hampton Rainbow Coalition , and had a difficult relationship with the Panthers . Some former members of Hampton 's coalition are resentful of Jackson appropriating the name , partly because Jackson 's politics are reformist , and partly because Jackson copyrighted the name , preventing others from using it . 
 Although money was a problem at first , initial backing came from Manhattan Borough President Percy Sutton , Gary , Indiana Mayor Richard Hatcher , Aretha Franklin , Jim Brown , and Ossie Davis . 
 The organizational meeting of PUSH was in the Chicago home of Dr. <unk> Howard , a prominent black doctor and community leader on the South Side . Before he moved to Chicago in 1956 , Howard had developed a national reputation as a Mississippi civil rights leader , surgeon , and entrepreneur . Howard served on PUSH 's board of directors and chaired the finance committee . 
 Through PUSH Jackson was able to continue pursuit of the same economic objectives that Operation Breadbasket had pursued . In addition , his new organization was able to expand into areas of social and political development for blacks in Chicago and across the nation . The 1970s saw various tactics to pursue the organization 's objectives including direct action campaigns , weekly radio broadcasts , and awards through which Jackson protected black homeowners , workers , and businesses , and honored prominent blacks in the US and abroad . He also started a push campaign against the legalization of abortion after the Roe vs Wade decision in 1973 . The organization was concerned with minority youth reading , and it championed education through PUSH @-@ Excel , a spin @-@ off program that emphasized keeping inner @-@ city youths in school while assisting them with job placement . The program , which persuaded inner city youth to pledge in writing to study two hours per night and which involves parental monitoring , impressed Jimmy Carter whose administration became a large sponsor after Secretary of Health , Education , and Welfare Joseph <unk> and Secretary of Labor Ray Marshall courted Jackson . 
 The organization was very successful at committing major corporations with large presences in the black community to adopt affirmative action programs in which they hired more black executives and supervisors and to buy from black suppliers , wholesalers , and distributors . The organization employed prayer vigils as a technique to call attention to issues . The organization opposed Ronald Reagan 's workfare initiative to compel that welfare recipients work for part of their benefits . 
 The organization staged several boycotts including early 1980s boycotts of Anheuser Busch and Coca Cola as well as a 1986 boycott of CBS television affiliates . The boycotts became so well known that at one point David Duke supporters referred to a boycott of Nike , Inc. as if whites were being oppressed by blacks . Nike spokesperson , Michael Jordan , disavowed the Nike boycott . The boycotts of Budweiser , and Coke as well as one against Kentucky Fried Chicken were touted for having won minority job concessions from white businesses . 
 = = National Rainbow Coalition = = 
 The National Rainbow Coalition ( Rainbow Coalition for short ) was a political organization that grew out of Jesse Jackson 's 1984 presidential campaign . During the campaign , Jackson began speaking about a " Rainbow Coalition " , an idea created by Fred Hampton , regarding the disadvantaged and welcomed voters from a broad spectrum of races and creeds . The goals of the campaign were to demand social programs , voting rights , and affirmative action for all groups that had been neglected by Reaganomics . Jackson 's campaign blamed President Ronald Reagan 's policies for reduction of government domestic spending , causing new unemployment and encouraging economic investment outside of the inner cities , while they discouraged the rebuilding of urban industry . The industrial layoffs caused by these policies hit the black and other minority populations particularly hard . At the 1984 Democratic National Convention on July 18 , 1984 , in San Francisco , California , Jackson delivered an address entitled " The Rainbow Coalition " . The speech called for Arab Americans , Native Americans , Asian Americans , youth , disabled veterans , small farmers , lesbians and gays to join with African Americans and Jewish Americans for political purpose . Whereas the purpose of PUSH had been to fight for economic and educational opportunities , the Rainbow Coalition was created to address political empowerment and public policy issues . After his unsuccessful bid for the Democratic nomination in 1984 , Jackson attempted to build a broad base of support among groups that " were hurt by Reagan administration policies " - racial minorities , the poor , small farmers , working mothers , the unemployed , some labor union members , gays , and lesbians . 
 = = Merger = = 
 Jackson moved from Chicago to Washington , D.C. to serve as shadow senator from 1991 to 1996 . When he returned to Chicago in 1996 he merged his organizations . The merged entity advocates for African Americans , Hispanics , Native Americans , other minorities , and women . Its main economic goal is to have more minorities on the payrolls , in the boardrooms , and on the supplier lists of major corporations . The industries it most aggressively pursues are the financial sector on Wall Street , the telecommunications field and high @-@ tech firms in Silicon Valley . The Wall Street activities are organized under sub @-@ organization " The Wall Street Project " . The organization has been active in pursuit of increase minority representation in other industries , most notably the broadcast media , the entertainment industry , and the automobile industry . It has also sought increased representation by minority administrators in college and professional sports under the leadership of Jesse Jackson , Jr . For Hispanic issues the merged entity works closely with the League of United Latin American Citizens and the National Council of La Raza . 
 In 1998 the organization admonished Freddie Mac for its lending and employment practices , which led to its pledge to earmark $ 1 billion in mortgage loans specifically for minorities , to donate more than $ 1 million directly to Rainbow / PUSH and to become a sponsor of Jackson 's annual Wall Street Project . In 2000 , the organization investigated the case of Raynard Johnson , who was found hanged by a belt from a tree in front of his home in Kokomo , Mississippi . Jackson labelled it a " lynching " , although two autopsies both concluded that the death was a suicide . In the early 2000s ( decade ) , Rainbow / PUSH worked with NASCAR to increase the number of minorities involved in auto racing , through direct financial support and projects to find talented African @-@ American racing drivers . This initiative was ended in 2003 , after the racing sanctioning body was criticized by conservative groups for the partnership . Among the smaller campaigns it has undertaken are the HIV / AIDS Initiative for funding for AIDS programs ; the National Field Department support of " constructive agitation to bring about societal change " ; and the Prison Outpost project , whose ultimate goal is " to eliminate the need for prisons . " 
 Through his organization and its predecessors Jackson has advocated universal health care , a war on drugs , direct peace negotiations between Palestinians and Israelis , ending apartheid in South Africa and advancing democracy in Haiti . The following is the organization 's list of major issues : 
 1 % Student Loans 
 Jobs and Economic Empowerment 
 Employee Rights and Livable Wages 
 Educational Access 
 Fair and Decent Housing 
 Voter Registration and Civic Education 
 Election Law Reform 
 Fairness in the Media , Sports , and Criminal Justice System 
 Political Empowerment 
 Trade and Foreign Policy 
 Affirmative Action and Equal Rights 
 Gender Equality 
 Environmental Justice 
 Former congressman Mel Reynolds , who served a sentence in prison for sexual assault and bank fraud , was hired by Rainbow / PUSH as its resident scholar on prison reform after his release in 2001 . The organization is a member of several anti @-@ war coalitions including Win Without War , United for Peace and Justice , and After Downing Street . 
 = = Involvement in the Duke Lacrosse team controversy = = 
 In 2006 , Jesse Jackson promised the Rainbow / Push Coalition would pay the college tuition for Crystal Mangum . Mangum made false rape allegations against members of Duke University 's men 's lacrosse team who had hired her as a stripper . Jackson said it would not matter if Mangum fabricated her story ; the tuition offer would still be good . 
 = Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers = 
 The Deliberative Council of Princes and Ministers ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> wáng <unk> huìyì ) , also known as the Council of Princes and High Officials and Assembly of Princes and High Officials , or simply as the Deliberative Council ( traditional Chinese : <unk> ; simplified Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) , was an advisory body for the emperors of the early Qing dynasty ( 1644 – 1912 ) . Derived from informal deliberative groups created by Nurhaci ( 1559 – 1626 ) in the 1610s and early 1620s , the Council was formally established by his son and successor Hong Taiji ( 1592 – 1643 ) in 1626 and expanded in 1637 . Staffed mainly by Manchu dignitaries , this aristocratic institution served as the chief source of advice on military matters for Hong Taiji and the Shunzhi ( r . 1643 – 1661 ) and Kangxi ( r . 1661 – 1722 ) emperors . It was particularly powerful during the regencies of Dorgon ( 1643 – 1650 ) and Oboi ( 1661 – 1669 ) , who used it to enhance their personal influence . 
 After serving as the most influential policymaking body of the dynasty for more than a century , the Deliberative Council was displaced and then made obsolete by the more ethnically mixed Grand Council , which the Yongzheng Emperor ( r . 1722 – 1735 ) created in the late 1720s to circumvent the influence of the deliberative princes and ministers . The Deliberative Council was formally abolished in 1792 . 
 = = Origins and formal establishment = = 
 Historian Robert <unk> has called the origin of the Council " a complicated and often confusing process . " The Council originated in informal institutions created by Nurhaci ( 1559 – 1626 ) to promote collegial rule among his sons . In 1601 , Nurhaci had organized Manchu society into four " Banners " that were doubled in number in 1615 to become the Eight Banners . In 1622 , he gave eight of his sons ( who were called " princes , " or <unk> ) control over one banner each and ordered them to meet to deliberate major policies , especially military matters . Nurhaci 's eight sons were known collectively as the " princes who deliberate on government " ( <unk> wang ) . 
 Another precursor to the Council was a group of " five high officials " and " ten judges " ( <unk> ) , all Manchu , that Nurhaci put in charge of administrative and judicial tasks in 1615 or 1616 . Robert <unk> claims that this group was then referred to as " high officials who deliberate on government " ( <unk> <unk> ) and assisted the princes in discussing policy . Franz Michael , however , claims that they were mere " technical advisors " , a point of view supported by Silas Wu . In 1623 , " eight high officials " were also made deliberative officials , but their functions were chiefly censorial and their primary role was to let Nurhaci know of conspiracies among the princes . 
 Nurhaci was succeeded by his son Hong Taiji ( r . 1626 – 1643 ) , who , instead of following his father 's wish for collegial rule , became a strong ruler who laid the institutional foundation of the Qing dynasty . In 1627 he placed the Eight Banners under the command of eight " high officials " ( Ma . : <unk> <unk> ; Ch . : <unk> ) , who were also told to assist the princes in policy deliberations . Silas Wu identifies this reform as the bona fide origin of the Deliberative Council , which then became Hong Taiji 's main policymaking structure and was consulted on foreign and military matters . In 1637 , one year after he had declared himself emperor of the Qing dynasty , Hong Taiji officially excluded imperial princes from the Council . Instead , the Council was manned by eight lieutenant @-@ generals ( later called <unk> <unk> in Chinese ) with two deputies ( fu <unk> <unk> ) each , who were put in charge of managing the Eight Manchu Banners . By limiting Council membership to Manchu military leaders from outside the imperial clan , Hung Taiji enhanced his personal power at the expense of the other princes . Nonetheless the Council remained a bastion of " collective aristocratic rule " within the Qing government . 
 = = Central role in the early Qing = = 
 When Hong Taiji died in 1643 , he was replaced by the young Shunzhi Emperor and two co @-@ regents : Dorgon and Jirgalang . In 1644 , under their leadership , the Qing dynasty defeated the weakened Ming dynasty and moved its capital to Beijing . The Deliberative Council of Ministers was Dorgon 's main policymaking body during his regency . Soon after moving to Beijing , he gave the Council control over both military and civil affairs , and expanded its membership to all lieutenant @-@ generals and deputy lieutenant @-@ generals in the Manchu and Mongol Banners , as well as to all Mongols and Manchus who held posts of Grand Secretary or Board president . Far from limiting Dorgon 's power , the Council served as his tool to denounce and arraign other princes who challenged his authority . In May 1644 , for instance , he had Hong Taiji 's son Hooge accused of seditious behavior and made Hooge 's enemies testify against him in front of the Council . He used the same method to purge Hooge for good in 1648 . 
 After Dorgon 's death on the last day of 1650 , the Shunzhi Emperor started his personal rule : he ordered the members of the Council to memorialize to him directly on important matters of state . After Dorgon 's supporters had been purged from the court ( by March 1651 ) , his former co @-@ regent Jirgalang made a number of special appointments to the Council to foster loyalty among the Manchu elite . Between 1651 and 1653 , he added thirty new members who lacked official positions in the Banners or the metropolitan bureaucracy . Two of the new appointees were Chinese Bannermen Fan Wencheng <unk> ( 1597 – 1666 ) and Ning <unk> <unk> ( d . 1665 ) , two of only three Chinese who were ever appointed to the Council . All four of the future regents for the Kangxi Emperor ( Oboi , Suksaha , <unk> , and Soni ) were also appointed to the Council at that time . In 1656 , the emperor issued an edict abolishing the automatic appointment to the Council of Manchu and Mongol Grand Secretaries , yet by the end of his reign in 1661 , the Council still counted more than fifty members . During the Shunzhi reign , the Council was often convened to investigate important officials who had been accused of corruption or malfeasance . 
 The Shunzhi Emperor ( r . 1643 – 1661 ) was succeeded by four regents led by Oboi , who took care of state affairs during the minority of the Kangxi Emperor ( r . 1661 – 1722 ) . Under the Oboi regency ( 1661 – 1669 ) , the Deliberative Council became " the most prominent Manchu institution . " While keeping their own seats on the Council , the regents limited membership to lieutenant @-@ generals of the Manchu and Mongol Banners and to Manchu and Mongol presidents of the Six Ministries . They also decided to grant membership to the president of the Court of Colonial Affairs , whose independence the Shunzhi Emperor had compromised by subjugating it to the Board of Rites . By 1662 , the Deliberative Council had been reduced to 31 members , chiefly senior Manchu leaders who had significant experience in both military affairs and civil government . 
 The Kangxi Emperor reverted many of the bureaucratic reforms of the Oboi faction after 1669 , but continued to rely on the Deliberative Council as a body of Manchu counselors whom he consulted on a wide variety of military and civil matters , especially those that were too sensitive or complex to handle through the regular bureaucracy . The emperor allowed the president of the Censorate to sit on the Council , then in 1683 , after the rebellion of the Three <unk> had been suppressed and peace reestablished , he decided that the lieutenant @-@ generals of the Banners would no longer be automatic members . After that , the Deliberative Council became more oriented toward civil administration . Nonetheless during the First Oirat – Manchu War , fought from 1687 to 1697 between the Qing Empire and the Dzungar Khanate , the Kangxi Emperor often consulted the Council on how to deal with Galdan , the khan of the <unk> , and with the <unk> ' enemies the Khalkha Mongols . During his reign , the Council met on imperial request and transmitted the result of its deliberations to the emperor , who usually followed the Council 's advice . 
 = = Replacement by the Grand Council = = 
 The Yongzheng Emperor succeeded the Kangxi Emperor after a crisis that pitted many of the Kangxi Emperor 's sons against one another . Many Manchu nobles who had sided with the Yongzheng Emperor 's rivals during the succession struggle were still members of the Deliberative Council . To avoid alienating these grandees , the Yongzheng Emperor still made new appointments to the Council and consulted it on various military matters , but he also worked to undermine its power . To bypass the Council , he created smaller parallel bodies which he found more reliable and less entrenched . Slowly , he transferred deliberative powers to these more trusted ministers . Around 1730 , these informal institutions crystallized into the Grand Council . Unlike the Deliberative Council , whose membership was almost exclusively Manchu , the Grand Council counted many Chinese among its ranks . This more ethnically mixed privy council served as the empire 's main policymaking body for the rest of the Qing dynasty . 
 After the stabilization of the Grand Council in the 1730s , the influence of the Deliberative Council quickly declined . During the Qianlong period ( 1736 – 1796 ) , the titles of " deliberative minister " and " deliberative prince " became mainly honorific . Manchu Grand Secretaries held such titles until 1792 , when the Council was formally abolished by the Qianlong Emperor . The title was revived in the second half of the nineteenth century for Prince Gong and others when Prince Gong was head of the Grand Council . 
 = Battle of Taejon = 
 The Battle of Taejon ( 14 – 21 July 1950 ) was an early battle of the Korean War , between American and North Korean forces . Forces of the United States Army attempted to defend the headquarters of the 24th Infantry Division . The 24th Infantry Division was overwhelmed by numerically superior forces of the Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) at the major city and transportation hub of Taejon . The 24th Infantry Division 's regiments were already exhausted from the previous two weeks of delaying actions to stem the advance of the KPA . 
 The entire 24th Division gathered to make a final stand around Taejon , holding a line along the Kum River to the east of the city . Hampered by a lack of communication and equipment , and a shortage of heavy weapons to match the KPA 's firepower , the American forces , outnumbered , ill @-@ equipped and untrained , were pushed back from the riverbank after several days before fighting an intense urban battle to defend the city . After a fierce three @-@ day struggle , the Americans withdrew . 
 Although they could not hold the city , the 24th Infantry Division achieved a strategic advantage by delaying the North Koreans , providing time for other American divisions to establish a defensive perimeter around Pusan further south . The delay imposed at Taejon probably prevented an American rout during the subsequent Battle of Pusan Perimeter . During the action , the KPA captured Major General William F. Dean , the commander of the 24th Infantry Division , and highest ranking American prisoner during the Korean War . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the invasion of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) by its northern neighbor , the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) , the United Nations committed forces on behalf of South Korea . The United States subsequently sent ground forces to the Korean peninsula to contain the North Korean invasion and to prevent the collapse of the South Korean state . American forces in the Far East had steadily decreased since the end of World War II , five years earlier . When forces were initially committed , the 24th Infantry Division of the Eighth United States Army , headquartered in Japan , was the closest US division . The division was under @-@ strength , and most of its equipment dated from 1945 and earlier due to defense cutbacks enacted in the first Truman administration . Nevertheless , the division was ordered into South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea to absorb the initial North Korean advances , and disrupt the more numerous North Korean units . The 24th Division effectively delayed the North Korean advance to allow the 7th Infantry Division , 25th Infantry Division , 1st Cavalry Division , and other Eighth Army supporting units to establish a defensive line around Pusan . 
 Immediately preceding the Battle of Taejon , some of the Bodo League massacres took place around Taejon , where between 3 @,@ 000 and 7 @,@ 000 South Korean leftist political prisoners were shot and dumped into mass graves by South Korean troops , partially recorded by a US Army photographer . 
 = = = Delaying action = = = 
 Task Force Smith , an advance element of the 24th Infantry Division was badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on 5 July , during the first encounter between American and North Korean forces . Task Force Smith retreated from Osan to Pyongtaek , where US forces were again defeated in the Battle of Pyongtaek . The 24th Infantry Division was repeatedly forced south by the North Korean force 's superior numbers and equipment in engagements at Chochiwon , Chonan , Hadong , and Yechon . American soldiers were untrained and unprepared at the outbreak of the war , and this lack of training showed in engagements with North Korean units which were much more disciplined . Most of the Americans were out of shape , untrained , undisciplined and had no combat experience . 
 On 12 July , the division 's commander , Major General William F. Dean , ordered the division 's three regiments , the 19th Infantry Regiment , 21st Infantry Regiment , and the 34th Infantry Regiment , to cross the Kum River , destroying all bridges behind them , and to establish defensive positions around Taejon . Taejon was a major South Korean city 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of Seoul and 130 miles ( 210 km ) northwest of Pusan , and was the site of the 24th Infantry Division 's headquarters . Dean formed a line with the 34th Infantry and 19th Infantry facing east , and held the heavily battered 21st Infantry in reserve to the southeast . The Kum River wrapped north and west around the city , providing a defensive line 10 to 15 miles from the outskirts of Taejon , which was surrounded to the south by the <unk> Mountains . With major railroad junctions and numerous roads leading into the countryside in all directions , Taejon was a major transportation hub between Seoul and Taegu , giving it great strategic value for both the American and North Korean forces . The division was attempting to make a last stand at Taejon , the last place it could conduct a delaying action before the North Korean forces would converge on the unfinished Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = US 24th Infantry Division = = = 
 The 24th Infantry Division 's three infantry regiments , which had a wartime strength of 3 @,@ 000 each , were already below strength on their deployment , and heavy losses in the preceding two weeks had reduced their numbers further . The 21st Infantry had 1 @,@ 100 men left , having suffered 1 @,@ 433 casualties . The 34th Infantry had only 2 @,@ 020 men and the 19th had 2 @,@ 276 men . Another 2 @,@ 007 men stood in the 24th Infantry Division artillery formations . These counts placed the division 's total strength at 11 @,@ 400 . This was severely reduced from the 15 @,@ 965 men and 4 @,@ 773 vehicles that had arrived in Korea at the beginning of the month . Each of the regiments had only two battalions of infantry as opposed to the normal three . Large numbers of men had to be pulled from the lines from combat fatigue . Morale was extremely low for the soldiers , who were exhausted from days without sleep . Casualties among the division 's commissioned officers were extremely high , forcing younger officers and non @-@ commissioned officers to take leadership positions normally occupied by more experienced ones . 
 In addition to casualties , shortages of equipment hampered the 24th Infantry Division 's efforts . Losses from earlier fighting reduced artillery support to two battalions . Communications equipment , weapons , and ammunition was limited and large amounts of equipment had been lost or destroyed in previous engagements . Most of the radios available to the division did not work , and batteries , communication wire , and telephones to communicate among units were in short supply , with some company formations having only one radio for one squad . The division had no tanks : its new M26 Pershing and older M4A3 Sherman tanks were still en route . One of the few weapons that could penetrate the North Korean T @-@ 34 tanks , the 3 @.@ 5 inch M20 " Super Bazookas " firing <unk> HEAT rocket ammunition , were in short supply . The paucity of radios and wire hampered communication between and among the American units . 
 = = = North Korean units = = = 
 North Korean planners intended for three divisions to attack Taejon from three directions , supported by tanks . The North Korean 3rd Division was ordered to attack from the north , against the flank . The North Korean 4th Division would attack across the Kum River from the east and south , in order to envelop Taejon and the US 24th Infantry Division with it . Eventually they would also be supported by elements of the North Korean 105th Armored Division . Although the North Korean 2nd Infantry Division was ordered to attack from Chongju against the American right flank , it was slow to move and arrived too late to participate in the battle . 
 The North Koreans advanced on the town with the 3rd and 4th divisions supported by over 50 T @-@ 34 tanks . Each North Korean division , normally operating with 11 @,@ 000 men , was at 60 to 80 percent strength , giving them nearly a two to one numerical superiority over the American forces . The morale of the two divisions was low , owing to repeated air attacks on equipment and overall exhaustion from continuous combat . Political officers promised the divisions they would be able to rest in Taejon after they took the city . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First North Korean attack = = = 
 On the morning of 14 July , American soldiers from 3rd Battalion , 34th Infantry on the heights 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) above the Kum River spotted T @-@ 34s across the river . The T @-@ 34s fired on the 3rd Battalion 's position from across the river , to no effect . By mid @-@ morning , North Korean infantry were spotted crossing the river by boat and mortar and artillery fire began hitting the 34th Infantry 's lines . In the confusion and resulting poor communication , the North Korean infantry managed to move around the American lines . The 1st Battalion , further north , also came under heavy attack by advancing North Korean forces , and though it repulsed the attack with the help of artillery , it was forced to withdraw to safer positions . 
 In the early afternoon , another attacking force , an estimated 1 @,@ 000 North Korean troops , crossed the river . The North Koreans captured an outpost of the 63rd Field Artillery Battalion , supporting the 34th Infantry with 105 @-@ mm howitzers . They turned a captured machine gun on the battalion 's HQ battery and began to fire , taking it by surprise . Artillery fire aimed at the battery destroyed communications and vehicles , and inflicted heavy casualties . Its survivors retreated on foot to the south . Meanwhile , only 250 yards ( 230 m ) away , a battery of the battalion also came under attack by 100 North Korean infantrymen , resulting in similar casualties and retreat . B Battery was attacked by 400 North Koreans , but an advance of South Korean horse cavalry spared the battery from heavy losses , allowing it to make an organized retreat . The 63rd Field Artillery lost all of its guns and 80 of its vehicles , many still intact for North Korean forces to use . 
 Later in the evening , 1st Battalion , 34th Infantry counterattacked the positions but was unable to take them back , in the face of machine gun and small arms fire , and was forced to withdraw by nightfall . After this failed attempt to retake the equipment , Dean ordered the positions where the captured equipment was located to be destroyed by an airstrike . With the 1st Battalion having taken heavy casualties and the 3rd Battalion forced to move to counter North Korean attacks , the northwest flank of the American line had been beaten back . The North Korean 4th Division began crossing the river , only slightly impeded by US aircraft attacking its boats . 
 = = = Second North Korean attack = = = 
 Following the initial penetration , the 34th Infantry line moved south to <unk> . The 19th Infantry moved its 2nd Battalion to fill some of the gaps left by the 34th , reinforced by Republic of Korea Army troops . The combined forces observed a large build @-@ up of North Korean troops on the other side of the river . At 03 : 00 on 16 July , the North Koreans launched a massive barrage of tank , artillery and mortar fire on the 19th Infantry 's positions and North Korean troops began to cross the river in boats . The North Korean forces gathered on the west bank and assaulted the positions of 1st Battalion 's C and E companies , followed by a second landing against B Company . North Korean forces pushed against the entire battalion , threatening to overwhelm it . The regimental commander ordered all support troops and officers to the line and they were able to repulse the assault . However , in the melee , North Korean forces infiltrated their rear elements , attacking the reserve forces and blocking supply lines . Stretched thin , the 19th Infantry was unable to hold the line at the Kum River and simultaneously repel the North Korean forces . 
 That evening , 2nd Battalion was moved to attempt to deal with the North Koreans in the rear but suffered casualties as well , and was unable to break the roadblocks . By 17 July , the 19th Infantry withdrew , and was ordered 25 miles ( 40 km ) southwest to regroup and re @-@ equip . Less than half of 1st Battalion returned , and only two of 2nd Battalion 's companies remained intact . All three regiments of the 24th Infantry Division , having each been defeated and overwhelmed , were down to battalion @-@ strength formations . The division 's 19th and 34th regiments had engaged the North Korean 3rd Infantry Division and the North Korean 4th Infantry Division between 13 and 16 July and suffered 650 casualties among the 3 @,@ 401 men committed there . On 18 July , the Eighth Army commander , Lieutenant General Walton Walker , ordered General Dean to hold Taejon until the 20th so that the 1st Cavalry Division and 25th Infantry Division could establish defensive lines along the Naktong River , forming the Pusan Perimeter . As the North Korean push against the US units forced them back , 31 US troops were killed in the Chaplain @-@ Medic Massacre . 
 = = = Taejon surrounded = = = 
 The North Koreans then moved against Taejon city . On 19 July , North Korean forces entered Taejon , the site of the 24th Infantry Division 's headquarters . The North Korean 3rd Division formed a roadblock between Taejon and <unk> , cutting off the 21st Infantry in its reserve positions . The 21st Infantry was subsequently unable to join the fight . However it attempted to hold the route of escape for the rest of the division during most of the fight at Taejon . At the same time , tanks from the North Korean 105th Armored Division began to enter the city , followed by troops of the 3rd and 4th infantry divisions . There , the North Korean forces deployed , occupying key buildings throughout the city to establish sniper positions . American attacks against these positions later set fire to many of Taejon 's wooden buildings . North Korean forces prioritised and attempted to eliminate American gun emplacements , food stores , and ammunition dumps , having received information on the location of these facilities through agents operating in the city . 
 At Taejon , the battered 24th Infantry Division was ordered to make a stand . The 34th Infantry also moved to the city to oppose the North Korean forces , which assaulted it head @-@ on while attempting to flank and cut off retreat from the rear . Dean began ordering elements of the division , including much of his headquarters , to retreat via train to Taegu , although he remained behind . By this time , several M24 Chaffee light tanks had been sent to reinforce the division from A Company of the 78th Tank Battalion . Regardless of the additional tanks , on 20 July , North Korean armored units pushed American forces back from Taejon Airfield , several miles northwest of Taejon , overwhelming the last American units defending the Kum River and forcing the remnants of the division into Taejon itself . At this point the city was surrounded and North Korean troops began setting roadblocks along the roads out of the city . 
 For two days , the 34th Infantry fought the advancing North Koreans in bitter house @-@ to @-@ house fighting . North Korean soldiers continued to infiltrate the city , often disguised as farmers . The remaining elements of the 24th Infantry Division were pushed back block @-@ by @-@ block . Without radios , and unable to communicate with the remaining elements of the division , Dean joined the men on the front lines . At one point , he personally attacked a tank with a hand grenade , destroying it . Large columns of North Korean forces began marching on the city from the south roads , reinforcing those that had crossed the river . American forces pulled back after suffering heavy losses , allowing the North Korean 3rd and 4th divisions to move on the city freely from the north , south , and east roads . The 24th Infantry Division repeatedly attempted to establish its defensive lines , and was repeatedly pushed back by the numerically superior North Koreans . 
 = = = Taejon falls = = = 
 At the end of the day on 20 July , Dean ordered the headquarters of the 34th Infantry to withdraw . His command was reinforced by several more light tanks from the 1st Cavalry Division . As the tanks fought through a North Korean roadblock , Dean , with a small force of soldiers , followed them . At the edge of the city , the final elements of the 34th Infantry , leaving the city in 50 vehicles , were ambushed and many of their vehicles were destroyed by machine guns and mortars , forcing the Americans to retreat on foot . In the ensuing fight , Dean 's jeep made a wrong turn and was separated from the rest of the American forces . Unable to turn back , Dean and his party attempted to retreat to American lines on their own , but 35 days later , alone and lost in the hills , Dean was captured by North Korean forces . For most of his incarceration , the North Koreans were not aware of his rank . Dean repeatedly attempted to make the North Koreans kill him for fear of divulging information under torture . North Korean leaders had threatened to harm Dean if he did not cooperate but he was never actually tortured . Eventually his rank was uncovered , but they were unable to gather any intelligence from him . 
 When the last of the 34th Infantry 's defenders left the city , the 21st Infantry , which had been protecting the road to Taegu , also withdrew , leaving Taejon in the hands of the North Korean forces . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By the end of the battle , the Americans counted 922 men killed and 228 wounded with almost 2 @,@ 400 missing , most of these men from the 34th Infantry . Evidence suggests that the North Koreans executed some of the missing and captured prisoners immediately after the battle . Although badly mauled , the 24th Infantry Division accomplished its mission of delaying North Korean forces from advancing until 20 July . By that time , American forces had set up the Pusan Perimeter to the southeast . On 22 July , the 24th Infantry Division was relieved by the 1st Cavalry Division . It was put under the command of Major General John H. Church , in the absence of Dean , whose whereabouts were unknown . After three weeks of fighting , the division had suffered almost 30 percent casualties . Historians attribute the substantial tactical losses of the 24th Infantry division to a lack of training , equipment , and readiness , owing to extended time spent on occupation duty in Japan and without training . 
 North Korean casualties could not be estimated because of lack of communications between units during the battle , which limited the value of American signals intelligence . North Korean armor suffered heavy losses . A total of 15 – 20 North Korean tanks were destroyed by anti @-@ tank weapons and US aircraft , and North Korean prisoners estimated that 15 76 @-@ mm guns , six 122 @-@ mm mortars , and 200 artillerymen were lost . Losses among North Korean infantry were heavy , especially in the NK 3rd Division . The NK 3rd division was reported between 60 and 80 percent of its strength at the beginning of the battle and was reduced to 50 percent by its end , with total casualties ranging from 1 @,@ 250 to 3 @,@ 300 . 
 By the time the battle ended , the United States had moved enough forces onto the Korean Peninsula to roughly equal the number of attacking North Korean forces . For its delaying actions in and around Taejon , the 24th Infantry Division was awarded the Presidential Unit Citation and the Republic of Korea Presidential Unit Citation . The division went into reserve status while it rested and rebuilt , and the first unit of the division back into action , the 19th Infantry Regiment , moved to the front lines of the Pusan Perimeter on 1 August . 
 The first two Medals of Honor for the Korean War were awarded for the Battle of Taejon . For his actions on the front lines , Dean was awarded the first Medal of Honor , although he remained a prisoner of the North Koreans until the end of the war ( released in September 1953 ) . A second soldier , Sergeant George D. Libby , received the Medal of Honor posthumously , for tending to wounded soldiers during the evacuation : he repeatedly passed over shelled roads to help evacuate them . He was killed while trying to evacuate more soldiers . Additionally , a chaplain , Herman G. Felhoelter , was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for an incident later known as the Chaplain @-@ Medic Massacre which took place during the battle near the Kum River . 
 = Bubbles ( video game ) = 
 Bubbles is an arcade video game developed by Williams Electronics and released in 1982 . The player uses a joystick to control a bubble in a kitchen sink . The object is to progress through levels by cleaning the sink while avoiding enemies . The game received a mixed reception from critics . 
 Development was handled by John Kotlarik and Python Anghelo . Kotlarik wanted to create a non @-@ violent game inspired by Pac @-@ Man . Anghelo designed the game 's artwork and scenario as well as a special plastic cabinet that saw limited use . Bubbles was not ported to any contemporary systems , but was later released as a web @-@ based version and on home consoles as part of arcade compilations . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Bubbles is an action game with puzzle elements where the player controls the protagonist , a soap bubble , from a top @-@ down perspective . The object is to clean a kitchen sink by maneuvering over ants , crumbs , and grease spots to absorb them before they slide into the drain . As the bubble absorbs more objects , it grows in size , eventually acquiring first eyes and then a smiling mouth . At the same time , sponges and scrub brushes slowly move around the sink , cleaning it on their own in competition with the player . Touching either of these enemies costs a player one life unless the bubble is large enough to have a complete face . In this case , the enemy will be knocked away and the bubble will shrink . Sponges and brushes can be knocked into the drain for bonus points , eliminating them from play . Two other enemies in the sink are stationary razor blades and roaches that crawl out of the drain . Contact with a blade is always fatal , while the bubble can safely touch the roach only while carrying a broom , which will kill the roach with one hit . The broom can be acquired by running over a cleaning lady who appears in the sink from time to time . 
 A level ends when all of the point @-@ scoring objects are gone - either lost down the drain , cleaned by sponges / brushes , eaten by roaches , or absorbed by the bubble . At this point , if the bubble is large enough to have a complete face , the player moves on to the next level ; otherwise , one life is lost and the level must be replayed . In addition , whenever the bubble has a face , the drain flashes green , giving the player a chance to enter it and skip the next level . Entering the drain while the bubble is too small costs one life . 
 = = Development = = 
 The game features monaural sound and pixel graphics on a 19 inch CRT monitor . The initial concept was conceived by John Kotlarik , who aimed to create a non @-@ violent game . Inspired by Pac @-@ Man , he envisioned similar gameplay in an open playing field rather than in a maze . Python Anghelo furthered the concept by creating artwork and a scenario . Kotlarik designed the protagonist to have fluid movement like it was traveling on a slick surface . The control scheme allows the digital input to operate similar to an analogue one . He programmed the bubble to accelerate in the direction the joystick is held . Once the joystick returns to its neutral position , the bubble will coast as the velocity slowly decreases . Anghelo designed the artwork for the wooden cabinets as well as a new cylindrical , plastic cabinet . Gary Berge , a mechanical engineer , created the new cabinets with a rotational molding process . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The game received a mixed reception from critics . Author John Sellers listed it among the weirder arcade games released . Clare Edgeley of Computer and Video Games echoed similar statements . She criticized the game , stating that the constant blue background was dull and the game lacked longevity . Retro Gamer 's Darran Jones described the game as engrossing and obscure . He also expressed disappointment that few people remember it . Brett Alan Weiss of AllGame called Bubbles a slightly underrated game . He stated that while it lacked excitement , its gameplay was enjoyable . Weiss further commented that the control scheme was unique for its time , and that the number of on @-@ screen objects moving smoothly was impressive . 
 The game was later remade for different platforms . In 2000 , a web @-@ based version of Bubbles , along with nine other classic arcade games , was published on <unk> Four years later , Midway Games also launched a website featuring the Shockwave versions . Williams Electronics included Bubbles in several of its arcade compilations : the 1996 Williams Arcade 's Greatest Hits , the 2000 Midway 's Greatest Arcade Hits ( Dreamcast version only ) , the 2003 Midway Arcade Treasures , and the 2012 Midway Arcade Origins . 
 Bubbles arcade cabinets have varying degrees of rarity . The cocktail and cabaret are the rarest , followed by the plastic and upright versions ; the plastic models are more valuable among collectors . Though the plastic cabinets were very durable , they would shrink over time , sometimes causing the device to become inoperable . Williams Electronics used this cabinet for only one other game , Blaster . 
 = Common blackbird = 
 The common blackbird ( Turdus merula ) is a species of true thrush . It is also called Eurasian blackbird ( especially in North America , to distinguish it from the unrelated New World blackbirds ) , or simply blackbird where this does not lead to confusion with a similar @-@ looking local species . It breeds in Europe , Asia , and North Africa , and has been introduced to Canada , United States , Mexico , Peru , Brazil , Argentina , Uruguay , the Falkland Islands , Chile , South Africa , Australia and New Zealand . It has a number of subspecies across its large range ; a few of the Asian subspecies are sometimes considered to be full species . Depending on latitude , the common blackbird may be resident , partially migratory , or fully migratory . 
 The male of the nominate subspecies , which is found throughout most of Europe , is all black except for a yellow eye @-@ ring and bill and has a rich , melodious song ; the adult female and juvenile have mainly dark brown plumage . This species breeds in woods and gardens , building a neat , mud @-@ lined , cup @-@ shaped nest . It is omnivorous , eating a wide range of insects , earthworms , berries , and fruits . 
 Both sexes are territorial on the breeding grounds , with distinctive threat displays , but are more gregarious during migration and in wintering areas . Pairs stay in their territory throughout the year where the climate is sufficiently temperate . This common and conspicuous species has given rise to a number of literary and cultural references , frequently related to its song . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The common blackbird was described by Linnaeus in the 10th edition of his Systema Naturae in 1758 as Turdus merula ( characterised as T. ater , <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The binomial name derives from two Latin words , <unk> , " thrush " , and merula , " blackbird " , the latter giving rise to its French name , merle , and its Scots name , <unk> . About 65 species of medium to large thrushes are in the genus Turdus , characterised by rounded heads , longish , pointed wings , and usually melodious songs . The common blackbird seems to be closest in evolutionary terms to the island thrush ( T. poliocephalus ) of Southeast Asia and islands in the southwest Pacific , which probably diverged from T. merula stock fairly recently . 
 It may not immediately be clear why the name " blackbird " , first recorded in 1486 , was applied to this species , but not to one of the various other common black English birds , such as the carrion crow , raven , rook , or jackdaw . However , in Old English , and in modern English up to about the 18th century , " bird " was used only for smaller or young birds , and larger ones such as crows were called " fowl " . At that time , the blackbird was therefore the only widespread and conspicuous " black bird " in the British Isles . Until about the 17th century , another name for the species was ouzel , <unk> or <unk> ( from Old English <unk> , cf . German <unk> ) . Another variant occurs in Act 3 of Shakespeare 's A Midsummer Night 's Dream , where Bottom refers to " The <unk> <unk> , so <unk> of hew , With <unk> @-@ tawny bill " . The ouzel usage survived later in poetry , and still occurs as the name of the closely related ring ouzel ( Turdus torquatus ) , and in water ouzel , an alternative name for the unrelated but superficially similar white @-@ throated dipper ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Two related Asian Turdus thrushes , the white @-@ collared blackbird ( T. <unk> ) and the grey @-@ winged blackbird ( T. <unk> ) , are also named blackbirds , and the Somali thrush ( T. ( olivaceus ) <unk> ) is alternatively known as the Somali blackbird . 
 The <unk> family of the New World is sometimes called the blackbird family because of some species ' superficial resemblance to the common blackbird and other Old World thrushes , but they are not evolutionarily close , being related to the New World warblers and tanagers . The term is often limited to smaller species with mostly or entirely black plumage , at least in the breeding male , notably the cowbirds , the grackles , and for around 20 species with " blackbird " in the name , such as the red @-@ winged blackbird and the melodious blackbird . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 As would be expected for a widespread passerine bird species , several geographical subspecies are recognised . The treatment of subspecies in this article follows Clement et al . ( 2000 ) . 
 T. m. merula , the nominate subspecies , breeds commonly throughout much of Europe from Iceland , the Faroes and the British Isles east to the Ural Mountains and north to about 70 N , where it is fairly scarce . A small population breeds in the Nile Valley . Birds from the north of the range winter throughout Europe and around the Mediterranean including Cyprus and North Africa . The introduced birds in Australia and New Zealand are of the nominate race . 
 T. m. <unk> is a small race which breeds in the Azores . The male is darker and glossier than merula . 
 T. m. cabrerae , named for Ángel Cabrera , Spanish zoologist , resembles <unk> and breeds in Madeira and the western Canary Islands . 
 T. m. <unk> , another small dark species with a glossy black male plumage , breeds in central and northern Morocco , coastal Algeria and northern Tunisia . 
 T m. aterrimus breeds in Hungary , south and east to southern Greece , Crete northern Turkey and northern Iran . It winters in southern Turkey , northern Egypt , Iraq and southern Iran . It is smaller than merula with a duller male and paler female plumage . 
 T. m. <unk> breeds on the Mediterranean coast of southern Turkey south to Jordan , Israel and the northern Sinai . It is mostly resident , but part of the population moves south west or west to winter in the Jordan Valley and in the Nile Delta of northern Egypt south to about Cairo . Both sexes of this subspecies are darker and greyer than the equivalent merula plumages . 
 T. m. intermedius is an Asiatic race breeding from Central Russia to Tajikistan , western and north east Afghanistan , and eastern China . Many birds are resident but some are altitudinal migrants and occur in southern Afghanistan and southern Iraq in winter . This is a large subspecies , with a sooty @-@ black male and a blackish @-@ brown female . 
 The Asian subspecies , the relatively large intermedius also differs in structure and voice , and may represent a distinct species . Alternatively , it has been suggested that they should be considered subspecies of T. maximus , but they differ in structure , voice and the appearance of the eye @-@ ring . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 In Europe , the common blackbird can be confused with the paler @-@ winged first @-@ winter ring ouzel ( Turdus torquatus ) or the superficially similar European starling ( Sturnus vulgaris ) . A number of similar Turdus thrushes exist far outside the range of the common blackbird , for example the South American <unk> thrush ( Turdus <unk> ) . The Indian blackbird , the Tibetan blackbird , and the Chinese blackbird were formerly considered subspecies . 
 = = Description = = 
 The common blackbird of the nominate subspecies T. m. merula is 23 @.@ 5 to 29 centimetres ( 9 @.@ 25 to 11 @.@ 4 in ) in length , has a long tail , and weighs 80 – 125 grams ( 2 @.@ 8 to 4 @.@ 4 oz ) . The adult male has glossy black plumage , blackish @-@ brown legs , a yellow eye @-@ ring and an orange @-@ yellow bill . The bill darkens somewhat in winter . The adult female is sooty @-@ brown with a dull yellowish @-@ brownish bill , a brownish @-@ white throat and some weak mottling on the breast . The juvenile is similar to the female , but has pale spots on the upperparts , and the very young juvenile also has a speckled breast . Young birds vary in the shade of brown , with darker birds presumably males . The first year male resembles the adult male , but has a dark bill and weaker eye ring , and its folded wing is brown , rather than black like the body plumage . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The common blackbird breeds in temperate Eurasia , North Africa , the Canary Islands , and South Asia . It has been introduced to Australia and New Zealand . Populations are sedentary in the south and west of the range , although northern birds migrate south as far as northern Africa and tropical Asia in winter . Urban males are more likely to overwinter in cooler climes than rural males , an adaptation made feasible by the warmer microclimate and relatively abundant food that allow the birds to establish territories and start reproducing earlier in the year . 
 Common over most of its range in woodland , the common blackbird has a preference for deciduous trees with dense undergrowth . However , gardens provide the best breeding habitat with up to 7 @.@ 3 pairs per hectare ( nearly three pairs per acre ) , with woodland typically holding about a tenth of that density , and open and very built @-@ up habitats even less . They are often replaced by the related ring ouzel in areas of higher altitude . 
 The common blackbird occurs up to 1000 metres ( 3300 ft ) in Europe , 2300 metres ( <unk> ft ) in North Africa , and at 900 – 1820 metres ( 3000 – 6000 ft ) in peninsular India and Sri Lanka , but the large Himalayan subspecies range much higher , with T. m. maximus breeding at 3200 – 4800 metres ( <unk> – 16000 ft ) and remaining above 2100 metres ( 6930 ft ) even in winter . 
 This widespread species has occurred as a vagrant in many locations in Eurasia outside its normal range , but records from North America are normally considered to involve escapees , including , for example , the 1971 bird in Quebec . However , a 1994 record from Bonavista , Newfoundland , has been accepted as a genuine wild bird , and the species is therefore on the North American list . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 The male common blackbird defends its breeding territory , chasing away other males or utilising a " bow and run " threat display . This consists of a short run , the head first being raised and then bowed with the tail dipped simultaneously . If a fight between male blackbirds does occur , it is usually short and the intruder is soon chased away . The female blackbird is also aggressive in the spring when it competes with other females for a good nesting territory , and although fights are less frequent , they tend to be more violent . 
 The bill 's appearance is important in the interactions of the common blackbird . The territory @-@ holding male responds more aggressively towards models with orange bills than to those with yellow bills , and reacts least to the brown bill colour typical of the first @-@ year male . The female is , however , relatively indifferent to bill colour , but responds instead to shinier bills . 
 As long as winter food is available , both the male and female will remain in the territory throughout the year , although occupying different areas . Migrants are more gregarious , travelling in small flocks and feeding in loose groups in the wintering grounds . The flight of migrating birds comprises bursts of rapid wing beats interspersed with level or diving movement , and differs from both the normal fast agile flight of this species and the more dipping action of larger thrushes . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The male common blackbird attracts the female with a courtship display which consists of oblique runs combined with head @-@ bowing movements , an open beak , and a " strangled " low song . The female remains motionless until she raises her head and tail to permit copulation . This species is monogamous , and the established pair will usually stay together as long as they both survive . Pair separation rates of up to 20 % have been noted following poor breeding . Although the species is socially monogamous , there have been studies showing as much as 17 % extra @-@ pair paternity . 
 Nominate T. merula may commence breeding in March , but eastern and Indian races are a month or more later , and the introduced New Zealand birds start nesting in August ( late winter ) . The breeding pair prospect for a suitable nest site in a creeper or bush , favouring evergreen or thorny species such as ivy , holly , hawthorn , honeysuckle or <unk> . Sometimes the birds will nest in sheds or outbuildings where a ledge or cavity is used . The cup @-@ shaped nest is made with grasses , leaves and other vegetation , bound together with mud . It is built by the female alone . She lays three to five ( usually four ) bluish @-@ green eggs marked with reddish @-@ brown blotches , heaviest at the larger end ; the eggs of nominate T. merula are 2 @.@ 9 × 2 @.@ 1 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 14 × 0 @.@ 93 in ) in size and weigh 7 @.@ 2 grammes ( 0 @.@ 25 oz ) , of which 6 % is shell . Eggs of birds of the southern Indian races are paler than those from the northern subcontinent and Europe . The female incubates for 12 – 14 days before the altricial chicks are hatched naked and blind . Fledging takes another 10 – 19 ( average 13 @.@ 6 ) days , with both parents feeding the young and removing faecal sacs . The nest is often ill @-@ concealed compared with those of other species , and many breeding attempts fail due to predation . The young are fed by the parents for up to three weeks after leaving the nest , and will follow the adults begging for food . If the female starts another nest , the male alone will feed the fledged young . Second broods are common , with the female reusing the same nest if the brood was successful , and three broods may be raised in the south of the common blackbird 's range . 
 A common blackbird has an average life expectancy of 2 @.@ 4 years , and , based on data from bird ringing , the oldest recorded age is 21 years and 10 months . 
 = = = Songs and calls = = = 
 Within its native Northern Hemisphere range , the first @-@ year male common blackbird of the nominate race may start singing as early as late January in fine weather in order to establish a territory , followed in late March by the adult male . The male 's song is a varied and melodious low @-@ pitched fluted warble , given from trees , rooftops or other elevated perches mainly in the period from March to June , sometimes into the beginning of July . It has a number of other calls , including an aggressive <unk> , a pook @-@ pook @-@ pook alarm for terrestrial predators like cats , and various chink and chook , chook vocalisations . The territorial male invariably gives chink @-@ chink calls in the evening in an ( usually unsuccessful ) attempt to deter other blackbirds from roosting in its territory overnight . During the northern winter , blackbirds can be heard quietly singing to themselves , so much so that September and October are the only months which the song cannot be heard . Like other passerine birds , it has a thin high <unk> alarm call for threats from birds of prey since the sound is rapidly attenuated in vegetation , making the source difficult to locate . 
 At least two subspecies , T. m. merula and T. m. <unk> , will mimic other species of birds , cats , humans or alarms , but this is usually quiet and hard to detect . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The common blackbird is omnivorous , eating a wide range of insects , earthworms , seeds and berries . It feeds mainly on the ground , running and hopping with a start @-@ stop @-@ start progress . It pulls earthworms from the soil , usually finding them by sight , but sometimes by hearing , and roots through leaf litter for other invertebrates . Small amphibians and lizards are occasionally hunted . This species will also perch in bushes to take berries and collect caterpillars and other active insects . Animal prey predominates , and is particularly important during the breeding season , with windfall apples and berries taken more in the autumn and winter . The nature of the fruit taken depends on what is locally available , and frequently includes exotics in gardens . 
 = = = Natural threats = = = 
 Near human habitation the main predator of the common blackbird is the domestic cat , with newly fledged young especially vulnerable . Foxes and predatory birds , such as the sparrowhawk and other accipiters , also take this species when the opportunity arises . However , there is little direct evidence to show that either predation of the adult blackbirds or loss of the eggs and chicks to corvids , such as the European magpie or Eurasian jay , decrease population numbers . 
 This species is occasionally a host of parasitic cuckoos , such as the common cuckoo ( Cuculus canorus ) , but this is minimal because the common blackbird recognizes the adult of the parasitic species and its non @-@ mimetic eggs . In the UK , only three nests of 59 @,@ 770 examined ( 0 @.@ 005 % ) contained cuckoo eggs . The introduced merula blackbird in New Zealand , where the cuckoo does not occur , has , over the past 130 years , lost the ability to recognize the adult common cuckoo but still rejects non @-@ mimetic eggs . 
 As with other passerine birds , parasites are common . 88 % of common blackbirds were found to have intestinal parasites , most frequently Isospora and Capillaria species. and more than 80 % had <unk> parasites ( Leucocytozoon , Plasmodium , Haemoproteus and Trypanosoma species ) . 
 Common blackbirds spend much of their time looking for food on the ground where they can become infested with ticks , which are external parasites that most commonly attach to the head of a blackbird . In France , 74 % of rural blackbirds were found to be infested with Ixodes ticks , whereas , only 2 % of blackbirds living in urban habitats were infested . This is partly because it is more difficult for ticks to find another host on lawns and gardens in urban areas than in uncultivated rural areas , and partly because ticks are likely to be commoner in rural areas , where a variety of tick hosts , such as foxes , deer and boar , are more numerous . Although ixodid ticks can transmit pathogenic viruses and bacteria , and are known to transmit Borrelia bacteria to birds , there is no evidence that this affects the fitness of blackbirds except when they are exhausted and run down after migration . 
 The common blackbird is one of a number of species which has <unk> slow @-@ wave sleep . One hemisphere of the brain is effectively asleep , while a low @-@ voltage EEG , characteristic of wakefulness , is present in the other . The benefit of this is that the bird can rest in areas of high predation or during long migratory flights , but still retain a degree of alertness . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 The common blackbird has an extensive range , estimated at 10 million square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 8 million square miles ) , and a large population , including an estimated 79 to 160 million individuals in Europe alone . The species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and is therefore evaluated as Least Concern . In the western Palaearctic , populations are generally stable or increasing , but there have been local declines , especially on farmland , which may be due to agricultural policies that encouraged farmers to remove hedgerows ( which provide nesting places ) , and to drain damp grassland and increase the use of pesticides , both of which could have reduced the availability of invertebrate food . 
 The common blackbird was introduced to Australia by a bird dealer visiting Melbourne in early 1857 , and its range has expanded from its initial foothold in Melbourne and Adelaide to include all of south @-@ eastern Australia , including Tasmania and the Bass Strait islands . The introduced population in Australia is considered a pest because it damages a variety of soft fruits in orchards , parks and gardens including berries , cherries , stone fruit and grapes . It is thought to spread weeds , such as blackberry , and may compete with native birds for food and nesting sites . 
 The introduced common blackbird is , together with the native silvereye ( Zosterops lateralis ) , the most widely distributed avian seed disperser in New Zealand . Introduced there along with the song thrush ( Turdus philomelos ) in 1862 , it has spread throughout the country up to an elevation of 1 @,@ 500 metres ( 4 @,@ 921 ft ) , as well as outlying islands such as the Campbell and <unk> . It eats a wide range of native and exotic fruit , and makes a major contribution to the development of communities of naturalised woody weeds . These communities provide fruit more suited to non @-@ endemic native birds and naturalised birds , than to endemic birds . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The common blackbird was seen as a sacred though destructive bird in Classical Greek folklore , and was said to die if it consumed pomegranate . Like many other small birds , it has in the past been trapped in rural areas at its night roosts as an easily available addition to the diet , and in medieval times the conceit of placing live birds under a pie crust just before serving may have been the origin of the familiar nursery rhyme : 
 Sing a song of sixpence , 
 A pocket full of rye ; 
 Four and twenty blackbirds baked in a pie ! 
 When the pie was opened the birds began to sing , 
 Oh wasn 't that a dainty dish to set before the king ? 
 The common blackbird 's melodious , distinctive song is mentioned in the poem <unk> by Edward Thomas ; 
 And for that minute a blackbird sang 
 Close by , and round him , <unk> , 
 Farther and farther , all the birds 
 Of Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire . 
 In the English Christmas carol The Twelve Days of Christmas , the line commonly sung today as " four calling birds " is believed to have originally been written in the 18th century as " four <unk> birds " , an archaism meaning " black as coal " that was a popular English nickname for the common blackbird . 
 The common blackbird , unlike many black creatures , is not normally seen as a symbol of bad luck , but R. S. Thomas wrote that there is " a suggestion of dark Places about it " , and it symbolised resignation in the 17th century tragic play The Duchess of Malfi ; an alternate connotation is vigilance , the bird 's clear cry warning of danger . 
 The common blackbird is the national bird of Sweden , which has a breeding population of 1 – 2 million pairs , and was featured on a 30 öre Christmas postage stamp in 1970 ; it has also featured on a number of other stamps issued by European and Asian countries , including a 1966 4d British stamp and an 1998 Irish 30p stamp . This bird — arguably — also gives rise to the Serbian name for Kosovo , which is the possessive adjectival form of Serbian <unk> ( " blackbird " ) as in Kosovo Polje ( " Blackbird Field " ) . 
 = = = Species information = = = 
 " BBC Science & Nature – Blackbird , with song clip " . Retrieved 26 December 2007 . 
 " Birds of Britain – Blackbird " . Retrieved 27 December 2007 . 
 " Madeira Birds – Information on subspecies cabrerae " . Retrieved 27 December 2007 . 
 " RSPB – Blackbird , including video and sound clips " . Retrieved 27 December 2007 . 
 Ageing and sexing ( PDF ; 5 @.@ 3 MB ) by Javier Blasco @-@ <unk> & Gerd @-@ Michael Heinze 
 Feathers of Common Blackbird ( Turdus merula ) 
 = = = Sounds and videos = = = 
 Audio recordings of Blackbird on Xeno @-@ canto . 
 Blackbird videos , photos & sounds on the Internet Bird Collection . Retrieved on 2007 @-@ 12 @-@ 27 
 Other Blackbird songs on <unk> 
 Video of bird eating mealworms 
 = = = Images = = = 
 " <unk> – Blackbird still images " . Retrieved 27 December 2007 . 
 = 2008 Mumbai attacks = 
 The 2008 Mumbai attacks were a series of attacks that took place in November 2008 , when 10 members of Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba , an Islamic militant organisation based in Pakistan , carried out a series of 12 coordinated shooting and bombing attacks lasting four days across Mumbai . The attacks , which drew widespread global condemnation , began on Wednesday , 26 November and lasted until Saturday , 29 November 2008 , killing 164 people and wounding at least 308 . 
 Eight of the attacks occurred in South Mumbai : at Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus , the Oberoi Trident , the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower , Leopold Cafe , Cama Hospital , the Nariman House Jewish community centre , the Metro Cinema , and in a lane behind the Times of India building and St. Xavier 's College . There was also an explosion at Mazagaon , in Mumbai 's port area , and in a taxi at Vile Parle . By the early morning of 28 November , all sites except for the Taj Hotel had been secured by Mumbai Police and security forces . On 29 November , India 's National Security Guards ( NSG ) conducted ' Operation Black Tornado ' to flush out the remaining attackers ; it resulted in the deaths of the last remaining attackers at the Taj Hotel and ending all fighting in the attacks . 
 Ajmal Kasab disclosed that the attackers were members of Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba , among others . The Government of India said that the attackers came from Pakistan , and their controllers were in Pakistan . On 7 January 2009 , Pakistan confirmed the sole surviving perpetrator of the attacks was a Pakistani citizen . On 9 April 2015 , the foremost ringleader of the attacks , Zaki ur Rehman Lakhvi , was granted bail against surety bonds of ₨ 200 @,@ 000 ( US $ 2 @,@ 000 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 There have been many non @-@ state attacks in Mumbai since the 13 coordinated bomb explosions that killed 257 people and injured 700 on 12 March 1993 . The 1993 attacks are believed to have been in retaliation for the Babri Mosque demolition . 
 On 6 December 2002 , a blast in a BEST bus near Ghatkopar station killed two people and injured 28 . The bombing occurred on the 10th anniversary of the demolition of the Babri Mosque in Ayodhya . A bicycle bomb exploded near the Vile Parle station in Mumbai , killing one person and injuring 25 on 27 January 2003 , a day before the visit of the Prime Minister of India Atal Bihari Vajpayee to the city . On 13 March 2003 , a day after the 10th anniversary of the 1993 Bombay bombings , a bomb exploded in a train compartment near the Mulund station , killing 10 people and injuring 70 . On 28 July 2003 , a blast in a BEST bus in Ghatkopar killed 4 people and injured 32 . On 25 August 2003 , two bombs exploded in South Mumbai , one near the Gateway of India and the other at Zaveri Bazaar in <unk> . At least 44 people were killed and 150 injured . On 11 July 2006 , seven bombs exploded within 11 minutes on the Suburban Railway in Mumbai , killing 209 people , including 22 foreigners and more than 700 injured . According to the Mumbai Police , the bombings were carried out by Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba and Students Islamic Movement of India ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 A group of men , sometimes stated as 24 , at other times 26 , received training in marine warfare at a remote camp in mountainous <unk> . Part of the training was reported to have taken place on the <unk> Dam reservoir . 
 The recruits went through the following stages of training , according to Indian and US media reports : 
 Psychological : Indoctrination to Islamist ideas , including imagery of atrocities suffered by Muslims in India , Chechnya , Palestine and across the globe . 
 Basic Combat : Lashkar 's basic combat training and methodology course , the <unk> Aam . 
 Advanced Training : Selected to undergo advanced combat training at a camp near <unk> , a course the organisation calls the <unk> <unk> . According to an unnamed source at the US Defense Department this includes advanced weapons and explosives training supervised by retired personnel of the Pakistan Army , along with survival training and further indoctrination . 
 Commando Training : Finally , an even smaller group selected for specialised commando tactics training and marine navigation training given to the Fedayeen unit selected in order to target Mumbai . 
 From the students , 10 were handpicked for the Mumbai mission . They also received training in swimming and sailing , besides the use of high @-@ end weapons and explosives under the supervision of LeT commanders . According to a media report citing an unnamed former Defence Department Official of the US , the intelligence agencies of the US had determined that former officers from Pakistan 's Army and Inter @-@ Services Intelligence agency assisted actively and continuously in training . They were given blueprints of all the four targets – Taj Mahal Palace & Tower , Oberoi Trident , Nariman House and Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus . 
 = = Attacks = = 
 The first events were detailed around 20 : 00 Indian Standard Time ( IST ) on 26 November , when 10 men in inflatable speedboats came ashore at two locations in Colaba . They reportedly told local Marathi @-@ speaking fishermen who asked them who they were to " mind their own business " before they split up and headed two different ways . The fishermen 's subsequent report to police received little response and local police were helpless . 
 = = = Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus = = = 
 The Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus ( CST ) was attacked by two gunmen . One of them , Ajmal Kasab , was later caught alive by the police and identified by eyewitnesses . The attacks began around 21 : 30 when the two men entered the passenger hall and opened fire , using AK @-@ 47 rifles . The attackers killed 58 people and injured 104 others , their assault ending at about 22 : 45 . Security forces and emergency services arrived shortly afterwards . Announcements by a railway announcer , Vishnu <unk> <unk> , alerted passengers to leave the station and saved scores of lives . The two gunmen fled the scene and fired at pedestrians and police officers in the streets , killing eight police officers . The attackers passed a police station . Knowing that they were outgunned against the heavily armed terrorists , the police officers at the station , instead of confronting the terrorists , decided to switch off the lights and secure the gates . 
 The attackers then headed towards Cama Hospital with an intention to kill patients , but the hospital staff locked all of the patient wards . A team of the Mumbai Anti @-@ Terrorist Squad led by police chief Hemant Karkare searched the Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus and then left in pursuit of Kasab and Khan . Kasab and Khan opened fire on the vehicle in a lane next to the hospital , and received return fire in response . Karkare , Vijay <unk> , Ashok Kamte and one of their officers were killed . The only survivor , Constable Arun Jadhav , was severely wounded . Kasab and Khan seized the police vehicle but later abandoned it and seized a passenger car instead . They then ran into a police roadblock , which had been set up after Jadhav radioed for help . A gun battle then ensued in which Khan was killed and Kasab was wounded . After a physical struggle , Kasab was arrested . A police officer , Tukaram <unk> was also killed when he ran in front of Kasab to shoot him . 
 = = = Leopold Cafe = = = 
 The Leopold Cafe , a popular restaurant and bar on Colaba Causeway in South Mumbai , was one of the first sites to be attacked . Two attackers opened fire on the cafe on the evening of 26 November , killing at least 10 people , ( including some foreigners ) , and injuring many more . 
 = = = Bomb blasts in taxis = = = 
 There were two explosions in taxis caused by timer bombs . The first one occurred at 22 : 40 at Vile Parle , killing the driver and a passenger . The second explosion took place at Wadi Bunder between 22 : 20 and 22 : 25 . Three people , including the driver of the taxi were killed , and about 15 others were injured . 
 = = = Taj Mahal Hotel and Oberoi Trident = = = 
 Two hotels , the Taj Mahal Palace & Tower and the Oberoi Trident , were among the four locations targeted . Six explosions were reported at the Taj hotel – one in the lobby , two in the elevators , three in the restaurant – and one at the Oberoi Trident . At the Taj Mahal , firefighters rescued 200 hostages from windows using ladders during the first night . 
 CNN initially reported on the morning of 27 November 2008 that the hostage situation at the Taj had been resolved and quoted the police chief of Maharashtra stating that all hostages were freed ; however , it was learned later that day that there were still two attackers holding hostages , including foreigners , in the Taj Mahal hotel . 
 A number of European Parliament Committee on International Trade delegates were staying in the Taj Mahal hotel when it was attacked , but none of them were injured . British Conservative Member of the European Parliament ( MEP ) Sajjad Karim ( who was in the lobby when attackers initially opened fire there ) and German Social Democrat MEP Erika Mann were hiding in different parts of the building . Also reported present was Spanish MEP Ignasi <unk> , who was barricaded in a hotel room . Another British Conservative MEP , Syed Kamall , reported that he along with several other MEPs left the hotel and went to a nearby restaurant shortly before the attack . Kamall also reported that Polish MEP Jan <unk> was thought to have been sleeping in his hotel room when the attacks started , but eventually left the hotel safely . Kamall and <unk> reported that a Hungarian MEP 's assistant was shot . Also caught up in the shooting were the President of Madrid , Esperanza Aguirre , while checking in at the Oberoi Trident , and Indian MP N. N. <unk> of Kerala and <unk> Noon while having dinner at a restaurant in the Taj Hotel . 
 = = = Nariman House = = = 
 Nariman House , a Chabad Lubavitch Jewish centre in Colaba known as the Mumbai Chabad House , was taken over by two attackers and several residents were held hostage . Police evacuated adjacent buildings and exchanged fire with the attackers , wounding one . Local residents were told to stay inside . The attackers threw a grenade into a nearby lane , causing no casualties . NSG commandos arrived from Delhi , and a naval helicopter took an aerial survey . During the first day , 9 hostages were rescued from the first floor . The following day , the house was stormed by NSG commandos fast @-@ roping from helicopters onto the roof , covered by snipers positioned in nearby buildings . After a long battle , one NSG commando <unk> <unk> Singh <unk> and both perpetrators were killed . Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife Rivka Holtzberg , who was six months pregnant , were murdered with four other hostages inside the house by the attackers . 
 According to radio transmissions picked up by Indian intelligence , the attackers " would be told by their handlers in Pakistan that the lives of Jews were worth 50 times those of non @-@ Jews . " Injuries on some of the bodies indicated that they may have been tortured . 
 = = = NSG raid = = = 
 During the attacks , both hotels were surrounded by Rapid Action Force personnel and Marine Commandos ( <unk> ) and National Security Guards ( NSG ) commandos . When reports emerged that attackers were receiving television broadcasts , feeds to the hotels were blocked . Security forces stormed both hotels , and all nine attackers were killed by the morning of 29 November . Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan of the NSG was killed during the rescue of Commando Sunil Yadav , who was hit in the leg by a bullet during the rescue operations at Taj . 32 hostages were killed at the Oberoi Trident . 
 NSG commandos then took on the Nariman house , and a Naval helicopter took an aerial survey . During the first day , 9 hostages were rescued from the first floor . The following day , the house was stormed by NSG commandos fast @-@ roping from helicopters onto the roof , covered by snipers positioned in nearby buildings . NSG Commando <unk> <unk> Singh <unk> , who was part of the team that fast @-@ roped onto Nariman House , died after a long battle in which both perpetrators were also killed . Rabbi Gavriel Holtzberg and his wife Rivka Holtzberg , who was six months pregnant , were murdered with four other hostages inside the house by the attackers . By the morning of 27 November , the NSG had secured the Jewish outreach centre at Nariman House as well as the Oberoi Trident hotel . They also incorrectly believed that the Taj Mahal Palace and Towers had been cleared of attackers , and soldiers were leading hostages and holed @-@ up guests to safety , and removing bodies of those killed in the attacks . However , later news reports indicated that there were still two or three attackers in the Taj , with explosions heard and gunfire exchanged . Fires were also reported at the ground floor of the Taj with plumes of smoke arising from the first floor . The final operation at the Taj Mahal Palace hotel was completed by the NSG commandos at 08 : 00 on 29 November , killing three attackers and resulting in the conclusion of the attacks . The NSG rescued 250 people from the Oberoi , 300 from the Taj and 60 people ( members of 12 different families ) from Nariman House . In addition , police seized a boat filled with arms and explosives anchored at <unk> dock off Mumbai harbour . 
 = = Attribution = = 
 The Mumbai attacks were planned and directed by Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba militants inside Pakistan , and carried out by 10 young armed men trained and sent to Mumbai and directed from inside Pakistan via mobile phones and VoIP . 
 In July 2009 Pakistani authorities confirmed that LeT plotted and financed the attacks from LeT camps in Karachi and Thatta . In November 2009 , Pakistani authorities charged seven men they had arrested earlier , of planning and executing the assault . 
 Mumbai police originally identified 37 suspects — including two army officers — for their alleged involvement in the plot . All but two of the suspects , many of whom are identified only through aliases , are Pakistani . Two more suspects arrested in the United States in October 2009 for other attacks were also found to have been involved in planning the Mumbai attacks . One of these men , Pakistani American David Headley , was found to have made several trips to India before the attacks and gathered video and GPS information on behalf of the plotters . 
 In April 2011 , the United States issued arrest warrants for four Pakistani men as suspects in the attack . The men , Sajid Mir , Abu <unk> , Mazhar Iqbal alias " Major Iqbal " , are believed to be members of Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba and helped plan and train the attackers . 
 = = = Negotiations with Pakistan = = = 
 Pakistan initially denied that Pakistanis were responsible for the attacks , blaming plotters in Bangladesh and Indian criminals , a claim refuted by India , and saying they needed information from India on other bombings first . 
 Pakistani authorities finally agreed that Ajmal Kasab was a Pakistani on 7 January 2009 , and registered a case against three other Pakistani nationals . 
 The Indian government supplied evidence to Pakistan and other governments , in the form of interrogations , weapons , and call records of conversations during the attacks . In addition , Indian government officials said that the attacks were so sophisticated that they must have had official backing from Pakistani " agencies " , an accusation denied by Pakistan . 
 Under US and UN pressure , Pakistan arrested a few members of Jamaat ud @-@ Dawa and briefly put its founder under house arrest , but he was found to be free a few days later . A year after the attacks , Mumbai police continued to complain that Pakistani authorities were not co @-@ operating by providing information for their investigation . Meanwhile , journalists in Pakistan said security agencies were preventing them from interviewing people from Kasab 's village . Home Minister P. Chidambaram said the Pakistani authorities had not shared any information about American suspects Headley and Rana , but that the FBI had been more forthcoming . 
 An Indian report , summarising intelligence gained from India 's interrogation of David Headley , was released in October 2010 . It alleged that Pakistan 's intelligence agency ( ISI ) had provided support for the attacks by providing funding for reconnaissance missions in Mumbai . The report included Headley 's claim that Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba 's chief military commander , Zaki @-@ ur @-@ Rahman Lakhvi , had close ties to the ISI . He alleged that " every big action of LeT is done in close coordination with [ the ] ISI . " 
 = = = Investigation = = = 
 According to investigations , the attackers travelled by sea from Karachi , Pakistan , across the Arabian Sea , hijacked the Indian fishing trawler ' Kuber ' , killed the crew of four , then forced the captain to sail to Mumbai . After murdering the captain , the attackers entered Mumbai on a rubber dinghy . The captain of ' Kuber ' , Amar Singh Solanki , had earlier been imprisoned for six months in a Pakistani jail for illegally fishing in Pakistani waters . The attackers stayed and were trained by the Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba in a safehouse at <unk> near Karachi before boarding a small boat for Mumbai . 
 David Headley was a member of Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba , and between 2002 and 2009 Headley travelled extensively as part of his work for LeT . Headley received training in small arms and countersurveillance from LeT , built a network of connections for the group , and was chief scout in scoping out targets for Mumbai attack having allegedly been given $ 25 @,@ 000 in cash in 2006 by an ISI officer known as Major Iqbal , The officer also helped him arrange a communications system for the attack , and oversaw a model of the Taj Mahal Hotel so that gunmen could know their way inside the target , according to Headley 's testimony to Indian authorities . Headley also helped ISI recruit Indian agents to monitor Indian troop levels and movements , according to a US official . At the same time , Headley was also an informant for the US Drug Enforcement Administration , and Headley 's wives warned American officials of Headley 's involvement with LeT and his plotting attacks , warning specifically that the Taj Mahal Hotel may be their target . 
 US officials believed that the Inter @-@ Services Intelligence ( <unk> ) officers provided support to Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba militants who carried out the attacks . Disclosures made by former American intelligence contractor Edward Snowden in 2013 revealed that the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) had intercepted communications between the Lashkar boat and the LeT headquarters in <unk> occupied Kashmir ( <unk> ) and passed the alert on to RAW on November 18 , eight days before the terrorists actually struck Mumbai . 
 The arrest of <unk> Ansari alias Abu Hamza in June 2012 provided further clarity on how the plot was hatched . According to Abu Hamza , the attacks were previously scheduled for 2006 , using Indian youth for the job . However , a huge cache of AK @-@ 47 's and RDX , which were to be used for the attacks , was recovered from Aurangabad in 2006 , thus leading to the dismantling of the original plot . Subsequently , Abu Hamza fled to Pakistan and along with Lashkar commanders , scouted for Pakistani youth to be used for the attacks . In September 2007 , 10 people were selected for the mission . In September 2008 , these people tried sailing to Mumbai from Karachi , but couldn 't complete their mission due to choppy waters . These men made a second attempt in November 2008 , and successfully managed to execute the final attacks . David Headley 's disclosures , that three Pakistani army officers were associated with the planning and execution of the attack were substantiated by Ansari 's revelations during his interrogation . After Ansari 's arrest , Pakistan 's Foreign Office claimed they had received information that up to 40 Indian nationals were involved in the attacks . 
 = = = Method = = = 
 The attackers had planned the attack several months ahead of time and knew some areas well enough to vanish and reappear after security forces had left . Several sources have quoted Kasab telling the police that the group received help from Mumbai residents . The attackers used at least three SIM cards purchased on the Indian side of the border with Bangladesh . There were also reports of a SIM card purchased in the US state New Jersey , if this is the case , then this would go back to Iraqi Intelligence Services and Al Qaeda from 9 – 11 and Lashkar or <unk> <unk> and Egyptian Islamic Jihad involvement through Pakistani ISI who had connections with Iraqi Intelligence from Saddam Hussein 's old network of militants . Police had also mentioned that <unk> Ansari , an Indian Lashkar operative who had been arrested in February 2008 , had scouted the Mumbai targets for the November attacks . Later , the police arrested two Indian suspects , <unk> Ahmad , who is from Srinagar in Kashmir , and <unk> Rehman , a resident of Kolkata . They supplied the SIM cards , one in Calcutta , and the other in New Delhi . 
 The attackers used a satellite phone and cell phones to talk to each other as well as their handlers that were based in Pakistan . In transcripts intercepted by Indian authorities between the attackers and their handlers , the handlers provided the attackers with encouragement , tactical advice , and information gained from media coverage . The attackers used both personal cell phones and those obtained from their victims to communicate with each other and the news media . Although the attackers were encouraged to murder hostages , the attackers were in communication with the news media via cell phones to make demands in return for the release of hostages . This was believed to be done in order to further confuse Indian authorities that they were dealing with primarily a hostage situation . 
 Type 86 Grenades made by China 's state @-@ owned Norinco were used in the attacks . 
 There were also indications that the attackers had been taking steroids . The gunman who survived said that the attackers had used Google Earth to familiarise themselves with the locations of buildings used in the attacks . 
 There were 10 gunmen , nine of whom were subsequently shot dead and one captured by security forces . Witnesses reported that they seemed to be in their early twenties , wore black T @-@ shirts and jeans , and that they smiled and looked happy as they shot their victims . 
 It was initially reported that some of the attackers were British citizens , but the Indian government later stated that there was no evidence to confirm this . Similarly , early reports of 12 gunmen were also later shown to be incorrect . 
 On 9 December , the 10 attackers were identified by Mumbai police , along with their home towns in Pakistan : Ajmal Amir from Faridkot , Abu Ismail Dera Ismail Khan from Dera Ismail Khan , Hafiz Arshad and <unk> Imran from Multan , Javed from Okara , Shoaib from <unk> , <unk> and Nasr from Faisalabad , Abdul Rahman from <unk> , and Fahad Ullah from <unk> <unk> . Dera Ismail Khan is in the North @-@ West Frontier Province ; the rest of the towns are in Pakistani Punjab . 
 On 6 April 2010 , the Home Minister of Maharashtra State , which includes Mumbai , informed the Assembly that the bodies of the nine killed Pakistani gunmen from the 2008 attack on Mumbai were buried in a secret location in January 2010 . The bodies had been in the mortuary of a Mumbai hospital after Muslim clerics in the city refused to let them be buried on their grounds . 
 = = = Attackers = = = 
 Only one of the 10 attackers , Ajmal Kasab , survived the attack . He was hanged in Yerwada jail in 2012 . Other nine attackers killed during the onslaught were Abdul Rehman Bada , Abdul Rahman Chhota , Abu Ali , Fahad Ullah , Ismail Khan , Babar Imran , Abu Umar , Abu Sohrab , and Shoaib alias <unk> . 
 = = = Arrests = = = 
 Ajmal Kasab was the only attacker arrested alive by police . Much of the information about the attackers ' preparation , travel , and movements comes from his confessions to the Mumbai police . 
 On 12 February 2009 Pakistan 's Interior Minister Rehman Malik said that Pakistani national Javed Iqbal , who acquired VoIP phones in Spain for the Mumbai attackers , and Hamad <unk> Sadiq , who had facilitated money transfer for the attack , had been arrested . Two other men known as Khan and Riaz , but whose full names were not given , were also arrested . Two Pakistanis were arrested in Brescia , Italy ( East of Milan ) , on 21 November 2009 , after being accused of providing logistical support to the attacks and transferring more than US $ 200 to Internet accounts using a false ID . They had Red Corner Notices issued against them by Interpol for their suspected involvement and it was issued after the last year 's strikes . 
 In October 2009 , two Chicago men were arrested and charged by the FBI for involvement in " terrorism " abroad , David Coleman Headley and Tahawwur Hussain Rana . Headley , a Pakistani @-@ American , was charged in November 2009 with scouting locations for the 2008 Mumbai attacks . Headley is reported to have posed as an American Jew and is believed to have links with militant Islamist groups based in Bangladesh . On 18 March 2010 , Headley pleaded guilty to a dozen charges against him thereby avoiding going to trial . 
 In December 2009 , the FBI charged Abdur Rehman Hashim Syed , a retired Major in the Pakistani army , for planning the attacks in association with Headley . 
 On 15 January 2010 , in a successful snatch operation R & AW agents nabbed Sheikh Abdul Khwaja , one of the handlers of the 26 / 11 attacks , chief of <unk> India operations and a most wanted suspect in India , from Colombo , Sri Lanka , and brought him over to Hyderabad , India for formal arrest . 
 On 25 June 2012 , the Delhi Police arrested <unk> Ansari alias Abu Hamza , one of the key suspects in the attack at the Indira Gandhi International Airport in New Delhi . His arrest was touted as the most significant development in the case since Kasab 's arrest . Security agencies had been chasing him for three years in Delhi . Ansari is a <unk> @-@ e @-@ Taiba ultra and the Hindi tutor of the 10 attackers who were responsible for the Mumbai attacks in 2008 . He was apprehended , after he was arrested and deported to India by Saudi Intelligence officials as per official request by Indian authorities . After Ansari 's arrest , investigations revealed that in 2009 he allegedly stayed for a day in a room in Old Legislators 's Hostel , belonging to <unk> Khan , a former MLA and minister in Maharashtra Government . The minister , however , denied having any links with him . Home Minister P. Chidambaram , asserted that Ansari was provided a safe place in Pakistan and was present in the control room , which could not have been established without active State support . Ansari 's interrogation further revealed that Sajid Mir and a Pakistani Army major visited India under fake names as cricket spectators to survey targets in Delhi and Mumbai for about a fortnight . 
 = = = MHA officials on Holiday = = = 
 A news story by <unk> NOW revealed that all the MHA top officials from the India were in Pakistan to attend a 5th Round Home Secretary level meeting in Islamabad on 25th , a day before the terrorists attacked . The Pakistan officials on 25th evening extended an invitation to Indian officials to visit a nearby hill station Murree and hold another level of talks . Murree is a remote location where even there are no mobile networks and on the day of attack all the 9 officers in the delegation from India were not reachable . The same was confirmed by <unk> Mani the then Secretary for Internal Security . 
 = = Casualties and compensation = = 
 At least 164 victims ( civilians and security personnel ) and nine attackers were killed in the attacks . Among the dead were 28 foreign nationals from 10 countries . One attacker was captured . The bodies of many of the dead hostages showed signs of torture or disfigurement . A number of those killed were notable figures in business , media , and security services . 
 According to Maharashtra chief minister Vilasrao Deshmukh , 15 policemen and two NSG commandos were killed , including the following officers : 
 Assistant Police Sub @-@ Inspector Tukaram <unk> , who succeeded in capturing a terrorist alive , with his bare hands . 
 Joint Commissioner of Police Hemant Karkare , the Chief of the Mumbai Anti @-@ Terrorism Squad 
 Additional Commissioner of Police : Ashok Kamte 
 Encounter specialist Senior Inspector Vijay <unk> 
 Senior Inspector Shashank Shinde 
 NSG Commando , Major Sandeep Unnikrishnan 
 NSG Commando , <unk> Gajendra Singh 
 Three railway officials of Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus had also been killed in the terror strikes . 
 The casualties occurred in the following locations , 
 The government of Maharashtra announced about ₹ 500 @,@ 000 ( US $ 7 @,@ 400 ) as compensation to the kin of each of those killed in the terror attacks and about ₹ 50 @,@ 000 ( US $ 740 ) to the seriously injured . In August 2009 , Indian Hotels Company and the Oberoi Group received about $ 28 million USD as part @-@ payment of the insurance claims , on account of the attacks on Taj Mahal and Trident , from General Insurance Corporation of India . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The attacks are sometimes referred to in India as " 26 / 11 " , after the date in 2008 that the attacks began , in similar style to the 9 / 11 attacks in the United States , the 11 @-@ M attack in Madrid , Spain , and the 7 / 7 bombings in London , United Kingdom . The Pradhan Inquiry Commission , appointed by the Maharashtra government , produced a report that was tabled before the legislative assembly more than a year after the events . The report said the " war @-@ like " attack was beyond the capacity to respond of any police force , but also found fault with the Mumbai Police Commissioner Hasan <unk> 's lack of leadership during the crisis . 
 The Maharashtra government planned to buy 36 speed boats to patrol the coastal areas and several helicopters for the same purpose . It also planned to create an anti @-@ terror force called " Force One " and upgrade all the weapons that Mumbai police currently have . Prime Minister Manmohan Singh on an all @-@ party conference declared that legal framework would be strengthened in the battle against " terrorism " and a federal anti @-@ terrorist intelligence and investigation agency , like the FBI , will be set up soon to co @-@ ordinate action against " terrorism . " The government strengthened anti @-@ terror laws with <unk> 2008 , and the federal National Investigation Agency was formed . 
 The attacks further strained India 's slowly recovering relationship with Pakistan . India 's then External Affairs Minister Pranab Mukherjee ( presently President of India ) declared that India may indulge in military strikes against terror camps in Pakistan to protect its territorial integrity . There were also after @-@ effects on the United States 's relationships with both countries , the US @-@ led NATO war in Afghanistan , and on the Global War on Terror . FBI chief Robert Mueller praised the " unprecedented cooperation " between American and Indian intelligence agencies over the Mumbai terror attack probe . However , Interpol secretary general Ronald Noble said that Indian intelligence agencies did not share any information with them ( Interpol ) . 
 A new National Counter Terrorism Centre ( <unk> ) was proposed to be set up by the then @-@ Home Minister P. Chidambaram as an office to collect , collate , summarise , integrate , analyse , co @-@ ordinate and report all information and inputs received from various intelligence agencies , state police departments , and other ministries and their departments . 
 = = = Movement of troops = = = 
 Pakistan moved troops towards the border with India voicing concerns about the Indian government 's possible plans to launch attacks on Pakistani soil if it did not co @-@ operate . After days of talks , the Pakistan government , however , decided to start moving troops away from the border . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Indians criticised their political leaders after the attacks , saying that their ineptness was partly responsible . The Times of India commented on its front page that " Our politicians fiddle as innocents die . " Political reactions in Mumbai and India included a range of resignations and political changes , including the resignations of Minister for Home Affairs Shivraj Patil , Chief Minister Vilasrao Deshmukh and deputy chief minister R. R. Patil for controversial reactions to the attack including taking the former 's son and Bollywood director Ram Gopal Verma to tour the damaged Taj Hotel and the latters remarks that the attacks were not a big deal in such a large city . Prominent Muslim personalities such as Bollywood actor Aamir Khan appealed to their community members in the country to observe Eid al @-@ Adha as a day of mourning on 9 December . The business establishment also reacted , with changes to transport , and requests for an increase in self @-@ defence capabilities . The attacks also triggered a chain of citizens ' movements across India such as the India Today Group 's " War Against Terror " campaign . There were vigils held across all of India with candles and placards commemorating the victims of the attacks . The NSG commandos based in Delhi also met criticism for taking 10 hours to reach the 3 sites under attack . 
 International reaction for the attacks was widespread , with many countries and international organisations condemning the attacks and expressing their condolences to the civilian victims . Many important personalities around the world also condemned the attacks . 
 Media coverage highlighted the use of social media and Internet social networking tools , including Twitter and Flickr , in spreading information about the attacks . In addition , many Indian bloggers and Wikipedia offered live textual coverage of the attacks . A map of the attacks was set up by a web journalist using Google Maps . The New York Times , in July 2009 , described the event as " what may be the most well @-@ documented terrorist attack anywhere . " 
 In November 2010 , families of American victims of the attacks filed a lawsuit in Brooklyn , New York , naming Lt. Gen. Ahmed Shuja Pasha , chief of the <unk> , as being complicit in the Mumbai attacks . On 22 September 2011 , the attack on the American Embassy in Afghanistan , was attributed to Pakistan via cell phone records identical to the attacks in Mumbai , also linked to Pakistan . The investigation is on @-@ going . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Kasab 's trial = = = 
 Kasab 's trial was delayed due to legal issues , as many Indian lawyers were unwilling to represent him . A Mumbai Bar Association passed a resolution proclaiming that none of its members would represent Kasab . However , the Chief Justice of India stated that Kasab needed a lawyer for a fair trial . A lawyer for Kasab was eventually found , but was replaced due to a conflict of interest . On 25 February 2009 , Indian investigators filed an 11 @,@ 000 @-@ page chargesheet , formally charging Kasab with murder , conspiracy , and waging war against India among other charges . 
 Kasab 's trial began on 6 May 2009 . He initially pleaded not guilty , but later admitted his guilt on 20 July 2009 . He initially apologised for the attacks and claimed that he deserved the death penalty for his crimes , but later retracted these claims , saying that he had been tortured by police to force his confession , and that he had been arrested while roaming the beach . The court had accepted his plea , but due to the lack of completeness within his admittance , the judge had deemed that many of the 86 charges were not addressed and therefore the trial continued . 
 Kasab was convicted of all 86 charges on 3 May 2010 . He was found guilty of murder for directly killing seven people , conspiracy to commit murder for the deaths of the 164 people killed in the three @-@ day terror siege , waging war against India , causing terror , and of conspiracy to murder two high @-@ ranking police officers . On 6 May 2010 , he was sentenced to death by hanging . However , he appealed his sentence at high court . On 21 February 2011 , the Bombay High Court upheld the death sentence of Kasab , dismissing his appeal . 
 On 29 August 2012 , the Indian Supreme Court upheld the death sentence for Kasab . The court stated , " We are left with no option but to award death penalty . The primary and foremost offence committed by Kasab is waging war against the Government of India . ” The verdict followed 10 weeks of appeal hearings , and was decided by a two @-@ judge Supreme Court panel , which was led by Judge Aftab Alam . The panel rejected arguments that Kasab was denied a free and fair trial . 
 Kasab filed a mercy petition with the President of India , which was rejected on 5 November . Kasab was hanged in Pune 's Yerwada jail in secret on 21 November 2012 at 7 : 30 am and naming the operation as operation ' X ' . The Indian mission in Islamabad informed the Pakistan government about Kasab 's hanging through letter . Pakistan refused to take the letter , which was then faxed to them . His family in Pakistan was sent news of his hanging via a courier . 
 = = = In Pakistan = = = 
 Indian and Pakistani police have exchanged DNA evidence , photographs and items found with the attackers to piece together a detailed portrait of the Mumbai plot . Police in Pakistan have arrested seven people , including Hammad Amin Sadiq , a homoeopathic pharmacist , who arranged bank accounts and secured supplies . Sadiq and six others begin their formal trial on 3 October 2009 in Pakistan , though Indian authorities say the prosecution stops well short of top Lashkar leaders . In November 2009 , Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said that Pakistan has not done enough to bring the perpetrators of the attacks to justice . 
 An eight @-@ member commission comprising defence lawyers , prosecutors and a court official was allowed to travel to India on 15 March 2013 to gather evidences for the prosecution of seven suspects linked to the 2008 Mumbai attacks . However , the defence lawyers were barred from cross @-@ examining the four prosecution witnesses in the case including Ajmal Kasab . On the eve of the first anniversary of 26 / 11 , a Pakistani anti @-@ terror court formally charged seven accused , including LeT operations commander Zaki ur Rehman Lakhvi . However , the actual trial started on 5 May 2012 . The Pakistani court conducting trial of Mumbai attacks accused , reserved its judgement on the application filed by Lakhvi , challenging the report of the judicial panel , to 17 July 2012 . On 17 July 2012 , the court refused to take the findings of the Pakistani judicial commission as part of the evidence . It however , ruled that if a new agreement that allows panel 's examination of witnesses , is reached , the prosecution may move an application for sending the panel to Mumbai . The Indian Government upset over the court ruling , however , contended that evidence collected by the Pakistani judicial panel has evidential value to punish all those involved in the attack . On 21 @-@ September @-@ 2013 , a Pakistani judicial commission arrived in India to carry out the investigation and to cross examine the witnesses . This is the second such visit , the one in March 2012 was not a success as its report was rejected by an anti @-@ terrorism court in Pakistan due to lack of evidence . 
 = = = In the United States = = = 
 The LeT operative David Headley ( born <unk> Sayed Gilani ) in his testimony before a Chicago federal court during co @-@ accused Tahawwur Rana 's trial revealed that Mumbai Chabad House was added to the list of targets for surveillance given by his Inter Services Intelligence handler Major Iqbal , though the Oberoi hotel , one of the sites attacked , was not originally on the list . On 10 June 2011 , Tahawwur Rana was acquitted of plotting the 2008 Mumbai attacks , but was held guilty on two other charges . He was sentenced to 14 years in federal prison on 17 January 2013 . 
 David Headley pleaded guilty to 12 counts related to the attacks , including conspiracy to commit murder in India and aiding and abetting in the murder of six Americans . On 23 January 2013 , he was sentenced to 35 years in federal prison . His plea that he not be extradited to India , Pakistan or Denmark was accepted . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 On the first anniversary of the event , the state paid homage to the victims of the attack . Force One — a new security force created by the Maharashtra government — staged a parade from Nariman Point to Chowpatty . Other memorials and candlelight vigils were also organised at the various locations where the attacks occurred . 
 On the second anniversary of the event , homage was again paid to the victims . 
 = Michel Ordener = 
 Michel Ordener was a general of division and a commander in Napoleon 's elite Imperial Guard . Of plebeian origins , he was born 2 September 1755 in L 'Hôpital and enlisted as private at the age of 18 years in the Prince Conde 's Legion . He was promoted through the ranks ; as warrant officer of a regiment of Chasseurs à Cheval , he embraced the French Revolution in 1789 . He advanced quickly through the officer ranks during the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 In 1804 , Ordener organized and led the controversial kidnapping of the Duke d 'Enghien . In 1805 , he commanded a regiment of the Imperial Guard cavalry at several important battles , including the Battle of Austerlitz ; although he led an energetic and opportune charge , Napoleon noted that Ordener seemed tired and predicted that the general would last only five or six years more . Ordener participated in one more campaign and then accepted a post in the Senate . Napoleon appointed him as Josephine Bonaparte 's equerry , supervising the care and maintenance of her horses . He followed this with the post as governor of the Emperor 's household in Compiegne , where Ordener died on 30 August 1811 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Although little is known of Ordener 's youth , he was the son of commoners and joined the legion of the Prince of Conde ( cousin to the king ) at the age of 18 ( 1776 ) . He was assigned as a private of the Boufflers Dragoons , part of this legion . In 1783 , he was appointed to the quartermaster corps and in 1787 , he was promoted to warrant officer . In the early days of the French Revolution , he adopted its principles with zeal and enthusiasm . 
 Subsequently , Ordener took part in all the French Revolutionary Wars . In the War of the First Coalition , he served with distinction in the armies of the Moselle , the Rhine , the Danube and in northern Italy . He was promoted to lieutenant in the 10th Regiment Chasseurs à Cheval ( light horse ) on 25 January 1792 and captain the following year . In 1796 he was promoted to chef de brigade of the 10th Regiment . At the Battle of Lodi , in northern Italy , despite the ravaging fire of Austrian cannons , Ordener held the famous bridge until the arrival of Napoleon with the rest of the army . Ordener crossed the Adda river with a brigade to encircle and envelope the Austrians at the Battle of Pavia . Afterward , he helped to take Milan . 
 At the onset of the War of the Second Coalition in 1799 , when the armies of the Danube and Helvetia were formed , he was assigned to the Army of the Danube under command of Jean Baptiste Jourdan . His 10th Regiment was part of Laurent de Gouvion Saint @-@ Cyr 's III . Division , and held the far left flank at the Battle of Ostrach , 21 March 1799 , in southwestern Germany . Although he was wounded on 14 August 1799 in Switzerland , he participated in the Second Battle of Zurich in which his 10th Chasseurs à Cheval routed a division of Russians , a decisive moment in the French victory . Ordener was promoted to colonel of the regiment in 1801 and on 29 August 1803 , he was promoted to general of brigade . 
 = = = Duke d 'Enghien affair = = = 
 On Napoleon 's orders , Ordener entered into the most controversial action of his career , leading a raid into the sovereign Grand Duchy of Baden to arrest Louis Antoine , Duke of Enghien , in 1803 . Napoleon 's orders were specific : Ordener and Armand Augustin Caulaincourt were to take 300 dragoons into the duchy , surround the village of <unk> , where the Duke lived , arrest the Duke and Charles Francois Dumouriez , who Napoleon believed was present , and bring both of the men back to France . Ordener and Caulaincourt were instructed also to take their own provisions and to inflict neither harm nor damage on any of the duchy 's inhabitants or their property . In the night of 14 – 15 March , the dragoons crossed the Rhine and surrounded the Duke 's lodgings . Dumouriez was not there , nor had he been , but they kidnapped the Duke and took him away to France . Within a few days , the Duke was spirited into the Chateau de Vincennes , on the outskirts of Paris . There he was tried for treason and executed immediately after the verdict . This action , which involved the invasion of a sovereign state , the kidnapping of a duke and a sham trial for treason followed by the man 's immediate execution , had political and diplomatic repercussions throughout Europe . 
 = = = Campaigns in Austria and Prussia = = = 
 In 1805 , Ordener participated in the campaign against Austria as commander of a regiment of horse grenadiers of the Imperial Guard . At the Battle of Austerlitz , he led a decisive and energetic charge . He executed this , upon order of Napoleon , with impetuosity ; this was the charge that pushed the Russians onto the ice and during which , French sources maintain , 40 @,@ 000 Russians drowned and another 30 @,@ 000 were taken prisoner . Although this charge garnered for Ordener his promotion to general of division , Napoleon commented that Ordener was worn out . He followed this observation with the frequently quoted prediction , " I think we have no more than five or six years left of him . " 
 In the 1806 campaign against Prussia , Ordener commanded a division of the elite Imperial Guard cavalry . After this campaign , he became a senator and was appointed to first equerry to the Empress Josephine . In this responsibility , he supervised the care of the empress 's horses , and acted as her senior aid . Michel Ordener 's daughter , Josephine @-@ Eugenie Ordener , was one of Josephine Bonaparte 's ladies @-@ in @-@ waiting . He also received the Order of the Iron Crown . 
 In December 1808 , Ordener was raised to Count of the Empire by Napoleon . The following year , Napoleon nominated him as governor for the imperial Château of Compiegne , where he died in 1811 of an attack of apoplexy . He is buried at the Panthéon . François Joseph Lefebvre , Duke of Danzig , another of Napoleon 's generals of plebeian origins and with whom Ordener had developed a long @-@ standing friendship , gave the eulogy : 
 " It is not because of simple regrets and because of honorable mourning that we must recognize the services of a warrior who has dedicated his whole life to his fatherland and his prince . Let us give public testimony to his virtues , to his merit , to all the qualities that have made him esteemed by the Emperor and that have rendered him dear to his friends and to his family . Let us praise him today at least , because his modesty can no longer prevent us , and let us not fear to offend a virtue that he has loved so much during his life . " 
 = = Family = = 
 Michel Ordener married Madeleine @-@ Françoise Walter while he served in the quartermaster corps . They had two children , a daughter mentioned above , and a son . The son , also named Michel , was born in <unk> , on 2 ( or 3 ) April 1787 and attended the special military academy at Metz from which he graduated on 8 December 1803 with the grade of sous @-@ lieutenant ( second lieutenant ) and an assignment to the 24th Regiment of Dragoons . He also took part in the expedition to Spain and the subsequent invasion of Portugal in 1808 . He was promoted to colonel and chef de brigade of the 30th Regiment of Dragoons . The Dragoons received battle honors for their participation at the Battle of Borodino . He was wounded on 28 November 1812 in the withdrawal from Russia , at the Battle of Berezina , and again prior to Napoleon 's abdication , at the Battle of Montmartre . He later fought at the Battle of Waterloo . Despite his record in the Napoleonic wars and his father 's common origins , he remained at his rank of colonel at the Bourbon Restoration , was confirmed as the second Count Ordener , and was acknowledged as a Knight of the Order of Saint Louis . Michel Ordener , Jr . , married Marie @-@ Francoise @-@ Pauline <unk> in 1829 and died in 1875 . 
 = Robert Clark ( businessman ) = 
 Sir Robert Anthony " Bob " Clark DSC ( 6 January 1924 – 3 January 2013 ) was a British naval officer and businessman . Clark attended King 's College , Cambridge before leaving at the age of 18 to join the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve during the Second World War . Discovered to be colour blind he was relegated to non @-@ seagoing posts , a prospect he found unappealing . He volunteered for service with the Special Operations Executive and saw active service in Italy , first on amphibious missions and later as a liaison officer with partisans in the Piedmont Mountains . Clark was captured by the Germans , and was later awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his gallantry . 
 A chance meeting after the war led to a position at the law firm of Slaughter and May , where he was soon made a partner . He switched career to become a merchant banker with Hill Samuel , where he developed an expertise in company mergers and acquisitions . Clark acted as chairman or director for numerous firms and sat on many governments bodies and committees . Clark met Robert Maxwell in 1969 when Maxwell attempted to outbid Rupert Murdoch for the News of the World , starting a lifelong acquaintance . He led Hill Samuel through their takeover by TSB before Maxwell brought him on as a non @-@ executive director at his Mirror Group of media companies . 
 Clark became embroiled in the scandal at the Mirror Group that unfolded after Maxwell 's death in 1991 . Clark claimed to be ignorant of Maxwell 's £ 492 million defrauding of the company and its pension scheme , and faced a non @-@ confidence vote by the shareholders . He survived to be made chairman of the group and to rebuild it after the scandal . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bob Clark was born on 6 January 1924 in Finchley , London . His parents were Gladys and Jack Clark , his father being a mechanical engineer who was once apprenticed to Sir Charles Parsons . Clark attended Highgate School in London and was evacuated with the school to Westward Ho ! in Devon on the outbreak of the Second World War . Clark was a keen football player and was captain of the Highgate team as well as being head boy of the school . He went up to King 's College , Cambridge to study modern languages . Whilst there he gained a blue in football , the first from the college in 20 years , and played against their rivals at Oxford University . 
 = = Navy career = = 
 Clark left Cambridge at the age of 18 to join the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve as an officer . During initial training at HMS Collingwood , near Portsmouth , Clark discovered that he was colour blind and only passed the medical examination by persuading the man sitting behind him to whisper the answers to him . Clark served aboard HMS Fleetwood on convoy escort operations in the Atlantic and Mediterranean before attending HMS King Alfred at Hove . Whilst there his colour blindness was discovered and he was banned from seagoing postings . 
 Frustrated at not being able to fight the enemy directly , Clark volunteered for service with the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) , an irregular warfare unit , in June 1943 , having claimed to have had experience working with small boats . He undertook commando training at Arisaig in the Scottish Highlands and further SOE training at Helford in Cornwall . After completing his training , Clark was dispatched to Algeria in September 1943 and thence to <unk> in south @-@ east Italy in December . He was attached to the SOE 's No 1 Special Force and undertook amphibious sabotage , reconnaissance operations and running of agents into enemy @-@ held beaches by canoe . His wireless operator for these missions was Marjorie Lewis , his future wife , who had joined the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry ( <unk> ; often used as a cover for women who joined SOE ) in 1943 . On 1 March 1944 Clark , who had previously only held the acting rank of sub @-@ lieutenant , was confirmed in a substantive ( though temporary ) rank . 
 Clark volunteered for parachute training with SOE and was subsequently allocated to Operation Clarion , the designation for British assistance provided to anti @-@ German partisans in northern Italy . He parachuted into the Piedmont Mountains , south of Turin , in November 1944 with a radio operator , Petty Officer Edward <unk> , to act as liaison officer to the partisans there . When Clark made his parachute jump he had Falla , his childhood teddy bear , inside his battledress for comfort and good luck . Despite this , he landed 50 miles ( 80 km ) off course and into a tree , breaking two ribs . Clark was rescued by a local partisan , Sergio <unk> of the 3rd Division of Italian partisans . 
 Clark set about arming the resistance and training them in methods of warfare . He had been instructed to avoid arming the communists where possible , his superiors fearing for their actions after the war , but finding the communists to be the most organised and well @-@ motivated group in his area proceeded to arm them anyway . He arranged an air drop of arms and explosives , and led the partisans on several railway sabotage expeditions . Clark later recalled that " blowing up railway engines was very great fun " . For his work with the partisans he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross , the third @-@ highest award for gallantry in the Royal Navy . Clark was betrayed and captured by a German patrol in December 1944 whilst trying to hide in a haystack with four partisans . 
 Clark managed to avoid summary execution at the hands of the Germans and was held in several Italian prisons where he was interrogated frequently . He was later transferred to the <unk> und <unk> Nord prisoner of war camp near Bremen . Marjorie Lewis did not know that Clark was still alive until he sent her an uncoded message , strictly against standing SOE orders , reading " Bob sends love to Marjorie " . After the camp was liberated Clark returned to London , sending ahead a telegram to Marjorie , stating : " Arriving London from Germany . Meet me " . They met and the two shook hands ; they were later married in 1949 . Clark 's teddy bear Falla , which he had had since the age of two , had accompanied him throughout his time as a prisoner and is thought to be the only teddy bear to have parachuted behind enemy lines and survived as a prisoner of war . Clark served in the Pacific Theatre and was promoted to lieutenant on 1 March 1946 before he was demobilised later that year . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Clark intended to move to Sudan after the war but a chance meeting with his old commanding officer , Hilary Scott , in St James 's led to him being offered a position as a clerk at the law firm of Slaughter and May . Clark later said of the meeting : " I knew nothing about the law , but I accepted . And luck worked . " He proved to be skilled at arranging mergers of companies and within six years of joining the firm was made a partner , at the age of 29 years . At Slaughter and May , Clark worked exclusively for the firm 's merchant bank clients and was involved in the bitter takeover of Millspaugh by Hadfield . In 1957 Clark became a director of <unk> Holdings , better known as Alfred McAlpine the civil engineering firm , and would remain on their board until 1996 . 
 Through his work Clark became acquainted with the partners of the Philip Hill , Higginson , <unk> merchant bank ( later known as Hill Samuel ) , one of the two largest in the country . The three men were all over 6 feet 4 inches ( 1 @.@ 93 m ) tall , " frightfully clever " and looking for a fourth partner . Clark , a tall man himself , fitted their apparent criteria and in 1961 accepted the fourth partnership at the bank ; he retired from his partnership at Slaughter and May on 30 September 1961 . At Hill Samuel he headed the issues and mergers department and advised on some of the largest company mergers in British history . Clark handled the General Electric Company plc 's takeovers of Associated Electrical Industries and English Electric under Arnold Weinstock , and the expansions of Racal , Beecham Group and Courtaulds . He also worked to win the firm business abroad . In 1967 he acted for the Astor family in the sale of The Times newspaper to Lord Thomson of Fleet . With the parties deadlocked and the final price disputed by £ 50 @,@ 000 , Clark successfully reached an agreement by flipping a coin . He correctly called the fall and won the Astors the additional £ 50 @,@ 000 . Clark kept the half @-@ crown he had used as a memento and had it mounted on a silver stand . Clark helped to draft the 1968 City Takeover Code that remains in force and regulates how takeovers are carried out in British companies . He chaired the National Film Finance Corporation from 1969 to 1976 and sat on a committee to represent Rolls @-@ Royce 's creditors during the nationalisation process . Clark worked with Robert Maxwell when he attempted to purchase the News of the World in 1969 . Maxwell was beaten by his rival , Rupert Murdoch ( whom Clark sued for libel during the course of the bid ) , but became friends with Clark and retained him as banker to his British Printing Corporation . 
 Clark chaired the government 's Industrial Development Advisory Board from 1973 to 1980 . In this position he found himself frustrated by Secretary of State for Industry Tony Benn 's decision to ignore the board 's advice and found workers ' co @-@ operative schemes at struggling firms Triumph Engineering and Fisher @-@ Bendix in the early 1970s . Clark decided not to resign but to stay on and try to restrain Benn in the future . Benn bore him no ill @-@ will for this and in 1974 asked him to join the government committee into the future of ailing car @-@ makers Austin and British Leyland . He agreed to take the chair of Leyland in 1976 as a stop @-@ gap measure but ended up holding the post for more than a year before the company , beset with strikes , nationalised and he handed the chair to Michael Edwardes . Clark remained a board member and in 1986 undertook discussions with General Motors in an attempt to get an increased bid for Leyland Vehicles , a bid later stopped by public outcry over the inclusion of the Land Rover name . 
 Clark became chairman of Hill Samuel Bank in 1974 , a post he would hold until 1987 . He was knighted on 10 February 1976 , receiving the honour from the Queen at Buckingham Palace , and became a director of the Bank of England on 4 June , following the death of Sir John Norman Valette Duncan . He was subsequently reappointed director for the four @-@ year terms beginning 1 March 1977 and 1 March 1981 . 
 Clark was appointed chief executive officer of the Hill Samuel holding group in 1976 and was chairman from 1980 to 1988 . Clark refused a takeover by Merrill Lynch , but after deregulation in 1986 he was convinced that Hill Samuel was not large enough to compete and , facing hostile takeovers from Kerry Packer and FAI <unk> , arranged takeover talks first with UBS and then with TSB . TSB acquired Hill Samuel in 1988 , and Clark became a director in 1987 and then deputy chairman in 1989 for two years . He was on the boards of many other companies , holding directorships at Eagle Star ( 1976 to 1987 ) Royal Dutch Shell ( 1982 to 1994 ) , Vodafone ( 1988 to 1998 ) , IMI ( 1981 to 1989 ) and Marley ( 1985 to 1989 ) – he later became the first non @-@ family chairman of the latter . He served on the Review Body on Doctors ' and Dentists ' Remuneration from 1979 to 1986 and was a trustee of the Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School from 1981 to 1995 . In 1982 he received an honorary Doctorate of Science from the Cranfield Institute of Technology . Clark was appointed vice @-@ chairman of pharmaceutical firm <unk> Beecham in 1987 , a post he held for eight years . He was also chairman of the United <unk> Stores , where he was responsible for refusing a takeover bid from Heron Foods before accepting one made by Hanson plc . 
 = = Mirror Group = = 
 Maxwell bought the Mirror Group in 1986 and floated it in May 1991 , appointing Clark to the board of directors . Maxwell claimed that the offer he made Clark would appeal to even a " one @-@ eyed Bulgarian peasant " . Clark claimed that he tried to make Maxwell follow conventional business practices and remained convinced that " until quite close to the end , he never did anything I asked him not to do " . It was only after Maxwell 's unusual death on 5 November 1991 that financial mismanagement of the Mirror Group came to light . There was evidence of 29 unusual payments of £ 230 million from Mirror to other Maxwell companies within one year in a fraud that eventually cost the company , and its pension fund , £ 492 million . Clark claimed that there had been no evidence for the directors to act on against Maxwell , telling the shareholders at an extraordinary general meeting ( EGM ) that " No system of internal control , however elaborate , can stop fraudulent collusion by a group of individuals holding authority and trust . None of us [ directors ] would have taken on the job had we thought Maxwell was a crook . How many can stand up and say : ' We said he was a crook a year ago ' ? " Clark 's position was disputed by the Department of Trade and Industry , which determined that the two non @-@ executive directors , Clark and Alan Clements , should have questioned the payments . At the EGM Clark almost lost his usual polite nature when he was accused of being a Maxwell " crony " by Rupert <unk> and had to rule a no @-@ confidence vote as out of order . 
 The liquidators of the Mirror asked him to stay on to clean up the company , and he was made chairman and Clements became deputy chairman . Clark brought in David Montgomery as chief executive officer and Lord Hollick as a director to rebuild the company . Hollick remained for just five months before he fell out with Clark , who said : " He mistook politeness for weakness . It is always a big mistake . " 
 Clark eventually stabilised the company and left as chairman in 1998 . He co @-@ founded the RP & C International ( <unk> Pierce & Clark ) investment bank in 1993 and remained a director until his death . He raised enough for a 25 % stake and partnered with a Texas bank to provide the rest . Clark was also deputy chairman of Fenchurch from 1992 to 1995 and remained on its board until 1998 . He chaired insurance broker Lownes <unk> , formerly part of Hill Samuel , in 1995 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Clark and his family lived for almost 50 years at a house in Surrey , the former home of horticulturist Gertrude Jekyll , that had been designed by Edwin Lutyens and which Clark described as " the best investment I ever made " . Clark was a keen antiquarian , collecting old books and keeping a record of each one that he read . He maintained an interest in sport as well as the opera , having acted as director of the English National Opera from 1983 to 1987 . He collected teddy bears , having more than 300 in total ( including Falla ) , and was also interested in the life of Captain Cook , retracing one of his voyages himself . Clark was vice @-@ chairman of the Salisbury Cathedral spire appeal . He was contacted in 1991 by <unk> , the Italian partisan who first helped him out of a tree in the war , and the pair visited each other regularly thereafter . Clark died on 3 January 2013 . 
 = Rødkleiva = 
 Rødkleiva is a hill located in Nordmarka in Oslo , Norway . It was taken into use as a slalom hill in 1947 and was used for the combined event of the Holmenkollen Ski Festival eleven times between 1947 and 1963 . It hosted the slalom events for the 1952 Winter Olympics , which saw a crowd of at least 25 @,@ 000 spectators . The Olympic course was 422 @.@ 5 meters ( 1 @,@ 386 ft ) long and had a drop of 169 meters ( 554 ft ) . The course gradually fell into disrepair and was closed in 1988 . 
 The hill has several times been launched as a potential location for a ski jumping hill . The first idea came in 1912 ; later options to replace Holmenkollbakken resurfaced during the 1930s and the 1970s , but were quickly rejected . With the closing of Midtstubakken , Oslo 's normal hill , in the late 1980s , Rødkleiva was again launched as a jumping hill . Vikersundbakken — Northern Europe 's only ski flying hill — was in the late 1990s proposed replaced by a new hill in Rødkleiva . The plans received support from the Norwegian Ski Federation , but the municipality and state were not interested in issuing grants and the proposal was finally laid to rest in 2006 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Slalom hill = = = 
 The first proposal for using Rødkleiva for skiing was made by Fritz Huitfeldt in 1912 . At the time Holmenkollbakken allowed jumps to 30 meters ( 98 ft ) and Huitfeldt 's proposal to build an 80 @-@ meter ( 260 ft ) hill was not taken seriously . In the 1930s , the idea of building a ski jump at Rødkleiva was renewed . However , Rødkleiva was rejected by the board of the Association for the Promotion of Skiing and in 1938 Holmenkollbakken was instead upgraded with scaffolding . 
 In 1939 , the Norwegian Ski Federation proposed that the Association for the Promotion of Skiing arrange slalom as part of the Holmenkollen Ski Festival , but the plans were interrupted by World War II . The slalom hill was inaugurated in 1947 , allowing Alpine skiing to be introduced in the Holmenkollen Ski Festival . Slalom took place at Rødkleiva while downhill the carried out at Norefjell Ski Resort in <unk> . The event was named Holmenkollen Kandahar and the races in Rødkleiva were organized by <unk> Lyn . Permanent cables for telephone and timing were installed in 1949 . 
 A series of upgrades were made to the hill ahead of the 1952 Winter Olympics . A start platform was constructed at the top of the hill to ensure better start conditions . A double pull @-@ hook ski lift was built on the north side of the hill . Floodlights were installed along the course to allow training and work during the evening . Ten loudspeakers and three microphones were installed as a transportable system . The hump at the top of the hill was leveled somewhat and the earthwork used to build out the bottom of the hill . The road from <unk> Station on the Holmenkollen Line was upgraded and a tunnel laid under the course to allow spectators to gather on both sides . A 200 @-@ seat press stand , including work stations and telephone booths , was constructed on the south side of the bottom of the hill . Opposite a stand for official guests was built , with a capacity for 300 people . Boxes at the finish line were built for officials and time @-@ keepers . The upgrades to the venue cost 336 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . During the Olympics the hill was 422 @.@ 5 meters ( 1 @,@ 386 ft ) long and had a drop of 169 meters ( 554 ft ) , starting at 479 meters ( 1 @,@ 572 ft ) above mean sea level . 
 The Young Men 's Christian Association built a cabin at <unk> , next to Rødkleiva , which was completed in 1961 . A new proposal to build a large ski jumping hill in Rødkleiva was launched during the early 1970s , but the Association for the Promotion of Skiing rejected the plans . 
 From the 1970s , Association for the Promotion of Skiing worked with plans to renovate the hill , especially to fill in the lower section close to <unk> . The proposal met little support from the municipality , who wanted to prioritize <unk> , which was much cheaper to upgrade . Thus Rødkleiva was degraded to a training course . On 2 October 1986 the city council changed their opinion and granted funds for upgrading the hill . The upgrade would have given sufficient standard to allow FIS Alpine Ski World Cup events in slalom to be held and was part of a municipal strategy to market Oslo as a winter sports destination . In 1987 , a proposal was made for the Holmenkollen area to become a national arena for freestyle skiing , with Rødkleiva to be made into a permanent mogul course . The hill was taken over by Tryvann Ski Resort in 1988 . Plans to build a new ski lift which would connect with the other slopes were launched in November of that year . Rødkleiva was planned as the main competition hill for slalom and would regain its Olympics size . Det Norske Veritas withdrew Rødkleiva 's approval in October 1988 , especially noting the poor condition of the ski lift . The necessary upgrades would cost " millions " . In 1989 the municipality proposed building a replacement for Midtstubakken at Rødkleiva , which would serve as Oslo 's new normal hill as a supplement to the large Holmenkollbakken . 
 = = = Ski flying hill proposal = = = 
 Vikersundbakken opened as Northern Europe 's only ski flying hill in March 1966 . The hill was later renovated and expanded ahead of the FIS Ski @-@ Flying World Championships 1977 and again ahead of the FIS Ski @-@ Flying World Championships 1990 . Holmenkollen National Arena and Holmenkollbakken were declared the national venue for Nordic skiing in 1997 , ahead of Granåsen in Trondheim and Lysgårdsbakken in Lillehammer . By then ideas had been launched to build a national ski flying hill in Rødkleiva . However , it was rejected both by Holmenkollen director Rolf <unk> and ski jumping director Odd <unk> , who stated that a new ski flying hill would be too expensive . 
 In March 1998 , former president of the Norwegian Ski Federation Christian Mohn announced plans for a hill in Rødkleiva which would allow jumps to 230 meters ( 750 ft ) . The venue , estimated to cost between NOK 100 and 150 million , was financed entirely with private funding ; the costs would be covered by drawing between 50 @,@ 000 and 80 @,@ 000 spectators to an annual FIS Ski Jumping World Cup event . The plans scheduled completion in 2001 . The location was , in addition to the close proximity to Oslo , chosen because the venue would be built tightly to the ground , thus eliminating any wind issues , the main reason for ski jumping events to be canceled . Mohn stated that ski flying was the future in ski jumping and that there would be place for two ski flying hills in Norway . This was rejected by Vikersundbakken @-@ director Johan <unk> who stated that a new Rødkleiva hill would " kill " Vikersundbakken . 
 By December 1998 , Mohn 's successor Jan Jensen was supporting granting Vikersundbakken national venue status in preparation for it hosting the FIS Ski @-@ Flying World Championships 2000 . By December , a limited company had been established to continue the planning and construction of the hill . In July 1999 , Vikersundbakken was granted a national venue status for ten years , which secured both state grants and the right to hold all World Cup ski flying events the following ten years . After the 2000 World Championships , Vikersundbakken 's Torstein Haugerud protested that Bertil <unk> , who was both managing director of Rødkleiva <unk> and a member of the Norwegian Ski Federation 's ski jumping committee , was using his position in the federation to promote the Rødkleiva project . 
 In February 2003 , the Norwegian Ski Federation published an eighty @-@ page report which concluded that Vikersundbakken should be retired and replaced with Rødkleiva . The report estimated that a hill would cost NOK 200 million and would allow jumps to 250 metres ( 820 ft ) , 25 meters ( 82 ft ) longer than the then world record hill Letalnica <unk> Gorišek in Planica , Slovenia . Rødkleiva was regarded as more favorable because of the ease of transport , high population concentration , and that an all @-@ new hill would allow for better television pictures . The federation 's goal was for Norway to regain its status as the prime organizer of ski jumping competitions . President of the Norwegian Ski Federation Sverre Seeberg stated that they had offered the International Ski Federation ( FIS ) to use Vikersundbakken every year , but that FIS had prioritized Granåsen for the World Cup . Seeberg stated that Norway would therefore focus on making Granåsen the regular venue for the World Cup opening . 
 Oslo announced in January 2004 that they , jointly with Lillehammer , planned to bid for the 2014 Winter Olympics . Deputy Mayor <unk> Kristiansen ( Progress Party ) speculated that normal hill ski jumping would be replaced with ski flying on the Olympic program and that it therefore would be necessary to build a ski flying hill in Oslo . In November 2004 , a Norwegian Ski Federation committee concluded that a new hill in Rødkleiva should be prioritized and that is would cost between NOK 300 and 400 million . The following month Minister of Culture <unk> Svarstad Haugland ( Christian Democratic Party ) criticized the federation for allowing Bertil <unk> and Steinar Johannesen to hold key roles in the decision process , while both owned a 13 @.@ 3 @-@ percent stake in Rødkleiva <unk> . 
 As part of Oslo 's bid to host the FIS Nordic World Ski Championships 2011 , it was necessary to build a normal hill , as Holmenkollbakken only consists of a large hill . Several proposals were made , including converting Holmenkollbakken to a normal hill and building a large hill in Rødkleiva , or building a new hill in Holmenkollen and building a small hill in Rødkleiva . Alternatively , a new small hill could be built at the location of the demolished Midtstubakken , next to Holmenkollbakken . City Councilor for Culture Anette Wiig Bryn ( Progress Party ) supported building a large hill in Rødkleiva and reducing Holmenkollbakken to a small hill . 
 On 20 April 2005 , the Norwegian Ski Federation 's board supported , with 13 against 1 vote , to build both a normal and a large hill at Rødkleiva and to close Vikersundbakken . However , the following day Svarstad Haugland stated that the government supported keeping Vikersundbakken rather than building a new venue in Rødkleiva . Clas Brede Bråthen responded that the federation hoped to build the venue with grants from the private sector , such as naming rights , and used Color Line Stadion in Ålesund as an example of a venue that had generated significant funding from corporate sponsors . A majority of the county chapters supported Vikersundbakken , with only 4 of 19 chapters supporting Rødkleiva . The Norwegian Ski Federation 's national convention voted on 28 May with a large majority to place first a normal hill and then a ski flying hill at Rødkleiva . 
 The decision was made despite that no political parties in Oslo supported constructing a ski flying hill and that neither the municipality nor the state were willing to issue grants . There were also concerns from environmental groups as Rødkleiva lies within a protected area . Two days after the convention decision , Vikersundbakken applied to host a World Cup event in 2007 . At a public meeting in August , politicians from all parties confirmed that they would not support Rødkleiva and City Council Chair Erling Lae declared the meeting as a funeral for the project . Yet the federation established a committee , led by Seeberg , to explore ways the venue could be financed and built . In December 2006 , Steinar Johannessen stated that he and the federation had given up having a ski jumping hill at Rødkleiva . 
 = = Events = = 
 Alpine skiing in the Holmenkollen Ski Festival was contested as a combined event , originally with slalom in Rødkleiva and downhill in Norefjell . Named the Holmenkollen Kandahar , it was inaugurated in 1947 . The event was held in Rødkleiva in 1947 – 48 , 1950 – 51 , 1953 , 1957 – 58 , and 1960 – 63 . From 1972 the slalom event was held at <unk> in Bærum the years it was in the Oslo area and from 1977 it was held in <unk> when held in the Oslo area . The local sports club IF Ready was the main user of Rødkleiva for organized recreational sports . 
 = = = 1952 Winter Olympics = = = 
 During the 1952 Winter Olympics , Rødkleiva hosted the men 's slalom and the women 's slalom , with the other events taking place at Norefjell . The organizing committee had set up 15 @,@ 000 tickets for the men 's discipline on 19 February , but between 25 @,@ 000 and 30 @,@ 000 people attended the race , the surplus who did not pay for tickets . The large popularity was to see Norway 's favoured Stein Eriksen . Although leading after the first heat , he came out of balance in the second and finished second behind Austria 's Othmar Schneider . The women 's race held the following day was won by the American Andrea Mead @-@ Lawrence . 
 = Here I Stand ( Usher album ) = 
 Here I Stand is the fifth studio album by American singer Usher , released on May 13 , 2008 by LaFace Records . Inspired by love for his new wife — Tameka Foster — and son , Usher recorded many ballads for the album . Prior to the album 's recording , Usher split with his mother , Jonnetta Patton , as manager and hired Benny Medina . Usher 's estranged father died months before the release of Here I Stand ; this also influenced themes of the album . It was originally to be titled " Measure of a Man " , but Usher named it Here I Stand to mark " a new chapter in [ his ] life " . 
 Usher promoted Here I Stand by performing on several television shows including Total Request Live , 106 & Park and Good Morning America . Among other concert appearances , he embarked on a One Night Stand : Ladies Only Tour , performing fifteen shows in November 2008 . Six singles were released from Here I Stand : " Love in This Club " , " Love in This Club Part II " , " Moving Mountains " , " What 's Your Name " , " Here I Stand " and " Trading Places " . " Love in This Club " , which features rapper Young Jeezy , topped the Billboard Hot 100 and New Zealand Singles Chart . 
 Here I Stand received generally positive reviews from music critics , who viewed it as a sign of growth and maturity from Usher , although others were unimpressed by the change in style from his 2004 album Confessions . It debuted atop the Billboard 200 , and sold 433 @,@ 000 copies in the US in its first week of release , and has since sold 1 @.@ 3 million copies in that country . The album also reached number one on the Canadian Albums Chart , UK Albums Chart and Australian Albums Chart , and has sold five million units worldwide . 
 Although it had sold two million copies by August 2008 , Here I Stand was seen as a commercial failure relative to Confessions , which had sold nineteen million copies . Tyler Lewis of PopMatters put the album 's limited success down to Usher 's and Foster 's marriage ; he believed that Usher 's fans disliked Foster . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2004 , Usher 's fourth studio album , Confessions was released , becoming the most @-@ shipped album in the United States . Before the album 's release , he broke up with his girlfriend Chilli . In December 2005 , he became romantically involved with stylist Tameka Foster ; the two wed on August 3 , 2007 , although Usher 's mother and manager , Jonnetta Patton , did not attend . Foster gave birth to Usher Raymond V later that year . In May 2007 , Usher split with Patton as his manager . This prompted " gossip " that Usher had " fired " her because of his growing relationship with Foster . He denied the claims , saying , " I love my mother ... I decided not to fire , not get rid of , but to give [ my mother ] the ultimate compliment — to retire her to be a full @-@ time grandmother . " He continued by stating that the split was a mutual decision . It was speculated that Patton 's dismissal was due to his engagement with Foster ; Usher dismissed these claims on Total Request Live ( TRL ) in May 2008 . In what MTV News ' Shawn Adler called an " angry tirade " , Usher stated , " My wife had nothing to do with me firing my mother — nothing like that , that 's trash . I hear y 'all talking crazy out there . She 's a beautiful black woman . Stop . Stop talking . And I love her . Stop it . " The outbreak was compared to Mariah Carey 's unannounced 2001 appearance on TRL , when she handed out popsicles to the show 's audience and performed a " striptease " , while some fans noted Usher 's speech as evidence that Foster was being controlling of Usher . Usher hired Benny Medina as his new manager ; Medina said of Usher , " The thing that excited me most is the intense commitment to his art , his incredible professionalism and the fact that I feel as though he 's just hitting a stride . " 
 In January 2008 , Usher 's father , Usher Raymond III , died . Both men regretted not spending more time in each other 's lives . " Prayer for You " , the seventh track on Here I Stand , is an interlude dedicated to Usher 's son , reflective on his relationship with his own father ; " No matter what happened , my father always prayed for me . The only difference is , I 'm gonna be there to be the father that my dad wished he was to me . " The first album name that artists and repertoire representative Mark Pitts conceived was " Measure of a Man " , but that title had already been used by Clay Aiken for his debut album , so Usher called it Here I Stand . Pitts said , " It was perfect because becoming a man is about going though pain , sorrow , and happiness . Usher 's done that ! From the love songs to the party joints , it 's exactly the story he wanted to tell . " Usher noted Here I Stand as beginning " a new chapter in my life " ; the album 's liner notes contain a verse from 1 Corinthians 13 : " When I was a child , I spoke as a child , I understood as a child , I thought as a child : but when I became a man , I put away childish things . " Here I Stand marked Usher 's growth from boyhood to manhood . In March 2007 , it was announced that work on the album had begun . Usher outlined the album 's concept : " A lot of what I plan to offer with this album is kinda standing in this spot ... The king 's back . I ain 't gonna say ' back , ' I never left . " 
 The Rich Harrison @-@ produced track , titled " Dat Girl Right There " , was leaked on November 11 , 2007 . The song charted on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs at number 74 , due to high airplay . Featuring Ludacris — with whom Usher collaborated on " Yeah ! " in 2004 — the song was originally thought to be the lead single from Here I Stand ; however it was not included on the record . Other potential tracks cited before the album 's release were " All the Time " ( produced by T @-@ Pain ) and " The <unk> " ( produced by Jermaine Dupri ) , although neither was included on the album . Here I Stand contains eighteen tracks ; James " <unk> " Lackey , Polow da Don , Tricky Stewart , Jazze Pha , The @-@ Dream , Los da Mystro , will.i.am , Dupri , Manuel Seal , LRoc , Dre & Vidal , Bryan @-@ Michael Cox , Stargate , Ne @-@ Yo , Danja , Soundz and J. R. Rotem all produced tunes on the album . On the iTunes Store deluxe edition , " Revolver " was included , which was produced by Alexander " Prettyboifresh " Parhm . 
 = = Composition = = 
 An R & B album , Josh Eells of Blender summed up much of the production of Here I Stand as " cocktail @-@ lounge crunk , full of splashy cymbals , jazzy electric guitar and tinkly pianos " . Many of its themes were inspired by Foster and Raymond V , resulting in a great number of ballads . Here I Stand opens with an " Intro " ( titled " Forever Young " on some copies ) , while the lead single " Love in This Club " follows , on which Young Jeezy appears . The mid @-@ tempo song features a shuddering synth beat and speaks of a lusting desire in a nightclub . " This Ain 't Sex " is a disco @-@ influenced song that " speaks of sex as a privileged act between two consenting adults " . " Trading Places " uses guitar instrumentation to host role reversal in both sexual and non @-@ sexual situations in a relationship . " Moving Mountains " is a ballad that draws on synth beats to relate a love struggle to an impossible task , such as moving mountains . The album 's sixth track is " What 's Your Name " , an electro song which features new wave @-@ influenced synths produced by will.i.am , who also contributes vocals to the song . The " Prayer for You " interlude follows , an ode to Usher 's son in which Raymond V cries . Usher prays for his son to be " better than me " . " Something Special " is a pop ballad that begins acoustically , and was inspired by Robin Thicke and John Mayer because of its honesty . Usher discussed the song : " It 's about the feeling when you 're in real love . It could be about my son or my wife . " 
 According to Usher " Love You Gently " , a piano @-@ based classic rhythm and blues ballad , is " the one [ track ] you throw on with your significant other when it 's time to get to it . This is why my son 's here . It 's a baby @-@ maker . " Jay @-@ Z appears on the horn @-@ founded " Best Thing " , which is about transition to manhood . Usher outlines lifestyle changes since his wife 's arrival and turns away from his days as " a hustler and a player " in " Before I Met You " , which makes use of guitar and heavy drums . He is suspected of infidelity and compared to his girlfriend 's cheating ex @-@ partner on " His Mistakes " . The thirteenth track on Here I Stand is " Appetite " , which utilizes flutes and has Usher tempted to cheat on his wife . " What 's a Man to Do " opens with a Native Indian call , while " Lifetime " contains influences of 1990s R & B. " Love in This Club Part II " features vocals from Beyoncé Knowles and Lil Wayne and samples The Stylistics ' " You Are Everything " ( 1971 ) ; its lyrical content is similar to that of Part I , and Wayne 's voice is modified through the use of a vocoder . The album 's soul and pop jazz @-@ derived title track , " Here I Stand " , drew comparisons to Stevie Wonder . With a theme of commitment , it was played at Usher 's and Foster 's wedding . Here I Stand closes with " Will Work for Love " , although it was placed as a hidden track on some copies ; Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine called it " cute " . 
 = = Release = = 
 In November 2007 , Usher hoped to release his fifth album , titled Here I Stand , but " issues in his personal life " delayed the album . According to reports , Usher has to spend more time with his then @-@ pregnant wife . The expected November release date was booked to coincide with that of Usher 's fragrance line . Released on May 13 , 2008 . The continually changing release dates became frustrating for Usher ; Dupri said to Billboard , " The last couple [ of ] times I 've been around [ Usher ] , you could tell he 's got the bug to hurry up and put this record out . He wants to get back out here and give the people that . He 's got that itch . " Here I Stand was first released by LaFace Records in Mexico and several European countries on May 13 , 2008 ; releases in other countries followed . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 In 2008 , Usher promoted Here I Stand by appearing at Radio 1 's Big Weekend , where he performed " This Ain 't Sex " , " Moving Mountains " , " What 's Your Name " , " Here I Stand " and " Love in This Club " , as well as singles from his previous albums . On the day of the album 's release , Usher appeared on television shows TRL and 106 & Park , and performed on Good Morning America on May 30 , 2008 . Usher performed " Love in This Club " on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , as of June 2008 . Usher sang " Love in This Club " with Young Jeezy on The Hills ' third season finale ( May 12 , 2008 ) , and again , by himself , at the sixth season finale of Dancing with the Stars ( May 20 , 2008 ) . At the BET Awards , hosted on June 23 , 2008 , were opened by Usher performing the single . " Love in This Club " and " This Ain 't Sex " were sung by Usher on Saturday Night Live ( May 17 , 2008 ) . Usher performed a one @-@ off showcase concert for 1 @,@ 500 fans at <unk> , London on May 22 , 2008 , for which the tickets were allocated by ballot . On September 4 , 2008 , Usher performed " Here I Stand " , " Trading Places " and " What 's Your Name " at the 2008 's National Football League Kickoff game at Columbus Circle , New York City . Natasha Bedingfield and Keith Urban also sang before the game , which saw the Washington Redskins play the New York Giants . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Five singles were released from Here I Stand . " Love in This Club " was leaked in early 2008 by its producer , Polow da Don , prior to its release on February 22 , 2008 . The song topped the US Billboard Hot 100 , the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and the New Zealand Singles Chart , while reaching the top ten of numerous other record charts . It was certified platinum in the United States and New Zealand . A sequel was created , titled " Love in This Club Part II " with Beyoncé & Lil Wayne , and was sent to radio as the album 's second single on April 28 , 2008 . While it did not have the commercial success of the original , it emerged on the Hot 100 , the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , the Canadian Hot 100 , and the ARIA Singles Chart , and received a gold certification from the RIAA . 
 " Moving Mountains " was released on May 23 , 2008 . It appeared on multiple singles charts outside the top twenty . However , it peaked at number six on the New Zealand Singles Chart , and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand on March 29 , 2009 . The fourth single to be released from Here I Stand was " What 's Your Name " ; it impacted radio on August 18 , 2008 . " What 's Your Name " charted on the Canadian Hot 100 and the ARIA Singles Chart , where it peaked at numbers eighty @-@ four and ninety @-@ one , respectively . " Here I Stand " was released to urban adult contemporary radio on August 18 , 2008 , managing to peak at number 18 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The album 's final single , " Trading Places " , was released on October 17 , 2008 and reached number forty @-@ five on the Hot 100 and number four on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 Usher toured fourteen cities in North America , coining the trip One Night Stand : Ladies Only Tour . Mainly targeting women , the tour commenced on November 2 , 2008 and concluded on November 25 , 2008 . The tour 's female @-@ focused concept was inspired by other male recording artists who " did things special like this for their female fans " , such as Teddy Pendergrass , Marvin Gaye and Prince . Enjoying the challenge of a female @-@ only tour , Usher said , " There [ are ] only a few artists that can pull that off , I feel like I 've had such a connection with my audience . This album , I felt like , was definitely the type of one that was more intimate . So what better way to get up close and personal than to make it all women ? " Usher performed the tour with a <unk> wardrobe . At each show , one fan was brought onstage " for an even more intimate experience with the singer " . This took place during " Superstar " ; a female fan was served champagne and strawberries by Usher while sitting on his lap as he sang to her . Among Usher 's own songs , the setlist also included portions of Stevie Wonder 's " Rocket Love " , Gaye 's " I Want You " and Prince 's " Do Me , Baby " . At the Detroit show he also gave T @-@ Baby 's " It 's So Cold in the D " . Usher was supported by a five @-@ piece band , three backing vocalists and four backup dancers . 
 = = = = Setlist = = = = 
 " Forever Young " 
 " Love in this Club " 
 " Follow Me " 
 " U Remind Me " 
 " This Ain 't Sex " 
 " That 's What It 's Made For " 
 " U Got It Bad " 
 " Trading Places " 
 " Do Me , Baby " / " Adore " 
 " Seduction " 
 " Nice & Slow " 
 " Dot Com " 
 " Rocket Love " 
 " Superstar " 
 " Bad Girl " 
 " You Make Me Wanna ... " 
 " I Don 't Know " 
