 Blair recorded a series of promotional interviews for radio and television for , among others , the Arabic television network Al Jazeera , the ITV1 daytime magazine programme This Morning , and BBC Two , which aired an hour @-@ long interview with the journalist and political commentator Andrew Marr . He was in Washington , D.C. on the day of the UK launch to participate in peace talks with Middle East leaders and attend a White House dinner with Barack Obama , Hillary Clinton , and Israeli and Palestinian leaders . The British newspaper The Independent reported that Blair 's visit to the United States was a coincidence , and not an attempt to be out of the United Kingdom when the book was published . When Blair arrived for his first book signing at a leading bookshop on O 'Connell Street , Dublin on 4 September , demonstrators heckled , jeered and threw eggs and shoes at him . One activist posed as a purchaser to attempt a citizen 's arrest of Blair for war crimes . Protestors clashed with Irish police and tried to push over a security barrier outside the shop . The demonstrators — anti @-@ war protestors and Irish republicans opposed to the peace process — called queuing customers " traitors " and " West Brits " . Four people were arrested during the incident . 
 Several days after the launch of the book , Blair appeared on the series premiere of ITV1 's breakfast television programme Daybreak , where he criticised the Dublin protestors as a small minority given undue media attention . Since the book was selling well , and given fears that protesters would also be present at a forthcoming book signing in London on 8 September , he expressed doubts over whether that event was justifiable or worth the inevitable disruption . Later in the day it was confirmed the signing at Waterstones in Piccadilly would not go ahead . A spokesman for Blair announced that a planned launch party for the book scheduled for the Tate Modern would take place despite plans by the Stop the War Coalition to demonstrate . However , the following day this event was also cancelled as a result of threats of disruption by campaigners . In subsequent weeks , a number of media organisations reported that copies of A Journey were being moved from autobiographical sections in bookshops to sections on crime and horror . More than 10 @,@ 000 people had joined a Facebook page calling for that action . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = In the United Kingdom = = = 
 A Journey drew a mixed reception from critics . Financial Times editor Lionel Barber called it " part psychodrama , part treatise on the frustrations of leadership in a modern democracy ... written in a chummy style with touches of Mills & Boon " . He wrote that it made Blair seem " likable , if manipulative ; capable of <unk> while wonderfully fluent ; in short , a brilliant modern politician ( whatever his moans about the media ) . " Writing in The Independent on Sunday , Geoffrey Beattie said A Journey offered an understanding of Blair 's " underlying psychology . " John <unk> , author of the Blair biography Tony Blair Prime Minister , was equally positive , giving particular praise to the chapter on the Iraq War . " The chapter on Iraq is tightly argued in some detail , which may persuade those with open minds to recognise that the decision to join the US invasion was a reasonable , if not very successful , one , rather than a conspiracy against life , the universe and everything decent , " he said . Mary Ann <unk> , writing for The Independent said , " whatever its faults , and toe @-@ curling passages , [ A Journey ] has many good lessons on how to succeed in both opposition and government . 
 Other reviewers were less positive . The political journalist and author Andrew Rawnsley was critical of Blair 's writing style in The Observer . " It is Tony Blair 's boast that he wrote every word in longhand ' on hundreds of <unk> ' . That I believe , " he wrote . " He was the most brilliant communicator of his era as a platform speaker or television interviewee , but he can be a ghastly writer . Anyone thinking about taking this journey needs to be given a travel advisory : much of the prose is execrable ... I could say that it is a pity that Tony Blair did not employ a ghostwriter to <unk> the prose and organise his recollections more elegantly . " Rawnsley does , though , praise the book as being " a more honest political memoir than most and more open in many respects than I had anticipated . " Julian Glover , a columnist in The Guardian , said that " no political memoir has ever been like this : a book written as if in a dream — or a nightmare ; a literary out @-@ of @-@ body experience . By turns honest , confused , memorable , boastful , fitfully endearing , important , lazy , shallow , rambling and intellectually correct , it scampers through the last two decades like a trashy airport read . " The Sunday Telegraph was extremely critical of Blair 's writing style . " If Blair wants to tell you a funny story , he makes the mistake of signalling in advance that you should be laughing — what happened was ' hilarious ' , his first weekend at Balmoral was ' utterly freaky ' — thereby strangling the anecdote at birth . The book , like its author , is slightly embarrassing . " In the journal History Today , Archie Brown , Emeritus Professor of Politics at Oxford University was critical of what he believed to be Blair 's flawed sense of leadership , but had praise for the chapter on the Northern Ireland peace process : " Blair 's role in the Northern Ireland settlement was perhaps his single most noteworthy achievement . His account of it is also the best chapter in a book which , even by the standards of memoirists who fancy themselves to be remarkable leaders , is strikingly egocentric . " 
 = = = In the United States = = = 
 Reviews in the US sounded similar themes . In The New Yorker , British novelist John Lanchester called A Journey " a detailed account of scrambling , scraping , horse @-@ trading , bluffing , and fudging the way to a deal — a remarkable combination of the ramshackle and the historic . " Fareed Zakaria of the The New York Times Book Review praised Blair for his openness in the publication . " When speaking about the challenges of his first term in office , Blair writes honestly and openly , " the newspaper said . " The style is not the elegant Oxbridge prose that might have been expected of a former prime minister but one filled with Americanisms . It is breezy , informal and candid enough to keep the reader thoroughly engaged . " However , Zakaria attacked Blair 's " sweeping generalizations " about terrorism . 
 Writing in The Washington Post , Leonard Downie , Jr . , former editor of that paper , called the work a " notably wistful memoir " and is generally positive about its content : " Toward the end of this well @-@ written and perhaps unintentionally self @-@ revealing memoir , Tony Blair , who was Britain 's prime minister during an eventful decade from 1997 to 2007 , insists he is ' trying valiantly not to fall into self @-@ justifying mode — a bane of political memoirs . ' But he has done just that . " Tim <unk> of the Los Angeles Times also gave the memoirs a favourable review , declaring it " a political biography of unusual interest . " 
 = = = Internationally = = = 
 There are fewer reviews from newspapers outside the United Kingdom and United States , but those available are generally positive . Writing for Australia 's The Sydney Morning Herald Alexander Downer , who served as Foreign Minister in the Government of John Howard gave A Journey a favourable review : " His [ Blair 's ] commitment to humanity is sincere and convincing , and his personality infectiously amiable with a delightful sense of self @-@ deprecating humour . " Konrad <unk> , a senior political writer for Canada 's The Globe and Mail was also positive : " If Tony Blair has not continued to agonize over the tough decisions of his prime ministership , he does a pretty good job of persuading otherwise in A Journey . " India 's English language daily The Hindu said of the book , " It is by no means a confessional memoir but a brave attempt with only patchy success at self @-@ justification . " 
 = = Political reaction = = 
 The Queen reportedly felt a " profound sense of disappointment " in Blair for breaking with protocol by revealing in his memoirs sensitive details of private conversations he had with her during his time as Prime Minister . A spokesman for Buckingham Palace told a newspaper , " No prime minister before has ever done this and we can only hope that it will never happen again . " The Sunday Express claimed , quoting " renowned Royal biographer Hugo Vickers " and other " Royal insiders " , that because of the book 's contents , Elizabeth II would withhold granting Blair the Order of the Thistle , an honour which is bestowed at the sovereign 's personal prerogative and normally given almost automatically to leaders of Scottish descent after leaving office . Gordon Brown was said to be " seething " and " dismayed " over the criticism he received from Blair in the book , but had told aides not to criticise it . Ed Balls , a Brown ally who served in his government as Secretary of State for Children , Schools and Families said , " It would have been much better if the memoirs had been a celebration of success rather than recriminations . In that sense I thought it was all a bit sad . It was so one @-@ sided . I didn 't think it was <unk> . " 
 Several more of Blair 's former colleagues and political opponents also commented on the book . Former Conservative minister Norman Tebbit wrote in The Daily Telegraph , " A Journey seems to be dominated by Blair 's anxiety to be seen as a great political leader who changed his country for the better . In fact it is , as I suppose all such books are to some extent , entirely about justifying himself and blaming others . " However , Tebbit admitted he had not read the book at the time of writing about it and based his opinion on media coverage . Writing in The Guardian , Alistair Darling , who was Chancellor under Gordon Brown , said that he " read with wry amusement how Tony Blair felt after much agonising that he couldn 't sack his Chancellor . History has a habit of repeating itself . " He concluded that the book was " a good read and shows us what can be done when we have confidence , clarity and a clear sense of purpose : we can win and change the country for the better . " Labour Member of Parliament Tom Harris said that the book " will be a reminder that opposition doesn 't have to be permanent , and that great things can be accomplished by a Labour government , but only if we have a leader capable of appealing to voters beyond our own party 's core . " Of Blair , he said , " There are still many , many Labour Party members who remember Blair as an election @-@ winning genius who , in office , was popular for an awful lot longer than he was unpopular . " Ed Miliband , then vying for the vacant position of Labour Party leader , said on the day of publication , " I think it is time to move on from Tony Blair and Gordon Brown and Peter Mandelson and to move on from the New Labour establishment and that is the candidate that I am at this election who can best turn the page . I think frankly most members of the public will want us to turn the page . " He was elected as Leader of the Labour Party several weeks later . 
 Some families of servicemen and servicewomen who were killed in Iraq reacted angrily to the book , in which Blair does not apologise for the invasion . " I can 't regret the decision to go to war . I can say never did I guess the bloody , destructive and chaotic nightmare that unfolded — and that too is part of the responsibility , " he says in the book . Reg Keys , whose son Tom Keys was killed in Iraq in 2003 , said that the book was " just crocodile tears from Blair . " Keys said , " The tears he claims to have shed are nothing like the tears I and my wife have shed for our son . They are nothing like the tears that tens of thousands of Iraqis have shed for their loved ones . They don 't even come close to it . They seem to me like crocodile tears . It is a cynical attempt to sanitise his legacy . " A spokesperson for Military Families Against the War said that Blair 's expression of regret over the loss of life was " completely meaningless . " The spokesperson added , " He has to prove his regret and giving money to charity doesn 't come close . He is giving a minuscule amount compared to the cost of war and rehabilitation of injured soldiers . It is laughable . " 
 Some of the dialogue Blair uses to describe his first meeting with Elizabeth II led to accusations of plagiarism from Peter Morgan , who wrote The Queen , set during the first few months of Blair 's premiership . Blair recalls his first meeting with Elizabeth II in which she tells him , " You are my 10th prime minister . The first was Winston . That was before you were born . " In the film , Helen Mirren 's fictionalised Elizabeth II says almost exactly the same thing . Morgan said it had been purely his own imagination . 
 = = Other accounts of the Blair years = = 
 Some commentators offered comparisons between A Journey and accounts of the Blair years written by other senior members of his government , particularly on Blair 's relationship with Gordon Brown . David Goodhart of Prospect Magazine wrote that in both Peter Mandelson 's memoir The Third Man and the first volume of Alastair Campbell 's Diaries ( 1994 – 97 ) , " Blair is important , but a rather weak figure buffeted by events and by Gordon Brown . In Blair 's own account , A Journey ( in which Mandelson features hardly at all , and Gordon Brown only at the end ) it is of course very different . Almost everything is driven forward by him ; the new Labour project was not imminent in Britain 's political history — it had to be shaped and moulded . " A similar theme was echoed by David Runciman in The London Review of Books , where he reflected that Mandelson 's memoirs " provide a much more complete account of the Blair / Brown relationship " , including details of Operation Teddy Bear , an aborted plot from 2003 to curb Brown 's increasing influence as Chancellor by dividing the Treasury to create a separate Office of Budget and Delivery that would be controlled directly by the Cabinet Office . 
 Writing for the journal British Politics , academic Mark Garnett provided a detailed analysis of the Blair and Mandelson memoirs , observing that while A Journey gives a more in @-@ depth account of what he termed " contemporary British government " , The Third Man is a more satisfying read : " The Third Man was a worthwhile effort for Peter Mandelson 's reputation , while Tony Blair has journeyed in vain . " The New Zealand Listener , on the other hand , suggested that A Journey and other memoirs written by prominent architects of New Labour had helped to seal its doom after David Miliband – the preferred candidate of all three as Brown 's successor – failed to be elected to the position : " All three backed David Miliband , and however much Miliband tried to distance himself – I 'm not New Labour , I 'm Next Labour – these three books and the publicity that surrounded them showed he had New Labour dye all over his hands . David was beaten to the leadership by his younger brother , Ed ( a man who lacked , as Blair himself might put it , the New Labour baggage ) , by a whisker – just over 1 % . And at a stroke , it 's clear these great , vocal <unk> of New Labour have unwittingly written its epitaph . " 
 = Aaron Loup = 
 Aaron Christopher Loup ( born December 19 , 1987 ) is an American professional baseball relief pitcher for the Toronto Blue Jays of Major League Baseball . He stands 6 feet 0 inches ( 183 cm ) and weighs 210 pounds ( 95 kg ) . Born in <unk> , Louisiana , Loup played baseball at Hahnville High School and Tulane University , where he led his teams to several state playoff appearances and recorded a five @-@ hit shutout . He was drafted by the Blue Jays out of Tulane in the ninth round of the 2009 draft . 
 After playing for three years with minor @-@ league affiliates for the Toronto Blue Jays and even being chosen for the 2012 Eastern League All @-@ Star Game , Loup was called up to the Blue Jays as a replacement for Luis Pérez and retired all six batters he faced . He was later voted the 2012 Toronto Blue Jays Rookie of the Year by the Toronto chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America ( BBWAA ) . Loup pitched 11 ⁄ 3 innings on Opening Day in 2013 , and would go on to win his first major league game on April 10 against the Detroit Tigers . He recorded his first two major league saves on April 12 and June 2 , and led the Blue Jays to a win in an 18 @-@ inning game on June 8 after a pair of groundouts . 
 Loup is a southpaw whose pitching drastically improved after coaches told him to become a sidearm pitcher . His fastball has been noted as particularly effective against both left- and right @-@ handed batters , but he continues to struggle with a changeup . Manager John Gibbons does not view Loup as a long reliever , but rather as a " situational , one @-@ inning guy . " He is known for his " relaxed " personality , which has improved after spending time with his teammates . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Loup was born December 19 , 1987 , in <unk> , Louisiana . His father and grandfather influenced his baseball interest the most when he was young , and he says that it was " just all baseball all the time " , with " a little football " . Loup said that when he was thirteen , " My dad had me in the backyard almost every day — or at least it seemed that way . I was always doing something , whether it was pitching off the mound or hitting in the cage . I wanted to play baseball and knew that I needed to work hard to get there . As a kid , I needed to be reminded of that sometimes . " His baseball role models growing up were Greg Maddux , John Smoltz , and Tom Glavine . 
 Loup played baseball at Hahnville High School , where he led the Hahnville Fighting Tigers to four state playoff appearances . As a sophomore , he threw a complete @-@ game no @-@ hitter against Terrebonne High School . He then attended Tulane University , where he majored in digital design and played for the Tulane Green Wave from freshman year until his junior year , when he was drafted by the Toronto Blue Jays . As a freshman for the Green Wave , he held a 4 @.@ 37 earned run average ( ERA ) and 36 strikeouts in 35 innings . As a sophomore , he held a 5 @.@ 66 ERA in 472 ⁄ 3 innings , as well as pitching a perfect game of relief on April 26 , 2008 . Before being drafted in his junior year , he had thrown 571 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 The Blue Jays drafted Loup in the ninth round of the 2009 Major League Baseball Draft . Loup had shown a strong performance when he was playing for the Tulane Green Wave and was the second Green Wave player to be drafted . Loup said of the event , " I had 20 people text message me before I even heard anything and then my phone rang and I got the call . It 's exciting . They told me they would call me as soon as the draft was over and we would discuss details , so hopefully everything will shake out . " 
 = = = Minor league career = = = 
 After the draft , Loup played for the Gulf Coast League Blue Jays in 2009 . In the 2009 season , he held a 3 @.@ 86 ERA and 19 strikeouts in 161 ⁄ 3 innings . In 2010 , he was moved up to the Lansing Lugnuts , one of the Class A affiliates of the Blue Jays , where he held a 4 @.@ 54 ERA and 73 strikeouts in 731 ⁄ 3 innings . On June 22 , 2010 , Loup was chosen a Mid @-@ Season All @-@ Star . He missed the last two months of the season with an unknown injury and began 2011 on the disabled list . In 2011 , he was moved to the Dunedin Blue Jays , the Class A @-@ Advanced Blue Jays affiliate , where he held a 4 @.@ 66 ERA and 56 strikeouts in 652 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 In 2012 , Loup joined the New Hampshire Fisher Cats , the double @-@ A affiliate of the Toronto Blue Jays . There , he boasted 36 Eastern League appearances , a 2 @.@ 84 ERA , and 43 strikeouts in 441 ⁄ 3 innings . After his teammate Sam Dyson was promoted to the Blue Jays , Loup was Dyson 's replacement for the Minor League Baseball 2012 Eastern League All @-@ Star Game . 
 = = = Toronto Blue Jays = = = 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 Loup began 2012 with the Fisher Cats . In the 2012 season , the Toronto Blue Jays used 32 different pitchers due to frequent injuries , and Loup was among these . He was called up to replace Luis Pérez on July 14 after Pérez tore his ulnar collateral ligament . In his debut , Loup retired all six batters he faced . 
 On August 3 , Loup became the first pitcher in Blue Jays history to bat in an American League game , grounding out to begin the top of the 15th against the Oakland Athletics . Loup closed out the season posting a 0 @-@ 2 record with a 2 @.@ 64 ERA and 21 strikeouts in 302 ⁄ 3 innings . The Toronto chapter of the Baseball Writers Association of America ( BBWAA ) named him the Toronto Blue Jays 2012 Rookie of the Year that November . 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 Though he was considered one of the front @-@ runners , there was still much competition for one of the limited 2013 bullpen spots as a relief pitcher . His main competition was seen as Brett Cecil and J. A. Happ . John Gibbons said , " How it best fits the team , how it all stacks up down there is really what it 's going to come down to . But we 're going to go with the best guy , not because guys are out of options . " Reportedly , Loup learned that he had acquired one of the bullpen spots when Gibbons walked by his locker and said , " Oh , hey Loup — you made the team . " 
 Loup pitched 1 1 ⁄ 3 innings of relief for the Blue Jays against the Cleveland Indians on Opening Day . On April 10 , in a game against the Detroit Tigers , Loup recorded his first career win . On April 12 , Loup recorded his first major league save in a game against the Kansas City Royals . He would later record a second major league save in a game against the San Diego Padres on June 2 . On April 20 , Loup committed a two @-@ run throwing error in the eleventh inning against the New York Yankees . During the first two months of the Blue Jays ' lackluster 2013 season , Loup and other relief pitchers helped to keep the Blue Jays from more defeats . Loup was the ninth and final pitcher in an eighteen @-@ inning game against the Texas Rangers on June 8 . The game , which was the longest in Blue Jays history , resulted in a win after Loup gained a pair of groundouts . In another game against the Rangers on June 14 , Loup pitched in the eighth inning and participated in a shutout . Loup ended the 2013 season with a 4 – 6 record , 2 @.@ 47 ERA and 53 strikeouts in 691 ⁄ 3 innings . 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 Loup was one of eight pitchers in the bullpen for the Blue Jays ' 2014 opening day . On April 20 , Loup walked three consecutive batters for the first time in his career , and took the loss as the Blue Jays fell to the Cleveland Indians 6 – 4 . On May 3 , the Blue Jays announced that Loup would replace Sergio Santos as the team 's closer until Casey Janssen returned from injury . After walking as many batters in three months as he had the entire last season , Loup regained confidence after pitching the last few innings of a game on June 4 that went from a 3 – 2 lead to an 8 – 2 win against the Detroit Tigers . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 Loup took the loss in the Blue Jays ' second game of the 2015 season . Entering with a 3 – 1 lead against the New York Yankees in the eighth inning , he loaded the bases without recording an out . All three runners would come in to score and Toronto would lose , 4 – 3 . On April 12 , Loup pitched 12 ⁄ 3 perfect innings against the Orioles , taking the win by a score of 10 – 7 . Loup experienced ineffectiveness throughout the season , posting an ERA over 5 @.@ 00 into August . Following a 3 – 1 win over the Yankees on August 16 , Loup was optioned to the Triple @-@ A Buffalo Bisons . He was recalled on September 1 . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 On January 15 , 2016 , Loup and the Blue Jays avoided salary arbitration by agreeing to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 05 million contract . Loup began the 2016 season on the disabled list with a left forearm flexor strain . He began a rehab assignment with the Dunedin Blue Jays on May 14 . On May 21 , he was moved up to the Buffalo Bisons to continue rehabbing the injury . 
 = = = Scouting report = = = 
 = = = = Defense = = = = 
 Due to his non @-@ ideal size as a pitcher , some have seen issues in Loup 's stamina and durability . His pitches can also come across as " a bit too <unk> . " He is , however , especially effective when pitching against left @-@ handed batters . In 2013 , Loup was viewed by the Blue Jays ' manager John Gibbons as " not necessarily a long guy ; he 's more a situational , one @-@ inning guy . " Despite his shortcomings , Loup has the lowest walk rate among all major league pitchers who have pitched at least seventy innings since 2012 , having walked only 2 @.@ 6 % of the batters he has faced . His consistency and endurance have made Loup the Blue Jays ' most @-@ used reliever , and he says " I 'm one of those guys that if my body would let me , I would pitch every day . " 
 The Baseball Cube 's player ratings , which are based solely on statistics on a scale from 0 @-@ 100 , gave Loup a 69 for control , a 62 for " K @-@ rating " , or strikeouts compared to batters faced , a 62 for efficiency , and a 52 for " <unk> " , or home runs compared to batters faced . 
 = = = = Pitching style = = = = 
 Loup is a left @-@ handed pitcher , or southpaw . He struggled at first with pitching until minor league pitching instructor Dane Johnson and Dunedin pitching coach <unk> Knowles told him to lower his arm and become more of a sidearm pitcher . Now , as he pitches , he tracks a plane from his ear to his shoulder , which also helped his effectiveness against left @-@ handed batters . His slider and fastball improved drastically , but his changeup continued to struggle , and Loup says that he is still a little inconsistent with it . He can throw a low @-@ 90s " breaking " fastball that is just as effective against right @-@ handed batters as left @-@ handed batters . John Farrell , a previous Toronto Blue Jays manager , said that it was " [ Loup 's ] poise and his presence that allows him to maintain not only composure , but the ability to execute . " Blue Jays ' bullpen coach Pat Hentgen says that Loup " keeps things simple , he doesn 't over @-@ think . He stays aggressive . He 's got a lot of guts , goes right after hitters and you combine all those things and you 're going to have the success that he 's had . " One reporter compared Loup to Bran Flakes , stating that " [ y ] ou know exactly what you 're going to get from him every time he takes the mound and he 's not going to add any excitement to any situation . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Loup married his high school sweetheart Leigh Ann . The couple have one child , a daughter named Sophie Harper Loup , born the weekend of August 24 , 2013 . Loup went on the paternity list for the Blue Jays on August 23 , 2013 , but was called back on August 26 due to the three @-@ day paternity list limit . Loup and his wife spend the off @-@ season at Loup 's Louisiana home . An avid <unk> , Loup prefers hunting deer with a compound bow . He has also been known to fish and hunt with a gun in the off @-@ season . He is known for having a more quiet and reserved personality , but he says that he has become " a little more comfortable " with his teammates by spending time and " connecting " with them , which he says contributes to his success . 
 = System Shock 2 = 
 System Shock 2 is a first @-@ person action role @-@ playing survival horror video game for Microsoft Windows , OS X and Linux , designed by Ken Levine and co @-@ developed by Irrational Games and Looking Glass Studios . Originally intended to be a standalone title , its story was changed during production into a sequel to the 1994 PC game System Shock ; the alterations were made when Electronic Arts — who owned the System Shock franchise rights — signed on as publisher . System Shock 2 was released on August 11 , 1999 , in North America . 
 The game takes place on board a starship in a cyberpunk depiction of 2114 . The player assumes the role of a soldier trying to stem the outbreak of a genetic infection that has devastated the ship . Like System Shock , gameplay consists of combat and exploration . It incorporates role @-@ playing system elements , in which the player can develop skills and traits , such as hacking and psionic abilities . 
 System Shock 2 received positive reviews , but failed to meet commercial sales expectations . Many critics later determined that the game was highly influential in subsequent game design , particularly on first @-@ person shooters , and considered it far ahead of its time . It has been included in several " greatest games of all time " lists . In 2007 , Irrational Games released a spiritual successor to the System Shock series , titled BioShock , to critical acclaim and strong sales . System Shock 2 had been in intellectual property limbo following closure of Looking Glass Studios . Night Dive Studios were able to secure the rights to game and System Shock franchise in 2013 to produce an updated version of System Shock 2 for modern personal computers . OtherSide Entertainment announced in December 2015 that they have been licensed the rights from Night Dive Studios to produce a sequel , System Shock 3 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like in its predecessor , System Shock , gameplay in System Shock 2 is an amalgamation of the action role @-@ playing game and survival horror genres . The developers achieved this gameplay design by rendering the experience as a standard first @-@ person shooter and adding a character customization and development system , which are considered as signature role @-@ play elements . The player uses melee and projectile weapons to defeat enemies , while a role @-@ playing system allows the development of useful abilities . Navigation is presented from a first @-@ person view and complemented with a heads @-@ up display that shows character and weapon information , a map , and a drag and drop inventory . 
 The backstory is explained progressively through the player 's acquisition of audio logs and encounters with ghostly apparitions . At the beginning of the game the player chooses a career in a branch of the Unified National Nominate , a fictional military organization . Each branch of service gives the player a set of starting bonuses composed of certain skills , though may thereafter freely develop as the player chooses . The Marine begins with bonuses to weaponry , the Navy officer is skilled in repairing and hacking , and the OSA agent gets a starting set of psionic powers . 
 The player can upgrade their skills by using " cyber @-@ modules " given as rewards for completing objectives such as searching the ship , and then spend them at devices called " cyber @-@ upgrade units " to obtain enhanced skills . Operating system ( O / S ) units allow one @-@ time character upgrades to be made ( e.g. permanent health enhancement ) . An in @-@ game currency called " nanites " may be spent on items at vending machines , including ammunition supplies and health packs . " Quantum Bio @-@ Reconstruction Machines " can be activated and reconstitute the player for 10 nanites if they die inside the area in which the machine resides . Otherwise , the game ends and progress must be resumed from a save point . The player can hack devices , such as <unk> to open alternate areas and vending machines to reduce prices . When a hack is attempted , a minigame begins that features a grid of green nodes ; the player must connect three in a straight row to succeed . <unk> , electronic lock picks , called " ICE @-@ picks " , can be found that will automatically hack a machine , regardless of its difficulty . 
 Throughout the game , the player can procure various weapons , including melee weapons , pistols , shotguns , and alien weapons . Non @-@ melee weapons degrade with use and will break if they are not regularly repaired with maintenance tools . There are a variety of ammunition types , each of which is most damaging to a specific enemy . For example , organic enemies are vulnerable to anti @-@ personnel rounds , while mechanical foes are weak against armor @-@ piercing rounds . Similarly , energy weapons cause the most damage against robots and cyborgs , and the annelid @-@ made exotic weaponry is particularly harmful to organic targets . Because ammunition is scarce , to be effective the player must use it sparingly and carefully search rooms for supplies . 
 The game includes a research function . When new objects are encountered in the game , especially enemies , their organs can be collected and , when combined with chemicals found in storage rooms , the player can research the enemies and thus improve their damage against them . Similarly , some exotic weapons and items can only be used after being researched . OSA agents effectively have a separate weapons tree available to them . <unk> powers can be learned , such as invisibility , fireballs and teleportation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 In <unk> , after the Citadel Station 's demise , TriOptimum 's attempts to cover up the incident were exposed to the media and the corporation was brought up on charges from multiple individuals and companies for the ensuing scandal . The virus developed there killed the station 's population ; the ruthless malevolent A.I supercomputer named SHODAN controlled , and eventually destroyed the Citadel Station in hopes of enslaving and destroying humanity . After a massive number of trials , the company went bankrupt and their operations were shut down . The United Nations Nominate ( UNN ) , a UN successor , was established to combat the malevolence and corruption of power @-@ hungry corporations , including TriOptimum . 
 In 2100 , 28 years later , the company 's failed stocks and assets were bought by a Russian oligarch named Anatoly Korenchkin , a former black market operator who sought to make money in legitimate ways . He re @-@ licensed and restored the company to its former status in the following decade . Along with producing healthcare and consumer products , Korenchkin signed weapons contracts with various military organizations , private and political @-@ owned . The new UNN was almost virtually powerless with Korenchkin exercising control over them . 
 In January 2114 , 42 years after the Citadel events and 12 years into rebuilding TriOptimum , the company created an experimental FTL starship , the Von Braun , which is now on its maiden voyage . The ship is also followed by a UNN space vessel , the Rickenbacker , which is controlled by Captain William Bedford Diego , son of Edward Diego , the Citadel Station 's infamous commander and public hero of the Battle of the Boston Harbor during the Eastern States police action . Because the Rickenbacker does not have an FTL system of its own , the two ships are attached for the trip . However , Korenchkin was egoistical enough to make himself the captain of the Von Braun despite being inexperienced 
 In July 2114 , 5 months into the journey , the ships respond to a distress signal from the planet Tau Ceti V , outside the Solar System . A rescue team is sent to the planet 's surface where they discover strange eggs ; these eggs , found in an old ejection pod , infect the rescue team and integrate them into an alien communion known as the Many . The infection eventually spreads to both ships and the ships are overrun with the virus . The virus overruns most of the crew . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Owing to a computer malfunction , the remaining soldier awakens with amnesia in a cryo @-@ tube on the medical deck of the Von Braun , being implanted with an illegal cyber neural interface . He is immediately contacted by another survivor , Dr. Janice Polito , who guides him to safety before the cabin <unk> . She demands that he meets her on deck 4 of the Von Braun . Along the way , the soldier battles the infected crew members . The Many also telepathically communicate with him , attempting to convince him to join them . After restarting the ship 's engine core , the soldier reaches deck 4 and discovers that Polito is dead . He is then confronted by SHODAN . It is revealed she has been posing as Polito to gain the soldier 's trust . 
 SHODAN mentions that she is responsible for creating the Many through her bioengineering experiments on Citadel Station . The Hacker , who created her , ejected the grove that contained her experiments to prevent them contaminating Earth , an act that allowed part of SHODAN to survive in the grove . The grove crash @-@ landed on Tau Ceti V. While SHODAN went into forced hibernation , The Many evolved beyond her control . SHODAN tells the soldier that his only chance for survival lies in helping destroy her creations . Efforts to regain control of <unk> , the main computer on the Von Braun , fail . SHODAN informs the soldier that destroying the ship is their only option , but he must transmit her program to the Rickenbacker first . While en route , the soldier briefly encounters two survivors , Tommy Suarez and Rebecca Siddons , who flee the ship aboard an escape pod . 
 With the transfer complete , the soldier travels to the Rickenbacker and learns both ships have been enveloped by the infection 's source , a gigantic mass of bio @-@ organic tissue . The soldier enters the biomass and destroys its core , stopping the infection . SHODAN congratulates him and tells of her intentions to merge real space and cyberspace through the Von Braun 's faster @-@ than @-@ light drive . The soldier confronts SHODAN in cyberspace and defeats her . The final scene shows Tommy and Rebecca receiving a message from the Von Braun . Tommy responds , saying they will return and noting that Rebecca is acting strange . Rebecca is shown speaking in a SHODAN @-@ like voice , asking Tommy if he " likes her new look " , as the screen fades to black . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development of System Shock 2 began in 1997 when Looking Glass Studios approached Irrational Games with an idea to co @-@ develop a new game . The development team were fans of System Shock and sought to create a similar game . Early story ideas were similar to the novella Heart of Darkness . In an early draft , the player was tasked with assassinating an insane commander on a starship . The original title of the game , according to its pitch document , was Junction Point . The philosophy of the design was to continue to develop the concept of a dungeon crawler , like Ultima Underworld : The Stygian Abyss , in a science fiction setting , the basis for System Shock . However , the press mistook System Shock to be closer to a Doom clone which was cited for poor financial success of System Shock . With Junction Point , the goal was to add in a significant role @-@ playing elements and a persistent storyline as to distance the game from Doom . 
 The title took 18 months to create with a budget of $ 1 @.@ 7 million and was pitched to several publishers , until Electronic Arts — who owned the rights to the Shock franchise — responded by suggesting the game become a sequel to System Shock . The development team agreed ; Electronic Arts became the publisher and story changes were made to incorporate the franchise . The project was allotted one year to be completed , and to compensate for the short time frame , the staff began working with Looking Glass Studio 's unfinished Dark Engine , the same engine used to create Thief : The Dark Project . 
 The designers included role @-@ playing elements in the game . Similar to Ultima Underworld , another Looking Glass Studios project , the environment in System Shock 2 is persistent and constantly changes without the player 's presence . Paper @-@ and @-@ pencil role @-@ playing games were influential ; the character customization system was based on Traveller 's methodology and was implemented in the fictional military branches which , by allowing multiple character paths , the player could receive a more open @-@ ended gameplay experience . Horror was a key focus and four major points were identified to successfully incorporate it . Isolation was deemed primary , which resulted in the player having little physical contact with other sentient beings . Secondly , vulnerability was created by focusing on a fragile character . Last were the inclusion of moody sound effects and " the intelligent placement of lighting and shadows " . The game 's lead designer , Ken Levine , oversaw the return of System Shock villain SHODAN . Part of Levine 's design was to ally the player with her , as he believed that game characters were too trusting , stating " good guys are good , bad guys are bad . What you see and perceive is real " . Levine sought to challenge this notion by having SHODAN betray the player : " Sometimes characters are betrayed , but the player never is . I wanted to violate that trust and make the player feel that they , and not [ only ] the character , were led on and deceived " . This design choice was controversial with the development team . 
 Several problems were encountered during the project . Because the team comprised two software companies , tension emerged regarding job assignments and some developers left the project . Additionally , many employees were largely inexperienced , but in retrospect project manager Jonathan Chey felt this was advantageous , stating " inexperience also bred enthusiasm and commitment that might not have been present with a more jaded set of developers . " The Dark Engine posed problems of its own . It was unfinished , forcing the programmers to fix software bugs when encountered . In contrast , working closely with the engine code allowed them to write additional features . Not all setbacks were localized ; a demonstration build at E3 was hindered when it was requested all guns be removed from the presentation due to then @-@ recent Columbine High School massacre . 
 = = = Release = = = 
 A demo for the game , featuring a tutorial and a third of the first mission , was released on August 2 , 1999 . Nine days later , System Shock 2 was shipped to retailers . An enhancement patch was released a month later and added significant features , such as co @-@ operative multiplayer and control over weapon degradation and enemy respawn rates . A port was planned for the Dreamcast but was canceled . 
 = = = End @-@ of @-@ support and source code leak = = = 
 Around 2000 , with the end @-@ of @-@ support for the game by the developer and publisher , remaining bugs and compatibility with newer operating systems and hardware became a growing problem . To compensate the missing support , some fans of the game became active in the modding community to update the game . For instance , the " Rebirth " graphical enhancement mod replaced many low @-@ polygonal models with higher quality ones , a " Shock Texture Upgrade Project " increased the resolution of textures , and an updated level editor was released by the user community . In 2009 , a complete copy of System Shock 2 's Dark Engine source code was discovered in the possession of an ex @-@ Looking Glass Studios employee who was at the time continuing his work for Eidos Interactive . In late April 2010 , a user on the Dreamcast Talk forum disassembled the contents of a Dreamcast development kit he had purchased . In 2012 significant unofficial updates for System Shock 2 ( and other Dark Engine @-@ based games ) were published . 
 = = = Intellectual property debacle and re @-@ release = = = 
 The intellectual property ( IP ) rights of System Shock 2 were caught for years in complications between Electronic Arts and Meadowbrook Insurance Group ( a subsidiary of Star Insurance Company ) , the entity that acquired the assets of Looking Glass Studios on their closure , though according to a lawyer for Star Insurance , they themselves have since acquired the lingering intellectual property rights from EA . 
 In October 2012 Stephen Kick of Night Dive Studios , seeking to bring the game to modern systems , started negotiations with the rights holders and was able to secure the rights . Kick worked with GOG.com for a timed @-@ exclusive release on their digital distribution website on February 2013 , where the game was the most requested to be added to the catalog . This version , considered by GOG.com to be a " collector 's edition " , includes updates to the original game to make it work on modern systems while still allowing user @-@ made modifications to be applied , and contains additional material such as the game 's soundtrack , maps of the Von Braun , and the original pitch document for the game . The update rights also allowed a Mac OS X version of System Shock 2 to be subsequently released on June 18 , 2013 through GOG.com. The title was later also available on Steam on May 10 , 2013 . On April 2014 a Linux version was also released . 
 Since then , Night Dive Studios also acquired the rights to System Shock , releasing an enhanced version of the game in September 2015 . Kick has reported they have acquired full rights to the series since then . 
 = = Reception = = 
 System Shock 2 received over a dozen awards , including seven " Game of the Year " prizes . Reviews were very positive and lauded the title for its hybrid gameplay , moody sound design , and engaging story . System Shock 2 is regarded by critics as highly influential , particularly on first @-@ person shooters and the horror genre . In a retrospective article , GameSpot declared the title " well ahead of its time " and stated that it " upped the ante in dramatic and mechanical terms " by creating a horrific gameplay experience . Despite critical acclaim , the title did not perform well commercially ; only 58 @,@ 671 copies were sold by April 2000 . 
 Several publications praised the title for its open @-@ ended gameplay . With regard to character customization , Trent Ward of IGN stated the best element of the role @-@ playing system was allowing gamers to " play the game as completely different characters " , and felt this made each play @-@ through unique . Erik <unk> writing for Just Adventure agreed , saying " There are very few games that allow you [ to ] play the way you want " . Alec <unk> of Allgame believed that the different character classes made the game “ diverse enough to demand instant replayability " . Robert Mayer from Computer Games Magazine called System Shock 2 " a game that truly defies classification in a single genre " , and ensured that " the action is occasionally fast @-@ paced , it 's more often tactical , placing a premium on thought rather than on reflexes . " 
 A number of critics described the game as frightening . Computer and Video Games described the atmosphere as " gripping " and guaranteed readers they would " jump out of [ their ] skin " numerous times . Allgame found the sound design particularly effective , calling it “ absolutely , teeth @-@ <unk> disturbing " , while PC Gamer 's William Harms christened System Shock 2 as the most frightening game he had ever played . Some critics found the weapon degradation system to be irritating , and members of the development team have also expressed misgivings about the system . The role @-@ playing system was another point of contention ; GameSpot described the job system as " badly unbalanced " because the player can develop skills outside their career choice . Allgame felt similarly about the system , saying it " leaned towards a hacker character " . 
 Along with Deus Ex , Sid Shuman of GamePro christened System Shock 2 " [ one of the ] twin barrels of modern [ first @-@ person shooter ] innovation " , owing to its complex role @-@ playing gameplay . IGN writer Cam Shea referred to the game as " another reinvention of the FPS genre " , citing the story , characters , and RPG system . PC Zone lauded the game as a " fabulous example of a modern @-@ day computer game " and named it " a sci @-@ fi horror masterpiece " . The title has been inducted into a number of features listing the greatest games ever made , including ones by GameSpy , Edge , Empire , IGN , GameSpot and PC Gamer . IGN also ranked System Shock 2 as the 35th greatest first @-@ person shooter of all time . SHODAN has proven to be a popular character among most critics , including IGN , GameSpot and The Phoenix . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 System Shock 2 has amassed a cult following , with fans asking for a sequel . On January 9 , 2006 , GameSpot reported that Electronic Arts had renewed its trademark protection on the System Shock name , leading to speculation that System Shock 3 might be under development . Three days later , Computer and Video Games reported a reliable source had come forward and confirmed the title 's production . Electronic Arts UK made no comment when confronted with the information . PC Gamer UK stated the team behind The Godfather : The Game ( EA Redwood Shores ) was charged with its creation . Ken Levine , when asked whether he would helm a third installment , replied " that question is completely out of my hands " . He expressed optimism at the prospect of System Shock 3 , but revealed that EA had not shown interest in his own proposal for a sequel , and was not optimistic with regards to their abilities . Electronic Arts did not confirm a new title in the series and allowed the System Shock trademark registration to lapse . Redwood Shores ' next release was 2008 's Dead Space , a game with noted similarities in theme and presentation to the System Shock series . 
 In November 2015 , Night Dive Studios , after acquiring the rights for the System Shock franchise , stated they are considering developing a third title in the series . In December 2015 , OtherSide Entertainment , a studio founded by former Looking Glass Studios designer Paul Neurath , announced they were developing System Shock 3 with rights granted to them by Night Dive Studios . OtherSide had acquired rights to make sequels to System Shock some years before this point , but did not have the rights to the series name , which Night Dive was able to provide . The sequel will feature Terri Brosius reprising her voice for SHODAN , and will include work from original System Shock concept artist Robb Waters . Warren Spector , the producer of the first System Shock , announced in February 2016 that he has joined OtherSide Entertainment and will be working on System Shock 3 . 
 = = = Spiritual successors = = = 
 In 2007 , Irrational Games — briefly known as 2K Boston / 2K Australia — released a spiritual successor to the System Shock series , entitled BioShock . The game takes place in an abandoned underwater utopian community destroyed by the genetic modification of its populace and shares many gameplay elements with System Shock 2 : reconstitution stations can be activated , allowing the player to be resurrected when they die ; hacking , ammo conservation , and exploration are integral parts of gameplay ; and unique powers may be acquired via plasmids , special abilities that function similarly to psionics in System Shock 2 . The two titles also share plot similarities and employ audio logs and encounters with ghostly apparitions to reveal backstory . In BioShock Infinite , Irrational Games included a gameplay feature called " 1999 Mode " , specifically in reference to System Shock 2 's release year , designed to provide a similar game experience , with a higher difficulty and long @-@ lasting effects of choices made , that would remind players of System Shock 's unforgiving nature . 
 = Battle of Plataea = 
 The Battle of Plataea was the final land battle during the second Persian invasion of Greece . It took place in 479 BC near the city of Plataea in Boeotia , and was fought between an alliance of the Greek city @-@ states , including Sparta , Athens , Corinth and Megara , and the Persian Empire of Xerxes I. 
 The previous year the Persian invasion force , led by the Persian king in person , had scored victories at the battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium and conquered Thessaly , Boeotia , Euboea and Attica . However , at the ensuing Battle of Salamis , the Allied Greek navy had won an unlikely but decisive victory , preventing the conquest of the Peloponnesus . Xerxes then retreated with much of his army , leaving his general Mardonius to finish off the Greeks the following year . 
 In the summer of 479 BC the Greeks assembled a huge ( by ancient standards ) army and marched out of the Peloponnesus . The Persians retreated to Boeotia and built a fortified camp near Plataea . The Greeks , however , refused to be drawn into the prime cavalry terrain around the Persian camp , resulting in a stalemate that lasted 11 days . While attempting a retreat after their supply lines were disrupted , the Greek battle line fragmented . Thinking the Greeks in full retreat , Mardonius ordered his forces to pursue them , but the Greeks ( particularly the Spartans , Tegeans and Athenians ) halted and gave battle , routing the lightly armed Persian infantry and killing Mardonius . 
 A large portion of the Persian army was trapped in its camp and slaughtered . The destruction of this army , and the remnants of the Persian navy allegedly on the same day at the Battle of Mycale , decisively ended the invasion . After Plataea and Mycale the Greek allies would take the offensive against the Persians , marking a new phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . Although Plataea was in every sense a resounding victory , it does not seem to have been attributed the same significance ( even at the time ) as , for example , the Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon or the Spartan defeat at Thermopylae . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Greek city @-@ states of Athens and Eretria had supported the unsuccessful Ionian Revolt against the Persian Empire of Darius I in 499 – 494 BC . The Persian Empire was still relatively young and prone to revolts by its subject peoples . Moreover , Darius was an usurper and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule . The Ionian Revolt threatened the integrity of his empire , and he thus vowed to punish those involved ( especially those not already part of the empire ) . Darius also saw the opportunity to expand his empire into the fractious world of Ancient Greece . A preliminary expedition under Mardonius , in 492 BC , to secure the land approaches to Greece ended with the re @-@ conquest of Thrace and forced Macedon to become a fully subordinate client kingdom of Persia , the latter which had been a Persian vassal as early as the late 6th century BC . An amphibious task force was then sent out under Datis and Artaphernes in 490 BC , using Delos as an intermediate base at , successfully sacking Karystos and Eretria , before moving to attack Athens . However , at the ensuing Battle of Marathon , the Athenians won a remarkable victory , resulting in the withdrawal of the Persian army to Asia . 
 Darius therefore began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece . However , he died before the invasion could begin . The throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I , who quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece , including building two pontoon bridges across the Hellespont . In 481 BC Xerxes sent ambassadors around Greece asking for earth and water as a gesture of their submission , but making the very deliberate omission of Athens and Sparta ( both of whom were at open war with Persia ) . Support thus began to coalesce around these two leading states . A congress of city states met at Corinth in late autumn of 481 BC , and a confederate alliance of Greek city @-@ states was formed ( hereafter referred to as " the Allies " ) . This was remarkable for the disjointed Greek world , especially since many of the city @-@ states in attendance were still technically at war with each other . 
 The Allies initially adopted a strategy of blocking land and sea approaches to southern Greece . Thus , in August 480 BC , after hearing of Xerxes ' approach , a small Allied army led by Spartan King Leonidas I blocked the Pass of Thermopylae , while an Athenian @-@ dominated navy sailed to the Straits of Artemisium . Famously , the massively outnumbered Greek army held Thermopylae against the Persian army for three days before being outflanked by the Persians , who used a little @-@ known mountain path . Although much of the Greek army retreated , the rearguard , formed of the Spartan and Thespian contingents , was surrounded and annihilated . The simultaneous Battle of Artemisium , consisting of a series of naval encounters , was up to that point a stalemate ; however , when news of Thermopylae reached them , they also retreated , since holding the straits of Artemisium was now a moot point . 
 Following Thermopylae the Persian army proceeded to burn and sack the Boeotian cities that had not surrendered , Plataea and Thespiae , before taking possession of the now @-@ evacuated city of Athens . The Allied army , meanwhile , prepared to defend the Isthmus of Corinth . Xerxes wished for a final crushing defeat of the Allies to finish the conquest of Greece in that campaigning season ; conversely , the allies sought a decisive victory over the Persian navy that would guarantee the security of the Peloponnese . The ensuing naval Battle of Salamis ended in a decisive victory for the Allies , marking a turning point in the conflict . 
 Following the defeat of his navy at Salamis , Xerxes retreated to Asia with the bulk of his army . According to Herodotus , this was because he feared the Greeks would sail to the Hellespont and destroy the pontoon bridges , thereby trapping his army in Europe . He thus left Mardonius , with handpicked troops , to complete the conquest of Greece the following year . Mardonius evacuated Attica and wintered in Thessaly ; the Athenians then reoccupied their destroyed city . Over the winter there seems to have been some tension among the Allies . The Athenians in particular , who were not protected by the Isthmus but whose fleet was the key to the security of the Peloponnese , felt hard done by and demanded that an allied army march north the following year . When the Allies failed to commit to this , the Athenian fleet refused to join the Allied navy in the spring . The navy , now under the command of the Spartan king Leotychides , thus skulked off Delos , while the remnants of the Persian fleet skulked off Samos , both sides unwilling to risk battle . Similarly , Mardonius remained in Thessaly , knowing an attack on the Isthmus was pointless , while the Allies refused to send an army outside the Peloponnese . 
 Mardonius moved to break the stalemate by trying to win over the Athenians and their fleet through the mediation of Alexander I of Macedon , offering peace , self @-@ government and territorial expansion . The Athenians made sure that a Spartan delegation was also on hand to hear the offer , and rejected it : 
 The degree to which we are put in the shadow by the Medes ' strength is hardly something you need to bring to our attention . We are already well aware of it . But even so , such is our love of liberty , that we will never surrender . 
 Upon this refusal , the Persians marched south again . Athens was again evacuated and left to the enemy . Mardonius now repeated his offer of peace to the Athenian refugees on Salamis . Athens , along with Megara and Plataea , sent emissaries to Sparta demanding assistance and threatening to accept the Persian terms if it was not given . According to Herodotus , the Spartans , who were at that time celebrating the festival of Hyacinthus , delayed making a decision until they were persuaded by a guest , <unk> of Tegea , who pointed out the danger to all of Greece if the Athenians surrendered . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 When Mardonius learned of the Spartan force , he completed the destruction of Athens , tearing down whatever was left standing . He then retreated towards Thebes , hoping to lure the Greek army into territory that would be suitable for the Persian cavalry . Mardonius created a fortified encampment on the north bank of the Asopus river in Boeotia covering the ground from Erythrae past <unk> and up to the lands of Plataea . 
 The Athenians sent 8 @,@ 000 hoplites , led by Aristides , along with 600 <unk> exiles to join the Allied army . The army then marched in Boeotia across the passes of Mount <unk> , arriving near Plataea , and above the Persian position on the Asopus . Under the guidance of the commanding general , Pausanias , the Greeks took up position opposite the Persian lines but remained on high ground . Knowing that he had little hope of successfully attacking the Greek positions , Mardonius sought to either sow dissension among the Allies or lure them down into the plain . Plutarch reports that a conspiracy was discovered among some prominent Athenians , who were planning to betray the Allied cause ; although this account is not universally accepted , it may indicate Mardonius ' attempts of intrigue within the Greek ranks . 
 Mardonius also initiated hit @-@ and @-@ run cavalry attacks against the Greek lines , possibly trying to lure the Greeks down to the plain in pursuit . Although having some initial success , this strategy backfired when the Persian cavalry commander <unk> was killed ; with his death , the cavalry retreated . 
 Their morale boosted by this small victory , the Greeks moved forward , still remaining on higher ground , to a new position nearer more suited for encampment and better watered . The Spartans and Tegeans were on a ridge to the right of the line , the Athenians on a hillock on the left and the other contingents on the slightly lower ground between . In response , Mardonius brought his men up to the Asopus and arrayed them for battle ; However , neither the Persians nor the Greeks would attack ; Herodotus claims this is because both sides received bad omens during sacrificial rituals . The armies thus stayed camped in their locations for eight days , during which new Greek troops arrived . Mardonius then sought to break the stalemate by sending his cavalry to attack the passes of Mount <unk> ; this raid resulted in the capture of a convoy of provisions intended for the Greeks . Two more days passed , during which time the supply lines of the Greeks continued to be menaced . Mardonius then launched another cavalry raid on the Greek lines , which succeeded in blocking the <unk> Spring , which had been the only source of water for the Greek army ( they could not use the Asopus due to the threat posed by Persian archers ) . Coupled with the lack of food , the restriction of the water supply made the Greek position untenable , so they decided to retreat to a position in front of Plataea , from where they could guard the passes and have access to fresh water . To prevent the Persian cavalry from attacking during the retreat , it was to be performed that night . 
 However , the retreat went awry . The Allied contingents in the centre missed their appointed position and ended up scattered in front of Plataea itself . The Athenians , Tegeans and Spartans , who had been guarding the rear of the retreat , had not even begun to retreat by daybreak . A single Spartan division was thus left on the ridge to guard the rear , while the Spartans and Tegeans retreated uphill ; Pausanias also instructed the Athenians to begin the retreat and if possible join up with the Spartans . However , the Athenians at first retreated directly towards Plataea , and thus the Allied battle line remained fragmented as the Persian camp began to stir . 
 = = The opposing forces = = 
 = = = The Greeks = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the Spartans sent 45 @,@ 000 men — 5 @,@ 000 Spartiates ( full citizen soldiers ) , 5 @,@ 000 other <unk> hoplites ( perioeci ) and 35 @,@ 000 helots ( seven per Spartiate ) . This was probably the largest Spartan force ever assembled . The Greek army had been reinforced by contingents of hoplites from the other Allied city @-@ states , as shown in the table . Diodorus Siculus claims in his Bibliotheca historica that the number of the Greek troops approached one hundred thousand . 
 According to Herodotus , there were a total of 69 @,@ 500 lightly armed troops — 35 @,@ 000 helots and 34 @,@ 500 troops from the rest of Greece ; roughly one per hoplite . The number of 34 @,@ 500 has been suggested to represent one light <unk> supporting each non @-@ Spartan hoplite ( 33 @,@ 700 ) , together with 800 Athenian archers , whose presence in the battle Herodotus later notes . Herodotus tells us that there were also 1 @,@ 800 Thespians ( but does not say how they were equipped ) , giving a total strength of 108 @,@ 200 men . 
 The number of hoplites is accepted as reasonable ( and possible ) ; the Athenians alone had fielded 10 @,@ 000 hoplites at the Battle of Marathon . Some historians have accepted the number of light troops and used them as a population census of Greece at the time . Certainly these numbers are theoretically possible . Athens , for instance , allegedly fielded a fleet of 180 triremes at Salamis , manned by approximately 36 @,@ 000 rowers and fighters . Thus 69 @,@ 500 light troops could easily have been sent to Plataea . Nevertheless , the number of light troops is often rejected as exaggerated , especially in view of the ratio of seven helots to one Spartiate . For instance , Lazenby accepts that hoplites from other Greek cities might have been accompanied by one lightly armoured retainer each , but rejects the number of seven helots per Spartiate . He further speculates that each Spartiate was accompanied by one armed helot , and that the remaining helots were employed in the logistical effort , transporting food for the army . Both Lazenby and Holland deem the lightly armed troops , whatever their number , as essentially irrelevant to the outcome of battle . 
 A further complication is that a certain proportion of the Allied manpower was needed to man the fleet , which amounted to at least 110 triremes , and thus approximately 22 @,@ 000 men . Since the Battle of Mycale was fought at least near @-@ simultaneously with the Battle of Plataea , then this was a pool of manpower which could not have contributed to Plataea , and further reduces the likelihood that 110 @,@ 000 Greeks assembled before Plataea . 
 The Greek forces were , as agreed by the Allied congress , under the overall command of Spartan royalty in the person of Pausanias , who was the regent for Leonidas ' young son , Pleistarchus , his cousin . Diodorus tells us that the Athenian contingent was under the command of Aristides ; it is probable that the other contingents also had their leaders . Herodotus tells us in several places that the Greeks held council during the prelude to the battle , implying that decisions were consensual and that Pausanias did not have the authority to issue direct orders to the other contingents . This style of leadership contributed to the way events unfolded during the battle itself . For instance , in the period immediately before the battle , Pausanias was unable to order the Athenians to join up with his forces , and thus the Greeks fought the battle completely separated from each other . 
 = = = The Persians = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the Persians numbered 300 @,@ 000 and were accompanied by troops from Greek city states that supported the Persian cause ( including Thebes ) . Herodotus admits that no one counted the latter , but he guesses that there were about 50 @,@ 000 of them . 
 Ctesias , who wrote a history of Persia based on Persian archives , claimed there were 120 @,@ 000 Persian and 7 @,@ 000 Greek soldiers , but his account is generally garbled ( for instance , placing this battle before Salamis , he also says there were only 300 Spartans , 1000 perioeci and 6000 from the other cities at Plataea , perhaps confusing it with Thermopylae ) . 
 Diodorus Siculus claims in his Bibliotheca historica that the number of the Persian troops was some five hundred thousand . 
 The figure of 300 @,@ 000 has been doubted , along with many of Herodotus ' numbers , by many historians ; modern consensus estimates the total number of troops for the Persian invasion at around 250 @,@ 000 . According to this consensus , Herodotus ' 300 @,@ 000 Persians at Plataea would self @-@ evidently be impossible . One approach to estimating the size of the Persian army has been to estimate how many men might feasibly have been accommodated within the Persian camp ; this approach gives figures of between 70 @,@ 000 and 120 @,@ 000 men . Lazenby , for instance , by comparison with later Roman military camps , calculates the number of troops at 70 @,@ 000 , including 10 @,@ 000 cavalry . Meanwhile , Connolly derives a number of 120 @,@ 000 from the same @-@ sized camp . Indeed , most estimates for the total Persian force are generally in this range . For instance , Delbrück , based on the distance the Persians marched in a day when Athens was attacked , concluded that 75 @,@ 000 was the upper limit for the size of the Persian army , including the supply personnel and other non @-@ combatants . 
 = = Strategic and tactical considerations = = 
 In some ways the run @-@ up to Plataea resembled that at the Battle of Marathon ; there was a prolonged stalemate in which neither side risked attacking the other . The reasons for this stalemate were primarily tactical , and similar to the situation at Marathon ; the Greek hoplites did not want to risk being outflanked by the Persian cavalry and the lightly armed Persian infantry could not hope to assault well @-@ defended positions . 
 According to Herodotus , both sides wished for a decisive battle that would tip the war in their favor . However , Lazenby believed that Mardonius ' actions during the Plataea campaign were not consistent with an aggressive policy . He interprets the Persian operations during the prelude not as attempts to force the Allies into battle but as attempts to force the Allies into retreat ( which indeed became the case ) . Mardonius may have felt he had little to gain in battle and that he could simply wait for the Greek alliance to fall apart ( as it had nearly done over the winter ) . There can be little doubt from Herodotus ' account that Mardonius was prepared to accept battle on his own terms , however . Regardless of the exact motives , the initial strategic situation allowed both sides to procrastinate , since food supplies were ample for both armies . Under these conditions , the tactical considerations outweighed the strategic need for action . 
 When Mardonius ' raids disrupted the Allied supply chain , it forced the Allies to rethink their strategy . Rather than now moving to attack , however , they instead looked to retreat and secure their lines of communication . Despite this defensive move by the Greeks , it was in fact the chaos resulting from this retreat that finally ended the stalemate . Mardonius perceived this as a full @-@ on retreat , in effect thinking that the battle was already over , and sought to pursue the Greeks . Since he did not expect the Greeks to fight , the tactical problems were no longer an issue and he tried to take advantage of the altered strategic situation he thought he had produced . Conversely , the Greeks had , inadvertently , lured Mardonius into attacking them on the higher ground and , despite being outnumbered , were thus at a tactical advantage . 
 = = The battle = = 
 Once the Persians discovered that the Greeks had abandoned their positions and appeared to be in retreat , Mardonius decided to set off in immediate pursuit with the elite Persian infantry . As he did so , the rest of the Persian army , <unk> , began to move forward . The Spartans and Tegeans had by now reached the Temple of Demeter . The rearguard under Amompharetus began to withdraw from the ridge , under pressure from Persian cavalry , to join them . Pausanias sent a messenger to the Athenians , asking them to join up with the Spartans . However , the Athenians had been engaged by the Theban phalanx and were unable to assist Pausanias . The Spartans and Tegeans were first assaulted by the Persian cavalry , while the Persian infantry made their way forward . They then planted their shields and began shooting arrows at the Greeks , while the cavalry withdrew . 
 According to Herodotus , Pausanias refused to advance because good omens were not divined in the goat sacrifices that were performed . At this point , as Greek soldiers began to fall under the barrage of arrows , the Tegeans started to run at the Persian lines . Offering one last sacrifice and a prayer to the heavens in front of the Temple of Hera , Pausanias finally received favourable omens and gave the command for the Spartans to advance , whereupon they also charged the Persian lines . 
 The numerically superior Persian infantry were of the heavy ( by Persian standards ) <unk> formation , but this was still much lighter than the Greek phalanx . The Persian defensive weapon was a large wicker shield and they used short spears ; by contrast , the hoplites were armored in bronze , with a bronze shield and a long spear . As at Marathon , it was a severe mismatch . The fight was fierce and long , but the Greeks ( Spartans and Tegeans ) continued to push into the Persian lines . The Persians tried to break the Greeks ' spears by grabbing hold of them , but the Greeks responded by switching to swords . Mardonius was present at the scene , riding a white horse , and surrounded by a bodyguard of 1 @,@ 000 men ; while he remained , the Persians stood their ground . However , the Spartans closed in on Mardonius ; a Spartan soldier named <unk> saw him astride his horse , picked up a large rock off the ground and threw it hard at Mardonius ; it hit him squarely in the head , killing him . With Mardonius dead , the Persians began to flee ; although his bodyguard remained , they were annihilated . Herodotus claims that the reason for their discomfort was a lack of armour . Quickly the rout became general , with many Persians fleeing in disorder to their camp . However , Artabazus ( who had earlier commanded the Sieges of Olynthus and Potidea ) , had disagreed with Mardonius about attacking the Greeks , and he had not fully engaged the forces under his command . As the rout commenced , he led these men ( 40 @,@ 000 , according to Herodotus ) away from the battlefield , on the road to Thessaly , hoping to escape eventually to the Hellespont . 
 On the opposite side of the battlefield the Athenians had triumphed in a tough battle against the Thebans . The other Greeks fighting for the Persians had deliberately fought badly , according to Herodotus . The Thebans retreated from the battle , but in a different direction from the Persians , allowing them to escape without further losses . The Allied Greeks , reinforced by the contingents who had not taken part in the main battle , then stormed the Persian camp . Although the Persians initially defended the wall vigorously , it was eventually breached ; the Persians , packed tightly together in the camp , were slaughtered by the Greeks . Of the Persians who had retreated to the camp , scarcely 3 @,@ 000 were left alive . 
 According to Herodotus , only 43 @,@ 000 Persians survived the battle . The number who died , of course , depends on how many there were in the first place ; there would be 257 @,@ 000 dead by Herodotus ' reckoning . Herodotus claims that the Greeks as a whole lost only 159 men . Furthermore , he claims that only Spartans , Tegeans and Athenians died , since they were the only ones who fought . Plutarch , who had access to other sources , gives 1 @,@ 360 Greek casualties , while both Ephorus and Diodorus Siculus tally the Greek casualties to over 10 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Accounts of individuals = = 
 Herodotus recounts several anecdotes about the conduct of specific Spartans during the battle . 
 Amompharetus : The leader of a battalion of Spartans , he refused to undertake the night @-@ time retreat towards Plataea before the battle , since doing so would be shameful for a Spartan . Herodotus has an angry debate continuing between Pausanias and Amompharetus until dawn , whereupon the rest of the Spartan army finally began to retreat , leaving Amompharetus ' division behind . Not expecting this , Amompharetus eventually led his men after the retreating Spartans . However , another tradition remembers Amompharetus as winning great renown at Plataea , and it has thus been suggested that Amompharetus , far from being insubordinate , had instead volunteered to guard the rear . 
 Aristodemus : The lone Spartan survivor of the slaughter of the 300 at the Battle of Thermopylae had , with a fellow Spartiate , been dismissed from the army by Leonidas I because of an eye infection . However , his colleague had insisted on being led into battle , partially blind , by a helot . Preferring to return to Sparta , Aristodemus was branded a coward and suffered a year of reproach before Plataea . Anxious to redeem his name , he charged the Persian lines by himself , killing in a savage fury before being cut down . Although the Spartans agreed that he had redeemed himself , they awarded him no special honour , because he failed to fight in the disciplined manner expected of a Spartan . 
 <unk> : Considered the " most beautiful man , not among the Spartans only , but in the whole Greek camp " , <unk> was eager to distinguish himself that day as a warrior but was deprived of the chance by a stray arrow that pierced his side while standing in formation . When the battle commenced he insisted on making the charge with the rest , but collapsed within a short distance . His last words , according to Herodotus , were , " I grieve not because I have to die for my country , but because I have not lifted my arm against the enemy . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to Herodotus , the Battle of Mycale occurred on the same afternoon as Plataea . A Greek fleet under the Spartan king Leotychides had sailed to Samos to challenge the remnants of the Persian fleet . The Persians , whose ships were in a poor state of repair , had decided not to risk fighting and instead drew their ships up on the beach at the feet of Mount Mycale in Ionia . An army of 60 @,@ 000 men had been left there by Xerxes and the fleet joined with them , building a palisade around the camp to protect the ships . However , Leotychides decided to attack the camp with the Allied fleet 's marines . Seeing the small size of the Greek force , the Persians emerged from the camp but the Greek hoplites again proved superior and destroyed much of the Persian force . The ships were abandoned to the Greeks , who burned them , crippling Xerxes ' sea power and marking the ascendancy of the Greek fleet . 
 With the twin victories of Plataea and Mycale , the second Persian invasion of Greece was over . Moreover , the threat of future invasion was abated ; although the Greeks remained worried that Xerxes would try again , over time it became apparent that the Persian desire to conquer Greece was much diminished . 
 The remnants of the Persian army , under the command of Artabazus , tried to retreat back to Asia Minor . Travelling through the lands of Thessaly , Macedonia and Thrace by the shortest road , Artabazus eventually made it back to Byzantium , though losing many men to Thracian attacks , weariness and hunger . After the victory at Mycale , the Allied fleet sailed to the Hellespont to break down the pontoon bridges , but found that this had already been done . The Peloponnesians sailed home , but the Athenians remained to attack the Chersonesos , still held by the Persians . The Persians in the region , and their allies , made for Sestos , the strongest town in the region , and the Athenians laid siege to them there . After a protracted siege Sestos fell to the Athenians , marking the beginning of a new phase in the Greco @-@ Persian Wars , the Greek counterattack . Herodotus ended his Histories after the Siege of Sestos . Over the next 30 years the Greeks , primarily the Athenian @-@ dominated Delian League , would expel ( or help expel ) the Persians from Macedon , Thrace , the Aegean islands and Ionia . Peace with Persia came in 449 BC with the Peace of Callias , finally ending a half @-@ century of warfare . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Plataea and Mycale have great significance in ancient history as the battles that decisively ended the second Persian invasion of Greece , thereby swinging the balance of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars in favour of the Greeks . They kept Persia from conquering all of Greece , although they paid a high price by losing many of their men . The Battle of Marathon showed that the Persians could be defeated , and the Battle of Salamis saved Greece from immediate conquest , but it was Plataea and Mycale that effectively ended that threat . However , neither of these battles is nearly as well known as Thermopylae , Salamis or Marathon . The reason for this discrepancy is not entirely clear ; it might , however , be a result of the circumstances in which the battle was fought . The fame of Thermopylae certainly lies in the doomed heroism of the Greeks in the face of overwhelming numbers ; and Marathon and Salamis perhaps because they were both fought against the odds , and in dire strategic situations . Conversely , the Battles of Plataea and Mycale were both fought from a relative position of Greek strength , and against lesser odds ; the Greeks , in fact , sought out battle on both occasions . 
 Militarily , the major lesson of both Plataea and Mycale ( since both were fought on land ) was to re @-@ emphasise the superiority of the hoplite over the more lightly armed Persian infantry , as had first been demonstrated at Marathon . Taking on this lesson , after the Greco @-@ Persian Wars the Persian empire started recruiting and relying on Greek mercenaries . One such mercenary expedition , the " Anabasis of the 10 @,@ 000 " as narrated by Xenophon , further proved to the Greeks that the Persians were militarily vulnerable even well within their own territory , and paved the way for the destruction of the Persian Empire by Alexander the Great some decades later . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Monuments to the battle = = = 
 A bronze column in the shape of intertwined snakes ( the Serpent column ) was created from melted @-@ down Persian weapons , acquired in the plunder of the Persian camp , and was erected at Delphi . It commemorated all the Greek city @-@ states that had participated in the battle , listing them on the column , and thus confirming some of Herodotus ' claims . Most of it still survives in the Hippodrome of Constantinople ( present @-@ day Istanbul ) , where it was carried by Constantine the Great during the founding of his city on the Greek colony of Byzantium . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Herodotus ( 1920 ) . The <unk> with an English translation by A. D. Godley . Cambridge : Harvard University Press . At the Perseus Project of the Tufts University . 
 Ctesias , Persica ( excerpt in Photius 's epitome ) 
 Diodorus Siculus ( 1967 ) . <unk> in Twelve Volumes with an English Translation by C. H. Oldfather . Cambridge , Mass . ; London . At the Perseus Project of the Tufts University . 
 Plutarch , Aristides 
 Xenophon , Anabasis 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Delbrück , Hans . History of the Art of War Vol I. ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Holland , Tom . Persian Fire . Abacus , 2005 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 349 @-@ 11717 @-@ 1 
 Green , Peter . The Greco @-@ Persian Wars . Berkeley : University of California Press , 1970 ; revised ed . , 1996 ( hardcover , ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ 20573 @-@ 1 ) ; 1998 ( paperback , ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ 20313 @-@ 5 ) . 
 Gibbon , Edward . The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Lazenby , JF . The Defence of Greece 490 – 479 BC . Aris & Phillips Ltd . , 1993 . ISBN 0 @-@ 85668 @-@ 591 @-@ 7 
 Fehling , D. Herodotus and His " Sources " : Citation , Invention , and Narrative Art . Translated by J.G. Howie . Arca Classical and Medieval Texts , Papers , and Monographs , 21 . Leeds : Francis Cairns , 1989 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 70 @-@ 0 
 Connolly , P. Greece and Rome at War , 1981 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 609 @-@ 5 
 Finley , Moses ( 1972 ) . " Introduction " . Thucydides – History of the Peloponnesian War ( translated by Rex Warner ) . Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ 044039 @-@ 9 . 
 Roisman , Joseph ; Worthington , Ian ( 2011 ) . A Companion to Ancient Macedonia . John Wiley and Sons . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 44 @-@ 435163 @-@ 7 . 
 Shepherd , William ( 2012 ) . Plataea 479 B.C. ; The most glorious victory ever seen . Osprey Campaign Series # 239 . Osprey Publishing . Illustrator : Peter Dennis . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 554 @-@ 0 
 = Henry Martyn = 
 Henry Martyn ( 18 February 1781 – 16 October 1812 ) was an Anglican priest and missionary to the peoples of India and Persia . Born in Truro , Cornwall , he was educated at Truro Grammar School and St John 's College , Cambridge . A chance encounter with Charles Simeon led him to become a missionary . He was ordained a priest in the Church of England and became a chaplain for the British East India Company . 
 Martyn arrived in India in April 1806 , where he preached and occupied himself in the study of linguistics . He translated the whole of the New Testament into Urdu , Persian and Judaeo @-@ Persic . He also translated the Psalms into Persian and the Book of Common Prayer into Urdu . From India , he set out for Bushire , Shiraz , Isfahan , and Tabriz . 
 Martyn was seized with fever , and , though the plague was raging at Tokat , he was forced to stop there , unable to continue . On 16 October 1812 he died . He was remembered for his courage , selflessness and his religious devotion . In parts of the Anglican Communion he is celebrated with a Lesser Festival on 19 October . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Martyn was born in Truro , Cornwall . His father , John Martyn , was a " captain " or mine @-@ agent at Gwennap . As a boy , he was educated at Truro grammar school under Dr. Cardew and he entered St John 's College , Cambridge , in the autumn of 1797 , and was senior wrangler and first Smith 's <unk> in 1801 . In 1802 , he was chosen as a fellow of his college . 
 He had intended to go to the bar , but in the October term of 1802 he chanced to hear Charles Simeon speaking of the good done in India by a single missionary , William Carey , and some time afterwards he read the life of David Brainerd , a missionary to the Native Americans . He resolved , accordingly , to become a missionary himself . On 22 October 1803 , he was ordained deacon at Ely , and afterwards priest , and served as Simeon 's curate at the Church of Holy Trinity , taking charge of the neighbouring parish of <unk> . 
 = = Missionary work = = 
 Martyn wanted to offer his services to the Church Missionary Society , when a financial disaster in Cornwall deprived him and his unmarried sister of the income their father had left for them . It was necessary for Martyn to earn an income that would support his sister as well as himself . He accordingly obtained a chaplaincy under the British East India Company and left for India on 5 July 1805 . On his voyage to the East , Martyn happened to be present at the British conquest of the Cape Colony on 8 January 1806 . He spent that day tending to the dying soldiers and was distressed by seeing the horrors of war . He would come away feeling that it was Britain 's destiny to convert , not colonize , the world . He wrote in his diary : 
 I prayed that … England whilst she sent the thunder of her arms to distant regions of the globe , might not remain proud and ungodly at home ; but might show herself great indeed , by sending forth the ministers of her church to diffuse the gospel of peace . 
 = = = India = = = 
 Martyn arrived in India in April 1806 , and for some months he was stationed at <unk> , near <unk> . In October 1806 , he proceeded to Dinapur , where he was soon able to conduct worship among the locals in the vernacular , and established schools . In April 1809 , he was transferred to Cawnpore , where he preached to British and Indians in his own compound , in spite of interruptions and threats from local non @-@ Christians . 
 He occupied himself in linguistic study , and had already , during his residence at Dinapur , been engaged in revising the sheets of his Hindustani version of the New Testament . He now translated the whole of the New Testament into Urdu also , and into Persian twice . He translated the Psalms into Persian , the Gospels into Judaeo @-@ Persic , and the Book of Common Prayer into Urdu , in spite of ill @-@ health and " the pride , pedantry and fury of his chief <unk> Sabat . " Ordered by the doctors to take a sea voyage , he obtained leave to go to Persia and correct his Persian New Testament . From there , he wanted to go to Arabia , and there compose an Arabic version . On 1 October 1810 , having seen his work at Cawnpore rewarded on the previous day by the opening of a church , he left for Calcutta , from where he sailed on 7 January 1811 for Bombay . The ship reached port on his thirtieth birthday . 
 = = Final voyage and death = = 
 From Bombay he set out for Bushire , bearing letters from Sir John Malcolm to men of position there , as also at Shiraz and Isfahan . After an exhausting journey from the coast he reached Shiraz , and was soon plunged into discussion with the disputants of all classes , " Sufi , Muslim , Jew , and Jewish Muslim , even Armenian , all anxious to test their powers of argument with the first English priest who had visited them . " He next traveled to Tabriz to attempt to present the Shah with his translation of the New Testament , which proved unsuccessful . Sir Gore Ouseley , the British ambassador to the Shah , was unable to bring about a meeting , but did deliver the manuscript . Although Martyn could not present the Bible in person , the Shah later wrote him a letter : 
 In truth ( said the royal letter of thanks to the ambassador ) through the learned and <unk> exertions of the Reverend Henry Martyn it has been translated in a style most befitting sacred books , that is in an easy and simple diction ... The whole of the New Testament is completed in a most excellent manner , a source of pleasure to our enlightened and august mind . 
 At this time , he was seized with fever , and after a temporary recovery , had to seek a change of climate . He set off for Constantinople , where he intended to return on furlough to England to regain his strength and recruit help for the missions in India . On 12 September 1812 , he started with two Armenian servants and crossed the Aras River . Urged on from place to place by their Tatar guide , they rode from Tabriz to Erivan , from Erivan to Kars , and from Kars to Erzurum . They departed Erzurum and though the plague was raging at Tokat , he was forced to stop there , unable to continue . He wrote his final journal entry on 6 October . It read , in part : 
 Oh ! when shall time give place to eternity ? When shall appear that new heaven and new earth wherein dwelleth righteousness ? There , there shall in no wise enter in any thing that <unk> : none of that wickedness which has made men worse than wild beasts , none of those corruptions which add still more to the miseries of mortality , shall be seen or heard of any more . 
 On 16 October 1812 he died and was given a Christian burial by Armenian clergy . 
 He was heard to say , " Let me burn out for God " . An indication of his zeal for the things of God . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 His devotion to his tasks won him much admiration in Great Britain and he was the hero of a number of literary publications . Thomas Babington Macaulay 's Epitaph , composed early in 1813 , testified to the impression made by his career : 
 An institution was established in his name in India , called the Henry Martyn Institute : An Interfaith Centre for Reconciliation and Research , Hyderabad , India . John McManners wrote in his Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity that Martyn was a man remembered for his courage , selflessness and his religious devotion . In parts of the Anglican Communion he is celebrated with a Lesser Festival on 19 October . 
 The Henry Martyn Trust based in Cambridge , England can trace its history back to 1897 , at a time of great enthusiasm in Cambridge for overseas missions , when an appeal was launched for a ' Proposed Missionary Library for Cambridge University ' , to be housed in the Henry Martyn Hall , erected ten years previously . 
 The Henry Martyn Library opened in the Hall in 1898 , and there it remained as a small collection of missionary biographies and other books until 1995 . The evolution of the Henry Martyn Library into the present Henry Martyn Centre began in 1992 , when Canon Graham Kings , now Bishop of Sherborne , was appointed as the first Henry Martyn Lecturer in <unk> in the Cambridge Theological Federation . 
 In 1999 the Centre became an Associate Institute of the Cambridge Theological Federation , one of the largest providers of theological education in the United Kingdom . 
 Today , the Centre continues to seek to promote the study of mission and world Christianity , developing strong links with mission study centres around the world and fulfilling the same aim that was stated by the founders of the Library in 1897 . 
 = Carl Hans Lody = 
 Carl Hans Lody , alias Charles A. Inglis ( 20 January 1877 – 6 November 1914 ; name occasionally given as Karl Hans Lody ) , was a reserve officer of the Imperial German Navy who spied in the United Kingdom in the first few months of the First World War . 
 He grew up in Nordhausen in central Germany and was orphaned at an early age . After embarking on a nautical career at the age of 16 , he served briefly in the Imperial German Navy at the start of the 20th century . His ill health forced him to abandon a naval career , but he remained in the naval reserve . He joined the Hamburg America Line to work as a tour guide . While escorting a party of tourists , he met and married a German @-@ American woman , but the marriage broke down after only a few months . His wife divorced him and he returned to Berlin . 
 In May 1914 , two months before war broke out , Lody was approached by German naval intelligence officials . He agreed to their proposal to employ him as a peacetime spy in southern France , but the outbreak of the First World War on 28 July 1914 resulted in a change of plans . In late August , he was sent to the United Kingdom with orders to spy on the Royal Navy . He posed as an American — he could speak English fluently , with an American accent — using a genuine U.S. passport purloined from an American citizen in Germany . Over the course of a month , Lody travelled around Edinburgh and the Firth of Forth observing naval movements and coastal defences . By the end of September 1914 , he was becoming increasingly worried for his safety as a rising spy panic in Britain led to foreigners coming under suspicion . He travelled to Ireland , where he intended to keep a low profile until he could make his escape from the UK . 
 Lody had been given no training in espionage before embarking on his mission and within only a few days of arriving he was detected by the British authorities . His un @-@ coded communications were detected by British censors when he sent his first reports to an address in Stockholm that the British knew was a postbox for German agents . The British counter @-@ espionage agency MI5 , then known as MO5 ( g ) , allowed him to continue his activities in the hope of finding out more information about the German spy network . His first two messages were allowed to reach the Germans but later messages were stopped , as they contained sensitive military information . At the start of October 1914 , concern over the increasingly sensitive nature of his messages prompted MO5 ( g ) to order Lody 's arrest . He had left a trail of clues that enabled the police to track him to a hotel in Killarney , Ireland , in less than a day . 
 Lody was put on public trial — the only one held for a German spy captured in the UK in either World War — before a military court in London at the end of October . He did not attempt to deny that he was a German spy . His bearing in court was widely praised as forthright and courageous by the British press and even by the police and MO5 ( g ) officers who had tracked him down . He was convicted and sentenced to death after a three @-@ day hearing . Four days later , on 6 November 1914 , Lody was shot at dawn by a firing squad at the Tower of London in the first execution there in 167 years . His body was buried in an unmarked grave in East London . When the Nazi Party came to power in Germany in 1933 , it declared him a national hero . Lody became the subject of memorials , namesake for a destroyer ship eulogies and commemorations in Germany before and during the Second World War . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Carl Hans Lody was born in Berlin on 20 January 1877 . His father was a lawyer in government service who served as mayor of <unk> in 1881 . The Lody family subsequently moved to Nordhausen , where they lived at 8 <unk> ( today Rudolf @-@ <unk> @-@ Strasse ) . Lody 's father served as deputy mayor there in 1882 but died in June 1883 after a short illness and his mother died in 1885 . He was fostered for a time by a couple in Leipzig before entering the orphanage of the Francke Foundations in nearby Halle . 
 Lody began an apprenticeship at a grocery store in Halle in 1891 , before moving to Hamburg two years later to join the crew of the sailing ship Sirius as a cabin boy . He studied at the maritime academy in Geestemünde , qualifying as a helmsman , and immediately afterwards served with the Imperial German Navy for a year between 1900 and 1901 . Subsequently joining the First Naval Reserve , he enlisted as an officer on German merchant ships . In 1904 he returned to Geestemünde , where he successfully obtained a captain 's licence . He fell seriously ill with what he later said was a stomach abscess , " caused from a very badly cured typhoid attack of fever from which I suffered in Italy on account of the bad water at Genoa . " An operation was required , which weakened his left arm and his eyesight . As Lody put it , " Consequently , my career as a seaman was closed as soon as I discovered that , and my doctor told me that I could not go any further . " 
 Lody found alternative employment with the Hamburg America Line , which had inaugurated a personally guided tour service for wealthy travellers going from Europe to America . Lody became a tour guide responsible for looking after these clients , and in this capacity visited European countries , including Britain . During one such tour he met a German @-@ American woman named Louise Storz , the 23 @-@ year @-@ old adoptive daughter of a wealthy beer brewer , Gottlieb Storz of Omaha , Nebraska . Louise 's tour included several European countries , including Germany ; by its conclusion she and Lody were engaged . After visiting Lody 's family in Berlin , the couple travelled to the United States . They were married on 29 October 1912 in what the Omaha Daily Bee described as " a ' society ' wedding " : 
 The home was beautifully decorated with chrysanthemums , palms and ferns . The ceremony and the details that preceded it were elaborate . About seventy @-@ five guests attended . After an extended western honeymoon tour Mr. and Mrs. Lody established a residence at the <unk> . 
 Despite the high profile of the wedding the couple lived together for only two months . Lody sought to obtain a position in the Storz Brewing Company but he lacked expertise in brewing . As the local Omaha Daily Bee newspaper put it , " Here he was in the United States with a wife to support and no position in sight . " He found a job working as a clerk for the Union Pacific Railroad for under $ 100 a month . Two months after they were married , Louise brought suit for divorce , charging that Lody had " beat [ en ] her , inflicting serious wounds to her body . " Lody left for Berlin shortly thereafter ; over six months later , he unexpectedly returned with a German lawyer to contest the suit in the Douglas County courts . The suit was withdrawn without explanation a few days later ; Lody returned to Berlin . The two sides apparently reached an amicable settlement ; in February 1914 the divorce suit was reinstated and Lody agreed not to contest it . The divorce was granted the following month . 
 The military historian Thomas Boghardt suggests that the Storz family did not approve of the match , and may have pressured the couple to separate . Lody said later that his former father @-@ in @-@ law gave him $ 10 @,@ 000 , possibly as compensation . The failed marriage had a lasting effect on Lody . He wrote in 1914 : " My feelings run riot when I can permit myself to review the dramatic events of the last three years and what is to be the probable climax of it all . " 
 = = Beginning of espionage career = = 
 On his return to Germany , Lody settled in Berlin , living in what he described as " well to do circumstances " . He stayed in the Adlon , the city 's most fashionable luxury hotel , while his sister Hanna lived with her doctor husband in the prosperous suburb of Westend in Charlottenburg . As tensions grew across Europe in the first half of 1914 , German naval intelligence – the Nachrichten @-@ Abteilung , or " N " – set out to recruit potential agents . Lody already had links with the service . During his time with the Imperial German Navy , Lody had served under Arthur Tapken , who later became N 's first director . The German Imperial Admiralty Staff , or Admiralstab , listed Lody as a possible recruitment target before the outbreak of war . The naval authorities regarded Hamburg America Line ( HAL ) employees such as Lody as ideal recruits because of their expertise in naval matters and presence in ports worldwide . The HAL had collaborated with the Admiralstab since the 1890s . The relationship became so close that in July 1914 , just before the outbreak of the war , the HAL 's director Albert Ballin told the Admiralstab that he would " place myself and the organisation subordinate to me at your Excellency 's disposal as best as possible . " 
 On 8 May 1914 , Fritz Prieger , the director of N , contacted Lody to ask whether he was willing to serve as a naval agent . Lody replied that he was " honoured " by Prieger 's trust and would serve at Prieger 's disposal . Within three weeks Lody had signed a formal agreement to operate as a " tension traveller " in southern France – an agent who would report back to Berlin in times of heightened international tensions . The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria on 28 June and the subsequent July Crisis precipitated the outbreak of World War I on 28 July . 
 With the United Kingdom declaring war in support of France and Belgium , Prieger sent Lody to Britain as a war agent . Lody was ordered to base himself in the Edinburgh – Leith area and monitor British naval movements . He was to travel along the Scottish coast and report on the warships stationed there ; " If or when Mr. Lody comes to know that a naval battle has taken place , he will enquire as much and unobtrusively as possible regarding losses , damage etc . " His orders reflected the Admiralstab 's belief that the war would be decided by a single major naval battle . 
 To communicate with his handlers , Lody was instructed to write to certain addresses in Christiania ( now Oslo ) , Stockholm , New York and Rome . He acquired an American emergency passport in the name of Charles A. Inglis , a genuine document obtained from the US Embassy in Berlin . When Germany declared war on Russia on 1 August , newly imposed restrictions prevented foreigners from leaving Germany without travel documents . Embassies and consulates throughout the country experienced a rush of visitors as foreigners sought emergency passports ; these had to be submitted to the German Foreign Ministry to obtain exit permits for neutral Denmark or the Netherlands . One such applicant was the real Charles A. Inglis , whose passport went missing – lost , it was claimed , although in fact the Foreign Ministry had appropriated it for Lody 's use . As the passport lacked security features such as the holder 's photograph or fingerprints , being merely a single @-@ sheet document , it was well @-@ suited for use by a spy . Lody said later that he had received it in the post from his superiors at N. He was also given £ 250 in British banknotes , 1 @,@ 000 Danish krone and 1 @,@ 000 Norwegian krone to finance his mission to the UK , where he would travel via Denmark and Norway . 
 Gustav Steinhauer , the head of N 's British section , later wrote that he had met Lody shortly before the latter 's departure , and spoken with him on a couple of occasions . Steinhauer had been active in Britain shortly before the outbreak of war , and was keen to give Lody advice on the difficulties he would face : 
 When you are in England , Lody , you are not in Germany or France with a neutral frontier close at hand to assist your escape . You will have to get through a port , and it will not be easy ... It will mean death if you are in the slightest degree careless . You must remember that all foreigners will be watched everywhere . Your correspondence will be opened and your luggage will be ransacked . They will go over your passport with a microscope to see that it is not forged and they will make you notify every change of address that you have . 
 To Steinhauer 's apparent surprise , Lody appeared nonchalant about the danger that he was about to go into . " Well , after all , one might as well die that way as any other , " Lody said , according to Steinhauer ; " I shall be rendering the Fatherland a service and no other German can do more than that . " At a final meeting at the Anhalter Bahnhof in Berlin , Steinhauer repeated his warnings , but Lody " only laughed at me and told me my fears were groundless . " Steinhauer regarded Lody 's ability to carry out his mission as " practically nil " and warned the Chief of Naval Intelligence not to send him to the UK , but the warning went unheeded . He recalled that " as he had specially volunteered for the task – and I must admit there were very few people in Berlin just then anxious to accompany him – they allowed him to go . " 
 As Steinhauer noted in his autobiography , the UK was a dangerous environment for a foreign agent . Only five years previously , the country had not had a dedicated counter @-@ espionage organisation . In 1909 a series of spy scares fanned by the press led to the establishment of the Secret Service Bureau , jointly headed by Captain Vernon Kell and Lieutenant @-@ Commander Mansfield Cumming . They soon split their responsibilities ; Kell took charge of counter @-@ espionage , while Cumming focused on foreign intelligence . These two divisions of the Secret Service Bureau eventually became two independent intelligence agencies , MI5 and MI6 . The Bureau quickly identified a list of possible German agents in the UK . Just before the outbreak of war on 4 August 1914 , Chief Constables across Britain and Ireland were instructed to arrest suspects in their areas . This was done quickly and a number of German agents were caught , crippling German intelligence operations in the UK at a crucial moment in the war . Steinhauer himself had been lucky to escape arrest ; he was known by name to the British authorities and he had been spying on the Royal Navy in Scotland as recently as late June 1914 . 
 = = Scotland = = 
 Lody embarked on his mission " so hastily that he did not even have time to learn a code that might have assisted him to get his messages through " , according to Steinhauer Posing as an American tourist , Lody left Berlin on 14 August , travelling via Denmark to the Norwegian port of Bergen . There he boarded a ship that took him to Newcastle , arriving on the evening of 27 August . He took a train to the North British Hotel ( now the Balmoral Hotel ) adjacent to Edinburgh Waverley railway station . On 30 August , he sent a telegram from Edinburgh 's main post office to an Adolf Burchard at 4 <unk> , Stockholm – a cover address for a German agent in Sweden . The message said : " Must cancel Johnson very ill last four days shall leave shortly " and was signed " Charles " . As it was an overseas telegram , he had to sign for it with his full ( alias ) name . 
 The Secret Service Bureau 's counter @-@ espionage section had by now become part of the War Office 's Directorate of Military Operations and was known as MO5 ( g ) . At the outbreak of war it instituted widespread censorship of letters and telegrams sent abroad . From 4 August all mails from the UK to Norway and Sweden had been brought to London for examination to identify any being sent to suspect addresses . Fatally for Lody , MO5 ( g ) was already aware that the Stockholm address was that of a German agent , and was watching for correspondence using the " Johnson " formula employed in Lody 's telegram . " Burchard " was later identified as a German agent by the name of K. Leipziger . After Lody sent his telegram to " Burchard " , exposing his " Charles Inglis " alias on the telegram form , MO5 ( g ) ' s Letter Interception Unit conducted a back @-@ tracking exercise to find any other messages sent to the same place . One of MO5 ( g ) ' s censors later described the scene at Salisbury House in London , where the Letter Interception Unit was based : 
 Several names were written on a large blackboard which hung on the wall , plainly visible , and we had to keep a sharp look @-@ out for any mention of these in letters we read . The names were those of persons suspected of sending information to Germany via neutral countries . In addition , a short sentence was scribbled up on this board : ' Johnson is ill ' . The Admiralty knew that somewhere in Britain a German officer was travelling about who intended to use this formula to convey the news of certain movements of the British fleet . 
 The " Johnson " telegram reached its destination and was only identified retrospectively by the British authorities . It was said to have indicated the presence of four British battleships , though the censors took its meaning to be that " he was being watched and in danger & would have to leave Edinburgh which he did later on . " 
 Having inadvertently exposed his assumed identity , Lody 's subsequent communications came under close scrutiny by MO5 ( g ) . He left his Edinburgh hotel on 1 September , and moved to a boarding @-@ house in Drumsheugh Gardens , where he gave his name as Charles A. Inglis of New York City and paid as a weekly boarder . Three days later he sent a letter in English to the same Stockholm address , enclosing an envelope with a second letter , in German and addressed to Berlin . This was intercepted by the British authorities , opened , photographed , sealed again and sent on to Sweden . A post @-@ war report by MI5 , the successor organisation to MO5 ( g ) , explains that it was treated this way " in the hope of learning more . " 
 In this instance MO5 ( g ) was happy to let Lody 's letters go through as they contained information that was wildly misleading and caused serious ( and needless ) worry to the German High Command . Lody had heard the widespread rumour that thousands of Russian troops with " snow on their boots " had passed through Scotland en route to the Western Front , and relayed it to his controllers in Berlin : 
 Will you kindly communicate with Berlin at once by wire ( code or whatever system at your disposal ) and inform them that on Sept . 3rd great masses of Russian soldiers have passed through Edinburgh on their way to London and France . Although it must be expected that Berlin has knowledge of these movements , which probably took its start at Archangel , it may be well to forward this information . It is estimated here that 60 @,@ 000 men have passed , numbers which seem greatly exaggerated . I went to the depot [ station ] and noticed trains passing through at high speed , blinds down . The landing in Scotland took place at Aberdeen . Yours very truly Charles . 
 Lody 's information was entirely inaccurate and had been gleaned , as he was to admit at his trial , purely from rumours : " I heard it in the boarding @-@ house and I heard it in the barber 's shop . " His second letter , in German , was addressed to " Herr <unk> " at German naval intelligence in <unk> , Berlin , and contained details of British naval losses and vessels stationed at Leith and Grangemouth . He had obtained details of the naval vessels simply by climbing Calton Hill in Edinburgh and observing the panorama from the summit , and by taking a promenade along the seafront at Grangemouth , used by thousands of citizens as a popular excursion . He was worried about the risks that he was taking and stated in his letter that he would not go near any place where he could be challenged , or where barricades and restrictions prevented access . His lack of training or preparation meant that these letters , like all of his communications , were written with no attempt at concealment whatsoever – no code or invisible ink – and were composed entirely en clair in ordinary written English or German . 
 On 7 September , Lody went to a cycle shop at Haymarket Terrace to hire a bicycle . He told the owner 's daughter that he was an American from New York who was sojourning in Edinburgh after the outbreak of war had spoiled a holiday in Europe . He was staying there for a few days while he waited for a berth to become available on a ship to America , as all the transatlantic vessels were fully booked with returnees . He said that he wanted to cycle to places around Edinburgh such as Rosyth and Queensferry and arranged to hire a bicycle . The owner 's daughter warned him that some roads were now guarded and he should stop immediately if challenged by a sentry , to which he replied , " Oh , I am only going to be cycling about for pleasure ! " 
 For the next week , Lody followed a routine of staying in his room until noon , going out for the afternoon and returning between 5 and 7 pm . He sometimes went out on his bicycle again in the evening . He spent his time looking for information and on 14 September sent a second envelope to Stockholm . This time it was merely a wrapper containing a second envelope , inside which was a letter addressed to the editor of a Berlin newspaper , Ullstein Verlag , in which Lody said : 
 Enclosed cutting from the Edinburgh The News of the World . Typical for the English way of causing ill @-@ feeling and at the same time characteristic of the perfect ignorance of journalists in this country regarding the difference between military weapons and military tools . But this does not make any difference , the population here believe everything . Yours truly Nazi . 
 This too was intercepted and photographed but , as it was a relatively harmless letter , it was forwarded on while the British authorities continued to monitor Lody 's communications in the hope of finding out more about the German espionage network . The day after sending it , on 15 September , Lody travelled to London to reconnoitre the city 's war preparations . Travelling light , he stayed for two nights at the Ivanhoe Hotel in Bloomsbury ( now the Bloomsbury Street Hotel ) and set to work finding information about the security measures at public buildings . He said later that he had not actually observed the buildings himself but had obtained cuttings from newspapers , which he intended to send to Berlin . He also wrote a report on 16 September , but claimed that he had never sent it – it was never found by the British – as he felt that it was poorly written . 
 Lody returned to Edinburgh on 17 September , taking the train from King 's Cross to Edinburgh . He met a young Scottish woman , Ida <unk> , gave her his card and talked with her a while before going into another carriage to smoke . There he overheard a conversation between two men , one apparently a submariner travelling to the naval base at Rosyth and the other a sailor who talked about Harwich . Lody later professed his surprise at how the two men were " talking in a rather free way , considering the present times " . One of the men talked about the difficulties of serving on a submarine , while the other asked Lody : " What country are you ? Are you from the other side ? " Lody replied , " Yes , I am an American . " They began discussing the war and talked about the recent sinking of the cruiser HMS Pathfinder , which had become the first ship ever to be sunk by a torpedo fired by a submarine . The sailor told Lody , " We are going to put out mines as the Germans have done so . We have a big surprise in store for the Germans . " Lody was not convinced and , after shaking hands with the sailor , left the smoking car . 
 Lody went back to his lodgings at Drumsheugh Gardens and continued to walk and cycle around the area . He made the acquaintance of two girls he met on Princes Street and went out with them on a couple of evenings . He gave up cycling after an accident on 25 September , in which he collided with a bicycle being ridden by one of his landlady 's friends while riding from Peebles to Edinburgh , causing her " some little injury " . He returned his damaged bicycle to the shop where he had rented it . 
 On 27 September , Lody wrote another letter in German to " Burchard " , enclosing press cuttings about the chivalry of British seamen and the sinking of the cruisers HMS Aboukir , Cressy and Hogue . The letter included a good deal of detailed information about naval movements and fortifications , such as the artillery defences of North Berwick , Kinghorn and North and South Queensferry . It was clear by now to Lody that his mission was not going successfully . The decisive naval battle that the German Admiralty had anticipated had not happened , and Lody was becoming increasingly fearful for his personal security . He said later : 
 I was in Edinburgh and I had nothing to do , and simply spent my time . I was terribly nervous . I was unaccustomed to it , and I was frightened walking about Edinburgh . I had this suit made . I was frightened to go about . 
 The environment in Lody 's boarding @-@ house was becoming increasingly hostile ; his hosts were growing suspicious of him . Their doubts grew as the ongoing espionage scare progressed . He had stayed there for more than three weeks and his evasive answers when questioned about when he expected to leave did not satisfy them . When they said that his accent appeared to be " more German than American " , he knew it was time to go . He wrote in his letter of 27 September that " the fear of espionage is very great and every day I see some Germans going to Redford Barracks under the escort of a soldier ... It is advisable for me to vanish for a few days , and to change my place of abode . I can only hope that my telegraphic and letter information have duly arrived . " He told his controllers that he would go to Ireland , disembarking at Dublin as it was the only Irish port not closed to foreigners . Despite his hopes , his letter was intercepted by the British ; this time it was retained as the information therein was of genuine military value . 
 = = Journey to Ireland and capture = = 
 Lody left his boarding @-@ house hastily on the morning of 27 September and stayed overnight at the Roxburgh Hotel in Edinburgh . He left some of his luggage there , telling the manageress that he would be away for about eight days , and travelled the next day to Liverpool , where he took a room at the London and North Western Hotel on Lime Street . He bought a ticket to Ireland and took the SS Munster to Dublin via Kingstown ( now Dún Laoghaire ) . It stopped at Holyhead in Anglesey , where an immigration official challenged Lody . His American travel documents proved sufficient to demonstrate his bona fides , and he proceeded on his way . 
 Lody 's controllers realised that his mission was not going according to plan and attempted to get in touch with him to provide assistance . A letter dated 8 September was sent to Charles A. Inglis c / o Thomas Cook , Edinburgh , but he never collected it , and may never have been aware of it . Another German agent , Paul Daelen , was ordered to go to Britain and provide Lody with a new cover address . Daelen reached England too late . Lody had already travelled to Ireland without giving his controllers a means of contacting him . 
 During his journey to Ireland , Lody met a Minneapolis doctor , John William Lee , who had been studying eye , ear , nose and throat diseases in Vienna before the outbreak of war had compelled him to leave . Lee was planning to travel back to New York aboard the RMS Baltic , leaving Queenstown ( now Cobh ) on 7 October , and intended to spend a few days exploring Ireland before his departure . Lody asked where Lee was planning to stay in Dublin ; Lee told him that it would probably be the Gresham Hotel on Sackville Street , to which Lody replied , " All right , let 's go there . " They travelled together to the hotel , booked into separate rooms , had dinner together and went to the Empire Theatre . Lody told Lee that he had been based in Germany working for an American adding @-@ machine company . When the conversation turned to the war , Lody opined that the German army was a very well @-@ trained body of strong @-@ bodied and enduring men , and that it would be hard to beat them . The following day they had breakfast together and went for a walk in Phoenix Park . 
 While Lee was exchanging some money at Thomas Cook on 30 September , Lody wrote a further letter in German to " Burchard " , clarifying his reasons for coming to Ireland and describing what he had seen on his journey . He explained : 
 I think it is absolutely necessary to disappear for some time because several people have approached me in a disagreeable manner . That does not happen to me only , but several Americans here have told me that they are sharply watched . Fear of espionage is very great and one smells a spy in every stranger . 
 Lody described anti @-@ Zeppelin precautions he had heard about in London and provided details of the conversions of the Cunard Line steamships RMS Aquitania and Lusitania for their wartime service , which he had seen while in Liverpool . Once again the letter was intercepted by the British and not allowed to go forward to Stockholm . Lody and Lee spent another evening in Dublin before going on a day @-@ trip by coach to Glendalough to see the lough and the surrounding countryside . On 2 October they parted with an agreement to meet again in Killarney the following day . Lee travelled to Drogheda , where he stayed overnight , while Lody went straight to Killarney and found a room at the Great Southern Hotel ( now the Malton Hotel ) . 
 Lody was unaware that his latest letters had galvanised the British authorities into action . They had hitherto been content with merely monitoring his communications but the militarily significant content of his most recent letters caused them to consider him now to be a serious threat . It did not take them long to catch up with him . His lack of even basic security precautions had left the authorities with a trail of clues that enabled them to track him down in less than a day . 
 While Lody was travelling to Killarney on the morning of 2 October , an Edinburgh City Police detective was ordered to enquire at hotels for a person named Inglis . The detective found that Lody had stayed at the Roxburgh Hotel and was shown his luggage , which still had a label attached bearing the name and address Charles A. Inglis , Bedford House , 12 Drumsheugh Gardens . An interview with the proprietor of the boarding @-@ house where Lody had stayed enabled the police to reconstruct his movements , while the manageress of the Roxburgh was able to tell them that he had gone to Ireland . 
 The police sent a report to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Vernon Kell of MO5 ( g ) on the same day to summarise their findings , and put a constant watch on the Roxburgh in case Lody returned . In the meantime , MO5 ( g ) contacted the Irish Sea ports to find whether Lody had passed through them . Affirmative answers came back from Liverpool and Holyhead . Later that same afternoon MO5 ( g ) sent a telegram to the Assistant Inspector General of the Royal Irish Constabulary in Dublin , which read : 
 Suspected German Agent believed to be passing in name of CHARLES <unk> as American Subject travelled from Edinburgh after 26 Sept via Liverpool & Holyhead where his passport noted and name taken . <unk> last night Gresham Hotel Dublin believed moving on to Belfast . Should be arrested and all documents seized minutest search necessary probably has code with him . Important to get specimens of his handwriting if possible . Kindly wire result . 
 The RIC made the investigation a top priority and replied to London at 7 @.@ 23 pm on 2 October : 
 Dr John Lea [ sic ] of United States arrived in Dublin on 29th with Charles Inglis and stayed at same hotel Inglis has gone to the Country today Lea will join him there tomorrow should he be arrested also description 35 years five feet eight sallow complexion darkened cropped moustache . Had a letter from Austria with him . Inspector General RIC . 
 At 9 @.@ 45 pm , District Inspector Cheeseman of the RIC arrived at the Great Southern Hotel in Killarney with a group of constables . He found Lody 's name in the visitors ' book and went to his room , but did not find him there . Returning to the foyer , Cheeseman saw Lody entering the hotel . He said : " Mr. Inglis , I presume ? " to which Lody replied , " Yes , what do you want ? " Cheeseman asked him to come to his hotel room and noted that Lody looked upset and frightened . He arrested Lody under the provisions of the Defence of the Realm Act 1914 ( DORA ) as a suspected German agent , prompting Lody to exclaim , " What is this ? Me , a German agent ? Take care now ; I am an American citizen . " When he was searched , his American identity documents were found along with £ 14 in German gold , 705 Norwegian krone and a small notebook . The latter listed British ships that had been sunk in the North Sea , names and addresses in Hamburg and Berlin and a possible cypher key . It also included copies of the four letters that he had sent to Stockholm . His bag contained a jacket that contained a tailor 's ticket reading " J. Steinberg , Berlin , C.H. Lody , 8 @.@ 5 @.@ 14 " . 
 Throughout all this , Lody 's demeanour was relatively calm after the initial shock . Cheeseman observed that Lody only appeared uneasy when his notebook was being examined ; the inspector later commented that Lody was not the usual class of man he was accustomed to dealing with , but admitted that he had never met a man under precisely similar circumstances . Cheeseman had been educated in Germany , knew the language and felt able to recognise a German accent ; he noticed that Lody 's American accent slipped from time to time , presumably due to stress , and became convinced that the man was German . 
 Lee was also arrested but was released without charge after two days when the investigation cleared him of any involvement in Lody 's espionage . He complained about his treatment and the British authorities ' refusal to let him see an American consul , and promised to take the matter up with the US State Department on his return . An MO5 ( g ) officer named R.H. Price smoothed things over with him on his release on 4 October , explaining what had prompted his arrest and paying his fare back to his hotel . Price reported , " I think he was quite soothed and he shook hands with me on parting . " Lee was unaware that the police had already recommended that both he and " Inglis " should be court @-@ martialled and shot if found guilty . 
 = = Legal complications = = 
 Lody was taken back to London where he was detained in Wellington Barracks under the watch of the 3rd Battalion , the Grenadier Guards . A meeting of the Cabinet on 8 October decided to try him for " war treason " , a decision that has been described as " legally , very curious " by the legal historian A. W. B. Simpson . He was not charged with espionage under either of the two relevant statutes , the Official Secrets Act 1911 or DORA . The principal reason lay in the wording of the Hague Convention of 1907 , which states : " A person can only be considered a spy when , acting clandestinely or on false pretences , he obtains or endeavours to obtain information in the zone of operations of a belligerent , with the intention of communicating it to the hostile party . " Lody was operating in the British Isles , outside the zone of operations , and was therefore not covered by this definition . Such circumstances had been anticipated by the most recent edition of the British Manual of Military Law , published in February 1914 , which recommended that individuals in such cases should be tried for war treason : " Indeed in every case where it is doubtful whether the act consists of espionage , once the fact is established that an individual has furnished or attempted to furnish information to the enemy , no time need be wasted in examining whether the case corresponds exactly to the definition of espionage . " 
 War treason as defined by the Manual covered a very wide range of offences , including " obtaining , supplying and carrying of information to the enemy " or attempting to do so . Its application in Lody 's case , rather than the government relying on DORA , was the result of a misunderstanding by the War Office . It had been misinformed in August 1914 that an unidentified German had been captured with a radio transmitter and interned in Bodmin Prison . In fact , no such person existed , but the story led Lord Kitchener , the Secretary of State for War , to ask the Lord Chancellor , Lord Haldane , for advice on how the supposed spy should be dealt with . Haldane stated that the individual should be put before a court martial and executed if found guilty . He wrote : 
 If an alien belligerent is caught in this country spying or otherwise waging war he can , in my opinion , be Court <unk> and executed . The mere fact that he is resident here and has what is popularly called a domicile is not enough ... When war breaks out an alien becomes prima facie an outlaw ... if he is a spy or takes up arms ... and he becomes a person without legal rights . By international law he must have a trial before punishment but the trial may be by Court Martial . He cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the civil courts . 
 This theory was relied upon by the Cabinet and the Army Council , which ordered on 9 August that Lody was to be tried by a court martial . There was some confusion about whether Haldane had really meant a court martial rather than a military tribunal , and the Adjutant General questioned whether DORA had limited the maximum punishment for espionage to penal servitude for life , rather than the death penalty . Further confusion was caused by the fact that Lody 's identity had not yet been fully established . If he really was an American citizen , he was not an " alien belligerent " and could not be court martialled . 
 On 21 October 1914 the Cabinet decided that Lody should be handed over to the civil police and tried by the High Court . After Lody then made a statement voluntarily admitting his real name and his status as a German subject , the Cabinet determined the following day that the original plan would be followed after all . The venue for the court martial was to be the Middlesex Guildhall in Parliament Square ; Major General Lord <unk> would preside , sitting with eight other officers . In hindsight , according to Simpson , it is doubtful whether the charge and eventual sentence were lawful . A later revision of the Manual of Military Law rejected the view that a spy commits a war crime and alluded to the Lody case in suggesting that war treason was not an applicable charge in such cases . Simpson comments that " it is fairly plain that Lody 's execution was unlawful under domestic and international law . " This objection was not raised during Lody 's trial but it would not have done him any good in any case , as there was no appeal for a decision made by a court martial . In the event , Lody 's trial was unique . No other spies captured in Britain were tried for war treason under international law . DORA was amended in November 1914 to permit a death sentence to be imposed . All of the subsequent 26 courts martial of accused spies were heard under DORA , resulting in 10 executions . 
 Another question that arose was whether Lody 's trial should be held in public or in camera . Captain Reginald Drake , MO5 ( g ) ' s head of counter @-@ espionage , wanted Lody to be tried secretly so that he could implement " an ingenious method for conveying false information to the enemy which depended on their not knowing which of their agents had been caught . " He was overruled , as the British Government believed that it would be more advantageous to publicise the threat of German spies to remove any doubt in the public mind that German espionage posed a serious threat in the UK . It was hoped that this would also generate support for the intelligence and censorship apparatus that was rapidly taking shape and would deter possible imitators . In the event , Lody 's was the only spy trial in either World War held in public in the UK . In pursuing this policy the Government sacrificed the chance to " turn " captured spies and turn them into assets for the British intelligence services . It was an opportunity that was taken in the Second World War when the highly successful Double @-@ Cross System was implemented . 
 = = Trial = = 
 The court martial was held over three days between Friday 30 October and Monday 2 November . Lody was charged with two offences of war treason concerning the two letters he had sent from Edinburgh on 27 September and Dublin on 30 September . In both letters , the charge sheet stated that Lody had sought " to convey to a belligerent enemy of Great Britain , namely Germany " information relating to the UK 's defences and preparations for war . He pleaded not guilty to both charges . He made an immediate impression on observers when he first appeared in court . The Daily Express reporter described him as : 
 a South German in appearance – a short , well @-@ built man of thirty @-@ eight [ sic - actually 37 ] , with a broad , low forehead that slopes backward , black hair parted in the middle and brushed backward , a broad , short nose , large , deep @-@ set , dark eyes with a look of keen intelligence in their depths , and tight @-@ set lips . 
 Sir Archibald Bodkin , the Director of Public Prosecutions , set out the case for the prosecution . The evidence was overwhelming ; the prosecution case highlighted the contents of Lody 's notebook and the luggage that he had left at the Roxburgh Hotel , and called a series of witnesses , including the elderly Scottish woman who ran the boarding @-@ house in which he had stayed in Edinburgh and the fashionably dressed Ida <unk> , who caused a stir when she described her meeting with Lody aboard the London to Edinburgh train . Bodkin did not read the incriminating letters aloud , due to the sensitivity of their content , but described them in general terms . The witnesses testified about their interactions with Lody and identified him as the man who had posed as " Charles A. Inglis " , though the proprietress of the Edinburgh boarding @-@ house experienced some difficulty . When she " was asked if she could see ' Charles A. Inglis ' in court , [ she ] looked everywhere except at the dock . Lody , who was sitting , stood up and gently waved his hands to attract her attention , while he smiled broadly and almost broke into laughter at the absurdity of the situation . " 
 Late on 30 October , Lody wrote to a friend in Omaha to tell him about his feelings before he began his defence . He told his friend : 
 I am prepared to make a clean breast of all this trouble , but I must protect my friends in the Fatherland and avoid as much possible humiliation for those who have been near and dear to me . 
 I am in the Tower [ sic – actually Wellington Barracks ] . Hourly while I am confined here an unfriendly guard paces the corridor . My counsellor [ George Elliot QC ] is an attorney of standing , but I ofttimes feel that he is trying to do his duty to his country rather than defend his client . Next week I shall know my fate , although there can hardly be a doubt as to what it is to be . I have attended to such legal matters as were necessary , but whether my wishes will ever be carried out I do not know . 
 You may have an opportunity to say a word to some of those for whom I feel an interest . Ask them to judge me not harshly , When they hear of me again , doubtless my body shall have been placed in concrete beneath this old tower , or my bones shall have made a pyre . But I shall have served my country . Maybe some historian will record me among the despised class of war victims … <unk> my demise shall be heralded as that of a spy , but I have spiritual consolation . Others have suffered and I must accept the reward of fate . 
 The second day of the trial was interrupted when a young man whom The Times described as being " of foreign appearance " was arrested and removed from the court on the orders of Captain Reginald " <unk> " Hall , the Director of Naval Intelligence . The interloper was one Charles Stuart Nairne , an Irishman and former Royal Navy lieutenant whom Hall spotted in the public gallery and considered to be " either a lunatic or a very dangerous person " . As Nairne was being removed into military custody , he attempted to shake Lody 's hand in the dock . 
 Lody was then called to give evidence . It was revealed to the public for the first time that he was an officer in the Imperial German Navy and that he had been ordered by a superior officer to spy in Britain . When he was asked for the name of that individual , his composure temporarily deserted him , as The Times ' reporter recorded : 
 For the space of perhaps half a minute the prisoner hesitated , and then , in a voice broken by gradually deepening emotion , said , " I have pledged my word not to give that name . I cannot do it . Where names are found in my documents I certainly do not feel I have broken my word , but that name I cannot give . I have given my word of honour . " 
 The prisoner sobbed a moment , then turned pale , and gazed before him in a dazed manner . Recovering his self @-@ possession he said , " I beg pardon ; my nerves have given way . " A glass of water was handed up to the prisoner . 
 Lody stated that he had been sent to the UK " to remain until the first [ naval ] encounter had taken place between the two Powers , and to send accurate information as regards the actual losses of the British Fleet " , as well as to observe what he could of Fleet movements off the coast . The court martial went into an in camera session while sensitive evidence was being heard . Lody claimed that he had asked in August to be erased from military service on the grounds of poor health and to be allowed to travel to the United States . This was refused , he went on , but a member of naval intelligence whom he had previously never met coaxed him into undertaking a mission in the UK on the condition that he could go to the US afterwards . Lody told the tribunal that he was not pressured but that " I have never been a coward in my life and I certainly would not be a shirker " , and that he had persisted with his mission because " once a man has promised to do a thing he does it , that is the understanding . " His services were provided " absolutely as an honour and free " , while he had never intended to be a spy : " I was pressed for secret service , but not as a spy – oh , no . If that would have been mentioned to me at Berlin I surely would have refused . The word in the sentence , I do not think it goes together . " He claimed that he had " pledged my word of honour " not to name his controller . 
 Little of this was true , but at the time the British had no way of knowing this . The files of the Admiralstab in Berlin show that he was approached by N , rather than volunteering for intelligence service , entered their employment as early as May 1914 ( rather than in August as he claimed ) , received regular pay rather than being unpaid , and intended to return to Berlin on completing his mission . It is unknown whether he really had any intention of going to the US , and there is no indication from the Admiralstab files that he had been asked to keep his controller 's name a secret . After hearing Lody 's evidence the court martial was adjourned until the following Monday . 
 On the final day of the court martial , 2 November 1914 , the prosecution and defence put forward their final arguments . Lody 's counsel argued for mitigation on the grounds that Lody had " [ come ] to this country actuated by patriotic German motives , entirely paying his own expenses and carrying his life in his hands , to fulfil the mandate of his supporters . " As one newspaper report put it , 
 He wished to go down to his final fate as a brave man , an honest man , and as an open @-@ hearted man . There was no suggestion of an attempt at pleading for mercy or for favourable treatment . " Englishmen will not deny him respect for the courage he has shown , " said Mr. Elliott . " His own grandfather , an old soldier , held a fortress against Napoleon … He knows that he carried his life in his hands , and he stands before the Court in that spirit … And he will face the decision of the Court like a man . " Lody was asked if he had any statement to make but said , " I have nothing more to say . " 
 The finding of guilt and sentence of death were pronounced in camera , without Lody present , before the court martial was adjourned . 
 = = Execution = = 
 No public announcement was made of the court martial 's verdict . Instead , the following day , the General Officer Commanding London District was sent instructions ordering the sentence to be promulgated on 5 November , with Lody being told , and for the sentence to be carried out at least 18 hours later . Great secrecy surrounded the proceedings which , when combined with the short timeframe , caused problems for the GOC in finding a suitable place of execution . He contacted Major @-@ General Henry <unk> , the Major of the Tower of London , to tell him : 
 I have been directed to carry out the execution of the German Spy who has been convicted by General Court Martial . The time given me has been short , so short that I have had only a few hours to arrange and have been directed to keep it secret . Under the circumstances the Tower is the only possible place and has been approved by the War Office . 
 While the Tower may have been " the only possible place " , in some respects it was a strange choice . It had not been used as a state prison for many years and the last execution there – that of Lord Lovat , the Jacobite rebel – had taken place in 1747 . It was one of London 's most popular tourist attractions , recording over 400 @,@ 000 visitors a year by the end of the 19th century , and remained open to tourists even on the day of Lody 's execution . During the Tower 's heyday , executions had been carried out in the open air on Tower Hill or Tower Green , but Lody 's execution was to take place at the Tower 's rifle range located in the eastern part of the Outer Ward between Martin and Constable Towers , behind the Outer Curtain wall and out of public sight . The Tower 's custodians , the Yeomen Warders ( " Beefeaters " ) , had long since become tourist guides rather than active @-@ duty soldiers , so eight men were selected from the 3rd Battalion , to carry out the sentence . 
 Lody was informed of his impending execution on the evening of 5 November and was brought to the Tower in a police van . According to the Daily Express , he " received the news calmly and with no sign of surprise . " He was held in the Casemates on the west side of the Tower , an area where the Yeoman Warders now live . His last meal was probably prepared by one of the Warders ' wives , as the Tower had no proper accommodation or dining facilities for prisoners . While at the Tower he wrote a couple of final letters . One was addressed to the Commanding Officer of the 3rd Battalion to thank his captors for their care of him : 
 Sir , 
 I feel it my duty as a German officer to express my sincere thanks and appreciation towards the staff of officers and men who were in charge of my person during my confinement . 
 Their kind and considered treatment has called my highest esteem and admiration as regards good fellowship even towards the enemy and if I may be permitted , I would thank you for making this known to them . 
 The Guards apparently never saw the letter ; the Adjutant General instead directed the letter to be placed in a War Office file rather than being sent to the regiment . 
 Lody also wrote a letter to his sister , which was published posthumously in the Frankfurter Zeitung newspaper , in which he told her and his other relatives : 
 My dear ones , 
 I have trusted in God and He has decided . My hour has come , and I must start on the journey through the Dark Valley like so many of my comrades in this terrible War of Nations . May my life be offered as a humble offering on the altar of the Fatherland . 
 A hero 's death on the battlefield is certainly finer , but such is not to be my lot , and I die here in the Enemy 's country silent and unknown , but the consciousness that I die in the service of the Fatherland makes death easy . 
 The Supreme Court @-@ Martial of London has sentenced me to death for Military Conspiracy . Tomorrow I shall be shot here in the Tower . I have had just Judges , and I shall die as an Officer , not as a spy . 
 Farewell . God bless you , 
 Hans . 
 Lody also left instructions that his ring was to be forwarded to his ex @-@ wife , which was carried out after his execution . 
 At dawn on the morning of 6 November 1914 , in cold , foggy and bleak weather , Lody was fetched from his cell by the Assistant Provost @-@ Marshal , Lord <unk> . He asked , " I suppose that you will not care to shake hands with a German spy ? " , to which the reply came , " No . But I will shake hands with a brave man . " A small procession formed up for the short journey to the rifle range , comprising Lody and his armed escort , the Tower 's Chaplain and the eight @-@ man firing squad . John Fraser , one of the Yeoman Warders , witnessed it and later described it : 
 Nobody liked this sort of thing . It was altogether too cold @-@ blooded for an ordinary stomach ( particularly that of a soldier , who hates cold @-@ bloodedness ) to face with equanimity , and it is not too much to say that , of that sad little procession , the calmest and most composed member was the condemned man himself . 
 For the Chaplain , in particular , it was a bad time . He had never had a similar experience , and his voice had a shake in it as he intoned the solemn words of the Burial Service over the living form of the man it most concerned . . . 
 The escort and the firing @-@ party , too , were far from comfortable , and one could see that the slow march suitable to the occasion was getting badly on their nerves . They wanted to hurry over it , and get the beastly business finished . 
 But the prisoner walked steadily , stiffly upright , and yet as easily and <unk> as though he was going to a tea @-@ party , instead of to his death . His eyes were upturned to the gloomy skies , and his nostrils eagerly drank in the precious air that was soon to be denied them . But his face was quite calm and composed – almost expressionless . 
 At the rifle range Lody was strapped into a chair . He refused to have his eyes bandaged , as he wished to die with his eyes open . A few moments later the inhabitants of the Tower heard " the muffled sound of a single volley " . His body was taken away to be buried in an unmarked grave in the East London Cemetery in Plaistow . The War Office issued a terse announcement of the execution a few days later on 10 November : " Sentence is duly confirmed . " 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Lody 's courageous demeanour in court produced widespread sympathy and admiration , a development that neither side had anticipated . Even his captors were captivated ; although MO5 ( g ) had recommended his execution as early as 3 October , by the time the trial was over , Kell was said by his wife to have considered Lody a " really fine man " of whom Kell " felt it deeply that so brave a man should have to pay the death penalty for carrying out what he considered to be his duty to his country . " Sir Basil Thomson of Scotland Yard commented that " there was some difference of opinion as to whether it was sound policy to execute spies and to begin with a patriotic spy like Lody . " According to Robert Jackson , the biographer of Lody 's prosecutor Sir Archibald Bodkin , Lody 's " bearing and frankness when caught so impressed Britain 's spy @-@ catchers and prosecutors that they talked about trying to get the Government to waive the internationally recognised rule that spies caught in wartime automatically are put to death . Only the certainty that Germany would not be as merciful to our own spies made them refrain . " Thomson also paid tribute to Lody in his 1937 book The Scene Changes : 
 Lody won the respect of all who came into contact with him . In the quiet heroism with which he faced his trial and his execution there was no suspicion of play @-@ acting . He never flinched , he never cringed , but he died as one would wish all Englishmen to die – quietly and <unk> , supported by the proud consciousness of having done his duty . 
 Lody 's conduct was contrasted favourably with the German spies captured after him , many of whom were nationals of neutral countries , who followed him to the execution chair . Lady Constance Kell commented that " most of the agents employed by the Germans worked only for the money they gained and were regarded with utter contempt " . Similarly , Thomson described " the scum of neutral spies " , of whom he said , " we came to wish that a distinction could have been made between patriotic spies like Lody and the hirelings who pestered us through the ensuing years " . Shortly after Lody 's death he was described in the House of Commons as " a patriot who had died for his country as much as any soldier who fell in the field . " 
 The British and German publics also took a positive view of Lody . His trial became something of a celebrity occasion ; as The New York Times observed , on the first day , " many fashionably dressed women thronged the galleries of the courtroom " and the final day was attended by " many leaders of London society as well as by prominent jurists , politicians , and military and naval men . " The Daily Express opined that " one cannot withhold a tribute to his daring resourcefulness and inflexible courage " and called Lody " one of the cleverest spies in Steinhauer 's service " , though it advised its readers to bear in mind that he was " a most dangerous spy . " 
 Louise Storz , Lody 's former wife , received his ring in early December along with a letter from him . She refused to disclose its contents , saying , " It is his last message to me and in no way concerns anyone else . The ring had also been our wedding ring . " She spoke of her reaction to his death in an interview in November 1914 with The Kansas City Star while visiting Excelsior Springs , Missouri . She said : 
 My nerves are completely upset and I have come to this quiet place where I hope to escape even the loving sympathy of my many friends in Omaha . I want to forget . But the awfulness of such a fate , I fear , I cannot soon erase from my memory ... He was so fine in so many ways . Of fine learning , an accomplished linguist , and of high courage . He used to talk <unk> of his love and devotion to his country . It must have been a beautiful thing , according to his way of thinking , to die if need be for his Fatherland . But I want to forget . I owe it to myself and my parents to call the chapter closed . 
 Her father refused to comment , saying that his interest in the Lody case was " only a passing one " . A rumour had it that the German government paid Louise Storz $ 15 @,@ 000 in compensation for her ex @-@ husband 's death , but she denied this in 1915 . 
 In Germany , Lody 's home town of Nordhausen planted an oak tree in his memory . Newspaper commentary was limited ; the first article about the case that The Times noted was only published around 19 November , in the Frankfurter Zeitung , in which a pseudonymous columnist suggested that the British might have been tempted to show Lody mercy : " I myself am convinced that the noble manliness with which this strong German composure bore itself before the Court touched the heart of the Judge , that the Judge said " If only we English had many such Hans <unk> ! " and that Hans Lody lives ... We shall not forget him , for he staked his country more than his life – his name and his honour . " A death notice was published in early December in the Stuttgarter Neues Tagblatt , stating that he had " died the hero 's death for the Fatherland in England , November 6 " . 
 Lody 's death produced a low @-@ key response from the German government . The Admiralstab recommended at the end of 1914 that he should be awarded a posthumous Iron Cross , Second Class , and argued that the recruitment of naval agents would be assisted if espionage could be rewarded with such a prestigious medal . The Kaiser agreed , though not without some reluctance . 
 The bravery Lody exhibited during his trial and execution was praised by many post @-@ war British writers . Sir George Aston , writing in his 1930 book Secret Service , called on his readers to " pay a tribute to a real German spy of the highest type ... Karl Lody " , while John Bulloch commented in his 1963 history of MI5 that Lody 's bearing made him " something of a hero even in the country against which he was working . " E.T. Woodhall , a former detective , collected accounts from officers who had been involved in the investigation and wrote in 1932 : " They are unanimous in their admiration for his manly and brazen qualities , but they all criticise his amazing lack of caution ... He was admired by everybody for his bravery and straightforward , patriotic devotion to his country . " 
 Lody may have had more complex motives than simple patriotism . Thomas Boghardt notes the " exceptional " way in which Lody bore himself at his trial , pointing out that " virtually all other German agents accused of espionage understandably tried to deny or minimise their involvement with N " . Boghardt had the advantage of being able to review the Admiralstab 's files on the case and highlights " small but important changes " , or rather discrepancies , between Lody 's statements in court and the facts preserved in the case files . As Boghardt puts it , 
 All this suggests that Lody was less concerned with averting a harsh sentence than he was with projecting a certain image of himself , that of a patriot who , despite his reluctance to join the secret service , rendered his fatherland a final service before starting a new life in America ; in short , a ' man of honour ' rather than a traitorous spy . Until his death , Lody conformed superbly to this image ... During the last weeks of his life , Lody tried to shatter the negative image usually attached to spies , and in this regard he was utterly successful . 
 Lody , suggests Boghardt , " had accepted his trial and probable execution as a form of expiation for events that had occurred long before his becoming a secret agent . " He raises the possibility that Lody was motivated by what had happened two years earlier in Omaha , when Lody had responded to the accusations of being a wife @-@ beater by declaring that he would " defend the honour of a gentleman " . Boghardt comments that " his eagerness to display his honour may indicate a concern that others doubted this very quality in him . While presenting himself to the world as a man of honour and accepting his fate courageously , Lody may have found comfort and strength in the thought that whoever had doubted his honour previously would now be persuade otherwise . " 
 = = From spy to national hero = = 
 During the Nazi era , Lody 's memory was appropriated by the new regime to promote a more muscular image of German patriotism . An elaborate commemoration of his death was held in Lübeck on 6 November 1934 , when flags across the city flew at half @-@ mast and bells tolled between 6 @.@ 45 and 7 am , the time of his execution . Later that day a memorial was unveiled at the <unk> gateway near the harbour , depicting a knight in armour with a closed visor ( representing Lody ) , with his hands fettered ( representing captivity ) and a serpent <unk> his feet ( representing betrayal ) . Below it an inscription was set into the gate 's brickwork , reading " <unk> HANS <unk> <unk> für uns 6 @.@ 11 @.@ 1914 im Tower zu London " ( " Carl Hans Lody died for us 6 @.@ 11 @.@ 1914 in the Tower of London " ) . 
 During the unveiling ceremony , which was attended by Lody 's sister and representatives of the present Reichsmarine and old Imperial German Navy , the road leading from the gateway to the harbour was also renamed " Karl @-@ Hans @-@ Lody @-@ Weg " . On the same day , officers from the Hamburg @-@ America Line presented city officials with a ship 's bell bearing the inscription " In Memory of Karl Hans Lody " , to be rung each 6 November at the time of his death . After World War II , when Lübeck was part of the British Zone of Occupation , the statue was taken down and the niche in which it stood was bricked up , though the inscription was allowed to remain and is still visible today . 
 Lody was further memorialised in 1937 when the newly launched destroyer Z10 was christened Hans Lody . Other ships in the same class were also given the names of German officers who had died in action . The ship served throughout the Second World War in the Baltic and North Sea theatres , survived the war and was captured by the British in 1945 . After a few years in Royal Navy service she was scrapped in Sunderland in 1949 . 
 Lody was also the subject of literary and stage works ; a hagiographic biographical account , Lody – Ein Weg um Ehre ( Lody – One Way to Honour ) , was published by Hans Fuchs in 1936 and a play called Lody : vom Leben und Sterben eines deutschen <unk> ( Lody : the life and death of a German officer ) , by Walter Heuer , premiered on Germany 's National Heroes ' Day in 1937 . It depicts Lody as brave and patriotic but clumsy , leaving a trail of clues behind him as he travels in the UK : wearing clothes marked " Made in Germany " , writing naval secrets on the back of a bus ticket which he loses and a Scotland Yard detective finds , coming to attention when an orchestra in London plays the German naval anthem , arousing suspicion when he calls for German wine while writing secret reports to Berlin , and leaving incriminating letters in the pockets of suits which he sends to be pressed . Lody is arrested in London and sentenced to death . Offered a chance to escape , he refuses and drinks a glass of wine with the firing squad , toasting Anglo @-@ German friendship . He is led out to his execution , saying his final words : " I shall see Germany once more – from the stars . " The Dundee Evening Telegraph described the storyline as " quaint " . 
 The <unk> in Berlin was named in his honour . 
 = = Burial = = 
 The 17 @-@ year @-@ old Bertolt Brecht wrote a eulogy to Lody in 1915 in which he imagined the purpose behind the spy 's death : 
 The reality was very different . Lody 's body was buried in an unmarked common grave in the East London Cemetery in Plaistow along with seventeen other men – ten executed spies and seven prisoners who died of ill @-@ health or accidents . It was not until 1924 that the grave received a marker , at the instigation of the German Embassy . Lody 's relatives were visiting it once a year and enquired whether his body could be exhumed and buried in a private grave . The War Office agreed , providing that the body could be identified , but the Foreign Office was more reluctant and pointed out that a licence for exhumation would have to be authorised by the Home Office . The Lody family placed a white headstone and kerb on the grave some time around 1934 . 
 In September 1937 the German government again requested that Lody 's body be exhumed and moved to a separate grave . This proved impractical for several reasons ; he had been buried with seven other men , each coffin had been cemented down and the lapse of time would make identification very difficult . Instead , the British Imperial War Graves Commission suggested that a memorial should be constructed in another part of the cemetery to bear the names of all the German civilians who were buried there . The proposal met with German agreement and the memorial was duly installed . During the Second World War , Lody 's original headstone was destroyed by <unk> Luftwaffe bombs . It was replaced in 1974 . 
 One further proposal was made to rebury Lody in the 1960s . In 1959 the British and German governments agreed to move German war dead who had been buried in various locations around the UK to a new central cemetery at Cannock Chase in Staffordshire . The German War Graves Commission ( VDK ) asked if it would be possible to disinter Lody 's body and move it to Cannock Chase . By that time , the plot had been reused for further common graves , buried above Lody 's body . The VDK was told that it would not be possible to disinter the other bodies without the permission of the relatives , which would have been an almost impossible task where common graves were concerned . The proposal was abandoned and Lody 's body remains at Plaistow . 
 = Ontario Highway 77 = 
 King 's Highway 77 , commonly referred to as Highway 77 , is a provincially maintained highway in the Canadian province of Ontario . One of three highways within Essex County , Highway 77 serves to interconnect Highway 3 near Leamington with Highway 401 near Tilbury . Prior to 1998 , the highway extended south into Leamington , ending at the former routing of Highway 3 and Highway 18 . This section was turned over to Essex County and renamed Erie Street . The speed limit on Highway 77 is 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) in most places , dropping to 50 km / h in built @-@ up areas . It is patrolled by the Ontario Provincial Police . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Due to the flat topography of Essex County , the land use surrounding Highway 77 is almost entirely agricultural . Soil conditions in Essex are ideal for farming , and as a result very few natural areas can be found in the county . Many streams have been diverted to irrigate the endless farmland to either side of the highway . Relief from the plain is provided only by the few hamlets along the route . In addition , Lake Erie and Lake St Clair are both a short distance from Highway 77 . 
 Highway 77 begins at the Leamington Bypass , north of the city of the same name . The western section of Highway 3 shares its eastern terminus with Highway 77 ; from there it travels west towards Windsor . Several greenhouses are visible near the southern end of the highway , a small percentage of the 610 hectares ( 1 @,@ 500 acres ) of land occupied by them in the Leamington area . Point Pelee National Park , the southernmost point in Canada , is also nearby . 
 The highway runs 11 @.@ 5 km ( 7 @.@ 1 mi ) north through Mount Carmel and <unk> to the village of Staples before turning to the east . It continues in this direction for 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) before returning to its northward orientation . North of there , the highway passes to the east of the Comber and District Historical Society Museum . The museum , which focuses on the history of agriculture , was established in the former Maple Grove Schoolhouse , which was built in 1894 . Pressing north to Highway 401 , it passes Middle Road ( once Highway 98 ) in the centre of Comber . Highway 401 provides access to Windsor and the United States to the west , and to the town of Tilbury and city of Chatham – Kent to the east . To the north , the road continues as Essex County Road 35 to Stoney Point on the shores of Lake Huron . 
 Traffic levels along Highway 77 vary , but are generally low . The busiest section of the highway lies at the southern end between Leamington and <unk> , with an average of 6 @,@ 000 vehicles travelling it per day . North of that , traffic drops considerably to 3 @,@ 000 vehicles , but increases approaching Comber and Highway 401 to around 4 @,@ 500 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Highway 77 designation was first applied on August 5 , 1936 to a road running southeast from Rodney , Ontario to Highway 3 at New Glasgow . On December 5 , 1957 , the highway was transferred to Elgin County and is now known as Elgin County Road 103 . The current Highway 77 was designated between Leamington and Highway 401 on April 1 , 1963 . The southern end followed present @-@ day Erie Street south through the city to Talbot Road . At the time , Highway 3 travelled along that road ; Highway 77 continued south of Talbot Road as Highway 18 . In early December 1999 , the Leamington Bypass of Highway 3 opened . The southern terminus of Highway 77 was subsequently truncated by 1 @.@ 7 km ( 1 @.@ 1 mi ) to end at the new bypass . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 77 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in Essex County . 
 = Chambersburg , Pennsylvania = 
 Chambersburg is a borough in the South Central region of Pennsylvania , United States . It is 13 miles ( 21 km ) miles north of Maryland and the Mason @-@ Dixon line and 52 miles ( 84 km ) southwest of Harrisburg in the Cumberland Valley , which is part of the Great Appalachian Valley . Chambersburg is the county seat of Franklin County . According to the United States Census Bureau the 2010 population was 20 @,@ 268 . When combined with the surrounding Greene , Hamilton , and Guilford Townships , the population of Greater Chambersburg is 52 @,@ 273 . Chambersburg is at the core of the Chambersburg , PA Micropolitan Statistical Area which includes surrounding Franklin County . The population of the Chambersburg Micropolitan Area in 2010 was 149 @,@ 618 . 
 Chambersburg 's settlement began in 1730 when water mills were built at the confluence of Conococheague Creek and Falling Spring Creek that now run through the center of the town . Its history includes episodes relating to the French and Indian War , the Whiskey Rebellion , John Brown 's raid on Harpers Ferry , and the American Civil War . The borough was the only major northern community burned down by Confederate forces during the war . 
 Chambersburg is located along the Lincoln Highway , U.S. 30 , between <unk> and Gettysburg , Pennsylvania and along U.S. 11 , the Molly Pitcher Highway , between Shippensburg , Pennsylvania , and Hagerstown , Maryland . Interstate 81 skirts the borough to its east . The town also lies approximately midpoint on US Route 30 between Pittsburgh and Philadelphia with the local geography reflecting both flatter areas like Philadelphia and mountainous areas like Pittsburgh . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = European settlement = = = 
 Native Americans living or hunting in the area during the 18th century included the Iroquois , Lenape and Shawnee . " Falling Spring " was first settled by Benjamin Chambers , a Scots @-@ Irish immigrant , in 1730 , who started a grist mill and saw mill by a then @-@ 26 @-@ foot ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) high waterfall where Falling Spring Creek joined Conococheague Creek . The creek provided power to the mills , and the settlement was known as " Falling Spring . " 
 On March 30 , 1734 , Chambers was issued a " <unk> license " for 400 acres ( 160 ha ) , from a representative of the Penn family , but European settlement in the area was of questionable legality until the treaty ending the French and Indian War , because not all Indian tribes with land claims had signed treaties . The Penn family encouraged settlement in the area in order to strengthen its case in a border dispute with the Maryland Colony , which had resulted in hostilities known as Cresap 's War . This dispute was not settled until 1767 and the surveying of the border known as the Mason @-@ Dixon line . Chambers traveled to England to testify in support of Penn 's claims . To maintain peace with the Indians , European settlers were sometimes removed from the nearby area . In May 1750 , Benjamin Chambers participated in removing settlers from nearby Burnt Cabins , which took its name from the incident . 
 The area was officially part of Chester County , then Lancaster , and then Cumberland until it became part of the newly established Franklin County in 1784 . 
 The Great Wagon Road connecting Philadelphia with the Shenandoah Valley passed nearby . In 1744 , it was completed through Harris 's Ferry , Carlisle , Shippensburg , and Chambersburg to the Potomac River . 
 In 1748 a local militia was formed for protection against Indians , with Benjamin Chambers being named colonel . 
 Chambersburg was on the frontier during the French and Indian War . The area 's population dropped from about 3 @,@ 000 in 1755 at the start of the war to about 300 , with most settlers not returning until after 1764 when the peace treaty was signed . Benjamin Chambers built a private stone fort during the war , which was equipped with two 4 pounder cannons and fighting occurred nearby . Because Chambers 's fort was otherwise lightly defended , the authorities attempted to remove the cannons to prevent them from being captured by Indians and used against other forts . The attempted removal was unsuccessful , and one of the cannons was used to celebrate Independence Day in 1840 . The Forbes Road and other trails going to Fort Pitt passed nearby as well . The Forbes Road developed into part of the main road connecting Pittsburg and Philadelphia , and much later into US 30 , and Chambersburg developed as a transportation hub at the crossroads of Forbes Road and the Great Wagon Road . 
 Fighting continued in the area after the war , most notably the Enoch Brown school massacre during Pontiac 's Rebellion and the Black Boys rebellion against British troops at Fort Loudon . 
 The first settlers were Scots @-@ Irish Presbyterians and German Protestants came soon afterward . Quakers and English Protestants , who made up a large proportion of early Pennsylvania settlers , did not often move as far west as Chambersburg . Blacks lived in Chambersburg almost from the start of settlement . Benjamin Chambers owned a black female slave sometime before the French and Indian War and twenty slaves were recorded as taxable property in 1786 . 
 The earliest church was established by Scots @-@ Irish Presbyterians in 1734 . Chambers gave land to the congregation in 1768 , requiring only a single rose as annual rent . Later land was given to the First Lutheran Church ( 1780 ) and Zion Reformed Church ( organized in 1780 ) under the same agreement , and these churches came to be known as the " Rose Rent Churches . " A Catholic community organized in 1785 . The Jewish cemetery dates back to 1840 . The Mt . Moriah First African Baptist Church dates to 1887 . 
 The town was first laid out in 1764 , and lots were advertised for sale on July 19 in Benjamin Franklin 's Pennsylvania Gazette 
 Notice is hereby given to the Public , that there is a town is laid out on <unk> Creek , on both sides of the Great Falling Spring , where is falls into said creek , by Benjamin Chambers , of Cumberland County . Lots may be had on reasonable terms and Firm Deeds granted for them by said Chambers : the day appointed for drawing of said lots is the 28th day of June inst .. which is a Thursday . The situation of this town is very good for water and stone , both free and marble , and sand all handy to the spot , and a well timbered part of the country adjoining it ; within said town is a good <unk> , Sawmill , and <unk> going by water . The articles of the Town shall be read on the day appointed for the drawing of the Lots , and the terms of the sale published by me 
 = = = 1775 – 1858 = = = 
 In June 1775 , soon after the Battle of Lexington , local troops were raised to fight the British in the American Revolution under the command of Benjamin Chambers 's eldest son Captain James Chambers , as part of the 1st Pennsylvania Regiment . These troops were among the first non @-@ New Englanders to join the siege of Boston , arriving on August 7 , 1775 . James Chambers fought for seven years during the revolution , reaching the rank of Colonel of Continental troops on September 26 , 1776 . His two brothers , William and Benjamin , Jr . , each served for much of the war and reached the rank of Captain . James Chambers commanded local troops at the Battle of Long Island , and at White Plains , Trenton , Princeton , Brandywine , Germantown and Monmouth . He was part of the rear guard covering the retreat from Brooklyn , and was wounded at the Battle of Brandywine while facing Hessian troops under General <unk> at Chadds Ford . 
 During the Whiskey Rebellion , local citizens raised a liberty pole in support of the rebels , and to protest conscription of soldiers to put down the rebellion . Nevertheless , these citizens were censured in a town meeting and removed the pole the next day . President George Washington , while leading United States troops against the rebels , came through town on the way from Carlisle to Bedford , staying overnight on October 12 , 1794 . According to tradition , Washington lodged with Dr. Robert Johnson , a surgeon in the Pennsylvania line during the Revolution . This march was one of only two times that a sitting president personally commanded the military in the field . ( The other was after President James Madison fled the British occupation of Washington , D.C. during the War of 1812 . ) After sending the troops toward Pittsburgh from Bedford under General Henry " Light Horse Harry " Lee , Washington returned through Chambersburg sometime between October 21 – 26 . James Chambers was appointed a Brigadier General of Militia during the Whiskey Rebellion . 
 Chambersburg was incorporated on March 21 , 1803 , and declared the County Seat when the State Assembly established a formal government . The first courthouse was John Jack 's tavern on the Diamond ( town square ) in 1784 , with a permanent courthouse built in 1793 , and the first county jail built 1795 . The " Old Jail " was built in 1818 , survived the fire of 1864 and is the oldest jail building in Pennsylvania . It was originally used as the sheriff 's residence and had the longest continuous use of any jail in the state , operating until 1971 . Today the Old Jail is a museum and home to the Franklin County – <unk> Historical Society . The county 's gallows still stand in the jail 's courtyard . 
 Much of the town 's growth was due to its position as a transportation center , first as the starting point on the Forbes Road to Pittsburgh . The U.S. Congress placed Chambersburg on the Philadelphia @-@ Pittsburgh postal road in 1803 . The road was rebuilt as the Chambersburg @-@ Bedford Turnpike in 1811 . The Cumberland Valley Railroad was built in 1837 and was the area 's center of economic activity for nearly 100 years . Until the completion of the Pennsylvania Railroad 's main line in 1857 , the fastest route from Pittsburgh to Philadelphia was by stagecoach from Pittsburgh to Chambersburg , and then by train to Philadelphia . 
 = = = Civil War era = = = 
 = = = = Underground railroad / John Brown = = = = 
 By 1859 , Chambersburg was a stop on the Underground Railroad . John Brown stayed in an upstairs room at Mary <unk> 's boarding house between June and October , 1859 while preparing for his raid on Harpers Ferry . Several of his fellow raiders stayed in the house as well , and four of them escaped capture and briefly visited the house after the raid . The house still stands at 225 East King Street . While in Chambersburg Brown posed as Dr. Isaac Smith , an iron mine developer , and bought and stored weapons under the guise of mining equipment . 
 Brown ( using the name John Smith ) and John Henry Kagi met with Frederick Douglass and Shields Green at an abandoned quarry outside of town to discuss the raid on August 19 . According to Douglass 's account , Brown described the planned raid in detail and Douglass advised him against it . Douglass also provided $ 10 from a supporter , and had helped Green – a future raider – locate Brown . 
 = = = = First two Confederate occupations , selective burnings = = = = 
 During the American Civil War on October 10 , 1862 , Confederate Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart , with 1 @,@ 800 cavalrymen , raided Chambersburg , destroying $ 250 @,@ 000 of railroad property and taking 500 guns , hundreds of horses , and at least " eight young colored men and boys . " They failed , however , to accomplish one of the main targets of the raid : to burn the railroad bridge across the Conococheague Creek at Scotland , five miles ( 8 km ) north of town . 
 During the early days of the 1863 Gettysburg Campaign , a Virginia cavalry brigade under Brig. Gen. Albert G. Jenkins occupied the town and burned several warehouses and Cumberland Valley Railroad structures and the bridge at Scotland . From June 24 – 28 , 1863 , much of the Army of Northern Virginia passed through Chambersburg en route to Carlisle and Gettysburg , and Robert E. Lee established his headquarters at a nearby farm . 
 = = = = Burning of entire town 1864 = = = = 
 The following year , Chambersburg was invaded for a third time , as cavalry , dispatched from the Shenandoah Valley by Jubal Early , arrived . On July 30 , 1864 , a large portion of the town was burned down by Brig. Gen. John McCausland for failing to provide a ransom of $ 500 @,@ 000 in U.S. currency , or $ 100 @,@ 000 in gold . Among the few buildings left standing was the Masonic Temple , which had been guarded under orders by a Confederate mason . Norland , the home of Republican politician and editor Alexander McClure , was burned even though it was well north of the main fire . 
 One black Chambersburg resident was killed when Confederates refused to allow him to leave his burning house . Another man was asked by the Confederates if he had ever educated " niggers " ; after replying that he had , the Confederates burned his house as well . Subsequently , " Remember Chambersburg " soon became a Union battle cry . 
 = = = Civil War Legacy = = = 
 = = = = General Jubal Early accused of war crimes : flees the United States = = = = 
 Lieutenant General Jubal Early was accused of war crimes for ordering the burning of Chambersburg . When the Army of Northern Virginia surrendered on April 9 , 1865 , Early escaped to Texas by horseback , where he hoped to find a Confederate force still holding out . He proceeded to Mexico , and from there , sailed to Cuba and Canada . Living in Toronto , he wrote his memoir , A Memoir of the Last Year of the War for Independence , in the Confederate States of America , which focused on his Valley Campaign . The book was published in 1867 . 
 = = = = Reconstruction of town = = = = 
 The town was rebuilt with a combination of state and private funding . Many new buildings were erected quickly and were not initially built to the original standards . 
 It took more than 30 years to fully restore the town 's housing stock to pre @-@ Civil War standards . 
 = = = = Formation of first school for orphaned children of soldiers killed in the Civil War = = = = 
 Due to an incident where two children of dead Union soldiers came begging for food to the doors of Chambersburg residents , the first school in Pennsylvania was created to serve children of Veterans orphaned due to war . The Governor of the state eventually established 69 additional such schools across the state . The original school in Chambersburg was renamed " The Scotland School for Veterans Children " in the 1890s . 
 The school remained open until 2010 and graduated more than 10 @,@ 000 children during its lifetime . 
 = = = = Early memorialization of Civil War = = = = 
 Memorial Fountain , built in the center of the diamond to honor the Civil War soldiers , was dedicated on July 17 , 1878 with fifteen thousand people in attendance . 
 A statue of a Union soldier stands next to the fountain , facing south to guard against the return of southern raiders . 
 = = = = Contemporary memorialization = = = = 
 To this day , the Civil War burning of Chambersburg remains a part of the town 's historic identity and yearly memorial events are held . 
 Chambersburg has also recently been the subject of study on how people have historically perceived and responded to war tragedies . 
 = = = National Register of Historic Places = = = 
 The following places in Chambersburg are on the National Register of Historic Places : 
 = = = Historic images = = = 
 <unk> photographs taken from a series of 22 postcard views mailed in 1921 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 According to the United States Census Bureau , Chambersburg has a total area of 6 @.@ 8 square miles ( 17 @.@ 6 km2 ) , all land . The elevation is 617 feet ( 188 m ) above sea level . Chambersburg is located in the Cumberland Valley next to the Appalachian Mountains . It also sits right outside of Caledonia State Park , a 1 @,@ 125 @-@ acre ( 455 ha ) park with fishing and hunting areas and hiking trails , including a section of the Appalachian Trail . Also outside of Chambersburg is Michaux State Forest , a 85 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 34 @,@ 000 ha ) forest . Both of these places provide recreation for residents . 
 Conococheague Creek , a noted trout stream , runs through the center of town . It is a tributary of the Potomac River . The northernmost reach of the Potomac watershed is a few miles north of town . 
 Chambersburg has a cold climate , according to the United States Department of Energy . The area receives anywhere from 38 to 42 inches ( 970 to 1 @,@ 070 mm ) of precipitation per year . And Chambersburg falls within the warmest part of the Humid Continental Climate with some characteristics in the summer of a Humid Subtropical Climate , but bears much more characteristics of the former . The average January low is 20 ° F ( − 7 ° C ) and the average high is 37 ° F ( 3 ° C ) . The average July high is 85 ° F ( 29 ° C ) and the average low is 62 ° F ( 17 ° C ) . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2000 , there were 17 @,@ 862 people , 7 @,@ 722 households , and 4 @,@ 386 families residing in the borough . The population density was 2 @,@ 601 @.@ 3 people per square mile ( 1 @,@ 003 @.@ 9 / km2 ) . There were 8 @,@ 305 housing units at an average density of 1 @,@ 209 @.@ 5 per square mile ( 466 @.@ 8 / km2 ) . The racial makeup of the borough was 86 @.@ 43 % White , 7 @.@ 56 % African American , 0 @.@ 18 % Native American , 0 @.@ 87 % Asian , 0 @.@ 05 % Pacific Islander , 3 @.@ 08 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 83 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 6 @.@ 38 % of the population . 
 There were 7 @,@ 722 households , out of which 24 @.@ 1 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 41 @.@ 2 % were married couples living together , 11 @.@ 7 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 43 @.@ 2 % were non @-@ families . 37 @.@ 5 % of all households were made up of individuals , and 16 @.@ 8 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 2 @.@ 16 and the average family size was 2 @.@ 83 . 
 In the borough the population was spread out , with 20 @.@ 8 % under the age of 18 , 9 @.@ 1 % from 18 to 24 , 26 @.@ 8 % from 25 to 44 , 20 @.@ 6 % from 45 to 64 , and 22 @.@ 7 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 40 years . For every 100 females there were 81 @.@ 7 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 77 @.@ 1 males . 
 The median income for a household in the borough was $ 32 @,@ 336 , and the median income for a family was $ 40 @,@ 352 . Males had a median income of $ 31 @,@ 803 versus $ 21 @,@ 548 for females . The per capita income for the borough was $ 19 @,@ 278 . About 9 @.@ 8 % of families and 12 @.@ 9 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 18 @.@ 3 % of those under age 18 and 9 @.@ 1 % of those age 65 or over . 
 The population stood at 7 @,@ 863 in 1890 ; 8 @,@ 864 in 1900 ; 11 @,@ 800 in 1910 ; 13 @,@ 171 in 1920 ; and 14 @,@ 852 in 1940 . It was estimated to be around 18 @,@ 000 people in January 2008 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The surrounding area has a large farming population , including many Amish and Mennonite families . Franklin County 's largest crop is corn ( maize ) with 579 farms that cover 29 @,@ 916 acres ( 12 @,@ 107 ha ) of land . Franklin also has 344 wheat farms and 299 barley farms which combined cover 14 @,@ 063 acres ( 5 @,@ 691 ha ) . Manufacturing in Chambersburg includes machinery production , metal fabrication , and food processing according to the 1997 Economic Census of Franklin County . The largest sectors by payroll were manufacturing companies such as T B Wood 's Inc . , Manitowoc cranes , retail trade , and health care and social assistance . Despite suburban growth , much of the economy of the area is still largely based on agriculture . 
 Retail stores such as Wal @-@ Mart and Lowe 's serve the population with jobs and basic needs . The Chambersburg Mall with four anchor stores and about fifty smaller stores is located in the unincorporated village of Scotland , about four miles ( 6 km ) north of town on Interstate 81 . Chambersburg 's retail sector has grown quickly since 2006 with the opening of Target , <unk> , Michaels , and Kohls near the newly built Exit 17 of Interstate 81 . Several restaurants new to the region have also opened , including Sonic , Starbucks , T.G.I. Fridays , Red Robin , <unk> , Ruby Tuesday , Panera Bread , Chipotle , Texas Roadhouse , Olive Garden , and Longhorn Steakhouse . 
 The city 's location on Interstate 81 within 100 miles ( 160 km ) of both Washington , D.C. and Baltimore , Maryland encourages trucking and distribution businesses . The Letterkenny Army Depot five miles ( 8 km ) north of town is a major employer . Camp David also employs Chambersburg residents . In 2004 Chambersburg had a per capita personal income ( <unk> ) of $ 28 @,@ 208 , below the national average of $ 33 @,@ 050 . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Chambersburg is part of small town America . Recreation includes hunting , sports events such as baseball games at Henninger Field , and high school football games . The town also hosts a professional football team , the Chambersburg Cardinals , that plays in the Gridiron Developmental Football League . People in the area speak in Pittsburgh English or with a Central Pennsylvania accent , over @-@ pronouncing " O 's " and " I 's " . Caledonia State Park provides an area for outdoor activities , with the park especially busy on July 4 . 
 The Capitol Theatre was opened as a movie palace on Main Street in 1927 . In 2003 , it reopened as the Capitol Theatre Center and is home to the Capitol Theatre Main Stage and Auditorium , Chambersburg Council for the Arts , Caledonia Theatre Company , Chambersburg Ballet Theatre School , and Chambersburg Community Theatre . In 2009 , Chambersburg ranked among <unk> magazine 's list of the " Top 25 Most Uniquely American Cities and Towns , " a piece written by current CBS News travel editor Peter Greenberg . In determining his ranking , Greenberg cited the Capitol Theatre . 
 Wilson College is home to the Cumberland Valley School of Music , a local school offering private instruction on various musical instruments . It offers a wide range of lessons , classes , workshops , and summer camps , as well as presenting numerous recitals and concerts in Thomson Hall . <unk> sponsors a children 's chorus ( the <unk> ) , a community band , a community orchestra , a concert jazz band , and the New Horizons Band , for adults age 50 or older . 
 Journalist David Brooks in 2001 used Chambersburg and Franklin County to typify Republican “ Red America . ” According to Brooks , there is little obvious income inequality and people don ’ t define their place in society by their income level . They value the work ethic and are anti @-@ union , anti @-@ welfare , pro @-@ free market , and religious social conservatives . 
 = = Government = = 
 The municipal government operates under the Pennsylvania Borough Code , with the Town Council holding both legislative and executive authority . The ten councilmen are elected from five wards ; two from each ward with staggered four @-@ year terms . The Mayor administers the Police Department and can cast tie @-@ breaking votes on the Council . Other departments are administered by the Borough Manager . 
 Darren Brown became Mayor on January 6 , 2014 . 
 As of January 2016 , the town councilmen are : 
 Samantha J. <unk> , 2nd Ward ( R ) 
 Sharon A. <unk> , 4th Ward ( D ) 
 Jeremy D. Cate , 4th Ward ( D ) 
 Allen B. Coffman , 1st Ward ( R ) ( Council President ) 
 Louisa C. Cowles , 3rd Ward ( D ) 
 Herbert R. <unk> , 5th Ward ( D ) 
 Alice C. Elia , 1st Ward ( D ) 
 Kathy J. Leedy . <unk> Ward ( D ) 
 John " Sean " A. Scott III , 2nd Ward ( D ) 
 Heath E. <unk> , 5th Ward ( D ) ( Council Vice President ) 
 Chambersburg is part of the 9th Congressional District of Pennsylvania and represented by Bill Shuster ( R ) in the House of Representatives , and by Pat Toomey ( R ) , and Bob Casey , Jr . ( D ) in the Senate . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Wilson College = = = 
 Wilson College is a private , Presbyterian @-@ related , liberal arts women 's college founded in 1869 and named for its first major donor , Sarah Wilson of Chambersburg . The college has 800 students and is known for its Women With Children , Veterinary Medical Technician , and Equestrian programs . Once an all women 's school , it currently is co @-@ education . In 2009 , the school opened the first " green " campus building in Chambersburg , PA . The building is part of the science and technology department and features a full @-@ length waterfall in the lobby . The waterfall begins on the third floor and ends in the basement of the building . 
 = = = Public schools = = = 
 Chambersburg Area Senior High School ( <unk> ) is a public school with around 2 @,@ 400 students in grades 9 – 12 , drawn from the borough of Chambersburg and the surrounding townships of Hamilton , Greene , Lurgan , Letterkenny and Guilford . <unk> is accredited by the Middle States Association and has occupied its current facilities since 1955 . Principal Dr. Barry Purvis was recognized as the 2006 High School Principal of the Year by the Pennsylvania Association of Elementary and Secondary School Principals . 
 Until August 2011 , J. Frank Faust Junior High School was the only public junior high school for eighth and ninth grade students of the Chambersburg Area School District . It served about 1400 students . J. Frank Faust is now a middle school for Chambersburg area students in the north . CAMS NORTH . It has 6th through 8th grade . 
 Chambersburg Area Middle School SOUTH was the only middle school , but as of August 2011 , it became CAMS SOUTH , 6th through 8th grade . During the 2001 – 02 school year , CAMS was recognized with the Blue Ribbon School Award of Excellence by the United States Department of Education , the highest award an American school can receive . 
 The Franklin County Career and Technology Center is also located in Chambersburg . <unk> is a school designated for students and adults to learn vocational trades while still learning core subjects in school . The school offers training in about 20 – 30 different concentrations . There are currently six different school districts with students attending <unk> : Chambersburg , Fannett @-@ Metal , Greencastle @-@ Antrim , Shippensburg , Tuscarora , and Waynesboro . 
 The Chambersburg school district includes seventeen elementary schools . Many school are being upgraded , rebuilt , or closed because of out @-@ of @-@ date buildings and lack of space . As of July 2008 , the current School Board President is Stanley Helman . Other members include Anne <unk> , Renee Sharpe , Norman Blowers , Lori Leedy , Fred Rice , Dave <unk> , and Joe <unk> . One seat is currently being filled after the resignation of the previous board president , Dr. Thomas Orndorff . 
 = = = Scotland School for Veterans ' Children = = = 
 The Scotland School for Veterans ' Children ( <unk> ) was a state owned school that offered tuition @-@ free residential education programs for children of Pennsylvania residents who are veterans or are currently serving in the U.S. armed forces . Scotland School had an original founding date of 1863 . It was founded as a result of two orphaned children going door to door begging for food . They knocked on the door of then governor , Andrew Gregg Curtin . Governor Curtin and his wife realized there was a forgotten group of people resulting from the American Civil War , the orphaned children of soldiers . Governor Curtin set up 70 schools across the state and they became known as the ' Soldier 's Orphan Schools ' . As students graduated , the student bodies of the schools began to decline and in 1895 all of the schools closed saved one , the one located in Scotland . The name was changed to Scotland School for Veteran 's Children . The purpose was then changed to provide an education to any child of any veteran , whether that veteran was living or deceased . Because of this new purpose and subsequent name change , the founding date of the school was changed to 1895 . It was located about four miles ( 6 km ) north of Chambersburg in the unincorporated village of Scotland and had about 300 students in grades 3 – 12 . The school was established in 1895 as the Pennsylvania Soldiers Orphans Industrial School . Over 10 @,@ 000 students have been educated at the school . The 186 @-@ acre ( 75 ha ) campus contains about 70 buildings including residential cottages . In 2009 , Governor Ed Rendell removed funding for the school in the year 's state budget , thereby forcing the school to close . 
 = = = Private schools = = = 
 Private schools include Corpus Christi , a Catholic school with 310 students and over 20 teachers and Cumberland Valley Christian School , a private Christian kindergarten through twelfth grade academy located in Chambersburg . Cumberland Valley Christian School is affiliated with the Open Door Church and has approximately four hundred students . Other private schools include the Montessori Academy of Chambersburg ( 22 months @-@ 12th grade , non @-@ sectarian ) and Shalom Christian Academy ( K @-@ 12 , Mennonite affiliation ) , and several elementary schools with Mennonite , Baptist , Brethren , Christian Science , and other religious orientations . 
 = = = Library = = = 
 Coyle Free Library has roots going back to 1891 , when a library of 166 books was organized by the local Afternoon Club . A member of the club , Blanche Coyle , left a bequest of $ 30 @,@ 435 in 1915 to construct a library building . The building was completed in 1924 , located at the corner of Second and Queen Streets . Later the library was made part of the Franklin County Library and began to receive funds from the County and State , though the Afternoon Club still donated funds though at least 1979 . The building it currently occupies is a former post office . 
 = = Media = = 
 = = = Newspapers = = = 
 The Chambersburg Public Opinion is the only daily newspaper published in town , and has weekday circulation about 17 @,@ 000 . It was founded in 1869 and is now owned by Gannett . 
 = = = Television and radio = = = 
 Television reception can be poor because of the surrounding mountains . <unk> , a family oriented station broadcasts from Chambersburg , and Harrisburg PBS station <unk> @-@ TV rebroadcasts via low @-@ powered translator <unk> . Franklin County is included in Harrisburg DMA . All Harrisburg TV stations are available off air and on cable . WHTM is the first network affiliated television station to establish a bureau in Chambersburg . <unk> @-@ TV , <unk> , and <unk> , broadcast from nearby Hagerstown , Maryland . 
 Chambersburg shares a radio market , the 165th largest in the United States , with Waynesboro , Pennsylvania , and Hagerstown , Maryland . 
 = = Sister city = = 
 <unk> , Shizuoka , Japan 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Betty Andujar , Texas politician 
 Philip Berlin , inventor of the railroad sleeping car . 
 D. Dudley Bloom , United States Navy officer and American businessman 
 George K. Brady , United States Army officer . Briefly commander of the Department of Alaska . 
 Ike Brookens , MLB player in 1975 with the Detroit Tigers . 
 Tom Brookens , MLB player from 1979 – 1990 , played third @-@ base for the 1984 World Series Champion Detroit Tigers 
 Revolutionary War soldier Margaret Corbin , known as " Captain Molly " 
 <unk> publisher Martin Delany , who in 1865 became the first African @-@ American field officer in the U.S. Army , was educated in Chambersburg in the 1830s . 
 Gus <unk> Major League Baseball pitcher ( 1902 – 1909 ) . 
 Henry Burchard Fine ( 1858 – 1928 ) was a dean at Princeton University and mathematician . 
 Baseball Hall of Famer Nellie Fox was born and lived just west of town in St. Thomas Township . 
 Patrick Gass ( 1771 – 1870 ) , the last surviving member of the Lewis and Clark expedition , was born just outside Chambersburg ( Falling Spring ) . 
 Kenton Harper , Virginia newspaper editor and Confederate army general during the Civil War , born and raised in Chambersburg 
 The Rev. John Grier Hibben , later President of Princeton University , served as pastor of Falling Spring Presbyterian Church , 1888 – 1891 . 
 Stephen D. Houston , a renowned Mayanist scholar , epigrapher , and anthropologist was born in Chambersburg in 1958 . 
 Archbishop John Hughes of New York lived in Chambersburg between 1817 and 1819 before going on to Mount St. Mary 's University . His family is buried at the Corpus Christi Church Cemetery in Chambersburg . 
 Journalist and author Gwen Ifill spent a portion of her childhood in Chambersburg while her father was pastor at St. James <unk> Church . 
 Alexander McClure , editor of the Franklin Repository from 1852 – 1864 
 David Fullerton Robison , a U.S. Representative , who in 1859 died of National Hotel disease , was born here 
 Joseph Winters an African @-@ American inventor and abolitionist , moved to Chambersburg in 1830 . 
 = Soldier ( Destiny 's Child song ) = 
 " Soldier " is a song by American recording group Destiny 's Child featuring American rappers T.I. and Lil Wayne . Columbia Records released " Soldier " as the second single from Destiny 's Child 's fourth studio album Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) on December 7 , 2004 . The artists co @-@ wrote the song with Sean Garrett and Rich Harrison ; the latter co @-@ produced it with Destiny 's Child members Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland . A Southern hip hop mid @-@ tempo song , it lyrically describes each members ' favorite type of male love interest . 
 " Soldier " received mostly positive reviews from music critics who praised its composition and the trio 's vocal performances , but criticized the lyrical content . The song received a nomination in the category for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards and won a Best R & B / Soul Single by a Group , Band or Duo award at the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . A commercial success , " Soldier " peaked within the top five in six European countries and in Australasia further being certified gold in the countries in the latter region . In the US , it peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Hot Dance Club Songs further receiving a Platinum certification by the RIAA . 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white music video directed by Ray Kay featured cameo appearances by several rappers and singers . It was nominated at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards under the category of Best Group Video . The band performed " Soldier " on several televised appearances in 2004 and 2005 and included it on the set list of their final tour Destiny Fulfilled ... And Lovin ' It ( 2005 ) . Both Beyoncé and Rowland performed the song during their solo tours after Destiny 's Child 's disbandment . The song was sampled in many songs by different artists , most notably by Nelly on his single " Grillz " ( 2005 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Soldier " was written by the artists along with Sean Garrett and Rich Harrison ; the latter co @-@ produced it with Destiny 's Child members Beyoncé and Kelly Rowland . The guest verses from Lil Wayne and T.I. made them the only featured artists on the album . " Soldier " was recorded by Jim Caruana at Sony Music Studios in New York City in 2004 . It was mixed by Dexter Simmons and mastered by Tom Coyne . 
 Garrett initially wrote " Soldier " in a taxi while going to the studio where the band worked on Destiny Fulfilled ; he sang the hook to the members afterwards and they liked it . Garrett further revealed about his collaboration with the group , " I loved how Destiny 's Child evolved and became this really incredible pop group but I wanted to introduce them to the hood from the perspective of having the world look at them in a different way ... What was great about that was they all liked guys from the streets . Each verse was a representation of the guy they were actually into . " During an interview with MTV News , Rowland said that with " Soldier " each member wanted to talk about their preference for a man during their solo verses , the place where he lives and his physical appearance . Beyoncé stated that as the song had a " Southern feel " and beat , they wanted to collaborate with Lil Wayne and T.I. who according to her added " rawness , realness and edge to the song " . During an interview in 2014 , Lil Wayne discussed his contribution in the song , " That set me off . Them little eight bars right there , that got me there boy . If you ask me why , it was Beyoncé . That shit was big . " " Soldier " was included on the group 's compilation albums # 1 's ( 2005 ) and Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Soldier " is a mid @-@ tempo Southern hip hop song ; Alex MacPherson of Stylus Magazine further found elements of Crunk & B music while Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times noted electropop elements in its composition . Discussing the song musically , Kitty Empire from The Observer classified it as a " ghetto anthem @-@ in @-@ waiting that echoes the Southern bent of much contemporary hip hop " . According to the sheet music published on the website Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Soldier " was composed using common time in the key of C minor with a pulsing hip hop tempo of 75 beats per minute . The vocal elements span from the low note of G3 to the high note of F5 . The song is instrumentally complete with ticking staccato synths , fractured , syncopated keyboard instruments , organ stabs , and off @-@ kilter kick drums . Pitchfork Media 's Tom Breihan felt that its beat was similar to materials by Dr. Dre . Dimitri Ehrlich from Vibe found major influence of Jay @-@ Z in " Soldier " further saying that " T.I. and Lil Wayne ... seem like stand @-@ ins for Hova " . 
 Lyrically , " Soldier " is a continuation of the previous song on Destiny Fulfilled , " Lose My Breath " . As the singers feel that their man does not fulfill them in the way they want , they tell him " I need a soldier " , further " upping their standards " . They request their man to be a " thug " , proclaiming their love for " country boys " ; their preference include a " soldier " who is " street " and " hood " . MacPherson further felt that the trio cruised the ghetto for suitable men with " Soldier " , an " ode to gangsta love " . Corey Moss of MTV felt that the song was one of the most personal moments on Destiny Fulfilled in the sense that Beyoncé 's then @-@ relatively secret relationship with rapper Jay @-@ Z was acknowledged " on record for the first time " . Moss further elaborated , " Albeit minor , her [ Beyoncé 's ] verse ( about falling for a guy from the BK , as in Jay 's Brooklyn stomping grounds ) offers a rare moment of commentary on the couple , which has thus far only been chronicled by tabloid photographers . " The song opens with T.I. rhyming lines and glorifying the profound love " between a thug and a <unk> " . As the song progresses , each member of Destiny 's Child describes their own favorite type of man , later harmonizing together for the chorus . Midway through the song , Lil Wayne 's verse contains a reference to rapper <unk> .. Williams is the last artist to sing her solo lines , which were described as " the sexiest " by Rashod <unk> of The Baltimore Sun . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from the website AllMusic described " Soldier " as one of the " hard @-@ driving dance cuts " of Destiny Fulfilled further choosing it as a highlight . Similarly , Alex MacPherson of Stylus Magazine wrote in his review that " [ The album ] shoots its load quickly , although just as effectively : ' Lose My Breath ' and ' Soldier ' are stunning , both displaying the Beyoncé trademark of creepily submissive lyrics matched with dominatrix vocals and arrangements to superb effect . " MacPherson continued praising the song 's slow " contemptuous grind " and the singers ' vocal delivery further concluding that T.I. and Wayne " get comprehensively owned " . The New York Times writer Kelefa Sanneh described the track as part of the album 's " lovable " material and went on saying , " [ it ] takes a ludicrous premise ... and turns it into sharp , <unk> electro @-@ pop " . Andy Battaglia writing for The A.V. Club felt that the song and " Cater 2 U " " make sassy end @-@ runs around notions of womanly subservience , but their best musical moments hide in tiny melismatic twirls instead of hooks " . The Guardian writer Caroline Sullivan described the track as " juddering " while BBC 's Nick Reynolds called it " good fun " . In a review of the song , Tom Breihan , an editor of Pitchfork Media , wrote that " Soldier " would have been a " perfectly acceptable album track " on The Writing 's on the Wall ( 1999 ) , but noted that its sound was different from the songs played on mainstream pop radio . Praising the trio for their vocal performances , he continued : 
 " ' Soldier ' might not carry with it the shock of the new , but it 's still a nice little single ... The women of Destiny 's Child don 't sound the slightest bit convincing singing about how they need thug boyfriends , but they wind their voices around a gorgeous hook exactly as well as they always have . T.I. and Lil Wayne stop by , not saying anything but sounding cool and tough and unflappable doing it . It 's pretty good , but don 't expect it to set your world on fire . " 
 Barbara Ellen of The Observer said the song was " of the exemplary standard " of the band 's previous albums , Survivor ( 2001 ) and The Writing 's on the Wall . Describing it as an " overt bid for street cred " , Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Sinclair felt that T.I and Lil Wayne " bring little to the party " with their contribution to the song . Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz writing for Billboard magazine felt that the group " cemented their street and chart credibility " with the song . Another reviewer from the same magazine felt that the band 's " personal transition from teen @-@ dom to womanhood " was most evident on " Soldier " and two other songs from the album . Jenny Eliscu from Rolling Stone wrote in her review , " It 's a hot track , even if the message feels affected coming from these church girls . " For the same reason , Vibe writer Dimitri Ehrlich described it as a Broadway show tune about thug life . Gil Kaufman from MTV News described the song as a " bouncy homage to thug love that featured the signature DC mix of urban grit and slick production " . Rashod <unk> writing for The Baltimore Sun gave a more mixed review for the song , writing " It is catchy , but the beat is trite , and the lyrical message is downright trifling " before adding that it glorifies a " warped " image of black masculinity which he heavily criticized . He further argued that the group " should put more thought into their lyrics " due to the background and image each member created throughout their career . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 " Soldier " won in the category for Best R & B / Soul Single by a Group , Band or Duo during the 2005 Soul Train Music Awards . At the 48th Annual Grammy Awards , the song received a nomination for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration but lost to " Numb / Encore " ( 2004 ) by Jay @-@ Z and Linkin Park . At the 23rd Annual ASCAP Pop Music Awards , " Soldier " was recognized as one of the Most Performed Songs in 2005 along with the group 's other song " Lose My Breath " . The following year it was one of the Award Winning R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs at the 2006 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Music Awards . 
 In 2013 , Lindsey Weber from Vulture put " Soldier " at number nine on her list of the top 25 songs by Destiny 's Child . Houston Chronicle 's Joey Guerra also included the song in his 2013 list of the band 's best songs . The same year it was ranked at number 64 on a list complied by Andrew Noz from Complex magazine of Lil Wayne 's 100 best songs . Similarly , Emily Exton from VH1 listed " Soldier " at the 19th position of T.I. ' s 20 best songs praising his " hot intro verse " . On the occasion of Beyoncé 's 32nd birthday , Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz from Billboard included " Soldier " at number 15 on the list of " Beyonce 's 30 Biggest Billboard Hits " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 After debuting on the chart for the week ending November 20 , 2004 , " Soldier " moved to number 41 on the US Billboard Hot 100 the following week . For the week ending December 10 , the single moved from number 14 to ten becoming the band 's tenth single to enter the top ten of the chart . It peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week ending February 12 , 2005 becoming the second single from the album to peak at that position . It fell from the top ten of the chart for the issue dated March 5 , 2005 after its position of number eight the previous week , thus spending a total of nine weeks in the first ten positions . Having spent a total of 23 weeks on the chart , " Soldier " was last seen at number 32 . The single was also successful on several other Billboard charts ; on the Hot Dance Club Songs it debuted at number 51 on the chart issue dated January 15 , 2004 and managed to peak at number one in its sixth week of charting for the issue dated February 26 , 2005 . " Soldier " further peaked at numbers three and four on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and Mainstream Top 40 charts respectively for the chart issues dated January 1 , 2005 and February 12 , 2005 . On May 18 , 2005 the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the single gold for selling 500 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . Its ringtone was further certified platinum on June 14 , 2006 for shipment of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . 
 " Soldier " was commercially successful in countries across Europe peaking within the top ten in six countries . On the Danish Singles Chart , it peaked at number five in its first week of charting on March 4 , 2005 . Having spent a total of ten weeks on that chart , of which four were in the top ten , it fell off on May 13 . In Finland , the song debuted at number seven which further became its peak position in two weeks of charting . In Switzerland , " Soldier " debuted at number 15 on February 20 , 2004 and peaked at number ten after two weeks . It spent an additional week at that position and fell off the chart after 12 weeks . In the UK , the single debuted at number four on the UK Singles Chart on the issue dated February 19 , 2005 . It gradually descended the chart , spending a total of seven weeks . On the Irish Singles Chart , the single debuted and peaked at number six on February 10 , 2005 . It also charted on other European charts , most notably at numbers 12 and 29 on the Spanish and French Singles Chart respectively . 
 In Australia , " Soldier " debuted and peaked at number three on the ARIA Singles Chart on February 20 , 2005 . It fell to numbers seven and eight respectively in the following two weeks and descended the chart for ten additional weeks before falling off on May 15 , 2005 . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) awarded the single with a gold certification in 2005 for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies in that country . " Soldier " had a similar success on the New Zealand Singles Chart where it peaked at number four on February 21 , 2005 and remained at that position for the following three weeks . It further spent the following four weeks in the top ten of the chart and fell off on May 23 , 2005 . In 2005 , the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) certified it gold for shipment of 7 @,@ 500 copies in that country . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Soldier " was filmed by Norwegian director Ray Kay and was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , becoming the band 's first clip using that technique . It marked the first time the group worked with Kay . During an interview , they praised him for shooting the scenes in a fast and convenient way , further describing the experience as " wonderful " . The video features cameo appearances by seven singers and rappers : Beyoncé 's sister Solange Knowles , Lloyd , Bow Wow , Ginuwine , Ice Cube , WC and Young Jeezy . 
 The video opens with Destiny 's Child walking between two rows of males <unk> with close @-@ up shots of each member 's face . T.I. appears rapping his part wearing a hat , sunglasses and chains . As the song progresses , the members are seen dancing along with the males in the background who also pose for the camera . During the middle of the video , the girls are seen walking with leashed dogs in their hands and Lil Wayne appears rapping his part afterwards . The camera focuses on each member during their solo part in the song as they perform a dance choreography and lip @-@ sync the lyrics . During the end of the video , as the group sings the lines " known to carry big things " , they rub the belly of Solange Knowles who was pregnant at the time of shooting . The clip ends with the girls holding the previously seen dogs in their hands . Throughout the visual , shots of three cars with different registrations are shown – a Cadillac from Georgia with the words " Da <unk> " , another car from New York City with the words " BK Style " and a third car from California with the word " Crenshaw " . 
 The music video was released on MTV on November 8 , 2004 . It is also featured on the DualDisc editions of the albums # 1 's and Destiny Fulfilled as well as on the bonus DVD of the Destiny Fulfilled Tour edition . VH1 aired the video during the program Pop @-@ Up Video on November 11 , 2011 along with trivial commentary . In 2013 it was included on the album Destiny 's Child Video Anthology which contained every music video the group had filmed during their career . Vulture 's Lindsay Weber described the clip as " camouflage @-@ heavy " . The video was nominated at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards under the category of Best Group Video but lost to Green Day 's " Boulevard of Broken Dreams " ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In late 2004 , the group performed " Soldier " with T.I. during MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) . At BET 's 106 & Park Destiny 's Child performed " Soldier " on November 15 , 2004 . At the beginning of the performance , Michelle Williams fell onstage during the group 's entrance . Williams addressed the incident during an interview in 2014 , saying , " I had no choice but to get up and act like it didn 't happen . Because of YouTube - 10 years later , at least once a week , somebody brings it to my attention . " She added that it would be the last time she discussed the incident and acknowledged that although " it lives on forever " a lot of " great things " have happened to her since then . On November 16 , 2004 another performance of the song was during the television show Good Morning America . Destiny 's Child appeared on CBS ' The Early Show on December 8 , 2004 and sang " Soldier " . The group performed the song again in early February 2005 at the British show Top of the Pops . At the 2005 NBA All @-@ Star Game on February 20 , 2005 they sang " Soldier " and " Lose My Breath " . Destiny 's Child also performed " Soldier " during the concert Rockin ' the Corps in April 2005 with the performance being featured on a DVD . 
 In 2005 , " Soldier " was added to the set list of Destiny 's Child 's final tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It . The group performed it against a backdrop of the American flag dressed in leather clothes taken from Beyoncé 's clothing line House of Deréon . The live rendition contained a sample from the song " Shout It Out " from the soundtrack of the film Drumline . Denise Sheppard writing for Rolling Stone felt that the drumline @-@ affected version performed during the concert was " for the delighted , largely female crowd " . While reviewing a concert in the UK , Adenike Adenitire of MTV News praised the group 's surprising look inspired by Mad Max noting that they proved " that you don 't need baggy jeans and a bandanna to be street " . Similarly , Barbara Ellen from The Observer felt that the look was emulating " all the Mad Max movies at once " . The song was included on the track listing of the group 's live album Destiny 's Child : Live in Atlanta ( 2006 ) chronicling a concert from the tour in that city for which T.I. and Wayne joined the band onstage performing their parts . 
 Following the group 's disbandment , both Beyoncé and Rowland included " Soldier " in the set list of their respective solo tours . The former performed it with her male background dancers during a Destiny 's Child medley at The Beyoncé Experience ( 2007 ) along with a snippet of Soulja Boy 's " Crank That ( Soulja Boy ) " ( 2007 ) . It was subsequently included on the singer 's live DVD The Beyoncé Experience Live ( 2007 ) dubbed as " Soldier Boy Crank Mix " . Rowland performed " Soldier " during her headlining concert tour Ms. Kelly Tour ( 2007 ) , on several dates during Chris Brown 's F.A.M.E. Tour ( 2011 ) where she appeared as a supporting act and during the co @-@ headlining Lights Out Tour ( 2013 ) with The @-@ Dream . She also performed " Soldier " on August 26 , 2010 during a promotional concert in New York City and at the Australian Supafest festival in April 2012 backed by male dancers . 
 = = Usage as sample = = 
 In 2005 , American rapper Nelly sampled " Soldier " for his song " Grillz " ( 2005 ) featuring Paul Wall , and Ali & Gipp from the album <unk> ( 2005 ) . Mike Schiller from PopMatters wrote that Jermaine Dupri 's production on the song was " uncharacteristically fantastic , finding a down ' n ' dirty groove in the unlikely source material of Destiny 's Child 's ' Soldier ' " . The following year " Only God " from JME 's instrumental mixtape Boy Better Know - Edition 4 : Tropical ( 2006 ) sampled the song . Hip hop artist DJ Drama used a sample of the song in " Grillz <unk> ' " featuring Lil ' Scrappy , <unk> , Diamond and Princess from his album Gangsta Grillz : The Album ( 2007 ) . " Soldier " was also sampled one more time for " Body Marked Up " ( 2009 ) by Willy <unk> , the first single from his debut album Tha Connect . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of the album Destiny Fulfilled . 
 Lead vocals : Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams 
 Vocal production : Beyoncé Knowles and Kelly Rowland 
 Recording : Jim Caruna at Sony Music Studios , New York City 
 Additional vocals : Tom Tapley and Fabian <unk> 
 Audio mixing : Dexter Simmons 
 Additional Pro Tools Editing : Rommel Nino Villanueva 
 Audio mastering : Tom Coyne 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = SM U @-@ 40 ( Austria @-@ Hungary ) = 
 SM U @-@ 40 or U @-@ XL was a U @-@ 27 class U @-@ boat or submarine for the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy . U @-@ 40 , built by the Austrian firm of Cantiere Navale Triestino ( CNT ) at the Pola Navy Yard , was launched in April 1917 and commissioned in August . 
 She had a single hull and was just over 121 feet ( 37 m ) in length . She displaced nearly 265 metric tons ( 261 long tons ) when surfaced and over 300 metric tons ( 295 long tons ) when submerged . Her two diesel engines moved her at up to 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) on the surface , while her twin electric motors propelled her at up to 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ; 8 @.@ 6 mph ) while underwater . She was armed with two bow torpedo tubes and could carry a load of up to four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and a machine gun . 
 During her service career , U @-@ 40 sank three ships and damaged two others , sending a combined tonnage of 9 @,@ 838 GRT to the bottom . U @-@ 40 was at Fiume at war 's end and was surrendered at Venice in March 1919 . She was granted to Italy as a war reparation and broken up the following year . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Austria @-@ Hungary 's U @-@ boat fleet was largely obsolete at the outbreak of World War I. The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy satisfied its most urgent needs by purchasing five Type UB I submarines that comprised the U @-@ 10 class from Germany , by raising and recommissioning the sunken French submarine Curie as U @-@ 14 , and by building four submarines of the U @-@ 20 class that were based on the 1911 Danish Havmanden class . 
 After these steps alleviated their most urgent needs , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy selected the German Type UB II design for its newest submarines in mid 1915 . The Germans were reluctant to allocate any of their wartime resources to Austro @-@ Hungarian construction , but were willing to sell plans for up to six of the UB II boats to be constructed under license in Austria @-@ Hungary . The Navy agreed to the proposal and purchased the plans from AG Weser of Bremen . 
 U @-@ 40 displaced 264 metric tons ( 260 long tons ) surfaced and 301 metric tons ( 296 long tons ) submerged . She had a single hull with saddle tanks , and was 121 feet 1 inch ( 36 @.@ 91 m ) long with a beam of 14 feet 4 inches ( 4 @.@ 37 m ) and a draft of 12 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 71 m ) . For propulsion , she had two shafts , twin diesel engines of 270 bhp ( 200 kW ) for surface running , and twin electric motors of 280 shp ( 210 kW ) for submerged travel . She was capable of 9 knots ( 16 @.@ 7 km / h ) while surfaced and 7 @.@ 5 knots ( 13 @.@ 9 km / h ) while submerged . Although there is no specific notation of a range for U @-@ 40 in Conway 's All the World 's Fighting Ships , 1906 – 1921 , the German UB II boats , upon which the U @-@ 27 class was based , had a range of over 6 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 000 km ) at 5 knots ( 9 @.@ 3 km / h ) surfaced , and 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ) submerged . U @-@ 27 @-@ class boats were designed for a crew of 23 – 24 . 
 U @-@ 40 was armed with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) bow torpedo tubes and could carry a complement of four torpedoes . She was also equipped with a 75 mm / 26 ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) deck gun and an 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun . 
 U @-@ 40 was ordered from Cantiere Navale Triestino ( CNT ) after funds for her purchase were raised and donated to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy by the <unk> <unk> . She was laid down on 8 August 1916 at the Pola Navy Yard , and launched on 21 April 1917 . 
 = = Service career = = 
 U @-@ 40 underwent diving trials on 3 July 1917 , reaching a depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) . One month later , on 4 August , the SM U @-@ 40 was commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy under the command of Linienschiffsleutnant Johann Krsnjavi . Previously in command of U @-@ 11 , Krsnjavi was a 30 @-@ year @-@ old native of <unk> ( the present @-@ day Đakovo in Croatia ) . 
 U @-@ 40 departed on her first patrol on 5 August , sailing through the Brioni islands . Two days out , the submarine came under attack by two aircraft . Bombs from the two planes damaged one of U @-@ 40 's fuel tanks but the U @-@ boat was able to continue to her Mediterranean patrol area . There , east of Malta , she unsuccessfully attacked a steamer on the 15th . Four days later — a little more than two weeks after the U @-@ boat 's commissioning — Krsnjavi and U @-@ 40 achieved their first kills . <unk> , a British steamer of 2 @,@ 422 gross register tons ( GRT ) , was transporting manganese ore , lead , and arsenic from <unk> for Middlesbrough when torpedoed by U @-@ 40 some 140 nautical miles ( 260 km ) southeast of Malta . The ship 's master and twelve other crewmen were killed in the attack . 
 Ten days later , after a rendezvous with sister boat U @-@ 32 in the Ionian Sea , U @-@ 40 damaged the collier <unk> in a torpedo attack . <unk> , carrying a load of coal from Newcastle , suffered no casualties in the attack . After successfully passing through the Otranto Barrage on 31 August , U @-@ 40 concluded her first patrol when she docked at Cattaro on 3 September . On 15 October , U @-@ 40 set out from Cattaro on her next patrol . She spent two days , 16 to 18 October , patrolling off Durazzo . Departing there , she headed for her assigned patrol area off Port Said . On 20 October , two aircraft from Corfu forced Krsnjavi to make an emergency dive , but the U @-@ boat escaped damage . On 25 October , U @-@ 40 encountered a severe storm that <unk> one of her fuel tanks . Three days later , Krsnjavi ordered the boat back to port when the gyrocompass broke . The boat made Cattaro on 1 November and underwent repairs there over the next five weeks . 
 Departing from Cattaro on her third patrol on 10 December , Krsnjavi steered the boat to her patrol area : cruising the Mediterranean between Alexandria and Malta . The first day of the new year brought U @-@ 40 's next success . On 1 January 1918 , the 5 @,@ 134 GRT Sandon Hall , a British steamer headed from Basra to London with a cargo of linseed oil and dates , was sent to the bottom 22 nautical miles ( 41 km ) north @-@ northeast of <unk> . A torpedo attack two days later on another steamer produced no result . Having exhausted her supply of torpedoes , U @-@ 40 headed back to port . On 6 January , the U @-@ boat 's deck gun was used to destroy a floating mine . The following day the boat was fired upon by three drifters of the Otranto Barrage but safely returned to Cattaro on 8 January . 
 After two month at Cattaro , Krsnjavi lead U @-@ 40 out on her fourth patrol on 5 March . The U @-@ boat came under attack on consecutive days while headed into the Mediterranean . On 9 March , two destroyers forced her to crash dive , while the following day a pair of aircraft did the same . Nine days later , U @-@ 40 torpedoed the Canadian steamer Lord Ormonde , but only damaged the 3 @,@ 914 @-@ ton ship . On 20 March , U @-@ 40 sent the Greek cargo ship <unk> M. <unk> and her load of ammunition to the bottom . U @-@ 40 launched an unsuccessful torpedo attack on a steamer in a convoy on 23 March . U @-@ 40 ended her patrol on 2 April at Cattaro . Gibson and Prendergast report on the claim of the Italian torpedo boat Ardea that she had depth charged and sunk U @-@ 40 in the Adriatic on 26 April . As Gibson and Prendergast note , U @-@ 40 did not sink that day , discrediting the report . U @-@ 40 did depart from Cattaro for Pola at the end of May to undergo repairs for the next two months . 
 U @-@ 40 departed from Pola on 5 August , but developed a leak a few days out and put in at Cattaro on 10 August . The U @-@ boat returned to Pola about two weeks later and remained there until October . While at Pola , command of U @-@ 40 passed to Linienschiffsleutnant Wladimir Pfeifer on 19 September . The 27 @-@ year @-@ old native of <unk> ( in present @-@ day Slovenia ) , was previously in command of U @-@ 17 and had , like Krsnjavi , also served a stint as commander of U @-@ 11 . On 19 October , U @-@ 40 departed Pola and eventually arrived at Fiume , where she remained through the end of the war . The U @-@ boat was taken to Venice on 23 March 1919 , where she was surrendered to the Italians as a war reparation . She was scrapped at Venice the following year . In her 15 @-@ month service career , U @-@ 40 sank three ships with a combined tonnage of 9 @,@ 838 , and damaged two others . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 * damaged but not sunk 
 = Battle of Marathon = 
 The Battle of Marathon ( Greek : Μάχη τοῦ <unk> , Machē tou <unk> ) took place in 490 BC , during the first Persian invasion of Greece . It was fought between the citizens of Athens , aided by Plataea , and a Persian force commanded by Datis and Artaphernes . The battle was the culmination of the first attempt by Persia , under King Darius I , to subjugate Greece . The Greek army decisively defeated the more numerous Persians , marking a turning point in the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . 
 The first Persian invasion was a response to Greek involvement in the Ionian Revolt , when Athens and Eretria had sent a force to support the cities of Ionia in their attempt to overthrow Persian rule . The Athenians and Eretrians had succeeded in capturing and burning Sardis , but they were then forced to retreat with heavy losses . In response to this raid , Darius swore to burn down Athens and Eretria . According to Herodotus , Darius asked for his bow , he placed an arrow upon the string and he discharged it upwards towards heaven , and as he shot into the air he said : " Zeus , grant me to take vengeance upon the Athenians ! " . Also he charged one of his servants , to say to him , every day before dinner , three times : " Master , remember the Athenians . " 
 At the time of the battle , Sparta and Athens were the two largest city states . Once the Ionian revolt was finally crushed by the Persian victory at the Battle of Lade in 494 BC , Darius began plans to subjugate Greece . In 490 BC , he sent a naval task force under Datis and Artaphernes across the Aegean , to subjugate the Cyclades , and then to make punitive attacks on Athens and Eretria . Reaching Euboea in mid @-@ summer after a successful campaign in the Aegean , the Persians proceeded to besiege and capture Eretria . The Persian force then sailed for Attica , landing in the bay near the town of Marathon . The Athenians , joined by a small force from Plataea , marched to Marathon , and succeeded in blocking the two exits from the plain of Marathon . The Athenians also sent a message asking for support to the Spartans . However , at the time the Spartans were involved in a religious festival and gave this as a reason for refusing to aid the Athenians . 
 The Greeks could not hope to face the superior Persian cavalry ; however , the location chosen was surrounded by marshes and mountains and so the cavalry was unable to join the main Persian army . Miltiades , the Greek general , ordered a general attack against the Persians . He reinforced his flanks , luring the Persians ' best fighters into his centre . The inward wheeling flanks enveloped the Persians , routing them . The Persian army broke in panic towards their ships , and large numbers were slaughtered . The defeat at Marathon marked the end of the first Persian invasion of Greece , and the Persian force retreated to Asia . Darius then began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition . After Darius died , his son Xerxes I restarted the preparations for a second invasion of Greece , which finally began in 480 BC . 
 The Battle of Marathon was a watershed in the Greco @-@ Persian wars , showing the Greeks that the Persians could be beaten ; the eventual Greek triumph in these wars can be seen to begin at Marathon . The battle also showed the Greeks that they were able to win battles without the Spartans , as they had heavily relied on Sparta previously . This win was largely due to the Athenians , and Marathon raised Greek esteem of them . Since the following two hundred years saw the rise of the Classical Greek civilization , which has been enduringly influential in western society , the Battle of Marathon is often seen as a pivotal moment in European history . 
 The battle is perhaps now more famous as the inspiration for the marathon race . Although thought to be historically inaccurate , the legend of the Greek messenger Pheidippides running to Athens with news of the victory became the inspiration for this athletic event , introduced at the 1896 Athens Olympics , and originally run between Marathon and Athens . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt , the earliest phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . However , it was also the result of the longer @-@ term interaction between the Greeks and Persians . In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly <unk> , but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples . Moreover , the Persian King Darius was a usurper , and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule . Even before the Ionian Revolt , Darius had begun to expand the empire into Europe , subjugating Thrace , and forcing Macedon to become a vassal of Persia . Attempts at further expansion into the politically fractious world of ancient Greece may have been inevitable . However , the Ionian Revolt had directly threatened the integrity of the Persian empire , and the states of mainland Greece remained a potential menace to its future stability . Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean , and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt . 
 The Ionian Revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos , a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Milesian tyrant Aristagoras . In the aftermath , Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power , but before he could do so , Aristagoras abdicated , and declared Miletus a democracy . The other Ionian cities followed suit , ejecting their Persian @-@ appointed tyrants , and declaring themselves democracies . Aristagoras then appealed to the states of mainland Greece for support , but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops . 
 The involvement of Athens in the Ionian Revolt arose from a complex set of circumstances , beginning with the establishment of the Athenian Democracy in the late 6th century BC . 
 In 510 BC , with the aid of Cleomenes I , King of Sparta , the Athenian people had expelled Hippias , the tyrant ruler of Athens . With Hippias 's father Peisistratus , the family had ruled for 36 out of the previous 50 years and fully intended to continue Hippias 's rule . Hippias fled to Sardis to the court of the Persian satrap , Artaphernes and promised control of Athens to the Persians if they were to help restore him . In the meantime , Cleomenes helped install a pro @-@ Spartan tyranny under Isagoras in Athens , in opposition to Cleisthenes , the leader of the traditionally powerful Alcmaeonidae family , who considered themselves the natural heirs to the rule of Athens . Cleisthenes , however , found himself being politically defeated by a coalition led by Isagoras and decided to change the rules of the game by appealing to the demos ( the people ) , in effect making them a new faction in the political arena . This tactic succeeded , but the Spartan King , Cleomenes I , returned at the request of Isagoras and so Cleisthenes , the Alcmaeonids and other prominent Athenian families were exiled from Athens . When Isagoras attempted to create a narrow oligarchic government , the Athenian people , in a spontaneous and unprecedented move , expelled Cleomenes and Isagoras . Cleisthenes was thus restored to Athens ( 507 BC ) , and at breakneck speed began to reform the state with the aim of securing his position . The result was not actually a democracy or a real civic state , but he enabled the development of a fully democratic government , which would emerge in the next generation as the demos realized its power . The new @-@ found freedom and self @-@ governance of the Athenians meant that they were thereafter exceptionally hostile to the return of the tyranny of Hippias , or any form of outside subjugation , by Sparta , Persia , or anyone else . 
 Cleomenes was not pleased with events , and marched on Athens with the Spartan army . Cleomenes 's attempts to restore Isagoras to Athens ended in a debacle , but fearing the worst , the Athenians had by this point already sent an embassy to Artaphernes in Sardis , to request aid from the Persian empire . Artaphernes requested that the Athenians give him an ' earth and water ' , a traditional token of submission , to which the Athenian ambassadors acquiesced . They were , however , severely censured for this when they returned to Athens . At some later point Cleomenes instigated a plot to restore Hippias to the rule of Athens . This failed and Hippias again fled to Sardis and tried to persuade the Persians to subjugate Athens . The Athenians dispatched ambassadors to Artaphernes to dissuade him from taking action , but Artaphernes merely instructed the Athenians to take Hippias back as tyrant . The Athenians indignantly declined , and instead resolved to open war with Persia . Having thus become the enemy of Persia , Athens was already in a position to support the Ionian cities when they began their revolt . The fact that the Ionian democracies were inspired by the example the Athenians had set no doubt further persuaded the Athenians to support the Ionian Revolt , especially since the cities of Ionia were originally Athenian colonies . 
 The Athenians and Eretrians sent a task force of 25 triremes to Asia Minor to aid the revolt . Whilst there , the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes , marching to Sardis and burning the lower city . This was , however , as much as the Greeks achieved , and they were then repelled and pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen , losing many men in the process . Despite the fact that their actions were ultimately fruitless , the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius 's lasting enmity , and he vowed to punish both cities . The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade ( 494 BC ) all but ended the Ionian Revolt , and by 493 BC , the last hold @-@ outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet . The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire 's border to the islands of the eastern Aegean and the Propontis , which had not been part of the Persian dominions before . The pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves ; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece and to punish Athens and Eretria . 
 In 492 BC , after the Ionian Revolt had finally been crushed , Darius dispatched an expedition to Greece under the command of his son @-@ in @-@ law , Mardonius . Mardonius re @-@ conquered Thrace and compelled Alexander I of Macedon to make Macedon a client kingdom to Persia , before the wrecking of his fleet brought a premature end to the campaign . However , in 490 BC , following the successes of the previous campaign , Darius decided to send a maritime expedition led by Artaphernes , ( son of the satrap to whom Hippias had fled ) and Datis , a Median admiral . Mardonius had been injured in the prior campaign and had fallen out of favor . The expedition was intended to bring the Cyclades into the Persian empire , to punish Naxos ( which had resisted a Persian assault in 499 BC ) and then to head to Greece to force Eretria and Athens to submit to Darius or be destroyed . After island @-@ hopping across the Aegean , including successfully attacking Naxos , the Persian task force arrived off Euboea in mid summer . The Persians then proceeded to besiege , capture and burn Eretria . They then headed south down the coast of Attica , en route to complete the final objective of the campaign — punish Athens . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The Persians sailed down the coast of Attica , and landed at the bay of Marathon , roughly 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Athens , on the advice of the exiled Athenian tyrant Hippias ( who had accompanied the expedition ) . Under the guidance of Miltiades , the Athenian general with the greatest experience of fighting the Persians , the Athenian army marched quickly to block the two exits from the plain of Marathon , and prevent the Persians moving inland . At the same time , Athens 's greatest runner , Pheidippides ( or Philippides in some accounts ) had been sent to Sparta to request that the Spartan army march to the aid of Athens . Pheidippides arrived during the festival of Carneia , a sacrosanct period of peace , and was informed that the Spartan army could not march to war until the full moon rose ; Athens could not expect reinforcement for at least ten days . The Athenians would have to hold out at Marathon for the time being , although they were reinforced by the full muster of 1 @,@ 000 hoplites from the small city of Plataea ; a gesture which did much to steady the nerves of the Athenians , and won unending Athenian gratitude to Plataea . 
 For approximately five days the armies therefore confronted each other across the plain of Marathon in stalemate . The flanks of the Athenian camp were protected either by a grove of trees , or an <unk> of stakes ( depending on the exact reading ) . Since every day brought the arrival of the Spartans closer , the delay worked in favor of the Athenians . There were ten Athenian strategoi ( generals ) at Marathon , elected by each of the ten tribes that the Athenians were divided into ; Miltiades was one of these . In addition , in overall charge , was the War @-@ Archon ( polemarch ) , Callimachus , who had been elected by the whole citizen body . Herodotus suggests that command rotated between the strategoi , each taking in turn a day to command the army . He further suggests that each strategos , on his day in command , instead deferred to Miltiades . In Herodotus 's account , Miltiades is keen to attack the Persians ( despite knowing that the Spartans are coming to aid the Athenians ) , but strangely , chooses to wait until his actual day of command to attack . This passage is undoubtedly problematic ; the Athenians had little to gain by attacking before the Spartans arrived , and there is no real evidence of this rotating generalship . There does , however , seem to have been a delay between the Athenian arrival at Marathon , and the battle ; Herodotus , who evidently believed that Miltiades was eager to attack , may have made a mistake whilst seeking to explain this delay . 
 As is discussed below , the reason for the delay was probably simply that neither the Athenians nor the Persians were willing to risk battle initially . This then raises the question of why the battle occurred when it did . Herodotus explicitly tells us that the Greeks attacked the Persians ( and the other sources confirm this ) , but it is not clear why they did this before the arrival of the Spartans . There are two main theories to explain this . 
 The first theory is that the Persian cavalry left Marathon for an unspecified reason , and that the Greeks moved to take advantage of this by attacking . This theory is based on the absence of any mention of cavalry in Herodotus ' account of the battle , and an entry in the Suda dictionary . The entry <unk> <unk> ( " without cavalry " ) is explained thus : 
 The cavalry left . When Datis surrendered and was ready for retreat , the Ionians climbed the trees and gave the Athenians the signal that the cavalry had left . And when Miltiades realized that , he attacked and thus won . From there comes the above @-@ mentioned quote , which is used when someone breaks ranks before battle . 
 There are many variations of this theory , but perhaps the most prevalent is that the cavalry was re @-@ embarked on the ships , and was to be sent by sea to attack ( undefended ) Athens in the rear , whilst the rest of the Persians pinned down the Athenian army at Marathon . This theory therefore utilises Herodotus ' suggestion that after Marathon , the Persian army re @-@ embarked and tried to sail around Cape Sounion to attack Athens directly ; however , according to the theory this attempt would have occurred before the battle ( and indeed have triggered the battle ) . 
 The second theory is simply that the battle occurred because the Persians finally moved to attack the Athenians . Although this theory has the Persians moving to the strategic offensive , this can be reconciled with the traditional account of the Athenians attacking the Persians by assuming that , seeing the Persians advancing , the Athenians took the tactical offensive , and attacked them . Obviously , it cannot be firmly established which theory ( if either ) is correct . However , both theories imply that there was some kind of Persian activity which occurred on or about the fifth day which ultimately triggered the battle . It is also possible that both theories are correct : when the Persians sent the cavalry by ship to attack Athens , they simultaneously sent their infantry to attack at Marathon , triggering the Greek counterattack . 
 = = = Date of the battle = = = 
 Herodotus mentions for several events a date in the lunisolar calendar , of which each Greek city @-@ state used a variant . Astronomical computation allows us to derive an absolute date in the proleptic Julian calendar which is much used by historians as the chronological frame . Philipp August <unk> in 1855 concluded that the battle took place on September 12 , 490 BC in the Julian calendar , and this is the conventionally accepted date . However , this depends on when exactly the Spartans held their festival and it is possible that the Spartan calendar was one month ahead of that of Athens . In that case the battle took place on August 12 , 490 BC . 
 = = Opposing forces = = 
 = = = Athenians = = = 
 Herodotus does not give a figure for the size of the Athenian army . However , Cornelius Nepos , Pausanias and Plutarch all give the figure of 9 @,@ 000 Athenians and 1 @,@ 000 Plataeans ; while Justin suggests that there were 10 @,@ 000 Athenians and 1 @,@ 000 Plataeans . These numbers are highly comparable to the number of troops Herodotus says that the Athenians and Plataeans sent to the Battle of Plataea 11 years later . Pausanias noticed on the monument to the battle the names of former slaves who were freed in exchange for military services . Modern historians generally accept these numbers as reasonable . 
 = = = Persians = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes . Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army , only saying that they were a " large infantry that was well packed " . Among ancient sources , the poet Simonides , another near @-@ contemporary , says the campaign force numbered 200 @,@ 000 ; while a later writer , the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200 @,@ 000 infantry and 10 @,@ 000 cavalry , of which only 100 @,@ 000 fought in the battle , while the rest were loaded into the fleet that was rounding Cape Sounion ; Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300 @,@ 000 , as does the Suda dictionary . Plato and Lysias give 500 @,@ 000 ; and Justinus 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Modern historians have proposed wide ranging numbers for the infantry , from 20 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 with a consensus of perhaps 25 @,@ 000 ; estimates for the cavalry are in the range of 1 @,@ 000 . 
 However , the lower end of that range contradicts the statement by Herodotus of a " large infantry that was well packed " . The 25 @,@ 000 fighting force by no means could be neither " large " nor intimidating to the eyes of the 11 @,@ 000 Greeks especially in the scenario ( see below ) that half of the Persian force circumnavigated cape Sounion to take Athens by surprise , leaving thus on the field a force almost equal numerically with Miltiades ' army . Probably the 25 @,@ 000 is the army that remained after the split of the Persian army , raising the size of the initial landing army in 50 @,@ 000 combatants . 
 To this force furthermore some adjustments must be made : 
 a ) In the hypothesis ( less likely ) that the 600 ships of Herodotus represent the entire Persian naval force ( both the combat and the troop @-@ transporting fleets ) and each ship carried a total crew of 230 @-@ 240 ( considering the 30 additional marines that Herodotus mentions ) we have a minimum of 138 @,@ 000 to 144 @,@ 000 personnel . It is unlikely that the Persians gathered such a fleet to just ferry across the Aegean only 50 @,@ 000 combatants , especially after making an effort to pack 30 marines more to each vessel . 
 In order to curry supplies for 2 months and ferry their 1 @,@ 800 strong cavalry , the Persians should have had in addition 200 supply ships and 70 horse @-@ transports ( see below ) ; thus a 870 @-@ strong fleet . 
 On the composition of the fleet in Marathon the following examples should be also considered : 
 -The Persian fleet that invaded Greece 10 years later ( 480 BC ) had 1207 triremes and 3000 transports . 
 -The Athenian fleet on the Sicilian expedition ~ 60 years later ( 415 BC ) had 40 % transports . 
 -The Punic fleet that campaigned against the Sicilian Greeks ~ 80 years later ( 406 BC ) had 120 triremes and 1000 transports ( siege of <unk> , siege of <unk> ) and again 400 triremes and 600 transports in 396 BC ( siege of Syracuse ) . 
 b ) In all the aforementioned cases the transport fleet were at least equal in size - if not larger - than the combat fleet . In the following ( more likely ) hypothesis the transport fleet will be the 2 / 3 of the 600 @-@ strong combat fleet representing thus the 30 % of the total ( 400 transports over 1 @,@ 370 ships ) : 
 Here is to be noted that the ships ' oarsmen and sailors were armed each with a light shield , a short sword and a helmet . Leather armors and missile weapons were also frequent . They were serving as light infantry and skirmishers when the ships were to be captured and - in rare occasions ( i.e. Battle of Naupactus 429 BC ) - in the main battlefield . 
 Because ancient historians are usually referring to the combat fleet of a naval force when they don 't mention the troop @-@ transports separately ( as in this case ) a possible breakdown of the Persian fleet in Marathon could be the following : 
 <unk> combat ships ( <unk> or open triremes ) . Represented the main fighting vessel in naval battles . They were called " open " because they had their upper deck almost completely removed in order to lighten and gain speed and maneuverability . They were carrying usually 30 @-@ 40 marines ( as in the Ionian Greek fleets and the Persian fleet ) but in some rare cases these force could be further more reduced in just 14 marines ( Athenian triremes during the city 's heyday of naval power ) to additionally increase speed . The triremes in Marathon were packed with 30 additional marines , for the purposes of the campaign . Thus : 
 Crew : 170 oarsmen , 15 sailors and officers , 60 marines . 
 ( <unk> ships : 109 @,@ 200 crew ; 36 @,@ 000 marines ) 
 -400 troop @-@ transports ( <unk> or closed triremes ) . Specially modified triremes where the two lower rows of oarsmen were removed and an upper deck was added in order to house more land troops . With less oarsmen and additional weight , those triremes were slow and heavy ; thus totally useless in naval combat and in need of escort . 
 Crew : 70 oarsmen , 15 sailors and officers , 160 land troops . 
 ( <unk> ships : 34 @,@ 000 crew ; 64 @,@ 000 land troops ) 
 <unk> cavalry @-@ transports ( modified <unk> triremes ) . 
 Crew : 70 oarsmen , 15 sailors and officers , 25 horses with their riders and complete gear . 
 ( <unk> ships : 5 @,@ 950 crew ; 1 @,@ 750 cavalry ) 
 -300 supply ships . They were normal merchant ships that were carrying supplies ( mostly grain ) during wars . A 250 @,@ 000 @-@ strong army needs 250 tons of supplies daily ( 5 ships ) . 
 Crew : 22 oarsmen , 10 sailors , 50 tons of supplies ( grain ) . 
 ( <unk> ships : 6 @,@ 600 oarsmen ; 3 @,@ 000 sailors ; 15 @,@ 000 tons of supplies , enough for 2 months ) 
 TOTAL : 257 @,@ 500 - > 155 @,@ 750 oarsmen and sailors ; 100 @,@ 000 soldiers and marines ; 1 @,@ 750 cavalry ; 1 @,@ 370 ships . Thus the account of the near @-@ contemporary Simonides ( 200 @,@ 000 men ) must be closest to the truth . The Greeks however fought half of that force in Marathon , on September 490 BC ( ~ 50 @,@ 000 foot @-@ soldiers and marines ) . 
 NOTE : The Persian fleet campaigned during the long Greek summer ( 5 months ) . They didn 't need to have more than 60 days of supplies because they could replenish their scores of provision in various ways ( through trade , pillaging or conquest ) . The fall of Eretria a few weeks earlier , in late summer just after the collecting of the crops , should have provided plenty of supplies to the Persians . The island of Euboea ( on which Eretria stands ) was at the time the main grain supplier for Athens . Furthermore , the fear of being low on supplies by the end of the campaigning season , drove the Persians to attempt the surprise attack on Athens by circumnavigating cape Sounion with half of their army . 
 = = Strategic and tactical considerations = = 
 From a strategic point of view , the Athenians had some disadvantages at Marathon . In order to face the Persians in battle , the Athenians had to summon all available hoplites ; and even then they were still probably outnumbered at least 2 to 1 . Furthermore , raising such a large army had denuded Athens of defenders , and thus any secondary attack in the Athenian rear would cut the army off from the city ; and any direct attack on the city could not be defended against . Still further , defeat at Marathon would mean the complete defeat of Athens , since no other Athenian army existed . The Athenian strategy was therefore to keep the Persian army pinned down at Marathon , blocking both exits from the plain , and thus preventing themselves from being outmaneuvered . However , these disadvantages were balanced by some advantages . The Athenians initially had no need to seek battle , since they had managed to confine the Persians to the plain of Marathon . Furthermore , time worked in their favour , as every day brought the arrival of the Spartans closer . Having everything to lose by attacking , and much to gain by waiting , the Athenians remained on the defensive in the run up to the battle . Tactically , hoplites were vulnerable to attacks by cavalry , and since the Persians had substantial numbers of cavalry , this made any offensive maneuver by the Athenians even more of a risk , and thus reinforced the defensive strategy of the Athenians . 
 The Persian strategy , on the other hand , was probably principally determined by tactical considerations . The Persian infantry was evidently lightly armoured , and no match for hoplites in a head @-@ on confrontation ( as would be demonstrated at the later battles of Thermopylae and Plataea . ) Since the Athenians seem to have taken up a strong defensive position at Marathon , the Persian hesitance was probably a reluctance to attack the Athenians head @-@ on . 
 Whatever event eventually triggered the battle , it obviously altered the strategic or tactical balance sufficiently to induce the Athenians to attack the Persians . If the first theory is correct ( see above ) , then the absence of cavalry removed the main Athenian tactical disadvantage , and the threat of being outflanked made it imperative to attack . Conversely , if the second theory is correct , then the Athenians were merely reacting to the Persians attacking them . Since the Persian force obviously contained a high proportion of missile troops , a static defensive position would have made little sense for the Athenians ; the strength of the hoplite was in the melee , and the sooner that could be brought about , the better , from the Athenian point of view . If the second theory is correct , this raises the further question of why the Persians , having hesitated for several days , then attacked . There may have been several strategic reasons for this ; perhaps they were aware ( or suspected ) that the Athenians were expecting reinforcements . Alternatively , since they may have felt the need to force some kind of victory — they could hardly remain at Marathon indefinitely . 
 = = Battle = = 
 The distance between the two armies at the point of battle had narrowed to " a distance not less than 8 stadia " or about 1 @,@ 500 meters . Miltiades ordered the two tribes that were forming the center of the Greek formation , the <unk> tribe led by Themistocles and the Antiochis tribe led by Aristides , to be arranged in the depth of four ranks while the rest of the tribes at their flanks were in ranks of eight . Some modern commentators have suggested this was a deliberate ploy to encourage a double envelopment of the Persian centre . However , this suggests a level of training that the Greeks were thought not to possess . There is little evidence for any such tactical thinking in Greek battles until Leuctra in 371 BC . It is therefore possible that this arrangement was made , perhaps at the last moment , so that the Athenian line was as long as the Persian line , and would not therefore be outflanked . 
 When the Athenian line was ready , according to one source , the simple signal to advance was given by Miltiades : " At them " . Herodotus implies the Athenians ran the whole distance to the Persian lines , a feat under the weight of hoplite armory generally thought to be physically impossible . More likely , they marched until they reached the limit of the archers ' effectiveness , the " beaten zone " ( roughly 200 meters ) , and then broke into a run towards their enemy . Another possibility is that they ran up to the 200 meter @-@ mark in broken ranks , and then reformed for the march into battle from there . Herodotus suggests that this was the first time a Greek army ran into battle in this way ; this was probably because it was the first time that a Greek army had faced an enemy composed primarily of missile troops . All this was evidently much to the surprise of the Persians ; " ... in their minds they charged the Athenians with madness which must be fatal , seeing that they were few and yet were pressing forwards at a run , having neither cavalry nor archers " . Indeed , based on their previous experience of the Greeks , the Persians might be excused for this ; Herodotus tells us that the Athenians at Marathon were " first to endure looking at Median dress and men wearing it , for up until then just hearing the name of the Medes caused the Hellenes to panic " . Passing through the hail of arrows launched by the Persian army , protected for the most part by their armour , the Greek line finally collided with the enemy army . Holland provides an evocative description : 
 The enemy directly in their path ... realised to their horror that [ the Athenians ] , far from providing the easy pickings for their bowmen , as they had first imagined , were not going to be halted ... The impact was devastating . The Athenians had honed their style of fighting in combat with other phalanxes , wooden shields smashing against wooden shields , iron spear tips clattering against breastplates of bronze ... in those first terrible seconds of collision , there was nothing but a pulverizing crash of metal into flesh and bone ; then the rolling of the Athenian tide over men wearing , at most , quilted <unk> for protection , and armed , perhaps , with nothing more than bows or slings . The hoplites ' ash spears , rather than shivering ... could instead stab and stab again , and those of the enemy who avoided their fearful jabbing might easily be crushed to death beneath the sheer weight of the advancing men of bronze . 
 The Athenian wings quickly routed the inferior Persian levies on the flanks , before turning inwards to surround the Persian centre , which had been more successful against the thin Greek centre . The battle ended when the Persian centre then broke in panic towards their ships , pursued by the Greeks . Some , unaware of the local terrain , ran towards the swamps where unknown numbers drowned . The Athenians pursued the Persians back to their ships , and managed to capture seven ships , though the majority were able to launch successfully . Herodotus recounts the story that <unk> , brother of the playwright Aeschylus , who was also among the fighters , charged into the sea , grabbed one Persian trireme , and started pulling it towards shore . A member of the crew saw him , cut off his hand , and <unk> died . 
 Herodotus records that 6 @,@ 400 Persian bodies were counted on the battlefield , and it is unknown how many more perished in the swamps . The Athenians lost 192 men and the Plataeans 11 . Among the dead were the war archon Callimachus and the general <unk> . 
 = = Conclusions = = 
 There are several explanations of the Greek success . Most scholars believe that the Greeks had better equipment and used superior tactics . According to Herodotus , the Greeks were better equipped ; however , they did not use bronze armour at this time , but that of leather or linen . The phalanx formation proved successful , because the hoplites had a long tradition in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , whereas the Persian soldiers were accustomed to a very different kind of conflict . At Marathon , the Athenians thinned their centre in order to make their army equal in length to the Persian army , not as a result of a tactical planning . It seems that the Persian centre tried to return , realizing that their wings had broken , and was caught in the flanks by the victorious Greek wings . Lazenby believes that the ultimate reason for the Greek success was the courage the Greeks displayed : 
 Marathon was won because ordinary , amateur soldiers found the courage to break into a trot when the arrows begun to fall , instead of grinding to a halt , and when surprisingly the enemy wings fled , not to take the easy way out and follow them , but to stop and somehow come to the aid of the hard pressured centre . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the immediate aftermath of the battle , Herodotus says that the Persian fleet sailed around Cape Sounion to attack Athens directly . As has been discussed above , some modern historians place this attempt just before the battle . Either way , the Athenians evidently realised that their city was still under threat , and marched as quickly as possible back to Athens . The two tribes which had been in the centre of the Athenian line stayed to guard the battlefield under the command of Aristides . The Athenians arrived in time to prevent the Persians from securing a landing , and seeing that the opportunity was lost , the Persians turned about and returned to Asia . Connected with this episode , Herodotus recounts a rumour that this manoeuver by the Persians had been planned in conjunction with the Alcmaeonids , the prominent Athenian aristocratic family , and that a " shield @-@ signal " had been given after the battle . Although many interpretations of this have been offered , it is impossible to tell whether this was true , and if so , what exactly the signal meant . On the next day , the Spartan army arrived at Marathon , having covered the 220 kilometers ( 140 mi ) in only three days . The Spartans toured the battlefield at Marathon , and agreed that the Athenians had won a great victory . 
 The dead of Marathon were buried on the battlefield . On the tomb of the Athenians this epigram composed by Simonides was written : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Fighting at the forefront of the Greeks , the Athenians at Marathon 
 laid low the army of the gilded Medes . 
 In the meanwhile , Darius began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition . Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt , and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece . The epic second Persian invasion of Greece finally began in 480 BC , and the Persians met with initial success at the battles of Thermopylae and Artemisium . However , defeat at the Battle of Salamis would be the turning point in the campaign , and the next year the expedition was ended by the decisive Greek victory at the Battle of Plataea . 
 = = Significance = = 
 The defeat at Marathon barely touched the vast resources of the Persian empire , yet for the Greeks it was an enormously significant victory . It was the first time the Greeks had beaten the Persians , proving that the Persians were not invincible , and that resistance , rather than subjugation , was possible . 
 The battle was a defining moment for the young Athenian democracy , showing what might be achieved through unity and self @-@ belief ; indeed , the battle effectively marks the start of a " golden age " for Athens . This was also applicable to Greece as a whole ; " their victory endowed the Greeks with a faith in their destiny that was to endure for three centuries , during which western culture was born " . John Stuart Mill 's famous opinion was that " the Battle of Marathon , even as an event in British history , is more important than the Battle of Hastings " . It seems that the Athenian playwright Aeschylus considered his participation at Marathon to be his greatest achievement in life ( rather than his plays ) since on his gravestone there was the following epigram : 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> · 
 <unk> δ ’ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 καὶ <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 This tomb the dust of Aeschylus doth hide , 
 <unk> 's son and fruitful Gela 's pride . 
 How tried his valor , Marathon may tell , 
 And long @-@ haired Medes , who knew it all too well . 
 Militarily , a major lesson for the Greeks was the potential of the hoplite phalanx . This style had developed during internecine warfare amongst the Greeks ; since each city @-@ state fought in the same way , the advantages and disadvantages of the hoplite phalanx had not been obvious . Marathon was the first time a phalanx faced more lightly armed troops , and revealed how effective the hoplites could be in battle . The phalanx formation was still vulnerable to cavalry ( the cause of much caution by the Greek forces at the Battle of Plataea ) , but used in the right circumstances , it was now shown to be a potentially devastating weapon . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Legends associated with the battle = = = 
 The most famous legend associated with Marathon is that of the runner Pheidippides / Philippides bringing news to Athens of the battle , which is described below . 
 Pheidippides ' run to Sparta to bring aid has other legends associated with it . Herodotus mentions that Pheidippides was visited by the god Pan on his way to Sparta ( or perhaps on his return journey ) . Pan asked why the Athenians did not honor him and the awed Pheidippides promised that they would do so from then on . The god apparently felt that the promise would be kept , so he appeared in battle and at the crucial moment he instilled the Persians with his own brand of fear , the mindless , frenzied fear that bore his name : " panic " . After the battle , a sacred precinct was established for Pan in a grotto on the north slope of the Acropolis , and a sacrifice was annually offered . 
 Similarly , after the victory the festival of the <unk> <unk> ( " sacrifice to the <unk> " ) was held at <unk> near Athens , in honor of Artemis <unk> ( " Artemis the Huntress " ) . This was in fulfillment of a vow made by the city before the battle , to offer in sacrifice a number of goats equal to that of the Persians slain in the conflict . The number was so great , it was decided to offer 500 goats yearly until the number was filled . Xenophon notes that at his time , 90 years after the battle , goats were still offered yearly . 
 Plutarch mentions that the Athenians saw the phantom of King Theseus , the mythical hero of Athens , leading the army in full battle gear in the charge against the Persians , and indeed he was depicted in the mural of the Stoa Poikile fighting for the Athenians , along with the twelve Olympian gods and other heroes . Pausanias also tells us that : 
 They say too that there chanced to be present in the battle a man of rustic appearance and dress . Having slaughtered many of the foreigners with a plough he was seen no more after the engagement . When the Athenians made enquiries at the oracle , the god merely ordered them to honor <unk> ( " he of the Plough @-@ tail " ) as a hero . 
 Another tale from the conflict is of the dog of Marathon . Aelian relates that one hoplite brought his dog to the Athenian encampment . The dog followed his master to battle and attacked the Persians at his master 's side . He also informs us that this dog is depicted in the mural of the Stoa Poikile . 
 = = = Marathon run = = = 
 According to Herodotus , an Athenian runner named Pheidippides was sent to run from Athens to Sparta to ask for assistance before the battle . He ran a distance of over 225 kilometers ( 140 miles ) , arriving in Sparta the day after he left . Then , following the battle , the Athenian army marched the 40 kilometers ( 25 miles ) or so back to Athens at a very high pace ( considering the quantity of armour , and the fatigue after the battle ) , in order to head off the Persian force sailing around Cape Sounion . They arrived back in the late afternoon , in time to see the Persian ships turn away from Athens , thus completing the Athenian victory . 
 Later , in popular imagination , these two events became confused with each other , leading to a legendary but inaccurate version of events . This myth has Pheidippides running from Marathon to Athens after the battle , to announce the Greek victory with the word " <unk> ! " ( Attic : <unk> ; we 've won ! ) , whereupon he promptly died of exhaustion . Most accounts incorrectly attribute this story to Herodotus ; actually , the story first appears in Plutarch 's On the Glory of Athens in the 1st century AD , who quotes from Heracleides of Pontus 's lost work , giving the runner 's name as either <unk> of <unk> or <unk> . Lucian of Samosata ( 2nd century AD ) gives the same story but names the runner Philippides ( not Pheidippides ) . It should be noted that in some medieval codices of Herodotus the name of the runner between Athens and Sparta before the battle is given as Philippides and in a few modern editions this name is preferred . 
 When the idea of a modern Olympics became a reality at the end of the 19th century , the initiators and organizers were looking for a great popularizing event , recalling the ancient glory of Greece . The idea of organizing a ' marathon race ' came from Michel Bréal , who wanted the event to feature in the first modern Olympic Games in 1896 in Athens . This idea was heavily supported by Pierre de Coubertin , the founder of the modern Olympics , as well as the Greeks . This would echo the legendary version of events , with the competitors running from Marathon to Athens . So popular was this event that it quickly caught on , becoming a fixture at the Olympic games , with major cities staging their own annual events . The distance eventually became fixed at 26 miles 385 yards , or 42 @.@ 195 km , though for the first years it was variable , being around 25 miles ( 40 km ) — the approximate distance from Marathon to Athens . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 = = = Modern studies = = = 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 Fink , Dennis L. The Battle of Marathon in Scholarship : Research , Theories and Controversies since 1850 ( McFarland , 2014 ) . 240 pp. online review 
 = Glenrothes = 
 Glenrothes ( listen ; / <unk> / , glen @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ; Scottish Gaelic : Gleann <unk> ) is a town situated in the heart of Fife , in east @-@ central Scotland . It is located approximately 30 miles ( 48 km ) from both Edinburgh , which lies to the south and Dundee to the north . The town had a population of 39 @,@ 277 in 2011 as recorded by the census , making it the third largest settlement in Fife and the 18th most populous settlement in Scotland . The name Glenrothes comes from its historical link with the Earl of Rothes who owned much of the land upon which the new town has been built ; " Glen " ( Scottish for valley ) was added to the name to avoid confusion with Rothes in Moray and in recognition that the town lies in a river valley . The motto of Glenrothes is " Ex terra vis " , meaning " Out of the earth , strength " , which dates back to the founding of the town . 
 Planned in the late 1940s as one of Scotland 's first post @-@ second world war new towns its original purpose was to house miners who were to work at a newly established coal mine , the Rothes Colliery . Following the failure of the mine the town developed as an important industrial centre in Scotland 's Silicon Glen between 1961 and 2000 with several major electronics and hi @-@ tech companies setting up facilities in the town . The Glenrothes Development Corporation ( GDC ) , a non @-@ departmental public body , was established to develop , manage and promote the new town . The GDC supported by the local authority oversaw the governance of Glenrothes until the wind @-@ up of the GDC in 1995 , after which all responsibility was transferred to Fife Council . 
 Glenrothes is the administrative capital of Fife containing both the Fife Council and Police Scotland Fife Division headquarters . Home to Fife 's main concentration of specialist manufacturing and engineering companies , several organisations have their global headquarters based in Glenrothes . Public services and service industries are also important to the town 's economy . Major employers include Bosch Rexroth ( hydraulics manufacturing ) , Brand Rex ( fibre optics manufacturing ) , Fife College ( education ) and Raytheon ( defence and electronics ) . Glenrothes is unique in Fife as the majority of the town 's centre is contained indoors , within Fife 's largest indoor shopping centre , the Kingdom Shopping Centre . 
 The town has won multiple horticultural awards in the " Beautiful Scotland " and " Britain in Bloom " contests for the quality of its parks and landscaping . It has numerous outdoor sculptures and artworks , a result of the appointment of town artists in the early development of the town . Public facilities include a regional sports and leisure centre , two golf courses , major parks , a civic centre and theatre and a college campus . The A92 trunk road provides the principal access to the town passing through Glenrothes and connecting it to the wider Scottish motorway and trunk road network . A major bus station is located in the town centre providing regional and local bus services to surrounding settlements . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The name Rothes comes from the association with the north @-@ east Scotland Earl of Rothes , family name Leslie . The Leslie family historically owned much of the land upon which Glenrothes has been built and their family name gave the adjacent village of Leslie its name . Glen ( from the Scottish Gaelic word ' <unk> ' meaning valley ) was added to prevent confusion with Rothes in Moray and to reflect the location of the town within the Leven valley . 
 The different areas ( precincts ) of Glenrothes have been named after the hamlets already established ( e.g. Cadham , Woodside ) , the farms which once occupied the land ( e.g. <unk> , Collydean , <unk> ) or historical country houses in the area ( e.g. Balbirnie , Balgeddie , Leslie Parks ) . 
 = = = Glenrothes new town = = = 
 Glenrothes was designated in 1948 under the New Towns ( Scotland ) Act 1946 as Scotland 's second post @-@ war new town . The case for developing the new town was partially driven by a national energy strategy created by the British Government following the Second World War . The concept was further advanced in a report produced in 1946 by Sir Frank Mears to the Central and South @-@ East Scotland Planning Committee . This made the case for a new town in the Leslie @-@ Markinch area to support growth in the coal mining industry in Fife . 
 The planning , development , management and promotion of the new town was the responsibility of the Glenrothes Development Corporation ( GDC ) , a <unk> appointed by the Secretary of State for Scotland . The corporation board consisted of eight members including a chairman and deputy chairman . The first meeting of the GDC was in Auchmuty House , provided by Tullis Russell on 20 June 1949 . 
 The original plan was to build a new settlement for a population of 32 @,@ 000 to 35 @,@ 000 people . The land which Glenrothes now occupies was largely agricultural and once contained a number of small rural communities and the hamlets of Cadham and Woodside which were established to house workers at local paper mills . Originally proposals for the new town would have centred it on Markinch ; however the village 's infrastructure was deemed unable to withstand the substantial growth required to realise a new town and there was considerable local opposition to the proposal . Leslie and Thornton were also considered as possible locations , again meeting local opposition , and eventually an area of 5 @,@ 320 acres ( 2 @,@ 153 ha ) between all of these villages was zoned for the new town 's development . Much of the historical Aytoun , Balfour , Balgonie and Rothes estates were included in Glenrothes ' assigned area along with the historical country houses Balbirnie House , Balgeddie House and Leslie House . 
 Prior to the development of Glenrothes the main industries in the area were papermaking , coal mining and farming . Tullis Russell was the largest paper manufacturer in the area and operated from its site for over 200 years . Other paper manufacturers established operations at the <unk> and <unk> Mills at Leslie to the west of the town , and Dixons Mill at Markinch in the east . The location of the mills was strategic to capitalise on the natural energy provided by the River Leven . 
 The Rothes Colliery , the new coal mine associated with the town 's development , was built on land to the west of Thornton , an established village south of Glenrothes . The mine which was officially opened by Queen Elizabeth II in 1957 was promoted as being a key driver in the economic regeneration of central Fife . However , un @-@ <unk> flooding and geological problems in the area combined with a lessening demand for coal nationally had a significant impact on the viability of the mine which resulted in its eventual closure in 1965 . Ironically , miners who had worked in older deep pits in the area had fore @-@ warned against the development of the Rothes Pit for this very reason . 
 The coal mine 's closure almost resulted in further development of Glenrothes being stopped . However shortly following the closure Central Government decided to change the town 's role by appointing Glenrothes as one of the economic focal points for Central Scotland as part of a National Plan for economic growth and development . The Glenrothes Development Corporation were successful in attracting a plethora of light industries and modern electronics factories to the town as a consequence . The first big overseas electronic investor was <unk> Instruments in 1959 followed by Hughes Industries in the early 1960s . A number of other important companies followed establishing Glenrothes as a major industrial hub in Scotland 's Silicon Glen . During the middle of the 1970s , the town also became the headquarters of Fife Regional Council ; effectively the county town of Fife , taking over the role from Cupar . 
 Unlike the other post @-@ war Scottish new towns ; Cumbernauld , East Kilbride , Irvine or Livingston , Glenrothes was not originally to be a Glasgow overspill new town , although it did later take this role . It was however populated in the early 1950s , in part , by families moving from the declining coalfield areas of Scotland . 
 Major industrial estates were developed to the south of Glenrothes , largely due to the proximity to the proposed East Fife Regional Road ( A92 ) which was developed in 1989 giving dual carriageway access to the main central Scotland road network . The Silicon Glen era peaked in the 1990s with Canon developing their first UK manufacturing plant at Westwood Park in Glenrothes in 1992 . ADC Telecommunications , a major American electronics company , established a base at Bankhead in early 2000 with the promise of a substantial number of jobs . By 2004 both companies had closed their Glenrothes operations with the promised jobs growth never materialising to any substantial level . The electronics industrial sector in Glenrothes and most of central Scotland was dependent upon an inward investment strategy that led to almost 43 % of employment in foreign @-@ owned plants which were susceptible to changes in global economic markets . Around the start of the 21st century , a decline in major electronics manufacturing in Scotland impacted on the town 's economy and as a result the industrial base of the town was forced to diversify for the second time in it 's short history . 
 by 1995 the GDC left a lasting legacy on the town by overseeing the development of 15 @,@ 378 houses , 5 @,@ 174 @,@ 125 square feet ( 480 @,@ 692 m2 ) of industrial floorspace , 735 @,@ 476 square feet ( 68 @,@ 328 m2 ) of office floorspace and 576 @,@ 977 square feet ( 53 @,@ 603 m2 ) of shopping floorspace . Since the winding up of the GDC Glenrothes continues to serve as Fife 's principal administrative centre and serves a wider sub @-@ regional area as a major centre for services and employment . 
 In 2008 Canadian artist and researcher Sylvia Grace Borda chose to holiday for a week in Glenrothes to explore , as was perceived , " an area considered by many Scots as uninteresting and unworthy of documentation " . She was curious to explore the town as if she were a late @-@ 1960s photographer of common places following on from a similar study of East Kilbride new town . The outcome was the production of a series of images which the artist believes contradict how some Scots would ' see ' Glenrothes , and reinforce the observation that it often takes a visitor to see what others take for granted . Just as in real time , it is too easy to rush by the everyday . The work sought to position itself so the everyday environment can cause the viewer pause and to regard the commonplace as extraordinary . 
 Glenrothes gained national publicity in 2009 by winning a Carbuncle Award following an unofficial contest operated by Urban Realm and <unk> Group which was set up to criticise the quality of built environments in Scotland . The judges of the contest awarded Glenrothes the category of the most dismal place in Scotland for its " depressed and investment starved town centre " . This generated mixed views from locals and built environment professions alike . 
 By contrast in 2010 the town has won awards for being the " Best Kept Large Town " and the most " Clean , sustainable and beautiful community " in Scotland in the Beautiful Scotland competition and was the winner in the " large town " category in the 2011 Royal Horticultural Society Britain in Bloom competition . The town continued its horticultural success by achieving further Gold awards in the 2013 and 2014 UK finals . 
 In 2011 Historic Scotland completed an assessment of the town art in Glenrothes , ultimately awarding listed building status to a number of artworks scattered throughout the town . The organisation also gave positive recognition to Glenrothes ' significant role in helping to create the idea of art being a key factor in creating a sense of place . 
 Glenrothes ' place and importance in the history and development of Scotland has been enshrined in the Great Tapestry of Scotland , which was unveiled in 2013 in the Scottish Parliament . The Glenrothes panel shows various pieces of the town 's public artworks , along with visual references to its important industrial heritage associated originally with coal mining and later as a major centre for " Silicon Glen " industries . 
 = = Governance = = 
 In the early years of the creation of the new town the Glenrothes Development Corporation ( GDC ) with input from the local authority , then Fife County Council , oversaw the governance of the new town . In the early 1990s the then Conservative UK Government established a wind @-@ up order for all of the UK 's new town development corporations . Responsibilities for the assets , management and governance of all of the new towns were to be transferred to either private sector companies or to the local authorities or other government organisations . The GDC was finally wound up in 1995 after which responsibility for Glenrothes was largely transferred to Fife Council with some assets such as the Kingdom Shopping Centre , industrial and office units sold off to private sector companies . 
 Glenrothes is represented by a number of tiers of elected government . North Glenrothes Community Council and <unk> , Stenton and <unk> Community Council form the lowest tier of governance whose statutory role is to communicate local opinion to local and central government . Glenrothes now lies within one of the 32 council areas of Scotland . Fife Council is the executive , deliberative and legislative body responsible for local governance in the region and has its main headquarters based in Glenrothes . Council meetings take place in Fife House ( formerly known as Glenrothes House ) in the town centre . The west wing of the building was built by the Glenrothes Development Corporation ( GDC ) as their offices in 1969 , which was later used as the headquarters of Fife Regional Council . Since the last Scottish election in 2012 , Fife Council is governed by a minority Labour Party , claiming a total of 35 seats , with the support of Conservative Party and Independent Councillors . 
 Glenrothes forms part of the county constituency of Glenrothes , electing one Member of Parliament ( MP ) to the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom by the first past the post system . Peter Grant of the Scottish National Party is the MP for Glenrothes after being elected in the 2015 general election . For the purposes of the Scottish Parliament , Glenrothes forms part of the Mid Fife and Glenrothes constituency following the 2011 Scottish elections . This newly formed constituency replaces the former Central Fife constituency taking in the Leven , Largo and <unk> ward and excluding the Buckhaven , Methil and Wemyss Villages ward . Each constituency elects one Member of the Scottish Parliament ( MSP ) by the first past the post system of election , and the region elects seven additional members to produce a form of proportional representation . Following the 2016 Scottish Elections the constituency is represented by Jenny Gilruth MSP of the Scottish National Party who replaces now retired Tricia Marwick former Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Glenrothes lies in mid @-@ Fife between the agricultural " Howe of Fife " in the north and east and Fife 's industrial heartland in the south and west . The neighbouring settlements are Coaltown of Balgonie , Leslie , Markinch and Thornton . The boundaries of the town are virtually indistinguishable between its neighbouring small towns and villages forming a contiguous urban area . The villages of Kinglassie , Milton of Balgonie and Star of Markinch are located slightly further away and are physically separated from Glenrothes by farmland . Kirkcaldy , a traditional industrial centre is the next nearest large town and lies approximately 7 miles ( 11 km ) to the south of the town . Glenrothes is also located equidistant from two of Fife 's other principal settlements , Dunfermline and St Andrews , at 19 miles ( 31 km ) and 21 miles ( 34 km ) away . Two of Scotland 's major cities , Edinburgh and Dundee , are located almost equidistantly from Glenrothes at 32 miles ( 51 km ) and 27 miles ( 43 km ) away , respectively . The smaller Scottish city of Perth is located 23 miles ( 37 km ) to the northwest . 
 The northern parts of the settlement lie upland on the southern fringes of the Lomond Hills Regional Park . The central parts of the town extend between the southern edge of the River Leven valley ; a substantial green space which passes east west through the town , and the Warout Ridge . Southern parts of Glenrothes are largely industrial and are situated on land which gently slopes south towards the Lochty Burn and the village of Thornton . The height above mean sea level at the town centre is 300 feet ( 91 m ) . Temperatures in Glenrothes , like the rest of Scotland , are relatively moderate given its northern latitude . Fife is a peninsula , located between the Firth of Tay in the north , the Firth of Forth in the south and the North Sea in the east . Summers are relatively cool and the warming of the water over the summer results in warm winters . Average annual temperatures in Glenrothes range from a maximum of 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) to a minimum of 9 ° C ( 48 ° F ) . 
 A linked network of semi @-@ natural landscape areas throughout the town allow for a mix of biodiversity with different flora and fauna and wildlife habitats . Areas of ancient woodland are found in Riverside Park and Balbirnie Park , both of which are also designated historic gardens and designed landscapes . Balbirnie Park is renowned for having a large collection of rhododendron species . Protected wildlife species found in the Glenrothes area include red squirrels , water voles and various types of bats . Landscape areas also act as natural drainage systems , reducing the likelihood of flooding in the built up areas of the town , with rainwater flows channelled to the River Leven , or to the Lochty Burn . Landscape planning has also ensured that Glenrothes ' road network , with particular focuses on the town 's many roundabouts , provides green networks throughout the town . 
 = = = Built environment and urban form = = = 
 Careful consideration was given to the form and infrastructure of the town , focusing on the creation of individual suburban type neighbourhoods ( precincts ) , each with their own architectural identity . Engineers , planners , builders and architects were tasked with creating not only good quality mass @-@ produced housing but green spaces , tree planting , wildlife corridors and soft and hard landscaping . This was seen as an equally important part of the process , helping to provide a sense of place and connection to the land that a New Town was felt to need in order to become a successful place where people would want to live and raise children . Separating industry as far as possible from housing areas in planned industrial estates was a key element of early plans . This was at the time seen as an important change from the " chaotic " , congested and polluted industrial towns and cities of the previous centuries where cramped unsanitary housing and dirty industries were built in close proximity to one another . The vision for Glenrothes was to provide a clean , healthy and safe environment for the town 's residents . 
 The settlement has been purposely planned using a series of masterplans . Development of Glenrothes started in Woodside in the east and progressed westwards . The first town masterplan was implemented as far as South Parks and <unk> housing precincts . Early residential precincts were based on Ebenezer Howard 's Garden City philosophy , using relatively tried and tested principles of town planning and architecture which is reflected in their housing styles and layouts . The first town masterplan sub @-@ divided the town 's designated area into self @-@ contained residential precincts with their own primary schools , local shops and community facilities . 
 A second town masterplan was developed in the late 1960s following Glenrothes ' change of role and was to accommodate an increased population target of 50 @,@ 000 @-@ 70 @,@ 000 . New areas of land in the north and south of the designated area were brought into production for new development . The road network was upgraded to deal with projected increases in car ownership and new housing estates were developed to the west , then to the south and finally to the north of the designated area . 
 The housing precincts of the 1960s and 1970s , developed under the second masterplan , departed slightly from the garden city ideals instead adopting <unk> principles ; separating as far as practical footpaths from roads . The housing precincts were designed to better accommodate increases in car ownership which increased significantly from the 1960s onwards . The townscape changed in this period with a mixture of higher densities , more contemporary architectural styles and new development layouts . Terraced housing and flats were predominantly developed with the fronts of houses designed to face onto public footpaths and open spaces . Car parking was kept either to the rear of properties or in parking bays located nearby in efforts to reduce the likelihood of road accidents occurring . Housing precincts from the 1980s onwards were largely developed by the private sector with the majority of this housing developed in low density suburban cul @-@ de @-@ sacs . Landscaping around the town included the blending of housing into the northern hillside through the use of structural planting and tree belts . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 The Glenrothes area 's geology is predominantly made up by glacial deposits with the subsoil largely consisting of boulder clay with a band of sand and gravel in the area to the north of the River Leven . The river valley largely comprises alluvium deposits and there are also igneous intrusions of olivine dolerite throughout the area . Productive coal measures were largely recorded in the southern parts of Glenrothes , approximately south of the line of the <unk> Kinglassie road . These coal measures form part of the East Fife coalfield and prior to 1962 the deposits there were to be worked by the Rothes Colliery , until it was found that there were severe issues with water penetration and subsequent flooding . Smaller limestone coal outcrops that had been historically worked were recorded around the Balbirnie and Cadham / Balfarg areas with the land that is now <unk> Park found particularly to be heavily undermined . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In 1950 the population in the Glenrothes designated area was approximately 1 @,@ 000 people who were located in the hamlets of Woodside and Cadham and in the numerous farm <unk> that were spread throughout the area . Population growth in the early phases of the town was described as being slow due to the dependence on the growth of work places at the Rothes Colliery . In 1960 the town population was shown to have increased to 12 @,@ 499 people rising to 28 @,@ 098 by 1969 . The town experienced its greatest levels of population growth between 1964 and 1969 with an average inward migration level of 1 @,@ 900 persons per annum . In 1981 Glenrothes ' population was estimated to have risen to 35 @,@ 000 and at the time the GDC was disbanded in 1995 it was estimated that the town 's population stood at just over 40 @,@ 000 people . 
 The 2001 census recorded the population of Glenrothes at 38 @,@ 679 representing 11 % of Fife 's total population . The 2011 census recorded a 1 @.@ 5 % population rise to 39 @,@ 277 . The total population in the wider Glenrothes area was estimated at 50 @,@ 701 based on 2013 mid @-@ year estimates from the National Records of Scotland . The number of households in Glenrothes in 2011 was recorded at 16 @,@ 910 ; 64 @.@ 5 % of which were owned . The age groups from 30 @-@ 44 year olds ( 20 @.@ 2 % ) and 45 @-@ 59 year olds ( 21 @.@ 3 % ) form the largest portion of the population . 16 @-@ 29 year olds made up 16 @.@ 6 % of the town 's population . 
 A study undertaken by Heriot @-@ Watt University in 2008 showed a local average gross weekly wage of £ 450 in the Glenrothes area , against a Fife average of £ 449 and a Scottish average of £ 468 . Wages are reflective of the type of jobs available locally , including higher than average employment in manufacturing and the public sector . The working age population of the town in 2011 was 29 @,@ 079 . The percentage of population economically active in Glenrothes was recorded at 68 @.@ 2 % in 2011 . 
 The number of Jobseekers Allowance ( JSA ) claimants at January 2016 in the Glenrothes area was 722 representing a 2 @.@ 2 % rate . This compares with 825 JSA claimants in January 2015 representing an annual drop of 103 <unk> . Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation ( SIMD ) figures indicate that Auchmuty , Cadham , Collydean , Macedonia and <unk> areas in Glenrothes fall within the 10 @-@ 15 % banding of deprived communities in Scotland . Scottish Index of Multiple Deprivation figures in 2012 records the percentage of local population that is employment deprived at 14 @.@ 5 % against a Fife and Scottish Average of 12 @.@ 8 % . The percentage of the local population that is income deprived in 2012 was recorded at 15 @.@ 7 % against a Fife and Scottish average of 13 @.@ 4 % . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Glenrothes area 's economy predominantly comprises manufacturing and engineering industries , health and public sector jobs and service sector jobs . The number of people employed in Glenrothes is around 24 @,@ 700 ; approximately 15 % of the 163 @,@ 000 jobs in Fife . Glenrothes is recognised for having the main concentration of specialist manufacturing and engineering companies in Fife . There are a total of 46 " Top 200 Fife Businesses " located in Glenrothes and there was a recorded 532 @,@ 100 square metres ( 5 @,@ 727 @,@ 477 sq ft ) of industrial and business <unk> within the town 's employment areas following a survey carried out in 2014 with the largest concentrations of premises in the south of the town and in around the town centre . Major employment areas in Glenrothes include : Bankhead , Eastfield , Pentland Park , Queensway , Southfield , Viewfield , Westwood Park and Whitehill . 
 = = = Manufacturing and engineering industries = = = 
 In 2011 manufacturing accounted for almost 15 % of employment in Glenrothes . A number of high tech industrial companies are located in the town largely specialised in electronics manufacturing . These are what remain of the clustering of Silicon Glen operations in the area which has gradually reduced and consolidated since the peak in the late 1990s . Remaining companies specialised in this sector include Brand Rex which specialises in the development of fibre optic cabling , <unk> which develops <unk> for the microelectronics sector , Raytheon which specialises in electronics for the defence industry , <unk> which provides technology repair and test services and <unk> which produces Micro Electric Mechanical Systems ( MEMS ) . Other major companies which have established a base in Glenrothes include Bosch Rexroth ( hydraulics manufacturing ) and <unk> ( precision engineering ) . Indian beverages group <unk> entered into a joint venture with John Fergus & Co Ltd to establish a new Scotch whisky distillery and bonded warehouse facility in Glenrothes . The new distillery , named <unk> , focuses on exporting to markets in India , Africa and the Far East . It opened in May 2016 creating 15 new jobs as well as generating new exports worth a predicted £ 3 @.@ 6 million to Scotland over the next three years . It is located at Whitehill Industrial Estate adjacent to Fife Airport . 
 = = = Public sector = = = 
 A number of public service agencies and authorities are based in Glenrothes contributing to the town 's administrative centre function . Police Scotland has established its Fife Division headquarters in Glenrothes at Viewfield . HM Revenue and Customs , Kingdom Housing Association and the Scottish Environment Protection Agency ( SEPA ) also have offices in Glenrothes at Pentland Park ; a business park within the town . Fife College is also a key employer in Glenrothes with a large campus based at Stenton Road adjacent to Viewfield Industrial Estate . Fife Council is a major employer in the locality with its prominent local authority headquarters building located in Glenrothes town centre . Many of the other council departments are contained in a number of the town centre 's office blocks and a major depot and office facility is located at Bankhead . 
 = = = Retail and service sectors = = = 
 Retail jobs accounted for approximately 11 % of the total number of jobs in the local economy in 2011 . The majority of shopping , retail services and administrative facilities in Glenrothes are concentrated in the town centre ( central business district ) . The Kingdom Centre provides the main shopping element of the town centre containing approximately 120 shop units and is anchored by a Dunnes department store . Community and commercial leisure facilities within the shopping centre include the Rothes Halls complex ; the town 's theatre , library , civic and exhibition centre . A cinema , restaurant , pub and bingo hall complex are located adjacent to the shopping centre at Carrick Gate / Church Street . Ten @-@ pin bowling facilities will also be available in the town centre with an announcement to refurbish and reopen the former Fraser bowling alley facility at Albany Gate . 
 The town centre has expanded beyond its original boundaries into the adjacent Queensway employment area . A number of commercial operators including the town 's major supermarkets and a large <unk> complex are located in Queensway . The town 's largest retail employers are Asda and Morrisons , which both trade from large stores at Queensway . A retail park has also been constructed at the Saltire Centre , approximately half of a mile ( 1 km ) to the southwest of the town centre . 
 Other types of service industries also add to the town 's economic mix , with large single employers being in the ' accommodation and food services ' sector which accounted for around 4 % of the town 's total jobs . Balbirnie House Hotel and Balgeddie House Hotel are the largest hotel operators in the immediate area . The Golden Acorn Hotel and pub is located at the eastern end of the town centre on North Street . Finance and professional employed represent 15 @.@ 6 % of the total number of jobs in the town . 
 = = = Regeneration and future development = = = 
