 Warrior had a two @-@ cylinder trunk steam engine , made by John Penn and Sons , driving a single propeller using steam provided by 10 rectangular boilers . The engine produced a total of 5 @,@ 772 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 304 kW ) during Warrior 's sea trials on 1 April 1868 giving a speed of 14 @.@ 08 knots ( 26 @.@ 08 km / h ; 16 @.@ 20 mph ) under steam alone . The ship carried 853 long tons ( 867 t ) of coal , enough to steam 2 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 900 km ; 2 @,@ 400 mi ) at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) . 
 The ironclad was ship rigged and had a sail area of 48 @,@ 400 square feet ( 4 @,@ 497 m2 ) . Warrior reached 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) under sail alone , 2 knots ( 3 @.@ 7 km / h ; 2 @.@ 3 mph ) faster than her sister ship Black Prince . She had the largest hoisting propeller ever made ; it weighed 26 long tons ( 26 t ) , and 600 men could raise it into the ship to reduce drag while under sail . To further reduce drag , both her funnels were telescopic and could be lowered . Under sail and steam together , the ship once reached 17 @.@ 5 knots ( 32 @.@ 4 km / h ; 20 @.@ 1 mph ) against the tide while running from Portsmouth to Plymouth . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Warrior was ordered on 11 May 1859 from Thames Ironworks and Shipbuilding Company in Blackwall , London . The ship was laid down some time after 6 June 1859 on the West Ham side of Bow Creek when the P & O ocean liner Seine was launched , and the slipway was reinforced to support Warrior 's weight . Full @-@ scale production of the ship 's iron began in August , and the construction probably began in mid @-@ August . Indecision by the Admiralty and frequent design changes caused many delays and nearly drove her builders bankrupt before a grant of £ 50 @,@ 000 was awarded to keep them solvent . Her launching on 29 December 1860 was during the coldest winter for 50 years . She was frozen to her slipway and required the use of hydraulic rams , additional tugs , and dockworkers running from side to side on the upper deck to rock her free . Warrior was commissioned in August 1861 to conduct her sea trials ; she was completed on 24 October for £ 377 @,@ 292 , almost twice the cost of a contemporary wooden ship of the line . Between March and June 1862 , defects exposed during her trials were rectified , and damage repaired . Changes included the fitting of a lighter bowsprit and a shorter jib boom , along with the provision of extra heads amidships . 
 The ship was initially assigned to the Channel Squadron under the command of Captain Arthur Cochrane . In March 1863 , Warrior escorted the royal yacht that brought Princess Alexandra of Denmark to Britain to marry the Prince of Wales . The princess appreciated the conduct of the ship 's crew , and requested Admiral Sir Michael Seymour to convey that " she was much pleased " to the ship . Cochrane had the message engraved on a brass plate and fitted to the ship 's wheel . Her descendant , Princess Alexandra of Kent , is now patron of the HMS Warrior 1860 Trust . 
 In mid @-@ 1863 the Channel Fleet toured British ports for 12 weeks ; the ship received 300 @,@ 000 visitors , including as many as 13 @,@ 000 a day in port . 
 Warrior began a refit in November 1864 during which the Armstrong guns , which had not proved successful in use , were removed and her armament was upgraded to the latest rifled muzzle @-@ loading guns . She was recommissioned in 1867 , under the command of Captain Julian Corbett , to relieve her sister as the guardship at Queenstown in Ireland , but instead both ships participated in the Fleet Review held on 17 July in honour of the visits made by the Khedive of Egypt and the Sultan of Turkey to Britain . After the review , the Admiralty paid off the ship on 24 July ; the following day Warrior was recommissioned with Captain Henry Boys in command . After working up at Spithead , she sailed to join the Channel Squadron on 24 September . At the end of the year she was deployed to Osborne Bay to guard Queen Victoria at Osborne House . The Fenian Rising was under way , and there was intelligence suggesting that the Queen might be in danger from Irish nationalists . While Warrior was performing this duty , she received an informal visit from the Queen . The ship was part of a squadron that escorted the royal yacht HMY Victoria and Albert II to Dublin in April 1868 for an official visit by the Prince of Wales , the future King Edward VII . In August , while cruising to Scotland , Warrior collided with HMS Royal Oak , losing her figurehead and jib boom and smashing Royal Oak 's cutter . Boys was court @-@ martialled and acquitted over the incident . 
 From 4 to 28 July 1868 , Warrior , with Black Prince and the wooden paddle frigate HMS Terrible , towed a specially built floating drydock , large enough to accommodate ironclads , 2 @,@ 700 nmi ( 5 @,@ 000 km ; 3 @,@ 100 mi ) across the Atlantic from Madeira to Bermuda . Upon her return to England in late August , Boys was relieved by Captain Frederick Stirling . After a refit to clean her hull and replace the figurehead lost in the collision , Warrior rejoined the Channel Squadron . On 2 March 1870 , Captain Henry Glyn assumed command of the ship . While returning from a joint cruise with the Mediterranean Fleet , the ship was present when HMS Captain was lost during a severe storm on 7 September . Further cruises followed , including trips to Madeira and Gibraltar . Warrior narrowly missed colliding with HMS Agincourt when she was following her out of Gibraltar and Agincourt grounded on Pearl Rock . 
 The rapid evolution of warship design , for which Warrior was partly responsible , meant that she started to become obsolete only ten years after she had been launched . In 1871 the Royal Navy commissioned its first mastless capital ship , HMS Devastation . In the absence of masts , the main armament could move from the broadside and traverse more freely from a higher position . In the same year , Warrior began a refit that lasted until 1875 ; it added a poop deck and steam capstan , a shorter bowsprit , and replacement boilers . In April 1875 , the ship was recommissioned , and assigned to the First Reserve , where she served as a guardship at Portland . In this role , she went on annual summer cruises to various ports . During the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 78 , she was mobilised due to concerns that the victorious Russians might be about to attack Constantinople , forcing Great Britain to intervene , but nothing transpired and Warrior cruised to Bantry Bay instead . In April 1881 she was transferred to the Clyde District , where she served as guardship until 31 May 1883 . Two of her masts were discovered to be rotten that month and with no replacements available , the ship was decommissioned and the masts removed . 
 Warrior was reclassified as a " screw battle ship , third class , armoured " in 1887 and again in May 1892 as a first @-@ class armoured cruiser , although no changes were made to her . She was considered for modernization as late as 1894 , but this was rejected as uneconomical after at least one new boiler was installed . The ship was used as a storage hulk from May 1901 to July 1902 . In preparation for her service as a depot ship for a flotilla of destroyers , the ship had her engines and boilers removed and part of her upper deck roofed over . Warrior served in this role from 1902 to 31 March 1904 , and was then assigned to the Portsmouth @-@ based Vernon , the Royal Navy 's torpedo @-@ training school . Her name was changed to Vernon III that month and six new Belleville boilers and four electric generators were installed so that she could supply steam and electricity to the neighbouring hulks that made up Vernon . Most of the upper deck was roofed over to form classrooms for radio training , and her fore and mizzen masts were reinstalled . In October 1923 , the school was transferred to a newly built shore installation , rendering Warrior and her companion hulks redundant ; Warrior resumed her name on 1 October and the Royal Navy declared her redundant six months later . 
 The mass scrapping of obsolete ships after World War I had caused a downturn in demand for scrap iron by the time the Navy decided to sell off Warrior on 2 April 1925 . There was no commercial interest in scrapping the old ship , and she remained at Portsmouth for another four years . She was modified into a mooring jetty beginning on 22 October 1927 . This entailed the removal of all of her equipment and masts other than her boilers and generators , and the installation of two diesel @-@ driven emergency pumps . The space under the poop was converted into accommodation for a <unk> and his family . The hulk was towed to her new home , Pembroke Dock in Wales , on 13 March 1929 where she served as a floating oil jetty . For the next fifty years , the ship lay just offshore from an oil depot at Llanion Cove . The Navy covered the ship 's upper deck with a thick layer of concrete during one of her maintenance dockings before World War II . In the war , she served as a base ship for coastal minesweepers and , on 27 August 1942 , was renamed as Oil Fuel Hulk C77 to release her name for use by a light aircraft carrier , HMS Warrior , then under construction . She refuelled 5 @,@ 000 ships during her service at Llanion Cove . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Restoring Warrior was discussed in the early 1960s , but did not develop into a serious project . In 1967 , the Greater London Council proposed to restore the ship as an attraction in London , but Warrior was still required in Pembroke by the Royal Navy and the scheme went no further . In 1968 the Duke of Edinburgh chaired a meeting that discussed preserving and restoring Warrior and other historic vessels , and a year later The Maritime Trust was established to save the decrepit ironclad and other historic ships . The Maritime Trust and a major supporter , the Manifold Trust led by the Conservative MP John Smith , maintained an interest in Warrior . In 1976 the Royal Navy announced that the Llanion Oil Depot would close in 1978 , and the Manifold Trust began to seek funds to restore her . With the promise of financial support for restoration , the Royal Navy donated the ship to the trust in 1979 . The Ship 's Preservation Trust acquired ownership of the ship in 1983 ; it became the Warrior Preservation Trust in 1985 . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 In August 1979 Warrior began her 800 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) journey to her temporary home in the Coal Dock at Hartlepool for restoration as a museum ship . She arrived on 2 September 1979 and began the £ 9 million restoration project , largely funded by the Manifold Trust . The Maritime Trust decided to restore Warrior to her 1862 condition with the aim that no further major work would be necessary for the next 20 years . The first two years of the restoration were generally devoted to safely removing material added after her first commission , like the poop deck and the 200 long tons ( 200 t ) of concrete decking . Intensive research was done to find detailed descriptions of the ship and her equipment as of 1862 to make the restoration as accurate as economically feasible . Sources included surviving official records , and the papers of those who had served on the ship during her active service . Bolt @-@ holes and ridges in the paint gave clues to the location of some fittings and fixtures , and the sketch plans of Midshipman Henry Murray , found in Captain Cochrane 's Letter Book , showed the locations of the armament , moveable fittings and stores . 
 Work on carving a replacement for Warrior 's figurehead , which was destroyed in the 1960s , began in 1981 using photographs of the original as a guide . The 12 @-@ foot ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) work @-@ in @-@ progress was displayed at the 1982 London International Boat Show with the carvers still at work ; it dominated coverage of the show . Before it was finished in mid @-@ 1983 , the figurehead appeared on the BBC children 's television programme Blue Peter . For much of 1984 it was displayed at the Main Gate of the Portsmouth Royal Dockyard . It was mounted on the ship on 6 February 1985 . 
 Replacement of the ship 's 86 @-@ foot @-@ 3 @-@ inch ( 26 @.@ 3 m ) -tall , 42 @-@ inch ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) -wide lower masts in wood was not feasible , so they were made of steel tube cut and welded to shape , with a ladder inside each mast to allow access to the platforms on the masts . The three masts and the bowsprit were stepped in place between September 1984 and February 1985 . Warrior 's engines , boilers and auxiliary machinery were considered too expensive to rebuild , so replicas were built from sheet steel with a few components made from cast iron to duplicate the look of the real equipment . The replica engines can rotate slowly , using electrical power , to allow visitors to imagine how they might have looked in operation . 
 The Woolwich Rotunda Artillery Museum and the States of Jersey lent examples of Warrior 's original primary guns , the muzzle @-@ loading 68 @-@ pounder and the breech @-@ loading 110 @-@ pounder , which were used as moulds for fibreglass replicas . The Armstrong guns were built with working breeches ; they , and the muzzles of all the guns , had to be sealed to prevent people leaving rubbish in them . Little information was available on the wooden gun carriages despite extensive research , and a prototype had to be developed and tested before they could be built . 
 = = = Museum ship = = = 
 In 1985 a new berth beside Portsmouth Harbour railway station was dredged , and a new jetty constructed in preparation for Warrior 's arrival in Portsmouth . The ship left Hartlepool on 12 June 1987 under the command of Captain Collin Allen and was towed 390 miles ( 630 km ) to the Solent in four days . When she entered Portsmouth Harbour she was welcomed by thousands of people lining the town walls and shore , and by over 90 boats and ships . She opened as a museum on 27 July . The restored ironclad was renamed HMS Warrior ( 1860 ) to avoid confusion with the Northwood Headquarters , commissioned as HMS Warrior in 1963 , which was at the time the operational headquarters of the Royal Navy . 
 Warrior is part of the National Historic Fleet , and is berthed in the Portsmouth Historic Dockyard complex , which is also the home of Nelson 's flagship HMS Victory and the Tudor warship Mary Rose . In 1995 she received over 280 @,@ 000 visitors , and the whole dockyard receives between 400 @,@ 000 and 500 @,@ 000 visitors annually . Warrior is still managed by the Warrior Preservation Trust and is used as a venue for weddings and functions to generate funds for her maintenance . The trust also has a collection of material related to the ship and an archive ; the latter is not yet open to the public . 
 = Francis Marbury = 
 Francis Marbury ( sometimes spelled <unk> ) ( 1555 – 1611 ) was a Cambridge @-@ educated English cleric , schoolmaster and playwright . He is best known for being the father of Anne Hutchinson , considered the most famous ( or infamous ) English woman in colonial America . 
 Born in 1555 , Marbury was the son of William Marbury , a Member of Parliament from Lincolnshire , and Agnes Lenton . Young Marbury attended Christ 's College , Cambridge , but is not known to have graduated , though he was ordained as a deacon in the Church of England in January 1578 . He was given a ministry position in Northamptonshire and almost immediately came into conflict with the bishop . Taking a position commonly used by Puritans , he criticised the church leadership for staffing the parish churches with poorly trained clergy and for tolerating poorly trained bishops . After serving two short jail terms , he was ordered not to return to Northamptonshire , but disregarded the mandate and was subsequently brought before the Bishop of London , John Aylmer , for trial in November 1578 . During the examination , Aylmer called Marbury an ass , an idiot , and a fool , and sentenced him to Marshalsea prison for his impudence . 
 After two years in prison Marbury was considered sufficiently reformed to preach again , and was sent to Alford in Lincolnshire , close to his ancestral home . Here he married and began a family , but again felt emboldened to speak out against the church leadership , and was put under house arrest . Following a time without employment , he became desperate , writing letters to prominent officials , and was eventually allowed to resume preaching . Making good on his promise to curb his tongue , he preached uneventfully in Alford , and with a growing prominence was rewarded with a position in London in 1605 . He was given a second parish in 1608 , which was exchanged for another closer to home a year later . He died unexpectedly in 1611 at the age of 55 . With two wives Marbury had 18 children , three of whom matriculated at Brasenose College , Oxford , and one of whom , Anne , became the famous puritan dissident in the Massachusetts Bay Colony who had a leading role in the colony 's Antinomian Controversy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Francis Marbury , born in London and baptised there on 27 October 1555 , was one of six children of William Marbury ( 1524 – 1581 ) , and the youngest of three sons . His father , who possibly attended Pembroke College , Cambridge in 1544 , was a lawyer in Lincolnshire , a Member of Parliament and a member of the Middle Temple , where he was admitted " specially ... at the instance of Mr. Francis <unk> " in May 1551 , and still active until 1573 . His mother was Agnes , the daughter of John Lenton of Old <unk> , Staffordshire according to historian John Champlin , but genealogist Meredith <unk> suggests that Lenton was from <unk> in Northamptonshire , which is much closer to where the Marburys lived . Marbury was likely schooled in London , perhaps at St Paul 's , and he became well grounded in Latin as well as learning some Greek . Though he was born and raised in London , his family maintained close ties with Lincolnshire . His older brother , Edward , was knighted there in 1603 , and died in 1605 as the High Sheriff of Lincoln . 
 Marbury matriculated at Christ 's College , Cambridge in 1571 , but is not known to have graduated . From Cambridge he went to Northamptonshire where he was ordained deacon by Edmund <unk> , Bishop of Peterborough , on 7 January 1578 . Though he was young when he became a deacon , he was not ordained as priest until decades later , in 1605 . While Marbury was of the Anglican Church , he had decidedly Puritan views . Not all English subjects thought that the queen had gone far enough to cleanse the Anglican Church of Catholic rites and governance , or to ensure that its ministers were capable of saving souls through powerful preaching . The most vocal of these critics were the Puritans , and Marbury was among the most radical of the non @-@ conforming Puritans , the Presbyterians . These more extreme non @-@ conformists wanted to " abolish all the pomp and ceremony of the Church of England and remodel its government according to what they thought was the Bible 's simple , consensual pattern . " To do this , they would eliminate bishops appointed by the monarchs , and introduce sincere Christians to choose the church 's elders ( or governors ) . The church leadership would then consist of two ministers , one a teacher in charge of doctrine , and the other a pastor in charge of people 's souls , and also include a ruling lay leader . 
 = = 1578 trial = = 
 As a young man Marbury was considered to be a " hothead " and felt strongly that the clergy should be well educated , and clashed with his superiors on this issue . He spent time preaching at Northampton , but soon came into conflict with the bishop 's chancellor , Dr. James Ellis , who was on a mission to suppress any nonconforming clergy . After two short imprisonments , Marbury was directed to leave Northampton and not return . He disregarded this order , and was then brought to trial in the consistory of St. Paul 's in London before the high commission on 5 November 1578 . Here he was examined by the Bishop of London , John Aylmer , and by Sir Owen Hopton , Dr. Lewis , and Archdeacon John Mullins . Marbury made a transcript of this trial from memory and used it to educate and amuse his children , he being the hero , and the Bishop being portrayed as somewhat of a buffoon , and the transcript can be found in Benjamin Brook 's study of notable Puritans . Historian Lennam finds nothing in this transcript that is either " improbable or inconsistent with the Bishop 's testy reputation . " 
 In the trial , Aylmer began the accusations of Marbury , saying " you had rattled the Bishop of Peterborough , " to which Marbury accused the bishop of placing poorly trained ministers in the parish churches , adding that the bishops were poorly supervised . Aylmer then retorted , " The Bishop of Peterborough was never more overseen in his life than when he admitted thee to be a preacher in Northampton . " Marbury warned that for every soul damned by the lack of adequate preaching , the guilt " is on the bishops ' hands . " To this Aylmer replied , " Thou <unk> upon thee to be a preacher , but there is nothing in thee . Thou art a very ass , an idiot , and a fool . " 
 As the examination continued , Aylmer considered the ability of the Anglican Church to put trained ministers in every parish . He barked , " This fellow would have a preacher in every parish church ! " to which Marbury replied , " so would St. Paul . " Then Aylmer asked , " But where is the living for them ? " To this Marbury answered , " A man might cut a large thong out of your hide , and that of the other prelates , and it would never be missed . " Having lost his patience , the bishop retorted , " Thou are an <unk> , proud , puritan knave . " Marbury answered , " I am no puritan . I beseech you to be good to me . I have been twice in prison already , but I know not why . To this , Aylmer was unsympathetic , and he rendered the sentence , " Have him to the Marshalsea . There he shall cope with the papists . " Marbury then actually threatened divine retribution upon the bishop by warning him to beware the judgements of God . His daughter Anne would make a similar threat towards the magistrates and ministers at her civil trial before the Massachusetts Court , nearly 60 years later . 
 = = Later life = = 
 For his conviction of heresy , Marbury spent two years in Marshalsea Prison , on the south side of the River Thames , across from London . In 1580 , at the age of 25 , he was released and was considered sufficiently reformed to preach and teach , and moved to the remote market town of Alford in Lincolnshire , about 140 miles ( 230 km ) north of London , near his ancestral home . He was soon appointed curate ( deputy vicar ) of Saint Wilfrid 's , the local church in Alford . His father died in 1581 , leaving the resource @-@ poor Marbury with some welcome income as well as " <unk> bookes and a ring of gold . " 
 Sometime about 1582 he married his first wife , Elizabeth Moore , and in 1585 he became the schoolmaster at the Alford Free Grammar School , one of many such public schools , free to the poor , begun by Queen Elizabeth . Marbury is thought to have been the teacher or tutor of young John Smith , who later became famous as an early explorer and leader in the Jamestown Colony in Virginia . 
 After bearing three daughters , Marbury 's first wife died about 1586 , and within a year of her death he married Bridget Dryden , about ten years younger than he , from a prominent Northampton family . Bridget was born in the Canons Ashby House in Northampton , the daughter of John Dryden and Elizabeth Cope . Her brother , Erasmus Dryden , was the grandfather of the famous playwright and Poet Laureate John Dryden . 
 In 1590 Marbury once again felt emboldened to speak out against his superiors , denouncing the Church of England for selecting poorly educated bishops and poorly trained ministers . The Bishop of Lincoln , calling him an " impudent Puritan , " removed him from preaching and teaching , and put him under house arrest . On 15 October 1590 Marbury wrote a letter to the statesman William Cecil , Lord Burleigh , who was the uncle of Marbury 's acquaintance , Francis Bacon . In the letter he explained his religious creed and claimed that he was deprived of his preaching license " for causes unknown to him . " Without employment , he tended his gardens and tutored his children , reading to them from his own writings , the Bible , and John Foxe 's Book of Martyrs . Somehow the family was able to survive , perhaps from borrowing from the <unk> . While this suspension from preaching was thought to be short by historian Lennam , his daughter 's biographer , Eve LaPlante , wrote that it lasted nearly four years . Whichever the case , by 1594 he was once again preaching , and from this point forward , Marbury resolved to curb his tongue and not openly question those in positions of authority . 
 Following this final suspension , both his fame and fortune rose , and at one point Marbury became lecturer at St Saviour , Southwark . In 1602 he was given the honour of delivering the " Spittle sermon " in London on Easter Tuesday , and again at St Paul 's Cross in London in June . The following year he had the distinction of delivering a special sermon on the accession of James I to the throne , and at this point several of his sermons were finding their way into print . With the support of Richard Vaughan , the Bishop of London , he was moved to London in 1605 , finding a residence in the heart of the city where he was given the position of vicar of the Church of Saint Martin 's in the Vintry . Here his Puritan views , though somewhat muffled , were nevertheless present and tolerated , since there was a shortage of pastors . 
 London was a vibrant and cosmopolitan city , and active playwrights of the time were William Shakespeare , Christopher Marlowe , and Ben Jonson , whose plays were performed just across the river . The Marburys managed to avoid the bubonic plague that occasionally worked its way through the city . Marbury took on additional work in 1608 , preaching in the parish of Saint Pancras , several miles northwest of the city , travelling there by horseback twice a week . In 1610 he was able to replace that position with one much closer to home , and became rector of Saint Margaret 's , on New Fish Street , only a short walk from Saint Martin in the Vintry . While all seemed to be going well , Marbury died unexpectedly in February 1611 , at the age of 55 . He had written his will in January 1611 , and its brevity suggests that it was written in a hurry following a sudden and serious illness . The will mentions his wife by name and 12 living children , but only his daughter Susan , from his first marriage , is mentioned by name . His widow resided for a time at St Peter , Paul 's Wharf , London , but about December 1620 she married Reverend Thomas Newman of Berkhamsted , Hertfordshire , and died in 1645 . 
 = = Works and legacy = = 
 Marbury 's most noted work , The Contract of Marriage between Wit and Wisdom was written in 1579 while he was in prison . It was a moral interlude or " wit play " , following The Play of <unk> and Science by John Redford , and an adaptation of its sequel The Marriage of Wit and Science . The play had actually been performed , being noted in 1590 as one of the " current plays of the time . " Author T. N. S. Lennam described the work as a " lusty , occasionally very coarse , short interlude in which the morality material is dominated by rather imitative farcical episodes more <unk> entertaining than didactic . " 
 Marbury also helped write the preface to the works of other religious writers . One of these prefaces was written for Robert <unk> 's A Treatise on God 's <unk> Calling ( 1603 ) , and another was for Richard Rogers ' seminal work , Seven Treatises ( 1604 ) . In the latter , Marbury praised Rogers " for having delivered a crushing blow against the Catholics and thereby vindicating the Church of England . " This prefatory material summed up the puritan unitary vision for England : " one godly ruler , one godly church , and one godly path to heaven , with puritan ministers writing the guidebooks . " 
 While Marbury was not considered one of the great Puritan ministers of his day , he was nevertheless well known . Sir Francis Bacon called him " The Preacher , " and recognised him as such in his 1624 work <unk> . A leading minister of the time , Reverend Robert Bolton , expressed a considerable respect for Marbury 's teachings . 
 One negative aspect of Marbury 's later career involved his time in Alford when he was the governor of the free grammar school there between 1595 and 1605 . A 1618 court case pointed to Marbury 's improper handling of the school 's endowments , and following an inquisition , the surviving executors to Marbury 's will were ordered to pay " certain sums unto the Governors " of the school as compensation . 
 = = Family = = 
 Marbury was said to have 20 children , but only 18 have been identified , three with his first wife , Elizabeth Moore , and 15 with his second wife , Bridget Dryden . The three children from his first marriage were all girls , Mary ( c . 1584 – 1585 ) , Susan ( baptised 12 September 1585 ; married a Mr. Twyford ) and Elizabeth ( c . 1587 – 1601 ) . His children with Bridget Dryden were Mary ( born c . 1588 ) , John ( baptised 15 February 1589 / 90 ) , Anne ( baptised 20 July 1591 ) , Bridget ( baptised 8 May 1593 ; buried 15 October 1598 ) , Francis ( baptised 20 October 1594 ) , <unk> ( baptised 21 December 1595 ) , Erasmus ( baptised 15 February 1596 / 7 ) , Anthony ( baptised 11 September 1598 ; buried 9 April 1601 ) , Bridget ( baptised 25 November 1599 ) , <unk> ( or <unk> , baptised 31 March 1601 ) , Daniel ( baptised 14 September 1602 ) , Elizabeth ( baptised 20 January 1604 / 5 ) , Thomas ( born c . 1606 ? ) , Anthony ( born c . 1608 ) , and Katherine ( born c . 1610 ) . 
 Three of Marbury 's sons , Erasmus , <unk> , and the second Anthony , all matriculated at Brasenose College , Oxford . His daughter Anne married William Hutchinson and sailed to New England in 1634 , becoming a dissident Puritan minister at the centre of the Antinomian Controversy , and was , according to historian Michael Winship , " the most famous , or infamous , English woman in colonial American history . " His only other child to emigrate was his youngest child , Katherine , who married Richard Scott and settled in Providence in the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations . Katherine and her husband were at times Puritans , Baptists , and Quakers , and Katherine was whipped in Boston for supporting her future son @-@ in @-@ law Christopher Holder who had his right ear cut off for his Quaker evangelism . 
 Marbury 's sister , Catherine , married in 1583 Christopher Wentworth , and they became grandparents of William Wentworth who followed Reverend John Wheelwright to New England , and eventually settled in Dover , New Hampshire , becoming the ancestor of many men of prominence . 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 In 1914 , John Champlin published the bulk of the currently known ancestry of Francis Marbury , showing his descent from Charlemagne and Alfred the Great . Most of the material in the following ancestor chart is from Champlin , supplemented by genealogist Meredith <unk> . The Williamson line was published in The American Genealogist by F. N. Craig in 1992 , while an online source , cited within , covers the <unk> line . An online source giving the ancestry of Agnes Lenton is incorrect based on Walter Davis ' research published in the New England Historic Genealogical Register in 1964 . 
 = Australian Army during World War II = 
 The Australian Army was the largest service in the Australian military during World War II . Prior to the outbreak of war the Australian Army was split into the small full @-@ time Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) and the larger part @-@ time Militia . Following the outbreak of war , on 14 September 1939 Prime Minister Robert Menzies announced that 40 @,@ 000 members of the Militia would be called up for training and a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong expeditionary force , designated the Second Australian Imperial Force ( Second AIF ) , would be formed for overseas service . Meanwhile , conscription was introduced in October 1939 to keep the Militia at strength as its members volunteered for the AIF . The Australian Army subsequently made an important contribution to the Allied campaigns in the Mediterranean , the Middle East and North Africa fighting the Germans , Italians and Vichy French during 1940 and 1941 , and later in the jungles of the South West Pacific Area fighting the Japanese between late 1941 and 1945 . Following the Japanese surrender Australian Army units were deployed as occupation forces across the South West Pacific . Meanwhile , the Army contributed troops to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in Japan from 1946 . 
 The Army was considerably expanded in early 1942 in response to the Japanese threat to Australia . During this year the Army 's strength peaked at eleven infantry divisions and three armoured divisions , and in August 1942 the Army had a strength of 476 @,@ 000 men . This force was larger than Australia 's population and economy could sustain , and its strength was reduced in the second half of the year . Militia units were able to serve outside of Australian territory in the South West Pacific Area from January 1943 after the Defence ( Citizen Military Forces ) Act 1943 was passed , but few did so . The Army was further reduced by 100 @,@ 000 members from October 1943 to free up manpower for industry . At the end of 1943 the Army 's strength was set at six infantry divisions and two armoured brigades , although further reductions were ordered in August 1944 and June 1945 . The Australian Army generally had a long @-@ standing policy of using British @-@ designed equipment , but equipment from Australia , the United States and some other countries was introduced into service in the war 's later years . Pre @-@ war doctrine was focused on conventional warfare in a European environment and the Army did not have any doctrine for jungle warfare prior to 1943 . In early 1943 the Army developed a jungle warfare doctrine by adapting the pre @-@ war field service regulations to meet the conditions in the South West Pacific . 
 The demands of combat during World War II led to changes in the composition of Army units . The success of German mechanised units during the invasions of Poland and France convinced Australian defence planners that the Army required armoured units , and these began to be raised in 1941 . These units were not suitable for jungle warfare , however , and most were disbanded during 1943 and 1944 . Conditions in the South West Pacific also led the Army to convert its six combat divisions to jungle divisions in early 1943 and 1944 with fewer heavy weapons and vehicles . This organisation proved only moderately successful , and the divisions were strengthened for their 1944 – 45 campaigns . The process of demobilisation began immediately after the end of hostilities in August 1945 and was finally completed on 15 February 1947 . A total of 730 @,@ 000 personnel enlisted in the Australian Army during the war , a figure which represented around 10 percent of the population . Nearly 400 @,@ 000 men ultimately served overseas , with 40 percent of the total force serving in front line areas . As a proportion of its population , the Australian Army was ultimately one of the largest Allied armies during World War II . Casualties included 11 @,@ 323 killed in action , 1 @,@ 794 who died of wounds , and 21 @,@ 853 wounded . Another 5 @,@ 558 were killed or died as prisoners of war ( POWs ) , while non @-@ battle casualties in operational areas were also significant and included 1 @,@ 088 killed and 33 @,@ 196 wounded or injured . In addition , the Army suffered a substantial number of casualties in non @-@ operational areas : 1 @,@ 795 soldiers killed and 121 @,@ 800 wounded or injured . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the outbreak of war the Australian Army consisted of the small full @-@ time Permanent Military Forces ( PMF ) and the larger part @-@ time Militia . Throughout the inter @-@ war years , a combination of complacency and economic austerity had resulted in limited defence spending . In 1929 , following the election of the Scullin Labor government , conscription was abolished and in its place a new system was introduced whereby the Militia would be maintained on a part @-@ time , voluntary basis only . The size of the Army remained small up until 1938 and 1939 when the Militia was rapidly expanded as the threat of war grew . In 1938 , there had been only 35 @,@ 000 soldiers in the Militia , but by September 1939 this had been increased to 80 @,@ 000 , supported by a PMF of 2 @,@ 800 full @-@ time soldiers whose main responsibility was largely to administer and train the Militia . This expansion had little impact on improving the readiness of Australian forces upon the outbreak of the war , though , as the provisions of the Defence Act 1903 restricted the pre @-@ war Army to service in Australia and its territories including Papua and New Guinea . As a result , when Australia entered the war in 1939 , a new all @-@ volunteer force was required that could fight in Europe or elsewhere outside of Australia 's immediate region . ( Similarly , in World War I the all @-@ volunteer First Australian Imperial Force ( First AIF ) was raised and served with distinction at Gallipoli , in the Middle East and on the Western Front . ) 
 From the 1920s Australia 's defence thinking was dominated by the " Singapore strategy " , which centred on the establishment of a major naval base at Singapore and the use of naval forces to respond to any future Japanese aggression in the region . As a maritime strategy , it resulted in a defence budget that was focused on building up the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) , in order to support the British Royal Navy . Between 1923 and 1929 , £ 20 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was spent on the RAN , while the Australian Army and the munitions industry received only £ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and the fledgling Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) just £ 2 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 . The strategy met significant political opposition from sections of the regular Army , including several prominent officers such as Henry Wynter and John Lavarack . Wynter in particular argued that war was most likely to break out in the Pacific at a time when Britain was involved in a crisis in Europe and would be unable to send sufficient resources to Singapore . He contended that Singapore was vulnerable , especially to attack from the land and the air , and argued for a more balanced policy of building up the Army and RAAF rather than relying on the RAN . 
 During the 1930s the Australian Army 's organisation , equipment and doctrine were similar to those of World War I. The Militia was organised into infantry and horse @-@ mounted cavalry divisions with fixed coastal fortifications positioned at strategic ports . While the Army recognised that there was a threat of war with Japan , little had been done to prepare for jungle warfare as pre @-@ war planning had conceptualised any such conflict as taking place in the main population centres of Australia 's eastern seaboard , along with isolated attacks against strategic points in Western Australia . The Army followed the trends in the British Army as it modernised in the late 1930s , but was unable to obtain the up @-@ to @-@ date equipment needed to properly implement the new British doctrines and organisations due to a lack of resources as a result of limited defence expenditures . Nevertheless , the Militia provided a pool of experienced officers and soldiers who could be used to expand the Army in the event of war , and indeed during the course of the war about 200 @,@ 000 Militia soldiers volunteered for overseas service . 
 In 1942 the Army adopted the title Australian Military Forces ( AMF ) to encompass the various categories of service : AIF , Militia and Permanent Forces . Wartime exigencies required a rapid expansion of the Army and during the war 730 @,@ 000 personnel enlisted in either the Militia or the AIF , a figure which represented around 10 percent of Australia 's population of just seven million , one of the highest percentages of any of the Allied armies during World War II . It subsequently made an important contribution to the Allied campaigns in the Mediterranean , the Middle East and North Africa fighting the Germans , Italians and Vichy French during 1940 and 1941 as part of British Commonwealth forces , and later in the jungles of the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) fighting the Japanese between late 1941 and 1945 primarily in conjunction with forces from the United States . Nearly 400 @,@ 000 men served overseas , with 40 percent of the total force serving in front line areas . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Origin of the Second Australian Imperial Force = = = 
 Australia entered World War II on 3 September 1939 . On 14 September Prime Minister Robert Menzies announced that 40 @,@ 000 members of the Militia would be called up for training and a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ strong expeditionary force , designated the Second Australian Imperial Force , would be formed for overseas service . Like its predecessor , the Second AIF was a volunteer force formed by establishing entirely new units . In many cases these units drew their recruits from the same geographical areas as First AIF units , and they were given the same numerical designations albeit with the prefix " 2 / " . 
 In October 1939 , conscription was introduced to keep the Militia at strength as its members volunteered for the AIF . From January 1940 , all unmarried men turning 21 were required to report to be examined for potential service . While a substantial proportion of these men were granted exemptions on medical grounds or because they would suffer financial hardship if forced to enter the military , the remainder were liable for three months training followed by ongoing reserve service . A side effect of this arrangement was the creation of two different armies with different conditions of service , one the part @-@ volunteer part @-@ conscript Militia and the other the all @-@ volunteer AIF . This situation resulted in administrative and structural problems that existed throughout the war , as well as a sometimes bitter professional rivalry between the men of the two forces . Later , provision was made to allow Militia units to transfer to the AIF if sufficient numbers of personnel volunteered to serve under AIF terms of service . This required 65 percent of a unit 's war establishment — or 75 percent of its actual strength — to volunteer and allowed whole battalions to become part of the AIF . 
 An early problem was whether to adopt the British or Australian organisation . In 1939 the British Army was in the process of re @-@ equipping with new weapons , and a new organisation was required . This new equipment was not available in Australia , so it was decided to organise the first unit to be raised — the 6th Division — with some elements of the old organisation and some of the new . Consequently , the 6th Division was raised as an infantry division of around 18 @,@ 000 personnel , and initially comprised twelve 900 @-@ man infantry battalions each consisting of four rifle companies , a battalion headquarters , regimental aid post and a headquarters company with various support platoons and sections including signals , mortars , carriers , pioneers , anti @-@ aircraft and administration . Artillery support was provided by three field regiments , each attached at brigade @-@ level , as well an anti @-@ tank regiment attached at divisional level and a divisional cavalry regiment which was equipped with armoured vehicles . Corps troops included a machine @-@ gun battalion , and various engineer , logistics and communication units . 
 Three further AIF infantry divisions were formed during 1940 : the 7th Division in February 1940 , the 8th Division in May and the 9th Division in June . However , the establishment of these divisions was reduced to the new nine @-@ battalion organisation as the size of an Australian division was reduced to approximately 17 @,@ 000 men , and the three surplus battalions of the 6th Division became part of the 7th Division . Further changes included the addition of a light anti @-@ aircraft regiment at divisional level , and a reorganisation of the divisional artillery from three four @-@ battery regiments consisting of 16 guns to three two @-@ battery regiments of 12 guns . An AIF corps headquarters , designated I Corps , was formed in March 1940 along with various support units . The 1st Armoured Division , the final AIF division to be formed , was established in July 1941 , built around a core of two armoured brigades each consisting of three tank @-@ equipped armoured regiments , supported by motorised cavalry , armoured cars , engineers and artillery . Several units , such as Z and M Special Units , were also raised for irregular warfare as were 12 commando companies . Many corps , support and service units were also raised during the war to provide combat and logistical support . 
 = = = Forces in Australia and the Pacific = = = 
 The Army 's command and administrative arrangements at the start of the war were based on a system of military districts that had existed since Federation , albeit with a number of modifications . Australia was divided into six military districts each of which largely equated to a State or Territory , and reported to the Department of the Chief of the General Staff . Meanwhile , the Military Board was responsible for the administration of the Army , with regular members consisting of the Deputy Adjutant @-@ General , the Chief of Intelligence , the Chief of the General Staff , the Chief of Ordnance and a civilian Finance Member , in addition to a number of consultative members , under the overall control of the Minister of the Defence . The 1st Military District ( 1 MD ) encompassed Queensland , the 2nd included most of New South Wales , the 3rd was primarily based on Victoria , the 4th included South Australia , the 5th included Western Australia and the 6th encompassed forces in Tasmania . In 1939 the Northern Territory was designated the 7th Military District , while and the 8th Military District was later activated in Port Moresby to command forces in New Guinea . 
 Following the outbreak of World War II a regional command structure was subsequently adopted , with 2 MD becoming Eastern Command , 5 MD redesignated Western Command , while 1 MD in Queensland became Northern Command and the three southern states of New South Wales , Victoria and Tasmania were amalgamated into Southern Command . In the early years of the war this structure proved effective for operations overseas ; however , as the threat of war with Japan grew the various commands and military districts came under greater pressure . The activation of the Militia for full @-@ time duty after Japan 's entry into the war in late 1941 compounded the situation . In response , the Army command structure was reorganised in early 1942 . While Western Australia remained unchanged , Queensland , New South Wales , Victoria , Tasmania and South Australia were redesignated as Lines of Communications Areas , 7 MD became Northern Territory Force and 8 MD was redesignated as New Guinea Force . In July 1942 the Military Board 's functions were assumed by the commander of the military forces , General Sir Thomas Blamey . 
 The AIF 's requirements for manpower and equipment constrained the Militia during the early years of the war . At the outbreak of the Pacific War the main Army units in Australia were five Militia infantry divisions — the 1st , 2nd , 3rd , 4th and 5th Divisions — two Militia cavalry divisions — the 1st and 2nd Cavalry Divisions — and the AIF 1st Armoured Division . The Volunteer Defence Corps ( VDC ) , which was a part @-@ time volunteer force of 100 @,@ 000 men based on the British Home Guard , was also available for local defence . In addition , by early 1942 there were 12 @,@ 000 garrison force personnel — mostly reservist veterans of World War I — organised into 13 garrison battalions for coastal defence and five battalions and two companies for internal security tasks , including guarding prisoner of war camps . Yet at this time only 30 percent of Militia units were on full @-@ time duty , with the remainder periodically undertaking three month @-@ long <unk> . The Militia was also poorly armed , and there was insufficient equipment to be issued to all units if they were mobilised . In response to the Japanese threat following the outbreak of the Pacific War and the capture of the 8th Division in Malaya , the condition of the Militia became a pressing concern , after largely having been ignored since 1940 . Several middle @-@ ranking and senior officers of the AIF were subsequently posted to Militia units and formations to give them experience . Meanwhile , the Army was forced to move units between Militia divisions so that the most combat @-@ ready could be sent to areas believed to be under the greatest threat of attack . Some battalions were amalgamated , and although some were later separated and reformed , others were disbanded altogether . After the Defence ( Citizen Military Forces ) Act 1943 was passed Militia units were able to serve outside Australian territory in the South West Pacific Area from January 1943 , though the 11th Brigade was the only major formation to do so . 
 The Army was considerably expanded in early 1942 in response to the Japanese threat to Australia . During this year the Army 's strength peaked at eleven infantry divisions — the 1st , 2nd , 3rd , 4th , 5th , 6th , 7th , 9th , 10th , 11th and 12th Divisions — and three armoured divisions — the 1st , 2nd and 3rd — organised into the First and Second Armies , and I , II and III Corps , as well as many support and service units . In August 1942 , the Army had a strength of 476 @,@ 000 men . This force proved larger than what Australia 's population and industry could sustain ; by late 1942 the number of personnel who needed to be inducted each month to make good losses caused by sickness and combat was much larger than the numbers who were becoming eligible for service , and the allocation of a high proportion of Australia 's limited supply of manpower to the military was inhibiting the expansion of the munitions industry and other key sectors of the economy . The Army was also unbalanced as a large majority its personnel were employed in arms corps undertaking combat and combat support roles . Heavily reliant upon its allies for logistical support , it required more personnel in support arms such as ordnance and transport to be functional as a self @-@ sufficient organisation . This situation was most acute in 1942 ; at that time there were 137 @,@ 236 men serving arms corps such as infantry , cavalry and armour , while there were just 29 @,@ 079 in ordnance . 
 This imbalance was slowly addressed after 1942 as the Army 's size was reduced . Most of the units that were disbanded were Militia arms corps units , and by September 1943 the AIF outnumbered the Militia , having 265 @,@ 000 members compared to just over 117 @,@ 000 . Further reductions came in October 1943 when the Army 's strength was further reduced by 100 @,@ 000 men to free up manpower to work in industry . At the end of 1943 the Army 's strength was set at six infantry divisions and two armoured brigades , although further reductions were ordered in August 1944 and June 1945 . By 1945 the support arms had grown considerably as a proportion of the total force and by August 1945 ordnance and the electrical and mechanical engineers totalled 42 @,@ 835 men , while the artillery had been reduced to half its previous strength . Infantry , cavalry and armoured corps personnel numbered just 62 @,@ 097 men , while engineers , signals and the medical services remained the same , albeit as part of a much smaller Army . Regardless , at the end of the war it remained one of the largest Allied armies as a proportion of population , being second only to the Soviet Union . The VDC was also reduced in size in May 1944 , and was finally disbanded on 24 August 1945 . If the conflict had continued past August 1945 , the size of the Army would have been further reduced to three divisions once Bougainville , New Guinea and New Britain had been secured . Two of these divisions would have been used on garrison duties , while a brigade group may have been made available for British @-@ led operations in South East Asia and the remaining division was to take part in the invasion of Japan . 
 The demands of combat during World War II led to changes in the composition of Army units . The success of German mechanised units during the invasions of Poland and France convinced Australian defence planners that the Army required armoured units , and these began to be raised in 1941 when the 1st Armoured Division was formed . The two Militia cavalry divisions were first motorised and then converted into armoured divisions in 1942 and the 3rd Army Tank Brigade was formed to provide support to the infantry . These large armoured units were not suitable for jungle warfare , however , and most were disbanded during 1943 and 1944 . Conditions in the South West Pacific also led the Army to convert its six combat divisions to jungle divisions in early 1943 and 1944 , reducing the authorised strength of the division by about 4 @,@ 000 men . Each infantry battalion shed around 100 personnel as various support elements such as the anti @-@ aircraft and carrier platoons were removed and consolidated at divisional level . The amount of heavy weapons and vehicles was also reduced , but the conditions that the organisation was designed for did not recur and it proved only moderately successful . As a result , the divisions were strengthened for their 1944 – 45 campaigns by returning the artillery and anti @-@ tank units that had been removed . The creation of the jungle divisions represented the first time in the Australian Army 's history that it had adopted an organisation specifically for the conditions in which its forces would fight . Previously force structure had been heavily influenced by the British Army , and the decision to adopt an organisation to suit local conditions reflected a growing maturity and independence . Yet it also resulted in the adoption of a two @-@ tier force structure , as formations that were not designated for jungle warfare remained on the previous scales of equipment and manning . Ultimately , while their structure was better suited to operations in Australia , they were no longer able to be used against the Japanese . As a result , the burden of the fighting increasingly fell on those formations that had been re @-@ organised , while the remainder of the Army was relegated to garrison duties . 
 The Army also raised many anti @-@ aircraft and coastal defence units during the war . The pre @-@ war coastal defences were greatly expanded from 1939 , and many new batteries were built near major ports in Australia and New Guinea in response to the threat of Japanese attack . Australia had a limited capacity to produce anti @-@ aircraft guns , and the bulk of equipment had to come from Britain . As such the development of such defences was initially hampered by a lack of available equipment . The coastal defence system reached its peak size during 1944 . The Army had few anti @-@ aircraft guns at the outbreak of war , and a high priority was given to expanding the air defences around major cities and important industrial and military facilities . By 1942 anti @-@ aircraft batteries were in place around all the major cities as well as the key towns in northern Australia . The expansion of the artillery in general , and coastal defence and anti @-@ aircraft units in particular , meant that by June 1942 some 80 @,@ 000 of the 406 @,@ 000 members of the Army were artillerymen . VDC units gradually took over responsibility for manning the fixed coastal and anti @-@ aircraft defences as the threat of attack against the Australian mainland receded . 
 Traditionally the Australian Army had relied on its major allies to provide logistic support , primarily raising combat units rather than support arms during times of conflict . Consequently , these services were relatively underdeveloped , and they remained so during the first years of the war . While British units provided many logistic and line of communication services for the AIF in North Africa during the early campaigns in 1940 and 1941 , the Army needed to raise extensive support units to support its combat formations in the Pacific following the Japanese entry into the war . As a result , the growth of the support arms and ancillary services proved dramatic , including many capabilities which the Australian Army had only minimal or no previous experience in maintaining . These units included terminal formations and beach groups responsible for loading and unloading ships , food and petroleum storage and distribution units and several farm units which grew food for troops in remote areas . In addition , with Australia 's national support base located well to the rear , in the major cities in the south @-@ east of the country , significant expansion of the Army 's transport capabilities was required to move supplies and men to the field force based in northern Australia and New Guinea . Many road transport units were raised to move supplies around Australia , while the Royal Australian Engineers eventually operated a fleet of 1 @,@ 900 watercraft and three air maintenance companies were formed to load supply aircraft . 
 = = = Women 's services = = = 
 Prior to World War II the Australian Army Nursing Service ( AANS ) was the only female branch of the Army . A reserve formation that had served overseas during World War I , the AANS was mobilised following the outbreak of war in 1939 and its Matron in Chief , Grace Wilson , served on the staff of the Director @-@ General of Medical Services , Major General Rupert Downes . For most of the war , AANS nurses were the only Australian servicewomen permitted to serve overseas , and many volunteered for the AIF . These women served in all the major theatres in which the Army fought and a total of 71 were killed on active service . The majority of these died in early 1942 during the fighting in Malaya and Singapore where 41 nurses were killed . In March 1942 , the Volunteer Aid Detachments ( <unk> ) also became a branch of the Army Medical Service . Consisting of volunteers originally coordinated by the Australian Red Cross and Order of Saint John , the <unk> were redesignated the Australian Army Medical Women 's Service ( <unk> ) in December 1942 , and were employed in military hospitals in Australia and overseas until after the end of the war , before returning to civilian control in 1948 . 
 Shortages of manpower also led to the establishment of the Australian Women 's Army Service ( AWAS ) in August 1941 . AWAS members filled a wide range of roles to allow the Army to redeploy male soldiers to fighting units . While they mainly worked in clerical and administrative positions , and auxiliary roles such as drivers and signallers , many served in anti @-@ aircraft batteries , operating radars and searchlights but not the guns themselves . While Blamey sought to have members of the AWAS posted overseas from early 1941 onwards , the Australian Government did not agree to this until 1945 . As a result , only about 400 of the 24 @,@ 000 women who joined the AWAS served outside Australia . The AWAS was reduced in size following the war , and was finally disbanded on 30 June 1947 . Colonel Sybil Irving commanded the AWAS from September 1941 until 1947 . In total some 35 @,@ 000 women served in the Army , making up about 5 percent of the force . 
 = = Campaigns = = 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 During the first years of World War II , Australia 's military strategy was closely aligned with that of the United Kingdom 's imperial defence policy . The Singapore strategy , which seemingly negated the need for large @-@ scale land forces in the Pacific , was a key component of this policy and consequently most Australian military units that were deployed overseas in 1940 and 1941 were sent to the Mediterranean and Middle East where they formed an integral part of the Commonwealth forces in the area . The three AIF infantry divisions dispatched to the Middle East were subsequently heavily involved in the fighting that followed . In addition to the force which was sent to North Africa , two AIF brigades ( the 18th and 25th ) were stationed in Britain from June 1940 to January 1941 and formed part of the British mobile reserve which would have responded to any German landings . An Australian Army forestry group also served in Britain between 1940 and 1943 . 
 The Australian Army first saw action in Operation Compass , the successful Commonwealth offensive in North Africa which was conducted between December 1940 and February 1941 . Although the 6th Division was not fully equipped , it had completed its training and on 14 December , it relieved the 4th Indian Division . Given the task of capturing Italian fortresses bypassed by the British 7th Armoured Division during its advance , on 3 January , the division went into action at Bardia . Although the fortress was manned by a larger force , the Australian infantry quickly penetrated the Italian defensive lines with the support of British tanks and artillery . The majority of the defenders surrendered on 5 January and the Australians took 40 @,@ 000 prisoners . The 6th Division followed up this success by assaulting the fortress of Tobruk on 21 January , securing it the next day and taking 25 @,@ 000 Italians prisoner . After this , the Australians pushed west along the coast road to Cyrenaica and captured Benghazi on 4 February . Later that month , the 6th Division was withdrawn for deployment to Greece and was replaced by the untested 9th Division , which took up garrison duties in Cyrenaica . 
 In the last week of March 1941 , a German @-@ led force launched an offensive in Cyrenaica . The Allied forces in the area were rapidly forced to withdraw towards Egypt . The 9th Division formed the rear guard of this withdrawal , and on 6 April was ordered to defend the important port town of Tobruk for at least two months . Sustained by the Australian destroyers of the Mediterranean Fleet , during the ensuing siege the 9th Division , reinforced by the 7th Division 's 18th Brigade as well as British artillery and armoured regiments , used fortifications , aggressive patrolling and artillery to contain and defeat repeated German armoured and infantry attacks . In September and October 1941 , upon the request of the Australian Government , the 9th Division was relieved and the bulk withdrawn from Tobruk . The 2 / 13th Battalion , however , was forced to remain until the siege was lifted in December as the convoy evacuating it was attacked . The defence of Tobruk cost the Australian units involved 3 @,@ 009 casualties , including 832 killed and 941 taken prisoner . 
 = = = Greece , Crete and Lebanon = = = 
 In early 1941 the 6th Division and I Corps headquarters took part in the ill @-@ fated Allied expedition to defend Greece from a German invasion . The corps ' commander , Lieutenant General Thomas Blamey , and Prime Minister Menzies both regarded the operation as risky , but agreed to Australian involvement after the British Government provided them with briefings which deliberately understated the chance of defeat . The Allied force deployed to Greece was much smaller than the German force in the region and the defence of the country was compromised by inconsistencies between Greek and Allied plans . 
 Australian troops arrived in Greece during March and manned defensive positions in the north of the country alongside British , New Zealand and Greek units . The outnumbered Allied force was not able to halt the Germans when they invaded on 6 April and was forced to retreat . The Australians and other Allied units conducted a fighting withdrawal from their initial positions and were evacuated from southern Greece between 24 April and 1 May . Australian warships also formed part of the force which protected the evacuation and embarked hundreds of soldiers from Greek ports . The 6th Division suffered heavy casualties in this campaign , with 320 men killed and 2 @,@ 030 captured . 
 While most of the 6th Division returned to Egypt , the 19th Brigade Group and two provisional infantry battalions landed at Crete where they formed a key part of the island 's defences . The 19th Brigade was initially successful in holding its positions when German paratroopers landed on 20 May , but was gradually forced to retreat . After several key airfields were lost the Allies evacuated the island 's garrison . Approximately 3 @,@ 000 Australians , including the entire 2 / 7th Battalion , could not be evacuated , and were taken prisoner . As a result of its heavy casualties the 6th Division required substantial reinforcements and equipment before it was again ready for combat . 
 The 7th Division , reinforced by the 6th Division 's 17th Brigade , formed a key part of the Allied ground forces during the Syria – Lebanon campaign which was fought against Vichy French forces in June and July 1941 . With close air support from the RAAF and the Royal Air Force , the Australian force entered Lebanon on 8 June and advanced along the coast road and Litani River valley . Although little resistance had been expected , the Vichy forces mounted a strong defence which made good use of the mountainous terrain . After the Allied attack became bogged down reinforcements were brought in and the Australian I Corps headquarters took command of the operation on 18 June . These changes enabled the Allies to overwhelm the French forces and the 7th Division entered Beirut on 12 July . The loss of Beirut and a British breakthrough in Syria led the Vichy commander to seek an armistice and the campaign ended on 13 July . 
 = = = El Alamein = = = 
 In the second half of 1941 the Australian I Corps was concentrated in Syria and Lebanon where it undertook garrison duties while its strength was rebuilt ahead of further operations in the Middle East . Following the outbreak of war in the Pacific most elements of the corps , including the 6th and 7th Divisions , returned to Australia in early 1942 to counter the perceived Japanese threat to Australia . The Australian Government agreed to requests from Britain and the United States to temporarily retain the 9th Division in the Middle East in exchange for the deployment of additional US troops to Australia and Britain 's support for a proposal to expand the RAAF to 73 squadrons . The Government did not intend that the 9th Division would play a major role in active fighting , and it was not sent any further reinforcements . 
 In mid @-@ 1942 , the Axis forces defeated the Commonwealth force in Libya and advanced into north @-@ west Egypt . In June the British Eighth Army made a stand just over 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) west of Alexandria , at the railway siding of El Alamein and the 9th Division was brought forward to reinforce this position . The lead elements of the division arrived at El Alamein on 6 July and it was assigned the most northerly section of the Commonwealth defensive line . From that position , the 9th Division subsequently played a significant role in the First Battle of El Alamein , helping to halt the Axis advance . Casualties were heavy , and the 2 / 28th Battalion was forced to surrender on 27 July when it was surrounded by German armour after capturing Ruin Ridge . Following this battle the division remained at the northern end of the El Alamein line and launched diversionary attacks during the Battle of Alam el Halfa in early September . 
 In October 1942 , the 9th Division and the RAAF squadrons in the area took part in the Second Battle of El Alamein . After a lengthy period of preparation , the Eighth Army launched its major offensive on 23 October . The 9th Division was involved in some of the heaviest fighting of the battle , and its advance in the coast area succeeded in drawing away enough German forces for the heavily reinforced 2nd New Zealand Division to decisively break though the Axis lines on the night of 1 / 2 November . The 9th Division suffered a high number of casualties during this battle and did not take part in the pursuit of the retreating Axis forces . During the battle the Australian Government requested that the division be returned to Australia as it was not possible to provide enough reinforcements to sustain it , and this was agreed to by the British and US governments in late November . The 9th Division left Egypt for Australia in January 1943 , ending the AIF 's involvement in the war in North Africa . 
 = = = Malaya and Singapore = = = 
 Due to the emphasis placed on cooperation with Britain , relatively few Australian military units were stationed in Australia and the Asia @-@ Pacific region after 1940 . Measures were taken to improve Australia 's defences as war with Japan loomed in 1941 , but these proved inadequate . The 8th Division was subsequently dispatched to Singapore in February 1941 , while plans were made for a Militia battalion to be stationed between Port Moresby and Thursday Island . An AIF battalion was also allocated to garrison Rabaul , and another brigade would be dispersed piecemeal to Timor and Ambon . Meanwhile , in July 1941 the 1st Independent Company was deployed to Kavieng on New Britain in order to protect the airfield , while sections were sent to <unk> in central New Ireland , Vila in the New Hebrides , Tulagi on Guadalcanal , Buka Passage in Bougainville , and Lorengau on Manus Island to act as observers . 
 In December 1941 the Australian Army in the Pacific consisted of the 8th Division , most of which was stationed in Malaya , and eight partially trained and equipped divisions in Australia , including the 1st Armoured Division . In keeping with the Singapore strategy , a high proportion of Australian forces in Asia were concentrated in Malaya during 1940 and 1941 as the threat from Japan increased . At the outbreak of war the Australian forces in Malaya consisted of two brigade groups from the 8th Division — the 22nd and 27th Brigades — under the command of Major General Gordon Bennett , along with four RAAF squadrons and eight warships . 
 Following the Japanese invasion on 8 December 1941 , the 8th Division and its attached Indian Army units was assigned responsibility for the defence of Johore in the south of Malaya . As a result , it did not see action until mid @-@ January 1942 when Japanese spearheads first reached the state , having pushed back the British and Indian units defending the northern parts of the peninsula . By this time , the division 's two brigades had been split up , with the 22nd having been deployed around Mersing and Endau on the east coast and the 27th in the west . The division 's first engagement came on the west coast around Muar on 14 January , where the Japanese Twenty @-@ Fifth Army was able to outflank the Commonwealth positions due to Bennett <unk> the forces under his command so that the weak Indian 45th Brigade was assigned the crucial coastal sector and the stronger Australian brigades were deployed in less threatened areas . While the Commonwealth forces in Johore achieved a number of local tactical victories , most notably around <unk> , Bakri and Jemaluang , they were unable to do more than slow the Japanese advance and suffered heavy casualties in doing so . After being outmanoeuvred by the Japanese , the remaining Commonwealth units withdrew to Singapore on the night of 30 – 31 January . 
 Following this the 8th Division was deployed to defend Singapore 's north @-@ west coast . Due to the casualties suffered in Johore most of the division 's units were at half @-@ strength , and the replacements that had been received — a draft of about 1 @,@ 900 replacements was sent in late January — were barely trained , some having as little as two weeks ' training in Australia before being dispatched . Assigned larger @-@ than @-@ normal frontages to defend along beaches that were ill @-@ suited for defence , the 22nd and 27th Brigades were spread thin on the ground with large gaps in their lines . The commander of the Singapore fortress , Lieutenant General Arthur Ernest Percival , believed that the Japanese would land on the north @-@ east coast of the island and deployed the near full @-@ strength British 18th Division to defend this sector . Nevertheless , on 8 February the Japanese landed in the Australian sector , and the 8th Division was forced from its positions after just two days of heavy fighting . A subsequent landing took place at Kranji , but the division was unable to turn this back and subsequently withdrew to the centre of the island . 
 After further fighting in which the Commonwealth forces were pushed into a narrow perimeter around the urban area of Singapore , Percival surrendered his forces on 15 February . Although some Australians were able to escape , following the capitulation 14 @,@ 972 Australians were taken prisoner . Bennett was among those that managed to get out , having left the island the night before the surrender via sampan after handing over command of his division to Brigadier Cecil Callaghan . He later justified his actions saying that he had gained an understanding of how to defeat the Japanese and needed to return to Australia to pass his knowledge on , but two post @-@ war inquiries found that he was unjustified in leaving his command . The loss of almost a quarter of Australia 's overseas soldiers and the failure of the Singapore strategy that had permitted it to accept the sending of the AIF to aid Britain , stunned the country . 
 The fall of Singapore raised fears of a Japanese invasion of the Australian mainland and the Government became concerned about the Army 's ability to respond . Although large , the forces in Australia contained many inexperienced units and lacked mobility . In response , most of the AIF was brought back from the Middle East and the Australian Prime Minister , John Curtin , appealed to the United States for assistance . As Japanese forces advanced through Burma towards India in early 1942 , the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , attempted to divert the 6th and 7th Divisions while they were en route to Australia , but Curtin refused to authorise this movement . As a compromise the 16th and 17th Brigades of the 6th Division disembarked at Ceylon and formed part of the island 's garrison until they returned to Australia in August 1942 . 
 = = = Netherlands East Indies and Rabaul = = = 
 While Australia 's contribution to the pre @-@ war plans to defend South East Asia from Japanese aggression was focused on the defence of Malaya and Singapore , small Australian forces were also deployed to defend several islands to the north of Australia . The role of these forces was to defend strategic airfields which could be used to launch attacks on the Australian mainland . Detachments of coastwatchers were also stationed in the Bismarck Archipelago and Solomon Islands to report on any Japanese operations there . 
 At the start of the Pacific War the strategic port town of Rabaul in New Britain was defended by " Lark Force " , which comprised the 2 / 22nd Battalion reinforced with coastal artillery and a poorly equipped RAAF bomber squadron . While Lark Force was regarded as inadequate by the Australian military , it was not possible to reinforce it before the Japanese South Seas Force landed at Rabaul on 23 January 1942 . The outnumbered Australian force was swiftly defeated and most of the survivors surrendered in the weeks after the battle . Few members of Lark Force survived the war , as at least 130 were murdered by the Japanese on 4 February and 1 @,@ 057 Australian soldiers and civilian prisoners from Rabaul were killed when the ship carrying them to Japan , the transport Montevideo Maru , was sunk by a US submarine on 1 July 1942 . 
 AIF troops were also dispatched from Darwin to the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) in the first weeks of the Pacific War . Reinforced battalions from the 8th Division 's third brigade , the 23rd , were sent to Koepang in West Timor as part of " Sparrow Force " and to the island of Ambon as " Gull Force " to defend these strategic locations from Japanese attack . The 2 / 2nd Independent Company was also sent to Dili in Portuguese Timor in violation of Portugal 's neutrality . The force at Ambon was defeated by the Japanese landing on 30 January and surrendered on 3 February 1942 . Over 300 Australian prisoners were subsequently killed by Japanese troops in a series of mass executions during February . While the force at Koepang was defeated after the Japanese landed there on 20 February and also surrendered , Australian commandos waged a guerrilla campaign against the Japanese in Portuguese Timor until February 1943 . 
 In the lead @-@ up to the Japanese invasion of Java a force of 242 carrier- and land @-@ based aircraft attacked Darwin on 19 February 1942 . At the time Darwin was an important base for Allied warships and a staging point for shipping supplies and reinforcements into the NEI . The Japanese attack was successful , and resulted in the deaths of 251 civilians and military personnel , most of whom were non @-@ Australian Allied seamen , and heavy damage to RAAF Base Darwin and the town 's port facilities . 
 A 3 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Army unit , as well as several Australian warships and aircraft from a number of RAAF squadrons participated in the unsuccessful defence of Java when the Japanese invaded the island in March 1942 . An Army force made up of elements from the 7th Division also formed part of the American @-@ British @-@ Dutch @-@ Australian Command ( ABDACOM ) land forces on Java but saw little action before it surrendered at Bandung on 12 March after the Dutch forces on the island began to capitulate . Following the conquest of the NEI , the Japanese Navy 's main aircraft carrier force raided the Indian Ocean , attacking Ceylon in early April . The two Australian Army brigades stationed at Ceylon at the time of the raid were placed on alert to repel a potential invasion but did not see action as this did not eventuate . 
 = = = Defence of Australia = = = 
 Japan 's rapid advance south had been unexpected , and the perceived threat of invasion led to a major expansion of the Australian military . By mid @-@ 1942 the Army had a strength of ten infantry divisions , three armoured divisions and hundreds of other units . Thousands of Australians who were ineligible for service in the military responded to the threat of attack by joining auxiliary organisations such as the Volunteer Defence Corps and Volunteer Air Observers Corps , which were modelled on the British Home Guard and Royal Observer Corps respectively . However , Australia 's population and industrial base were not sufficient to maintain these forces once the threat of invasion had passed , and the Army was progressively reduced in size from 1943 . 
 Despite Australian fears , the Japanese never intended to invade the Australian mainland . While an invasion was considered by the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters in February 1942 , it was judged to be beyond the Japanese military 's capabilities and no planning or other preparations were undertaken . Instead , in March 1942 the Japanese military adopted a strategy of isolating Australia from the United States by capturing Port Moresby in New Guinea and the Solomon Islands , Fiji , Samoa and New Caledonia . Yet this plan was frustrated by the Japanese defeat in the Battle of the Coral Sea and was postponed indefinitely after the Battle of Midway . While these battles ended the threat to Australia , the Australian government continued to warn that an invasion was possible until mid @-@ 1943 . A series of Japanese air raids against northern Australia occurred during 1942 and 1943 , and while the main defence was provided by RAAF and Allied fighters , a number of Australian Army anti @-@ aircraft batteries were also involved in dealing with this threat . 
 Meanwhile , in 1942 the Australian military was reinforced by units recalled from the Middle East and an expansion of the Militia and RAAF . United States military units also arrived in Australia in great numbers before being deployed to New Guinea , and in April 1942 command of Australian and US forces in the South West Pacific was consolidated under an American commander , General Douglas MacArthur . After halting the Japanese the Allies moved onto the offensive in late 1942 , with the pace of advance accelerating in 1943 . From 1944 the Australian military was mainly relegated to subsidiary roles in holding or mopping @-@ up operations , but continued to conduct large @-@ scale operations until the end of the war with a larger proportion of its forces deployed in the final months of the conflict than at any other time . 
 = = = Papuan campaign = = = 
 Japanese forces first landed on the mainland of New Guinea on 8 March 1942 when they invaded Lae and Salamaua to secure bases for the defence of the important base they were developing at Rabaul . In response , Australian guerrillas from the New Guinea Volunteer Rifles established observation posts around the Japanese beachheads and the 2 / 5th Independent Company successfully raided Salamaua on 29 June . After the Battle of the Coral Sea frustrated the Japanese plan to capture Port Moresby via an amphibious landing , they attempted to capture the town by landing Major General Tomitarō Horii 's South Seas Force at Buna on the north coast of Papua and advancing overland using the Kokoda Track to cross the rugged Owen Stanley Range . The Kokoda Track campaign began on 22 July when the Japanese began their advance , opposed by an ill @-@ prepared Militia brigade designated " Maroubra Force " . This force was successful in delaying the South Seas Force but was unable to halt it . 
 In late August and early September 1942 Australian forces at Milne Bay inflicted the first notable land defeat of the war upon the Japanese . After the Japanese landed a unit of Special Naval Landing Forces to capture the airbases that the Allies had established in the area , two brigades of Australian troops — the Militia 7th and AIF 18th — designated " Milne Force " , supported by two RAAF fighter squadrons and US Army engineers , launched a counter @-@ attack . Outnumbered , lacking supplies and suffering heavy casualties , the Japanese were forced to withdraw . The victory helped raise Allied morale across the Pacific Theatre , especially on the Kokoda Track where the Japanese had continued to make progress throughout August . 
 On 26 August two AIF battalions from the 7th Division reinforced the remnants of Maroubra Force but the Japanese continued to advance along the Kokoda Track and by 16 September they reached the village of Ioribaiwa near Port Moresby . After several weeks of exhausting fighting and heavy losses , the Japanese troops were within 32 kilometres ( 20 mi ) of Port Moresby . Yet supply problems made any further advance impossible , and the Japanese began to fear an Allied counter @-@ landing at Buna . Following reverses at the hands of US forces on Guadalcanal the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters decided they could not support fronts on both New Guinea and Guadalcanal . Horii was subsequently ordered to withdraw his troops on the Kokoda Track until the issue at Guadalcanal was decided . 
 After this , the Australian forces were heavily reinforced by the 7th Division 's 21st and 25th Brigades . Supported logistically by native Papuans who were recruited by the Australian New Guinea Administrative Unit , often forcibly , to carry supplies and evacuate wounded personnel , the Australians pursued the Japanese back along the Kokoda Track . In early November , they had been forced into a small bridgehead on the north coast of Papua . Australian and US forces attacked the Japanese bridgehead in Papua in late November 1942 . The Allied force consisted of the exhausted 7th Division and the inexperienced and ill @-@ trained US 32nd Infantry Division , and was short of artillery and supplies . Due to a lack of supporting weapons and MacArthur and Blamey 's insistence on a rapid advance the Allied tactics during the battle were centred on infantry assaults on the Japanese fortifications . These resulted in heavy casualties and the area was not secured until 22 January 1943 . 
 Throughout the fighting in Papua , most of the Australian personnel captured by Japanese troops were murdered . In response , for the remainder of the war Australian soldiers generally did not attempt to capture Japanese personnel and aggressively sought to kill their Japanese opponents including some that had surrendered . Following the defeats in Papua and Guadalcanal the Japanese withdrew to a defensive perimeter in the Territory of New Guinea . Meanwhile , during the fighting in 1942 – 43 the Australian Army increasingly developed a tactical superiority over the Japanese in jungle warfare . 
 The Papuan campaign led to a significant reform in the composition of the Australian Army . During the campaign , the restriction banning Militia personnel from serving outside of Australian territory hampered military planning and caused tensions between the AIF and Militia . In late 1942 and early 1943 Curtin overcame opposition within the Labor Party to extending the geographic boundaries in which conscripts could serve to include most of the South West Pacific and the necessary legislation was passed in January 1943 . This made deploying the Militia easier , but ultimately only one brigade , the 11th , was dispatched outside of Australian territory , being deployed to Merauke on the south coast of Dutch West Papua in the NEI during 1943 and 1944 as part of " Merauke Force " . 
 = = = New Guinea offensives = = = 
 After halting the Japanese advance , Allied forces went on the offensive across the SWPA from mid @-@ 1943 . Australian forces played a key role throughout this offensive , which was designated Operation Cartwheel . In particular , Blamey oversaw a series of highly successful operations around the north @-@ east tip of New Guinea which " was the high point of Australia 's experience of operational level command " during the war . After the successful defence of Wau the 3rd Division began advancing towards Salamaua in April 1943 . This advance was mounted to divert attention from Lae , which was one of the main objectives of Operation Cartwheel , and proceeded slowly . In late June the 3rd Division was reinforced by the US 162nd Regimental Combat Team , which staged an amphibious landing to the south of Salamaua . The town was eventually captured on 11 September 1943 . 
 In early September 1943 Australian @-@ led forces mounted a pincer movement to capture Lae . On 4 September the 9th Division made an amphibious landing to the east of the town and began advancing to the west . The following day , the US 503rd Parachute Regiment made an unopposed parachute drop at Nadzab , just west of Lae . Once the airborne forces secured Nadzab Airfield , the 7th Division was flown in and began advancing to the east in a race with the 9th Division to capture Lae . This race was won by the 7th Division , which captured the town on 15 September . The Japanese forces at Salamaua and Lae suffered heavy losses during this campaign , but were able to escape to the north . 
 After the fall of Lae the 9th Division was given the task of capturing the Huon Peninsula . The 20th Brigade landed near the strategic harbour of Finschhafen on 22 September 1943 and secured the area . The Japanese responded by dispatching the 20th Division overland to the area and the remainder of the 9th Division was gradually brought in to reinforce the 20th Brigade against the expected counter @-@ attack . The Japanese mounted a strong attack in mid @-@ October which was defeated by the 9th Division after heavy fighting . During the second half of November the 9th Division captured the hills inland of Finschhafen from well dug in Japanese forces . Following its defeat , the 20th Division retreated along the coast with the 9th Division and 4th Brigade in pursuit . 
 While the 9th Division secured the coastal region of the Huon Peninsula the 7th Division drove the Japanese from the inland Finisterre Range . The Finisterre Range campaign began on 17 September when the 2 / 6th Independent Company was air @-@ landed in the Markham Valley . The company defeated a larger Japanese force at Kaiapit and secured an airstrip which was used to fly in the division 's 21st and 25th Brigades . Through aggressive patrolling the Australians forced the Japanese out of positions in extremely rugged terrain and in January 1944 the division began its attack on the key Shaggy Ridge position . The ridge was taken by the end of the month , with the RAAF playing a key supporting role . Following this success the Japanese withdrew from the Finisterre Range and Australian troops linked up with American patrols from Saidor on 21 April and secured Madang on 24 April . 
 = = = Advance to the Philippines = = = 
 The Australian military 's role in the South @-@ West Pacific decreased during 1944 as US forces took over responsibility for the main Allied effort in the region . In the latter half of 1943 the Australian Government decided , with MacArthur 's agreement , that the size of the military would be decreased to release manpower for war @-@ related industries which were important to supplying Britain and US forces in the Pacific . Australia 's main role in the Allied war effort from this point forward was supplying the other Allied countries with food , materials and manufactured goods needed for the defeat of Japan . As a result of this policy , the size of the Army was reduced from late 1943 onwards , though an offensive force of six infantry divisions ( three AIF and three Militia divisions ) was maintained until the end of the war . In early 1944 all but two of the Army 's divisions were withdrawn to the Atherton Tableland for training and rehabilitation . However , several new battalions of Australian @-@ led Papuan and New Guinea troops were formed during 1944 and organised into the Pacific Islands Regiment . These troops had earlier seen action alongside Australian units throughout the New Guinea campaign , and they largely replaced the Australian Army battalions disbanded during the year . 
 While the Australian Government offered I Corps for use in Leyte and Luzon , nothing came of several proposals to utilise it in the liberation of these islands . The Army 's prolonged period of relative inactivity during 1944 led to public concern , and many Australians believed that the AIF should be demobilised if it could not be used for offensive operations . This was politically embarrassing for the government , and helped motivate it to look for new areas where the military could be used . It also impacted upon the Army 's morale ; as the Allies advanced further towards Japan , the Army was increasingly relegated to " second string " roles , despite having fought " above its weight " for most of the war . 
 = = = Mopping up in New Guinea and the Solomons = = = 
 In late 1944 , the Australian Government committed twelve Australian Army brigades to replace six US Army divisions which were conducting defensive roles in Bougainville , New Britain and the Aitape – Wewak area in New Guinea in order to free up the American units for operations in the Philippines . While the US units had largely conducted a static defence of their positions , their Australian replacements mounted offensive operations designed to destroy the remaining Japanese forces in these areas . The value of these campaigns was controversial at the time and remains so to this day as the Australian Government authorised these operations for primarily political , rather than military , reasons . It was believed that keeping the Army involved in the war would give Australia greater influence in any post @-@ war peace conferences and that liberating Australian territories would enhance Australia 's influence in its region . Critics of these campaigns , such as author Peter Charlton , argue that they were unnecessary and wasteful of the lives of the Australian soldiers involved as the Japanese forces were already isolated and ineffective . 
 The 5th Division replaced the US 40th Infantry Division on New Britain during October and November 1944 and continued the New Britain campaign with the goals of protecting Allied bases and confining the large Japanese force on the island to the area around Rabaul . In late November the 5th Division established bases closer to the Japanese perimeter and began aggressive patrols supported by the Allied Intelligence Bureau . The division conducted amphibious landings at Open Bay and Wide Bay at the base of the Gazelle Peninsula in early 1945 and defeated the small Japanese garrisons in these areas . By April the Japanese had been confined to their fortified positions in the Gazelle Peninsula by the Australian force 's aggressive patrolling . The 5th Division suffered 53 fatalities and 140 wounded during this campaign . After the war it was found that the Japanese force was 93 @,@ 000 strong , which was much higher than the 38 @,@ 000 which Allied intelligence had estimated remained on New Britain . 
 The II Corps continued the Bougainville campaign after it replaced the US Army 's XIV Corps between October and December 1944 . The corps consisted of the 3rd Division , 11th Brigade and Fiji Infantry Regiment on Bougainville and the 23rd Brigade which garrisoned neighbouring islands and was supported by RAAF , Royal New Zealand Air Force and United States Marine Corps air units . While the XIV Corps had maintained a defensive posture , the Australians conducted offensive operations aimed at destroying the Japanese force on Bougainville . As the Japanese were split into several enclaves the II Corps fought separate offensives in the northern , central and southern portions of the island . The main focus was against the Japanese base at Buin in the south , and the offensives in the north and centre of the island were largely suspended from May 1945 . While Australian operations on Bougainville continued until the end of the war , large Japanese forces remained at Buin and in the north of the island . 
 The 6th Division was assigned responsibility for completing the destruction of the Japanese Eighteenth Army , which was the last large Japanese force remaining in the Australian portion of New Guinea . Supported by several RAAF squadrons and RAN warships , the division was reinforced by Militia and armoured units and began arriving at Aitape in October 1944 . In late 1944 the Australians launched a two @-@ pronged offensive to the east towards Wewak . The 17th Brigade advanced inland through the Torricelli Mountains while the remainder of the division moved along the coast . Although the Eighteenth Army had suffered heavy casualties from previous fighting and disease , it mounted a strong resistance and inflicted significant casualties . The 6th Division 's advance was also hampered by supply difficulties and bad weather . The Australians secured the coastal area by early May , and Wewak was captured on 10 May after a small force was landed east of the town . By the end of the war the Eighteenth Army had been forced into what it had designated its " last stand " area . The Aitape – Wewak campaign cost 442 Australian lives while about 9 @,@ 000 Japanese died and another 269 were taken prisoner . 
 = = = Borneo campaign = = = 
 The Borneo campaign of 1945 was the last major Allied campaign in the South West Pacific . In a series of amphibious assaults between 1 May and 21 July , the Australian I Corps , under Lieutenant General Leslie Morshead , attacked Japanese forces occupying the island . Allied naval and air forces , centred on the US 7th Fleet under Admiral Thomas Kinkaid , the Australian First Tactical Air Force and the US Thirteenth Air Force , also played important roles in the campaign . The goals of this campaign were to capture Borneo 's oilfields and Brunei Bay to support the US @-@ led invasion of Japan and British @-@ led liberation of Malaya which were planned to take place later in 1945 . The Australian Government did not agree to MacArthur 's proposal to extend the offensive to include the liberation of Java in July 1945 , however , and its decision not to release the 6th Division for this operation contributed to it not going ahead . 
 The campaign opened on 1 May 1945 when the 26th Brigade Group landed on the small island of Tarakan off the east coast of Borneo to secure the island 's airstrip as a base to support the planned landings at Brunei and Balikpapan . While it had been expected that it would take only a few weeks to secure Tarakan and re @-@ open the airstrip , intensive fighting on the island lasted until 19 June and the airstrip was not opened until 28 June . As a result , the operation is generally considered to have not been worthwhile . 
 The next phase began on 10 June when the 9th Division conducted simultaneous assaults in north @-@ west Labuan and on the coast of Brunei . While Brunei was quickly secured , the Japanese garrison on Labuan held out for over a week . After the Brunei Bay region was secured the 24th Brigade was landed in North Borneo and the 20th Brigade advanced along the western coast of Borneo south from Brunei . Both brigades rapidly advanced against weak Japanese resistance and most of north @-@ west Borneo was liberated by the end of the war . During the campaign the 9th Division was assisted by indigenous fighters who were waging a guerrilla war against Japanese forces with the support of Australian special forces such as Z Special Unit . 
 The third and final stage of the campaign was the capture of Balikpapan on the central east coast of Borneo . This operation had been opposed by Blamey , who believed that it was unnecessary , but went ahead on the orders of MacArthur . After a 20 @-@ day preliminary air and naval bombardment the 7th Division landed near the town on 1 July . Balikpapan and its surrounds were secured after some heavy fighting on 21 July but mopping up continued until the end of the war as isolated pockets of Japanese resistance remained . The capture of Balikpapan was the last large @-@ scale land operation conducted by the Western Allies during World War II . Although the Borneo campaign was criticised in Australia at the time , and in subsequent years , as pointless or a waste of soldiers ' lives , it did achieve a number of objectives , such as increasing the isolation of significant Japanese forces occupying the main part of the NEI , capturing major oil supplies and freeing Allied prisoners of war , who were being held in deteriorating conditions . 
 = = = Post @-@ war years = = = 
 Prior to the end of the war on 15 August 1945 , the Australian military was preparing to contribute forces to the invasion of Japan . Australia 's participation in this operation would have involved elements of all three services fighting as part of Commonwealth forces . It was planned to form a new 10th Division from existing AIF personnel which would form part of the Commonwealth Corps with British , Canadian and New Zealand units . The corps ' organisation was to be identical to that of a US Army corps , and it would have participated in the invasion of the Japanese home island of Honshū which was scheduled for March 1946 under Operation Coronet . Planning for operations against Japan ceased in August 1945 when Japan surrendered following the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . Japanese field commanders subsequently surrendered to Allied forces across the Pacific Theatre and Australian forces accepted the surrender of their Japanese opponents at ceremonies conducted at Morotai , several locations in Borneo , Timor , Wewak , Rabaul , Bougainville and Nauru . Following the surrender the Australian Army faced a number of immediate operational and administrative issues , including the need to maintain security in the areas it occupied , the disarming and administration of surrendered Japanese forces in these areas , organising the return of approximately 177 @,@ 000 soldiers ( including prisoners of war ) to Australia , the demobilisation and discharge of the bulk of the soldiers serving in the Army , and the raising of an occupation force for service in Japan . 
 Australian Army units were deployed as occupation forces following the Japanese surrender . Under the terms of an agreement reached between Blamey and Admiral Louis Mountbatten , the head of South East Asia Command , Australia was responsible for providing occupation forces for all of Borneo , the NEI east of Lombok ( including western New Guinea ) and the pre @-@ war Australian and British territories in eastern New Guinea and the Solomon Islands as well as Nauru and Ocean Islands in the Pacific . The Australian forces in Borneo and the NEI were to remain in place only until they were relieved by British and Dutch units in late 1945 . I Corps was responsible for garrisoning Borneo and the eastern NEI , and the First Army disarmed Japanese forces in the pre @-@ war British and Australian territories in and around New Guinea . After the surrender documents were signed the 7th and 9th Divisions took control of Borneo and five forces were dispatched from Morotai and Darwin to the key islands in the eastern NEI . While the British forces in the western NEI took part in fighting against Indonesian nationalists , the Australians were careful to not become involved in the Indonesian National Revolution and sought to hand control of their occupation zones to the Netherlands Indies Civil Administration as quickly as possible . Relations between the Australian troops and Indonesians were generally good , due in part to the decision by the Waterside Workers ' Federation of Australia to not load Dutch ships which were carrying military supplies bound for the NEI . The last Australian occupation troops left the NEI in February 1946 . 
 The Australian Army also contributed troops to the British Commonwealth Occupation Force ( BCOF ) in Japan . Volunteers for this force were recruited in late 1945 , with most being assigned to three new infantry battalions : the 65th Battalion was formed from volunteers from the 7th Division , the 66th Battalion by men from the 6th Division and the 67th from 9th Division personnel . These and other units were grouped at Morotai as the 34th Brigade in October 1945 . The brigade 's departure for Japan was delayed until February 1946 by inter @-@ Allied negotiations , but it eventually took over responsibility for enforcing the terms of the Japanese surrender in Hiroshima Prefecture . The three infantry battalions raised for occupation duties were designated the 1st , 2nd and 3rd battalions of the Royal Australian Regiment in 1949 , and the 34th Brigade became the 1st Brigade when it returned to Australia in December 1948 , forming the basis of the post @-@ war Regular Army . From that time the Australian Army contribution to the occupation of Japan was reduced to a single under @-@ strength battalion . Australian forces remained until September 1951 when the BCOF ceased operations , although by the time the majority of units had been committed to the fighting on the Korean peninsular following the outbreak of the Korean War on 25 June 1950 . 
 = = Leadership = = 
 When the war began the Army was on the cusp of a generational change . At the time , the senior officers on the active list were Major Generals Gordon Bennett and Thomas Blamey , although Bennett had not held an appointment for seven years and Blamey for the last two . Then came the Chief of the General Staff , Major General John Lavarack ; the Adjutant General , Major General Sir Carl Jess ; Major General Owen Phillips , the Quartermaster General ; Major General Edmund Drake @-@ Brockman , the commander of the 3rd Division ; and Major General Iven Mackay , the commander 2nd Division . All were over 50 years of age and all except Bennett , Drake @-@ Brockman and Mackay were serving or former regular soldiers . Only the first three were considered to command the 6th Division and Second AIF , for which posts Blamey was selected by Prime Minister Menzies . Both Blamey and Lavarack were promoted to lieutenant general on 13 October 1939 . Blamey was subsequently appointed General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) I Corps following its raising in March 1940 , while Mackay was appointed to succeed him in command of the 6th Division and Lavarack assumed command of the newly formed 7th Division . 
 The next most senior regular officers , all colonels , included men like Vernon Sturdee , Henry Wynter and John Northcott , all of whom had joined the Army before World War I. These officers held senior commands throughout the war , but seldom active ones . Below them were a distinct group of regular officers , graduates of the Royal Military College , Duntroon , which had opened in 1911 . Their number included Frank Berryman , William Bridgeford , Cyril Clowes , Horace Robertson , Sydney Rowell and George Alan Vasey . These officers had fought in World War I and reached the rank of major , but their promotion prospects were restricted and they remained majors for twenty years . Many left the Army to join the British or Indian armies , or the RAAF , or to return to civilian life . As a group , they had become embittered and resentful , and determined to prove that they could lead troops in battle . Many regular officers had attended training courses or been on exchange with the British Army , which was important in the early years of the war when there was close cooperation between the two armies . 
 Between the wars , the reservists enjoyed much better promotion prospects . While Alan Vasey , a major in the First AIF , was not promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel until 1937 , Kenneth Eather , a reservist who was too young to serve in World War I , was commissioned in 1923 and promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1935 . Menzies ordered that all commands in the 6th Division be given to reservists rather than regular officers , who had become political adversaries through their outspoken opposition to the Singapore strategy . Appointments therefore went to reservists like Stanley Savige , Arthur Allen , Leslie Morshead and Edmund Herring . Later other Militia officers rose to prominence as brigade and division commanders . The distinguished records of officers like Heathcote Hammer , Ivan Dougherty , David Whitehead , Victor Windeyer and Selwyn Porter would challenge the regular officers ' contention that they had a special claim to senior command ability . 
 At the start of the war , the majority of battalion commands went to older reservists , many of whom had commanded battalions or served in the First AIF . As the war went on , the average age of battalion commanders declined from 42 @.@ 9 years old in 1940 to 35 @.@ 6 in 1945 . The prevalence of regular officers in senior positions also rose , and in 1945 they held half of all senior appointments . They remained under @-@ represented in unit commands , and , as in 1940 , there was still only one infantry battalion commanded by a regular officer . Following the outbreak of war with Japan , many senior officers with distinguished records in the Middle East were recalled to Australia to lead Militia formations and fill important staff posts as the Army expanded . The following year , though , the Army reached its greatest extent after which it shrank in size . With a limited number of senior appointments and more senior officers than required , Blamey faced public and political criticism after he " shelved " several senior officers . The career prospects of junior officer were also affected , particularly in the infantry . Of the 52 officers promoted to the substantive rank of lieutenant colonel in the last six months of 1944 only five were infantrymen , while two were engineers , and 45 were from the supporting arms . 
 Meanwhile , the return of the AIF divisions to Australia from the Middle East in 1942 coincided with the arrival of large numbers of American troops , including the US 32nd and 41st Infantry Divisions . From April 1942 MacArthur took over command of all US and Australian forces in the newly formed South West Pacific Area as Supreme Commander . Blamey had been appointed Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief AMF in March following his promotion to general , setting up Land Headquarters to subsume the role of the Military Board , which was suspended on 30 July . As Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief AMF he reported directly to MacArthur and was subsequently also given command of Allied Land Forces in the theatre . Yet although Australian forces made up the bulk of the Allied forces in SWPA until 1944 in practice for political reasons MacArthur ensured that Blamey only commanded Australian forces , while he also limited the number of Australian staff officers posted to General Headquarters , and they remained underrepresented for the remainder of the war . 
 = = Equipment = = 
 The Australian Army generally had a long @-@ standing policy of using British @-@ designed equipment , but equipment from Australia , the United States and some other countries was introduced into service in the war 's later years . Pre @-@ war defence policies favoured the RAN , which received the majority of defence spending in the interwar period . The result was that when war came in 1939 , the Army 's equipment was of World War I vintage , and Australian factories were only capable of producing small arms . Most equipment was obsolescent and had to be replaced , and new factories were required to produce the latest weapons , equipment and motor vehicles . Some 2 @,@ 860 motor vehicles and motorcycles suitable for military use were purchased in 1939 for the Militia and another 784 for the 6th Division , but since a division 's war establishment was around 3 @,@ 000 , this was only enough for training . In February 1940 , the Treasury urged the War Cabinet to slow orders of motor vehicles to save the shipping space used for sending them to the Middle East for wheat cargoes . 
 Throughout the war , Australian infantry units were largely equipped with British @-@ designed but Australian @-@ made small arms and support weapons . The standard rifle was the SMLE No 1 Mk III * , manufactured since 1912 at the Lithgow Small Arms Factory . Small quantities of the Lee – Enfield No.4 Mk I / Mk I * rifle , made by the Long Branch Arsenal in Canada and Savage @-@ Stevens Firearms in the US , were used in New Guinea although most of these rifles were provided to other branches of the Australian military and to the Volunteer Defence Corps in order to free up No.1 <unk> * rifles for frontline infantry units . American @-@ made M1 Garand semi @-@ automatic rifles and M1 carbines were also issued to some Australian infantry units attached to US Army formations in New Guinea . Direct fire support was provided by a mixture of machine guns , including the Vickers machine gun which was produced at Lithgow from 1929 , which were utilised by specialised machine @-@ gun battalions and , later , also medium machine @-@ gun platoons within infantry battalions . The Bren Gun replaced Lewis Gun as the standard automatic rifle in the early years of the war , and within infantry battalions was utilised at the section level . Their manufacture in Australia started in 1941 . To improve rates of fire , the American Thompson submachine gun was introduced but it was eventually replaced by the Australian @-@ designed Owen Gun and the British @-@ designed but Australian @-@ modified and <unk> Austen submachine gun . Infantry platoons were also equipped with M36 grenades . The Boys anti @-@ tank rifle was the standard infantry anti @-@ tank weapon at the start of the war , but was replaced with the PIAT in 1943 . The heavier support weapons used by infantry battalions the war included the 2 @-@ inch mortar and Stokes 3 @-@ inch mortar . Infantry battalions were also equipped with Universal Carriers until being converted to the tropical warfare establishment in 1943 , when the organic carrier platoons were consolidated into companies assigned at divisional level . A man @-@ pack flamethrower was also introduced in 1945 . 
 Not until 17 January 1940 did Richard Casey obtain Cabinet 's approval to spend £ 400 @,@ 000 to construct a plant to manufacture 25 pounder field guns and 2 pounder anti @-@ tank guns . Until the 25 pounder could become available in quantity , units in Australia and the Far East were equipped with the old 18 pounder . Some units in the Middle East operated the 18 / 25 pounder , an 18 pounder that had been re @-@ bored to take 25 pounder ammunition , until they received British 25 pounders . The old 4 @.@ 5 inch howitzer also saw service , with the 2 / 10th Field Regiment employing them in support of the 9th Division during the Siege of Tobruk . A collection of captured Italian guns , known as the " Bush Artillery " , were also employed . These were rendered obsolete when the 25 pounder became available in quantity . Eventually , 1 @,@ 527 were manufactured in Australia . A special light weight version known as the Short 25 pounder was developed for jungle warfare . The requirement for a portable field piece in mountainous jungle led to the use of the 3 @.@ 7 inch Mountain Howitzer in the New Guinea campaign . The American 75 mm Pack Howitzer M1 was also employed . Experience in the Western Desert campaign soon showed that the 2 pounder could not deal with German tanks , and it was superseded by the 6 pounder , which began coming off the assembly lines in Australia in July 1942 . In turn it was replaced in 1944 by the 17 pounder , which was manufactured at the Maribyrnong Ordnance Factory . The anti @-@ aircraft artillery were equipped with the Swedish @-@ designed Bofors 40 mm gun , which was manufactured in Australia , and the British 3 @.@ 7 inch Anti @-@ Aircraft gun . Medium artillery included the American 155 mm Long Tom and the British 5 @.@ 5 inch gun . 
 The need for tanks to equip armoured units led the War Cabinet to approve the manufacture of the Sentinel tank in 1940 . Some 66 of them were delivered by the time manufacture ceased in July 1943 , but none were used in action . Otherwise tanks were sourced from overseas . A quantity of M3 Stuart light tanks were received in September 1941 , while the first shipment of British Matilda II tanks arrived in July 1942 , and these proved to be the most suitable type for jungle warfare . A flame @-@ thrower variant was produced and eventually saw action in the Borneo campaign . The most numerous tank used by the Australian Army was the M3 Lee . Several hundred of these equipped the armoured divisions , but unlike the Stuarts and Matildas , they did not see action . An Australian scout car known as the Dingo was produced as an interim measure until adequate supplies of the Canadian <unk> armoured car became available in 1944 . The Australian Army also operated some amphibious tractors . 
 The Australian Army developed its own landing craft . Development of an Australian version of the Landing Craft Assault , the ALCV ( Australian Landing Craft , Vehicle ) , was carried out by Army personnel working alongside the Ford Motor Company . Prototypes were constructed by sappers and launched on the Brisbane River . The initial version , known as the ALCV I was found to be too small , so the larger 12 @-@ metre ALCV II was developed . An Australian version of the Landing Craft Mechanized , the ALCM , was also developed and manufactured by Ford in Brisbane and later at Geelong . Operational experience demonstrated the need for larger landing craft , so the ALCV III , an enlarged version of the ALCM II with four Ford V8 engines and twice the cargo capacity , was produced . The Army also ordered 15 ALCM IIIs , a type of similar capacity to an American Landing Craft Tank , with five Ford V8 engines . Only four were delivered before the end of the war , but they arrived in time to see service in New Guinea . 
 By 1945 , due to a shrinking number of operational units and stepped up production , equipment shortages were a thing of the past . Indeed , the Army had more equipment that it actually needed . For example , a total of 368 25 pounders were required for combat and 38 for training but there were a total of 1 @,@ 516 on hand . Additionally , a total of 530 2 pounder and 6 pounder anti @-@ tank guns were required , but the Army had 1 @,@ 941 , while 68 3 @.@ 7 inch anti @-@ aircraft guns were needed for combat and five for training , but there were 640 pieces available . Similar surpluses existed with small arms such as the Bren , of which 9 @,@ 438 were required , but there were 21 @,@ 139 in the system . The situation in relation to Bren gun carriers was even more marked with only 123 of the 3 @,@ 767 vehicles actually being required , due to the decreased requirements for mobility vehicles in jungle warfare . 
 = = Training and doctrine = = 
 The Australian Army 's pre @-@ war doctrine was focused on conventional warfare in a European environment . This doctrine and the supporting training manuals were common to those of all Commonwealth countries . Following the outbreak of war the Army continued to focus on preparing its units to fight in Europe and North Africa . By far the single greatest difficulty in training in the early war years was the shortage of equipment . However , there were also critical shortages of instructors . The decision to form the 1st Armoured Division created a requirement for large numbers of highly skilled personnel , but there were few officers and men with the required skills in the small pre @-@ war Army and many of them were already serving in the AIF 's divisional mechanised cavalry regiments . An Armoured Fighting Vehicles School was created at Puckapunyal , Victoria , in 1941 , and in March 1943 , the Armoured Corps Training Centre was moved there . 
 Another problem for the Militia was a lack of continuity in the training . When the war began , men were called up for only one month 's additional training . This was then increased to three months ' additional training . In 1940 – 41 , officers and non @-@ commissioned officers were intensively trained for 18 to 24 days , after which there was a camp for 70 days . Meanwhile , soldiers who had been through the 90 @-@ day training regimen in 1939 – 40 were given 12 days ' additional training , while those who had not completed this training undertook 70 days . This allowed for individual training , but prevented proper unit training . In July 1941 , fully trained soldiers who had completed 90 days ' training became liable for three months ' additional training per year while new recruits were liable for six months . At the same time , the War Cabinet provided for more intensive training for the full @-@ time cadre of Militia units , which were not to exceed 25 percent of the unit 's strength . Training for the Militia and the VDC was also hampered in the early war years by a lack of small arms , particularly after the Dunkirk evacuation when Australia dispatched its reserve stock of rifles to Britain , in an effort to help replace equipment lost by the British Army , amidst concerns of an invasion of the United Kingdom after the Fall of France . 
 Although the Army 's focus was on conventional warfare , in late 1940 Lieutenant Colonel J.C. Mawhood , a British officer , arrived in Australia with a small specialist staff to conduct training in unconventional warfare . A school , known as No. 7 Infantry Training Centre , was opened at Wilsons Promontory , Victoria , which was described as " an isolated area of high , rugged and heavily timbered mountains , precipitous valleys , swiftly running streams , and swamps . " The 1st , 2nd and 3rd Independent Companies and a nucleus of the 4th were raised by October 1941 when training was discontinued . After the outbreak of the war with Japan , the school was reopened as the Guerrilla Warfare School , the training of the fourth company was completed . These independent companies were later redesignated as commando squadrons , of which twelve were eventually raised , including the 1st , which had been destroyed early in the war ; as the war progressed they were used more in the flank protection and reconnaissance roles than for unconventional warfare . 
 The Australian Army did not have any doctrine for jungle warfare prior to 1942 . Some lessons were passed on by officers who escaped from Malaya and Singapore , however , and these were incorporated into a training memorandum in May that year . AIF units that returned from North Africa undertook some training in jungle tactics before going into action , but the Militia units which initially faced the Japanese in New Guinea suffered from inadequate training , and this led to them suffering heavy casualties . 
 In order to be able to move troops to the front in New Guinea more rapidly , to acclimatise them during the process , and to allow more realistic training of large formations in jungle and mountainous but malaria @-@ free terrain , Blamey decided to establish a training and staging area on the Atherton Tableland in November 1942 . Eventually , accommodation was provided there for 70 @,@ 000 troops . As divisions returned from tours of duty in New Guinea in 1943 and 1944 , they were sent to Atherton for anti @-@ malaria treatment . The men then went on leave , after which they returned to Atherton where training was conducted before staging and departing again . 
 In early 1943 the Army developed a jungle warfare doctrine by adapting the pre @-@ war field service regulations to meet the conditions in the South @-@ West Pacific . The Army 's front @-@ line combat formations were reorganised and trained in accordance with this doctrine during the year . A jungle warfare school was opened at Canungra , Queensland , in November 1942 , and all reinforcements for combat units subsequently passed through the school before joining their unit . Canungra consisted of a reinforcement training centre , an Independent Company training centre , and a tactical school . With the establishment of Canungra the Independent Company training centre on Wilsons Promontory was closed . 
 Over time , training programs included greater cooperation between the Army 's combat arms and with the other services . A Combined Training Centre , also known as HMAS Assault , opened on 1 September 1942 at Nelson Bay , adjacent to Port Stephens , New South Wales , as a central establishment for the training staffs , beach parties and small boat crews . In July 1942 , a Combined Training School was established at Bribie Island , Queensland , and nearby Toorbul Point for Army units . During 1943 and 1944 , combined training with the RAAF and RAN was also carried out at Trinity Beach , near Cairns in preparation for amphibious operations in the South West Pacific as the Allies advanced . 
 The Australian Army began training paratroops in December 1942 as an offshoot of the training of Independent Companies . The 1st Parachute Battalion was subsequently formed in March 1943 . It reached full strength by January 1944 , but , although it was warned for action a number of times , including the possible rescue of prisoners of war held at Sandakan in 1945 , it did not see any fighting . After the war it participated in the reoccupation of Singapore . 
 By 1945 the Army possessed a comprehensive schools system , with 40 schools of various kinds . Between 1942 and 1945 96 @,@ 000 training courses were conducted . Soldiers who were selected to become officers were trained at various Officer Cadet Training Units around the country , and by the end of the war these units had produced 7 @,@ 887 officers . Meanwhile , regular officers of the PMF continued to be trained at the Royal Military College , Duntroon with a number of shortened courses of between six months and a years ' duration being run . Unlike the First AIF , newly commissioned lieutenants were not sent back to their original unit , but were posted to the first vacancy . Other schools included the School of Artillery , the Guerrilla Warfare School , the Cooking and Catering School , the School of Military Law and the School of Movement and Transport . Recruit training was now thorough and exacting , and for infantrymen culminated in a jungle training course at Canungra , where the Jungle Warfare School turned out 4 @,@ 000 reinforcements a month . In 1945 , the 29th Brigade received 1 @,@ 000 young reinforcements shortly before embarking for Torokina , but their commander later remarked that their training at Canungra had been so thorough that they " reacted with almost miraculous quickness to conditions of battle . " 
 = = Prisoners of war = = 
 Nearly 29 @,@ 000 Australians were taken prisoner by the Axis during the war , the bulk of them members of the Australian Army . During the fighting in the Middle East and Greece , 7 @,@ 116 Australian soldiers were taken prisoner by German and Italian forces . Of these men , 3 @,@ 109 were captured at Crete and 2 @,@ 065 on the mainland of Greece . Most of the other POWs were members of the 9th Division captured during the retreat from Cyrenaica in early 1941 , the siege of Tobruk or the fighting near El Alamein in mid @-@ 1942 . Like other western Allied POWs , the Australians were held in permanent camps in Italy and Germany and were generally treated in accordance with the Geneva Conventions . As the war neared its end the Germans moved many prisoners towards the interior of the country to prevent them from being liberated by the advancing Allied armies . These movements were often made through forced marches in harsh weather and resulted in many deaths . As the war drew to a close , a unit designated the AIF Reception Group ( United Kingdom ) was established near Eastbourne in England to provide accommodation and support for the POWs once they were released . By August 1945 all the former Australian POWs in Europe had embarked on ships bound for Australia . While Australian prisoners suffered a higher death rate in German and Italian captivity than their counterparts in World War I , it was much lower than the rate suffered under Japanese internment . 
 More than 21 @,@ 000 members of the AIF were captured by the Japanese during the first months of 1942 . Most of these men were members of the 8th Division captured at Singapore , the NEI and Rabaul , but about 2 @,@ 000 members of the I Corps party sent to Java in early 1942 were taken prisoner there . Throughout captivity these POWs were treated harshly , resulting in a high death rate . Australians were held in camps across the Asia @-@ Pacific region and many endured long voyages in grossly overcrowded ships . While most of the Australian POWs who died in Japanese captivity were the victim of deliberate malnutrition and disease , hundreds were murdered by their guards . The Burma @-@ Thai Railway was the most notorious of the prisoner of war experiences , as 13 @,@ 000 Australians worked on it at various times during 1942 and 1943 alongside thousands of other Allied POWs and Asians conscripted by the Japanese ; nearly 2 @,@ 650 Australians died there . Thousands of Australian POWs were also sent to the Japanese home islands where they worked in factories and mines in generally harsh conditions . The POWs held in camps at Ambon and Borneo suffered the highest death rates ; 77 percent of those at Ambon died and few of the 2 @,@ 500 Australian and British prisoners in Borneo survived ; almost all were killed by overwork and a series of death marches in 1945 . Overall , only 14 @,@ 000 of the Australian prisoners taken by the Japanese survived captivity . The majority of these deaths were caused by malnutrition and disease . The treatment of the POWs prompted many Australians to remain hostile towards Japan after the war . Australian authorities investigated the abuses against Allied POWs in their country 's zone of responsibility after the war , and guards who were believed to have mistreated prisoners were among those tried by Australian @-@ administered war crimes trials . 
 = = Demobilisation = = 
 The process of demobilisation began immediately after the end of hostilities , although it had partially commenced as early as 1943 . At the end of the war the strength of the Australian Army was 398 @,@ 594 men , approximately half of which were serving overseas in the South West Pacific Area . The demobilisation plan was put into action on 16 August 1945 , the day after Japan surrendered . Undertaken in four phases , it was finally completed on 15 February 1947 by which time a total of 349 @,@ 964 soldiers had been discharged . Although the process largely proceeded smoothly , many soldiers felt it was too slow and there was widespread dissatisfaction among men continuing to serve in the South West Pacific after the war ended . The speed of demobilisation was hampered by the requirement to continue to maintain security in the areas still occupied , the lack of sufficient shipping , the administrative workload entailed , and limited facilities for use for the demobilisation process . Although the Second AIF was not disbanded until 30 June 1947 a temporary organisation known as the Interim Army was established at the end of the war and included all members of the Army on full @-@ time duty . Meanwhile , in a departure from previous defence policy the Australian government decided that a small peace @-@ time regular force was to be raised to provide a trained , full @-@ time force capable of being deployed either in Australia or overseas in a national emergency and the Australian Regular Army was subsequently established on 30 September 1947 . The Militia , under the guise of the Citizen Military Forces , was re @-@ established on 1 July 1948 to provide a part @-@ time volunteer force which would be able to provide the basis for expansion in wartime . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 In the course of the fighting the Australian Army sustained approximately 61 @,@ 000 battle casualties , the bulk of them from the Second AIF . This included 11 @,@ 323 killed in action , 1 @,@ 794 died of wounds , and 21 @,@ 853 wounded . 5 @,@ 558 were killed or died in captivity , while another 20 @,@ 920 survived as prisoners of war . Non @-@ battle casualties included 1 @,@ 088 killed and 33 @,@ 196 wounded / injured in operational areas , and another 1 @,@ 795 killed and 121 @,@ 800 wounded / injured in non @-@ operational areas . The large number of non @-@ battle casualties was significant , illustrating the toll that sickness and disease took upon the Army . 
 = Feminist Improvising Group = 
 The Feminist Improvising Group ( FIG ) were a five- to eight @-@ piece English free improvising avant @-@ garde jazz and experimental music ensemble formed in London in 1977 by Scottish vocalist Maggie Nicols and English bassoonist / composer Lindsay Cooper . Their debut performance was at a " Music for Socialism " festival at the Almost Free Theatre in London in October 1977 , and they toured Europe several times in the late 1970s and early 1980s . 
 FIG were the first publicly performing women @-@ only group of improvisers and challenged the hitherto male @-@ dominated musical improvisation community . The group consisted of women from different backgrounds with different levels of musicianship , and their concerts were a combination of music and theatre that dealt with everyday women 's issues . FIG also integrated " lesbian sexuality " into their performances that , Canadian academic Julie Dawn Smith said , " queered " the improvisational space and " demanded queer listening " . 
 FIG were generally not well received by male improvisers , who Nicols said criticised their technical ability and their " irreverent approach to technique and tradition " . Smith noted that FIG 's performances were also criticised by some feminists for being " too virtuosic and abstract " , but they generally received positive reactions from both women and men at concerts . A review in the improvised music magazine Musics said that FIG 's debut performance " was a welcome contrast to the previous performances [ of the evening ] which had been singularly humourless . " 
 In 1983 FIG evolved into the European Women 's Improvising Group ( EWIG ) , bowing to pressure to tone down their name . FIG were influential on the second @-@ generation improvisation scene and spawned a number of women @-@ only improvising groups and events . FIG were also educational in that they exposed new audiences to improvisation and feminism . 
 = = History = = 
 The Feminist Improvising Group ( FIG ) was founded in London in 1977 by Scottish vocalist Maggie Nicols from Centipede and English bassoonist / composer Lindsay Cooper from Henry Cow . Nicols and Cooper first discussed the idea of an all @-@ women improvising group at a musician 's union meeting . Cooper said , " we agreed that improvisation had become very important and no women were doing it . And suddenly we thought , well let 's do it ! Let 's get women together and do it ourselves ! " While Nicols and Cooper had both performed frequently with men , they had little experience performing with other women , but their involvement in class politics as well as feminist and lesbian activism prompted them to pursue this project . The other members of the five @-@ piece ensemble were cellist / bassist Georgie Born , also from Henry Cow , vocalist / pianist Cathy Williams from the British duo Rag Doll , and trumpeter Corinne <unk> from British feminist rock band Jam Today . They had originally intended to call themselves the " Women 's Improvising Group " , but at their first engagement they discovered that the organisers had billed them as the " Feminist Improvising Group " . Nicols said that the " political statement of the band 's name never even came from us ! But we just thought , ' OK , they 've called us feminist , we 'll work with that ' " . 
 FIG 's debut performance was at a " Music for Socialism " festival at the Almost Free Theatre in London in October 1977 . Their act was a combination of music and comedy , and focused on " women 's experience " and " mundane daily things " . Nicols described it as " quite anarchic . It had elements of theatre ; we had props , we were chopping onions , I was rushing around with perfume , it was completely improvised . " 
 FIG became the first publicly performing women @-@ only improvising group , and they challenged the established improvising community with performances that were theatrical , with politics and farce supplementing their music . They staged parodies around the role of women in society and incorporated domestic " found objects " in their performances , including " vacuum cleaners , brooms , <unk> , pots and pans , and egg <unk> " . Their performances often had some of the women cleaning the stage , while the others huddled in a group to " explore the sonic possibilities of household items . " They also broke down the barriers that traditionally existed between the performer and the audience by engaging in " antiphonal exchange [ s ] " with them , and promoting the notion that " anyone can do it " . FIG redefined free improvisation by introducing " social virtuosity " , the ability to communicate with the other musicians and the audience . 
 In the late 1970s and early 1980s , FIG toured Europe several times , where they played at festivals at various venues , including Paris , Berlin , Rome , Copenhagen , Stockholm and Reykjavík . When Cooper and Born were performing with Henry Cow in Zürich in early 1978 , Cooper invited Swiss pianist Irène Schweizer to join FIG . English filmmaker Sally Potter , who played saxophone and sang , joined the group in April 1978 . Dutch trombonist Annemarie Roelofs , English singer Frankie Armstrong , Dutch woodwind player Angèle <unk> , and French saxophonist and guitarist Françoise <unk> also played intermittently with the group . Some of FIG 's performances consisted of up to eight women . 
 Nicols left FIG in 1980 to form another all @-@ women group called Contradictions . In 1983 , under the helm of Schweizer , FIG evolved into The European Women 's Improvising Group ( EWIG ) , bowing to pressure that their name was " too political " . EWIG included Schweizer , Cooper , Roelofs , French double bassist Joëlle Léandre , and French singer Annick <unk> . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 In the 1970s there was a view that the free improvisation music space was largely the domain of male heterosexuals , and that women were marginalized . Canadian academic Julie Dawn Smith wrote in her 2004 essay , " Playing Like a Girl : The Queer Laughter of the Feminist Improvising Group " , that " The opportunity for freedom in relation to sexual difference , gender , and sexuality for women improvisers was strangely absent from the discourses and practices of free jazz and free improvisation " . When the Feminist Improvising Group appeared in 1977 , they challenged the established male @-@ dominated musical improvising community . FIG were a mixture of white , black , lesbian , straight , <unk> and middle @-@ class women . Maggie Nicols wanted the group to be open to all women of different backgrounds and different levels of musicianship , even those who had not improvised before . She saw these differing abilities , which gave rise to unexpected results , as a strength and not a weakness . According to critic Dana Reason Myers , " The result was a music that had to be taken on its own terms , as music that decidedly and consciously included the politics of being women , musicians , improvisers , and members of a society . " 
 While some of the members lacked conventional musical skills , they were " politically very right " and quickly adapted to improvising . Because of the nature of free improvisation , the women were able to perform together without concerns about competency . Georgie Born said that FIG functioned very differently from a mixed group : " when you are playing with men , there is an element of competition ; they tend to feel that there is a threat from women . In an all @-@ women band we are released from that kind of pressure . " Born added that without men , women are more honest and open with each other , and are more receptive to what each member of the group is doing . 
 FIG integrated " lesbian sexuality " in their improvised performances : their stage acts often included " fights " and " hugs " that Smith described as " violating taboos of musical propriety and masculinist competition that prohibited musicians from touching one another " . According to Smith , " refus [ ing ] to ' pass ' as straight opened possibilities for the improvisation of female sexuality . In effect FIG queered space of improvisational practice . " 
 Smith wrote that male heterosexual improvisers typically dismissed women in audiences as not important , seeing them as " either wives , girlfriends , or groupies " . She said FIG seized this opportunity to change the relationship between improvisers and female audiences . Using their " skills of social and technical virtuosity " , FIG improvised around issues important to women , and thereby " drew women into their music who might not otherwise be concerned with the concept of free improvisation . " Smith explained that even women not familiar with the technicalities of free improvisation still related to a group of women on stage " foreground [ ing ] their bodies and their sounds for the pleasure of other woman " . 
 The Guardian described FIG 's music as often comprising " hard trombone chords , angular bursts , and restless <unk> made by every imaginable sound @-@ producing object " ; it sometimes drifts into " blues @-@ like dirge [ s ] " or tangos , but is different from the " unrelieved adventures into the abstract to be heard from some male improvising groups . " American academic David G. Pier said FIG used free jazz 's " extreme timbres " to enhance their live performances , which he described as " in @-@ your @-@ face queer sexuality and feminist shock politics . " 
 Smith described performances by FIG as a " sonic negotiation of eroticism , resistance , liberation , joy , pleasure , power , and agency , a multilayered call and response between individual improvisers and a community of listeners " . She added that FIG were " instrumental in encouraging listeners / interpreters to negotiate the work from a queer perspective , opening a space for the listener who responds to the laughter of women with her own improvised laughter . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Annemarie Roelofs recalled that critics of the Feminist Improvising Group were always either very positive , or very negative ; there was never any middle @-@ ground . Nicols and Roelofs said they received little support from male improvisers , who criticised their technical ability and referred to them as women , not musicians . FIG 's message that " anyone can do it " antagonised many who value " technical virtuosity " and " improvisational competence " . Nicols said they also complained about FIG 's " irreverent approach to technique and tradition " , while Smith suggested that they may have felt threatened by the " spectacle of so many unsupervised and unpredictable women on the stage " . Irène Schweizer recalled that FIG were invited to perform at the Total Music Meeting in Berlin in November 1979 because she had played at the festival before ( in all @-@ men groups ) . But after seeing FIG perform , the organiser asked Schweizer " how come you brought such a group , they can 't play , and they are not good enough . " Nicols said that avant @-@ garde musician Alexander von <unk> also complained about FIG being there , saying that " we couldn 't play our instruments " and that he could have found " loads of men that would have played a lot better " . 
 Recalling FIG 's appearance at the Total Music Meeting , guitarist Eugene Chadbourne said " The lack of support for FIG must obviously extend beyond the boundaries of that group into the entire area of women musicians ... I am sure the lack of men on stage made some men feel excluded . " Schweizer believed that many male improvisers felt threatened by FIG because of their use of humour , " We were not that serious , like men , [ ... ] they take [ improvising ] so seriously " . Georgie Born described FIG 's humour as " very iconoclastic and very surreal , or very silly . There were no big boys there standing judging . " On the issue of FIG being a women @-@ only group , Nicols remarked , " It 's amazing the number of men that were saying , ' Why are there no men ? ' And yet nobody had ever dreamed to think of asking why there were men only [ groups ] . " 
 Some feminist audiences were also critical of FIG , saying that they were " too virtuosic and abstract " . At a Women 's Festival at The Drill Hall in London , many women in the audience were unfamiliar with " free music " and accused FIG of being " elitist " and " inaccessible " . This was frustrating for the members of the group who expected support from such quarters . 
 But FIG also received positive reactions from both men and women at concerts . Nicols recalled the " dykes " in the audience who had come to see them at FIG 's first performance : they were into disco and soul and sat patiently through the other improvisers , but when FIG came on , " They laughed their heads off . " A review in the improvised music magazine Musics said that FIG 's set " was a welcome contrast to the previous performances [ of the evening ] which had been singularly humourless . " Lindsay Cooper recalled a comment made to her by a female artist working in film : " I don 't know what on earth you 're doing but I like it . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 The Feminist Improvising Group , and its successor , The European Women 's Improvising Group , spawned a number of women @-@ only improvising groups and events . In 1980 Contradictions was formed by Maggie Nicols , who modelled it on FIG . The founding members included Nicols , Jackie <unk> and Sylvia Hallett , with Irène Schweizer and Joëlle Léandre participating in their first concert . Contradictions went on to become a women 's workshop run by Nicols in which " anyone could participate " . Schweizer was one of the organisers of the <unk> festivals that staged the first International Women 's Jazz Festival for Improvised Music in 1986 in Frankfurt . In the early 1990s , Nicols , Schweizer and Léandre formed the " highly theatrical and often satirical " improvising trio , Les Diaboliques , who released three albums between 1994 and 1998 . 
 Nicols said that FIG were " tremendously influential " on the second @-@ generation improvisation scene that developed in its wake . Léandre , after seeing FIG for the first time performing in Paris , said she had been " shocked [ ... ] to see only women onstage " . FIG were also educational in that they exposed free improvisation to women unfamiliar with the genre , and acquainted men with feminism . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Feminist Improvising Group ( 1979 ) 
 Cassette tape release of extracts from live performances in Copenhagen ( 29 April 1978 ) , Stockholm ( 20 August 1978 ) and Reykjavík ( 18 – 19 November 1978 ) . 
 Another Evening at Logos , 1974 / 79 / 81 ( 2015 ) 
 Compilation album by various artists , including FIG , who contribute one track recorded live at the <unk> International Multi Media Festival in Ghent , Belgium ( 22 February 1979 ) . 
 = = Members = = 
 Maggie Nicols – vocals 
 Lindsay Cooper – bassoon , oboe , sopranino saxophone , piano 
 Georgie Born – cello , bass guitar 
 Corinne <unk> – trumpet 
 Cathy Williams – keyboards , vocals 
 Irène Schweizer – piano , drums 
 Sally Potter – vocals , alto saxophone 
 Annemarie Roelofs – trombone , violin 
 Frankie Armstrong – vocals 
 Angèle <unk> – flute , tenor saxophone , soprano saxophone 
 Françoise <unk> – alto saxophone , guitar 
 Source : 
 = SMS Gefion = 
 SMS Gefion ( " His Majesty 's Ship Gefion " ) was an unprotected cruiser of the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) , the last ship of the type built in Germany . She was laid down in March 1892 , launched in March 1893 , and completed in June 1895 after lengthy trials and repairs . The cruiser was named after the earlier sail frigate Gefion , which had been named for the goddess Gefjon of Norse mythology . Intended for service in the German colonial empire and as a fleet scout , Gefion was armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 @-@ centimeter ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , had a top speed in excess of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) , and could steam for 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) , the longest range of any German warship at the time . Nevertheless , the conflicting requirements necessary for a fleet scout and an overseas cruiser produced an unsuccessful design , and Gefion was rapidly replaced in both roles by the newer Gazelle class of light cruisers . 
 Gefion initially served with the main German fleet and frequently escorted Kaiser Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern on trips to other European countries , including a state visit to Russia in 1897 . In late 1897 , Gefion was reassigned to the East Asia Squadron ; she arrived there in May 1898 . The ship took part in the Battle of Taku Forts in June 1900 during the Boxer Rebellion in China . She returned to Germany in 1901 and was modernized , but she did not return to service after the work was finished in 1904 . She was to be mobilized after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but a crew could not be assembled due to shortages of personnel . Instead , she was used as a barracks ship in Danzig from 1916 to the end of the war . In 1920 , she was sold , converted into a freighter , and renamed Adolf Sommerfeld . She served in this capacity for only three years , and was broken up for scrap in Danzig in 1923 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Gefion was designed to serve as a colonial cruiser in the German colonial empire ; during peacetime she was to police German holdings and suppress native unrest , and in times of war she would act as a commerce raider . In addition , the new cruiser design was intended to be capable of serving as a fleet scout . This pair of roles was necessary because the German naval budget was too small to permit development of pure fleet scouts and colonial cruisers . Indeed , Gefion was essentially a smaller version of contemporary German protected cruisers such as Kaiserin Augusta . As a result of the competing design requirements — a high top speed necessary for a fleet scout , very long cruising radius for a commerce raider , and the firepower necessary in the colonies — the resulting design was unsatisfactory . 
 Gefion , classified as a cruiser @-@ corvette , was authorized in the 1890 – 91 budget and named for the earlier sail frigate Gefion . The contract for her construction was awarded to Schichau @-@ Werke in late 1891 . She was the last unprotected cruiser built by the Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) ; thereafter , the Germans built the Gazelle class of light cruisers to fill the need for small , overseas cruisers . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Gefion was 109 @.@ 2 meters ( 358 ft ) long at the waterline and 110 @.@ 4 m ( 362 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 13 @.@ 2 m ( 43 ft ) and had a draft of 6 @.@ 47 m ( 21 @.@ 2 ft ) forward and 6 @.@ 27 m ( 20 @.@ 6 ft ) aft . She was designed to displace 3 @,@ 746 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 687 long tons ; 4 @,@ 129 short tons ) , but with a full ammunition , stores , and fuel load she displaced up to 4 @,@ 275 t ( 4 @,@ 207 long tons ; 4 @,@ 712 short tons ) . The hull was constructed from transverse and longitudinal steel frames , except for the lower stem and stern parts , which were made of bronze . The frames were covered with wood planking and a metal sheath that extended to 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) above the waterline to reduce fouling . 
 She was fitted with a fore and main pole mast with spotting tops to aid her gunnery . The ship had a crew of 13 officers and 289 enlisted men . She carried a number of small boats , including one picket boat , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and one dinghy . Gefion was crank , rolled badly , and made severe leeway , and her decks were wet in a head sea . She nevertheless maneuvered well and had a tight turning radius . She had a metacentric height of <unk> m ( 1 ft 10 in ) . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 Gefion was powered by two vertical , 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines , which drove a pair of 3 @-@ bladed screw propellers that were 4 @.@ 2 m ( 14 ft ) in diameter . Steam was provided by six coal @-@ fired , transverse , cylindrical , double water @-@ tube boilers , which were trunked into three vertical funnels . The engines were designed to produce 9 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 700 kW ) for a top speed of 19 knots ( 35 km / h ; 22 mph ) . On trials , her engines produced 9 @,@ 827 ihp ( 7 @,@ 328 kW ) and a speed of 20 @.@ 5 kn ( 38 @.@ 0 km / h ; 23 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ship could store up to 860 t ( 850 long tons ; 950 short tons ) of coal , which enabled her to steam for 3 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 500 km ; 4 @,@ 000 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 kn ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Electrical power was provided by three generators , which supplied a total output of 40 kilowatts ( 54 hp ) at 67 volts . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 Gefion was originally to be armed with 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns , but the main battery was revised to fifteen 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK L / 35 guns and finally to ten 10 @.@ 5 cm guns . These guns were supplied with a total of 807 rounds of ammunition , and they had a maximum range of 10 @,@ 800 m ( 35 @,@ 400 ft ) . She was also equipped with six 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 40 guns , with 1 @,@ 500 rounds . They had a range of 6 @,@ 200 m ( 20 @,@ 300 ft ) . The ship was also fitted with two 45 cm ( 18 in ) deck @-@ mounted torpedo tubes with a total of five torpedoes . The ship was protected with a light armored deck consisting of steel . The deck was 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , with 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick sloped sides . The coaming around the funnels was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The engine rooms received much more significant protection , with coaming 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick on top of 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) of teak . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for the new cruiser was laid down on 28 March 1892 at the Schichau @-@ Werke shipyard in Danzig , and the completed hull was launched on 31 March 1893 . Kaiser Wilhelm II attended her launching , and the speech was given by the director of the Kaiserliche Werft ( Imperial Shipyard ) in Danzig , Kapitän zur See ( Captain at Sea ) Graf Kurt von Haugwitz . Sea trials began on 27 June 1894 at Kiel and lasted until 2 October . Serious defects in her design , in particular poor ventilation , were revealed through the trials , which necessitated modifications at the Kaiserliche Werft in Kiel . She was accordingly placed in reserve after completing her trials . The work lasted until mid @-@ 1895 , and the ship was ready for commissioning on 5 June 1895 . That month , she was present for the celebration marking the opening of the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . 
 In July , she escorted Wilhelm II 's yacht Hohenzollern on a visit to the king of Sweden and a trip to the Cowes Regatta . The two ships thereafter visited Leith in the Firth of Forth . Following her return to Wilhelmshaven on 17 August , she participated in the annual autumn fleet maneuvers . During the maneuvers , Gefion , a pair of torpedo boats , and a salvage ship searched for the wrecked torpedo boat S 41 in Jammer Bay on 28 August . A second attempt was made on 24 September , but it too was unsuccessful . She thereafter resumed her duties as escort for Hohenzollern , and during this period she conducted further sea trials that confirmed her cruising radius , which was the highest of all German ships at the time . 
 In February 1896 , she was assigned as the watch ship in Kiel . From 24 to 30 May , she joined maneuvers in the Baltic Sea with the II Division of the I Squadron ; these were the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads . Gefion rejoined Hohenzollern as her escort for Wilhelm II 's voyage to Norway in July . While there , on 10 July , Gefion helped pull free the stranded French steamer SS Chanzy . From 9 August to 15 September , Gefion participated in the annual autumn fleet maneuvers in the Baltic and North Seas . By 17 September , she was back in Kiel to resume her duties as watch ship . From 2 to 14 December , she accompanied the II Division through the Kattegat and Skagerrak . She returned to Kiel in early 1897 and continued her watch ship duties until June . She took Admiral Hans von Koester on a trip to Sassnitz in April for celebrations to mark the opening of the first telegraph cable between Germany and Sweden . In June she began to serve as a training ship for stokers . During this period , she escorted Hohenzollern to a sailing regatta in the mouth of the Elbe , which was followed by another trip to Norway and Sweden in July . 
 On 30 July , Gefion was back in Kiel , though she escorted Hohenzollern to Kronstadt from 4 to 13 August for Wilhelm II to have a meeting with Czar Nicholas II of Russia , along with the I and II Divisions of the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) . Gefion thereafter joined the autumn maneuvers , which lasted until 22 September . She then returned to Kiel for periodic repairs . After this work was completed in December , Gefion was assigned to the newly formed II Division of the East Asia Squadron . The Division was commanded by Prince Heinrich , the brother of Wilhelm II , who flew his flag in the re @-@ built armored cruiser Deutschland . The protected cruiser Kaiserin Augusta was the third ship in the division . On 15 December , the three ships left Germany , Wilhelm II having instructed their crews , " Should anyone seek to hinder you in the proper exercise of our legitimate rights , go for them with a mailed fist . " The division was bound for the newly conquered base at Tsingtau in the Kiautschou Bay concession . They arrived on 5 May 1898 and met the rest of the squadron , which was commanded by Vizeadmiral ( Vice Admiral ) Otto von Diederichs . 
 = = = Deployment to the China Station = = = 
 Shortly before the arrival of the II Division , the US Navy destroyed the Spanish fleet at the Battle of Manila Bay during the Spanish – American War . Diederichs detached Gefion to investigate the situation in Manila in an attempt to maneuver Germany into a position to secure colonial possessions in the Philippines , or even to obtain a German prince on the Philippine throne outright . In late March 1899 , Gefion was sent to <unk> in response to mistreatment of German missionaries there ; Kapitänleutnant ( Captain Lieutenant ) Franz <unk> went ashore with a landing party of 132 marines and artillerymen to punish the offenders . 
 In April , Prince Heinrich replaced Diederichs as the squadron commander . That same month , Gefion had to leave the harbor at Wusong to assist Deutschland , which had suffered engine damage . At the end of the month , Gefion steamed up the Yangtze River as far as Hankou . She visited Japanese ports , including Nagasaki , starting in June and the Russian port of Vladivostok in August , before having to assist Deutschland once again , after the latter vessel struck a reef in <unk> Bay in Fujian . As a precautionary measure , she escorted Deutschland to Hong Kong for repairs . At the end of the year , Gefion met Deutschland in Bangkok ; the latter vessel was carrying Prince Heinrich back to Germany . In January 1900 , Vizeadmiral Felix von Bendemann arrived to take command of the East Asia Squadron , aboard his flagship , the protected cruiser Hertha . In the first half of the year , Gefion and the rest of the squadron cruised in the German central Pacific colonies . 
 By the end of May 1900 , the unrest that sparked the Boxer Rebellion began to appear in the Shandong Peninsula , particularly around the German base at Tsingtau . After the outbreak of the rebellion , Gefion and the rest of the squadron joined ships from other European navies to launch a relief expedition under the command of Edward Hobart Seymour . The ships bombarded Chinese coastal defenses southeast of Tianjin and sent an expeditionary force — the Seymour Expedition — ashore at the Battle of Taku Forts on 16 – 17 June . The contingent from Gefion was commanded by Kapitänleutnant Otto <unk> ; these men participated in the storming of the Great Hsi @-@ Ku Arsenal in Tianjin . Starting in mid @-@ July , Gefion was stationed outside the mouth of the Yangtze to monitor traffic in the area . In November , she went to Hong Kong for an overhaul . In January 1901 , the ship 's commander was sent to temporarily govern Tsingtau on behalf of the ill governor . Between February and April , Gefion was in Nagasaki , and in June she was stationed at Shanghai . She stayed there until September , when the Admiralstab ( Admiralty Staff ) ordered her to return to Germany . On 22 September she departed Chinese waters and arrived back in Germany on 1 October . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 She was decommissioned for a major reconstruction the day she returned to Germany . The work was done at the Kaiserliche Werft in Wilhelmshaven from December 1901 to 1904 . New , more powerful electrical generators were installed , the upper deck was enclosed , and the 10 @.@ 5 cm guns that had been located on the upper deck were moved to gun ports in the hull . The two 5 cm guns that were located abreast of the center funnel were moved further aft , to the third funnel . After completion of the work , Gefion was left out of service in reserve . Following the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , the Admiralstab ordered Gefion to be reactivated , and on 10 August Korvettenkapitän ( Corvette Captain ) <unk> was placed in command of the ship . A crew could not be assembled due to shortages in personnel , however , and so the ship could not be placed back into service . <unk> was therefore transferred to another ship on 21 August . Gefion was thereafter moved to Danzig in 1916 for use as a barracks ship for crews of warships being repaired at the Kaiserliche Werft there . She remained there for the duration of the war , and was stricken from the naval register on 5 November 1919 . 
 She was thereafter sold to Norddeutsche Tiefbaugesellschaft , converted into a diesel @-@ powered freighter , and renamed Adolf Sommerfeld in 1920 . With her new diesel engines , which had come from the unfinished U @-@ boats U @-@ 115 and U @-@ 116 , she could steam at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ; 13 mph ) and had a cargo capacity of 2 @,@ 600 t ( 2 @,@ 600 long tons ; 2 @,@ 900 short tons ) . The conversion was not particularly successful , and was only done due to a severe shortage of shipping in the aftermath of the war . As a result , Adolf Sommerfeld served only very briefly , and was broken up for scrap by Danziger Hoch- und Tiefbau in Danzig in 1923 . 
 = The Transformers ( IDW Publishing ) = 
 The Transformers is a comic book series by IDW Publishing , based upon Hasbro 's Transformers characters and toy line . 
 Following Dreamwave Productions ' bankruptcy in 2005 , IDW picked up the rights and hired long @-@ time Transformers writer Simon Furman to craft a rebooted Generation 1 @-@ based continuity , similar to Ultimate Marvel . An issue # 0 was published in October 2005 , and the ongoing series began in January 2006 . 
 For the first four years of its run , the series was marketed as various limited series for each story , in published order as The Transformers : Infiltration , Stormbringer , Escalation , Megatron Origin , Devastation , Revelation , All Hail Megatron and Maximum Dinobots . The series also had a sister title of ongoing one @-@ shots entitled The Transformers : Spotlight which began in September 2006 , each focusing on a particular character and affecting the storyline of the main title . 
 Starting in November 2009 , an ongoing series of the Transformers was launched and ended in December 2011 . Concurrently , during this time , other mini @-@ series were also published : Last Stand of the Wreckers , Bumblebee , Ironhide , Drift , Infestation and Heart of Darkness , the latter of which led into the story arc Chaos . 
 Following a one @-@ shot titled The Death of Optimus Prime , two new ongoing series started in January 2012 , Robots in Disguise and More Than Meets the Eye . A digital Transformers comic also became available titled Autocracy , consisting of 12 eight @-@ page issues . Two sequels to Autocracy titled Monstrosity and Primacy started publishing in March 2013 and August 2014 , respectively . In April and November 2014 , the Windblade and Drift - Empire of Stone mini @-@ series were also published . In addition , in November 2014 , The Transformers : Robots in Disguise changed its title to just The Transformers . A second ongoing series of Windblade started in March 2015 . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Dreamwave Productions shut down on January 4 , 2005 , and announced they would cease publication of all their comics , leaving Transformers : Generation One and its prequel series , Transformers : The War Within incomplete . Chris Ryall , editor @-@ in @-@ chief of IDW Publishing , leaped at the chance to bid on the property . On May 19 , 2005 , Hasbro announced they had awarded the licensing rights to IDW Publishing , with plans for an issue # 0 in October 2005 and an ongoing title entitled The Transformers : Infiltration to begin in January 2006 . Beforehand , Ryall met up with long @-@ time writer Simon Furman . Furman aimed for a contemporary version of the Generation 1 incarnation to appeal to new and old fans alike . They both cited a focus on the " Robots in Disguise " element of the characters , aiming to bring back their " myth and majesty " . Overall , Furman described it as , " This was , at last ( after 20 @-@ plus years ) MY take on Transformers . " Furman also aimed for a real time approach , using maps to help guide his stories . Infiltration 's issue # 0 sold 100 @,@ 000 copies in pre @-@ orders , a record for the company . Furman focused the story on Autobot medic Ratchet and broke new ground for G1 @-@ based storylines by excluding the Ark crash storyline , to give proper intent to the Transformers being on Earth , thus separating the fictional universe from the Beast Wars one . E. J. Su was hired as the artist , and was given free rein to re @-@ design characters slightly . 
 Infiltration received mixed reviews . Furman 's decision to put leaders Optimus Prime and Megatron on the sidelines divided fans , as did the slow pace and the use of human characters . Furman and Ryall responded positively , promising to make both fans and critics happy after reading various message board comments . The Transformers : Stormbringer followed in July , set around the same time frame as Infiltration , and had art by Don Figueroa . The four issue tale was intended to be a weekly event , but Diamond Comic Distributors ' resistance meant it became monthly . Furman had planned to visit Cybertron later on , but the fans demanded a human @-@ less story , and Stormbringer was written . Most importantly , the story revealed Cybertron to be dead , giving the saga a darker feel and explaining the status quo of Autobots and Decepticons spread out and fighting pocket wars . Furman intentionally wanted a larger scale and " took Cybertron out of the equation " to shape the overall arc . The story also allowed him to reinvent Thunderwing and the Pretenders , which he felt was one of the sillier concepts . 
 In September , the companion series , The Transformers : Spotlight was launched , set to last for five issues . Furman drew upon classic stories for Shockwave , re @-@ created the personalities of Hot Rod and Ultra Magnus , and wrote Sixshot for the first time . Nightbeat 's story laid a vital seed for future stories , as well as allowing him to re @-@ invent the <unk> . In November The Transformers : Escalation began , a direct sequel to Infiltration . It put Optimus and Megatron center stage , and brought in characters from the Spotlights . The Spotlights expanded as IDW accepted Furman 's willingness to write for any character . This has even included Wheelie , a character he has personally voiced criticism of in the past . 
 Furman took a break from the main storyline in June to allow Eric Holmes to write the prequel , The Transformers : Megatron Origin over four months . Holmes conceived the tale for his favorite character , Megatron , and to explore the beginnings of the Autobot @-@ Decepticon war , collaborating with Furman to further tie @-@ in the story into the existing continuity and taking historical inspiration from the decline of the Roman Empire . In addition , Furman allowed Nick Roche to write and draw a Spotlight for Kup , and Roche also wishes to create another one for Rumble . Furman returned for The Transformers : Devastation , which will be affected by Galvatron 's Spotlight ( itself spinning out of Nightbeat 's ) , before leading into The Transformers : Revelation . Galvatron was re @-@ invented as a separate character from Megatron , and Optimus Prime himself received a Spotlight , with both one @-@ shots including major revelations that will affect storylines beyond Revelation . Devastation had a faster pace and explored rebellion in the Decepticon ranks , similar to the early Marvel stories . With the conclusion of Devastation , Revelation began in June . However , this series had a different format to that seen previously , and consisted of four interrelated Spotlight issues that brought several of the elements of the storyline thus far , most notably the Dead Universe storyline , to a conclusion . The arc following Revelation was a twelve @-@ issue limited series , later expanded to sixteen issues , titled All Hail Megatron which began in July 2008 , taking place a year after the end of Devastation and focusing on an Earth conquered by the Decepticons without the Autobots around to stop them , this time written by Shane McCarthy . A planned storyline , Expansion , has now been canceled , although some of the themes the series would have dealt with may still appear . A new mini @-@ series by Furman , Maximum Dinobots , spun out of Spotlight : Grimlock and featured the Dinobots , Sunstreaker , and the Machination , beginning in December after the conclusion of Revelation , with art by Spotlight artist Nick Roche . 
 For the future , Furman has completely ruled out <unk> , the <unk> , ( this is no longer accurate , as the <unk> appeared in a wall painting in Spotlight : Wheelie , as well as one named <unk> physically appearing in Monstrosity ) , and the Liege Maximo . Furman has also expressed interest in re @-@ inventing Japanese @-@ exclusive characters and female Transformers , exploring the challenge of rationalizing sex / gender in giant robots . Furman addressed the issue of gender in Transformers in a Spotlight issue on Arcee , rationalizing them as a failed attempt to introduce gender into the Transformer race by Jhiaxus . Elita One and a few other female Transformers later appeared in the Megatron Origin mini @-@ series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The origins of the Transformers as a race are as yet clouded in legend ; however , according to the personal beliefs of the relatively ancient Cybertronian Cyclonus , it happened like this : 
 In the beginning , there was only Primus , the god of light and creation , who had been brought forth by Cybertron itself as the counterpart to another , unnamed being . Deeming that his power was too great to be contained by himself alone , he split his potency into five beings , including of course himself , and also <unk> , who possessed great wisdom ; <unk> , who was a fount of knowledge ; <unk> , who could alter his shape into an infinity of forms ; and Mortilus , the embodiment of death , the necessary end of life . For a time , these five entities , known as the Guiding Hand , led life on Cybertron to heights of harmony and creation , but eventually Mortilus tried to change the course of life so that the Cybertronians would become a Universe @-@ conquering army . What followed was a veritable war of the gods , which ended in tragedy and devastation . Mortilus himself perished , but not before dealing severe and irreversible damage to the other members of the Guiding Hand . On the verge of death , Primus withdrew into the planet itself , communicating from then on through the supercomputer Vector Sigma ; while the other three only survive as relics which are essential to the Cybertronian race . <unk> ' essence had been imprisoned by Mortilus in a crystal container , but he managed to change it into a vessel which would let those who were worthy partake of his undying wisdom . In this form he is known as the Matrix of Leadership , which also provides a link to Primus and thus to life itself . <unk> and <unk> had been shred down to their very cores , but now became the first blueprints for the two most basic components of all Cybertronians from then on , namely the brain module and the transformation cog . With the death of Mortilus himself , a Cybertronian 's life force would be immune to the ravages of time , rendering them effectively immortal . After their creators passed into the mists of time , but having been bestowed by them life itself , intelligence , knowledge , the ability to change their form and virtual immortality , the Transformers set out to create their own destiny ; a chivalrous order dedicated to defending peace and harmony with honor was formed , the so @-@ called Knights of Cybertron , and they travelled out into the Universe aboard vast , self @-@ aware vessels known as <unk> . 
 To modern , rational Cybertronians , of course , this account is little more than a myth ; but some , like Omega Supreme , know which parts of it are fact . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 During the Golden Age of Cybertron , Nova Prime wishes to expand the influence of Cybertronians throughout the galaxy . His Chief Theoretical Strategist Jhiaxus experiments with six volunteers to combine them into a superior being , but the experiment fails , resulting in Monstructor . At some point he also experiments with gender in Transformers , creating Arcee , who grows deranged with hatred for her creator due to this . Sometime later , the Ark @-@ 1 is launched into space under the <unk> of exploration , but in reality an attempt to expand Cybertron 's influence . The crew includes Nova Prime and Galvatron . When passing through a black hole , the ship enters a " Dead Universe " , altering the crew , and is presumed lost . With Nova Prime and Jhiaxus gone , Omega Supreme imprisons Monstructor . 
 Later , hard times follow , with the Autobots becoming a corrupt galactic police force . While shutting down an Energon @-@ mining operation , they incite a riot by beating an outspoken miner to death . The riot is extinguished , resulting in the miners either dead or imprisoned . A surviving miner , Megatron , manages to take over a prison shuttle and hide it in Kaon , the <unk> city on Cybertron . Megatron makes a name for himself in the underground gladiatorial matches , learning to enjoy the kill . He recruits the Seekers , Soundwave , and the future <unk> to perform acts of terrorism throughout Cybertron . Megatron rallies a large group of gladiators and proposes for them to unite under the same badge , but they are caught and arrested by Sentinel Prime 's police force . However , this is part of Megatron 's plan , as Starscream kills the Autobot Senate . Megatron kills Sentinel Prime , and the newly forged Decepticons take over the city @-@ state of Kaon , heralding the beginning of the war . The populace at large is distracted by mass sports race games , with racers like the arrogant but talented Blurr becoming celebrities . Early on during the war , both Autobot and Decepticon try to recruit Blurr to their cause , with a young Optimus talking Blurr into saving the life of Zeta Prime from Starscream 's assassination squad . A rookie Tracks is saved from the elite Predacons by special ops soldier Jazz . In later years , Tracks passes on the story of the lone Autobot to boost morale in times of crisis . 
 Around this time , a third group of Cybertronians form who are opposed to the war and both sides of it . They leave Cybertron and are never seen again . The war eventually devastates the planet , and a Decepticon scientist named Thunderwing suggests to graft Transformers with protective organic shells , which Megatron rejects . Thunderwing experiments on himself , becoming a beast who devastates Cybertron . The Decepticons recover more quickly and stage a new offensive against the Autobots , who suffer the loss of the charismatic Blaster , the voice of the Autobot resistance : he is shot and set adrift in space by a traitor . 
 With their home world dead , the Transformers continue their war on other planets . The Decepticons escalate tensions on planets by replacing important people with loyal clones called facsimiles , allowing the worlds to destroy themselves before they move in for the energy resources , and send Sixshot to finish off the planets . Nonetheless , the two sides agree to the <unk> Accord , in which they will not supply weapons to less advanced cultures . Scorponok violates this treaty on <unk> , creating " transformable men " with the help of Mo <unk> 's corporation , but an attack by Ultra Magnus forces him to flee . Badly damaged with only his decapitated head remaining , he arrives on Earth at some point and establishes the Machination , an organization dedicated to acquiring Transformer technology for their own ends . 
 = = = Ore @-@ 13 / Super Energon = = = 
 The Decepticon scientist Shockwave begins the secretive Operation : Regenesis — seeding Energon on various planets , including Earth . While stabilizing Earth 's seeding , the Dynobots attack Shockwave , and they are all buried in molten lava for thousands of years . Bludgeon is assigned by Megatron to investigate Operation : Regenesis and Soundwave is told to spy on him . In 1984 , Soundwave learns to his horror that Bludgeon intends to use the Ultra @-@ Energon on Earth to re @-@ animate Thunderwing , but is silenced and put into stasis @-@ lock in his cassette player mode . The following year , an organization named Skywatch find Laserbeak and Ravage 's bodies . Starscream and his unit later come to Earth , discover Shockwave 's Energon and mine it in Nebraska . When they exhaust this supply in 2006 , they move to Oregon , entering siege mode to protect their discovery . As part of their plan to acquire a Transformer , an agent working for the Machination takes a photo of a Decepticon transforming and locates the original Decepticon base . As a response he is targeted and killed by Thundercracker , Runabout and <unk> . Before his death , his laptop with the photo is stolen by a girl named Verity Carlo and she is taken to the Autobots - inadvertently leading the Machination straight to them via a homing device in the laptop . 
 In the meantime , Bludgeon returns to Cybertron and reawakens Thunderwing , believing that Thunderwing 's destruction of planets will appease and revitalize the spirit of Cybertron . After <unk> is razed , Bludgeon is driven insane by a failed bonding attempt and Thunderwing is taken down by Optimus Prime . Thunderwing 's corpse is placed under guard . Prime sets a course for Earth as he learns vague details of Regenesis , heavily suspicious due to Ironhide 's call regarding Starscream breaking into siege mode . Megatron already takes action , exploring the Nebraska base . Having anticipated Megatron 's course of action , Starscream imbues himself with " ore @-@ 13 resin " and battles him . His super @-@ powered body is still no match for Megatron , and he is severely wounded . Optimus arrives on Earth to join Prowl 's unit , aware that Megatron 's presence on Earth has caused it to become the main battle front . The Machination also observes the Autobots entering their Lake Michigan base . 
 = = = War on Earth = = = 
 Prime decides to send Verity and her two friends Hunter and Jimmy home . Ironhide and Sunstreaker are given this task , but the Machination strikes and seemingly destroy Sunstreaker and Hunter . Ratchet realizes that Sunstreaker 's corpse is a fake and that he and Hunter have simply been kidnapped . Megatron uses the Ore @-@ 13 to give him the rare ability of mass @-@ displacement to transform into an earthen pistol , and decides to stay on Earth to escalate tensions , using a human facsimile to stir up a war between the United States and El <unk> . The Autobots , with newly arrived allies , battle the Decepticons in the Russian breakaway state of <unk> where the super @-@ powered Megatron beats Prime to near death . Prime manages to recover and puts Megatron to flight . However , the facsimile Georgi <unk> arrives dead at the Autobot base . 
 The Machination performs a successful surgery on Hunter , and Ironhide is seemingly killed in an explosion set up by them . They now begin to manufacture their own army of Sunstreaker bodies . Shockwave and the Dynobots are excavated up by archaeologists in Eureka , Nevada and Skywatch takes over the area . In Oregon , two young humans wonder whether to buy Soundwave , still trapped in cassette player mode . Megatron calls Sixshot to come and speed up Earth 's destruction , and the Reapers follow , eager to have Sixshot join their attempt to rid the universe of war @-@ like species . Elsewhere on Earth , <unk> 's grandiose plans for a coup against Megatron fail when the Decepticon leader kills him in one @-@ on @-@ one combat . 
 Elsewhere , Galvatron emerges from the Dead Universe , destroys an alien observatory and crushes Hound 's unit on Cybertron to retrieve the body of Thunderwing . While unconscious during his battle with Megatron , Prime encountered the presence of Nova Prime , and he meets with Nova 's once @-@ associate , Omega Supreme . Monstructor escapes his prison and seeks revenge against Omega . He finds Omega along with Prime , and after battling him , Prime leaves Monstructor to be tended by Jetfire . Elsewhere , Blaster 's body is recovered from space . After more assassination attempts he discovers the traitor is an unwilling Beachcomber , controlled by Soundwave and Bombshell 's <unk> shell . Angry , he vows to hunt down Soundwave . 
 Back on Earth Nightbeat puzzles out the links between the Machination 's various actions . The returned Prime attempts to get proactive by moving the location of the Ark @-@ 19 , but it is shot down by Sixshot , though the crew survive . The subsequent battle between Prime and Sixshot exposes the Transformers to the world at large and forces the military to call in a carpet bombing strike . The Autobots escape , but Verity and Jimmy are seemingly killed . Elsewhere , Hot Rod and Wheeljack set out to recover Ironhide 's body , but are confronted by the Machination 's Headmaster army , only escaping due to Wheeljack 's gadgets . Hunter escapes his captors and discovers the decapitated but still living head of Sunstreaker . Sunstreaker reveals his mind is being used as the hub for the Machination 's army , and Hunter opts to fight back , becoming a Headmaster himself . The Reapers arrive at Earth , attacking the Decepticon base and forcing Megatron to recall Sixshot , while Nova Prime ( now known as Nemesis Prime ) , concerned at the pace of events , dispatches Galvatron to Earth . 
 Elsewhere , the Autobot penal facility on Garrus @-@ 9 is attacked by the Combaticons , who escape with the Monstructor component Transformers , forcing a reluctant Fortress Maximus to dispatch Arcee to track them down . Learning of this , Prime pulls Prowl 's detachment away from Earth to help contain the problem , though Hot Rod elects to stay to learn Sunstreaker 's fate . Nightbeat also suspects someone has tampered with his memory . Elsewhere , Sixshot , having encountered and felt a kinship with the Reapers before , defects to their side , but is taken out by a returned Starscream ( revived by the other Decepticons to stand up to Megatron ) , leading to a full @-@ scale battle between the Decepticons and Reapers . The Decepticons win , with aid from Galvatron , who escapes with Sixshot 's body as the US military locates the Decepticons ' base . Scorponok merges with the human Dante into a new body , but is unable to prevent Hunter , now merged with Sunstreaker 's mind in a copy of his body , from escaping . In the Dead Universe Nemesis Prime , Jhiaxus , and Galvatron agree the endgame is about to begin . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 On Cybertron Cyclonus , dispatched from the Dead Universe on a mission to activate the Nega @-@ Core , inadvertently alerts the Autobots to his presence , but is still able to activate the Core , as well as its lethal guardian Thunderwing . On Garrus @-@ 9 Prime calls in the Wreckers to deal with the escalating situation as Nemesis Prime leads the forces of the Dead Universe from the <unk> expanse . Meanwhile , Hardhead accompanies Nightbeat to Gorlam Prime in an attempt to find his missing memories . Attacked by <unk> , Nightbeat is taken control of by Jhiaxus and Hardhead reluctantly eliminates him , before disappearing into the dimensional portal . A furious Nemesis Prime realizes he must do Nightbeat 's job of eliminating Optimus Prime personally . The Wrecker 's assault on Thunderwing proves futile , while Arcee teams up with Banzai @-@ Tron to track down the escaped Monstructor , and Jetfire prepares to use Thunderwing 's technology to enable other Autobots to survive the effects of the <unk> expanse . Dealer 's attempt to retrieve the Magnificence for himself backfires when a suspicious Hot Rod uses it to confirm his doubts about Dealer , who is promptly killed . Hot Rod then uses the Magnificence to locate the other Nega @-@ Cores and their guardians , ( Sixshot and Monstructor ) , and passes the information on . Jetfire then formulates a plan to override Jhiaxus ' control of them via taking over their mental link . Nemesis Prime attacks Optimus on Garrus @-@ 9 personally , but is betrayed and killed by Galvatron , who is then tossed into a solar pool by Prime . Jetfire 's plan works , as Cloudburst 's team , now equipped with Thunderwing 's technology , is able to dispose of the Nega @-@ Cores in the Dead Universe , closing it off completely . Jhiaxus is hunted down on Gorlam Prime by Arcee and Hardhead ( now undead like the Dead Universe 's inhabitants ) , where his immortality means Arcee can kill him over and over . On Earth , Sideswipe , having beaten <unk> and Grindcore , decides he has proven himself and leaves without Sunstreaker . Over the following years , Gorlam Prime evolves into a new Cybertron , and its inhabitants evolve into beings like Transformers . But on Garrus @-@ 9 , Galvatron still lives within the solar pool . In the aftermath of this , the former Decepticon assassin Drift , his outlook changed by meeting the legendary third faction of Cybertronians , attempts to rescue Autobot captives from a Decepticon ship , and ends up crossing path with Kup and the Wreckers . An impressed Kup , believing everyone deserves a second chance , offers him a spot on his new commando squad . 
 = = = Machination Empire = = = 
 Skywatch , having lost control of Ravage and Laserbeak due to interference from Soundwave , reactivate Grimlock to use against the increasing Transformer activity . Due to Machination sabotage Grimlock escapes and is approached by Scorponok , who proposes an alliance . Grimlock refuses and is out gunned in the battle , but teleports to the <unk> ship before Scorponok terminates him , still buried after the battle with Shockwave , vowing to bring the Machination down . Skywatch reactivate the other Dynobots , unaware the Machination are manipulating them into killing Grimlock . Finding the Skyfire , the Headmasters attack and manage to teleport Grimlock to Fallon , Nevada , in the midst of a pitched battle . Skywatch respond by moving in the other Dynobots as both Hot Rod and the combined form of Hunter and Sunstreaker locate the Machination . Hot Rod is almost killed by Scorponok , but kept alive as a witness to the Headmaster 's plans . The battle in Fallon devastates the town , but the Dynobots are able to reassert their personalities . Scorponok sends in his Headmaster army as Skywatch head agent Red , now suspicious of the repeated control failures on the Transformers , confers with Shockwave , fitting him with a bomb and directing him to eliminate the Dynobots , Ravage and Laserbeak . In Fallon , the infighting Dynobots manage to fight off the Headmasters with aid from Grimlock 's allies the <unk> . Hot Rod manages to escape as Sunstreaker and Hunter locate the main Machination facility , while Shockwave locates the stasis locked Soundwave , making a deal with him to deactivate the bomb in his head in return for freeing Soundwave from stasis lock . Sunstreaker saves Hot Rod ( who then sends a distress call ) but is blasted by Scorponok as the Dynobots and <unk> launch a full @-@ scale assault on the Machination . Outclassed by the sheer numbers of Headmasters , they are saved when a grieving Hunter pulls the plug on Sunstreaker 's original head , seemingly killing him and disabling the Machination forces . However , a vengeful Scorponok and the newly arrived Shockwave attack as Ultra Magnus , still searching for Scorponok , receives Hot Rod 's signal . Shockwave and Scorponok battle each other . The Headmaster loses but Grimlock , finally accepting responsibility for his actions , battles Shockwave , and the other Dinobots aid him . Scorponok is permanently taken out when Hot Rod and Swoop disable his original head . Grimlock brings down the Machination compound on top of him and Shockwave as Magnus arrives to clean up the situation . Grimlock is arrested along with Shockwave and Scorponok , but the other Dinobots are no longer under suspicion , and repair the Skyfire to leave . 
 = = = Invasion = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Machination 's attempted takeover , Sunstreaker and Hunter are successfully separated by Ratchet . Hunter has a happy reunion with Verity and Jimmy , but Sunstreaker , angry over what has been done to him , abandons his former partner . After the initial battles on Earth , the Decepticons lie low , experimenting with creating new life and eventually creating the Insecticons to take advantage of a now captured Hunter , as well as thousands of failed experiments eventually dubbed the Swarm . As the Autobots have reinforced their position on Earth , the Decepticons lure them into a trap by planting disinformation about a Decepticon trap with the help of Sunstreaker , who is convinced that he is in fact helping Starscream kill Megatron . His motives are darker than merely helping the Autobots win by disposing of Megatron - he asks the Decepticon to kill all the humans in revenge for what was done to him . Armed with the disillusioned Autobot 's knowledge , unified and with their new weapon - Devastator - the Decepticons decimate the Autobots . Planning to dispose of them through a portal to Cybertron , Prime manages to fight them off long enough for his troops to escape through the portal , though at great cost - Prime is heavily damaged and rendered comatose by the damage he takes , and the Autobots are marooned on Cybertron . 
 With the Autobots gone , the Decepticons launch a full @-@ scale assault on New York City , randomly annihilating buildings and causing mayhem as part of a simultaneous galaxy @-@ wide assault . The initial human aerial counterattack is annihilated . Even opposed by Colonel Daniel Witwicky , the Decepticons decimate all further military assaults and destroy all bridges and tunnels leading into the city . The Decepticon assault moves to other cities in the country , including Los Angeles , San Francisco , and Washington , D.C. , as the Constructicons begin to build in what was once Manhattan . On Cybertron , the dispirited and beaten Autobots begin to fall apart as Ironhide clashes with Prowl over the traitor in their midst . Another group of Autobots under Kup 's command crashed on the planet after the Decepticons gained the access codes , where it is revealed that the situation is grave : Megatron has taken the Matrix . The humans attempt to send in a small commando team to assassinate Megatron , but the party is killed by <unk> before even making across the river - all save their commander Spike . As the Decepticon assault spreads to other parts of Earth , the Decepticons begin to fall apart internally , with even Megatron worrying about the leadership challenges he will face now they have no enemy . The slaughter in Israel and Beijing worries other nations enough for them to contemplate using nuclear weapons on New York . On Cybertron the Swarm emerge , forcing the Autobots to flee once more . 
 As the Autobots flee , the tensions within the group boil over , and Ironhide beats Mirage , whom he believes is the traitor , near to death . He is wrong , as Sunstreaker 's guilt finally overtakes him and he confesses everything to Ironhide , before sacrificing himself to halt the Swarm 's pursuit by destroying a vital bridge . On Earth Starscream again plans a coup , with help from the Insecticons , who have experimented on the real reason the Decepticons were able to access the Autobot codes and systems - a captured , dissected but still living Hunter . Spike links up with the remnants of the human resistance , aiming to kill Megatron with a prototype weapon made from Shockwave 's gun arm , killing Rumble in the process . His efforts are for naught , as the other world nations still aim to bomb New York . On Cybertron , Prime is revived , managing to quell the dissent amongst the other Autobots . They are almost overwhelmed by the Swarm , but are saved by the timely arrival of Omega Supreme , who transforms and takes the Autobots to Earth . On Earth Starscream begins a coup against Megatron , gathering the Insecticons and Constructicons to his side . Megatron battles back and avoids being killed by Devastator as the United Nations begin a determined aerial counterstrike . As Starscream realizes that Megatron has orchestrated his coup to weed out the weak in the Decepticons , the Autobots arrive and attack . In the midst of the battle , Megatron reveals his strategy . More of his troops are hidden , disguised , among the humans , including the carrier for the UN nuclear bomb . With this , Megatron intends to wipe out the humans . However , with the intervention of a disgruntled Thundercracker the European Union is prevented from nuking New York City , though he pays for his " betrayal " . Megatron is severely damaged by the combined efforts of Optimus Prime and Spike , but is saved by Starscream who determines that the only way he could become the leader of the Decepticons is by taking the leadership from Megatron and not for it to be offered to him . The Decepticons retreat from Earth leaving the Autobots amongst humans hostile toward any Cybertronians . Sideswipe discovers the captive Hunter , who had been tortured by Bombshell 's experiments , and euthanizes him . 
 = = = Two years later = = = 
 As the Decepticons retreated from Earth , with a critically injured Megatron , it created a void among the Decepticon ranks . Many of Megatron 's former generals take turns trying to gain power . Others go rouge , like Overlord as he takes control of the Garrus 9 penal facility and turns it into an extermination camp . A new team of Wreckers is sent by Prowl to retake the prison . They manage , however , at a heavy price with most members dead or critically wounded . 
 Meanwhile , back on Earth , with their members running low on energon and slowly being captured by Skywatch , tension is high amongst the Autobots . After a rescue raid led by Hot Rod results in Ironhide 's death , Optimus Prime gives up his position as leader and surrenders to Skywatch , causing a schism between the Autobots , who split into two groups : one led by Hot Rod , who , taking the name " Rodimus " , joins forces with a group of Decepticons fronted by Swindle in an effort to build a ship and leave the planet , and a second who elect Bumblebee as their new leader , and are soon joined by Ultra Magnus , who determines to arrest Rodimus for treason . More Autobots , fearing they will be arrested by Magnus , also go AWOL , but most of them are captured by Skywatch and used as a bargaining tool by Spike Witwicky to force information out of Optimus Prime . Thundercracker , having been shot down by Skywarp three years previously , starts to develop admiration for Earth and its inhabitants . Although Bumblebee was elected as Autobot leader , he gets little respect , as Autobots strike out on their own or disrespect his authority . A rogue faction within Skywatch contacts the Autobots and sets up a meeting with Bumblebee to enlist the Autobots ' help in capturing Decepticons . Bumblebee agrees and the bots are fitted with special badges to cloak them from the main Skywatch force , but when the Colonel orders the capture of Blurr and resentment ensues , the Autobots learn that the badges also have the ability to immobilize them . Meanwhile , Magnus arrives at Hot Rod 's camp and attempts to capture Swindle , but is stopped by Hot Rod . He also fails in trying to get Hot Rod to disassemble the ship his party is building to get off Earth . In the battle that follows , Swindle betrays Rodimus and reveals his new creation , <unk> , but the day is saved thanks to Skywatch , with whom Optimus Prime has brokered an alliance , and some timely side @-@ switching from the disillusioned Thundercracker . The disgraced Rodimus flees Earth alone , and the Autobots rally under Bumblebee . 
 Working with Skywatch , the Autobots begin helping them deal with Transformer @-@ related crises around Earth , finding themselves caught between the Combaticons , allied with North Korea , and the Predacons , working for China . Disenchanted Skywatch operative Sandra broadcasts footage of his battle to the world , exposing Skywatch 's secret alliance with the Autobots ; when Bumblebee tries to hold a press conference in response , he is grievously injured by a human agent of anti @-@ Transformer movement Earth 's Children , wielding Cybertronian weaponry surreptitiously supplied by the Decepticons . This heralds the return of the rebuilt Megatron , who launches a devastating attack on Skywatch and the Autobots but is eventually defeated by Optimus Prime and surrenders to his custody . 
 Meanwhile , on his sojourn in space , Rodimus manages to recover the Matrix of Leadership from Starscream ( right before Megatron 's restoration and reclamation of the Decepticons ) . Gathering allies Wheelie and <unk> on the planet LV @-@ 117 and then heading to Cybertron itself , he adds Sunstreaker and a resurrected Ironhide to his team , Rodimus discovers that Galvatron has returned with an army and is planning something on the Transformers ' homeworld . Rodimus returns to Earth to pass on this news , and most of the Autobots then join Optimus Prime in taking off for Cybertron aboard Omega Supreme , with Megatron as their prisoner , to stop Galvatron 's scheme . 
 A small contingent of Autobots remains behind on Earth to investigate allegations that Skywatch head Spike Witwicky illegally executed Scrapper , discovering that his crimes go far deeper , and that he has been trading weapons technology with Swindle . Spike goes on the run , and Jazz , already compromised after killing a human in the heat of battle , dissolves the Autobots ' alliance with Skywatch . Prime 's Autobots arrive on Cybertron and engage both Galvatron 's forces and the Decepticons who have followed them there , but when they are forcibly merged into the monstrous " <unk> " by the power of Galvatron 's dark master , D @-@ Void , Megatron joins the fight and triumphs over the hellish avatar . Galvatron , meanwhile , ventures into the planet 's depths , intending to use the Heart of Darkness with Vector Sigma to open a portal to the Dead Universe and release D @-@ Void , but is stopped by Optimus Prime , who opens the Matrix and drains its energies to stop the creature 's entry into the living universe . The interaction of the Matrix and Vector Sigma , however , prompts an incredible transformation for Cybertron itself ... 
 = = = New era = = = 
 Optimus awakens to find that three weeks have passed , and in that time Cybertron has been reformatted into a primordial state , Megatron is missing while the Decepticons that formed the <unk> have been fitted with explosive microchips to keep them under control , and many unaligned Cybertronians ( referred to as <unk> and led by former Autobot Metalhawk ) have returned and are demanding the exile of both the Autobots and Decepticons so that they can have the planet for themselves . With the Matrix now emptied of all its power , Optimus decides to go by his old name of Orion Pax , and agrees to leave Cybertron forever in exchange for the Autobots being allowed to stay . 
 Rodimus , being given half of the Matrix , decides to lead a search for the fabled Knights of Cybertron in the hope that they can help restore order to Cybertron . Taking to the stars on board the ship called the Lost Light , Rodimus is joined by Ultra Magnus and Drift as his second @-@ and @-@ third @-@ in @-@ commands , Ratchet , Chromedome , Rewind , <unk> , Brainstorm , Rung , Whirl and a reformed Cyclonus , among several others . Following an unexpected quantum jump upon launch , the Lost Light is hurled off into the depths of space , where the crew is joined by Skids and contends with a stowaway <unk> . A visit to Delphi by Ratchet to help cure a plague introduces the threat of the Decepticon Justice Division , who then feature in a Decepticon @-@ dedicated story menacing a band of misfit Decepticons , and also brings the facility 's surviving patients and staff onto the ship — including Fortress Maximus , whose post @-@ traumatic stress causes him to snap and nearly kill Rung . Hoping to cure Rung 's damaged brain , Rewind gathers a small group together to recount a shared story from their past about Orion Pax foiling a Senate plot to discredit the burgeoning Decepticon movement in the days of <unk> . Chromedome is manipulated by Drift into carrying out a plan laid out by Prowl : using his <unk> skills to tap the memories and learn the secrets of mass @-@ murdering Decepticon Overlord , secretly hidden on board the Lost Light . Unfortunately , Chromedome accidentally allows Overlord to escape , and Rewind has to sacrifice himself to jettison the monster from the ship before the section of the ship is blown up . Drift admits to responsibility for Overlord 's actions , resulting in his exile , even though Rodimus later reveals he was a part of the plot as well . Ultra Magnus is also fatally wounded in the battle , but when his body disappears from the ship 's <unk> , the crew track it to Luna 1 , where they discover and foil a twisted plot by Chief Justice <unk> to wipe out all those Transformers he sees as tainted by original sin . 
 Meanwhile , back on Cybertron , Bumblebee struggles to maintain control , particularly after <unk> 's plots to have Skywarp assassinate him during a memorial for the Lost Light ( which was presumed destroyed during its launch ) . Prowl and Arcee foil the attempted murder thanks to Starscream , who sees no benefit to restarting the war , and begins to work with Bumblebee and Metalhawk to form a new united government for Cybertron . Though many Decepticons are provided with jobs and fall into line , Bombshell continues with mysterious experiments that result in Prowl , at the end of his tether and increasingly emotionally closed @-@ off , executing him . Fortunately , Ironhide is able to prevent chaos by successfully petitioning to have the I / D chips installed in the Decepticons turned off , restoring a sense of equality . Ironhide then recruits the Dinobots to join him in venturing into the wilderness to searching for the missing <unk> , only to go missing themselves . It is while they are being searched for by the other Autobots , Decepticons and <unk> that something else is discovered instead : a <unk> has returned to Cybertron , and it dubs Starscream the destined leader of the Transformer race . Before Starscream can exploit this new standing to any great extent , Megatron makes a surprising return and is taken into custody , causing the Decepticons to riot in the streets . It turns out that Megatron has secretly been working with a small team of Decepticons within Iacon to perfect the combination process , and he creates a new , more @-@ powerful Devastator out of the Constructicons and Prowl , who has been under the mind @-@ control of the still @-@ living Bombshell . Ironhide , the Dinobots and the <unk> — now <unk> — make a triumphant return to take Devastator down , while Megatron himself is neutralized by a failsafe created by Wheeljack . In the chaos , however , Starscream kills Metalhawk and uses his death to secure his position as sole ruler of Iacon , casting the Autobots and Decepticons out into the wilderness . 
 During this time , Orion Pax joins up with Hardhead , <unk> and Wheelie , and discover that Jhiaxus , Bludgeon and Monstructor are carrying out a plan of Shockwave 's that involves using the different ores of the Regenesis program to alter the future . 
 = = = Dark Cybertron Event = = = 
 With Megatron 's defeat on Cybertron , Shockwave turns all his attention to his part of this plan , and brings a <unk> that Jhiaxus and <unk> tricked Orion into awakening to Cybertron , and combines his Regenesis ores of Regeneration and Death to transform the giant into a zombie " Necrotitan " . Through this he makes contact with Nova Prime and Galvatron in the Dead Universe and , requiring a space bridge to free the two ancient Cybertronians from the undead realm , Shockwave has the titan unleash a " death plague " upon Iacon ; in the chaos that follows , the reanimated Metalhawk is used to retrieve the captive Megatron so that Shockwave can employ the space bridge within his body . The united forces of Bumblebee 's Autobots and Soundwave 's Decepticons storm Shockwave 's Crystal City base and prevent Nova Prime 's emergence in the living universe , but Galvatron manages to make the crossing . 
 Simultaneously , Gorlam Prime begins to collapse into a portal to the Dead Universe , and Pax and his team are only saved from being sucked inside by the timely arrival of the Lost Light . Conferring with Starscream and learning of events on Cybertron , Pax leads a team through the portal into the Dead Universe to try and stop Shockwave 's plot from the other side . They encounter and are tricked into a trap by Nova Prime 's mind @-@ controlled thrall Nightbeat , but are able to free him , along with Nova 's other captive , Kup ; Pax destroys Nova , retaking the name of Optimus Prime in the process . 
 Meanwhile , the Lost Light , attempting to track down Jhiaxus , is pulled off @-@ course by a summons from the badly @-@ wounded Metroplex , via a severed portion of his thumb the ship had previously encountered . Finding the ancient Autobot , and his companions Windblade , <unk> and Nautica on the ocean planet <unk> , the crew defends him and themselves against an army of Shockwave 's Ammonite minions and use their ship 's engines to give him enough of a power boost to teleport them all back home to Cybertron . They return as the Necrotitan is in the middle of razing Iacon at Shockwave 's command ; Megatron , having fallen in with Bumblebee , uses his space bridge to teleport Metroplex 's thumb — revealed to contain another of Shockwave 's ores — from the Lost Light back into its owner 's hand , giving him the energy to defeat the Necrotitan and heal the plague . 
 Unfortunately , all has transpired according to Shockwave 's plans : the Ammonites , Lost Light and Necrotitan were <unk> to ensure that Metroplex would return to Cybertron and bring the last of the ores with him , while Optimus Prime was deliberately lured into the Dead Universe so that he could destroy Nova Prime and remove his control over it . Using all of his combined ores , fueled by the energy of the Dead Universe — channeled through an unwitting Galvatron — Shockwave intends to bend space and time to his will , collapsing all of reality into a singularity that will be used to feed Cybertron for eternity . As the majority of the Autobots and Decepticons battle the colossal Ammonite army Shockwave summons to the planet , a small team ventures into Crystal City to confront him , where they are soon rejoined by Optimus Prime 's team , who emerge through a portal within the unknowingly @-@ undead Brainstorm . Metalhawk sacrifices himself to unbalance the ore equation , destroying the Ammonites , while Bumblebee is killed by Shockwave ; inspired by the words and the sacrifice of his new friend , Megatron dons the Autobot symbol , an action that throws Shockwave into confusion . The scientist 's loss of focus causes him to lose control of his <unk> drive , setting his mind adrift in time and resulting in the re @-@ emergence of his pre @-@ Shadowplay self . Horrified at what he has become , Shockwave allows Optimus and Megatron to kill him , destroying the drive and bringing an end to his plan . 
 = = = Dawn of the Autobots = = = 
 = = Chronological Comic Order = = 
 This is a chronological listing of the comics in which the timeline of events developed . 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 The Transformers has been collected in eleven volumes roughly in chronological order . The first eight volumes , under the title Transformers : IDW Collection , collect most of the series in between Infiltration and Heart of Darkness , including Spotlights . Starting with the issue Death of Optimus Prime , the Transformers are collected under the title Transformers : IDW Collection Phase Two , of which three volumes have been published . The Autocracy series has also been collected in print form . 
 = Schubert 's last sonatas = 
 Franz Schubert 's last three piano sonatas , D 958 , 959 and 960 , are the composer 's last major compositions for the piano . They were written during the last months of his life , between the spring and autumn of 1828 , but were not published until about ten years after his death , in 1838 – 39 . Like the rest of Schubert 's piano sonatas , they were mostly neglected in the 19th century . By the late 20th century , however , public and critical opinion had changed , and these sonatas are now considered among the most important of the composer 's mature masterpieces . They are part of the core piano repertoire , appearing regularly on concert programs and recordings . 
 One of the reasons for the long period of neglect of Schubert 's piano sonatas seems to be their dismissal as structurally and dramatically inferior to the sonatas of Beethoven . In fact , the last sonatas contain distinct allusions and similarities to works by Beethoven , a composer Schubert venerated . However , musicological analysis has shown that they maintain a mature , individual style . Schubert 's last sonatas are now praised for their mature style , manifested in unique features such as a cyclical formal and tonal design , chamber music textures , and a rare depth of emotional expression . 
 The three sonatas are cyclically interconnected by diverse structural , harmonic and melodic elements tying together all movements in each sonata , as well as all three sonatas together ; consequently , they are often regarded as a trilogy . They also contain specific allusions and similarities to other Schubert compositions , such as his Winterreise song cycle ; these connections point to turbulent emotions expressed in the sonatas , often understood as highly personal and autobiographical . Indeed , some researchers have suggested specific psychological narratives for the sonatas , based on historical evidence concerning the composer 's life . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 The last year of Schubert 's life was marked by growing public acclaim for the composer 's works , but also by the gradual deterioration of his health . On March 26 , 1828 , together with other musicians in Vienna , Schubert gave a public concert of his own works , which was a great success and earned him a considerable profit . In addition , two new German publishers took an interest in his works , leading to a short period of financial well @-@ being . However , by the time the summer months arrived , Schubert was again short of money and had to cancel some journeys he had previously planned . 
 Schubert had been struggling with syphilis since 1822 – 23 , and suffered from weakness , headaches and dizziness . However , he seems to have led a relatively normal life until September 1828 , when new symptoms such as effusions of blood appeared . At this stage he moved from the Vienna home of his friend Franz von <unk> to his brother Ferdinand 's house in the suburbs , following the advice of his doctor ; unfortunately , this may have actually worsened his condition . However , up until the last weeks of his life in November 1828 , he continued to compose an extraordinary amount of music , including such masterpieces as the three last sonatas . 
 Schubert probably began sketching the sonatas sometime around the spring months of 1828 ; the final versions were written in September . These months also saw the appearance of the Three Piano Pieces , D. 946 , the Mass in E @-@ flat major , D. 950 , the String Quintet , D. 956 , and the songs published posthumously as the <unk> collection ( D. 957 and D. <unk> ) , among others . The final sonata was completed on September 26 , and two days later , Schubert played from the sonata trilogy at an evening gathering in Vienna . In a letter to Probst ( one of his publishers ) , dated October 2 , 1828 , Schubert mentioned the sonatas amongst other works he had recently completed and wished to publish . However , Probst was not interested in the sonatas , and by November 19 , Schubert was dead . 
 In the following year Schubert 's brother Ferdinand sold the sonatas ' autographs to another publisher , Anton <unk> , who would only publish them about ten years later , in 1838 or 1839 . Schubert had intended the sonatas to be dedicated to Johann Nepomuk Hummel , whom he greatly admired . Hummel was a leading pianist , a pupil of Mozart , and a pioneering composer of the Romantic style ( like Schubert himself ) . However , by the time the sonatas were published in 1839 , Hummel was dead , and <unk> , the new publisher , decided to dedicate them instead to composer Robert Schumann , who had praised many of Schubert 's works in his critical writings . 
 = = Structure = = 
 Schubert 's three last sonatas have many structural features in common . D. 958 can be considered the odd one of the group , with several differences from the remarkably similar structure of D. 959 and D. 960 . First , it is in a minor key , and this is the primary departure that determines its other differences from its companions . Accordingly , the major / minor scheme is alternated , with main material being minor , and digressions and the slow movement set in the major . Its opening Allegro is considerably more concise than those of the other two sonatas , and does not make use of the expansive time @-@ dilating modulatory quasi @-@ development passages that so strongly characterize the other two opening movements . Furthermore , its slow movement follows an <unk> form instead of the ABA form of the other two sonatas . Its third movement , instead of a scherzo , is a slightly less lively , more subdued minuet . Finally , the finale is in a sonata form rather than rondo @-@ sonata form . However , these differences are relative and are significant only in comparison to the extreme similarity of D. 959 and D. 960 . Those two are similar to the extent that they can be considered variations on an identical compositional template , having no major structural differences . All three sonatas , most importantly , share a common dramatic arc and make considerable and identical use of cyclic motives and tonal relationships to weave musical @-@ narrative ideas through the work . Each sonata consists of four movements , in the following order : 
 First movement in moderate or fast tempo , and in sonata form . The exposition consists of two or three thematic and tonal areas and , as common in the Classical style , moves from tonic to dominant ( in major mode works ) or to the relative major ( in minor mode works ) . However , as often with Schubert , the harmonic scheme of the exposition involves additional , intermediate tonalities , which may be quite remote from the tonic @-@ dominant axis , and sometimes imbue certain expository passages with the character of a development section . The main themes of the exposition are often in ternary form , with their middle section digressing to a different tonality . The themes generally do not form symmetrical periods , and irregular phrase lengths are prominent . The exposition ends with a repeat sign . The development section opens with an abrupt turn into a new tonal area . A new theme , based on a melodic fragment from the second thematic group of the exposition , is presented in this section over recurrent rhythmic figuration , and then developed , undergoing successive transformations . The first thematic group returns in the recapitulation with different or additional harmonic digressions ; the second group returns unaltered , only transposed a fourth up . The short coda maintains the tonic key and mainly soft dynamics , achieving a resolution of the movement 's conflicts and ending pianissimo . 
 Slow second movement , in a key different from the tonic , and in A – B – A ( ternary ) or A – B – A – B – A form . The main sections ( A and B ) are contrasted in key and character , A is slow and meditative ; B is more intense and animated . The movement begins and ends slowly and quietly . 
 Third dance movement ( Scherzo or minuet ) in the tonic , in overall A – B – A ternary form , with a trio in either ternary or binary form , and in a conventionally related key ( relative major , subdominant , and parallel minor respectively ) . They are based on their sonata 's first movements , with a similar tonal scheme and / or motivic reference . The B section of each piece features tonalities serving important dramatic functions in previous movements . Each features animated , playful figurations for the right hand and abrupt changes in register . 
 Finale in moderate or fast tempo , and in sonata or rondo @-@ sonata form . The themes of the finales are characterized by long passages of melody accompanied by relentless flowing rhythms . The exposition has no repeat written in . The development section is more ordinary in style than that of the first movement , with frequent modulations , sequences , and fragmentation of the exposition 's first theme ( or the main theme of the rondo ) . The recapitulation closely resembles the exposition , with the minimal harmonic changes needed to end the section in the tonic : the first theme returns in a shortened version ; the second theme returns unaltered , only transposed a fourth up . The coda is based on the exposition 's first theme . It is composed of two parts , the first quiet and attenuated , creating a sense of expectation , the second animated , dissipating the final tension in decisive , agitated motion and ending with fortissimo tonic chords and octaves . 
 = = = Sonata in C minor , D. 958 = = = 
 I. Allegro . The opening is dramatic , with a fully voiced forte C minor chord . The voice @-@ leading of this passage outlines a chromatic ascent to A @-@ flat – this will be the first instance of a remarkable degree of chromaticism in the sonata as a whole . The most salient feature of the first theme is the sudden modulatory digression to A @-@ flat major , established by a rushing downward scale initiated by the final achievement of this key in the ascending voice of the minor theme . The exposition shifts from the tonic to the relative major ( E @-@ flat major ) , touching midway upon its parallel minor ( E @-@ flat minor ) , all in accordance with Classical practice . This second theme , a hymn @-@ like E @-@ flat major melody in four @-@ part harmony , greatly contrasts with the first , though its melodic contour is prefigured in the sudden A @-@ flat major departure . Both themes progress somewhat in the style of variations , and are structured with irregular phrase lengths . The development section is highly chromatic , and is texturally and melodically distinct from the exposition . The recapitulation is once again traditional , staying in the tonic and stressing subdominant tonalities ( D @-@ flat , the lowered second degree – in the first theme ) . The coda returns to the material of the development section , but with stable tonality , dying out in a dark series of cadences in low register . 
 II . Adagio in A @-@ flat major , A – B – A – B – A form . Nostalgic in its traditional classical character ( one of the few instrumental <unk> Schubert wrote ) , the opening theme of this movement is an elegant , touching melody that eventually undergoes remarkable tonal and cadential treatment , undermining the peaceful setting . Charles Fisk has pointed out that the voice @-@ leading of the first phrase , 1 – 7 – 1 – 2 – 3 – 4 – 3 , is based on the initial A @-@ flat digression in the beginning of the Allegro . The unorthodox , chromatic harmonic structure of this movement is generated from a short progression that appears towards the end of the A section , leading to a plagal cadence in the subdominant key ( D @-@ flat ) , chromatically colored with its own minor subdominant chord ( G @-@ flat minor ) . The importance of this progression and of D @-@ flat in general is emphasized by its quotation in a climax of the finale 's exposition . This diversion of the main theme 's expected cadence leads to the haunted atmosphere of the B section , which is full of chromatic modulations and startling <unk> . In the second appearance of the A and B sections , almost the entire music is shifted a semitone up , further cementing the importance of the ascending minor 2nd in the sonata as a whole . The focal plagal progression returns transformed at the end of the movement , with even subtler chromatic coloration and more distant modulations , touching on C major , before the piece finally ends in the tonic , the theme now weakened and given an illusory quality due to the evasion of cadences , free modulation , and tendency toward digression into troubled minor passages . 
 III . Menuetto : Allegro – Trio . This is a somber movement , quite distinct from the typical atmosphere of dance movements . It is relatively conservative in its key scheme , moving to the relative major key and back to the tonic . In the B section , a sequence of <unk> is interrupted by a dramatic interpolation in A @-@ flat major , referencing the departure to this key in the opening of the Allegro with the added minor 6th . The second A section is a transformation of the first , interrupted every four bars by a silent bar , creating a mysterious atmosphere . The trio is in A @-@ flat major , ternary form , with a B section beginning in E @-@ flat major colored by its own minor 6th , and modulating to G @-@ flat major via the parallel minor . 
 IV . Allegro . This movement is written in 6 / 8 and in tarantella style , and is characterised by a relentless galloping rhythm calling on demanding pianistic effects with frequent hand @-@ crossing and leaps across registers . It employs the three @-@ key exposition , a recurrent element in Schubert 's style . The first theme shifts from C minor to C major – another Schubertian feature , and contains many allusions to D @-@ flat major , which finally becomes established in a climactic reference to the Adagio 's characteristic plagal cadence . The second theme , proceeding with the enharmonic parallel minor of this cadence ( C @-@ sharp minor ) , further develops the cadence in its alternation of tonic and subdominant tonalities . After a series of modulations , the exposition ends in the traditional relative major , E @-@ flat . The development section begins in C @-@ flat with a new theme , derived from the last bars of the exposition . Later on , additional material from the exposition is developed , gradually building up towards a climax . The recapitulation is also written in three keys ; the first theme is drastically shortened , and this time the second theme veers to B @-@ flat minor , the result being that the closing section appears in the traditional tonic . The coda begins with a long anticipatory passage which stresses A @-@ flat , the submediant , and then reintroduces the first theme , restoring the most of the music omitted from its reprise . This last passage is characterized by sweeping arpeggios with violent dynamic contrasts - a series of <unk> fortissimo decaying to piano , following the rise and fall of the melody . On the last iteration , the melody hits triple forte at the zenith of its register and then plunges four octaves in a descending arpeggio , poco a poco diminuendo al pianissimo . An emphatic cadence then concludes the piece . 
 = = = Sonata in A major , D. 959 = = = 
 I. Allegro . The sonata begins with a forte , heavily textured chordal fanfare emphasizing a low A pedal and duple @-@ meter stepwise diatonic ascent in thirds in the middle voices , followed immediately by quiet descending triplet arpeggios punctuated by light chords outlining a chromatic ascent . These highly contrasting phrases provide the motivic material for much of the sonata . The second theme is a lyrical melody written in four @-@ part harmony . The exposition follows standard classical practice by modulating from tonic ( A ) to dominant ( E ) for the second theme , even preparing the latter tonality with its own V – the only first movement to do so in the mature Schubert . Despite this traditional approach , both exposition themes are built in an innovative ternary form , and in each resulting ' B ' section a highly chromatic development @-@ like section based on the exposition 's second phrase modulates through the circle of fourths , only to return to the tonic . This novel structure creates a sense of harmonic movement without actually committing to a thematic modulation , and is one of the techniques Schubert uses to achieve a sense of scale in the movement . The development proper is based on a scalar variation of the second theme heard at the end of the exposition . Here , in contrast to the striking modulatory excursions nested in the exposition , the tonal plan is static , shifting constantly between C major and B major ( later B minor ) . After the development theme is finally stated in the tonic minor , the dramatic <unk> has the unconventional role of only shifting to the major mode to prepare the recapitulation , rather than fully preparing the tonic key ( which in this case has already been established ) . The recapitulation is traditional – staying in the tonic , and emphasizing the tonic minor and the flat submediant ( F major ) as subdominant tonalities . The coda restates the first theme , this time in a much more ' hesitant ' manner , pianissimo and with further allusions to subdominant tonalities . The movement ends with serene arpeggios ; however , for the penultimate chord , Schubert chose a striking Italian sixth on ♭ II , instead of the more usual dominant or diminished seventh chords . This choice is not arbitrary – it is a final statement of the chromatically @-@ based ascending minor second motive that pervaded the movement , a motive that will be reversed into a descending minor second in the following movement . 
 II . Andantino in F @-@ sharp minor , A – B – A form . The A section presents a sparse , lamenting , poignant melody , full of sighing gestures ( portrayed by descending seconds ) . This theme , despite its vastly different character , references the opening bars of the Allegro , an aforementioned source of much of the sonata 's material – the Andantino 's first measure shares with the fanfare a second @-@ beat bass note ' echo ' after the downbeat on A , creating an audible rhythmic affinity ; additionally , the quiet close of the A theme features the fanfare 's characteristic pattern of stepwise thirds in the middle voices enclosed between tonic octaves . The middle section is of an improvisatory , fantasia @-@ like character , with extremely harsh modulations and sonorities , culminating in C @-@ sharp minor with fortissimo chords . The chromaticism , triplet emphasis , and modulatory patterns of this section are all reminiscent of the developments nested within the Allegro 's exposition . After the C @-@ sharp minor climax ( according to Fisk , a key of great importance in the cycle due to its relation to Der Wanderer ) , a recitative section with startling <unk> outbursts emphasizing an ascending minor second leads to a serene phrase in the major mode ( C @-@ sharp major ) , which in turn leads ( as the dominant of F @-@ sharp minor ) back to the A section , here somewhat transformed , with new accompanimental figuration . The final bars of the movement feature rolled chords that prefigure the opening of the following Scherzo . 
 III . Scherzo : Allegro vivace – Trio : Un poco più lento . The A section of the scherzo uses a playful leaping rolled chord figure that is rhythmically and harmonically reminiscent of the opening bars of the sonata . The B section is dominated by the juxtaposition of two distant tonal realms . It commences in C @-@ major for a rollicking theme that is abruptly interrupted by a downward @-@ rushing C @-@ sharp minor scale without any modulatory preparation , in a striking cyclic reference to the climax of the preceding movement 's middle section . Following this outburst , the B section quietly ends in C @-@ sharp minor a grace @-@ note melody identical in contour to a figure from the theme of the Andantino ( 2 – 1 – 7 – 1 – 3 – 1 ) , before modulating back to the movement 's tonic . C major returns in the concluding A section , this time more tonally integrated into its A @-@ major surroundings , by modulatory sequences . The ternary form trio in D major uses hand crossing to add melodic accompaniment to the chordal theme , and is rhythmically and harmonically based on the opening of the Allegro . 
 IV . Rondo : Allegretto – Presto . This lyrical rondo movement consists of relentless flowing triplet movement and endless songful melody . Its form is a sonata @-@ rondo ( A – B – A – development – A – B – A – coda ) . The Rondo 's main and opening theme is taken from the slow movement of the sonata D. 537 of 1817 . Charles Fisk has pointed out that this theme would make musical sense as a response subsequent to the questioning leading tone that closes the Allegro 's opening fanfare ; in this capacity the Rondo 's lyricism is the dramatically delayed final goal of the sonata . The second thematic group is written in the traditional dominant key ; however , it is very long , modulating through many different subdominant tonalities . The development section , in contrast , culminates in a long passage in C @-@ sharp minor with a climax characterized by a tension @-@ building ambiguity between E major and C @-@ sharp minor and a greatly prolonged evasion of a cadence . This leads to a false recapitulation in F @-@ sharp major , which then modulates to begin again in the home key . In the coda , the main theme returns fragmented , with full bar pauses , which lead each time to unexpected changes of key . This is followed by an agitated presto section , based on the final bars of the main theme , and the sonata concludes with a bold evocation of its very opening measures , with an ascending arpeggio ( essentially an inversion of the descending figure from the Allegro 's second phrase ) , followed by a fortissimo full statement of the opening fanfare in retrograde . 
 = = = Sonata in B @-@ flat major , D. 960 = = = 
 I. Molto moderato . This movement employs a three @-@ key exposition . The first theme introduces a G @-@ flat trill that anticipates the following harmonic events – a shift to G @-@ flat major in the central section of the main theme , and , after a return to the tonic , an enharmonic shift to F @-@ sharp minor at the start of the second theme . After a colorful harmonic excursion , the third tonal area arrives in the traditional dominant key ( F major ) . In contrast to the previous sonatas , here the development section elaborates on several different themes from the exposition . It reaches a dramatic climax in D minor , in which the first theme is presented , fluctuating between D minor and the home key , in a manner similar to the parallel passage from the previous sonata ( see above ) . In the recapitulation , the bass line in the first theme rises to B @-@ flat instead of descending to F ( as in the exposition ) , and the second theme enters in B minor , instead of F @-@ sharp minor . The rest of the exposition is repeated without alterations , transposed a fourth up , meaning that it returns to the home key , B @-@ flat , for the third tonal area . The coda once again recalls the first theme , although only fragmentarily . 
 II . Andante sostenuto . This movement is written in ternary form , and the key of C @-@ sharp minor – " the most tonally remote inner movement in Schubert 's mature instrumental works in sonata form " . In the main section , a somber melody is presented over a relentless rocking rhythm . The central section is written in A major , and presents a choral melody over an animated accompaniment ; it later touches upon B @-@ flat major , the sonata 's home key . The main section returns with a variant of the original accompanying rhythm . This time , the tonal scheme is more unusual : after a half cadence on the dominant , a sudden , mysterious harmonic shift introduces the remote key of C major . This eventually turns into E major , and proceeds as before . The coda shifts to the tonic major , but is still haunted by glimpses of the minor mode . 
 III . Scherzo : Allegro vivace con <unk> – Trio . The first part of the scherzo proper cadences not in the tonic or dominant , but in the subdominant . The second , B part , continues to modulate by ascending fourths , until it reaches the key of D @-@ flat major . In this key , a new theme is presented , emphasizing the local subdominant ( G @-@ flat major , a further fourth upward ) – first in the major mode , then in the minor , with an enharmonic shift to F @-@ sharp minor . This harmonic excursion eventually leads , through A major and a B diminished triad , back to the tonic and the opening section . The trio is in binary form and in B @-@ flat minor , the first presentation of the tonic minor in the sonata . 
 IV . Allegro ma non troppo – Presto . The finale has the same structure as that of the previous sonata . Many elements of this movement imply large @-@ scale resolution of harmonic and thematic conflicts established earlier in this and even the two previous sonatas . The main rondo theme opens with an ' empty ' octave on G , which resolves to C minor , subsequently interpreted as ii of V in B @-@ flat major . Brendel asserts that this theme , beginning in the ambiguous G / Cm , functions as a resolution of the troubling G ♭ trill presented in the very beginning of the sonata , using G ♭ to resolve to F major as V of B @-@ flat . The second theme , in ternary form , is written in the traditional key of the dominant , with a central section in D major ; it consists of an extended , characteristically Schubertian stepwise melody played over an uninterrupted flow of semiquavers . This second theme uses the same melodic contour ( 5 @-@ 8 @-@ 7 @-@ 6 @-@ 6 @-@ 5- ( 5 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 ) ) of the remarkable C major modulation in the final A section of the second movement , implying further connotations of conflict resolution . After an abrupt end to the second theme and a pregnant pause , a minor dotted @-@ rhythm chordal theme in F @-@ minor suddenly enters fortissimo , elaborating and modulating before sublimating into a pianissimo version of itself in the parallel major . This third theme is highly similar in rhythm and melodic contour as well as left hand pattern to the tarantella of the C minor sonata , which may not be a coincidence when considering the overall high level of cyclic connection between the sonatas . This theme evolves into a rhythmic segue that leads seamlessly back to the main theme of the rondo . The development section , based entirely on the rhythmic pattern of the main rondo theme , is characterised by juxtaposed eighth notes and triplets , reaching a climax on C @-@ flat major , from which the bass descends in chromatic modulation eventually to G in an extended diminuendo to return to the main theme . In the coda , the main theme is fragmented in a manner also similar to the finale of the previous sonata ; in a highly chromatic and unstable progression , the octave on G here descends through G @-@ flat to F , in an extension of the G @-@ G ♭ -F resolution of the theme . After finally reaching this dominant preparation for the final time , the movement closes with an exceedingly triumphant and affirming presto section that totally resolves all dramatic conflicts in the sonata and the series . 
 = = Compositional process = = 
 The compositional process of the last sonatas can be studied owing to the almost complete survival of their manuscripts . According to these , the sonatas were written in two stages – a preliminary sketch ( the first draft ) and a full , mature final version ( the fair copy ) . 
 The sketches were written during the spring and summer of 1828 , possibly even earlier . The inner movements were sketched up to the final bar , while the outer , sonata @-@ form movements were only sketched up to the beginning of the recapitulation and in the coda . In the sketches , passages from different movements ( or even different sonatas ) sometimes appear on the same leaf ; such evidence suggests that the last two sonatas were composed in parallel , at least in part . Furthermore , in the B @-@ flat Sonata , Schubert sketched the finale before completing the first movement , unlike his usual practice , in which finales were conceived at a later stage . 
 The final versions of the sonatas convey the impression of a single unit , and were likely notated in close succession during September 1828 . The sonatas were labeled Sonate I , II , III , respectively , and Schubert wrote at the bottom of the last folio of the third sonata the date September 26 . As compared to the sketches , the final versions are written much more neatly and orderly , with full notation and greater care for small details . 
 A thorough study of the emendations that Schubert edited into the final versions , in comparison with his sketches , reveals many insights . " Examination of Schubert 's sketches for the sonatas reveals him as highly self @-@ critical ; moreover , it shows that the ' heavenly lengths ' of the sonatas were actually a later addition , not conceived from the start . In his subsequent corrections , Schubert elaborated on his themes and expanded them , giving them more ' musical space ' " , in Alfred Brendel 's words . In the revision , Brendel continues , " proportions are rectified , details start to tell , <unk> suspend time . Rests clarify the structure , allowing breathing space , holding the breath or listening into silence " . 
 The major emendations in the final versions can be summarized as follows : 
 The most frequent modification is expansion of the original material . The expansions frequently repeat preceding measures or consist of rests or left @-@ hand figurations without the melody , providing a pause in the motion . This is especially noticeable in the Adagio , minuet and finale of the C minor Sonata , the middle section of the Andantino in the A major Sonata , and the first movement of the B @-@ flat Sonata . 
 Changes in the tempo or meter indications , mainly in the opening movements : <unk> / I was originally marked Allegro moderato ; <unk> / I was originally in alla breve time ; <unk> / II was originally marked Andante ; and <unk> / I was originally marked Moderato . 
 Some of the major cyclic elements in the sonatas were only added in the final version . This includes the final bars of the A major Sonata , which consist of a cancrizans of its opening ; and the arpeggiation at the end of the slow movement of the same work , which anticipates the opening of the scherzo . 
 Classical @-@ type sonata @-@ form transitions , going from tonic to dominant , were also modified . In the opening movement of the A major Sonata , the transition was originally written a fourth higher ; as it appears , only after figuring out the recapitulation , did Schubert decide to transpose the transition in the exposition in accordance with the recapitulation 's harmonic scheme , thus creating the more Classical type transition that establishes V of V , found in no other opening movement in late Schubert . In the analogous place in the finale of the same sonata , Schubert started writing the transition but eventually discarded it and started again , once he realized he was still in the tonic , rather than establishing the dominant . These examples demonstrate the weakening of the tonic @-@ dominant axis in Schubert 's harmonic thinking , and his general " aversion to the dominant " . 
 Two passages in the sonatas were radically modified : the development section in the finale of the A major Sonata , and the middle section in the slow movement of the B @-@ flat Sonata . 
 In addition to the differences mentioned above , numerous other , local modifications of the structure , harmony or texture were applied to the original material . In these modifications , certain uniquely ' daring ' original progressions were occasionally toned down , whereas in other places , the new version was even bolder than its predecessor . 
 = = Unifying elements and <unk> = = 
 Schubert composed his three last sonatas in close succession ; furthermore , he intended to publish them together as a set , as evident by the sonatas ' titles . In support of this view that the sonatas are a single unity , pianist and scholar Alfred Brendel has found profound musical links between the sonatas . He has argued that the sonatas complement each other in their different characters , and demonstrated that the entire sonata trilogy is based on the same basic group of <unk> motifs . Moreover , each of the sonatas contains a complex network of inner harmonic and motivic connections linking together all movements , and passages from one movement often reappear , usually transformed , in later movements . Most of these connections are too subtle to be detected during casual listening . In some cases , however , Schubert quotes a theme or passage from an earlier movement with little alteration , inserting it in structurally significant locations , creating an immediately audible allusion . Such explicit connections are related to the cyclic form , one of the musical forms associated with the Romantic period in music . 
 The most manifestly cyclical work of the three sonatas is the Sonata in A major . In the sonata 's scherzo , a joyous passage in C major is suddenly interrupted by a fierce downward rushing scale in C @-@ sharp minor , which closely recalls a parallel passage at the climax of the preceding movement ; this is followed in the scherzo by a dance theme whose melody is derived from the Andantino 's opening melody . This unique moment is one of the most explicit , audible cyclic references in the sonata trilogy . Another important cyclic element in the A major Sonata is the subtle similarities and connections that exist between each movement 's ending and the following movement 's opening ; the connection between the opening and ending of the sonata as a whole , is even bolder : the sonata ends in a cancrizans of its opening , a framing device which is probably unprecedented in the sonata literature . 
 Charles Fisk , also a pianist and music scholar , has described another cyclic element in Schubert 's last sonatas – a unifying tonal design , which follows a similar , basic dramatic scheme in each of the three works . According to Fisk , each sonata presents at its very beginning , the generative kernel of a musical conflict from which all the ensuing music will derive . The first movement , beginning and ending in the sonata 's home key , confronts this key with a contrasting tonality or tonal stratum . This dichotomous tonal design is also manifested in both third and final movements , whose openings are variants of the first movement 's opening . Moreover , the contrasting tonality becomes the main key of the second movement , thus increasing the harmonic tension in the middle of the sonata , while projecting the first movement 's tonal design ( home key – contrasting tonality – home key ) on the sonata as a whole . In the first half of each sonata , the musical material in the contrasting tonality is presented in sharp conflict with the material in the home key – in each appearance boldly detached from its surroundings . However , in the third movements and especially in the finales , this contrasting tonal realm is gradually integrated into its environment , bringing a sense of unity and resolution to the tonal conflict which was presented at the beginning of the sonata . Fisk goes further to interpret the dramatic musical scheme manifested in the tonal design of the sonatas , as the basis of a unique psychological narrative ( see below ) . 
 = = Allusion to other works by Schubert = = 
 Besides the internal references that they often make to earlier passages within them , Schubert 's last sonatas contain distinct allusions and resemblances to some of his previous works , mostly earlier piano works , as well as many of his songs . Important similarities also exist between certain passages in the sonatas and works from other genres that were composed in parallel , during the same months in 1828 . 
 The finale of the A major Sonata , uses as its main theme , a transformation of an earlier theme from the second movement of the Piano Sonata in A minor , D. 537 . Schubert introduced some changes to the original melody , which make it conform better with the sonata 's basic motifs , in accordance with the cyclical scheme of the sonata . Another allusion to an earlier piano work appears in the middle of the sonata 's slow movement : after the climax in the middle section of the Andantino , appears a passage ( bars 147 – 158 ) that closely recalls bars 35 – 39 from the Impromptu in G @-@ flat major , D. 899 . 
 An important , unique work for solo piano written by Schubert , stands apart from his sonatas , but is closely related to them in its concept and style : the Wanderer Fantasy of 1822 . The harmonic scheme inherent in each of Schubert 's last sonatas , according to Charles Fisk , of a tonal conflict gradually resolved through musical integration , finds its precedent in the Fantasy . Moreover , a tonal stratum which plays a unique role throughout the sonata trilogy – C @-@ sharp minor / F @-@ sharp minor , is also <unk> in the Fantasy as well as the song on which it was based , Der Wanderer ( of 1816 ) ( Fisk calls C @-@ sharp minor " the wanderer 's key " ) . In these two earlier works , and likewise in the last sonatas , passages written in the C @-@ sharp minor / F @-@ sharp minor stratum portray a sense of alienation , of wandering and homelessness , according to Fisk . The allusion to the song Der Wanderer becomes fully explicit when , in the development section of the B @-@ flat Sonata 's opening movement , the new theme first presented in this section , undergoes a transformation ( in bars 159 – 160 ) to become an almost literal quotation of the song 's piano introduction . 
 Another composition from the song genre , also mentioned by Fisk and others , as intimately related to the last sonatas , and also depicting a feeling of wandering and homelessness , is the Winterreise ( A Winter 's Journey ) song cycle . Numerous connections between different songs from the cycle and the sonatas , especially the C minor Sonata , have been mentioned . For example : in the C minor Sonata , the first movement 's development section recalls the songs <unk> and Der Lindenbaum ; the second movement and the finale recall the songs Das <unk> , <unk> Tranen , Gute Nacht , Auf dem <unk> , Der Wegweiser , and <unk> . These allusions to Winterreise retain the alienated , lonely atmosphere of its songs . 
 Several of Schubert 's last songs ( the <unk> collection ) , composed during the period of the sketching of the last sonatas , also portray a deep sense of alienation , and bear important similarities with specific moments in the sonatas . These include the songs Der Atlas ( recalls the opening of the C minor Sonata ) , Ihr Bild ( the B @-@ flat major / G @-@ flat major conflict at the opening of the B @-@ flat Sonata ) , Am Meer , and Der Doppelgänger . 
 Additional songs which have been mentioned in analogy to specific passages in the last sonatas include Im <unk> ( the opening of the A major Sonata 's finale ) , and <unk> ( the main section of the Andantino in the A major Sonata ) . 
 Schubert 's famous String Quintet was written in September 1828 , together with the final versions of the sonatas . The slow movements of the quintet and the B @-@ flat Sonata bear striking similarities in their main sections : both employ the same unique textural layout , in which two @-@ three voices sing long notes in the middle register , accompanied by the contrasted , short pizzicato notes of the other voices , in the lower and upper registers ; in both movements , the long notes over the relentless ostinato rhythm , convey an atmosphere of complete stillness , of arrest of all motion and time . String quintet textures also appear elsewhere , throughout the sonata trilogy . 
 = = <unk> connotations and suggestions of a narrative = = 
 Schubert 's mature music often manipulates the listener 's sense of time and forward movement . Passages creating such an effect appear frequently in the last sonatas , mainly in the first and second movements . Two harmonic devices are employed in the sonatas to create this effect : 
 Tonal detachment of passages or complete movements from their home @-@ key surroundings . These passages are often introduced by sudden , " magical " harmonic shifts that closely juxtapose the home key ( or a closely related key such as the dominant ) with the new , distant tonality . Two examples of this procedure , from the opening movement of the B @-@ flat Sonata , are shown on the right . 
 Creation of tonal stasis by rapid oscillation between two contrasting tonalities . Such a device appears in the development sections of the A major and B @-@ flat sonatas , opening movements . 
 Harmonic manipulations of this kind create a sense of standstill , of arrest of time and motion ; they often suggest a feeling of detachment , of entering a new dimension , independent of the preceding material , such as the realm of dreams and memories ( if the preceding material is conceived as reality ) ; some tonally detached passages may convey a feeling of an alienated , inhospitable environment , an exile ( if the preceding material is conceived as home ) . 
 The emotional effect of these passages is often further enhanced by textural and / or cyclical devices , such as a sudden shift of musical texture , concomitant with the shift in tonality ; the use of mechanically repetitive accompanimental patterns , such as <unk> and repeated chords , in the tonally remote or oscillating passages ; and the allusion to previously stated material , which appeared earlier in the piece , in tonally detached passages . Schubert 's frequent use of similar harmonic , textural and cyclical devices in his settings of poems depicting such emotional states , only strengthens the suggestion of these psychological connotations . 
 <unk> connotations of this kind have sometimes been used as a basis for the construction of a psychological or biographical narrative , attempting to interpret the musical program behind Schubert 's last sonatas . Charles Fisk has suggested that the sonatas portray a protagonist going through successive stages of alienation , banishment , exile , and eventual homecoming ( in the A major and B @-@ flat Sonatas ) , or self @-@ assertion ( in the C minor Sonata ) . Discrete tonalities or tonal strata , appearing in complete musical segregation from one another at the beginning of each sonata , suggest contrasting psychological states , such as reality and dream , home and exile , etc . ; these conflicts are further deepened in the ensuing slow movements . Once these contrasts are resolved at the finale , by intensive musical integration and the gradual transition from one tonality to the next , a sense of reconciliation , of acceptance and homecoming , is invoked . Fisk 's hypothetical narrative is grounded on the basis of the ample cyclic connections within the sonatas and their unique tonal design , as well as their musical similarities to songs such as Der Wanderer and the Winterreise song cycle ; and on biographical evidence concerning Schubert 's life , including a story written by Schubert ( Mein Traum – My Dream ) . Fisk suggests that the sonatas convey Schubert 's own feelings of loneliness and alienation ; by their striving towards musical and tonal integration , the writing of these works offered Schubert a release from his emotional distress , particularly deepened after finishing the composition of the lonely , depressive and hopeless songs of Winterreise , during the preceding year . 
 It is often suggested that the Last Sonata , in B @-@ flat major , is a farewell work in which Schubert faces his own death ( somewhat analogous to the myths surrounding Mozart 's Requiem ) ; this is usually ascribed to the relaxed , meditative character which dominates the two opening movements . Death scenes are also associated , somewhat more explicitly , with the more tragic C minor Sonata ; Charles Fisk , for example , mentions ghosts and a ' dance of death ' , in the outer movements . However , when judging from a biographical point of view , the notion that Schubert felt his imminent death at the time of composing the last sonatas is questionable . 
 = = Beethoven 's influence = = 
 It is well acknowledged that Schubert was a great admirer of Beethoven , and that Beethoven had an immense influence on Schubert 's writing , especially on his late works . Schubert often borrowed musical and structural ideas from the works of Beethoven , to combine them into his own compositions . There are two outstanding examples for this practice in the last piano sonatas : 
 The opening of the Sonata in C minor is " taken almost note @-@ for @-@ note " from the theme of Beethoven 's 32 Variations in C minor . 
 The structure of the finale of the Sonata in A major is borrowed from the finale of Beethoven 's Piano Sonata , Op. 31 , No. 1 , as evident through numerous parallels in structural features . 
 Numerous additional , less obvious similarities to works by Beethoven have been frequently mentioned in the literature . In these cases , the question of whether or not Schubert had actually borrowed his ideas from Beethoven is open to musicological debate . Here are some examples : 
 in the C minor Sonata , certain passages in the first two movements resemble parallel passages from Beethoven 's Piano Sonata No. 8 , Op. 13 ( the Pathétique ) , written in the same key . 
 in the A major Sonata , bars 200 – 206 from the end of the development section in the finale recall bars 51 – 55 from the first movement of Beethoven 's Piano Sonata in C @-@ sharp minor , Op. 27 , No. 2 ( the Moonlight Sonata ) . 
 in the B @-@ flat Sonata , the opening theme of the first movement recalls the opening of Beethoven 's " Archduke " Trio , whereas bars 34 – 39 recall bars 166 – 169 from the first movement of Beethoven 's Fifth Piano Concerto , the Emperor ; in the latter case , both passages are similarly modified in the <unk> . The opening of the sonata 's finale , in turn , recalls the opening of the finale from Beethoven 's String Quartet in B @-@ flat major , Op. 130 . 
 A striking feature of many of these alleged borrowings from Beethoven is that they retain , in their borrowed state , the same structural position they had in Beethoven 's original design – they appear in the same movements , at the same structural points . However , despite all this evidence in support of Schubert 's borrowing from Beethoven , " he evokes the memory of Beethoven and the classical style , but is no docile follower " , as Alfred Brendel points out . " On the contrary , his familiarity with Beethoven 's works taught him to be different ... Schubert relates to Beethoven , he reacts to him , but he follows him hardly at all . Similarities of motif , texture or formal pattern never obscure Schubert 's own voice . Models are concealed , transformed , surpassed " . A good example of Schubert 's departure from Beethoven 's line can be found in his most overt quotation of Beethoven – the opening of the Sonata in C minor . Once Schubert 's theme has reached A @-@ flat – the highest note in Beethoven 's theme – instead of the original , witty cadence in the tonic , Schubert 's theme continues to ascend to higher pitches , culminating fortissimo on another A @-@ flat , an octave higher , <unk> as a downward rushing A @-@ flat major scale . From this A @-@ flat major interlude – an evasion of the opening material 's harmonic goal , the main generative thematic material for the entire sonata will arise . In this way , what had initially appeared to be a mere note @-@ to @-@ note plagiarism of Beethoven has eventually given way to a radically different continuation , one which invokes Schubert 's own , idiosyncratic compositional style . 
 But perhaps the best example of Schubert 's departure from the style of his idol is the finale of the A major Sonata . Although starting from themes of equal length , Schubert 's movement is much longer than Beethoven 's . The added length comes from the episodes within the rondo structure : 
 Schubert 's second theme ( the B section of the rondo ) indulges in a long harmonic and melodic excursion , going through the keys of the subdominant and flat submediant . Beethoven 's more traditional short and simple theme merely consists of alternating tonic and dominant harmonies . 
 Schubert 's development section ends with a long passage in C @-@ sharp minor , with no parallel in Beethoven 's finale . 
 Charles Rosen , who unraveled this unique borrowing of a Beethovenian structure in Schubert 's A major Sonata , has also referred to Schubert 's departure from the former 's style in this instance : " Schubert moves with great ease within the form which Beethoven created . He has , however , considerably loosened what held it together , and stretched its ligaments unmercifully ... the correspondence of part to whole has been considerably altered by Schubert , and explains why his large movements often seem so long , since they are being produced with forms originally intended for shorter pieces . Some of the excitement naturally goes out of these forms when they are so extended , but this is even a condition of the unforced melodic flow of Schubert 's music " . Rosen adds , however , that " with the finale of the A major Sonata Schubert produced a work that is unquestionably greater than its model " . 
 = = Reception , criticism and influence = = 
 Schubert 's piano sonatas seem to have been mostly neglected during the entire nineteenth century , often dismissed for being too long , lacking in formal coherence , being un @-@ pianistic , etc . However , references to the last sonatas can be found among two nineteenth @-@ century Romantic composers who took serious interest in Schubert 's music and were influenced by it : Schumann and Brahms . 
 Schumann , the last sonatas ' dedicatee , reviewed the works in his Neue Zeitschrift für Musik in 1838 , upon their publication . He seems to have been largely disappointed by the sonatas , criticizing their " much greater simplicity of invention " and Schubert 's " voluntary renunciation of shining novelty , where he usually sets himself such high standards " , and claiming the sonatas " ripple along from page to page as if without end , never in doubt as to how to continue , always musical and singable , interrupted here and there by stirrings of some vehemence which , however , are rapidly stilled " . Schumann 's criticism seems to fit the general negative attitude maintained towards these works during the nineteenth century . 
 Brahms 's attitude towards the last sonatas was different . Brahms found special interest in Schubert 's piano sonatas , and expressed his wish to " study them in depth " . In her diary , Clara Schumann mentioned Brahms 's playing of the B @-@ flat Sonata , and praised his performance . In Brahms 's works dating from the early 1860s , a clear Schubertian influence can be observed , in features such as closed lyrical themes , distant harmonic relationships , and use of the three @-@ key exposition . Two of these works , the First String Sextet and the Piano Quintet , contain specific features that resemble Schubert 's B @-@ flat Sonata . 
 The negative attitude towards Schubert 's piano sonatas persisted well into the twentieth century . Only around the centennial of Schubert 's death did these works begin to receive serious attention and critical acclaim , with the writings of Donald Francis Tovey , and the public performances of Artur Schnabel and Eduard Erdmann . During the following decades , the sonatas , and especially the final trilogy , received growing attention , and by the end of the century , came to be regarded as essential members of the classical piano repertoire , frequently appearing on concert programs , studio recordings , and musicological writings . Some late twentieth century scholars have even argued that Schubert 's last sonatas should rank together with Beethoven 's most mature sonatas . The B @-@ flat Sonata , the last of them all , has gained the highest acclaim and popularity among the three . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Schubert 's last sonatas mark a distinct change of compositional style from his earlier piano sonatas , with several important differences . The typical movement length has increased , due to the use of long , lyrical , fully rounded @-@ off , ternary @-@ form themes , the insertion of development @-@ like passages within expositions , and the lengthening of the development section proper . <unk> , the orchestral grandeur of the middle @-@ period sonatas gives way to a more intimate writing that resembles a string ensemble . New textures appear in the last sonatas – scale @-@ like melodic elements , free counterpoint , free fantasia , and simple accompanimental patterns such as Alberti bass , repeated chords , and <unk> ; the orchestral unison texture , abundant in the preceding sonatas , has disappeared . The harmonic language has also changed : more distant key relationships are explored , longer modulatory excursions , more major / minor shifts of mode , and more chromatic and diverse harmonic progressions and modulations , using elements such as the diminished seventh chord . In general , the last sonatas seem to enact a return to an earlier , more individual and intimate Schubertian style , here combined with the compositional craftsmanship of Schubert 's later works . 
 Certain features of Schubert 's last sonatas have been mentioned as unique among his entire output , or even that of his period . Here one can mention the profound level of cyclic integration ( especially the cancrizans which " <unk> " the A major Sonata ) ; fantasia @-@ like writing with a harmonic daring looking forward to the style of Liszt and even of Schoenberg ( in the slow movement of the A major Sonata , middle section ) ; exploitation of the piano 's ability to produce overtones , both by use of the sustain pedal ( in the slow movement of the B @-@ flat Sonata ) , and without it ( in the A major Sonata ) ; and the creation of tonal stasis by oscillating between two contrasting tonalities ( in the development sections of the opening movements of the A and B @-@ flat major sonatas ) . 
 As mentioned above , Schubert 's last sonatas have long been historically neglected , dismissed as inferior in style to Beethoven 's piano sonatas . However , the negative view has changed during the late twentieth century , and today these works are usually praised for their conveying of an idiosyncratic , personal Schubertian style , indeed quite different from Beethoven 's , but holding its own virtues . In this mature style , the Classical perception of harmony and tonality , and the treatment of musical structure , are radically altered , generating a new , distinct type of sonata form . 
 Schubert 's last sonatas are sometimes compared to Mozart 's last symphonies , as unique compositional achievements : both consist of trilogies with one tragic , minor @-@ key work , and two serene , major @-@ key works ; both were created during an astoundingly short period of time ; and both creating a culmination of the composer 's lifetime achievement in their respective genres . 
 = = Performance issues = = 
 Several key issues are routinely raised by musicians and music scholars , when discussing the performance of Schubert 's compositions for piano . These discussions also concern the last piano sonatas . For most of these issues , no general agreement has been reached ; for example , to what extent should the sustain pedal be used , how to combine triplets with dotted rhythms , whether to allow tempo fluctuations within the course of a single movement , and whether to observe each repeat sign meticulously . 
 The issue of repeat signs has been debated particularly in the context of the opening movements of the two last sonatas . Here , as in many of Schubert 's sonata form movements , a repeat sign is written for an exceedingly long exposition , while the material of the exposition is repeated a third time in the recapitulation with little alteration . This has led some musicians to omit the exposition repeat when performing these movements . In the last two sonatas , however , unlike other movements , the first ending of the exposition contains several additional bars of music , leading back to the movement 's opening . When performing the movement without the repeat , the music in these bars is totally omitted from the performance , as it does not appear in the second ending . Furthermore , in the B @-@ flat sonata , these added bars contain strikingly novel material , which does not appear anywhere else in the piece , and is radically different from the second ending . Pianist András Schiff has described the omission of the repeat in these two movements as " the amputation of a limb " . Brendel , on the other hand , considers the additional bars as unimportant and prefers to omit the repeats ; with regard to the B @-@ flat sonata , he further claims that the transitional bars are too unconnected to the rest of the movement , and believes that their omission actually contributes to the coherence of the piece . 
 Another performance issue pertains to the choice of tempi , which is of special relevance in Schubert 's major instrumental works , particularly in the opening movements . Schubert often notated his opening movements with moderate tempo indications , the extreme case being the Molto moderato of the B @-@ flat piano sonata . The latter movement in particular , has been interpreted in vastly different speeds . Ever since the famous performances by Sviatoslav Richter , taking the opening movement at an extremely slow pace , similar tempo interpretations for this movement have been frequent . However , the majority of Schubert scholars tend to dismiss such an interpretation , arguing instead for a more flowing pace , a measured allegro . 
 Some Schubert performers tend to play the entire trilogy of the last sonatas in a single recital , thereby stressing their interrelatedness , and suggesting that they form a single , complete cycle . However , since each of these sonatas is rather long ( as compared , for instance , with most of Mozart 's or Beethoven 's sonatas ) , such a program may prove exhausting to some listeners . One of the solutions to this problem is to shorten the program by omitting repeats , mainly those of the opening movements ' expositions ( however , this practice is highly disputed , as noted above ) . The pioneers of the Schubert sonata performance , Schnabel and Erdmann , are known to have played the entire trilogy in one evening ; more recently , so did Alfred Brendel , Maurizio Pollini , Mitsuko Uchida , and Paul Lewis . 
 = = Available editions and recordings = = 
 Several highly acclaimed editions of Schubert 's last sonatas are available , namely those of Bärenreiter , Henle , Universal , and Oxford University Press . These editions have , however , occasionally received some criticism for the wrong interpretation or notation of Schubert 's intentions , on issues such as deciphering the correct pitches from the manuscript , notating <unk> , discriminating between accent and <unk> markings , and reconstructing missing bars . 
 The sonatas have been performed and recorded by numerous pianists . Many , especially the devoted Schubert performers , have recorded the entire sonata trilogy ( and often all of Schubert 's sonatas or his entire piano repertoire altogether ) . Others have sufficed with only one or two of the sonatas . Of the three sonatas , the last ( in B @-@ flat ) is the most famous and most often recorded . The following is an incomplete list of pianists who have made notable commercial recordings of the sonata trilogy , in full or in part : 
 Entire sonata trilogy : Leif Ove <unk> , Claudio Arrau , Paul <unk> @-@ Skoda , Daniel Barenboim , Alfred Brendel ( several recordings ) , Richard Goode , Wilhelm Kempff , Walter Klien , Stephen <unk> , Paul Lewis , Radu Lupu , Murray Perahia , Maurizio Pollini , András Schiff , Andreas <unk> , Mitsuko Uchida . 
 Sonata in C minor : Sviatoslav Richter . 
 Sonata in A : Vladimir Ashkenazy , Jorge <unk> , Christoph Eschenbach , Artur Schnabel , Rudolf Serkin . 
 Sonata in B @-@ flat : Clifford Curzon , Jörg <unk> , Leon Fleisher ( two recordings ) , Clara <unk> , Vladimir Horowitz ( two recordings ) , Menahem Pressler , Sviatoslav Richter ( four recordings ) , Arthur Rubinstein ( two recordings ) , Artur Schnabel , Rudolf Serkin ( two recordings ) . 
 = = Media = = 
 = Collybia tuberosa = 
 Collybia tuberosa , commonly known as the lentil shanklet or the appleseed coincap , is an inedible species of fungus in the Tricholomataceae family , and the type species of the genus Collybia . Like the two other members of its genus , it lives on the decomposing remains of other fleshy mushrooms . The fungus produces small whitish fruit bodies with caps up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) wide held by thin stems up to 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) long . On the underside of the cap are closely spaced white gills that are broadly attached to the stem . At the base of the stem , embedded in the substrate is a small reddish @-@ brown sclerotium that somewhat resembles an apple seed . The appearance of the sclerotium distinguishes it from the other two species of Collybia , which are otherwise very similar in overall appearance . C. tuberosa is found in Europe , North America , and Japan , growing in dense clusters on species of Lactarius and Russula , boletes , hydnums , and polypores . 
 = = Taxonomy , phylogeny , and naming = = 
 The species was first described under the name Agaricus <unk> by the French naturalist Jean Bulliard in the 6th volume of his Herbier de la France ( 1786 ) . Christian Hendrik Persoon called it Agaricus amanitae subsp. <unk> in his 1799 publication Observationes <unk> , while Samuel Frederick Gray referred it to Gymnopus in 1821 . It was transferred to Collybia by Paul Kummer in 1886 . The species has also been called Microcollybia <unk> in a 1979 publication by Joanne Lennox , but the genus Microcollybia has since been folded into Collybia . Additional taxonomic synonyms include Marasmius sclerotipes Bres . 1881 , Chamaeceras sclerotipes ( Bres . ) Kuntze 1898 , and Collybia sclerotipes ( Bres . ) <unk> 1950 . 
 Molecular phylogenetic analysis reported in 2001 used RNA sequences to establish that C. tuberosa forms a monophyletic group with C. cookei and C. cirrhata ; this finding was later corroborated in a 2006 publication . 
 The specific epithet tuberosa is derived from the Latin word for " tuberous " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " lentil shanklet " , or the " appleseed coincap " . Samuel Gray called it the " tuberous naked @-@ foot " in his 1821 Natural Arrangement of British plants . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of C. tuberosa ranges in shape from obtusely convex to cushion @-@ shaped with a margin curved inward when young , to flattened in age , with margin curved downward to straight . The cap sometimes has a shallow depression in the center , or a shallow umbo . Its diameter is small , reaching a maximum of 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) . The cap surface is dry to moist , smooth to covered with fine soft hairs , and somewhat hygrophanous — changing color depending on the level of hydration . Sometimes the cap margin is pleated or grooved . The center of the cap is pinkish @-@ buff but whitish around the margin , and it becomes whitish overall as it matures . The flesh is thin , and colored whitish to light buff . The mushroom has no distinctive taste or odor , and is considered inedible . 
 The gills are adnate ( bluntly fused to the stem ) , becoming subdecurrent with age ( running slightly down the length of the stem ) . The gill spacing is close to subdistant , and the individual gills are whitish to pinkish @-@ buff , thin , narrow to moderately broad , and have straight edges . The stem is 10 – 50 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long by 1 – 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 – 0 @.@ 08 in ) , and roughly equal in width throughout its length . It is slender and thread @-@ like , flexible and pliant , with a dry surface . The top of the stem is covered with scales or a fine whitish powder , while the lower portion has hairs ranging from delicate to coarse . The color of the stem is generally whitish to pinkish @-@ buff , but it darkens after it has been handled . The stem interior is pithy , and becomes hollow with age . The stems originate from a dark reddish @-@ brown sclerotium of variable shape , typically measuring 3 – 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 47 in ) by 2 – 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 20 in ) . The surface of the sclerotium is initially smooth , but later becomes wrinkled or furrowed ; its interior is solid and white . It is often compared to an apple seed in appearance . Typically , several sclerotia are connected by thin strands of mycelia . The sclerotium is a resting structure that allows to fungus to overwinter in its host . In 1915 , William Murrill reported the sclerotia of C. tuberosa to be bioluminescent . 
 The spore print is white . Individual spores are smooth , ellipsoid to tear @-@ shaped in profile , obovoid to ellipsoid or cylindric in face or back view , with dimensions of 4 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 2 by 2 @.@ 8 – <unk> They are inamyloid and acyanophilous ( non @-@ reactive to staining with Melzer 's reagent and Methyl blue , respectively ) . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells in the hymenium ) are club @-@ shaped to cylindric and 15 @.@ 4 – 21 by 3 @.@ 5 – 5 µm . The cheilocystidia ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are scattered to infrequent , inconspicuous , and 17 @.@ 5 – 31 @.@ 5 µm long . Their shape ranges from a contorted cylinder to roughly club @-@ shaped to irregularly diverticulate ( with short offshoots approximately at right angles to the main stem ) . There are no pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) . The gill tissue is made of interwoven hyphae that are non @-@ reactive to Melzer 's reagent . These hyphae are smooth and thin @-@ walled , measuring 2 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 4 µm in diameter . The cap tissue is made of hyphae that is interwoven below the center of the cap , radially oriented over the gills , and inamyloid . These hyphae are smooth , thin @-@ walled , and 2 @.@ 8 – 7 µm in diameter . The cap cuticle is a thin layer of smooth thin @-@ walled hyphae that are more or less radially oriented , bent @-@ over , cylindric and somewhat gelatinous , measuring 2 – 5 µm in diameter ; they are occasionally diverticulate . The cuticle of the stem is made of a layer of parallel , vertically oriented smooth , thin @-@ walled hyphae that are 2 – 4 @.@ 2 µm in diameter , pale yellowish brown in alkali mounting solution . The stem has moderately thin @-@ walled and smooth cystidia that are resemble flexuous or contorted cylinders . They are hyaline in alkali , and 3 @.@ 5 – 7 µm in diameter . Clamp connections are present in the hyphae of all tissues . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Baeospora myosura is similar in size and appearance to C. tuberosa , but grows on spruce and Douglas @-@ fir cones . The " Magnolia coincap " ( Strobilurus <unk> ) is smaller and grows on the cones of Magnolias . The two remaining Collybia species closely resemble C. tuberosa , but can be distinguished by examining the stem bases at the point of attachment into the substrate . C. cookei has roughly spherical , light brown to yellowish sclerotia , while C. cirrhata does not produce sclerotia . In the field , C. tuberosa may be distinguished from C. cookei by its dark reddish @-@ brown sclerotia that somewhat resembles an appleseed . A microscope provides a more definitive way of distinguishing the two : the hyphae in the sclerotia of C. cookei are rounded , while those of C. tuberosa are elongated ; this diagnostic character is apparent with both fresh and dried material of the two species . In contrast , C. cirrhata does not produce sclerotia . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 It is not known if C. tuberosa is strictly parasitic , and needs the host to be living , or whether it is saprobic . Either way , the fruit bodies of the fungus are found growing solitarily or in dense clusters on the decomposing , often blackened remains of other mushrooms . Hosts include agarics ( particularly Lactarius and Russula ) , boletes , hydnums , and polypores . In the Pacific Northwest region of the United States , Russula crassotunicata is a common and abundant species that has been definitively identified as a host of both C. tuberosa and Dendrocollybia racemosa . The Russula fruit bodies are slow to decay , and are available nearly year @-@ round as a substrate for the <unk> . Based on field observations , the authors suggest that C. tuberosa may produce fruit bodies on less decayed mushrooms , while D. racemosa produces them on much more heavily decayed mushrooms . 
 Collybia tuberosa is found in Europe and North America , and in most common in the summer and autumn , coinciding with the fruiting periods of other mushrooms . It has also been reported from Japan . 
 = Fark = 
 Fark is a community website created by Drew Curtis that allows members to comment on a daily batch of news articles and other items from various websites . The site receives many story submissions per day and approximately 100 of them are publicly displayed on the site , spread out over the main page and tabs ( Entertainment , Sports , Geek , Politics and Business ) . 
 Founder Drew Curtis says the stories are selected without intentional political bias , but that he tries to run both far @-@ left and far @-@ right articles . 
 Links are submitted by Fark members ( collectively referred to as " Farkers " ) , which admins can approve ( " greenlight " ) for posting on either the main page or one of the subsidiary tab pages . All links ( excluding those of sponsors ) , whether approved or not , have associated threads where users can comment on the link . <unk> links can generate upwards of 300 @,@ 000 page views in one month for the recipient . This can generate such an enormous amount of traffic in such a short time that smaller websites are often rendered inoperable due to congestion or simple server failure . This is colloquially referred to as the website being " <unk> " by the community . 
 = = History = = 
 Fark was created in 1999 by Drew Curtis of Lexington , Kentucky . Curtis states that the word " <unk> " originated either from a chat room euphemism for " f * * k " or from a drunken misspelling ; although he tells people it is the former because it is a " better story that way " . He registered Fark.com in September 1997 , when a friend mentioned that all of the four letter domain names were disappearing . Originally , Fark contained no content except for an image of a squirrel with large testicles . This photograph is that of a Cape Ground Squirrel in Etosha National Park , Namibia , taken by photographer Kevin Shafer , who at the time worked for the Corbis Corporation , ca . 1993 . The squirrel image is no longer used in the production area of the site , but it can still be found as the server 's 404 error for pages that do not exist . 
 Since 1993 , Curtis had frequently read morning news stories and exchanged them with friends . Although this would later become the inspiration for Fark , Curtis toyed with the idea of starting an online curry recipe database . In 1999 , eighteen months after registering the domain name , he launched Fark as a way to share interesting news postings with his friends rather than sending them numerous emails . The first story posted was an article about a fighter pilot who crashed while attempting to moon another fighter pilot . 
 During Fark 's first year , the site received over 50 @,@ 000 page views and one million the year after . Features such as link submission and forums were added as popularity and participation grew . By January 2008 , according to Curtis , the site was averaging an estimated 52 million page views per month from 4 million unique visitors . Fark was officially incorporated in the state of Delaware as , " Fark , Inc . " , on January 31 , 2008 . 
 While most of the story links on the main page are submitted by users and selected for placement based on merit , there was an incident in August 2004 in which Fark was accused of selling preferential placement of story links on the main page . The accusation stemmed from an exchange between <unk> CEO Jason <unk> and third party sales employee <unk> Gupta , where Gupta claimed <unk> could buy an editorial on Fark for $ 300 to $ 400 . Curtis dismissed the incident as the result of an overenthusiastic salesperson , and subsequently fired Gupta . Gupta worked for a company called Gupta Media and did not have the authority to speak for Fark , according to Curtis . 
 Curtis launched <unk> in 2006 as a NSFW ( not safe for work ) offshoot of Fark , primarily because advertisers complained about links to female breasts on the main site . Customers could purchase NSFW links through <unk> at the price of $ 400 per link . 
 Fark launched Fark TV on January 17 , 2007 . The first video was a spoof ad for a mock product called " Meth Coffee . " In May 2008 , Turner Broadcasting announced that it would be folding <unk> , Fark TV 's host site , into the Adult Swim brand , and laying off most of the staff , effectively canceling Fark TV . 
 A new design for the website was launched on April 25 , 2007 , with the comment , " Fark site redesign is now live . Hope nothing breaks , we 're all out drinking . " The new design was initially received with some controversy by many users , mostly due to the change in layout and a seemingly indifferent attitude by site moderators to user impact or feedback . In response , Drew Curtis noted the following reasons for the redesign : " Websites have to evolve over time . Otherwise you end up with a layout anachronism like the Drudge Report . The old design was put into place years ago , over time changes were nailed on to the design like loose shingles on a leaky roof . It was time to reformat and remove a bunch of the clutter while trying to keep the core design intact . " The site layout was refined over the next few weeks in accordance with many suggestions . 
 Curtis published the book , It 's Not News , It 's Fark : How Mass Media Tries to Pass off Crap as News in May 2007 . The book critically explores the mass media industry and the go @-@ to stories used when there is a lack of hard news to report . It sold 25 @,@ 000 copies in its first 12 weeks on the market . Despite its initial strong reception , the book only received mild attention from reviewers . Salon.com gave it a favorable review , although the only major newspaper to review it was the Tucson Citizen , which only gave it a mini @-@ review . 
 On November 24 , 2009 , Fark launched a new partnership with USA Today , as they became the exclusive host and sponsor of Fark 's Geek Page , a collection of technology @-@ related links . This represents the site 's first content partnership with a major media brand . Previously , Curtis had signed a sales only deal with Maxim Online . The page shows aggregated technology news headlines from other news sources with USA Today 's Tech section branding . Its right column displays technology content from USA Today with video clips and a headline widget of <unk> 's Tech Live and Game Hunters stories . 
 In January 2011 , Fark was sued in Los Angeles Federal Court by Gooseberry Natural Resources , LLC , for allegedly violating US Patent No. 6 @,@ 370 @,@ 535 , titled , " System and method for structured news release generation and distribution . " This patent , awarded in 2002 , involves typing text into an administration system , storing it on a server , and publishing it on the Internet . Other defendants sued in the case include Reddit , The Atlanta @-@ Journal Constitution , Digg , <unk> ( owner of Slashdot ) , TechCrunch , <unk> , and Yahoo . Drew Curtis argued that Fark does not produce " news releases " or " press releases " , as the lawsuit stated , and instead provides a forum for humorous links to stories on other websites . The case was settled in August 2011 , for the sum of $ 0 . Curtis later described the entire ordeal as , " a nightmare " , saying , " Imagine someone breaking into your home , then being forced to sit on the couch while their lawyers file motions over how much stuff they can take . " At the 2012 TED Conference in Long Beach , California , he referred to patent trolls as " terrorists " , comparing them to the Abu Sayyaf terror group in the Philippines , which kidnapped people for ransom , collected small sums of money , expanded with more personnel and equipment , and then kidnapped more people for higher ransoms . 
 Fark tweaked its site design a little more on June 1 , 2011 , with the comment , " Fark 's redesign will go live at <unk> EST . Heads @-@ up for those of you who missed the other warning threads and need a place to completely lose your mind . " Having learned from the controversy caused by the 2007 redesign , Curtis introduced the new site as a preview one week ( two weeks for TotalFark users ) prior to June 1 , to allow users to comment on the changes and provide feedback on where things were broken . The primary reason for the redesigned site is to make it easier to use and more intuitive . The site 's tagline was changed from " It 's not news , it 's <unk> " to " We don 't make news . We mock it . " The music tab was also dropped , due to low usage – content was rolled into the Showbiz or Video tab , where most of the content was already cross @-@ posted anyway . An overhaul to the Fark Mobile Web site was not done at this time , but Curtis did say that small changes would be implemented over time to make the mobile site more consistent with the overall design of the new site . 
 An official iPhone app , " <unk> ! on Fark " , was released on June 11 , 2012 , for the iPhone , iPad , and iPod Touch . The app enables users to receive notifications on various stories appearing on Fark by topic or keyword , as well as allows users to comment on stories . It also lets users set a " snooze " option , or a period of time when notifications will not be sent ( e.g. for sleeping or work ) . An app for Android phones is also planned . Other iOS apps are also available allowing users to browse the site , including , " Mobile Reader for <unk> ® " and , " Fark ® Not News " , although these are not official apps . 
 = = Administration = = 
 Compared to other popular websites , such as Daily Kos and <unk> , Fark is a relatively small operation , run more or less singlehandedly by founder Drew Curtis from his home near Lexington , Kentucky . The site earns revenue from advertising and membership in its TotalFark program . Although Curtis won 't release official revenue figures , he estimated that , in 2006 , the site earned just under $ 600 @,@ 000 per year . Its classifieds section alone generates as much as $ 40 @,@ 000 per year . Technology writer Mathew Ingram described Fark as " staggeringly successful " and noted the disparity between Fark 's revenue and the amount of press given to sites like Digg . Fark has also spoken about its steady , above average <unk> . 
 Despite a fairly high revenue , Drew takes a yearly salary of just $ 60 @,@ 000 . The rest of the money goes to the site 's legal " war chest " as well as to pay other expenses such as hosting , website design , and forum moderation . 
 Curtis has used public relations to drive traffic , including interviews every Friday on TechTV for one to one and a half years ( ca . 2002 – 2003 ) about the three weirdest tech @-@ oriented stories of the week . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Tags = = = 
 <unk> can give stories several different tags , such as stupid , interesting , obvious , or dumbass . Tags that say <unk> , <unk> or <unk> are used for threads where digital content is edited for a humorous or artistic effect . In addition , the newsflash tag is used for news which is a matter of important breaking news , and an email is sent to the administrators notifying them that someone has submitted a newsflash . 
 Due to the large amount of headlines submitted to the site from the state of Florida , and because " so many stupid things happen in Florida , it deserved its own Fark tag , " the Florida tag was created at the suggestion of users . Similarly , articles discussing Wil Wheaton – a Fark user himself – are given the Wheaton tag and articles discussing Christopher Walken are occasionally given the Walken tag , though Walken has never participated on Fark . 
 On August 19 , 2008 , a new fail tag was introduced , to be used for submitted articles where the subject does something ignorant or when a major gaffe occurs . A new <unk> tag was introduced to in recognition of the <unk> meme on December 21 , 2009 . 
 = = = TotalFark = = = 
 In February 2002 , Curtis introduced TotalFark as a subscription service , charging $ 5 per month . By May 2007 there were an estimated 2 @,@ 000 subscribers , generating $ 120 @,@ 000 per year . Subscribers , known collectively as <unk> or <unk> , at one time had the privilege of seeing and commenting on all links submitted to the site , as opposed to only those approved for inclusion on the main page . However , as of 2010 an estimated 40 % of links submitted to TotalFark are deleted within one minute of being submitted . In a typical 24 @-@ hour period , TotalFark 's main page includes 1 @,@ 200 to 1 @,@ 800 links with associated comment threads , whereas Fark 's main page includes only 60 to 80 links from that total . 
 Subscribers who purchase a 6- or 12 @-@ month subscription are also eligible to receive an @ <unk> email address . The <unk> email service is provided through Google 's Gmail service . 
 = = = <unk> and clichés = = = 
 Fark 's comment threads are often littered with various <unk> or clichés . These are essentially in @-@ jokes which either originated on Fark or on other sites ( such as 4chan or Something Awful ) that have become an integral part of the community culture and used in myriad discussions in the forums , regardless of whether they apply to the topic at hand . Several groups of people seem to take a bit more abuse than others on the site , including PETA , Catholic priests , the French , and Duke University , according to Curtis . The site has also become somewhat well known for including " NSFW " ( Not Safe For Work ) in the headlines of links that contain images or videos of a sensitive nature , and in 2007 , attempted to file a trademark of the phrase . Fark was also involved in organizing the Rickrolling of the New York Mets in April 2008 , when they encouraged readers to vote for Rick Astley 's Never Gonna Give You Up as the song to be played during every home game of the 2008 season . 
 One particularly notable Farkism involves the acronym UFIA ( <unk> Finger In Anus ) , which became a cliché after an article making the main page misquoted a judge using the line . UFIA was prominently used again in February 2005 , when Drew Curtis purchased the naming rights to the Fleet Center ( now TD Garden ) in Boston , Massachusetts for the single day of February 28 , 2005 . The consensus choice of Fark 's readers was that it should be re @-@ dubbed the " Fark.com UFIA Center " . In the end , however , Boston Garden was chosen as the name due to obscenity concerns . In April 2006 , a Fark member convinced the Tennessee Department of Transportation to erect an Adopt a Highway sign in the name of UFIA on the two miles of State Route 63 west of the intersection of SR 63 and U.S. Route <unk> . The Department required a definition of UFIA , which was explained as , " Uniting Friends in America . " The sign remained up for a few days , but was ultimately removed once authorities were informed of the origins of the acronym . 
 Another popular Farkism involves <unk> @-@ TV Consumer Specialist Ric Romero , which began on October 19 , 2005 , when he wrote a news story on the " new " internet phenomenon of blogging . The story was then picked up by Fark , where he was ridiculed for posting a story about something that many people did not consider " news " and was actually quite obvious . Over the course of the next several years , he became somewhat of a meme on the site , as Farkers would post links to his stories , along with his photo , and a brief caption stating something obvious that everyone already knew . On December 7 , 2009 , Drew Curtis discovered his Facebook fan page , which led Ric to ask the Farkers that joined his new Facebook page to donate to the Spark of Love Toy Drive , which subsequently resulted in 582 online donations totaling $ 13 @,@ 659 @.@ 20 by December 16 , 2009 . Romero thanked the Fark community on the news for their donations , and recognized his status as a Farkism , also reporting the " breaking news " that " Water is Wet . " 
 = = = Photoshop contests = = = 
 The site features regular Photoshop contests , in which users use a graphical editing program ( such as Adobe Photoshop , from which the contest draws its name ) to manipulate an image provided by the creator of the contest . A similar site , Something Awful , sponsors Photoshop <unk> contests . The image is usually manipulated for humorous effect , but can also be edited to create an aesthetically pleasing image or to showcase a poster 's image manipulation skill , which is then voted on by others in the forum . 
 = = = Fark Parties = = = 
 At periodic intervals throughout the year , Fark Parties are organized , usually in conjunction with the travels of Curtis . The practice began in 1999 , when Curtis was doing some database consulting in Spartanburg , South Carolina . Staying in a hotel with nothing to do , he posted a note up on the site asking anybody who lived in the area to email him if they wanted to join him for a beer . 
 = = = FarkIt = = = 
 " FarkIt " or " Fark This " is a method of submitting information that increases its chances of being seen on the Fark web site . A FarkIt button appears on a web site , and links submitted through this button go to a different database . The Fark web site gives priority to submissions from sites that clearly show the button . This might mean that the URL of a particular article will be that of the site showing the button , rather than one which does not , even if the site without the button was the first from which the given article was submitted . 
 = = Traffic and users = = 
 As of June 2009 , the site received approximately three to four million unique visitors per month , and garnered 60 million page views and 75 million outbound links . This put it in the top 100 of English language websites . Fark 's Alexa rating was 2 @,@ 310 , with the average user spending 5 @.@ 8 minutes per day on the site and 5 @,@ 337 sites linking in . 67 @.@ 2 % of users originate from the United States . The site receives approximately 2 @,@ 000 story submissions per day from users , and approximately 50 of them are displayed on the main page of the site , or " green @-@ lighted " . Subscribers to the subscription TotalFark service , are able to view all 2 @,@ 000 submissions per day for a $ 5 per month fee . There are around 500 @,@ 000 user accounts on the site ( including both TotalFark as well as unpaid accounts ) , although only about 5 % actually read comments , and only 1 % actually post in the forums . <unk> links can generate upwards of 300 @,@ 000 page views in one month for the recipient , which is such an enormous amount of traffic that smaller websites are often " <unk> " , meaning that their servers have crashed . 
 Normally , in the absence of serious news , comments in the forums on the site tend to be of a more sophomoric nature . However , during major events such as the September 11 attacks or the Hurricane Katrina aftermath , usage spikes and the site can actually be seen as a more serious outlet for news . Some users can also contribute greatly to reporting actual events ; for instance , the citizen journalism of the events during the 2009 Iranian election protests was recognized by several major media outlets . In response to this coverage , Drew Curtis placed a green band on the letter " K " in the site 's logo at the top of the page , to show support for Mir @-@ Hossein <unk> . 
 In a June 2009 interview , Curtis said that almost all traffic coming from the People 's Republic of China and India was from <unk> , so he blocked both countries from the site . 
 = = Publicity = = 
 As the site 's popularity grew , Fark appeared many times in popular media outlets . In 2006 , Curtis and Fark were featured on the cover of Business 2 @.@ 0 magazine as part of the feature story about successful websites . In 2007 and 2009 , Fark was referenced on the game show Jeopardy ! , with a category entitled " Fark.com Headlines . " The site is also frequently used as a humorous source for news by many radio stations , as well as late night comedy shows . However , much to Drew Curtis ' dismay , it is very rarely cited as a source for many of these stories . 
 Several celebrities have also stated that they either checked the website regularly or participated in its discussion forums using an account . Some of these celebrities include Alan Colmes of Fox News , Mythbusters co @-@ host Adam Savage , science fiction author John <unk> , and actor Wil Wheaton . 
 = Systematic Chaos = 
 Systematic Chaos is the ninth studio album by American progressive metal / rock band Dream Theater . Released on June 4 , 2007 in the United Kingdom and June 5 , 2007 in the United States , Systematic Chaos was the band 's first release through Roadrunner Records , which was sold to their previous label Atlantic Records , through which the band had released their previous studio album Octavarium ( 2005 ) . The album was recorded from September 2006 to February 2007 at Avatar Studios in New York City , after the band 's first break from summer touring in ten years . The lyrics of the album were written by John Petrucci , James LaBrie , and Mike Portnoy about fictional , political , and personal topics , respectively . 
 The album peaked in the top twenty in eight countries ' sales charts ; in addition , the album peaked at the nineteenth position on the Billboard 200 , making it the highest peaking Dream Theater album in the United States until the release of Black Clouds & Silver Linings ( 2009 ) , which debuted at the sixth position . Critical reception of the album was generally positive ; Jon Eardley from MetalReview.com called the band , " arguably the most consistent band throughout the entire progressive rock / metal industry " . 
 Dream Theater promoted the album on their Chaos in Motion world tour , which lasted a year and spanned thirty @-@ five countries . The album was released in regular and special edition formats ; the special edition included a 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix of the album , in addition to a ninety @-@ minute " making of " documentary about the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 After recording their twentieth anniversary concert , Score , on April 1 , 2006 , Dream Theater rested for its first summer in ten years . The band would reconvene at Avatar Studios , in New York City , in September 2006 . Mike Portnoy stated that the relationship between band members was " the best it 's ever been " . The band hired Paul Northfield , who had previously worked with bands that had inspired Dream Theater , including Rush and Queensrÿche , to engineer the album . As with previous albums , Dream Theater simultaneously wrote and recorded Systematic Chaos . Mike Portnoy and John Petrucci co @-@ produced the album ; Portnoy said that the band hires an engineer and a mixer to act as an " objective outside ear " , but the members ultimately " call their own shots " . Previous Dream Theater albums shared planned themes throughout , such as Metropolis Pt . 2 : Scenes from a Memory ( 1999 ) as a concept album or Train of Thought ( 2003 ) as a heavy , " balls to the wall " album . Though Portnoy had some preconceived ideas for Systematic Chaos , he decided not to tell the rest of the band ; leaving them to start with a " completely open palate " . However , Portnoy did want to retain a " cutting , aggressive , modern " mood throughout , " It had to have balls , " he added , " it had to be cool " . 
 The album was titled Systematic Chaos after Portnoy and Petrucci picked phrases from song lyrics that they felt would be a fitting title , in similar fashion to previous albums like Images and Words ( 1992 ) or Awake ( 1994 ) . The pair selected the word " chaos " , which appears in " The Dark Eternal Night " . Petrucci and Portnoy were also attracted to the phrase " Random thoughts of neat disorder " which appears in " Constant Motion " . Inspired by the " duality " of the phrase , opposites of the word " chaos " were discussed , resulting in the word " systematic " . Portnoy said that in addition to the album , " systematic chaos " is also a " fitting description of the band in general " . 
 = = Songs = = 
 John Petrucci wrote the lyrics for five of the eight songs on the album , telling a fictional story through each one . 
 = = = In the Presence of Enemies = = = 
 The first piece recorded , the twenty @-@ five @-@ minute epic " In the Presence of Enemies , " was described by Petrucci as the " epitome of a Dream Theater creation " . He went on to describe the composition as " very progressive , very long " ; also noting that it set a good tone for writing and recording the rest of the album . Their longest recording since " Six Degrees of Inner Turbulence " , it was split into two parts , due to it having a good open and close for the album at the same time . According to Portnoy , the band felt it was too long to open the album , but did not want to close the album with a long song , as they had with the twenty @-@ four @-@ minute title track of their last album Octavarium ( 2005 ) . The songs are normally played together in their entirety in live shows . During recording , the work was titled , " The Pumpkin King , " and in the album 's booklet , the song is given a subtitle , " The Heretic and the Dark Master . " 
 The story of " In the Presence of Enemies " was inspired by a Korean manhwa named Priest , as Petrucci explains that not being a manga fan , precisely , " [ ... ] I like it though . This one , I just stumbled upon and I really liked the content . It inspired me to take a different approach lyrically . You have to keep things interesting for yourself when writing new material so I just took this and ran with it . [ ... ] Those types of lyrics are fun to write , you know ? The dark subject matter , the dark master stuff . It 's another way of writing , a fresh one to me . " He also summarizes the lyrics : " It 's a story about somebody who loses himself and end struggles with the darkness , symbolized by the Dark Master . And the story ends up really being the darkness within and goes through the different phases where he has to fight demons and things like that . 
 = = = Forsaken = = = 
 Petrucci said " Forsaken " is a story told through a " short song structure " . The song tells of a person who is visited at night by a vampiress . While the man thinks he is being taken away and being shown " wonderful things " , he doesn 't realize that the whole time he is getting his blood sucked , and is eventually taken , in the end , by the vampiress . An animated music video of " Forsaken " , produced by Gonzo and directed by <unk> Soejima , was released on January 26 , 2008 . The band allowed Soejima artistic freedom with the design of the video , which was set in a science fiction future instead of the present day . During the production of the album , the working title for this song was " Jet Lag " , and it was the sixth song to be written . 
 = = = Constant Motion = = = 
 " Constant Motion " was released as the first single from the album on April 27 , 2007 . It was first made available as a free download the same day by Roadrunner Records ; it could be found at Roadrunner Records ' Dream Theater sub @-@ website for a limited time . This song was also made available to download for the music video game Rock Band . The song is considered as one of the hardest songs available for the game on both Guitar and Drums . Its working title was " <unk> Chameleon " , and was the second piece written . 
 Mike Portnoy said that since it was one of the more aggressive , more driving songs on the album , that the lyrics were very much a metaphor for his Obsessive Compulsive Disorder . With everything he does for Dream Theater as well as his life in general , that his " wheels are always in constant motion " , and that he 's always juggling many different projects or responsibilities for the band at the same time . So the lyrics are a representation for whats going on in his head on any given day . 
 The song was also accompanied by a music video , the first the band had produced in over a decade . The video clip premiered on July 13 , 2007 and was released as a free download , in two different formats , also for a limited time . The band had not produced a music video since " Hollow Years " from Falling into Infinity ( 1997 ) , citing lack of interest and lack of rotation on music channels for the latter . The video received considerable airplay on MTV2 's Headbangers Ball and was voted as the second best music video of 2007 by the same ; it is arguably Dream Theater 's most popular video since " Pull Me Under " in 1992 . 
 = = = The Dark Eternal Night = = = 
 Petrucci wrote the lyrics to " The Dark Eternal Night " about a pharaoh who has returned after dormancy as a monster to haunt a town . The lyrics are heavily influenced by the short story Nyarlathotep by American horror fiction writer H.P. Lovecraft , even borrowing a lot of specific phrases from this story . The song contains an improvised continuum solo , performed by Rudess while the drum tracks were being recorded ; the band members liked the solo enough to keep in the final recording . In the October 2010 issue of Total Guitar Magazine , its readers voted the main riff of " The Dark Eternal Night " as the fourth greatest riff of the decade . During the making of the song , the title was , " <unk> " ( " North American Dream Squad " ) and it was the fifth song to be written . 
 The sprawling , progressive midsection was not featured in the song 's original edit , but is based around a riff that Rudess came up with in the control room , when listening to the original , more conservative instrumental section . " I was debating whether or not I should even bring it up , but then I got brave and said ' You know , I 've got this weird idea . ' " 
 The Dark Eternal Night was the second of two songs released to the general public in advance of the album 's release , with an in @-@ studio video being released to YouTube in May 2007 . 
 = = = Repentance = = = 
 Portnoy wrote " Repentance " as the fourth part of his Twelve @-@ step Suite , a collection of songs from various Dream Theater albums which revolve around his journey through Alcoholics Anonymous . The song discusses steps eight and nine of the process , which deal with making a list of people whom one has wronged and , if possible , making direct amends with them . Portnoy , who as of 2007 had been sober for 7 ½ years , invited friends and fellow musicians Mikael Åkerfeldt , Jon Anderson , David Ellefson , Daniel Gildenlöw , Steve Hogarth , Chris Jericho , Neal Morse , Joe Satriani , Corey Taylor , Steve Vai , and Steven Wilson to record spoken apologies , regrets , and sorrows of their own , which were featured throughout the song . Portnoy dedicated " Repentance " , " to Bill W. and all of his friends " . During recording , the title of the track was , " <unk> " and it was the seventh and final song to be written . This saga is concluded in the band 's tenth studio album Black Clouds & Silver Linings with " The Shattered Fortress " . 
 = = = Prophets of War = = = 
 " Prophets of War " was written by James LaBrie , who based the lyrics loosely on Joseph C. Wilson 's book The Politics of Truth . The lyrics talk about possible ulterior motives behind the Iraq War , while remaining " middle of the road " . The title is a play on words , where the " prophets " of the war , could also be gaining a " profit " from the War . During the recording of the song , Portnoy suggested fans could voice certain lyrical chants . In response to a message posted on the band 's website four hundred fans gathered outside the recording studio to record the chanting , however only sixty could fit into the studio . The title of the track during recording was , " Carpet Babies " and it was the third song to be written . 
 = = = The Ministry of Lost Souls = = = 
 At 14 : 57 , " The Ministry of Lost Souls " is the album 's second longest track . Throughout the song 's lyrics , Petrucci tells of a person who dies in the process of saving a woman from drowning . However , the woman who is saved is filled with " regret and sorrow " until she is able to re @-@ unite with her rescuer . The title for the track during recording was , " Schindler 's Lisp " and it was the fourth song to be written . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Both the regular and special editions of Systematic Chaos were released on June 4 , 2007 in the UK and June 5 , 2007 in the US . Over their seven album relationship with Warner Music Group , Dream Theater became disappointed at the lack of coverage they gave the band . " [ ... ] Our previous label basically relied on our fanbase to do everything . [ They would ] put the money up for the record and put the CD in the shops , " said Portnoy . On February 8 , 2007 , Dream Theater reached an agreement with Roadrunner Records to release their new album . Systematic Chaos had nearly been written and recorded at the time of the signing . Ironically , Warner purchased Roadrunner Records a week after the band signed with them . According to LaBrie , Roadrunner followed through on all of its promises to the band concerning the promotion of the album . 
 Portnoy spent a month directing and editing a documentary titled Chaos in Progress : The Making of Systematic Chaos , which was released on the two disc special edition of the album . The bonus disc of the special edition also included 5 @.@ 1 surround sound mix of the entire album . Dream Theater supported the album by touring on the Chaos in Motion Tour from June 3 , 2007 to June 4 , 2008 . The world tour comprised 115 shows throughout thirty @-@ five countries . Multiple concerts were filmed for the band 's fifth DVD , titled Chaos in Motion 2007 – 2008 . The compilation of concerts was released on September 30 , 2008 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception for Systematic Chaos was generally positive . Writing for MetalReview.com , Jon Eardley called the album , " another solid outing " . He complimented Petrucci for " Constant Motion " , writing that it contains " some of the best riffs Petrucci has brought to the table " . In addition , he called the latter part of " The Dark Eternal Night " " the most brutal part in any song to date " . Reviewing for Metal Invader , Nikos <unk> called the album , " energetic , sharp – edged , full of beautiful melodies and heavy riffs , long epic compositions " . He called Dream Theater 's instrumentalists " four masters of music that use their instruments as if they were their limbs " , in addition to stating , " James LaBrie sounds more mature than ever " . In conclusion , <unk> called Systematic Chaos , " an excellent album that needs many times to be listened in order to be digested " . Greg Prato , of AllMusic , wrote " [ ... ] ' Forsaken ' proves wrong those who say that Dream Theater is all about instrumental gymnastics and not songwriting " . He also compared riffs in " The Dark Eternal Night " to the band Pantera . Overall , he states " [ ... ] the quintet sticks to the prog metal game plan that they 've followed since their inception " . Reviewer Chad Bowar of About.com , wrote that " In the Presence of Enemies - Part I " is " an effective way to set the tone for the rest of the songs " . Overall , Bowar gave the album four out of five stars , calling it , " one of the best Dream Theater releases in quite a while " . 
 The album peaked in the top twenty @-@ five in the United Kingdom and Australia , where the band had never previously charted . In the United States , the album peaked at the nineteenth position on the Billboard 200 , making it the highest peaking Dream Theater album in the United States at the time of its release . Overall , Systematic Chaos peaked in the top twenty for album sales in eight countries . In the US , the album sold 35 @,@ 689 copies the first week it was released . 
 In 2014 , readers of Rhythm magazine voted Systematic Chaos the second greatest drumming album in the history of progressive rock . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All music composed by Dream Theater . 
 = = = Special edition bonus DVD = = = 
 Complete album in 5 @.@ 1 surround sound 
 Chaos in Progress : the making of Systematic Chaos 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = John Haynes ( governor ) = 
 John Haynes ( May 1 , 1594 – c . January 9 , 1653 / 4 ) , also sometimes spelled Haines , was a colonial magistrate and one of the founders of the Connecticut Colony . He served one term as governor of the Massachusetts Bay Colony and was the first governor of Connecticut , ultimately serving eight separate terms . 
 Haynes was influential in the drafting of laws and legal frameworks in both Massachusetts and Connecticut . He was on the committee that drafted the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut , which has been called one of the first written constitutions . He also invested most of his fortune in Connecticut , " to the ruine of his <unk> in Englande " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Haynes was likely born at Messing , Essex , England , the eldest son of John Haynes and Mary Michel Haynes . The family was an armigerous gentry or ' visitation family ' who had lived at <unk> , Herefordshire , and at Great Haddam . In 1605 , when he was eleven , his father died , and he eventually inherited the family 's many properties . It is possible that Haynes attended Cambridge ; during the relevant time period , two John <unk> are listed as attending . By about 1616 , Haynes was living at Gurney 's Manor , Hingham , Norfolk , a hotbed of Puritan sentiment , where Haynes was Lord of the Manor . There he married Mary <unk> , the daughter of Norfolk nobility , with whom he had six children . In 1627 , his wife Mary died and was buried at St. Andrews Church in Hingham . In the early 1620s , he purchased <unk> Hall , near Colchester in Essex ; this estate alone was reported to produce £ 1 @,@ 100 per year . 
 Essex was also a Puritan center , and Haynes was greatly influenced by the pastor Thomas Hooker , who was a close friend . In about 1630 , John Winthrop and John Humphreys , two of the founders of the Massachusetts Bay Colony , extended invitations to Hooker and Haynes to join them in the New World . Apparently leaving his minor children behind , Haynes emigrated in 1633 , sailing aboard the Griffin with Hooker . They settled first at Newtowne ( later renamed Cambridge ) , where Haynes was the guest of Thomas Dudley until his own house was ready . 
 = = Massachusetts Bay Colony = = 
 As a man of some means , ( Winthrop referred to him as a " man of great estate " ) in 1634 , Haynes was admitted as a freeman and elected to the colony 's council of assistants . He was also named to a committee overseeing military matters , a position that assumed some importance when war broke out with the Pequot tribe that year . The assistants were called on to consider the controversial defacement of the English flag by John Endecott in 1634 . Claiming that St George 's Cross was a symbol of popery , he had cut it from the Salem militia company 's banner . Haynes was part of a moderate faction that disagreed with Endecott 's action , claiming that the cross had been reduced to a symbol of nationalism . For his action , Endecott was censured and deprived of serving in any offices for one year . 
 In 1634 , Haynes served in a variety of municipal capacities . He was a Cambridge selectman and served on a commission that decided the boundary between Boston and Charlestown . He was elected governor in 1635 , winning an election that Roger Ludlow had been expected to win . Haynes had argued for the lowering of taxes ; Ludlow also alleged that the deputies of some towns had made private agreements that concerned the vote before it occurred . Ludlow , who was not even elected as an assistant , was apparently motivated by his loss to leave the colony for a settlement on the Connecticut River . 
 Haynes ' one @-@ year term as governor was marked by political conflict between a faction led by Haynes , Hooker , and Dudley , and another led by Winthrop . The major disagreement between them concerned the strictness of judicial procedures and the process of rendering judgments ; the Haynes faction believed that Winthrop had been lax in some of his decisions . The conservative faction was successful in enacting regulations for stricter judicial procedures ; it also passed legislation banning the smoking of tobacco and restricting overly ostentatious or fashionable clothing . Haynes also presided over the trial and banishment of Roger Williams , an act that Williams reports Haynes later expressed some regret over . 
 = = Connecticut Colony = = 
 In 1635 , a significant religious division began to grow in the Massachusetts colony . Anne Hutchinson and others espoused the <unk> view that the laws of the Church of England did not apply to them , while others argued the opposing Legalist position . Harsh reactions to the controversy may have played a role in the decision by Hooker , and consequently Haynes , to leave the colony for new settlements on the Connecticut River . Historians have also cited shortages of land and food as a reason for this migration , and political competition between Haynes and Winthrop . Winthrop recorded that Hooker 's company was motivated by " the strong bent of their spirits to remove " . 
 Haynes , while making arrangements to follow Hooker , continued to be involved in Massachusetts through 1636 , serving as an assistant and as colonel of one of the colony 's militia regiments . His lieutenant colonel was Roger <unk> , who in 1635 came over from England with his sister Mabel . John and Mabel were married in 1636 ; they had five children . 
 Haynes joined Hooker at the settlement they called Hartford in 1637 . The colonial settlements on the river were established without any sort of royal charter and were not within the bounds of the Massachusetts Bay Colony . For the first two years , the few small settlements were governed by a general court of magistrates , headed by Haynes , and were likely preoccupied with the ongoing conflict with the Pequots . After the war ended in late 1638 , the magistrates began drafting a body of principles and laws ; these were ratified in January 1638 / 9 . Now known as the Fundamental Orders of Connecticut , this document has been called the " first written constitution " . The chief architects of the Fundamental Orders were Ludlow , the colony 's principal legal mind , Haynes , and Thomas Hooker , who was known to advocate for the liberties the document enshrines . 
 Pursuant to the terms of this constitution , elections were held on April 11 , 1639 , and Haynes was elected as the colony 's first governor . Because of restrictions in the constitution that disallowed consecutive terms , he was in and out of the office of governor a total of eight times between 1639 and his death in 1653 / 4 . During most of the years he was not governor , he was instead the deputy governor . 
 Due to a lack of detailed documentation , the exact role Haynes played in the colony 's political activities is unclear . One of his more notable achievements was the negotiations with some of the neighboring colonies that led to the creation of the New England Confederation in 1643 . This organization was a loose confederation of the Connecticut , Massachusetts Bay , New Haven , and Plymouth Colonies , principally established to coordinate defense against common threats . For Connecticut , the major threats came from Indians and from the Dutch of the New Netherlands to the west . In particular , the smaller colonies benefited from this confederation at the expense of the significantly more populous Massachusetts colony . During his terms in office , he was called upon to mediate disputes between local Indians and to negotiate with Dutch representatives of the New Netherlands , who claimed land south of Hartford on the Connecticut River . When one Dutch trader complained about the seizure by some Englishmen of land he claimed , Haynes responded that because the Dutchman had done nothing to develop the land , and that because " it was a sin to let such rich land ... lie uncultivated " , he had effectively forfeited his claim . This dispute resulted in minor military confrontations between the English and Dutch in the 1640s and was resolved temporarily in the 1650 Treaty of Hartford , in which the Dutch ceded their claims on the river . Some territorial disputes continued even after the English took New Netherlands from the Dutch in 1664 , and the territory described in the Duke of York 's charter overlapped that of Connecticut . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Contrary to the engraved date on his tombstone in Hartford 's Ancient Burying Ground , Haynes did not die on March 1 , 1653 / 4 . A letter , written by John Winthrop , Jr. on January 9 , 1653 / 4 , mentions his recent death . The Connecticut General Court issued a statement on March 6 , calling for a " day of humiliation " following the " sudden death of our late Governor " . Haynes ' son , Hezekiah , a military officer who served in the English Civil War , noted that his father had invested between £ 7 @,@ 000 and £ 8 @,@ 000 in the colony " to the ruine of his <unk> in Englande " ; his estate was valued at about £ 1 @,@ 500 . Haynes was a significant landowner in the Hartford area , and he and Edward Hopkins operated a mill in the town . Haynes ' daughter Ruth married Samuel Wyllys , the son of another Connecticut founder , George Wyllys . Their descendants have continued the legacy of political involvement in Connecticut and elsewhere . 
 = National Assembly Building of Slovenia = 
 The National Assembly Building ( Slovene : <unk> <unk> <unk> , also <unk> the Parliament ( Parlament ) in Ljubljana , the capital of Slovenia , is a modernist palace housing the legislature of Slovenia . Built between 1954 and 1959 by the architect Vinko Glanz , it is a three @-@ storey building with an area of 2 @,@ 200 m2 ( 24 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . It is located on the Republic Square in the center of Ljubljana . Annual visitor numbers are around 13 @,@ 000 . 
 Despite its name , the building houses both the National Assembly ( lower house ) and the National Council ( upper house ) of the legislature . The building is an officially protected monument , led in records as the People 's Assembly Building of the Republic of Slovenia ( <unk> Republike <unk> ) . It was opened on 19 February 1959 as the Palace of the People 's Assembly ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , because it was built in the time when the Socialist Republic of Slovenia had a People 's Assembly . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Cathedral of Freedom is an unrealised project of the Slovenian Parliament building , designed by the architect Jože <unk> in 1949 . It featured a large cone @-@ shaped roof of 394 feet ( 120 m ) high but failed to result in any action . A new legislature building was thereafter planned by the architect Vinko Glanz , a much more conservative and modest design than either of the <unk> concepts , being an austere modernist palace with no monumental elements or decorations save a large sculptural group of bronze figures framing its main portico . 
 Work began in 1954 on construction of the building to Glanz 's plans , using <unk> , a Ljubljana construction firm . Part of the ethos was that local building materials should be used , such as wood , stone and marble . 27 master craftsmen were also used for the metalwork and joinery . It was completed in 1959 . 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 The building , opened as the Palace of the People 's Assembly , hosted the first session of the People 's Assembly of the Republic of Slovenia on 19 February 1959 . 
 For its first 32 years , the building held meetings of the Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Slovenia . Following the independence of Slovenia in 1991 , it gave way to use by the Slovenian Parliament : both the National Assembly and the National Council . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Exterior architecture = = = 
 The four @-@ storey building is externally austere . A freestanding cube , the main façade faces Republic Square and is inlaid with Karst marble , with green <unk> granite below each window . The only decorative element is the two storey main portal – four oak doors surrounded by statues by Zdenko Kalin and Karel <unk> which represent working people . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Inside , the building is furnished with paintings and frescoes by a selection of Slovenian artists . The largest , a 67 @.@ 4 by 1 @.@ 4 metres ( 221 @.@ 1 by 4 @.@ 6 ft ) wall painting by the 20th century mural artist Slavko <unk> , extends across the length of the entrance hall and illustrates the history of Slovenians . Created in 1958 and 1959 , the mural portrays events including the Revolutions of 1848 , the First World War and the 1918 creation of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , the Second World War and national liberation , and the creation of socialist Yugoslavia and homeland reconstruction . The walls of the first @-@ floor corridor are furnished with portraits of former Presidents of the National Assembly . Following the 1991 independence of Slovenia , the building 's interior has been refurbished several times to suit the <unk> of the new Slovenian Parliament . 
 The center of the building is occupied by the 422 m2 ( 4 @,@ 540 sq ft ) , 150 seat Great Hall , where the National Assembly convenes . Formerly rectangular , it was renovated into an amphitheater in 2000 . Each seat has a microphone , an automatic voting system , plug socket and access to the National Assembly 's computer network . The chair facing the doors to the hall is for the President of the National Assembly . Behind it , a bronze relief of the coat of arms of Slovenia is positioned on the marble wall . The sculptor Marko <unk> created the work in 1991 to celebrate independence . There is also a 106 @-@ seat gallery for the public and guests to view the Great Hall . 
 The National Council holds its meetings in the Small Hall , on the ground floor . The room is also used for public presentations and conferences . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 On 18 May 2010 , the front façade of the building , made of rare green tonalite , was severely damaged by students who threw granite rocks removed from a nearby pavement at the building 's main entrance . The incident happened during a large student protest against the proposed law on the introduction of mini jobs that would curb student work and changes to scholarship policy . Repairs to the building were estimated at 27 @,@ 000 euros . 
 = 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot = 
 The 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot was an infantry regiment of the British Army . The regiment was created as the 2nd Battalion , 11th Regiment of Foot in 1756 , redesignated as the 64th Regiment of Foot in 1758 , and took a county title as the 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot in 1782 . Following the Cardwell Reforms the regiment amalgamated with the 98th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment of Foot to become The Prince of Wales 's ( North Staffordshire Regiment ) in 1881 . In the new regiment the 64th Foot became the 1st Battalion due to its seniority over the 98th Foot . 
 Although the 64th Foot fought in many of the major conflicts of the late 18th and early 19th centuries , it was normally in the more minor theatres of these conflicts . During the Seven Years ' War it served in the West Indies ; in the Napoleonic Wars , its role was limited , again , to the West Indies and South America . In the mid @-@ 19th century , it fought in the Anglo @-@ Persian War and the Indian Rebellion of 1857 , where one of its soldiers was awarded the Victoria Cross . 
 = = Formation = = 
 The formation of the 64th Foot was prompted by the expansion of the army as a result of the commencement of the Seven Years ' War . On 25 August 1756 it was ordered that a number of existing regiments should raise a second battalion , among those chosen was the 11th Foot . The 2nd Battalion of the 11th Foot was raised at Southampton in 1756 before moving to Newcastle upon Tyne . On 21 April 1758 the War Office ordered that the 2nd battalions raised two years previously should be become independent regiments in their own right and on that day the 2nd Battalion 11th Foot became the 64th Foot . Shortly after King George II ordered that the dates of seniority of the 64th Foot and the other regiments created on 21 April 1758 should be backdated to the date of their raising as 2nd battalions , therefore the date seniority of the 64th Foot became 1756 . The first colonel of the regiment was the Honourable John Barrington and it was he who decided that the facings of the 64th Foot should be black . 
 = = Seven Years ' War = = 
 Almost immediately after becoming the 64th Foot , the regiment was sent to the West Indies . Upon arrival , in 1759 , it took part in the unsuccessful attempt to take Martinique and then in the successful invasion of Guadeloupe . Participation in this action earned the regiment its first battle honour Guadaloupe 1759 , though this honour was not actually awarded until 1909 . The regiment returned to England in June 1759 severely reduced in numbers by men drafted to other units and by tropical disease . On arrival at Portsmouth only 137 other ranks out of an establishment strength of 790 were fit for duty , though officer strength was almost up to strength . Recovery took a long time and after a brief period in Suffolk the regiment spent three years in the Scottish Highlands and five years in Ireland before sailing for North America in 1768 . 
 = = North America and the American War of Independence = = 
 The first posting for the 64th in America was Boston , at the time a centre of discontent and an unhappy posting as a result . In 1770 the regiment moved to Halifax , Nova Scotia but in 1772 returned to Boston being stationed at Castle William . 
 As unrest grew the 64th took place in an incident which lays a claim to the first blood of the American War of Independence being shed in Salem , Massachusetts . On 26 February 1775 a supply of weapons and ammunition was known to be in Salem . The 64th , under their commander Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Leslie , were ordered to seize the weapons . American patriots in Salem were forewarned and tried to prevent the 64th from carrying out their orders . In the scuffle that ensued a local Salem man , Joseph Whicher , was slightly injured by a British bayonet . Negotiations prevented any further bloodshed and the 64th withdrew to Boston , their mission a failure . 
 On the outbreak of hostilities in April 1775 , the 64th was still stationed at Castle William and remained there as the garrison throughout the Siege of Boston . Consequently , the regiment did not take part in the Battle of Bunker Hill . When , in March 1776 , the British abandoned Boston , the 64th were the last regiment to depart for Halifax , giving them the distinction of being the last British unit to set foot in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts during the war . 
 Following the reorganisation of the army the 64th , like most regiments , found itself without its flank ( grenadier and light infantry ) companies which had been detached to form part of the 2nd Grenadier and 2nd Light Infantry Battalions respectively . All three battalions took part in the 1776 capture of New York and the 64th was engaged in the later Battle of Ridgefield . 
 In 1777 all three units participated in the Philadelphia campaign , taking part in the Battle of Brandywine , the Battle of Paoli and the Battle of Germantown . Remaining in Philadelphia over the winter and into 1778 , the 64th and 2nd Grenadier Battalion formed part of the rearguard when Lieutenant @-@ General Clinton evacuated the city in June 1778 . Returning to New York , the 64th took part in several small operations . The Light company took part in the skirmish that became known as the Baylor Massacre . 
 November 1779 saw all the companies of the regiment being transferred to the Southern theatre of operations . In April 1780 the 64th was part of the covering force besieging Charleston , while the grenadier and light companies formed part of the main siege force . After the capture of Charleston , the grenadier and light companies were withdrawn to New York and as Major @-@ General Cornwallis began to advance on Virginia , the 64th remained in Carolina as guard troops . In 1781 the 64th were involved in the Battle of Eutaw Springs and a year later in one of the last actions of the war , the Battle of the Combahee River . The grenadier company was reunited with the 64th but the light company was among the units that surrendered with Cornwallis at Yorktown . 
 In December 1782 the regiment left America for Jamaica . Back in England , a change occurred in army policy , to hopefully increase recruiting , infantry regiments were given additional territorial titles . The 64th became the 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Foot and began its long association with the city of Lichfield as the depot companies moved there and soon after began to wear the Staffordshire Knot on its uniform . 
 = = Napoleonic Wars = = 
 Following the defeat in America , the 64th remained in Jamaica for two years , returning to England in 1783 . Four years later the regiment was stationed in Ireland , before sailing once more for the West Indies in 1793 at the outbreak of the Napoleonic Wars . At the end of the Seven Years ' War both Martinique and Guadeloupe had been returned to France under the terms of the Treaty of Paris . From Barbados the 64th Foot took part in the invasion of Martinique in early 1794 . As before the flank companies were detached from the rest of the regiment but all three elements were involved in the actions in Martinique . This short but successful campaign earned the regiment its second battle honour , Martinique 1794 — although as with the earlier Guadeloupe honour , it was not actually awarded until 1909 . 
 The light and grenadier companies were involved in the capture , shortly afterwards , of St Lucia and the recapture of Guadeloupe . A short period as garrison duty followed and then the regiment returned to England , severely weakened by both losses in battle and sickness , mostly yellow fever . Sir Charles Grey , commander of the British forces in the West Indies , estimated that he had lost 5 @,@ 000 out of 7 @,@ 000 troops in less than six months . 
 The regiment returned to England in 1795 , before moving to Gibraltar and then Ireland , where it played a minor part in suppressing the 1798 rebellion . The 64th returned to England in 1800 . 
 Within months the 64th had returned to the West Indies for a campaign of seizing islands held by , variously , France , The Netherlands and Denmark . The first island to fall was the Franco @-@ Dutch island of Saint Martin . This was followed by the Dutch island of St Eustatius and the Danish islands of Saint Thomas , Saint John and Saint Croix . With the signing of the Treaty of Amiens , which restored to France and its allies all territories conquered by the British , the 64th were withdrawn to Barbados . Peace did not last long and in 1803 war with France broke out again . The 64th was immediately in action being part of an expeditionary force that took St Lucia , earning the battle honour St Lucia 1803 — the award of this honour was more timely , it being awarded in 1818 . The expedition continued onto the South American mainland with the capture of Dutch held Surinam in 1804 . A fourth battle honour , Surinam , was awarded — again in 1818 . Garrison duties kept the 64th in Surinam for the next nine years meaning that the regiment played no further part in the Napoleonic Wars . 
 A move to Halifax , Nova Scotia in 1813 found the 64th providing the funeral guard for James Lawrence , Captain of the USS Chesapeake after the capture of the Chesapeake . In 1815 the regiment returned to Europe to be sent to France as part of the Army of Occupation after the Battle of Waterloo . 
 = = Years of peace = = 
 It was to be 1856 before the regiment found itself on active service again . In the interim there had been a short spell in England , a long posting in Gibraltar , several years in Ireland , another six @-@ year tour in the West Indies — where once again fever caused much suffering . These were followed by a short three @-@ year tour in Canada which provided one item of note . On the voyage home two companies , under the command of Captain James Draper , and about 100 women and children were on board the barque Alert when the ship hit a reef about 100 miles out of Halifax . The ship was refloated but in a heavy sea was at risk of sinking and was taking on water . The master of the Alert decided that the only course of action was to beach the vessel but was worried that the ship was becoming top heavy as the troops and their families made for the upper deck . Captain Draper and the troops were persuaded to remain on the troop deck despite the rising water level . The ship was beached on an uninhabited island and all on board were later rescued . The Duke of Wellington Commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the British army directed that the story of Captain Draper 's detachment be read out to every regiment and corps in the army as an example of the rewards of steadiness and discipline . The two companies were reunited with the rest of the regiment in England , serving in England and Ireland until being posted to India . Based here until 1856 it saw no active service despite being mobilised as part of a Reserve Field Force in Sindh in 1852 . 
 = = Anglo @-@ Persian War = = 
 War between Britain and Persia broke out in 1856 and the 64th , together with the 20th Bombay Native Infantry , formed the 1st Brigade in the expeditionary force assembled for the campaign . Landing in Persia in late November , the regiment took place in battles at Reshire and Bushire . In 1857 the force advanced inland and defeated the Persian field army at Koosh @-@ Ab on 8 February 1857 while the flank companies were involved in action at Ahwaz . Although hostilities lasted for a little over three months , four battle honours were awarded ; Reshire , Bushire , Koosh @-@ Ab and Persia . The 64th were the only British regiment to be awarded all four . 
 = = Indian Rebellion = = 
 Following the Persian campaign the 64th returned to India arriving in Bombay only two weeks after the first unrest had occurred in Meerut . The regiment was immediately ordered to take part in the Cawnpore relief force under Major @-@ General Sir Henry Havelock . The relief force did not reach Cawnpore before the city fell under rebel control , a forced march was therefore ordered and the first clash with the rebel forces occurred at Fatehpur . From there a number of skirmishes took place until the force met with the rebels in a significant engagement at <unk> on 16 July . It was for his actions in this battle that Lieutenant Henry Havelock of the 10th Foot was awarded the Victoria Cross . This award created considerable discontent within the 64th as the citation inferred that it was only due to Lt Havelock 's actions that the regiment advanced and achieved its objectives . The matter was referred to Sir Colin Campbell , Commander in Chief , India who upheld the complaint raised and voiced strong criticism of staff officers — Havelock was serving as Aide @-@ de @-@ camp to his father — interfering with regimental officers doing their duty . The relief force entered Cawnpore on 17 July 1857 . Subsequently elements of the regiment played a small part in the relief of Lucknow but the majority of the regiment remained in Cawnpore and it was here that , on 28 November 1857 , Drummer Thomas Flinn won the only Victoria Cross awarded to a member of the regiment for tackling two enemy artillerymen despite having been wounded himself . Subsequently the regiment moved to Fatehgarh and remained there for the rest of the campaign until June 1859 when it returned to Bombay . A single battle honour Lucknow was awarded to the regiment . 
 = = Final years and amalgamation = = 
 On return from India in 1861 , the regiment spent six years in England , moving to Malta in 1867 , then Ireland in 1872 . In 1874 , line infantry battalions were linked in pairs , and the 64th formed a joint depot with the 98th ( Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment of Foot at Limerick . The depot moved to Lichfield , Staffordshire in 1880 . Up to 1879 the 64th was stationed in various parts of the United Kingdom , often performing police duties . The regiment returned to Ireland in 1879 , based at <unk> , County Tipperary and it was based here when it was formally amalgamated with the 98th to become the Prince of Wales 's ( North Staffordshire ) Regiment on 1 July 1881 . 
 The regiment was renamed The North Staffordshire ( The Prince of Wales 's ) Regiment in 1920 . In 1959 the North Staffordshire and South Staffordshire Regiments amalgamated to form The Staffordshire Regiment ( The Prince of Wales 's ) . In September 2007 The Staffordshire Regiment amalgamated with the Cheshire Regiment and the Worcestershire and Sherwood Foresters Regiment to form The Mercian Regiment , in which the Staffords became the 3rd ( Staffordshire ) Battalion . 
 The black facings worn by the 64th Foot are today commemorated by the use of black backing to chevrons and rank insignia by all Warrant Officers and Non @-@ commissioned officers of the Mercian Regiment . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 Battle honours awarded to the regiment were : 
 Guadaloupe 1759 , Martinique 1794 ( both awarded 1909 ) 
 St. Lucia 1803 , Surinam 
 Anglo @-@ Persian War : Reshire , Bushire , Koosh @-@ Ab , Persia 
 Indian Mutiny : Lucknow 
 = = Colonels of the Regiment = = 
 Colonels of the Regiment were : 
 = = = 64th Regiment of Foot ( 1756 – 1782 ) = = = 
 1758 – 1759 : Maj @-@ Gen. Hon. John Barrington 
 1759 : F.M. George Townshend , 1st Marquess Townshend 
 1759 – 1766 : Gen. Hon. George Cary 
 1766 – 1790 : Lt @-@ Gen. John Pomeroy 
 = = = 64th ( 2nd Staffordshire ) Regiment of Foot ( 1782 – 1881 ) = = = 
 1790 – 1808 : Gen. John Leland 
 1808 : Lt @-@ Gen. William Anne <unk> 
 1808 – 1816 : Gen. Henry Wynyard 
 1816 – 1837 : Lt @-@ Gen. Sir William Henry Pringle , GCB 
 1837 – 1855 : Gen. Sir Richard Bourke , KCB 
 1855 – 1867 : Gen. Sir James Freeth , KCB , KH 
 1867 – 1870 : Lt @-@ Gen. Henry Keane Bloomfield 
 1870 – 1881 : Gen. Charles Algernon Lewis 
 = The Wedding of River Song = 
 " The Wedding of River Song " is the thirteenth and final episode in the sixth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , and was first broadcast on BBC One on 1 October 2011 . It was written by lead writer and executive producer Steven Moffat and directed by Jeremy Webb . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Matt Smith ) attempts to escape his apparent death at the hands of the Silence . River Song ( Alex Kingston ) , whom the Silence had programmed to kill the Doctor , refuses , and they end up in an alternate timeline where all of time is running simultaneously and beginning to disintegrate . The Doctor tries to restore the universe with the help of River and the alternate universe versions of his companions Amy Pond ( Karen Gillan ) and Rory Williams ( Arthur Darvill ) . It is revealed that he had already planned escape by posing as himself using the shape @-@ shifting Teselecta . 
 " The Wedding of River Song " concludes the story arc of the series and reveals what really happened at the start of the season premiere , " The Impossible Astronaut " . The episode features many returning characters . It also pays tribute to the classic series character Brigadier Lethbridge @-@ Stewart following the death of the character 's actor Nicholas Courtney . One of the last episodes to be filmed for the series , production for " The Wedding of River Song " finished in April 2011 . The episode was watched by a total of 7 @.@ 67 million viewers in the UK , and received positive to mixed reviews from critics . While visual elements were praised , the characters and resolution of the episode received a mixed reception . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Teaser = = = 
 A prelude to the finale was released online 24 September 2011 after the previous episode , " Closing Time " . It shows Area 52 with the clock stuck at 5 : 02 p.m. , where Silence are kept in stasis and River Song is wearing an eye patch in the same fashion as Madame Kovarian . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The Doctor , aware of his imminent death at the fixed point of time on 22 April 2011 at Lake Silencio in Utah , attempts to track down the Silence to learn why he must die . He encounters the Teselecta shapeshifting robot and its miniaturised crew who are currently posing as one of the members of the Silence ; they offer him any help within their power as he faces his death . Through them , the Doctor is led to the living head of Dorium <unk> , one of the Doctor 's allies taken by the Order of the Headless Monks ( " A Good Man Goes to War " ) . Dorium reveals that the Silence are dedicated to averting the Doctor 's future , warning him " On the fields of <unk> , at the fall of the Eleventh , when no living creature can speak falsely or fail to answer a question will be asked — one that must never be answered . And Silence must fall when the question is asked . " ( " The Time of the Doctor " ) The Doctor continues to refuse to go to Lake Silencio until he discovers his old friend Brigadier Lethbridge @-@ Stewart has died , at which point he accepts his fate . To avoid crossing his own time stream , he gives the Teselecta crew four invitations to Lake Silencio for Amy and Rory , River Song , Canton Everett Delaware III , and a younger version of himself . 
 As shown in " The Impossible Astronaut " , the Doctor joins his friends at Lake Silencio and then approaches the astronaut , now known to be a younger version of River Song , Amy and Rory 's daughter , trained to kill the Doctor by the Silence and Madame Kovarian . River does not want to kill him but is unable to fight the suit 's control , and the Doctor says he forgives her and reminds her that the event is inevitable . River , despite his warning against interfering with a fixed point , surprises the Doctor by draining the astronaut suit 's weapons systems and averting his death . Time becomes " stuck " as a result and begins to disintegrate ; all of Earth 's history begins to run simultaneously at a fixed moment of 5 : 02 p.m. on 22 April 2011 . In London , Holy Roman Emperor Winston Churchill takes the Doctor , his " soothsayer " , out from his locked cell to ask him about the condition of time . The Doctor explains the preceding events , as tally marks begin appearing on his arms , indicating the presence of the Silence . After noticing a Silence nest overhead , they are rescued by Amy and a squad of soldiers under her command . Due to the effects of the crack in her bedroom , Amy is cognizant of the altered timeline , though she is unaware that her trusted captain is her husband Rory . Amy takes the Doctor to " Area 52 " , a hollowed @-@ out Giza pyramid , where they have captured over a hundred Silence and Madame Kovarian . River is also there , aware of the consequences of her actions she refuses to allow the Doctor to touch her , an event that would " unfreeze " time and allow it to resume . They all wear " eyedrives " , external memory eye patches which enable them to avoid the Silence 's effect of erasing themselves from memory . 
 They realise that this was a trap arranged by Kovarian , as the Silence begin to escape confinement and overload the eyedrives , killing their users . The Doctor and River escape to the top of the pyramid while Amy and Rory fight off a wave of Silence and Amy realises who Rory is . Madame Kovarian dislodges her own <unk> as it begins to overload , but Amy forces it back in place with the intention of killing her as revenge for Kovarian taking her child ( Melody Pond ) away . Amy and Rory regroup with River and the Doctor . River tries to convince the Doctor that this frozen timeline is acceptable and that he does not have to die , but the Doctor explains that all of reality will soon break down . River claims she 'll suffer more than anyone else in the universe if she has to kill the Doctor , despite his horror at the idea . To stop it , the Doctor marries River on the spot and whispers something in her ear , declaring that he had just told her his name . He then requests that River allow him to prevent the universe 's destruction . The two kiss , and reality begins to return to normal . 
 Sometime later , Amy and Rory are visited by River , shortly after the events of " Flesh and Stone " in River 's timeline . When Amy explains that she had recently witnessed the Doctor 's death , River reveals that the Doctor lied when he said he told her his name ; instead he had said " Look into my eye " . The Doctor had asked the Teselecta to masquerade as him at Lake Silencio , and the Doctor and his TARDIS had been miniaturised within it . Elsewhere , the Doctor takes Dorium 's head back to where it was stored and explains that his perceived death will enable him to be forgotten as he had been getting " too big " and drawing too much attention . As the Doctor leaves , Dorium warns of the prophecies that still await him and the question which Dorium calls out after him : " Doctor who ? " 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The Doctor mentions the possibility of visiting Rose Tyler and Jack Harkness . He also says that Queen Elizabeth I is still waiting to elope with him as hinted in The End of Time ; this explains why she was so angry in " The Shakespeare Code " . Amy 's office contains the model of the TARDIS she made as a child ( " The Eleventh Hour " ) , along with drawings of various monsters and scenes from her adventures with the Doctor . River Song states that she used her hallucinogenic lipstick on President Kennedy , a possession of hers that was introduced in " The Time of Angels " . 
 One of the Silence calls Rory " the man who dies and dies again " , a reference to the many times he appears to die . In " Forest of the Dead " , River whispers something in the Doctor 's ear that makes him trust her , which the Doctor states just before her death was " my name " and that " There 's only one reason I would ever tell anyone my name " . The episode 's main plot centres around the damage caused by River when she tries to re @-@ write a fixed point in time . The concept of " fixed points " in history which may not be altered , even by the Doctor or his companions , was introduced in The Aztecs ( 1964 ) and was named and explored in the new series with episodes such as " The Fires of Pompeii " and " The Waters of Mars " . When River meets Amy for a bottle of wine , she is wearing military fatigues and says that she " just climbed out of the <unk> " , and that she saw Amy there . This refers to events in " Time of Angels " and " Flesh and Stone " ( the " crash of the <unk> " first being mentioned in " Silence in the Library " . ) 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Wedding of River Song " concludes the story arc of the Doctor 's apparent death which began in the series opener , " The Impossible Astronaut " and resolves more pieces of River Song 's timeline . Despite this , it leaves ambiguous whether the Doctor and River are legitimately married . Showrunner and episode writer Steven Moffat described it as " a big roller coaster ride of Doctor Who madness " . One of the " mad idea [ s ] " he included in the episode , " Live Chess " , came because Moffat wanted to make chess — which he called " one of the most boring games in the world " — into a dangerous spectator sport . Originally , the script did not include the brief scene with a Dalek ; Moffat had intended to rest the Doctor 's most famous adversary for the sixth series . Amy 's confrontation with Madame Kovarian , a scene which shows what she might have been like had she not met the Doctor , was also added into the script later . 
 Following the death of actor Nicholas Courtney , the Doctor learns in the episode that Courtney 's character Brigadier Lethbridge @-@ Stewart has died peacefully in a nursing home . Moffat said of the reference , " In a story about the Doctor going to his death , it seemed right and proper to acknowledge one of the greatest losses Doctor Who has endured . " Moffat has confirmed that the eyedrives are also a tribute to Courtney , who wore an eye patch when playing an alternative version of the Brigadier in Inferno ( 1970 ) . Several characters reappear in the episode , including Charles Dickens ( Simon Callow ) from " The Unquiet Dead " , Winston Churchill ( Ian McNeice ) from " Victory of the Daleks " , the Silurian doctor Malohkeh ( Richard Hope ) from " The Hungry Earth " / " Cold Blood " , the Teselecta and Captain Carter ( Richard Dillane ) from " Let 's Kill Hitler " , and the Headless Monks and Dorium ( Simon Fisher @-@ Becker ) from " A Good Man Goes to War " . McNeice felt there was room for his character to return , as " Victory of the Daleks " had hinted that he and the Doctor knew each other well . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 " The Wedding of River Song " was one of the last episodes filmed for the series ; 29 April 2011 was the last day of filming . However , a scene from " Let 's Kill Hitler " was delayed and shot on 11 July 2011 , making that the last day of filming for the series . American television hostess Meredith Vieira recorded her report of Churchill 's return to the Buckingham Senate in front of a green screen while filming a segment for The Today Show 's " Anchors Abroad " segment in May 2011 . 
 Mark Gatiss , who played <unk> , was credited in this episode under the pseudonym " Rondo <unk> " , a homage to the American horror actor Rondo Hatton on whom the character 's look was based ; Gatiss underwent prosthetics to play the part . Gatiss , who has written for Doctor Who , also played Professor Richard Lazarus in " The Lazarus Experiment " ( 2007 ) and provided the voice of Danny Boy in " Victory of the Daleks " . 
 The cast found working with the eye patches strange as they had to act with one eye ; Kingston remarked that it made her " slightly dizzy " . Gillan was allowed to fire a specially @-@ made machine gun used for films . Churchill 's Roman Buckingham Palace was filmed in the Cardiff 's City Council building . The script called for an Indiana Jones style tunnel for the Headless Monks ' chamber , but as that kind of location was not available in Cardiff a set was built instead . The skulls were hand @-@ crafted and required a lot of preparation , so it was one of the first things started for the episode 's production . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Wedding of River Song " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 1 October 2011 and on the same date in the United States on BBC America . Overnight ratings showed that the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 1 million viewers , the third most @-@ watched programme of the evening and an improvement upon preceding weeks of Doctor Who as well as the previous series finale . Final consolidated figures by the Broadcasters ' Audience Research Board were 7 @.@ 67 million viewers , the seventh highest for BBC One and the second most @-@ watched programme for 1 October . It was given an Appreciation Index of 86 , placing it in the " excellent " category . However it was the lowest rated finale since the revival of Doctor Who , with the others scoring an AI of 88 to 91 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received positive to mixed reviews from critics , with some reservations over the resolution and character interactions . Dan Martin of The Guardian gave a positive review , believing that the episode " moves along the bigger , 50 @-@ year story and effectively reboots the show " . He particularly praised it for being simplistic , as well as the visuals of all history running together at once . Rachel Tarley , writing for Metro , praising the " gripping race " against time and noting that the script was " snappy and witty throughout , but the episode had its eerie and touching moments where necessary , too " . The A.V. Club 's Keith Phipps gave the episode an A , calling it " pretty close to a perfect season finale " for those not looking for all of the answers . Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy wrote , " As a piece of Saturday night entertainment , it works — packed full of strong performances , stunning visuals and sharp dialogue . And as the resolution to a series @-@ long arc , it 's mostly satisfactory — though the episode poses as many questions as it answers . " 
 Dave Golder of SFX gave the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars , explaining that he was in conflict whether to rate it five or four stars and calling it " about nine tenths a great , great episode " . He referred to the many concepts of the episode as a " sumptuous confection made mostly out of the finest ingredients " and found the Teselecta resolution a " cool twist " at first but it meant " the whole episode is just an elaborate version of the classic Star Trek : Voyager alternate timeline shtick complete with reset button " . IGN 's Matt Risley rated " The Wedding of River Song " 8 @.@ 5 out of 10 , writing it " managed to tie together plot threads and character arcs without too much Deus Ex <unk> predictability and with a whole host of trademark sci @-@ fi spectacle to boot " . Though he thought the wedding " felt a little too rushed to leave any lingering emotional aftertaste " , he praised other emotional moments in the episode and the fact that everyone thinks the Doctor is dead will help the show explore a new angle . 
 Gavin Fuller of The Daily Telegraph called it an " uneven ending " ; he praised it for being " visually clever " and liked the way the Silence were handled , but thought the Teselecta solution was " a bit of a cop @-@ out " . Neela Debnath of The Independent was displeased with the episode , calling it a " <unk> " that " refused to tie up the loose ends neatly " , and that as a finale it was " underwhelming in terms of drama and overwhelming in terms of information " . However , she praised the fact that Moffat appears to be spreading storylines over several series , believing it " strengthens the show " . On the other hand , HitFix 's Alan Sepinwall thought that the resolutions from the wedding on were " excellent " , but felt it could have done without another alternate universe , as it was similar to the previous finale " The Big Bang " . Maureen Ryan of TV Squad criticised the episode for having too many " bells and whistles " which undermined the emotional moments , especially the wedding , which she did not believe showed that the Doctor was really in love with River . However , she did enjoy " callbacks " to previous episodes such as Churchill and Amy and Rory 's relationship . Charlie Jane Anders of io9 thought it was better than the previous finale , " The Big Bang " , as there were more answers , fun , and a satisfying resolution . However , she was critical of the reason River had to kill the Doctor as well as their relationship , and believed that Amy killing Madame Kovarian was " no substitute " for Amy dealing with what Kovarian had done to her child . 
 = Imperial War Museum North = 
 Imperial War Museum North ( sometimes referred to as IWM North ) is a museum in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford in Greater Manchester , England . One of five branches of the Imperial War Museum , it explores the impact of modern conflicts on people and society . It is the first branch of the Imperial War Museum to be located in the north of England . The museum occupies a site overlooking the Manchester Ship Canal in Trafford Park , an area which during the Second World War was a key industrial centre and consequently heavily bombed during the Manchester Blitz in 1940 . The area is now home to the Lowry cultural centre and the MediaCityUK development , which stand opposite the museum at Salford Quays . 
 The museum building was designed by architect Daniel Libeskind and opened in July 2002 , receiving 470 @,@ 000 visitors in its first year of opening . It was recognised with awards or prize nominations for its architecture and is a prime example of <unk> architecture . The museum features a permanent exhibition of chronological and thematic displays , supported by hourly audiovisual presentations which are projected throughout the gallery space . The museum also hosts a programme of temporary exhibitions in a separate gallery . Since opening , the museum has operated a successful volunteer programme , which since January 2007 has been run in partnership with Manchester Museum . As part of a national museum , Imperial War Museum North is financed by the Department for Culture , Media and Sport and by self @-@ generated income . Admission is free . 
 = = Planning and construction = = 
 During the 1990s , the Imperial War Museum sought to open a branch in the north of England . Seventy @-@ one sites were offered for consideration by 36 local councils . One such council was that of Hartlepool , in County Durham , for whom a new museum building was designed by architect Sir Norman Foster for a site on Hartlepool 's dockside . In 1992 the Teesside Development Corporation offered the museum , on behalf of Hartlepool council , a total of £ 14 @.@ 4 million towards construction and running costs . However , the National Audit Office later reported that the Corporation 's offer breached government rules and negotiations were abandoned . 
 In January 1999 the then Culture Secretary Chris Smith launched a project to construct the new museum in Trafford , Greater Manchester . The Trafford Park area has strong associations with the Second World War on the British home front ; factories in the area produced Avro Lancaster heavy bombers , and Rolls @-@ Royce Merlin aero engines used by a number of Royal Air Force combat aircraft . By 1945 the area employed 75 @,@ 000 people . The area was consequently heavily bombed , particularly during the Manchester Blitz , when 684 people were killed in raids over two nights in December 1940 . By the time of Chris Smith 's announcement , the museum had already received outline planning permission ( in October 1997 ) , with full approval in April 1999 . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 An architectural competition for the new museum was held in 1997 , with the winning design being that of Berlin @-@ based architect Daniel Libeskind . Born in Łódź , Poland , in 1946 , Libeskind 's family had suffered during the Second World War and dozens of his relatives had died in the Holocaust . At the museum 's opening , Libeskind said that he sought to " create a building ... which emotionally moved the soul of the visitor toward a sometimes unexpected realization " ' . Libeskind envisaged a ' constellation composed of three interlocking shards ' with each shard being a remnant of an imagined globe shattered by conflict . These shards in turn represented air , earth and water , and each formed a functionally distinct part of the museum . The 55 m high air shard , provides the museum 's entranceway and a viewing balcony above the Manchester Ship Canal with views of the Manchester skyline . The construction of the tower leaves viewers exposed to the elements and one reviewer considered that it reflected " the aerial perspective of modern warfare and the precariousness of the life below " . The earth shard houses the museum 's exhibition spaces , while the water shard accommodates a cafe with views of the canal . 
 Originally budgeted at £ 40 million , the museum was eventually completed for £ 28 @.@ 5 million after anticipated National Lottery funding was not forthcoming . The museum was funded by local , national and European development agencies . The European Union 's European Regional Development Fund contributed £ 8 @.@ 9 million , English Partnerships and the North West Development Agency £ 2 @.@ 7 million , and £ 2 @.@ 8 million was provided by Trafford Metropolitan Borough Council . Peel Holdings , a local transport and property company , contributed £ 12 @.@ 5 million ; this was reportedly the largest single sum ever given to a UK cultural project by a private enterprise . The reduction in budget forced a number of changes ; the substitution of metal for concrete in the construction of the shards , the removal of a planned auditorium , and a change of exhibition content . The site 's external landscaping also had to be reduced ; in 2009 , following an architectural design competition managed by RIBA Competitions , Berlin @-@ based company <unk> 1 were appointed to complete this landscaping . Despite these economies , the fundamental " shattered globe " concept remained intact . A final £ 3 million was raised by a fundraising campaign led by BBC News war correspondent Kate Adie . Construction of the museum , by structural engineers Arup and main contractor Sir Robert McAlpine , began on 5 January 2000 and the building was topped out in late September that year . Exhibition fitting started in November 2001 , and the museum opened to the public on 5 July 2002 , shortly before the 2002 Commonwealth Games which were hosted in Manchester that year . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Permanent exhibitions are housed in the museum 's first @-@ floor main gallery space within the earth shard . These consist of a chronological display which runs around the gallery 's 200 @-@ metre ( 660 ft ) perimeter and six thematic displays in " silos " within the space . As part of the earth shard , the 3 @,@ 500 m2 floor of the gallery is curved , gradually dropping away like the curvature of the Earth from a nominal " North Pole " near the gallery 's entrance . Within this hall , described as cavernous and dramatic , a number of large artefacts are displayed ; they include a Russian T @-@ 34 tank , a United States Marine Corps AV @-@ 8B Harrier jet and a 13 @-@ pounder field gun which fired the British Army 's first shot of the First World War . Around the gallery , a number of vertical mechanical conveyors called " <unk> " display selections of smaller artefacts , some of which can be handled by visitors . 
 In addition to the physical exhibits , the walls of the gallery space are used as screens for the projection of hourly audiovisual presentations called the Big Picture , which explore themes related to modern conflict . These presentations use up to 1 @,@ 500 images from the Imperial War Museum 's photograph archive and were originally projected from 60 synchronised slide projectors mounted throughout the space . In 2011 digital projectors were installed , allowing a greater degree of flexibility . The images are complemented by personal accounts from the museum 's oral history sound archive . The Big Picture was devised after the reduction in the museum 's budget forced the scrapping of the previous exhibition plan by designers <unk> and <unk> . 
 Also within the earth shard , a separate gallery accommodates a programme of temporary exhibitions . These have included the Witness series of art exhibitions from the museum 's collection , examining First and Second World War art , and the work of female war artists . 
 The <unk> , a passageway linking the earth and water shards , is used for smaller art or photographic exhibitions , such as Ghislaine Howard 's photojournalism @-@ inspired painting series 365 . 
 Outside the museum building , an ex @-@ Iraqi Army T @-@ 55 tank was put on display at the main entrance in August 2008 . This vehicle was captured by the Royal Engineers during the opening stages of the Iraq War in 2003 . The spot had previously been occupied by an Iraqi ZSU @-@ 23 @-@ 4 <unk> anti @-@ aircraft gun . Captured by the Royal Artillery after the 1991 Gulf War , it was moved from Imperial War Museum Duxford and displayed to mark the museum 's fifth anniversary in July 2007 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The museum enjoyed a successful first year , with an initial target of 300 @,@ 000 visitors surpassed after six months , with over 100 @,@ 000 visitors in the first six weeks ; by the museum 's first anniversary on 5 July 2003 some 470 @,@ 000 visitors had been received . The museum won the Building Award in the 2003 British Construction Industry Awards , and was shortlisted for the 2004 Stirling Prize . The museum received a largely positive critical reception , with reviewers remarking on the metaphorical power of the building , the complementary effects of the museum 's main exhibition with its internal architecture , and the economy with which the museum was built . In August 2005 Imperial War Museum North received its millionth visitor . The museum was , however , criticised in 2008 by The Guardian for poor energy efficiency , as part of a report into the carbon dioxide emissions of UK public buildings . 
 = = Volunteer programme = = 
 Supporting Imperial War Museum North 's educational goals , the museum has operated a volunteer programme since opening in 2002 . The programme seeks to engage local people at risk of social exclusion . Originally based on a National Vocational Qualification , the programme was revised and relaunched in 2004 , and consisted of a basic cultural heritage course , providing opportunities to develop academic skills and improve confidence , and to support individuals seeking to return to employment . In return volunteers work in the museum 's public spaces as part of the front of house teams . In January 2007 the museum launched the in Touch volunteer programme , in partnership with Manchester Museum and supported by £ 425 @,@ 000 from the Heritage Lottery Fund . The programme was recognised by the Department of Culture , Media and Sport as a case study of its kind , in the department 's Third Sector Strategy . 
 = Run the World ( Girls ) = 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " is a song recorded by American recording artist Beyoncé , from her fourth studio album 4 ( 2011 ) , released as the lead single from the album on April 21 , 2011 . It was written by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , Beyoncé , Nick " Afrojack " van de Wall , Wesley " Diplo " Pentz , David " Switch " Taylor , and <unk> Palmer . Production was handled by Switch , The @-@ Dream , Beyoncé , and Shea Taylor . The song 's development was motivated by the fact that Beyoncé wanted something different : a mixture of different cultures and eras , a new sound , and a message which would give women strength . An unedited demo of the song , then thought to be titled " Girls ( Who Run the World ) " , was leaked on the internet on April 18 , 2011 . " Run the World " premiered on US radio on April 21 , 2011 , and was digitally released the same day . 
 " Run the World " is a electropop and R & B song that heavily samples " Pon de Floor " by Major Lazer . The song 's title and lyrics comprise an unapologetically aggressive message promoting female empowerment . " Run the World " initially divided critics ; some complimented the song 's sample , its musical direction , and Beyoncé 's aggressiveness , while others criticized the continuation of past themes and stated that they wanted to see Beyoncé covering new topics . Several critics compared " Run the World " to Beyoncé 's other singles with similar themes such as " Independent Women " ( 2000 ) – with Destiny 's Child , and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) among others , stating that " Run the World " takes a more direct and assertive approach towards female empowerment . 
 The single peaked at number 29 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and reached the top 10 in Australia , Belgium , Japan , the Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Scotland and South Korea . " Run the World " was a top 20 hit in Canada , France , Ireland , Italy , and the United Kingdom . The song 's accompanying music video was directed by Francis Lawrence and was filmed in California over a three @-@ day span . It received widespread critical acclaim , with critics affirming that Beyoncé started a dance revolution and favoring the heavily @-@ choreographed visuals . The video won Best Choreography at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards and Best Dance Performance at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards . 
 Beyoncé promoted " Run the World " with high @-@ profile live performances , notably at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards and on the French X Factor . Although her performance at the Billboard Music Awards was well received by critics , it ignited controversy surrounding the production due to visual similarities to a performance by Italian pop star Lorella Cuccarini in February 2010 at the 60th Sanremo Music Festival in Italy . " Run the World " was used to awaken the crew of the final mission of the US Space Shuttle Atlantis and was dedicated to Mission Specialist Sandra Magnus . Heather Morris covered " Run the World " for the American television show Glee episode " Asian F " . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 In an interview with The Capital FM Network in early March 2011 , Shea Taylor confirmed that 4 's lead single would premiere at the end of April . " Run the World " was written by Terius " The @-@ Dream " Nash , Beyoncé , Nick van de Wall , Thomas Wesley Pentz , Dave Taylor , and <unk> Palmer . It was produced by Switch , The @-@ Dream , Beyoncé and Taylor . " Run the World " was recorded by DJ Swivel and Pat Thrall at MSR Studios , New York City , and was mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios , Virginia Beach . Before release , the song 's title was rumored to be " Girls ( Who Run the World ) " . On April 14 , 2011 , two portions of the song leaked online while an unfinished demo of " Run the World ( Girls ) " was leaked online on April 18 , 2011 . In an interview with Billboard , Beyoncé described the song : 
 It 's definitely riskier than something a bit more ... simple . I just heard the track and loved that it was so different : it felt a bit African , a bit electronic and futuristic . It reminded me of what I love , which is mixing different cultures and eras — things that typically don 't go together — to create a new sound . I can never be safe ; I always try and go against the grain . As soon as I accomplish one thing , I just set a higher goal . That 's how I 've gotten to where I am . 
 Between June 16 and June 27 , 2011 , one song from 4 each day was available to listen to on Beyoncé 's official website , together with its accompanying photographs from the album packaging and a quote . On June 27 , 2011 , " Run the World ( Girls ) " was the twelfth song to be made available . In the accompanying quote , Beyoncé said : " I try to write songs that will bring out the best in all of us and keep us close together . I think about saying the things that women want to say but sometimes are not confident enough to say . I am going to continue to write those songs that give women strength . " 
 = = Release and artwork = = 
 After the single leaked on the internet , it was released early . " Run the World ( Girls ) " premiered on US radio on April 21 , 2011 , at 8 a.m. EST , and was made available for download on iTunes Stores worldwide the same day . According to Digital Spy , the single was available on iTunes , and podcast service Concrete Loop , without payment a few hours before its official release . " Run the World ( Girls ) " was released to mainstream , urban contemporary and urban adult contemporary radio on April 26 , 2011 . According to MTV News , " Run the World ( Girls ) " was well received by Beyoncé 's fans on Twitter . A Digital EP with three remixes of the song was released in Australia , New Zealand , Europe , and the UK , on September 2 , 2011 . 
 The cover art for " Run the World ( Girls ) " was previewed on April 20 , 2011 . On the cover , Beyoncé strikes a bold pose while standing in sand . With her fist in the air covered in forearm protectors , Beyoncé wears a hip cut draping yellow Emilio Pucci dress and black stiletto boots . The Los Angeles Times wrote that the photograph points to a " ... post @-@ apocalyptic war zone , donning an elaborate gold headdress and holding a red flag emblazoned with a black ' B ' . " The photograph was taken on April 14 , 2011 . Tray Hova of Vibe magazine complimented the cover art of the single , stating that Beyoncé looks " resplendent as hell " on the cover and that " Nobody 's complaining about Bey season here . " Eleanor Young , in Marie Claire , described the cover art as " hideous " . Ray Rogers of Billboard stated that Beyoncé " clearly transmits her trademark message of female empowerment " . Becky Bain of Idolator described the cover as " pretty disappointing " , and that , with a " ballistic , over @-@ the @-@ top club banger " song like " Run the World ( Girls ) " , she expected something more than a body shot of Beyoncé , and criticized the cover for being confusing regarding the location of the photography . However , Bain complimented Beyoncé on her choice of <unk> as " ... serious business " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Run the World " is an electropop and R & B song . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News described the song as a " club banger " and " female empowerment / girl power type of song " , like several of Beyoncé 's previous singles , including " Independent Women " ( 2000 ) — with Destiny 's Child — and " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ( 2008 ) . Shea Taylor said that the track draws more from pop music than R & B , and is reminiscent of Michael Jackson 's prime work . " Run the World ( Girls ) " also incorporates dancehall influences in the tradition of " Get Me Bodied " ( 2007 ) . The " high energy " song contains elements of go @-@ go , and is set to a marching militaristic drumbeat sampled from the club song " Pon de Floor " by Major Lazer and Vybz Kartel . " Run the World " also consists of heavy synth pangs and African and marching percussion . 
 A review in The Huffington Post , and Kevin O 'Donnell of Spin magazine , noted that " Run the World ( Girls ) " features shout vocals and raw chanting . In an interview with Ray Rogers of Billboard , Beyoncé stated that this was something she wanted to showcase in 4 , " I used a lot of the brassiness and grittiness in my voice that people hear in my live performances , but not necessarily on my records . " Kathy McCabe of Australian newspaper The Daily Telegraph likened " Run the World " to " Single Ladies " and " Diva " ( 2009 ) . Johnston Breihan of The Village Voice compared " Run the World ( Girls ) " to schoolyard chants , due to its " cheer @-@ team beats " and the repetitive use of the word " Girls " . Billboard magazine 's critic Jem Aswad described the song 's production , lyrics and Beyoncé 's vocals : 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " is a complex but catchy track that 's actually more reminiscent of M.I.A. and Santigold than Sasha Fierce . The song combines a dancefloor @-@ defying military drumbeat , a sample from Switch 's group Major Lazer , an unconventional song structure and some incongruously pretty , layered <unk> that are basically chanted but still employ [ Knowles ' ] full vocal range . The lyrics , however , are just as female @-@ empowering as we 've come to expect . There 's much more to the song than first meets the ear — it confuses on first listen but coalesces beautifully with repeated plays . 
 Rap @-@ Up stated that Beyoncé is dominant over men in " Run the World " . " Run the World " opens with a short piano solo and a heavy beat . Beyoncé chants , " Girls ! / We run this mutha / Girls ! / Who run the world . " It moves into smoother , more persuasive but still boastful lyrics , " I think I need a barber / None of these ho 's can fight me / I 'm so good with this / I remind you I 'm so ' hood with this . " She then delivers the repetitive hook and chorus lines . In the second verse , Beyoncé sings that education gives women strength and independence . Other lyrics of this theme include the line , " smart enough to make these millions , strong enough to bear the children , then get back to business . " Jocelyn Vena of MTV News said that Beyoncé sings in her signature staccato style on the second verse of the song . She repeats the chorus after the bridge lines and her vocals fade out as the song finishes . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Critics had mixed reactions towards the track . Amos Barshad writing for the New York magazine described " Run the World ( Girls ) " as " kind of a monster — aggressive and intense and totally committed " . He also called the song declarative and felt that as a lead single , it was " bluntly effective . " Matt Donnelly of The Los Angeles Times compared " Run the World ( Girls ) " to several of Beyoncé 's previous singles , stating that the song has a harder edge than " Independent Women Pt . 1 " , nevertheless , it does not contain " the gritty , futuristic chic " of " Diva " ( 2009 ) . Jenna Clarke of The Sydney Morning Herald called it an " infectious sounding track " having a catchy dance beat with empowering lyrics and added that the song showcases " a grittier sounding Beyoncé " , yet still following the " power footsteps " of her other chart topping hits such as " Single Ladies " and " Crazy In Love " ( 2003 ) . Kevin O 'Donnell of Spin magazine described the song as " a rousing girl power anthem " , which resembles " Single Ladies " and " If I Were a Boy " ( 2008 ) , and highlighted that " Run The World ( Girls ) " is " far rowdier " than any of those songs because of its synth squiggles and raw chanting . Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post considered " Run the World ( Girls ) " to be one of the most exciting tracks Beyoncé has ever released . 
 Jocelyn Vena of MTV News called " Run the World ( Girls ) " a " sassy [ song with ] girl @-@ power lyrics paired with [ a ] club appeal " , further writing that the song is " loud and proud in its relentless message " , and that Beyoncé " is clearly rallying the troops to her side " . Nick <unk> of VH1 lauded the song for several pointed comments on empowerment which according to him , " are skillfully weaved into the lyrics , without feeling out of place . " He also wrote that " Run the World ( Girls ) " restores girls ' own subjectivity and that the bridge shows a " practically Cleopatra @-@ channeling Beyoncé . " Lewis Corner from Digital Spy described " Run the World ( Girls ) " as " yet another female @-@ empowerment revolution that is sure to dominate dancefloors this summer " . Robert Copsey , also writing for Digital Spy , awarded the song four stars out of five , complimenting the " earthy beats , hypnotising hooks and militant drums pound [ ing ] relentlessly as Queen B declares it 's ' <unk> who run this mutha ' with more woman @-@ friendly conviction than Geri Halliwell at a Spice Girls convention circa 1998 . " Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media wrote that " Run the World ( Girls ) " is " as devotedly pro @-@ female as the title would lead you to expect " , and is as dancefloor @-@ directed as Beyoncé gets , in the tradition of " Get Me Bodied " and " Single Ladies " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani wrote " [ Beyoncé ] misses the mark big time here " and called the song " plain daft " . He , however , praised the song 's bridge and Beyoncé " warm , gooey harmonies " . Maura Johnston of The Village Voice disapproved of the song 's lack of structure , calling it " a bit overstuffed , but fairly enjoyable " . Dallas Observer critic Shahryar Rizvi stated that the track " cribs a bit " from Major Lazer 's " Pon de Floor " and M.I.A. ' s track " Boyz " , but added that Beyoncé being a couple of years late in acquiring this sound was " a problem " . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Digital Spy ranked " Run the World " at number 16 on its list of 25 Best Songs of 2011 . Jon Pareles of The New York Times placed the song in his list of Top Songs from 2011 . It received a Teen Choice Award for Choice R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Track at the 2011 Teen Choice Awards . " Run the World " was nominated for Best Single at the 2011 Virgin Media Music Awards . On The Village Voice 's 2011 year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Run the World ( Girls ) " was ranked at number 137 . The song was nominated for Best R & B / Urban Dance Track at the 27th Annual International Dance Music Awards . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the song at number seven on their list of ten best Beyoncé 's songs , writing that it " had everyone , male and female , dancing " . The same year , the writers of Complex magazine put the song at number 25 on their list of Beyoncé 's 25 best songs , adding that her assertion " we run this mother " , " practically wills every woman who hears this song to aspire to bigger things " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Three days after its release to digital download outlets , the single debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 18 on April 24 , 2011 . A week later it had risen to number 11 and debuted at number five on the UK R & B chart . The song descended the chart for five consecutive weeks to number 45 before rising again to number 23 on the singles chart and from number 12 to number 6 on the R & B chart on May 29 , 2011 when the music video was released . In Ireland , the single debuted at number 11 on April 28 , 2011 , the highest chart entry that week and in France , " Run the World ( Girls ) " debuted at number 33 with 2 @,@ 065 copies sold . It peaked at number 12 . On May 1 , 2011 , the song entered the Australian Singles Chart at number 12 , being the highest new entry that week , and at number six on its urban chart . One day later , " Run the World ( Girls ) " debuted at number 21 in New Zealand , where it was the highest new entry that week . " Run the World ( Girls ) " declined in the charts in Australia and New Zealand . However , after the release of its music video , the single rose from number 42 to number 15 on the ARIA Singles Chart and peaked at number 4 on its urban chart on May 30 , 2011 . The following week , it climbed to number 10 on the singles chart , where it peaked . It was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for sales of over 70 @,@ 000 copies . The video release helped " Run the World ( Girls ) " re @-@ enter the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 26 on May 23 , 2011 and it peaked the following week at number nine . " Run the World ( Girls ) " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for sales of over 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " debuted at number 40 on Canadian Hot 100 chart issue dated May 7 , 2011 . Paul <unk> of Nielsen SoundScan called the debut impressive as the song was released between digital and radio charts . It stands as Beyoncé 's highest entry as a solo artist on the chart . After declining in the chart for three consecutive weeks , " Run the World ( Girls ) " left the chart in the week ending May 28 , 2011 . For the week ending June 11 , 2011 , the single recovered from number 60 to number 16 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart , receiving the titles of the greatest chart mover and the greatest digital gainer . For the issue dated May 7 , 2011 , " Run the World ( Girls ) " debuted at number 23 on the US Hot Digital Songs chart , selling 77 @,@ 000 downloads sold. and at number 65 on the Radio Songs chart with 18 million listener impressions . It accordingly debuted at position 33 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , and was the highest debut on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , opening at number 41 . Digital sales of the single declined by 39 % , amassing a total of a total of 47 @,@ 000 downloads ; it fell to number 39 on the Hot Digital Songs chart . 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " was the highest debut , starting at number 37 on the US Pop Songs chart issue dated May 21 , 2011 . For the same week ending , the song continued to descend the Hot 100 chart to number 65 . One week later , the single debuted at number 43 on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , becoming Beyoncé 's nineteenth solo entry on that chart . The same week , the single fell to number 76 on the Hot 100 chart . After descending the Hot 100 chart for four consecutive weeks , " Run the World ( Girls ) " recovered 26 places , moving from number 76 to number 50 for the week ending June 4 , 2011 , promoted by the song 's re @-@ entry on the Hot Digital Songs chart at number 44 after its music video 's release . The following week , the single escalated to number 29 on the Hot 100 chart , which was its peak , as it descended the Hot 100 chart in subsequent weeks . " Run the World ( Girls ) " peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart issue dated July 9 , 2011 . On July 29 , 2011 , it was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales of over 500 @,@ 000 copies . As of January 2016 the song has sold 1 @,@ 324 @,@ 000 digital copies . 
