 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and release = = = 
 The music video for " Run the World ( Girls ) " was directed by Francis Lawrence . Beyoncé worked with eight choreographers , including Frank Gatson and Sheryl Murakami . The executive producer was Missy <unk> . Filming took place in the Mojave Desert and Inglewood , California . Images from the Mojave shoot were leaked online on April 12 , 2011 , showing Beyoncé standing in a smoky , post @-@ apocalyptic war zone , wearing a gladiator outfit and a gold crown , and waving a red flag with a " B " logo . She was surrounded by dancers in brightly colored skirts , black military @-@ style jackets and peaked caps . Other images showed an army of women posing against a ravaged car with the word " Révolution " sprayed on it . Posters of Beyoncé 's face are seen behind the women . In an interview with MTV News on April 18 , 2011 , director Francis Lawrence , who had previously directed the video for Lady Gaga 's " Bad Romance " ( 2010 ) , discussed the music video : 
 " I just shot a Beyoncé video at the beginning of this last week , Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday , which was fun , and I hadn 't done a video since 2009 . It 'll be big , it 'll probably be one of the bigger Beyoncé music videos ever done . And , I can say that I think the song is unbelievable . The Gaga thing took me by surprise , ' cause I 've done videos for probably 15 years , and I had forgotten what it felt like to have a video premiere and have it be anticipated and have it explode . And yeah I hope the same for Beyoncé , but I don 't know if that 's gonna happen . It is a fantastic song , so I really hope that song catches for her , and I think the video 's gonna be really fun and cool and different for her . " 
 On May 4 , 2011 , another 20 @-@ second clip of the music video was released , showing a troupe of females in a rural location , however Beyoncé is not seen during the clip . A third teaser was released on May 10 , 2011 , showing Beyoncé standing in front of a burning car , riding a horse and assembling an army in a post @-@ apocalyptic clip . At a private listening party held on May 12 , 2011 for 4 , Beyoncé offered a small group of fans a preview of five songs from the album and the official video for " Run the World ( Girls ) " , which reportedly features a lion and Beyoncé writhing around in sand . The video was scheduled for release on May 13 , 2011 at 12 : 01 a.m , however Vevo confirmed that the release would be delayed because Beyoncé was " ... perfecting it " . The video premiered on American Idol on May 18 , 2011 . The director 's cut of the music video is included on the deluxe version of 4 . The video was released on July 1 , 2011 but was leaked on June 29 , 2011 . 
 = = = Fashion = = = 
 In the video for " Run the World ( Girls ) " , Beyoncé 's outfits include armor , a high priestess ' headdress , lingerie and runway couture Beyoncé is first seen wearing a red and gold embroidered dress with thigh @-@ high boots , both by Alexander McQueen from fall / winter 2010 . In the first dance scene of the video , she is wearing a Brian Lichtenberg patchwork fur vest . For a dance routine in sand , she wears a black fringed Norma Kamali outfit , followed by a Givenchy dress in a scene depicting Beyoncé with two larger @-@ than @-@ life hyenas . During a scene involving warriors , Beyoncé is wearing a black cut @-@ out dress shown at Jean Paul Gaultier 's spring couture show . A short Gareth Pugh dress with golden sequins and two gowns by Emilio Pucci – one yellow with a plunging neckline , the other emerald green with an asymmetrical cut – complete Beyoncé 's outfits . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with Beyoncé riding a black horse over an open , deserted plain . As the horse lifts off the ground , scenes of Beyoncé standing atop a ruined vehicle are shown , as she leads a large army of women . Additional scenery includes a large bull in the middle of the battleground and a large banner featuring an African themed drawing of Beyoncé . A woman seemingly nailed on a cross is later seen . As several scantily clad women are shown , a SWAT team of men charge towards the battlefield as a sample from Major Lazer 's " Pon de Floor " is played . As the male forces arrive , Beyoncé , is wearing a large golden helm and is surrounded by a lion , a large group of women prepared for battle and banners featuring Beyoncé insignia . As the song begins , Beyoncé removes her armor and confronts the male army , engaging in a series of shoulder @-@ thrusting dance routines . 
 Beyoncé dances seductively towards the men as scenes of Beyoncé wearing several outfits are seen , the first of which is a white evening gown as she grasps the chains of two chained hyenas . As the confrontation escalates , Beyoncé appears next to several flaming vehicles , and she undergoes another costume change . Returning to the main plot , the video shows Beyoncé in front of a small group of her female army , wearing a yellow ensemble and black heeled @-@ boots . As the dancing commences , scenes of the two clashing armies are seen while Beyoncé writhes in sand . The females , now an even larger group , are shown dancing , using powerful and emphatic movements , in front of the male army with alternating costumes and several flags in the background . The video ends with the front line of females confronting the men face to face , raising their right arms and saluting to them as Beyoncé rips off the male general 's badge , placing it on herself . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The video received general acclaim from critics . On the night of the video 's premiere , Rap @-@ Up complimented Beyoncé on starting a " dance revolution " , her " heavily @-@ choreographed visuals " and " menagerie of wild animals , outrageous fashion , and epic dance sequences " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine wrote that Beyoncé comes off like " barely sentient " but added that she remains cohesive and rational as a human being in real life . He further wrote : " Her reserve of crazy is far from bottomless , and she seems to save it all for her music videos , and I love her for that [ ... ] [ The video is ] awesome in distressingly fragmented ways . " Gina Serpe of E ! Online wrote that " for anyone still laboring under the illusion that Beyoncé does not mean business , well , just watch this video . Described by B [ eyoncé ] herself as ' futuristic ' , ' electronic ' and ' African ' , the 29 @-@ year @-@ old fused all that and more into a still remarkably cohesive music video . " CBS News wrote the " smoking hot video [ was ] blowing up on the web " . The Huffington Post wrote that Beyoncé largely brings back the elements that made " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " ' s video a hit , citing women 's empowerment and a brand new dance . Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post complimented Beyoncé 's wardrobe and dancing in the video , and wrote that the choreography ensures the lyrics , " my persuasion can build a nation " . 
 James Montgomery of MTV News wrote Beyoncé has returned " to claim her throne " and that the message in the video " hammers the point home with all the subtlety of a jackhammer " . He highlighted the " elaborate , hip @-@ displacing dance routines , haute @-@ couture costuming , wide @-@ screen cinematography and expensive @-@ looking sets " . Larry Fitzmaurice of Pitchfork Media wrote that " a thousand YouTube bedroom dancers flood [ ing ] the Internet with their own takes " were to come in the near future . Rolling Stone praised Beyoncé 's dance moves and wrote that it is the latest addition " to the canon of dance pop videos with over @-@ the @-@ top apocalyptic imagery " . Nick Neyland of Prefix Magazine wrote Beyoncé made the best music video of 2011 , commending its " big budget extravagance , full of preposterous costumes and ridiculously over the top dance routines " . Sarah Anne Hughes of The Washington Post wrote that Beyoncé uses " the non @-@ violent tactic of dance to fight off some bad guys in riot gear " and that Beyoncé 's alter ego Sasha Fierce " is out in full force as she uses an army of swiveling and shimmying women , her middle finger and two hyenas on leashes to keep control of a post @-@ apocalyptic society " . Billboard magazine wrote that Beyoncé made a triumphant return in the elaborate music video for " Run the World ( Girls ) " after creating classic clips for " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , " Crazy in Love " , and " Ring the Alarm " . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 On July 20 , 2011 , the video received three nominations at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards in the categories Best Female Video , Best Choreography , and Best Cinematography . It won the Best Choreography category . The video was nominated for Best Video at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . On November 27 , 2011 , the video won Best Dance Performance at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards . It was nominated for Best Video at the 2011 Virgin Media Music Awards and Favorite Music Video at the 2012 People 's Choice Awards . The writers of Slant Magazine put the music video at number 12 on their list of The 25 Best Music Videos of 2011 . The Guardian included " Run the World ( Girls ) " on its list of the best pop videos of 2011 , praising its " glorious effect " and the heavy choreography , before concluding that it is " tiring just watching it " . On BET 's Notarized : Top 100 Videos of 2011 , " Run the World ( Girls ) " was ranked at number two . The video was nominated for Best Pop Video and Best Choreography at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards Japan , and International Artist Video of the Year at the 2012 MuchMusic Video Awards . It was nominated for World 's Best Video at the 2012 World Music Awards . In 2013 , John Boone and Jennifer Cady of E ! Online placed the video at number seven on their list of Beyoncé 's ten best music videos , comparing her dancing in the sand with Shakira 's . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé 's first live performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " was on May 17 , 2011 on Surprise Oprah ! A Farewell Spectacular at the United Center in Chicago . The special aired on May 23 , 2011 . Beyoncé wore a tuxedo leotard with red heels and was accompanied by 40 female back @-@ up dancers . The show was organized to commemorate the 25th and final season of The Oprah Winfrey Show . Celebrities including Madonna , Tom Hanks , John Legend , Dakota Fanning , Tom Cruise and his wife Katie Holmes were present . Beyoncé altered the bridge 's lyrics , singing : " Oprah , your persuasion can build a nation . " The crowd held up blue lights in the arena as Beyoncé sang the song twice while Winfrey danced . According to the Chicago Tribune , Beyoncé received the loudest applause of the show . Beyoncé performed " Run the World ( Girls ) " live at the 2011 Billboard Music Awards ceremony at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas on May 22 , 2011 . The writers of Billboard magazine described the live performance as both " stunning " and " impressive " . Erika Ramirez of the same magazine put the performance at number one on her list of " Beyonce 's 5 Biggest TV Performances " saying that it " showcased the strength of her reign best " . It was also placed in the list of 15 Awesome Billboard Music Award Performances by the writers of the magazine . 
 During her promotional tour of Europe , Beyoncé performed at several festivals and made only a limited amount of television appearances . Beyoncé performed the song at a private concert in Nice , France , on June 20 , 2011 . One week later , Beyoncé flew to the United Kingdom to serve as the closing act at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival on June 26 , 2011 , where " Run the World ( Girls ) " was featured as the second to last song on the 90 minute set list , before finishing with " Halo " . Beyoncé was also the solo female ever to headline the Pyramid stage in over twenty years . Beyoncé then returned to France , where she performed the song along with her live band on Le Grand Journal in June 2011 . " Run the World ( Girls ) " was sung live by Beyoncé on June 28 , 2011 on the French X Factor . On July 1 , 2011 , Beyoncé gave a free concert on Good Morning America as part of its Summer Concert Series on August 14 , 2011 and during her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé shows in Roseland Ballroom , New York City , to an audience of 3 @,@ 500 . Beyoncé wore a gold dress and performed with her all @-@ female band and backing singers , called the Mamas . During the ITV special A Night with Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed " Run the World ( Girls ) " to a selected crowd of fans . 
 In May , 2012 , Beyoncé performed " Run the World " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . The revue was also called " Back to Business " which was picked from a lyric of the song . A writer of Black Entertainment Television noted , " She dazzled fans with an assortment of high @-@ energy performances of her upbeat hits like ... ' Run the World ( Girls ) . ' " Caryn Ganz of Spin magazine praised the " <unk> " march , while Rebecca Thomas of MTV News wrote that Beyoncé 's choreography during the performance of " Run the World " , " is meant to do the same : a series of sensual <unk> moves that revolve around the hips and legs . " Ben Ratliff of The New York Times mentioned the song in the " almost continuous high point " of the concert . The song also acted as the opening number of her Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . After a video intro of Beyoncé imitating Mary Antoinette , Beyoncé rises from beneath the stage along with sparks and flames , leading into the opening performance of " Run the World ( Girls ) " . The song was part of the set list of Beyoncé and Jay @-@ Z 's co @-@ headlining On the Run Tour ( 2014 ) . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Following her performance at the Billboard Music Awards , Beyoncé initially received widespread praise from fans , critics and celebrities . However , the following day , critics voiced concerns about similarities to a performance by Italian pop star Lorella Cuccarini in February 2010 at the 60th Sanremo Music Festival . Billy Johnson , Jr of Yahoo ! Music wrote : " Kenzo Digital , who spent a month creating Beyoncé 's interactive video , told Yahoo ! News that Lorella concert footage is only part of the inspiration for Beyoncé 's show : " [ The Cuccarini artists ] are awesome and do incredible work as well , but there are a lot of different inspirations for where our piece came from . " In a Yahoo ! Amplified interview with Daniel Kreps , Digital said : " It 's just a bare white screen . It 's a technique in video art since the [ 19 ] 80s in terms of frontal projection and interactive things . That 's really nothing new . It 's not even a new technology . It 's just an incredibly simple , awesome storytelling device , and with a performer like Beyoncé it becomes incredibly powerful . " Beyoncé later responded through an interview with AOL Music , saying she was inspired after finding Cuccarini 's performance online : 
 " My makeup artist showed me the performance of Lorella Cuccarini a year ago , and it inspired me so much . I then met with the talented people who worked on it . The technology and concept were so genius . She was inspired after discovering Cuccarini 's performance online . Thank God for YouTube or I would have never been exposed to something so inspiring . I never worked so hard on anything in my life as that performance for the Billboard Awards . " 
 = = Usage in media and cover versions = = 
 Beyoncé pre @-@ recorded a message to the astronauts of the final mission of the US Space Shuttle Atlantis on July 16 , 2011 . With " Run the World ( Girls ) " playing in the background , Beyoncé said : " Good morning Atlantis . This is Beyoncé . Sandy , Chris , Doug , and Rex , you inspire all of us to dare to live our dreams — to know that we are smart enough and strong enough to achieve this . This song is especially for my girl Sandy and all the women who have taken us to space with them , and the girls who are our future explorers . " " Run the World ( Girls ) " was used in a commercial for Beyoncé 's fragrance , Pulse ( 2011 ) . Released on August 18 , 2011 , the 15 @-@ second advertisement , directed by Jake Nava , shows Beyoncé wearing a metallic gown and walking through lights an instrumental version of the song plays in the background . 
 A dancer who had worked with Beyoncé , Heather Morris , covered " Run the World ( Girls ) " for the American television show Glee episode " Asian F " , which aired on October 4 , 2011 . Morris danced to the song wearing a leather cheerleading skirt . Amy Lee of The Huffington Post described Morris ' dance choreography as " amazing " and Kristen Dos Santos of E ! News called Morris ' performance " knockout " and added that it might be Glee 's best performance to date . Morris ' version debuted at number 91 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and at number 47 on the US Hot Digital Songs chart for the week ending October 22 , 2011 . On August 25 , 2013 , girl group <unk> – Belle performed " Run the World ( Girls ) " during the fifth season of The X Factor Australia . Giles Hardie of The Sydney Morning Herald rated their performance six out of ten and wrote it was a " terrible song choice " . He also felt that it was " a bit early for Beyoncé for these girls perhaps as the song was bigger than them " . 
 American Idol season 14 contestant <unk> Jones sang the song as her farewell performance . 
 The song was covered a cappella in the film Pitch Perfect 2 . 
 Knowles performed the song live with actor Channing Tatum on a 2016 episode of Lip Sync Battle 
 = = Format and track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Single Version ] – 3 : 56 
 UK digital remix single 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Chris Lake Remix ] – 6 : 24 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Kito Remix ] – 3 : 37 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Billionaire Remix ] – 5 : 19 
 US digital remix single 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Kaskade Club Remix ] – 5 : 02 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ RedTop Club Remix ] – 6 : 02 
 " Run the World ( Girls ) " [ Jochen Simms Club Remix ] – 6 : 17 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are taken from 4 liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Bill Haywood = 
 William Dudley Haywood ( February 4 , 1869 – May 18 , 1928 ) , better known as " Big Bill " Haywood , was a founding member and leader of the Industrial Workers of the World ( IWW ) and a member of the executive committee of the Socialist Party of America . During the first two decades of the 20th century , he was involved in several important labor battles , including the Colorado Labor Wars , the Lawrence Textile Strike , and other textile strikes in Massachusetts and New Jersey . 
 Haywood was an advocate of industrial unionism , a labor philosophy that favors organizing all workers in an industry under one union , regardless of the specific trade or skill level ; this was in contrast to the craft unions that were prevalent at the time , such as the AFL . His belief that workers of all ethnicities should be united also clashed with many unions . His strong preference for direct action over political tactics alienated him from the Socialist Party and contributed to his recall from the party 's executive committee in 1913 . 
 Never one to shy from violent conflicts , Haywood was frequently the target of prosecutors . His trial for the murder of Frank Steunenberg in 1907 ( of which he was acquitted ) drew national attention ; in 1918 , he was one of 101 IWW members convicted of violating the Espionage Act of 1917 during the First Red Scare . In 1921 , while out of prison during an appeal of his conviction , Haywood fled to Bolshevik Russia , where he spent the remaining years of his life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 William D. Haywood was born in 1869 in Salt Lake City , Utah Territory . His father , a Pony Express rider , died of pneumonia when Haywood was three years old . His maternal grandfather was an Afrikaner born in the Orange Free State in 1820 . At age nine , he injured his right eye while whittling a slingshot with a knife , permanently blinding his right eye . Haywood never had his damaged eye replaced with a glass eye ; when photographed , he would turn his head to show his left profile . That same year , he began working in the mines , never having received much formal education . After brief stints as a cowboy and a homesteader , he returned to mining in 1896 . High @-@ profile events such as the gradual demise of the Molly <unk> , the Haymarket Massacre in 1886 and the Pullman Strike in 1894 fostered Haywood 's interest in the labor movement . 
 = = = Western Federation of Miners involvement = = = 
 In 1896 , Ed Boyce , president of the Western Federation of Miners , spoke at the Idaho silver mine where Haywood was working . Inspired by his speech , Haywood signed up as a WFM member , thus formally beginning his involvement in America 's labor movement . 
 Haywood immediately became active in the WFM , and by 1900 he had become a member of the national union 's General Executive Board . In 1902 , he became secretary @-@ treasurer of the WFM , the number two position after President Charles Moyer . That year , the WFM became involved in the Colorado Labor Wars , a struggle centered in the Cripple Creek mining district that lasted for several years and took the lives of 33 union and non @-@ union workers . The WFM initiated a series of strikes designed to extend the benefits of the union to other workers , who suffered from brutal working conditions and starvation wages . The defeat of these strikes led to Haywood 's belief in " One Big Union " organized along industrial lines to bring broader working class support for labour struggles . 
 = = = Foundation of the Industrial Workers of the World = = = 
 Late in 1904 , several prominent labor radicals met in Chicago , Illinois to lay down plans for a new revolutionary union . A manifesto was written and sent around the country . Unionists who agreed with the manifesto were invited to attend a convention to found the new union which was to become the Industrial Workers of the World . 
 At 10 a.m. on June 27 , 1905 , Haywood addressed the crowd assembled at Brand 's Hall in Chicago . In the audience were two hundred delegates from organizations all over the country representing socialists , anarchists , miners , industrial unionists and rebel workers . Haywood opened the First Convention of the Industrial Workers of the World with the following speech : 
 Fellow Workers , this is the Continental Congress of the working @-@ class . We are here to confederate the workers of this country into a working @-@ class movement that shall have for its purpose the emancipation of the working @-@ class from the slave bondage of capitalism . The aims and objects of this organization shall be to put the working @-@ class in possession of the economic power , the means of life , in control of the machinery of production and distribution , without regard to capitalist masters . 
 Other speakers at the convention included Eugene Debs , leader of the Socialist Party of America , and Mary Harris " Mother " Jones , an organizer for the United Mine Workers of America . After its foundation , the IWW would become aggressively involved in the labor movement . 
 = = = Murder trial = = = 
 On December 30 , 1905 , Frank Steunenberg was killed by an explosion in front of his Caldwell , Idaho home . A former governor of Idaho , Steunenberg had clashed with the WFM in previous strikes . Harry Orchard , a former WFM member who had once acted as WFM President Charles Moyer 's bodyguard was arrested for the crime , and evidence was found in his hotel room . Famed Pinkerton detective James McParland , who had infiltrated and helped to destroy the Molly <unk> , was placed in charge of the investigation . 
 Before the trial , McParland ordered that Orchard be placed on death row in the Boise penitentiary , with restricted food rations and under constant surveillance . After McParland had prepared his investigation , he met with Orchard over a " sumptuous lunch " followed by cigars . The Pinkerton detective told Orchard that he could escape immediate hanging only if he implicated the leaders of the WFM . In addition to using the threat of hanging , McParland promised food , cigars , better treatment , possible freedom , and even a possible financial reward if Orchard cooperated . The detective obtained a 64 @-@ page confession from Orchard in which the suspect took responsibility for a string of crimes and at least seventeen murders . 
 Writer Peter Carlson charged that McParland then used perjured extradition papers , which falsely stated that WFM leaders had been at the scene of the Steunenberg murder , to cross state lines into Denver , Colorado and arrest Haywood , Moyer , and George Pettibone . However , under Idaho law , conspirators were considered to be present at the scene of the crime . McParland arrived in Denver on Thursday , February 15 , and presented the extradition papers to Colorado Governor McDonald , who , by prior arrangement with the governor of Idaho , accepted them immediately . But they waited until Saturday evening to arrest Haywood , Pettigrew , and Moyer , then held the three overnight in the Denver Jail , and refused requests by the three to contact lawyers and family . Early Sunday morning the prisoners were put on a special train , and guarded by Colorado militia , were sped to Idaho . Writer Peter Carlson described it as a " kidnapping scheme , " to extradite them to Idaho before the courts in Denver could intervene . The events were so extraordinary that even American Federation of Labor president Samuel Gompers , who had little good to say about the WFM , directed his union to raise funds for the defense . The U.S. Supreme Court denied a habeas corpus appeal ( George Pettibone v. Jasper C Nichols ) , ruling that the arrest and extradition were legal , with only Justice Joseph McKenna dissenting . 
 Haywood 's trial began on May 9 , 1907 , with famed Chicago defense attorney Clarence Darrow defending him . The government had only the testimony of Orchard , the confessed bomber , to implicate Haywood and the other defendants , and Orchard 's checkered past and admitted violent history were skillfully exploited by Darrow during the trial , though Darrow did not lead Orchard 's cross @-@ examination . / During the trial Orchard admitted that he had acted as a paid informant of the Mine Owners ' Association , in effect working for both sides . He admitted to accepting money from Pinkerton detectives , and had caused explosions during mining disputes before he had met Moyer or Haywood . After Darrow 's final summation ( which moved many in the courtroom to tears ) , the jury acquitted Haywood . During the subsequent trial of George Pettibone , Darrow conducted a powerful cross @-@ examination against Orchard , before falling ill and withdrawing from the trial , leaving Judge Hilton of Denver in charge of the defense . After a second jury acquitted Pettibone , the charges against Moyer were dropped . 
 Despite his radical views , Haywood emerged from the trial with a national reputation . Eugene Debs called him " the Lincoln of Labor . " Along with his colorful background and appearance , he was known for his blunt statements about capitalism . " The capitalist has no heart , " he often said , " but harpoon him in the pocketbook and you will draw blood . " Another time , he began a speech by noting , " Tonight I am going to speak on the class struggle and I am going to make it so plain that even a lawyer can understand it . " Yet Haywood also had a flair for dangerous hyperbole that , when quoted in newspapers , was used to justify wholesale arrests of IWW strikers . " <unk> ! That 's good ! " he often said . " I like that word . It suggests stripping the capitalist , taking something away from him . But there has got to be a good deal of force to this thing of taking . " 
 When the WFM withdrew from the IWW in 1907 , Bill Haywood remained a member of both organizations . His murder trial had made Haywood a celebrity , and he was in demand as a speaker for the WFM . But his increasingly radical speeches became more at odds with the WFM , and in April 1908 , the WFM announced that the union had ended Haywood 's role as a union representative . Haywood left the WFM , and devoted all his time to organizing for the IWW . 
 = = = Lawrence Textile Strike = = = 
 Bill Haywood had left the WFM and was organizing for the IWW by the time the Lawrence Textile Strike in Lawrence , Massachusetts garnered national attention . On January 11 , 1912 , textile mill workers in Lawrence left their jobs in protest of lowered wages . Within a week , twenty thousand workers were on strike . The IWW already had a presence in Lawrence and assumed leadership of the strike . 
 Authorities responded by calling out police , and the strike quickly escalated into violence . Local IWW leaders Joseph Ettor and Arturo Giovannitti were jailed on charges of murdering Anna <unk> , a striker whom nineteen witnesses later said was killed by police gunfire , and martial law was declared . In response , Haywood and other organizers arrived to take charge of the strike . Over the next several weeks , Haywood personally masterminded or approved many of the strike 's tactical innovations . Chief among these was his decision to send strikers ' hungry children to sympathetic families in New York and Vermont . 
 After hearing from immigrants how European strikers had used this tactic during prolonged strikes , Haywood decided to take the gamble in Lawrence , a first in American Labor history . He and the IWW used announcements in socialist newspapers to solicit host families , then screened strikers to see who might be willing to send their children into the care of strangers . On February 10 , 1912 , the first group of " Lawrence Strike Children " bid tearful goodbyes to their parents and , with chaperones to guide them , boarded a train for New York . The children arrived safely in Manhattan that evening where they were taken to a Labor hall . They were soon lavished with food and clothes and would stay in New York another seven weeks . Despite their excellent treatment , officials in Lawrence and elsewhere were shocked by the move . " I could scarcely believe that the strike leaders would do such a thing as this , " Lawrence mayor Michael Scanlon said . " Lawrence could have very easily cared for these children . " Though also denounced in the press , the children 's exodus gained widespread publicity and made the city of Lawrence look bad . While police and the mayor allowed smaller contingents of children to leave on two more occasions , plans were made to crack down . 
 On February 24 , when strikers attempted to send still more children away , police were ready . During a melee , women and children were forcibly separated , police lashed out with clubs , and dozens of strikers and their offspring were jailed . A national outrage resulted . The New York World wrote , " The Lawrence authorities must be blind and the mill owners mad . " The New York Tribune called the police response " as chuckle @-@ headed an exhibition of incompetence to deal with a strike situation as it is possible to recall . " The incident led to a congressional hearing and the attention of President William Howard Taft . Nationwide publicity pressured the mill owners into cooperating with the strikers ; on March 12 , the owners agreed to all the demands of the strikers , officially ending the strike . 
 However , Haywood and the IWW were not yet finished in Lawrence ; despite the end of the strike , Ettor and Giovannitti remained in prison . Haywood threatened the authorities with another strike , saying " Open the jail gates or we will close the mill gates . " Legal efforts and a one @-@ day strike on September 30 did not prompt the authorities to drop the charges . Haywood was indicted in Lawrence for misuse of strike funds , a move that kept him from returning to the city and eventually led to his arrest on the Boston Common . However , on November 26 , Ettor and Giovannitti were acquitted , and upon their release were treated to a massive demonstration of public support . 
 = = = Socialist Party of America involvement = = = 
 For many years , Haywood was an active member of the Socialist Party of America . Haywood had always been largely Marxist in his political views , and campaigned for Eugene Debs during the 1908 presidential election , traveling by train with Debs around the country . Haywood also represented the Socialist Party as a delegate to the 1910 congress of the Second International , an organization working towards international socialism . In 1912 , he was elected to the Socialist Party National Executive Committee . 
 However , the aggressive tactics of Haywood and the IWW , along with their call for abolition of the wage system and the overthrow of capitalism created tension with moderate electorally @-@ oriented members of the Socialist Party . Haywood and the IWW focused on direct action and strikes , which often led to violence , and were less concerned with political tactics . When Haywood was quoted speaking at public meetings in New York City to the effect that he had never advocated the use of the ballot by the workers but had instead favored the tactics of direct action , an initiative recalling Haywood from the NEC was launched by the State Executive Committee of the Socialist Party of New York . In February 1913 the recall of Haywood was approved by a margin of more than 2 @-@ to @-@ 1 . Following his defeat , Haywood left the ranks of the Socialist Party , joined by thousands of other IWW members and their sympathizers . 
 = = = Other labor involvement = = = 
 In 1913 , Haywood was involved in the Paterson silk strike . Haywood and approximately 1 @,@ 850 strikers were arrested during the course of the strike . Despite the long holdout and fundraising efforts , the strike ended in failure on July 28 , 1913 . Haywood again made headlines , however , when the IWW staged the Paterson Strike Pageant at Madison Square Garden , in which actual strikers appeared onstage as themselves re @-@ enacting the strike even as it was going on in Paterson . Haywood became a celebrity in progressive circles and began frequenting the intellectual salon of Mabel Dodge <unk> where , while often wearing his Stetson hat , he hobnobbed with writers and artists of the avant @-@ garde . 
 = = = Espionage trial = = = 
 Haywood and the IWW frequently clashed with the government during their labor actions . The onset of World War I gave the federal government the opportunity to take action against Haywood and the IWW . Using the newly passed Espionage Act of 1917 as justification , the Department of Justice raided forty @-@ eight IWW meeting halls on September 5 , 1917 . The Department of Justice , with the approval of President Woodrow Wilson , then proceeded to arrest 165 IWW members for " conspiring to hinder the draft , encourage desertion , and intimidate others in connection with labor disputes . " 
 In April 1918 , Haywood and 100 of the arrested IWW members began their trial , presided over by Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis . The trial lasted five months , the longest criminal trial up to that time ; Haywood himself testified for three days . All 101 defendants were found guilty , and Haywood ( along with fourteen others ) was sentenced to twenty years in prison . 
 Despite the efforts of his supporters , Haywood was unable to overturn the conviction . In 1921 , Haywood skipped bail while out on appeal and fled to Russia . IWW officials were taken by surprise that Haywood had jumped bail , with his own attorney declaring that " Haywood has committed hari @-@ kiri so far as the labor movement is concerned if he has really run away . He will be disowned by the IWW and all sympathizers . " A bond in the amount of $ 15 @,@ 000 posted by millionaire supporter William Bross Lloyd was forfeited as a result of Haywood 's flight . 
 = = = Life in Soviet Russia = = = 
 In Soviet Russia , Haywood became a labor advisor to Lenin 's Bolshevik government , and served in that position until 1923 . Haywood also participated in the founding of the <unk> Autonomous Industrial Colony . Various visitors to Haywood 's small Moscow apartment in later years recalled that he felt lonely and depressed , and expressed a desire to return to the United States . In 1926 he took a Russian wife , though the two had to communicate in sign language , as neither spoke the other 's language . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On May 18 , 1928 , Haywood died in a Moscow hospital from a stroke brought on by alcoholism and diabetes . Half of his ashes were buried in the Kremlin wall ; an urn containing the other half of his ashes was sent to Chicago and buried near the Haymarket Martyrs ' Monument . 
 = = Haywood 's labor philosophy = = 
 = = = Industrial unionism = = = 
 Even before Haywood first became an official with the Western Federation of Miners , he was convinced that the system under which working people toiled was unjust . He described the execution of the Haymarket leaders in 1887 as a turning point in his life , predisposing him toward membership in the largest organization of the day , the Knights of Labor . Haywood had watched men die in unsafe mine tunnels , and had marched with Kelly 's Army . He had suffered a serious hand injury in the mines , and found that his only support came from other miners . When Haywood listened to Ed Boyce of the WFM addressing a group of miners in 1896 , he discovered radical unionism and welcomed it . 
 Haywood also shared Boyce 's skepticism of the role played by the American Federation of Labor ( AFL ) . Haywood criticized labor officials who were , in his view , insufficiently supportive of Labor militants . For example , he recalled with disdain the opening remarks of Samuel Gompers when the AFL leader appeared before Illinois Governor Richard Oglesby on behalf of the Haymarket prisoners : 
 I have differed all my life with the principles and methods of the condemned . 
 Gompers was an advocate of craft unionism , the idea that workers should be separated into unions according to their skills . The AFL disdained to organize workers who were not skilled . Furthermore , in 1900 Gompers became the first vice @-@ president of the National Civic Federation , which was " dedicated to the fostering of harmony and collaboration between capital and organized labor . " But Haywood had become convinced by the experiences of striking railroad workers that a different union philosophy , some form of industrial unionism , was necessary for workers to obtain justice . This had become apparent in 1888 when the craft @-@ organized locomotive firemen kept their engines running , helping their employers to break a strike called by the railroad engineers . 
 Eugene V. Debs had been head of the locomotive firemen 's union , but he resigned to create the American Railway Union ( ARU ) , organized industrially to include all railroad workers . In June 1894 , the ARU voted to join in solidarity with the ongoing Pullman strike . Railroad traffic throughout the nation was " largely paralyzed . The effectiveness of the industrial form of unionism was evident from the start . " The strike was eventually crushed by massive government intervention that included 2600 Deputy U.S. Marshals , and 14 @,@ 000 state and federal troops in Chicago alone . Debs attempted to seek help from the American Federation of Labor . He asked that AFL railroad brotherhood affiliates present the following proposition to the Railway Managers ' Association : 
 ... that the strikers return to work at once as a body , upon the condition that they be restored to their former positions , or , in the event of failure , to call a general strike . 
 Observing that the ARU was defenseless , AFL officials viewed the plight of the rival organization as an opportunity to bolster the railway brotherhoods , which the AFL was courting , and instructed all AFL affiliates to withhold help . In spite of what Haywood perceived as " treachery " and " double @-@ cross " by the AFL leadership — the ARU members had put their own organization at risk for others , but the AFL refused to even help them try to end the strike in a draw — the power of workers crossing their trade lines and jurisdictional boundaries to join together in a fight against capital greatly impressed him . He described the revelation of such power as " a great rift of light . " 
 For Haywood , industrial union principles were later confirmed by the defeat of the Western Federation of Miners in the 1903 – 05 Cripple Creek strike due — he believed — to insufficient labor solidarity . The WFM miners had sought to extend the benefits of union to the mill workers who processed their ore . Since the government had crushed the ARU , the railroad workers were again organized along craft lines , similar to the AFL . Those same railroad unions continued to haul the ore from mines that were run by strike breakers , to mills that were run by strike breakers . " The <unk> form the connecting link in the proposition that is scabby at both ends , " Haywood complained . " This fight , which is entering its third year , could have been won in three weeks if it were not for the fact that the trade unions are lending assistance to the mine operators . " The obvious solution , it seemed to Haywood , was for all of the workers to join the same union , and to take collective action in concert against the employers . The militants of the WFM referred to the AFL as the " American Separation of Labor , " a criticism that was later echoed by the Industrial Workers of the World . 
 = = = Haywood 's revolutionary imperative = = = 
 Haywood 's industrial unionism was much broader than formulating a more effective method of conducting strikes . Haywood grew up a part of the working class , and his respect for working people was genuine . He was quickly angered by the arrogance of employers " who had never ... spoken to a workingman except to give orders . " 
 Having met Debs during his WFM days , Haywood had also become interested in the former railway leader 's new passion , socialism . Haywood subscribed to the belief , and with Boyce , formulated as a new motto for the WFM , that : 
 Labor produces all wealth ; all wealth belongs to the producer thereof . 
 Haywood observed how the government frequently took the side of business to defeat the tactics and the aspirations of the miners . During an 1899 organizing drive in Coeur d 'Alene , with pay cuts as a motivating issue , the company hired spies and then fired organizers and pro @-@ union miners . Some frustrated miners responded with violence and when two men were killed , martial law was declared . As they had done in a strike in Coeur d 'Alene seven years earlier , soldiers acted as strike breakers . They rounded up hundreds of union members without formal charges and put them in a filthy , vermin @-@ infested warehouse without sanitation services for a year . They were so crowded that the soldiers locked the overflow of prisoners in boxcars . One local union leader was imprisoned for 17 years . 
 Haywood considered the brutal conditions in Coeur d 'Alene a manifestation of class warfare . In 1901 the miners agreed at the WFM convention that a " complete revolution of social and economic conditions " was " the only salvation of the working classes . " 
 In the WFM 's 1903 – 04 struggle in Colorado , with martial law once again in force , two declarations uttered by the National Guard and recorded for posterity further clarified the relationship of the mine operator 's enforcement army — provided courtesy of the Colorado governor — to the workers . When union attorneys asked the courts to free illegally imprisoned strikers , Adjutant General Sherman Bell declared , " Habeas corpus be damned , we 'll give ' em post mortems . " Reminded of the Constitution , one of Bell 's junior officers declared coolly , " To hell with the Constitution . We 're not going by the Constitution . " 
 General Bell had been the manager of one of the coal mines in Cripple Creek where the strike was taking place . It wasn 't any surprise to Haywood that soldiers seemed to be working in the interests of the employers ; he had seen that situation before . But when the Colorado legislature acknowledged the complaints of organized labor and passed an eight hour law , the Colorado supreme court declared it unconstitutional . So the WFM took the issue to the voters , and 72 percent of the state 's voters approved the referendum . But the Colorado government ignored the results of the referendum . 
 To members of the WFM , it became clear that government favored the companies , and only direct action by organized workers could secure the eight @-@ hour day for themselves . When miners in Idaho Springs and Telluride decided to strike for the eight @-@ hour day , they were rounded up at gunpoint by vigilante groups and expelled from their communities . Warrants were issued for the arrest of the law @-@ breaking vigilantes , but they were not acted upon . 
 Haywood complained that John D. Rockefeller was " wielding more power with his golf sticks than could the people of Colorado with their ballots . " It appeared to Haywood that the deck was stacked , and no enduring gains could be won for the workers short of changing the rules of the game . Increasingly , his industrial unionism took on a revolutionary flavor . In 1905 Haywood joined the more left @-@ leaning socialists , labor anarchists in the Haymarket tradition , and other militant unionists to formulate the concept of revolutionary industrial unionism that animated the Industrial Workers of the World . Haywood called this philosophy " socialism with its working clothes on . " 
 Haywood favored direct action . The socialist philosophy — which WFM supporter the Rev. Fr . Thomas J. Hagerty called " <unk> " — did not seem hard @-@ nosed enough for Haywood 's labor instincts . After the Boise murder trial , he had come to believe , 
 It is to the ignominy of the Socialist Party and the Socialist Labor Party that they have so seldom joined forces with the <unk> in these desperate political struggles . 
 While Haywood continued to champion direct action , he advocated the political action favored by the socialists as just one more mechanism for change , and only when it seemed relevant . At an October 1913 meeting of the Socialist Party , Haywood stated : 
 I advocate the industrial ballot alone when I address the workers in the textile industries of the East where a great majority are foreigners without political representation . But when I speak to American workingmen in the West I advocate both the industrial and the political ballot . 
 The " industrial ballot " referred to the direct action methods ( strikes , slowdowns , etc . ) of the IWW . 
 Haywood seemed most comfortable with a philosophy arrived at through the hard @-@ <unk> experiences of the workers . He had the ability to translate complex economic theories into simple ideas that resonated with working people . He distilled the voluminous work of Karl Marx into a simple observation , " If one man has a dollar he didn 't work for , some other man worked for a dollar he didn 't get . " While Haywood respected the work of Marx , he referred to it with irreverent humor . Acknowledging his scars from dangerous mining work , and from numerous fistfights with police and militia , he liked to say , " I 've never read Marx 's Capital , but I have the marks of capital all over me . " 
 Haywood demonstrated his Marxist roots when , confronted by the Commission on Industrial Relations with an argument about the sanctity of private property , he responded that a capitalist 's property merely represented " unpaid labor , surplus value . " But the forum also gave Haywood an opportunity to compare the philosophy of the IWW with that of Marx and the socialist parties . Reminded by the Commission that socialists advocated ownership of the industries by the state , Haywood remembered in his autobiography that he had drawn a clear distinction . All of industry should be owned " by the workers , " he observed . 
 = = = Racial unity in the labor movement = = = 
 Much of Haywood 's philosophy relating to socialism , to the idea that industrial unionism was preferable to craft unionism , what he saw as the evils of the wage system , his attitude about corporations , militia , and politicians , seem to have been held in common with his mentor at the WFM , Ed Boyce . Boyce also called for legislation to forbid employment of aliens . Unlike Boyce and many other labor leaders and organizations of the time , Haywood believed that workers of all ethnicities should organize into the same union . According to Haywood , the IWW was " big enough to take in the black man , the white man ; big enough to take in all nationalities – an organization that will be strong enough to obliterate state boundaries ; to obliterate national boundaries . " 
 In 1912 , Haywood spoke at a convention for The Brotherhood of Timber Workers in Louisiana ; at the time , interracial meetings in the state were illegal . Haywood insisted that the white workers invite the African American workers to their convention , declaring : 
 You work in the same mills together . Sometimes a black man and a white man chop down the same tree together . You are meeting in a convention now to discuss the conditions under which you labor . Why not be sensible about this and call the Negroes into the Convention ? If it is against the law , this is one time when the law should be broken . 
 Ignoring the law against interracial meetings , the convention invited the African American workers . The convention would eventually vote to affiliate with the IWW . 
 = = Works = = 
 Industrial Socialism With Frank Bohn . Chicago : Charles H. Kerr & Co . , 1911 . 
 " The General Strike . Chicago : Charles H. Kerr & Co . , n.d. [ 1911 ] . Speech of March 16 , 1911 . 
 Bill Haywood 's Book : The Autobiography of Big Bill Haywood . New York : International Publishers , 1929 . Reissued as The Autobiography of Big Bill Haywood . 
 = Matrikas = 
 Matrikas ( Matrika singular , Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> " mother " ) , also called Matara ( Sanskrit : <unk> plural , <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> singular ) , is a group of Hindu goddesses who are always depicted together . Since they are usually depicted as a <unk> , they are called Saptamatrika ( s ) ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ् <unk> : , " seven mothers " ) : Brahmani , Vaishnavi , Maheshvari , Indrani , Kaumari , Varahi , Chamunda and Narasimhi . However , they may sometimes be eight ( <unk> ( s ) : <unk> , अष ् <unk> : , " eight mothers " ) . Whereas in South India , Saptamatrika worship is prevalent , the <unk> are venerated in Nepal . 
 The Matrikas assume paramount significance in the goddess @-@ oriented sect of Hinduism , Tantrism . In Shaktism , they are " described as assisting the great Shakta Devi ( goddess ) in her fight with demons . " Some scholars consider them Shaiva goddesses . They are also connected with the worship of warrior god Skanda . In most early references , the Matrikas are described as having inauspicious qualities and often described as dangerous . They come to play a protective role in later mythology , although some of their inauspicious and wild characteristics still persist in these accounts . Thus , they represent the prodigiously fecund aspect of nature as well as its destructive force aspect . 
 In the 6th century encyclopedia Brihat @-@ Samhita , <unk> says that " Mothers are to be made with cognizance of ( different major Hindu ) gods corresponding to their names . " They are associated with these gods as their spouses or their energies ( Shaktis ) . Originally believed to be a personification of the seven stars of the star cluster the Pleiades , they became quite popular by the seventh century and a standard feature of goddess temples from the ninth century onwards . 
 = = Origins and development = = 
 According to Jagdish Narain Tiwari and Dilip <unk> , the Matrikas were existent as early as the Vedic period and the Indus Valley civilization . Seals with rows of seven feminine deities or priestesses are cited as evidence for the theory . A Hindu text known as the Rigveda ( IX 102 @.@ 4 ) speaks of a group of seven Mothers who control the preparation of Soma , but the earliest clear description appears in some layers of the epic Mahabharata ( dated to 1st century AD ) . <unk> believes that Matrika description in Mahabharata , is rooted in the group of seven females depicted on Indus valley seals . It was assumed that the people locally worshipped these goddesses , such an example is also described in Zimmer Heinrich book The Art Of Indian Asia , about the seven shrines of seven Mother Goddesses worshipped locally . By the fifth century , all these goddesses were incorporated in mainstream orthodox Hinduism as Tantric deities . David Kinsley proposes that the Matrikas may be non @-@ Aryan or at least non @-@ Brahmanical ( orthodox Hinduism ) , local village goddesses , who were being assimilated in the mainstream . He cites two reasons for his assertion : their description in Mahabharata as dark in colour , speaking foreign languages and living in " peripheral areas " and their association with non @-@ Brahmanical god Skanda and his father , Shiva , who though Vedic has non @-@ Brahmanical attributes . Sara L. <unk> suggests that Matrikas maybe inspired by the concept of Yakshas , who are associated with Skanda and Kubera – both are often portrayed with the Matrikas . In contrast to Indus valley origins theory , Bhattacharyya notes : 
 [ The ] cult of the Female Principle was a major aspect of Dravidian religion , The concept of Shakti was an integral part of their religion [ ... ] The cult of the Sapta Matrika , or Seven Divine Mothers , which is an integral part of the Shakta religion , may be of Dravidian inspiration . 
 The Sapta @-@ Matrikas were earlier connected with Skanda ( Kumara ) and in later times , associated with the sect of Shiva himself . During the Kushana period ( 1st to 3rd century ) , the sculptural images of the matrikas first appear in stone . The Kushana images merged from the belief in <unk> ( lit " destroyers of children " ) worship related to conception , birth , diseases and protection of children . The <unk> tradition included the worship of the infant Skanda with the Matrikas . The goddesses were considered as personifications of perils , related to children and thus , were pacified by worship . The Kushana images emphasize the maternal as well as destructive characteristics of the Matrikas through their emblems and weapons . They appear to be an undifferentiated sculptural group but develop in standard and complex iconographic representation during the following Gupta period . 
 In the Gupta period ( 3rd to 6th century A.D. ) , folk images of Matrikas became important in villages . The diverse folk goddesses of the soldiers like Matrikas were acknowledged by the Gupta rulers and their images were carved on royal monuments in order to strengthen the loyalty and adherence of the armed forces . The Gupta kings <unk> and <unk> I ( c. second half of fifth century ) made Skanda ( Kumara ) their model and elevated the position of Skanda 's foster mothers , the Matrikas from a cluster of folk goddesses to court goddesses . Since the fourth century , <unk> , Madhya Pradesh had a rock @-@ cut shrine been solely devoted to the Sapta Matrika . 
 The Western Ganga Dynasty ( 350 – 1000 CE ) kings of Karnataka built many Hindu temples along with <unk> carvings and memorials , containing sculptural details of <unk> . The evidence of Matrika sculptures is further pronounced in the Gurjara – <unk> ( 8th to 10th century A.D. ) and <unk> period ( 8th to 12th century A.D. ) . The Chalukyas claimed to have been nursed by the Sapta Matrikas . It was a popular practice to link South Indian royal family lineage to a Northern kingdom in ancient times . During the Chalukya period ( 11th to 13th century ) , all Matrikas continued to figure among the deity sculptures of this period . The Kadambas and Early Chalukyas from the fifth century praise the Matrikas in their <unk> , as giver of powers to defeat enemies . In most of the relevant texts , their exact number has not been specified , but gradually their number and names became increasingly crystallized and seven goddesses were identified as matrikas , albeit some references indicate eight or even sixteen Matrikas . Laura Kristine Chamberlain ( now Laura K. <unk> ) cites : 
 The inconsistency in the number of Matrikas found in the valley [ Indus ] today ( seven , eight , or nine ) possibly reflects the localization of goddesses [ . ] Although the Matrikas are mostly grouped as seven goddesses over the rest of the Indian Subcontinent , an eighth Matrikas has sometimes been added in Nepal to represent the eight cardinal directions . In Bhaktapur , a city in the Kathmandu Valley , a ninth Matrika is added to the set to represent the center . 
 = = Iconography = = 
 The iconographical features of the Matrikas have been described in Hindu scriptures such as Puranas and Agamas and the epic Mahabharata . Puranas like Varaha Purana , Agni Purana , Matsya Purana , Vishnudharmottara Purana and Devi Mahatmya , a part of Markandeya Purana as well as Agamas such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and Rupamandana describe the Matrikas . 
 The Ashta @-@ Matrika or Ashta @-@ Matara as described in Devi Mahatmya is given below . 
 Brahmani ( Sanskrit : ब ् रह ् <unk> , <unk> ) or Brahmi ( Sanskrit : ब ् <unk> ् मि , <unk> ) is the Shakti ( power ) of the creator god Brahma . She is depicted yellow in colour and with four heads . She may be depicted with four or six arms . Like Brahma , she holds a rosary or noose and kamandalu ( water pot ) or lotus stalk or a book or bell and is seated on a hamsa ( identified with a swan or goose ) as her vahana ( mount or vehicle ) . She is also shown seated on a lotus with the hamsa on her banner . She wears various ornaments and is distinguished by her basket @-@ shaped crown called karaṇḍa mukuṭa . 
 Vaishnavi ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> , <unk> ) , the power of the preserver @-@ god Vishnu , is described as seated on the Garuda ( eagle @-@ man ) and having four or six arms . She holds Shankha ( conch ) , chakra ( Discus ) , mace and lotus and bow and sword or her two arms are in varada mudra ( Blessing hand gesture ) and abhaya mudra ( " No @-@ fear " hand gesture ) . Like Vishnu , she is heavily adorned with ornaments like necklaces , anklets , earrings , bangles etc. and a cylindrical crown called <unk> mukuṭa . 
 <unk> ' ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> , <unk> ) is the power of god Shiva , also known as Maheshvara . Maheshvari is also known by the names <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , derived from Shiva 's names Rudra and Mahesh . Maheshvari is depicted seated on Nandi ( the bull ) and has four or six hands . The white complexioned , <unk> ( three eyed ) goddess holds a Trishula ( trident ) , Damaru ( drum ) , <unk> ( A garland of beads ) , <unk> ( drinking vessel ) or axe or an antelope or a kapala ( skull @-@ bowl ) or a serpent and is adorned with serpent bracelets , the crescent moon and the <unk> mukuṭa ( A headdress formed of piled , matted hair ) . 
 Indrani ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् द ् <unk> , <unk> ) , also known as <unk> , ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् द ् री , <unk> ) , <unk> , Shakri , <unk> ' and <unk> , is the power of the Indra , the Lord of the heaven . Seated on a charging elephant , <unk> , is depicted dark @-@ skinned , with two or four or six arms . She is depicted as having two or three or like Indra , a thousand eyes . She is armed with the Vajra ( thunderbolt ) , goad , noose and lotus stalk . <unk> with variety of ornaments , she wears the <unk> mukuṭa . 
 <unk> ' ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ) , also known as Kumari , <unk> and Ambika is the power of Kumara ( Kartikeya or Skanda ) , the god of war . Kaumari rides a peacock and has four or twelve arms . She holds a spear , axe , a Shakti ( power ) or Tanka ( silver coins ) and bow . She is sometimes depicted six @-@ headed like Kumara and wears the cylindrical crown . 
 Varahi ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ) or <unk> is described as the power of Varaha – the boar @-@ headed form of Vishnu or Yama – the god of death , has a boar head on a human body and rides a ram or a buffalo . She holds a Danda ( rod of punishment ) or plough , goad , a Vajra or a sword , and a <unk> . Sometimes , she carries a bell , chakra , chamara ( a yak 's tail ) and a bow . She wears a crown called karaṇḍa mukuṭa with other ornaments . 
 Chamunda ( Sanskrit : <unk> ् <unk> , <unk> ) , also known as Chamundi and Charchika is the power of Devi ( Chandi ) . She is very often identified with Kali and is similar in her appearance and habit . The identification with Kali is explicit in Devi Mahatmya . The black coloured Chamunda is described as wearing a garland of severed heads or skulls ( Mundamala ) and holding a Damaru ( drum ) , trishula ( trident ) , sword and <unk> ( drinking @-@ vessel ) . Riding a jackal or standing on a corpse of a man ( <unk> or preta ) , she is described as having three eyes , a terrifying face and a sunken belly . 
 <unk> ' ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> ) , power of Narasimha ( lion @-@ man form of Vishnu ) , is a woman @-@ lion and throws the stars into disarray by shaking her lion mane . 
 Though the first six are unanimously accepted by texts , the name and features of the seventh and eighth Matrika are disputed . In Devi @-@ Mahatmya , Chamunda is omitted after the Saptamatrika list , while in sculpture in shrines or caves and the Mahabharata , Narasimhi is omitted . The Varaha Purana names Yami – the Shakti of Yama , as the seventh and <unk> as the eighth Matrika , created by flames emerging from Shiva 's mouth . In Nepal , the eighth Matrika is called Maha @-@ Lakshmi or Lakshmi is added omitting Narasimhi . In lists of nine Matrikas , Devi @-@ Purana mentions <unk> or <unk> – the Shakti of Ganesha , characterized by her elephant head and ability to remove obstacles like Ganesha and <unk> omitting Narasimhi . 
 = = Legends = = 
 There are several Puranic texts related to the origin of Matrikas . Matsya Purana , Vamana Purana , Varaha Purana , Kurma Purana and the <unk> contain references to Matrikas , and this asserts their antiquity . 
 According to the Shumbha @-@ Nishumbha story of Devi Mahatmya , Matrikas appear as Shaktis from the bodies of the gods – Brahma , Shiva , Skanda , Vishnu , Indra ; having form of each , approached Chandika ( identified with Devi ) with whatever form , ornaments and vehicle the god possessed . In that form , they slaughter the demon army . Thus , the Matrikas are goddesses of the battlefield . They are described as assistants of Durga having sinister as well as propitious characteristics . After the battle , the Matrikas dance drunk with their victim 's blood . This description is repeated with little variation in Devi Bhagavata <unk> and Vamana Purana . The Devi @-@ Bhagavata Purana mentions three other goddesses , Shaktis of other gods in addition to Saptamatrikas making a group of 10 Matrikas . 
 According to latter episode of Devi Mahatmya , Durga created Matrikas from herself and with their help slaughtered the demon army . In this version , Kali is described as a Matrika , who sucked all the blood of demon Raktabija . Kali is given the epithet Chamunda in the text . When demon Shumbha challenges Durga to a single combat , she absorbs the Matrikas in herself and says that they are her different forms . In the Vamana Purana too , the Matrikas arise from different parts of Devi and not from male gods although they are described and named after the male deities . 
 In Matsya Purana , Shiva had created seven Matrikas to combat the demon Andhaka , who had the ability to duplicate from each drop of his blood that falls from him when he is wounded . The Matrikas drink up his blood and help Shiva defeat the demon . After the battle , the Matrikas begin a rampage of destruction by starting to devour other gods , demons and peoples of the world . Narasimha , Vishnu 's man @-@ lion incarnation , creates a host of thirty @-@ two benign goddesses who calm down the terrible , fire @-@ breathing Matrikas . Narasimha commanded the Matrikas to protect the world , instead of destroying it and thus be worshipped by mankind . At the end of the episode , Shiva 's terrible form Bhairava is enshrined with the images of the Matrikas at the place where the battle took place . This story is retold in Vishnudharmottara Purana . Vishnudharmottara Purana further relates them with vices or inauspicious emotions like envy , pride , anger etc . 
 In Varaha Purana , they are created from the distracted mind of goddess Vaishnavi , who loses her concentration while doing asceticism . They are described as lovely and act as the goddesses ' attendants on the battlefield . In Bhagavata Purana , when beings created by Vishnu are enlisted ; the Matrikas are listed with rakshasas ( demons ) , bhutas ( ghosts ) , <unk> , <unk> and other dangerous beings . In the same text , milkmaids offer a prayer for protection of the infant @-@ god Krishna from the Matrikas . 
 The Devi Purana ( 6th – 10th century ) mentions a group of sixteen matrikas and six other types of Matrikas mentioned , apart from the Saptamatrikas . It introduces the Loka @-@ <unk> ( mothers of the world ) , a term used in the Mahabharata , in the very first chapter . Kind to all creatures , the Matrikas are said to reside in various places for the benefit of children . The text paradoxically describes the Matrikas as being created by various gods like Brahma , Vishnu , Shiva , Indra as well as being their mothers . Devi Purana describe a pentad of Matrikas , who help Ganesha to kill demons . Further , sage <unk> is described as worshipping the <unk> ( the five mothers ) named Ambika ( Kaumari ) , <unk> , Chamunda , Brahmi and Vaishnavi and who have been established by Brahma ; for saving king Harishchandra from calamities . The Matrikas direct the sage to perform worship of <unk> ( interpreted as a Yantra or Mandala or a circular shrine to the Matrikas ) , established by Vishnu on the Vindhya mountains , by meat and ritual sacrifice . 
 = = = Mahabharata = = = 
 The Mahabharata narrates in different chapters the birth of warrior @-@ god Skanda ( the son of Shiva and Parvati ) and his association with the Matrikas – his adopted mothers . 
 In one version , Indra ( king of gods ) sends the goddesses called " mothers of the world " to kill him . However , upon seeing Skanda , instead they follow their maternal instincts and raise him . In the chapter Vana @-@ parva version , the Saptamatrikas are mentioned . Later in the Mahabharata ; when absorption of these indigenous goddesses in the Brahmanic pantheon was initiated , a standardized group of seven goddesses – the Saptamatrikas , Shaktis or powers of Brahmanic gods are mentioned as Brahmi , Maheshvari , Kumari , Vaishnavi , Varahi , Indrani and Chamunda . 
 In other accounts of Skanda 's birth in Mahabharata , eight ferocious goddesses emerge from Skanda , when struck by Indra 's Vajra ( thunderbolt ) . These are <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , which Skanda accepted as his mothers , who stole other children – a characteristic of the Matrikas . 
 Another account mentions the Maha @-@ matrikas ( the great mothers ) , a group of the wives of six of the <unk> ( 7 great sages ) , who were accused of being Skanda 's real mothers and thus abandoned by their husbands . They request Skanda to adopt them as his mothers . Skanda agrees and grants them two boons : to be worshipped as great goddesses and permission to torment children as long as they are younger than 16 years and then act as their protectors . These six goddesses as well as the Saptamatrikas are identified or associated with Vedic Krittikas , the constellation Pleiades . 
 The Shalya Parva of the Mahabharata mentions characteristics of a host of Matrikas , who serve Skanda . Ninety @-@ two of them are named but the text says there exist more . The Shalya Parva describes them as young , cheerful , most of them fair but having dangerous features like long nails and large teeth . They are said to fight like Indra in battles , invoking terror in minds of enemies ; speak different foreign tongues and lives in inaccessible places away from human settlements like crossroads , caves , mountains , springs , forests , riverbanks and cremation grounds . Notable among these lists of Matrikas is Putana , a goddess who tried to kill the infant Krishna ( an incarnation of Vishnu ) by suckling him with poisoned breast milk and consequently killed by Krishna . 
 = = Depictions = = 
 The textual description of Matrikas is generally awesome , frightening and ferocious . In the Mahabharata , all the seven mothers are described as fatal or serve as threats to foetuses or infants . They are described as living in trees , crossroads , caves and funeral grounds and they are terrible as well as beautiful . But , in the sculptural portrayal , they are depicted quite differently as protectors and benevolent mothers . They are armed with the same weapons , wear the same ornaments , and ride the same vahanas and carry the same banners as their corresponding male deities . 
 The <unk> are generally carved in relief on a rectangular stone slab in the sequential order of Brahmani , Maheshvari , Kumari , Vaishnavi , Varahi , Indrani and Chamunda , being flanked by two male figures – a terrible form of Shiva ( Virabhadra ) and his son Ganesha in both sides ( first – on their right and last – on their left ) . Thus , the Matrikas are considered Saivite goddesses . They are often depicted on the lintel slabs of the main door of a Shiva temple – mainly in <unk> @-@ <unk> region , with their respective mounts forming the pedestal . Sometimes , they are occupied by the couple Uma @-@ Maheshvara ( Parvati and Shiva ) . The earliest instance of their portrayal with Uma @-@ Maheshvara is at Desha <unk> , Nepal although now the Matrika images have withered away . The 12th century Sanskrit author <unk> mentions worship of Matrikas with Shiva in Kashmir , his work <unk> . 
 Three panels of Saptamatrikas appear near the Shiva cave at Udayagiri , Bhopal . They are also depicted in the Shaiva caves of Elephanta and Ellora ( Caves 21 , 14 , 16 and 22 ) . In sixth century Rameshvara cave ( Cave 21 ) at Ellora , " With the terrific aspect repressed entirely , the matrikas are depicted as benign and are worshipped in adulation . Sensuous , elegant , tender , beautiful adolescents , they are yet haughty and grand , quintessentially the <unk> . " <unk> ( Kumari ) is depicted with a child on her lap and even Varahi is depicted with a human head , rather than the usual boar one . In Ravana @-@ ka @-@ kai cave ( Cave 14 ) , each of the matrikas is with a child . In eighth century Kailash Temple ( cave 16 ) – dedicated to Shiva – of Rashtrakuta period , the Matrikas appear on the southern boundary of the temple . As the influence of Tantra rose , the fertility area and upper parts of body in the Matrika sculptures were stressed . 
 In each of the four depictions at Ellora , the matrikas are accompanied by Virabhadra , Ganesha and also on their left ( besides Ganesha ) by Kala ( Time personified or Death ) . The presence of Kala in form of a skeleton , seems to indicate the darker aspect of the matrikas ' nature . At Osian , the Matrikas is flanked by Ganesha and Kubera ( the treasurer of the gods and a devotee of Shiva ) while Virabhadra sits in the middle of the group . In Gupta and post @-@ Gupta art , like in 6th Century caves of <unk> , the Matrikas are accompanied by Shiva 's son Skanda . 
 = = Associations = = 
 = = = Yoginis = = = 
 Often the Matrikas are confused with the Yoginis , a group of sixty @-@ four or eighty @-@ one Tantric goddesses . In Sanskrit literature the Yoginis have been represented as the attendants or various manifestations of goddess Durga engaged in fighting with the demons Shumbha and Nishumbha , and the principal Yoginis are identified with the Matrikas . Other Yoginis are described as born from one or more Matrikas . The derivation of sixty @-@ four Yoginis from eight Matrikas became a common tradition , by mid- 11th century . The Mandala ( circle ) and chakra of Yoginis were used alternatively . The eighty @-@ one Yoginis evolve from a group of nine Matrikas , instead of seven or eight . The Saptamatrika ( Brahmi , Maheshvari , Kumari , Vaishnavi , Varahi , Indrani and Chamunda ) joined by Chandika and Mahalakshmi form the nine Matrika cluster . Each Matrika is considered to be a Yogini and is associated with eight other Yoginis resulting in the troupe of eighty @-@ one ( nine times nine ) . Thus , Yoginis are considered as manifestations or daughters of the Matrikas . 
 The yoginis also occupy an important place in Tantra , one of their chief temples in India are in ' <unk> @-@ <unk> ' and the ' <unk> <unk> ' ( the 64 yoginis ) temple near Bhubaneswar , Odisha . The rise of Yogini cult is also analogous to the rise of the Matrikas ' cult . Bhattacharyya sums it this way : " The growing importance of Shaktism [ of the matrikas and yoginis in the first millennium CE ] brought them into greater prominence and distributed their cult far and wide . [ ... ] The primitive Yogini cult was also revived on account of the increasing influenced of the cult of the Seven Mothers . " 
 = = = Script characters = = = 
 Matrika ( Sanskrit <unk> ) is also a term used to denote features of Indic scripts ( also in combination with <unk> , <unk> ) , though there is considerable variation in the precise interpretation of the term from one author to another . Sometimes it denotes a single character , the entire collection of characters ( an " alphabet " ) , the alphabetic " matrix " used as a collation tool , vowels in particular ( considered erroneous by Georg Bühler ) , or the sound of the syllable represented by the character . Various traditions identify the script matrikas with the personified divine Matrikas . 
 According to K.C. Aryan , the number of Matrikas is determined in the structure of the Devanagari alphabet . First is the ( A ) group which contains the vowels , then the ( Ka ) , ( Cha ) , ( Ta ) , ( ta ) , ( Pa ) , ( Ya ) and ( <unk> ) groups . The seven mother goddesses ( Saptamatrikas ) correspond to the seven consonant groups ; when the vocalic ( A ) group is added to it , the eight mother goddesses ( <unk> ) are obtained . The Shaktas hold that the Mothers preside over impurities ( mala ) and over sounds of the language . The Mothers were identified with fourteen vowels plus the <unk> and <unk> – making their number sixteen . 
 In Tantra , the fifty or fifty @-@ one letters including vowels as well as consonants from A to <unk> , of the Devanagari alphabet itself , the <unk> of bija , have been described as being the Matrikas themselves . It is believed that they are infused with the power of the Divine Mother herself . The Matrikas are considered to be the subtle form of the letters ( varna ) . These letters combined make up syllables ( pada ) which are combined to make sentences ( <unk> ) and it is of these elements that mantra is composed . It is believed that the power of mantra derives from the fact that the letters of the alphabet are in fact forms of the goddess . The 50 Matrika Kalas are given in the same account as follows : Nivritti , <unk> , Vidya , Shanti , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Para , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Ananta , <unk> , Riddhi , Smriti , Medha , Kanti , Lakshmi , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Siddhi , Jada , <unk> , Shanti , <unk> , Rati , <unk> , Varada , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Nidra , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Kriya , <unk> , <unk> , Pita , <unk> , <unk> , Ananta . Sometimes , the Matrikas represent a diagram written in the letter , believed to possess magical powers . 
 = = Worship = = 
 = = = In India = = = 
 According to Leslie C. Orr , the Saptamatrika , who first appeared in South India in the eighth century , had once temples dedicated exclusively to them , but the ninth century onwards , they were demoted to status of " deities of the entourage " ( <unk> devata ) of Shiva . Their images moved from the <unk> to corners of temple complexes and now they are as guardian deities in small village shrines . The Saptamatrikas are worshipped as <unk> ( the celestial nymphs ) in most South Indian Shiva temples . But the <unk> temple at <unk> in Tiruchirapalli district ( In 1909 called <unk> district ) is important in worship of the Matrikas . Here once stood a temple dedicated to the Saptamatrika , which was replaced by the present temple . 
 In India , shrines of the Saptamatrikas are located in " the wilderness " , usually near lakes or rivers , and are made of seven vermilion smeared stones . It is believed that the Matrikas kill fetuses and newborns unless pacified with bridal finery and prayers by women . Devdutt Pattanaik says : " The cult of the Seven Mothers is found all over India . ... Pregnant women and nursing mothers worship them . When these goddesses are angry , they make women barren and strike newborns with fatal fevers . When they are appeased , they ensure the health and happiness of children . " A prominent Saptamatrika temple is located near <unk> River , in <unk> . 
 The Saptamatrika images are worshipped by women on <unk> – new moon day , with the 64 yoginis represented by rice flour images or <unk> nuts . The goddesses are worshipped by ceremonial offerings of fruit and flower and mantras . 
 = = = In Nepal = = = 
 The Matrikas function both as city protectors and individual protectors in both Hinduism and Buddhism . The <unk> matrika are considered as <unk> ( grandmother goddesses , who are feared as bringer of disease and misfortune as well act as <unk> ) in the <unk> pantheon . Temples ( pithas i.e. seats ) of the ashta matrika built in and around Kathmandu are considered powerful places of worship . 
 The pithas are usually open @-@ air shrines , but may be closed structures too . In these pithas , the Matrikas are worshipped with their followers ( ganas ) in form of stone statues or natural stones , while in <unk> ( god @-@ houses ) in towns and villages , they are represented in brass images . The brass images ( <unk> @-@ murtis ) are paraded around town and placed at their respective pithas once every year . Like Vishnudharmottara Purana ( discussed in Legends ) , the Matrikas are considered as representing a vice and are worshipped by <unk> ( a pilgrimage around the pithas ) to free oneself from them . Though each pitha is primarily dedicated to a Matrika , the other Matrikas are also worshipped as subordinate deities . The pithas , which are " theoretically located at the outer boundaries of the city " are said to form a protective mandala around the city and assisted to a certain compass point . In other temples like the ones dedicated to <unk> Bhairava , the <unk> are worshipped as a circle of stones . In Bhaktapur , the <unk> are believed to the preserver goddesses of the city guarding the eight geometrical directions . Mary <unk> says " Not only do the <unk> guard the compass points but they are also regarded as regents of the sky . " Sometimes , they are paired with the Ashta Bhairava ( Eight aspects of Bhairava ) and sculpted on temple roofs or terraces . Nepali Buddhists worship the Matrikas as described in <unk> . 
 The Malla king of Nepal Srinivasa Malla built the Patan durbar ( court ) in 1667 AD and is believed to have seen the Matrikas dance in the durbar one night . The king ordered that the Ashta @-@ matrika be worshipped during the Ashwin Navaratri and cost is defrayed by the durbar . The custom continues til this day . Another festival <unk> is celebrated in Patan with animal sacrifices to the Matrikas . 
 In the Kathmandu valley of Nepal , the Ashta @-@ matrikas with a central village goddess are worshipped as protectors of the city or town . They are identified with the guardians of directions ( <unk> ) , places ( <unk> ) or lands ( <unk> ) , satiated by blood sacrifice . <unk> Buddhists associate the Matrikas with 24 human qualities , which can mastered by visiting three sets of eight Matrika pithas . 
 = = = Tantric worship = = = 
 The 7th century Sanskrit author Banabhatta mentions the propitiation of Matrikas by a Tantric ascetic in his <unk> . The text mentions use of <unk> ( mandala of the Matrikas ) or Yantra along with a special <unk> ( ritual ) to cure the ailing king . The text describes " young nobles [ .. ] ( of the king ) burning themselves with lamps to propitiate the Matrikas in a temple dedicated to the Matrikas ( <unk> @-@ <unk> ) . Banabhatta 's Kadambari , Bhasa 's <unk> , <unk> 's <unk> mention the ritual offerings of food and shrines of Matrikas at crossroads . Other offerings include flowers and clothes and meat and wine for some Matrikas . Tantric works like <unk> @-@ Tantra ( unknown date , author ) and <unk> discuss the worship of Matrikas as Shaktis or letters of the alphabet . A process of this worship , Matrika @-@ nyasa ( lit . " installation of the Mothers " ) , is described in Devi Gita , part of Devi Bhagavata Purana . It involves installation of powers of Matrikas – as letters of the alphabet – in one 's body , by " feeling the deity worshipped in different parts of the body " like head , face , anus and legs and reciting mantras . The <unk> @-@ matrika @-@ nyasa , a more specialized form of Matrika @-@ nyasa , combines the installation of " most powerful set of all letters ( Matrikas ) " with the seed syllable <unk> of Goddess Bhuvaneshvari . 
 Stone inscriptions of Tantric worship of The Matrikas are found in Gangadhar , Rajasthan ( by king <unk> 423 C.E. , identified as the first epigraphic evidence of Tantra worship ) ; in Bihar ( by Guptas – fifth century ) and in Deogarh , Uttar Pradesh ( by <unk> – sixth century ) . The Gangadhar <unk> deals with a construction to a shrine to Chamunda and the other Matrikas , " who are attended by Dakinis ( female demons ) " and rituals of daily Tantric worship ( <unk> ) like the ritual of Bali ( offering of grain ) . 
 The eight Matrikas are said to reside the second line of <unk> in Sri Chakra . They are frequently aligned with the Eight <unk> , as in <unk> Tantra . The <unk> Tantra ( 1 @.@ 33 ) explains that the primary function of Matrikas is to preside eight groups ( <unk> ) of letters of Devanagari alphabet , while <unk> states they issue originate from the vowels . 
 = = = Rituals and goals of worship = = = 
 The Natya Shastra ( 13 @.@ 66 ) recommends worship to Matrikas before setting up the stage and before dance performances . Indra declares in chapter 90 of Devi Purana that the Matrikas are the best among all deities and should be worshipped in cities , villages , towns and shields . Matrikas are generally to be worshipped on all occasions with Navagraha ( the nine planets ) and the <unk> ( Guardians of the directions ) and at night with the Goddess . 
 The Matsya Purana and Devi Purana prescribe that Matrika shrines should be north @-@ facing and be placed in northern part of a temple @-@ complex . The temples of the Matrikas are found earliest dating to the fourth century and from textual evidence , it is predicated that " there must be impressive shrines all over the [ Indian ] subcontinent " . Although circular <unk> and Chakras are mentioned in religious texts , most existing shrines are rectangular in nature . Pal speculates that earlier circular shrines , which open to the sky or under trees of less durable material were replaced by the Guptas in stone as rectangular shrines . 
 The Devi Purana mentions the Matrikas or Deva Shaktis ( powers of the gods ) as group of seven or more , who should be worshipped for Mukti ( liberation ) by all , but particularly kings for powers of domination . The Saptamatrika are worshipped for " personal and spiritual renewal " with Mukti as the ultimate goal as well as for powers to control and rule and earthly desires ( <unk> ) . Also important are the banners of the Saptamatrikas , which are carved outside the Udayagiri caves . These banners are called " Indra 's sisters " in the Devi Purana . The Purana lists them as : swan , bull , peacock , conch , discus , elephant and skeleton – attributes of the Matrikas . A king installing these banners is believed to get mukti and <unk> . As per the <unk> , Matrikas acted as the king 's tangible Shaktis and conferred the power to conquer and rule . 
 = Politics of Vietnam = 
 The politics of the Socialist Republic of Vietnam are defined by a single @-@ party socialist republic framework , where the President of Vietnam is the head of state and the Prime Minister of Vietnam is the head of government , in a one @-@ party system led by the Communist Party of Vietnam . Executive power is exercised by the government and the President of Vietnam . Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly of Vietnam ( Vietnamese : Quốc hội ) . The Judiciary is independent of the executive . The parliament adopted the current Constitution of Vietnam ; its fourth , on 15 April 1992 , and it has been amended once since then . 
 The ( <unk> <unk> nước ) is elected by the National Assembly for a five @-@ year term and acts as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Vietnam People 's Armed Forces and Chairman of the Council for Defence and Security . The government ( Chính phủ ) , the main executive state power of Vietnam , is headed by the Prime Minister , who has several Deputy Prime Ministers and several ministers in charge of particular activities . The executive branch is responsible for the implementation of political , economic , cultural , social , national defence , security and external activities of the state . The National Assembly is a unicameral legislative body . The National Assembly has 500 members , elected by popular vote to serve four @-@ year terms . The legislature is , according to the constitution , the highest organ of the state . Its powers includes the enactment and amendment of the constitution and laws ; the adoption of the government budget ; supervising the Government of Vietnam and other holders of public powers responsible to the National Assembly ; and appointing members of the judiciary . The Vietnamese constitution and legislation provide for regular elections for the office of the President of the Socialist Republic , the National Assembly and the People 's Councils . 
 Vietnam has , officially at least , an independent judicial system governed by the Constitution of Vietnam and national legislation enacted by National Assembly . The Supreme People 's Court ( <unk> <unk> Nhân dân <unk> cao ) is the highest court of appeal in Vietnam . There are other specialised courts in Vietnam , including the Central Military Court , the Criminal Court , the Civil Court and the Appeal Court . The Supreme People 's Procuracy observes the implementation of state organs and makes sure that Vietnamese citizens follow the law . 
 = = Legal framework = = 
 Vietnam is a one @-@ party socialist republic . The current Vietnamese state traces its direct linage back to the Democratic Republic of Vietnam ( North Vietnam ) and the 1945 August Revolution led by Hồ Chí Minh . The current constitution was adopted on 15 April 1992 by the National Assembly of Vietnam . There have been three other constitutions in Vietnamese history : the 1946 , 1959 and 1980 constitutions . The current constitution has been amended once , during the 10th session of the National Assembly on 25 December 2001 . The Communist Party of Vietnam , the leading non @-@ State organ , operates in accordance with the laws . Government powers in Vietnam are divided into legislative , executive and judiciary powers . Vietnam 's legal system is based upon socialist legality according to Article 12 of the constitution . 
 = = State ideology = = 
 Vietnam is a socialist republic with a one @-@ party system led by the Communist Party of Vietnam ( CPV ) . The CPV espouses Marxism – Leninism and Hồ Chí Minh Thought , the thoughts of the late Hồ Chí Minh . The two ideologies function as a firm ideological basis and serve as guidance for the activities of the Party and state . According to the Constitution , Vietnam is " in the period of transition to socialism " . Marxism – Leninism was introduced to Vietnam in the 1920s and 1930s , and Vietnamese culture has been led under the banner of patriotism and Marxism – Leninism . Hồ Chí Minh 's beliefs were not systematised during his life , nor quickly following his death . Trường Chinh 's biography of " Chairman Hồ " in 1973 emphasised his revolutionary policies . The thoughts of Hồ Chí Minh were systematised in 1989 , under the leadership of Nguyễn Văn Linh . Hồ Chí Minh Thought , alongside Marxism – Leninism , became the official ideology of the CPV and the state in 1991 . The CPV 's claim to legitimacy was retained following the collapse of communism in 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 by its commitment to the thoughts of Hồ Chí Minh , according to Sophie Quinn @-@ Judge . According to Pierre <unk> , the author of Ho Chi Minh : a Biography , the current state ideology is Hồ Chí Minh Thought , with Marxism – Leninism playing a secondary role . While some claim that Hồ Chí Minh Thought is used as a veil for the Party leadership since they , according to this version , have stopped believing in communism , however this is false when considering that Hồ Chí Minh was an avid supporter of Vladimir Lenin and the dictatorship of the proletariat . Others see Hồ Chí Minh Thought as a political umbrella term whose main function is to smuggle in non @-@ socialist ideas and policies without challenging socialist legality . 
 Since its foundation , the key ideology has been Marxism – Leninism , but since the introduction of a mixed economy in the late 1980s and 1990s , it has lost its monopolistic ideological and moral legitimacy . Marxism – Leninism , which is a class @-@ based ideology , lost its legitimacy because of the mixed economy . As became clear because of the Đổi Mới reforms , the Party could not base its rule on defending only the workers and the peasants , which was officially referred to as the " working class @-@ peasant alliance " . In the constitution introduced in 1992 , the State represented the " workers , peasants and intellectuals " . In recent years , the Party has stopped representing a specific class , but instead the " interests of the entire people " , which includes entrepreneurs . The final class barrier was removed in 2002 , when party members were allowed to engage in private activities . In the face of de @-@ emphasising the role of Marxism – Leninism , the Party has acquired a broader ideology , laying more emphasis on nationalism , <unk> and becoming the protector of tradition . 
 = = Communist Party = = 
 According to the official version , the Communist Party of Vietnam ( Vietnamese : Đảng Cộng <unk> Việt Nam ) is leading the Vietnamese people " in carrying out the country 's renovation , modernisation and industrialisation . " According to the Party 's statute , amended at the 9th National Congress on 22 April 2001 , the CPV was " established and trained by President Hồ Chí Minh , has led the Vietnamese people to carry out successfully the August Revolution , establishing the Democratic Republic of Việt Nam , now the Socialist Republic of Việt Nam , to defeat foreign invaders , to abolish the colonial and feudalist regime , to liberate and reunify the country , and then carry out the cause of renovation and socialist construction and firmly defend national independence . " It believes in socialist internationalism of the working class , and supports the " struggle for peace , national independence , democracy and social progress of the world 's people . " The CPV acts as the vanguard of the working people and the whole nation by representing their interests . Its aim is to create " a strong , independent , prosperous and democratic country with an equitable and civilized society , to realise socialism and ultimately , communism . " The Party 's ideological foundation is Marxism – Leninism and Hồ Chí Minh Thoughts . These ideologies guide the activities of the Party , while promoting " the nation 's traditions , and absorbing other nations ' essential ideas . " 
 The CPV is organised on the principles of democratic centralism . It practices " criticism , self @-@ criticism , and strict discipline " and pursues " collective leadership and individual responsibility , and promoting comradeship and solidarity in line with the Party 's political programs and statutes . " The CPV is subject to Vietnamese laws and the Constitution . It is the country 's ruling party , and promotes the " mastery of the people over the country " . The Party is under the supervision of the people . It is dependent on having the people contributing the party , by strengthening , uniting and leading the people in the revolutionary cause . The political system in Vietnam is led by the CPV , and it " leads , respects and promotes the role of the State , the Vietnamese Fatherland Front ( VFF ) and other socio @-@ political organisations . " 
 = = = Congress = = = 
 The National Congress is the party 's highest organ . The direction of the Party and the Government is decided at the National Congress , held every fifth year . The Central Committee is elected by the National Congress . Delegates vote on policies and candidates posts within the central party leadership . Following ratification of the decisions taken at the National Congress , the National Congress dissolves itself . The Central Committee , which is elected by the National Congress every fifth year , implements the decisions of the National Congress in the five @-@ year period . Since the Central Committee only meets twice a year , the Politburo implements the policies of the National Congress . 
 = = = Central Committee = = = 
 The Central Committee ( CC ) is the CPV 's most powerful institution . It delegates some of its powers to the Secretariat and the Politburo when it is not in session . When the Vietnam War ended in 1975 , the Vietnamese leadership , led by Lê Duẩn , began to centralise power . This policy continued until the 6th National Congress , when Nguyễn Văn Linh took power . Linh pursued a policy of economic and political decentralisation . The party and state bureaucracy opposed Linh 's reform initiatives ; because of this , Linh tried to win the support of provincial leaders . This caused the powers of the provincial chapters of the CPV to increase in the 1990s . The CPV lost its power to appoint or dismiss provincial @-@ level officials in the 1990s ; this is proven by the fact that Võ Văn Kiệt tried to wrestle this power back to the centre during the 1990s without success . These developments led to the <unk> of the Central Committee ; for example , more and more CC members have a background in provincial party work . Because of these changes , power in Vietnam has become increasingly devolved . The number of Central Committee members with a provincial background increased from a low of 15 @.@ 6 percent in 1982 to a high of 41 percent in 2001 . The current President of the Socialist Republic , Trương Tấn Sang , was directly elected from the provinces at the 8th Party Congress , held 1996 . Because of the devolution of power , the powers of the Central Committee have increased substantially ; for instance , when a two @-@ thirds majority of the Politburo voted in favour of retaining Lê Khả Phiêu as General Secretary ( the leader of Vietnam ) , the Central Committee voted against the Politburo 's motion and voted unanimously in favour of removing Lê Khả Phiêu from his post of General Secretary . The Central Committee did this because the majority of its members were of provincial background , or were working in the provinces ; because of this , these members were the first to feel the pinch when the economy began to stagnate during Lê Khả Phiêu 's rule . 
 The Central Committee elects the Politburo in the aftermath of the Party Congress . Since the full Central Committee meets only once a year , the Politburo functions as the Party 's leading collective decision @-@ making body . The Secretariat is also elected by the Central Committee , and is headed by the General Secretary . It is responsible for solving organisational problems and implementing the demands of the Central Committee . The Secretariat oversees the work of the Commissions of the Central Committee . 
 The following is the official order of precedence of the Politburo according to the 12th National Party Congress . 
 1st Nguyễn Phú Trọng – General Secretary of the Central Committee and Secretary of the Central Military Commission 
 2nd General Trần Đại Quang – President of Vietnam 
 3rd Nguyễn Thị Kim <unk> – Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National Assembly 
 4th Ngô Xuân <unk> – General , Minister of National Defense 
 5th General Tô Lâm – Senior Lieutenant , Minister of Public Security 
 6th Nguyễn Xuân Phúc – Prime Minister 
 7th Nguyễn Thiện Nhân – President of the Vietnam Fatherland Front 
 8th Đinh Thế <unk> Executive Secretary of the Secretariat , Chairman of the Theoretical Council and member of the Secretariat 
 9th Phạm Minh Chính – Head of the PCC Commission on Organization 
 10th <unk> Thị <unk> - Deputy Chairwoman of the National Assembly and Deputy Secretary of the National Assembly Party Caucus 
 11th Vương Đình <unk> – Deputy Prime Minister 
 12th Trần Quốc <unk> – Head of the PCC Commission on Inspection and member of the Secretariat 
 13th Phạm Bình Minh – Deputy Prime Minister , Minister of Foreign Affairs 
 14th Trương Thị Mai – Head of the Central Commission of Popularization 
 15th Trương Hòa Bình – Deputy Prime Minister , Deputy Secretary of the Government – Party Committee 
 16th Nguyễn Văn Bình – Head of the PCC Commission on Economics 
 17th Võ Văn <unk> - Head of the Central Commission of Propaganda 
 18th Đinh La Thăng - Secretary of the Ho Chi Minh city Party Committee 
 19th Hoàng Trung Hải - Secretary of the Ha Noi city Party Committee 
 Secretariat : 
 1st Nguyễn Phú Trọng – General Secretary of the Central Committee and Secretary of the Central Military Commission 
 2nd Đinh Thế Huynh - permanent member of the Party Central Committee ’ s Secretariat 
 3rd Trần Quốc <unk> - Head of the PCC Commission on Inspection 
 4th Phạm Minh Chính <unk> of the PCC Commission on Organization 
 5th Võ Văn <unk> - Head of the Central Commission of Propaganda of the Communist Party of Vietnam 
 6th Trương Thị Mai - Head of the Central Commission of Popularization of the Communist Party of Vietnam 
 7th Lương Cường - Senior Lieutenant , Chief of the General Department of Politics under the Vietnam People 's Army 
 8th Nguyễn Văn <unk> - Head of the Central Office of the Communist Party of Vietnam 
 9th Nguyễn Hòa Bình - Chief Justice of the Supreme People 's Court 
 = = Fatherland Front = = 
 The Vietnamese Fatherland Front ( VFF ) is an umbrella group of pro @-@ communist movements . According to Article 9 of the Constitution , the VFF and its members constitute " the political base of people 's power " . The state must create a favorable environment for the VFF and its member organisations . The VFF is a voluntary mass organisation of political , socio @-@ political and social organisations and " individuals from all classes , social strata , ethnic groups , and religions , including overseas Vietnamese . " Its main objectives are to gather and build a people unity bloc , " strengthen the people 's political and spiritual consensus , encourage the people to promote their mastership , to implement the CPV 's guidelines and policies , and to abide by the Constitution and laws . " The VFF is governed on the principles of " democratic consensus , coordinated and united action . " Its organisation has been modelled after the state structure , and the VFF has its own independent statute . Notable member organisations of the VFF include the General Confederation of Labour , the Hồ Chí Minh Communist Youth Union and the Veteran Association , among others . 
 = = Executive = = 
 The President of the Republic ( Vietnamese : <unk> <unk> nước Việt Nam ) is the head of state and head of government , elected to a five @-@ year term by the National Assembly , and is limited by the Constitution to a maximum tenure of 2 terms . In addition to being the Chairman of the Council for Defence and Security and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Vietnam People 's Armed Forces , the president has the procedural duty of appointing or dismissing of the Vice Presidents , Prime Minister , Deputy Chief Judge of the Supreme People 's Court and Head of the Supreme People 's Procuracy , with the consent of the National Assembly through a simple majority vote . The President has influence on foreign policy , and has the right to declare a state of emergency and to declare war . The most recent presidential elections were held on 25 July 2011 , when Trương Tấn Sang , the incumbent , was re @-@ elected by the deputies ( members ) of the National Assembly . 
 The government ( Vietnamese : Chính phủ ) is the executive arm of the National Assembly and the highest administrative body of the Vietnamese state . It is headed by the prime minister and consists of deputy prime ministers , ministers and other members . The government is a unified administration responsible for the implementation of political , economic , cultural , social , national defence , security and external activities of the state . It is also responsible for the effectiveness of the state apparatus itself from the top down , stabilisation in the country and the observance of the constitution . As with the President , the government is elected by the deputies of the National Assembly for a five @-@ year term . The Prime Minister of the Socialist Republic is elected or dismissed by the National Assembly , at the request of the president . Since 7 April 2016 , the prime minister of the government has been Nguyễn Xuân Phúc . 
 = = Legislative = = 
 The National Assembly ( Vietnamese : Quoc hoi ) is a unicameral legislative body , and is governed on the basis of democratic centralism . It is the highest representative organ and the highest state organ . The National Assembly is the only organ vested with constitutional and legislative powers . It is responsible for fundamental domestic and foreign policies , socio @-@ economic policies , defence and security issues , and it exercises supreme control over all state activities . Deputies ( members ) of the National Assembly are elected through secret ballots in democratic elections which are held every fifth year . The National Assembly is convened twice a year , and its Standing Committee represents it between sessions . 
 The membership of the Standing Committee consists of the chairman , deputy chairmen and other members ; these members are elected by the National Assembly . Standing Committee members cannot simultaneously be members of the Government . Members work on a full @-@ time basis , and their terms of office correspond with the term of the National Assembly . The Standing Committee continues to function until a new National Assembly is elected . According to the constitution , the Standing Committee is responsible for 12 duties . Of these , the most important are the powers to announce , convene and chair the National Assembly sessions , to interpret the constitution , laws and ordinances , and to issue ordinances on those matters assigned by the National Assembly . It supervises and guides the People 's Councils and their activities , and directs , regulates and coordinates the activities of the Ethnic Council and the committees of the National Assembly . 
 There are seven committees of the National Assembly . Committee membership is determined by the National Assembly . They are responsible for the studying and examination of bills , legislative initiatives , drafts of ordinances and other drafts of legal documents and reports assigned by the National Assembly or the Standing Committee . The committees provide the National Assembly and its Standing Committee with their opinions on the legislative programme . The committees supervise and conduct investigations within their respective competency and exercise powers which are stipulated by law . The National Assembly elects the Ethnic Council , which consists of a Chairman , Deputy Chairmen and other members . The Ethnic Council studies and recommends actions to the National Assembly ; the National Assembly has to consult with the Ethnic Council before issuing any decisions on ethnic policy . The Chairman of the Ethnic Council has to attend meetings of the Government which concern ethnic policy . The powers of the Ethnic Council are comparable to those of the committees . 
 = = Judiciary = = 
 The Vietnamese judicial system is based upon Socialist legality . The country 's highest judicial organ is the Supreme People 's Court ( SPC ) . The composition of the SCP includes the Chief Justice , Deputy Chief Judge , jurors and court secretaries . The structure of the SCP ( from the top down ) is as follows : Council of Judges , Commission of Judges , Central Military Court , Criminal Court , Civil Court , Appeal Court , and assisting staff . The Chief Judge of the SCP is elected by the National Assembly , while the President of the Socialist Republic has the power to nominate and dismiss the Deputy Chief Judge and judges at the Chief Judge 's request . The Central Committee of the Vietnamese Fatherland Front introduces People 's Jurors , which are in turn appointed by the Standing Committee of the National Assembly . According to the Government Web Portal , the operating principles of the courts are , during hearings , that the " judges and jurors are independent and only obey the laws . " Justice and democracy within the system is supposedly ensured because legal decision @-@ making is an open process . Jurors play an essential role , and defenders have the right of defence and to hire a lawyer . 
 The Supreme People 's Prosecutor ( SPP ) , the Vietnamese equivalent to an attorney general , observes the implementation process of the Ministries , ministerial @-@ level agencies , government organs , local authorities , social and economic organisations , the armed forces , security forces and the Vietnamese citizens in general . The SPP respects the Constitution and state laws , practices public prosecution as stated by the law and ensures law enforcement . The head of the SPP is elected , dismissed , or removed from office by a proposal of the President . The Deputy Heads , prosecutors and inspectors appointed by the SPP head can be dismissed by the President on the Head 's request . 
 The SPC is the highest court for appeal and review , and it reports to the National Assembly , which controls the judiciary 's budget and confirms the president 's nominees to the SPC and SPP . The SPP issues arrest warrants , sometimes retroactively . Below the SPC are district and provincial people 's courts , military tribunals , and administrative , economic and labor courts . The people 's courts are the courts of first instance . The Ministry of Defence ( MOD ) has military tribunals , which have the same rules as civil courts . Military judges and assessors are selected by the MOD and the SPC , but the SPC has supervisory responsibility . Although the constitution provides for independent judges and lay assessors ( who lack administrative training ) , the United States Department of State maintains that Vietnam lacks an independent judiciary , in part because the Communist Party selects judges and vets them for political reliability . Moreover , the party seeks to influence the outcome of cases involving perceived threats to the state or the party 's dominant position . In an effort to increase judicial independence , the government transferred local courts from the Ministry of Justice to the SPC in September 2002 . However , the Department of State saw no evidence that the move actually achieved the stated goal . Vietnam 's judiciary is also hampered by a shortage of lawyers and by rudimentary trial procedures . The death penalty often is imposed in cases of corruption and drug trafficking . 
 = = Elections = = 
 Article 6 of the Constitution states that " The people make use of state power through the agency of the National Assembly and the People 's Councils , which represent the will and aspirations of the people , are elected by them and responsible to them " . Deputies ( members ) of the National Assembly are directly elected on a democratic basis through secret ballots . All citizens who are 18 or older , regardless of ethnic group , gender , social position , belief , religion , level of education , occupation or length of residency have the right to vote , the exceptions being the mentally disabled and those people who have been deprived of the right to vote by law . People aged 21 or older have the right to stand as a candidate at elections . Three election commissions have been established to manage elections ; at the central level is the Election Council , at the provincial level and in centrally @-@ run cities the Election Committee is responsible for election monitoring and the Election Commission is responsible for election monitoring at constituencies . 
 The current 500 members of the National Assembly were elected during the 2011 parliamentary election , and they have a five @-@ year term . Despite foreign criticism , it is generally believed that the National Assembly has become more powerful in recent years . The last election was held , according to the authorities , in a democratic , fair , lawful and safe manner and was considered a success . Voter turnout was 99 @.@ 51 percent ; nearly 62 million people voted . In their respective constituencies , Nguyễn Phú Trọng , the General Secretary , was elected to the National Assembly with 85 @.@ 63 percent of the votes , Prime Minister Nguyễn Tấn Dũng was elected with 95 @.@ 38 percent and President Trương Tấn Sang was elected with 80 @.@ 19 percent . Outside the ruling troika , it was Nguyễn Xuân Phúc , the Chairman of the Government Office , who was elected with the highest margin , with 94 @.@ 59 percent of the votes . The number of self @-@ nominated candidates was four times higher than the previous election . Fifteen out of the 182 candidates nominated by the central government and the central party leadership were defeated in the elections . Lê Thị Thu Ba , a member of the Party 's Central Committee and Chairman of the Committee of Law during the 12th National Assembly ( 2007 – 2011 ) , was not re @-@ elected to the National Assembly . Several capitalists were elected to the assembly , but due to the socialist ideology of the state , they are not allowed to sit on the assembly 's Committee on Economy and Budget . 
 Nguyễn Sinh Hùng , the Chairman of the National Assembly , nominated Trương Tấn Sang for the Presidency . 487 deputies of the National Assembly , meaning 97 @.@ 4 percent , voted in favour of Trương Tấn Sang . In his victory speech , Trương Tấn Sang said , " I pledge to improve my moral quality and study the example of the late President Hồ Chí Minh to cooperate with the government to bring Vietnam to become a fully industrialized country by 2015 . " 
 = = = Latest parliamentary election = = = 
 = = = Latest presidential election = = = 
 = = Local government = = 
 Provinces and municipalities are subdivided into towns , districts and villages . Provinces and municipalities are centrally controlled by the national government . Towns , districts and villages are locally accountable to some degree through elected people 's councils . Certain cities and provinces are under direct control of the central government . The provinces are divided into districts , provincial cities and towns ; cities under direct rule are divided into towns , urban and rural districts . In turn , the district is divided into communes and <unk> . In the words of Article 118 of the Constitution , the " provincial city and the town are divided into wards and communes ; the urban district is divided into wards . " The establishment of People 's Council and People 's Committees is determined by law . 
 In the provinces , the People 's Council is the " local organ of State power " , and it represents the " aspirations , and mastery of the people " . The People 's Council is democratically elected , and is accountable to the people and to superior organs of the state . It must pass resolutions which are formal orders of superior organs of state , and it acts on behalf of the constitution . The People 's Council decides the plans for socio @-@ economic development , decides the budget and is responsible for national defence and security at the local level . The deputy ( member ) of the People 's Council acts on the behalf of the people , and has the right to make proposals to the People 's Council and other local State organs . In turn , officials of these local organs have the responsibility to receive and to examine them . The People 's Council have to elect a People 's Committee , the executive organ of the People 's Council . It is the People 's Committee which has the responsibility to implement " the Constitution , the law , the formal written orders of superior State organs and the resolutions of the People 's Council . " The People 's Committee is headed by a Chairman , who acts as the body 's leader . All decisions of the People 's Committee are taken through a collegial decision @-@ making process , and have to " conform to the will of the majority . " The chairman has the power to annul decisions of lower standing organs . Local officials of the Vietnamese Fatherland Front , its local head , and officials from other mass organisations in the locality have the right to attend the meetings of the People 's Council and the People 's Committee if relevant problems are discussed . According to Article 125 of the constitution , " The People 's Council and the People 's Committee shall make regular reports on the local situation in all fields to the Fatherland Front and the mass organisations ; shall listen to their opinions and proposals on local power building and socio @-@ economic development ; shall cooperate with them in urging the people to work together with the State for the implementation of socio @-@ economic , national @-@ defence , and security tasks in the locality . " 
 = = = List of provinces = = = 
 = Drushyam = 
 Drushyam ( English : Visual ) is a 2014 Indian Telugu @-@ language thriller film directed by Sripriya and jointly produced by Daggubati Suresh Babu and Rajkumar Sethupathi . It is a remake of Jeethu Joseph 's 2013 Malayalam film Drishyam and features Daggubati Venkatesh , Meena and Nadhiya reprising the respective roles played by Mohanlal , Meena and Asha Sarath in the original . 
 The film tells the story of Rambabu , a middle @-@ class cable TV operator , and his family . They come under suspicion when Varun , the son of the Inspector @-@ general of police ( IG ) , goes missing soon after harassing Rambabu 's daughter . The rest of the film reveals how Varun disappeared and what Rambabu does to keep his family from going to prison . 
 The production work of Drushyam was undertaken by Suresh <unk> and George Pious . Music for the film was composed by Sharreth . The cinematography was led by S. Gopal Reddy and the editing by Marthand K. Venkatesh . Principal photography commenced on 8 March 2014 and lasted three months . It was shot primarily in Kerala , similar to the original , and also filmed at Araku , <unk> , Vizianagaram and Hyderabad . The post @-@ production phase ended after one month . Drushyam released on 11 July 2014 to positive feedback from critics . It went on to become one of the highest @-@ grossing Telugu films of the year , collecting a worldwide distributor share of ₹ 200 million . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Rambabu is a cable network operator who lives in <unk> , a village located in the Araku region , with his wife Jyothi and their daughters – Anju , a twelfth @-@ grade student , and Anu , who is in secondary school . By virtue of his job , Rambabu spends a lot of time watching films in multiple languages . He does so with so much interest that he makes major life decisions by subconsciously taking on the behaviours of characters from these films . 
 During a school trip to a camp , a nude photograph of Anju is taken on a cell phone camera hidden in the bathroom . The culprit is revealed as Varun , the son of the Inspector @-@ general of police , Geetha . When Varun meets Anju later to blackmail her , she breaks his cell phone and inadvertently kills him . With her mother 's help , she hides his body in a compost pit that was originally made for manure . Unbeknownst to them , this is witnessed by Anu . Jyothi tells Rambabu about the incident and he devises a plan to save his family from imprisonment . He gets rid of the broken cell phone . However , as he is disposing of Varun 's car , Rambabu is seen by a corrupt police constable named Veerabhadram , who holds a grudge against him . Rambabu then takes his family out on a trip to Vizianagaram , where they attend a religious meeting , watch a movie and dine at a restaurant . 
 Meanwhile , Geetha starts an investigation when she realises that her son has gone missing . After a preliminary investigation , Geetha calls Rambabu and his family in for questioning . Rambabu , predicting that this would happen , coaches his family on how to present their alibi . As a result , when questioned individually , their responses are consistent . They also produce the restaurant receipt , the movie tickets and the tickets of the bus journey as proof of their alibi . The statements of the people who own the establishments that the family visited in Vizianagaram further solidify Rambabu 's alibi . However , after a thorough investigation , Geetha realises that Rambabu had acquired the tickets and the receipt on the day of the incident , made an acquaintance with the owners , and had only actually taken the trip a day later with his family . 
 Geetha arrests Rambabu and his family , and Veerabhadram uses force to beat the truth out of them . As Rambabu , Jyothi and Anju are severely injured , Geetha 's husband , Prabhakar , asks her to put a stop to this . Out of fear , Anu reveals what she saw and Varun 's friend describes the transgression at the camp . After digging up the compost pit , the police find the carcass of a pig instead of Varun 's body , indicating that Rambabu had already moved it . Jyothi 's brother , Rajesh , and her father call the media and Anu complains to them about Veerabhadram 's ill @-@ treatment of her family . After Veerabhadram <unk> Rambabu and his relatives , he is beaten by the local people who learn about him from the media . Rambabu 's goodwill remains intact and all the locals extend their support to him . Veerabhadram is suspended , the remaining staff transferred , and Geetha resigns from her post as IG . 
 Before leaving for the United States , Geetha and Prabhakar meet Rambabu to apologise for their deeds , and express their hope that Varun will return some day . But Rambabu indirectly tells them that he killed Varun to save his family and asks them to forgive him . 
 The film comes to an end with Rambabu signing a register at the newly constructed <unk> police station . As he leaves , a flashback shows him during the construction of the station with a shovel in hand , indicating that Varun 's body is hidden in the building 's foundation . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Rajkumar Sethupathi acquired the rights to remake Jeethu Joseph 's Drishyam ( 2013 ) , which starred Mohanlal , Meena and Asha Sarath in the lead roles . Following Kamal Haasan 's suggestion , Sethupathi chose Daggubati Venkatesh to play the lead role in the Telugu version . Haasan previously met Venkatesh in Goa and advised him to act in a film that challenges him as an actor . Venkatesh , along with his brother Daggubati Suresh Babu , then watched Drishyam . 
 Suresh Babu joined Sethupathi as a co @-@ producer , while Sripriya was approached to direct the film . This was Venkatesh 's first collaboration with a female director . It was also his first non @-@ commercial film . Based on Sripriya 's and Sethupathi 's previous collaboration with Suresh <unk> and George Pius 's Wide Angle Creations ( on Malini 22 Palayamkottai ) , the production house was given the contract for this film . 
 After Drishyam 's Telugu remake was confirmed , Haasan called Venkatesh to tell him that he was happy that Venkatesh was going to reprise Mohanlal 's role from the original . After considering other potential titles , Drushyam was finalised because of its relevance to the film 's storyline . ' Darling ' Swami and the Paruchuri brothers wrote the dialogues . The film had its formal launch ceremony on 21 February 2014 in Hyderabad . Sharreth composed the music . S. Gopal Reddy took charge of the film 's cinematography and Marthand K. Venkatesh its editing . With this film , Suresh Productions completed its golden jubilee in Telugu cinema as a production and distribution company . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Meena reprised her role from the original , marking her comeback to Telugu cinema after sixteen years . It was her fifth collaboration with Venkatesh . She called her character " innocent , vulnerable , emotional , sweet , funny and strong all at the same time " , adding that she was initially sceptical to play a mother to adolescents because Telugu film sensibilities were different from that of Malayalam ones , but accepted it due to the script 's novelty . Nadhiya was selected to play Asha Sarath 's role of a police officer from the original . She confirmed later that she would be playing an Inspector General of Police , which is a role she found being " almost like a role of a lioness that is trying to protect her family and yet is ferocious from the inside " , calling it a " challenging and different " one . 
 A casting call was announced by Suresh Productions for the roles of Venkatesh 's daughters in the film . They were looking for a girl aged 14 – 17 years to play the role of the elder daughter named Anjali , and another aged 8 – 12 years to play her younger sibling , Anu . Esther Anil was confirmed to reprise her role as the younger sister . <unk> Jayakumar , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old science student from Bangalore , was selected to play the role of elder sister in the film . This happened when a Malayalam filmmaker visited her dance performance in Thiruvananthapuram , and was struck by her expressions and photogenic features . He suggested that she pursue a career in the film industry . She referred to her character as a simple and vulnerable girl , who gets exploited . Her family is her world and she is particularly attached to her father . Kalabhavan Shajon was initially reported to reprise his role of a corrupt police officer from the original , but Ravi Kale was chosen instead . 
 Chaitanya Krishna confirmed his inclusion in the cast by the end of March 2014 . In late April 2014 , Naresh was chosen to play an important role in the film , which he later described as one of the best roles of his career . Roshan Basheer was selected to reprise the role of Varun , the son of the Inspector General of Police , in the remake . He did not feel that he was being typecast and he accepted the role , adding that it is not often that a Malayalam actor gets a chance to act in the Telugu films . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During the pre @-@ production phase , Venkatesh allocated bulk dates and the film 's shoot was expected to be completed in a single schedule . Principal photography began in the locales of Kerala on 8 March 2014 . Filming continued in the Idukki district of Kerala , where the original was primarily shot . The film 's spokesperson told IANS that most of the film would be shot in Kerala , at locations similar to the original , except for a few scenes . Sripriya chose Kerala for two reasons – its greenery , and to avoid local interference from crowds that would ensue if shot in Andhra Pradesh , where Venkatesh is a star . After filming crucial scenes at a few villages near Kochi for more than three weeks , the film 's unit shot at Araku and <unk> beginning mid April 2014 . Subsequently , they planned to continue at Vizianagaram . 
 The film 's shooting reached its final stages at Hyderabad in late May 2014 , and the post @-@ production phase began . A statement from the film 's unit on 8 June 2014 stated that the principal photography had been wrapped up and post production work was under way , targeting a July 2014 release . 
 The violence in the pre @-@ climax sequences was toned down to match the sensibilities of the Telugu audience after Venkatesh expressed scepticism as to whether the audience would accept him getting beaten up badly in the police station . During set construction for the police station and the house in the film , the producer and the director wanted to get rid of some coconut trees . However , art director Vivek managed to erect those sets without cutting down any trees . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was initially planned to be released on or after 15 August 2014 , to coincide with the Independence Day of India . The release plans were advanced to July 2014 because a lack of new releases that month provided an opportunity to cash in . The release date was later finalised as 11 July 2014 . The final copy of the film was sent to the Central Board of Film Certification on 7 July 2014 for censoring . 
 A special preview was held two days before the film 's release , on 9 July 2014 , with the intention of getting feedback from trial audiences . It was hosted as an " Audience and Media Research screening " at a city multiplex in Hyderabad . This was a first @-@ of @-@ its @-@ kind event in Telugu cinema . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 A press release on 6 July 2014 stated that Suresh Productions and <unk> Media , a South Indian digital content and entertainment company , would distribute the film overseas . Errabus distributed the film in the United Kingdom . It released in London 's renovated and then @-@ full @-@ digital East Ham Boleyn Cinema with a 7 @.@ 1 sound system . The film was released on 64 screens across the United States , with premieres on 10 July 2014 . It was also released in the overseas markets of Singapore , Malaysia and Tanzania in East Africa . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's first look poster featured a photograph of Venkatesh , Meena , <unk> Jayakumar and Esther with a police station in the backdrop . The title had the tag line " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( Visuals may be deceptive ) . A promotional campaign titled " My best memories with my father " was launched on 13 June 2014 by Venkatesh and his father D. Ramanaidu . Participants were directed to submit their best memories along with supporting pictures to a marketing page on Facebook , or via email , with the winner being granted an opportunity to meet Venkatesh in person . The film 's team also invited Twitter users to upload photos of themselves with their fathers to celebrate " Fathers ' Day Week " , beginning 15 June 2014 . A selfie featuring Venkatesh and his son Arjun was released as well . 
 More than a week later , on 22 June 2014 , the filmmakers launched a jigsaw puzzle on Facebook as part of the film 's promotion , featuring several scenes related to the film . The game enabled users to win prizes every day . The idea behind this jigsaw puzzle was to " escalate the drama and the suspense of the film " . The film 's theatrical trailer , 110 seconds long , was released on 3 July 2014 . Around ₹ 30 — 40 million were spent on the film 's promotions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 According to International Business Times India , the film received positive feedback from critics . Ranjani Rajendra of The Hindu called the film a " compelling thriller that does not disappoint " , adding that what the film " boils down to is two sets of parents desperate to ensure their children 's wellbeing and makes for a good watch " . Sandhya Rao of Sify stated , " For the first time in Telugu cinema do we see such an intense film . After a long time we are seeing a film that comes with nail @-@ biting sequences . Superior performance , incredible screenplay and exhilarating suspense ! " She called Drushyam a " highly recommended watch " . 
 Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . He stated that the film is not " a regular song , dance and action entertainer . It is completely a screenplay @-@ based film where every character plays an important role . The story showcases family bonding and also takes one on a thrilling ride " , adding that the film 's story " calls for some brilliant acting and the cast has done justice to their roles " . Hemanth Kumar of The Times of India also gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and called it an " ode to classic style of filmmaking — clinical in its approach and hits just about the perfect notes to keep the audience hooked , without much gimmickry " , adding that the film 's biggest achievement is that it " respects our intelligence and reinforces the principle that story @-@ telling isn 't a dying art " . 
 Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and called it a " good suspense thriller which will be a treat for family audience " , and stated " the second half of the film is simply superb and the suspense element makes you sit on the edge of the seat and watch the movie biting your nails . The climax is also good and it makes the viewers to walk out of the cinema hall with a contented heart " . IndiaGlitz gave the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and stated , " The biggest strength of Drushyam is not its genre , but the fact that an excellent screenplay has been written around too less characters for a movie of this genre and without sub plots and the like " , and added that " Drushyam is edge @-@ of @-@ the @-@ seat , but it doesn 't demand the audience to connect the threads . An unconventional film , this film is refreshing as it is not formulaic " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film collected a distributor share of approximately ₹ 15 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 230 @,@ 000 ) at the AP / Telangana box office on its first day . It held strong on the second day , collecting almost 80 % of the first day 's share , resulting in a two @-@ day total of ₹ 27 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 410 @,@ 000 ) . By the end of its first weekend , Drushyam collected a total of approximately ₹ 46 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 690 @,@ 000 ) at the AP / Telangana box office . Trade analyst Trinath told IANS that the film in fact collected ₹ 52 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 780 @,@ 000 ) in its opening weekend . 
 In the United States , the film collected ₹ 45 @.@ 08 lakh ( US $ 66 @,@ 989 ) in two days , including preview shows , which trade analyst Taran Adarsh referred to as " a good start " . By the end of its first weekend in the US , Drushyam collected a total of approximately ₹ 13 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 206 @,@ 554 ) . With this , the film managed to surpass the second weekend collections of Bobby Jasoos ( released a week earlier ) , but failed to beat the first weekend collections of Humpty Sharma Ki Dulhania ( released on the same date ) . 
 By the end of its first week , the film collected ₹ 95 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 4 million ) nett at the global box office . At the ten @-@ day mark , global collections rose to ₹ 131 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 9 million ) , with ₹ 103 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 5 million ) earned at the AP / Telangana box office and the remaining ₹ 27 @.@ 5 million ( US $ 410 @,@ 000 ) from markets throughout the rest of India and overseas . The film collected a total share of ₹ 152 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 3 million ) at the global box office in two weeks and was declared " a hit venture " . By the end of its lifetime , the film collected a total share of ₹ 200 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 0 million ) at the global box office and was declared " a super hit " . With this , Drushyam became one of the highest grossing Telugu films of 2014 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film 's satellite rights were sold to Gemini TV of Sun Network for ₹ 55 million in mid @-@ July 2014 . Suresh Babu revised the sale to ₹ 200 million , as a three film package including Gopala Gopala and <unk> <unk> , both co @-@ produced by him . Drushyam had its global television premiere on 15 February 2015 at 6 p.m. IST . It registered a TRP rating of 18 @.@ 61 which was reportedly one of the best ever in the history of Telugu cinema . In comparison , two other successful Telugu films of 2014 , Race Gurram and Manam , which incidentally also aired on Gemini TV , registered a TRP rating of 15 @.@ 6 and 15 @.@ 7 respectively . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Sharreth composed two songs for the film . The lyrics for both of them were penned by Chandrabose . The songs were released on 5 July 2014 by Lahari Music , through their official channel at YouTube . 
 Sandhya Rao of Sify.com stated in her review that the songs and background score " gel well with the film " , while Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment said that the background score was " amazing " . 
 = = Character chart of Drishyam and its remakes = = 
 = Unending = 
 " Unending " is the season finale of the tenth season and series finale of the science fiction television series Stargate SG @-@ 1 , and the show 's two @-@ hundred sixteenth episode overall . Written and directed by Robert C. Cooper , the episode originally premiered in the United Kingdom on Sky One on March 13 , 2007 , and in the United States on June 22 , 2007 on the Sci Fi Channel . The episode attracted approximately 2 @.@ 2 million viewers on its American broadcast , a ratings success for the Sci Fi Channel . 
 The episode begins with the mass suicide of the Asgard race , who try to preserve their legacy by giving all of their accumulated knowledge and technology to the SG @-@ 1 team and the crew of the Earth ship Odyssey . When the ship is attacked by Ori warships , Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Samantha Carter creates a time dilation field that speeds up time within the ship , and it takes fifty years until a defense against the Ori weapons can be found . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The members of SG @-@ 1 and General Hank Landry ( Beau Bridges ) are travelling on the Earth ship Odyssey to the Asgard home world , Orilla , when the Asgard Thor beams aboard . He reveals that after millennia of genetic manipulation , a disease has brought his race very close to extinction , and SG @-@ 1 accepts his offer to upload the sum of all Asgard knowledge into Odyssey as a way to preserve the Asgard legacy after their mass suicide . However , Orilla and Odyssey are soon attacked by Ori warships . Orilla erupts with huge explosions , and after Odyssey escapes to the next planet with a Stargate and beams the bulk of its crew down , the Ori fire a final energy beam upon the ship . Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Samantha Carter ( Amanda Tapping ) activates a localized time dilation field that makes time look frozen outside the field to give SG @-@ 1 and Landry time to find a defense . 
 During the initial months on board , Vala Mal Doran ( Claudia Black ) repeatedly tries to seduce Daniel Jackson ( Michael Shanks ) . Daniel finally confronts Vala for what he believes to be her insincerity , teasing , and mocking of him . Vala 's upset reaction makes Daniel realize the honesty of her feelings , and they share a passionate embrace . As the years pass , each team member attempts to deal with the isolation . General Landry develops a gardening hobby ; Carter learns how to play the cello ; Daniel continues the translation of Asgard information in the database and develops his relationship with Vala ; and Cameron Mitchell ( Ben Browder ) and Teal 'c ( Christopher Judge ) exercise and train while Mitchell is growing more frustrated and angry . After many years , General Landry succumbs to old age and dies . 
 After fifty years Carter has devised a way to reverse time within a localized field , however the Odyssey 's power source ( ZPM ) is almost completely depleted from maintaining the time dilation field for fifty years . Mitchell however hypothesizes that the power of the Ori energy beam could provide the required energy to reverse the time . This , however , will mean the loss of any memories of the last fifty years ; additionally , whoever volunteers will remain at their advanced age . Teal 'c , who as a Jaffa has a much longer lifespan than the other team members , volunteers to remain behind and perform the rescue , protected within a separate field . As the group prepares their plan , Vala and Daniel exchange a last embrace , assuring each other of their love . When everything is in place , they deactivate the time dilation field and , after the normal timeline is restored , Teal 'c prevents Colonel Carter from activating the time dilation field . Odyssey leaves before it is destroyed , saving SG @-@ 1 and the Asgard 's legacy . 
 Back at the SGC ( Stargate Command ) , Teal 'c refuses to reveal any of the events on the ship , much to Vala 's disappointment . As the episode , the season and the series come to a close , SG @-@ 1 contemplates Teal 'c's joking words of wisdom in the gateroom and says " indeed " all at once . General Landry wishes the team God @-@ speed , and SG @-@ 1 steps through the gate on their next mission . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Unending " is the fiftieth Stargate SG @-@ 1 episode written by Robert C. Cooper , and the second episode of the series directed by Cooper . Being the series ' tenth season finale , " Unending " was the fifth season finale to potentially serve as Stargate SG @-@ 1 's last episode , although the writers originally anticipated another renewal of the series and planned to end the season with a cliffhanger . However , the Sci @-@ Fi Channel announced the series ' cancellation in August 2006 , approximately one month before " Unending " was written . The network opposed the idea of a cliffhanger leading up to a possible movie , and since the producers never intended " to blow up the SGC and kill everyone " , the episode 's theme and name were chosen to give " a sense of ending without it being an ending " . This move also allowed for the fan conspiracy theories surrounding a possible real Stargate in the underground Cheyenne Mountain Complex to continue . The option to end the series with a two @-@ parter was considered but rejected , as Cooper felt this would have made the ending less special . The buildup of the Ori arc in Seasons 9 and 10 would eventually get a pay @-@ off in Stargate : The Ark of Truth , a film produced after the end of the show . The cast and crew knew by the end of the episode 's filming on October 5 , 2006 that more films would be produced . 
 Robert C. Cooper intended the episode as " an emotional tribute to the ten seasons that [ had ] come before " and " the last chapter in the book – but not necessarily in the series of books . It was a chance [ ... ] , using science fiction , to show people one version of what the future might be like for these characters that they 've spent so much time with and loved so much . " By killing off the Asgard race , Cooper gave the episode an element of tragedy that reflected his feelings at the time . Producer Brad Wright wanted all of the characters to get a last shot in the spotlight instead of focusing on only one character . Because of fan <unk> about team episodes , Cooper decided to put the characters through several decades of life and see their relationships develop and evolve . The references in " Unending " to the events of season 2 's " The Fifth Race " , another Cooper @-@ penned episode often named as a fan favorite , were intended , as were the callbacks to season 9 's " The Ties That Bind " ( the Daniel @-@ Vala argument , see below ) and season 10 's " Line In The Sand " ( the solution of using the Ori beam ) . The period aboard the ship was originally significantly less than fifty years , but the actors ' last @-@ stage makeup , which Cooper only saw minutes before filming , looked so old that Cooper was forced to increase the number of years in the script . 
 Cooper originally wrote the developing romance between Daniel and Vala in " Unending " by having them have sex without a confrontation . Claudia Black and Michael Shanks protested against this intended story , as Shanks felt that " [ t ] here 's always been this underlining , keeping [ Vala ] at arms length because of the fear of getting too close . " Cooper rewrote the scene to show Vala 's vulnerability to Daniel , and have Daniel share his true feelings of a relationship . The actors decided to play the confrontation scene as genuinely as possible , with both characters being neither completely in @-@ character nor totally out @-@ of @-@ character . The scene was rehearsed a lot and was filmed over the course of six hours . Cooper was nevertheless concerned that Daniel appeared too edgy and mean , although his feelings were motivated by the two years of torment with Vala , and losing his wife nearly ten years before . Daniel 's line , " You better not be messing with me " , was only said in one take by Michael Shanks . Since Cooper prefers to follow up on such emotional scenes with a laugh , the immediate next scene shows Vala coming out of Daniel 's room , where she encounters a disbelieving Mitchell jogging by . In Cooper 's mind , Daniel held a crying Vala in another scene because she had gotten pregnant and had lost the baby . To contrast the obvious relationship between Daniel and Vala , Amanda Tapping and Christopher Judge subtly played their scenes as if their characters also had a romantic relationship . 
 To give the Odyssey an unnatural <unk> feeling of solitude , many wide angle shots and <unk> matte extension were used with no additional music . Robert C. Cooper often listened to the CCR song " Have You Ever Seen the Rain ? " during the making of the episode and decided to play it over the first montage , showing the passage of time . The tone of the second montage was set with a cello . Stargate composer Joel Goldsmith later accompanied the hand movements of the hired cellist with different music during post @-@ production . A third montage was filmed but not included in the final cut of the episode since the last table scene already supplied the needed sentiment . Each time period included the same shots to help the audience focus on the differences that characters have gone through . The last scene at Stargate Command was the last filmed Stargate SG @-@ 1 scene , shot at two o 'clock in the morning , for which every member of the crew came back . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The broadcast of " Unending " on the British channel Sky One on March 13 , 2007 pulled in around 518 @,@ 000 viewers , making Stargate SG @-@ 1 the third most @-@ watched program for Sky One during that week . " Unending " attracted approximately 2 @.@ 2 million viewers on its first American broadcast on the Sci Fi Channel on June 22 , 2007 , the best performance for SG @-@ 1 since the September 22 , 2006 mid @-@ season finale . 
 Reviewers were generally satisfied with the conclusion , and some like Bill Keveney of the USA Today felt the episode does not stray far from " the series formula – a mix of sci @-@ fi adventure , relationships and humor " . Jason Van Horn of IGN enjoyed the humor , " the amount of heart and pure emotion running rampant this episode " , which he thought served as a symbol for the entire show that will stay in the public mind through re @-@ runs and DVDs . Two scenes that stood out for him as " powerful " , " heart @-@ wrenching " and " the icing on the cake " , were Mitchell 's breakdown and Vala 's seduction of Daniel signaling " the beginning of a very long lasting and loving relationship " . Vala 's emotional response to Daniel was interpreted as an example of her character growth , while another reviewer felt the " Vala / Daniel argument [ was ] a tad overwrought [ although ] the motivation is clear " . The emotional death of Landry appealed to several reviewers , as did the resolution via Teal 'c's heroic sacrifice . 
 The " clever , ground @-@ breaking " , " fitting " and " hugely satisfying " episode reminded <unk> 's Ian <unk> of Star Trek : The Next Generation 's finale " All Good Things ... " , while TV Squad 's Richard Keller noted strong similarities to a two @-@ part episode of Star Trek : Voyager named " Year of Hell " . He was " extremely sad to see [ the series ] go " , but could not overlook the mediocrity , predictability and lack of originality of the series finale . TV Zone 's Anthony Brown , who considered the episode " curious [ ly ] low @-@ key " , regretted the planned direct @-@ to @-@ DVD films , as " the whole thing inevitably loses its punch as the reset button 's pressed [ ... ] , rather than providing the genuine emotion of an actual ending " . Maureen Ryan of The Chicago Tribune thought that the episode went out on " a strange note " with a disappointing last " string of banal clichés " dialogue exchange , although the cast and the established goodwill of their characters could partly make up for it . Mary McNamara of Multichannel News lauded Cooper 's direction , lighting , costuming , the " haunting " music and sound , the production values and special effects . She acknowledged the SG @-@ 1 finale as a " true ensemble / team piece " with " a poignant and satisfying conclusion " , and despite not making it into the top ten of series finales , the episode was " very good " and " respects and rewards the ten year commitment viewers have made to the series " . David Bianculli from the New York Daily Times gave the episode two and a half out of five and saying the franchise stopped " Without warning " thanks to this episode . 
 = Put the Needle on It = 
 " Put the Needle on It " is a song performed by Australian singer Dannii Minogue , which was written by Minogue , Mathias Johansson , Henrik Korpi and Karen Poole for Minogue 's fourth album Neon Nights ( 2003 ) . It is the opening track , and was released as its lead single on 4 November 2002 . It reached the top twenty on the Australian , Irish and United Kingdom Singles Charts . In the UK it also topped the club charts . In 2003 , it was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association indicating shipment of 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 " Put the Needle on It " is a dance @-@ pop song which received mixed reviews from music critics , and its musical style was compared to United States pop singer , Madonna . Its music video , directed by Miikka <unk> , features Minogue in a studio surrounded with colourful neon lights and spinning on a human @-@ sized record player . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 In 2002 , Minogue began writing and recording material for her fourth album , Neon Nights ( 2003 ) , with Mathias Johansson ( aka Mathias <unk> ) , Henrik Korpi , and previous collaborator Karen Poole in Stockholm , Sweden . During one of their sessions , they wrote " Put the Needle on It " , a song about sex . Minogue was determined to compose a dance music song to thank United Kingdom DJs . They had accepted her into that genre following the success of her previous year 's single , " Who Do You Love Now ? " . In the UK , it is difficult for artists to be accepted into the dance music scene because DJs are usually not " interested in pop artists calling themselves dance artists because they 've done one remix of their song " . 
 " Put the Needle on It " is a mid @-@ tempo 1980s inspired disco song " about sex disguised as a pop ditty about a record player " . The song was composed as a collaborative effort between Korpi , Johansson , Poole and Minogue , although Minogue contributed most of the lyrics . The song is written in the common verse @-@ chorus form and features instrumentation from keyboards and synthesisers . 
 In 2010 Turkish singer <unk> released a cover version in her native language called “ Sana <unk> <unk> ” ( English : " Not you brother " ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 " Put the Needle on It " received mixed reviews from contemporary pop music critics . <unk> Leach of RTÉ Entertainment compared the song 's musical style to American pop singer Madonna , while Amazon.com 's David Trueman wrote that the song " utilises the funkier end of 1980s disco , with a contemporary edge that removes the cheese and dispels any notion that [ Minogue ] may be hanging on the coattails of her big sister ( Kylie Minogue ) " . MusicOMH 's Alexis Kirke called the track a " slow but inevitable grower " which " shows that Dannii 's dark song @-@ writing powers can compete right at the top of the charts " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Put the Needle on It " was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 4 November 2002 . It reached number seven on the UK Singles Chart and number one on the Upfront Club Chart , becoming Minogue 's fifth song to top the club chart . Across Europe , the track performed moderately well , reaching the top twenty in Ireland and top thirty in the Netherlands It also reached number four on the Irish Dance Charts . " Put the Needle on It " peaked at number eleven on the Australian Singles Chart . In 2003 , the song was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association indicating shipment of 35 @,@ 000 units . On the ARIA End of Year Charts for 2003 , the track appeared at number eleven on the Dance Singles Chart and at number eighteen on the Top Australian Singles Chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 " Put the Needle on It " features a futuristic music video that was directed by Miikka <unk> in 2002 . The video features Minogue in a studio surrounded with colourful neon lights and spinning on a human @-@ sized record player . The video begins with a close @-@ up on a television screen showing only Minogue 's lips , singing the opening lines . A large , human @-@ sized record player is then shown , surrounded by large video screens repeating the opening scene of the video . Minogue , wearing a short black dress and a cropped hair cut , is then shown in a digital room , surrounded by many lights and occasionally four digital dancers . The final sequence of the video features Minogue in a purple dress , spinning on the large record player introduced at the beginning . As the video concludes , all of the scenes are inter @-@ cut and gradually fade . 
 A music video for a remix version was also created using the Jason Nevins ' " Club Creation Edit " of the song . The remix video used only the scenes of Minogue in the digital room and spinning around on the record player , but they are arranged in a different order than how they appear in the original video . The music video was released commercially on The Hits & Beyond special edition companion DVD ( 2006 ) and Dannii Minogue : The Video Collection ( 2007 ) . The latter included a short film , " Put the Needle on It ( Behind the Scenes ) " , detailing the production of the track and its video . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following people contributed to " Put the Needle on It " : 
 Dannii Minogue – lead vocals 
 Karen Poole – backing vocals 
 Korpi & <unk> – production , arrangement 
 Jonas <unk> – engineering 
 Niklas Flyckt – mixing 
 = Coast Guard City = 
 A Coast Guard City is a United States municipality designated as such by the Commandant of the United States Coast Guard on application of the local civilian government . It is an honorary designation intended to recognize communities of special importance to the U.S. Coast Guard . 
 = = Criteria = = 
 Designation as a Coast Guard City is made by the Commandant of the United States Coast Guard on advise of a review board and upon application by a municipal government . According to the U.S. Coast Guard , applications are expected to demonstrate an applicant jurisdiction 's ability to meet a multi @-@ part criteria that can include : erection of monuments and memorials to the Coast Guard , organization of civic celebrations on the anniversary of the founding of the U.S. Coast Guard , offer of special recognition and merchandise discounts to Coast Guard personnel by the local business community , providing support to local U.S. Coast Guard Morale , Welfare and Recreation initiatives . 
 Designation as a Coast Guard City is for a five @-@ year period , but can be renewed indefinitely conditioned on the city continuing to meet the criteria . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The Coast Guard City program was established by the United States Congress in 1998 to recognize cities where military assets of the United States Coast Guard are located and which demonstrate support to Coast Guard personnel stationed there . The first city so designated was Grand Haven , Michigan . 
 As of 2015 , 18 cities had been designated as " Coast Guard Cities . " 
 = = = Legislation = = = 
 The authorizing legislation for the Coast Guard City program provides that : 
 The Commandant of the Coast Guard may recognize the community of Grand Haven , Michigan , as " Coast Guard City , USA " . If the Commandant desires to recognize any other community in the same manner or any other community requests such recognition from the Coast Guard , the Commandant shall notify the Committee on Commerce , Science , and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives 90 days prior to approving such recognition . 
 = = = List of Coast Guard Cities = = = 
 = Russian battleship Imperator Nikolai I ( 1916 ) = 
 Imperator Nikolai I ( Russian : Император Николай I or Emperor Nikolai I ) was a Russian dreadnought built during World War I for service in the Black Sea . She was designed to counter multiple prospective Ottoman dreadnoughts which had been placed under order by the Ottoman government , since this raised the possibility that the Russian dreadnoughts being built for the Black Sea Fleet could be outclassed . The ship used the same main armament as the preceding Imperatritsa Mariya class , but was larger and more heavily armored . Imperator Nikolai I was launched in 1916 , but construction was suspended on 24 October 1917 . The Soviets considered completing her in 1923 , but later rejected the idea . She was towed to Sevastopol in 1927 and scrapped . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was designed in response to efforts by the Ottoman Empire to acquire modern dreadnoughts from abroad . By late 1913 it appeared that the Turks would be able to muster three dreadnoughts , two of which were armed with 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 343 mm ) guns , versus the three Russian dreadnoughts of the Imperatritsa Mariya class then building . A modified version of that class would be the quickest to put into service and the preliminary design work began in December of that year , well before she was formally ordered on 12 September 1914 . She was a much bigger and more heavily armored ship than the earlier ships , but her guns and machinery were virtually identical to those of the Imperatritsa Mariya class to save time . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was considerably larger than the preceding Imperatritsa Mariya class . She was 182 meters ( 597 ft 1 in ) long overall , had a beam of 29 meters ( 95 ft 2 in ) and at full load a draft of 9 meters ( 29 ft 6 in ) . The ship displaced 27 @,@ 830 metric tons ( 27 @,@ 390 long tons ) at standard load , over 3 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 000 long tons ) more than Imperatritsa Mariya 's displacement of 23 @,@ 413 metric tons ( 23 @,@ 043 long tons ) , and 31 @,@ 877 metric tons ( 31 @,@ 374 long tons ) at full load . High @-@ tensile steel was used throughout the hull with mild steel used only in areas that did not contribute to structural strength . The hull was subdivided by 20 transverse watertight bulkheads . The engine room was divided by two longitudinal bulkheads between frames 95 – 107 and a centerline bulkhead divided the condenser compartment . The double bottom was 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 3 ft 11 in ) deep and she was given an ice @-@ breaking bow , probably in the hopes that she 'd be able to operate outside the Black Sea . Frahm anti @-@ rolling tanks were fitted on each side to reduce her rolling motion . She had two electrically driven rudders on the centerline , the main rudder abaft the smaller auxiliary rudder . Imperator Nikolai I 's designed metacentric height was 1 @.@ 2 meters ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The machinery of Imperator Nikolai I differed only in small ways from that of her predecessors . The wing propeller shafts were powered by high pressure ahead and astern turbines , while the inboard shafts were powered by low pressure turbines . They produced a total of 29 @,@ 700 shp ( 22 @,@ 100 kW ) . 20 mixed @-@ firing triangular Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers powered the turbines with a working pressure of 17 @.@ 5 atm ( 257 psi ) . The forward group of eight boilers were positioned between the first and second third while the aft group of twelve boilers lay between the second and third turrets . Maximum speed was estimated at 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The maximum coal capacity was 3 @,@ 557 @.@ 3 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 501 long tons ) , over 1 @,@ 500 t ( 1 @,@ 500 long tons ) more than her predecessor 's capacity of 2 @,@ 000 t ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) , plus an unknown amount of fuel oil . 
 Imperator Nikolai I had four Curtiss @-@ AEG main and two auxiliary turbo generators with each driving two dynamos , one each for alternating current and direct current . Each main generator was rated at 360 kilowatts while the auxiliaries had a capacity of 200 kilowatts each . These powered the complex electrical system that combined alternating current for most equipment with direct current for heavy @-@ load machinery like the turret motors . No diesel generators were provided . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Her main armament consisted of a dozen 12 @-@ inch Pattern 1907 52 @-@ caliber guns mounted in four triple turrets distributed the length of the ship . These guns were identical to those used in the Imperatritsa Mariya @-@ class ships , but the turrets were modified to improve the rate of fire . The guns could be depressed to − 5 ° and elevated to 25 ° . They could be loaded at any angle between − 5 ° and + 15 ° ; their rate of fire was supposed to three rounds per minute up to 15 ° of elevation . The turrets could elevate at 3 – 4 ° per second and traverse at a rate of 3 @.@ 2 ° per second . 100 rounds per gun were carried at full load . The guns fired 470 @.@ 9 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 038 lb ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 762 m / s ( 2 @,@ 500 ft / s ) ; this provided a maximum range of 23 @,@ 230 meters ( 25 @,@ 400 yd ) . 
 The secondary armament consisted of twenty 130 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) 55 @-@ caliber Model 1913 guns mounted in casemates . They were arranged in two groups , six guns per side from the forward turret to the rear funnel and the remaining four clustered around the rear turret . Three guns per side were situated to fire ahead as that was the most likely direction of attack by torpedo boats as anticipated by the Naval General Staff . Their rate of fire ranged from five to eight rounds per minute and they were provided with 245 rounds per gun . They had a maximum range of about 15 @,@ 364 meters ( 16 @,@ 802 yd ) with a 36 @.@ 86 @-@ kilogram ( 81 @.@ 3 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of 823 m / s ( 2 @,@ 700 ft / s ) . 
 The original anti @-@ aircraft armament was going to be four 38 @-@ caliber 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 64 mm ) AA guns mounted on the roofs of the fore and aft turrets , but this was changed during construction to four 37 @-@ caliber 4 @-@ inch ( 102 mm ) of a new design that never entered service . Four underwater 17 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes were also fitted , two on each broadside in compartments between frames 43 – 46 and frames 113 – 15 . Twelve torpedoes were carried for them . 
 = = = Fire control = = = 
 The 6 @-@ meter ( 20 ft ) rangefinders were originally going to be fitted in the conning tower , but this was changed during construction to mounting them in the forward and aft main gun turrets using periscopes in armored hoods on the turret roofs . These would provide data for the central artillery post to calculate and then transmit to the guns for the gun crew to follow . A new , domestically designed , Erikson mechanical computer was intended to be used . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Imperator Nikolai I was much more heavily armored than the Imperatritsa Mariya @-@ class ships , as the weight of armor for the former totaled 2 @,@ 576 long tons ( 2 @,@ 617 t ) more than the older ships . Even so , Russian armor factories were unable to roll Krupp cemented armor plates of size greater than 270 millimeters ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) , compensating by increasing the thickness of the internal splinter bulkhead . The plates were sized to match the frames to provide support for their joints and they were joined together to better distribute the shock of a shell 's impact . The waterline belt had a total height of 5 @.@ 2 meters ( 17 ft ) , 3 @.@ 45 meters ( 11 @.@ 3 ft ) of which was above the design waterline and 1 @.@ 75 meters ( 5 ft 9 in ) below . Forward , the remaining portion of the waterline was protected by two strakes ; the lower of which was initially 200 millimeters ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick , but thinned to 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . It extended 90 centimeters ( 35 in ) above the design waterline . The upper strake was 100 mm thick and extended up to the middle deck . Aft , the waterline belt was 175 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 9 in ) thick and terminated in a 175 @-@ mm transverse bulkhead aft of the steering gear . The aft area between the upper and middle decks was the only unarmored area of the hull and had a 300 millimeters ( 12 in ) transverse bulkhead to protect the rear turret magazine from shells fired from rear bearings . The forward bulkhead was only 25 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) to serve as a splinter bulkhead as it was screened at all angles by side or deck armor . The 75 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) upper belt ran from the bow back to the aft turret and was 2 @.@ 95 meters ( 9 ft 8 in ) high . For the first time it was made of cemented armor which saved 300 long tons ( 305 t ) and 140 long tons ( 142 t ) in comparison to the <unk> plates used on the Gangut and Imperatritsa Mariya classes respectively . Behind the side armor was a face @-@ hardened inboard longitudinal splinter bulkhead that was 75 mm thick between the middle and lower decks , but decreased to 25 mm between the middle and upper decks . This sloped away from the edge of the lower deck to the lower edge of the armor belt with a thickness of 75 mm . 
 The main gun turrets had a face and rear 300 mm thick with 200 mm sides and roof . The barbettes were 300 mm thick , but reduced to 225 – 250 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 8 in ) when behind other armor . The conning tower sides were 400 millimeters ( 15 @.@ 7 in ) thick with a 250 @-@ mm roof . The funnel uptakes were protected by 75 mm of armor , but reduced to 25 mm between the upper and middle decks . The upper deck was 35 millimeters ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick , which was intended to activate the fuze of any shell penetrating it before it reached the main armored deck that was 63 mm ( 2 @.@ 5 in ) thick over the armored citadel . Forward of the citadel the upper deck remained 35 mm thick , but aft the armored decks dropped to the level of the top of the waterline belt ( the 35 mm deck ) while the 63 mm deck was at the lower edge of the belt . Underwater protection was minimal as there was only 10 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) watertight bulkhead behind the upwards extension of the double bottom and even this was squeezed out as the hull narrowed towards the end turrets . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction began on 22 June 1914 by the ONZiV at Nikolayev , after the launch of Imperatritsa Ekaterina Velikaya on 7 June cleared the building slip . However she was not actually laid down until 28 April 1915 with the intention to launch her in October 1915 . The normal building schedule was maintained until early 1915 as the Russians believed that the war would be over soon . However , workers were diverted to more important projects and war production began to interfere with deliveries of material beginning shortly afterwards which delayed her launch until on 18 October 1916 . Several proposals were evaluated while she was building to modify her in light of the issues demonstrated by the Imperatritsa Mariya @-@ class in service . They proved to trim badly by the bow and were very wet forward . One proposal was made to fit Imperator Nikolai I with a forecastle deck to improve her seaworthiness . This was rejected , as the additional weight from the forecastle and raising the forward barbette would actually worsen her trim forward . However , a proposal to add a 1 @.@ 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 7 in ) bulwark forward was accepted . Work on her continued at a slow rate through the February Revolution of 1917 , but the unsettled times disrupted her construction and further delayed her . She was renamed <unk> ( Russian : <unk> : Democracy ) on 29 April 1917 and she was estimated to be about 60 % complete . Industrial unrest and strikes further slowed progress and the provisional government postponed further work on 24 October 1917 until " a more favorable time " . 
 She was captured on 17 March 1918 when Nikolaev was occupied by the Germans and Austrians , but they did nothing with her incomplete hull . On 25 January 1919 she was listed by the Directorate of Ukraine as planned to be completed and included into the navy list by 1920 . On 27 January 1919 she was mentioned at Directorate Navy Ministry order at the list for renaming from 1920 – into <unk> Ukraina . However none of the short @-@ lived Directorate orders were actually implemented . She remained at Nikolayev throughout the Russian Civil War , of no use to either side . The victorious Soviets finally inspected her in 1923 to see if she was worth completing . Her dilapidated state and obsolescent design caused them to conclude that it was not worth doing and she should be sold for scrap . Efforts were made to sell the hull abroad to raise hard currency , but when these came to nought she was towed to Sevastopol on 28 June 1927 to begin dismantling . 
 = One Fierce Beer Coaster = 
 One Fierce Beer Coaster is the second studio album by American alternative rock band Bloodhound Gang , released on December 3 , 1996 . Produced by Jimmy Pop , it was the band 's first release on Geffen Records , and the first to feature Michael " Spanky G " <unk> on drums , " Evil " Jared Hasselhoff on bass guitar , and DJ Q @-@ Ball on the turntables . The musical style of One Fierce Beer Coaster is grounded in the alternative rock genre , with prominent rap metal guitar riffs and lyrics rife with toilet humor . 
 Originally released on the independent label Republic Records , One Fierce Beer Coaster was later picked up by Geffen Records two months after its release due to word @-@ of @-@ mouth popularity . The album has received mixed to moderately favorable reviews . Three singles were released from the album including " Fire Water Burn " , " I Wish I Was Queer So I Could Get Chicks " and " Why 's Everybody Always Pickin ' On Me ? " . The first single , " Fire Water Burn " , was a modern rock hit , charting on seven different international charts . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The Bloodhound Gang began as a small alternative band from King of Prussia , Pennsylvania . The band took its name from " The Bloodhound Gang " , a segment on the 1980s PBS kids ' show 3 @-@ 2 @-@ 1 Contact that featured three young detectives solving mysteries and fighting crime . The band consisted of Jimmy Pop , Daddy Long Legs , <unk> , Lupus Thunder , and Skip O <unk> . In April 1994 , the band released their second demo tape , The Original Motion Picture Soundtrack to Hitler 's Handicapped Helpers ( 1994 ) . This resulted in a record deal with Cheese Factory Records , which was later renamed Republic Records . Later that year , the Bloodhound Gang released their first EP , <unk> Haze ( 1994 ) . 
 In March 1995 the group signed a record deal with Columbia Records and released their first full @-@ length album , titled Use Your Fingers ( 1995 ) , but were subsequently dropped by the label . At this time Daddy Long Legs and <unk> , who were angry with Columbia Records , left the band to form another rap group , Wolfpac . Bass player Evil Jared Hasselhoff , drummer Spanky G and turntablist D.J. Q @-@ Ball joined Bloodhound Gang as replacements . In addition , Skip O <unk> eventually left to pursue a career outside of the music industry . Eventually , the band began working on their new album , One Fierce Beer Coaster . 
 = = Music = = 
 The Bloodhound Gang entered Dome Sound / Ultra Psyche Studios with engineer Rich <unk> in March 1996 to record One Fierce Beer Coaster . All of the songs were produced by Jimmy Pop , who also mixed most of the musical tracks on his personal Macintosh . The album was later mastered by Joe <unk> at Sterling Sound Studios in New York City . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 While the album 's predecessor , Use Your Fingers , was written and recorded in a more hip hop @-@ oriented style , featuring distinct rap beats , One Fierce Beer Coaster featured a more alternative @-@ oriented sound . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described The Bloodhound Gang 's sound as , " smarmy , <unk> alternative funk @-@ metal , complete with junk culture references and " ironic " musical allusions . " Former Bloodhound Gang guitarist Lupus Thunder credits Weezer as an inspiration for " Fire Water Burn " and Lemonade and Brownies @-@ era Sugar Ray for " Kiss Me Where It Smells Funny . " 
 To create the hip @-@ hop and rock fusions on the album , Jimmy Pop utilized the standard hip hop technique of sampling . The chorus for " Fire Water Burn " is taken from " The Roof Is on Fire " by Rock Master Scott & the Dynamic Three and also features the lyrics ' I am white like Frank Black is / So if man is five and the devil is six then that must make me seven / This <unk> 's gone to heaven , ' a direct reference to the post @-@ 1993 stage name of Black Francis who wrote the Pixies song " Monkey Gone to Heaven " to which the lyrics allude . " Why 's Everybody Always Pickin ' On Me ? " is built around a re @-@ recorded sample of " Spooky " , by Mike Sharpe as performed by Classics IV and also features a small lift from the Bill Cosby track " Greasy Kid Stuff . " Finally , the track " Your Only Friends Are Make Believe " features a chorus melody lifted from the Duran Duran song " Hungry Like the Wolf . " 
 Originally , the Republic Records version of the album contained a sample from the Men At Work single " Down Under " in the song " Shut Up " and a scratchy recording introducing the album at the beginning of " Kiss Me Where It Smells Funny " . The samples were subsequently removed on Geffen pressings . 
 = = = Lyricism = = = 
 The lyrics for One Fierce Beer Coaster utilize over @-@ the @-@ top satire and toilet humor to provide comedy . For instance the album opener , " Kiss Me Where It Smells Funny " , is a song about a man and his new girlfriend and their adventures in cunnilingus . It was written by Jimmy Pop about his then @-@ girlfriend ; the two subsequent albums would each have one song about said girlfriend - " Three Point One Four " and " No Hard Feelings , " respectively . " Lift Your Head Up High ( And Blow Your Brains Out ) " is a satirical call for people who have considered suicide to go through with the act , because their life is worthless . Three minutes into the song , Jimmy Pop says " Rewind and let me reverse it backwards like Judas Priest first did . " Immediately after this , a four @-@ second segment of backwards vocals repeats four times . When played in reverse , this segment says , " Devil shall wake up and eat Chef Boyardee <unk> . " 
 The album 's best @-@ known single , " Fire Water Burn " , is a diatribe against a white boy who attempts , and fails , to act like a black thug . " I Wish I Was Queer So I Could Get Chicks " is satirical song about the belief that girls only like gay men , playing on the stereotype that gay men are often better looking and more sensitive than straight men . " Why 's Everybody Always Pickin ' On Me ? " is mainly about how Jimmy Pop was constantly picked on in high school and has since developed extreme <unk> , an intense fear of being ridiculed . 
 The album also includes a cover of Run DMC 's " It 's Tricky " and " Boom " , which features an appearance by Vanilla Ice . Vanilla Ice later incorporated his verse into the song " Prozac " , which appeared on the album Hard to Swallow . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 One Fierce Beer Coaster was originally released on Republic Records , which , under its earlier name , Cheese Factory Records , had previously released material by the band . As word @-@ of @-@ mouth praise for the album spread , however , Geffen Records signed the band after two months . Packaging design was created by designer Michael Calleia . 
 The original release contained a song called " Yellow Fever " , which was about having sex with Asian women , as well as a hidden track on track number 69 on the original release . It consisted of an audio collage featuring Howard Stern talking about peanut butter , a televangelist , a news broadcast on the disease Lupus ( a reference to <unk> <unk> ) , a phone call from a drunk friend of Jimmy 's , and other assorted oddities . The Geffen re @-@ release omitted this track . " Yellow Fever " and the hidden track were later released on an EP called One Censored Beer Coaster . 
 " Fire Water Burn " played a major role in the slow build of interest that ultimately led to the band 's mainstream breakthrough . Because the band could not afford financially solvent national tours , they promoted themselves by sending their music to alternative rock @-@ based radio stations across the country . Eventually , an intern brought the band to the attention of the music director of 107 @.@ 7 The End in Seattle . The director , liking what he heard , played " Fire Water Burn " on his Friday night show . After airing , the station was flooded with phone calls asking about the song and the band and the director passed the song onto the music director at KROQ @-@ FM in Los Angeles . This snowball effect eventually overwhelmed the band with demands for their new record . After hearing of the underground success One Fierce Beer Coaster was receiving , many record labels began courting the band . According to manager Brett <unk> in an interview with HitQuarters , Madonna 's label Maverick " really wanted to sign the band in the worst possible way , even to the point where I had to tell Madonna that I couldn ’ t put her on the phone with Jimmy Pop . " The band eventually signed a record deal with Geffen Records . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 When Geffen Records re @-@ released the album , the label refused to release the song " Yellow Fever " because of its graphic lyrical content . As such , the song was removed from Geffen pressings of the album . In response , Jimmy Pop told Yahoo ! Launch that the Gang 's lyrical matter was not intended to be taken literally . 
 In 2000 , the song was the subject of further controversy when students at the University of Maryland , including members of the East Coast Asian American Student Union ( <unk> ) and the Lesbian , Gay , Bisexual , Transgender Alliance demanded the band ’ s removal from a concert line @-@ up . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 One Fierce Beer Coaster has received mixed to moderately favorable reviews . Roni Sarig said that it was " full of smart lines , great hooks , and creative arranging . " AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine wrote that , " One Fierce Beer Coaster was picked up by DGC about two months after its release [ ... ] And , listening to the single , " Fire Water Burn , " it 's possible to hear why . " 
 However , not all reviews were complimentary . In his review of the lead single " Fire Water Burn , " Entertainment Weekly reviewer Matt Diehl referred to the band 's music as " mumbling hip @-@ hop slang with self @-@ conscious Caucasian stiffness . " The album was also panned for its heavy use of toilet and sex @-@ based humor . Stephen Thomas Erlewine writes that , " what really sinks the album is the revolting , sophomoric humor that passes for lyrics . " 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 On January 18 , 1997 , One Fierce Beer Coaster debuted on the Billboard 200 at number 132 . It peaked at number 57 less than a month later , dropping off the charts over the next few weeks . It later made a final reappearance at number 170 . The album spent a total of 26 weeks on the chart . 
 On October 16 , 1998 , the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jimmy Pop except when noted . 
 = = Credits = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 Singles 
 = Doug Stone = 
 Douglas Jackson " Doug " Brooks ( born June 19 , 1956 ) , known professionally as Doug Stone , is an American country music singer . He debuted in 1990 with the single " I 'd Be Better Off ( In a Pine Box ) " , the first release from his 1990 self @-@ titled debut album for Epic Records . Both this album and its successor , 1991 's I Thought It Was You , earned a platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of America . Two more albums for Epic , 1992 's From the Heart and 1994 's More Love , are each certified gold . Stone moved to Columbia Records to record Faith in Me , Faith in You , which did not produce a Top Ten among its three singles . After suffering a heart attack and stroke in the late 1990s , he exited the label and did not release another album until Make Up in Love in 1999 on Atlantic Records . The Long Way was released in 2002 on the Audium label ( now part of E1 Music ) , followed by two albums on the independent Lofton Creek Records . 
 Stone has charted twenty @-@ two singles on Hot Country Songs , with his greatest chart success coming between 1990 and 1995 . In this timespan , he charted four number 1 singles : " In a Different Light " , " A Jukebox with a Country Song " , " Too Busy Being in Love " , and " Why Didn 't I Think of That " , plus eleven more top ten singles . He is known for his neotraditionalist country sound and his frequent recording of ballads . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stone was born as Douglas Jackson Brooks on June 19 , 1956 in Marietta , Georgia . His mother , who was also a country music singer , taught him how to play guitar when he was five . When he was seven years old , his mother placed him onstage to open for Loretta Lynn . His mother and father later divorced , and afterward , he moved to live with his father . He found additional work singing as a teenager : first at local skating rinks , and then at local bars , and later as one member of a short @-@ lived trio ; in addition , he and his father worked as mechanics to make ends meet . He also built a recording studio in his house , while performing in local clubs . By 1982 , Stone was suffering from depression brought on by his musical career , when a friend introduced him to <unk> Cohen , who would later become his second wife . He played various local venues , and was discovered by a record label manager while singing at a Veterans of Foreign Wars hall . The manager asked him for demos , which she then sent to Epic Records . He chose to record under the name Doug Stone , so as to avoid confusion with Garth Brooks . Record producer Doug Johnson played three tunes for Epic Records producer Bob Montgomery , who disliked the first two that he heard but enjoyed the third one . Through Montgomery 's assistance , Stone signed with Epic in 1989 , thus becoming the only artist that Montgomery ever signed without seeing perform live . 
 = = Musical career = = 
 = = = 1990 – 1991 : Doug Stone = = = 
 Stone 's self @-@ titled debut album was released in 1990 with Johnson as producer . Mac McAnally , Mark O 'Connor , Paul Franklin , Brent Rowan , and Willie Weeks were among the session musicians on it . Contributing songwriters included David Lee Murphy , Larry Boone , Randy Boudreaux , A.L. " Doodle " Owens , and Keith Palmer , who would later chart two singles for Epic in 1991 . Its first single , " I 'd Be Better Off ( In a Pine Box ) , " spent twenty @-@ five weeks on the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts and peaked at No. 4 . In addition , the single was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Country Song , and the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America for U.S. shipments of one million copies . The album 's next two singles were both Top Ten singles as well : " Fourteen Minutes Old " at No. 6 and " These Lips Don 't Know How to Say Goodbye " at No. 5 . Following these songs was " In a Different Light " , co @-@ written by Dickey Lee , which became Stone 's first number 1 on Billboard . Stone received three music award nominations in 1991 : the Horizon Award ( now New Artist Award ) from the Country Music Association , Star of Tomorrow from Music City News , and Top New Male Vocalist from the Academy of Country Music . 
 Brian Mansfield gave Doug Stone a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half star rating out of five in his review for Allmusic . His review praised " I 'd Be Better Off " in particular , calling the song a " towering expression of self @-@ pity that most singers could spend a career trying to top , " also saying that Stone " came close " to matching that song 's quality in the album 's ballads . 
 = = = 1991 @-@ 1992 : I Thought It Was You , From the Heart , and The First Christmas = = = 
 I Thought It Was You , his second album , was released in August 1991 . Also certified platinum , it produced three more chart singles : the No. 4 title track , followed by the number 1 " A Jukebox with a Country Song " and " Come In Out of the Pain " at No. 3 . " A Jukebox with a Country Song " spent two weeks at number 1 , thus becoming his only multi @-@ week number 1 single . Stone co @-@ wrote the track " The Feeling Never Goes Away " with Kim Williams and Phyllis Bennett , and then @-@ labelmate Joe Diffie co @-@ wrote " Burning Down the Town " . Alanna Nash of Entertainment Weekly gave the album an " A " , saying that it contained " sex @-@ and @-@ smolder ballads " comparable to Conway Twitty . Mansfield was less favorable , saying that Stone " seems to wallow in sorrow " . 
 In early 1992 , Stone began experiencing dizziness and pain in one of his arms . He also began feeling chest pains which he initially thought were heartburn . After feeling disoriented at a concert in Oregon , he canceled an appearance at the Academy of Country Music telecast . He then underwent quadruple bypass surgery at Centennial Medical Center to alleviate four severe arterial blockages near his heart which had initially gone undiscovered by doctors . Following the surgery , Stone changed his diet and began exercising , in addition to touring in support of his third album , From the Heart , released that August . The album 's title was seen by many music writers , including Irwin Stambler and <unk> Landon of Country Music : The Encyclopedia , as ironic in the wake of Stone 's heart surgery . 
 With a gold certification for shipments of 500 @,@ 000 copies , From the Heart produced two more number 1 singles in " Too Busy Being in Love " and " Why Didn 't I Think of That " . The other two singles were " Warning Labels " and " Made for Lovin ' You " , at No. 4 and No. 6 respectively . The latter had previously been recorded by both Dan Seals and Clinton Gregory . Mansfield thought that From the Heart was more consistent than Stone 's previous two albums , saying that his " voice is at its pain @-@ wracked best " on " Warning Labels " and that " The heart references take on a special meaning given the open @-@ heart surgery that preceded this album " . Nash criticized the album as " sappy , lightweight tales of infatuation and starry @-@ eyed courtship " . One month after From the Heart , Stone released a Christmas album titled The First Christmas . Although this album produced no singles , " Sailing Home for Christmas " was made into a music video . Stone was nominated in both 1992 and 1993 for Star of Tomorrow by Music City News , and Top Male Vocalist from the Academy of Country Music , winning the former award in 1993 . He toured in 1992 with Patty Loveless , Lynyrd Skynyrd , and Hank Williams , Jr . 
 = = = 1993 @-@ 1995 : More Love and Greatest Hits , Vol . 1 = = = 
 His fourth album , More Love , was released in November 1993 . Unlike his previous albums , Stone co @-@ produced with James Stroud , except on the track " Dream High " , which Stroud produced with Tom Bahler and Bruce Swedien . It also included different session musicians than his previous albums , such as guitarist Dann Huff and backing vocalist Curtis Wright . Its lead @-@ off single was " I Never Knew Love " , which spent two weeks at No. 2 on the country singles charts and accounted for his only entry on the Billboard Hot 100 , where it peaked at No. 81 . The album 's next two singles were the No. 4 " Addicted to a Dollar " and the title track , which Stone wrote with Gary Burr , at No. 6 . Tom Roland of New Country magazine criticized the album for " continu [ ing ] to mine the drippy side of Stone " through " manipulative " ballads , but cited " Addicted to a Dollar " and " Love , You Took Me by Surprise " as being " tougher " than Stone 's previous works . 
 Starting in June 1994 , Stone discovered that he was having breathing problems which were affecting his singing . He consulted throat doctors at Vanderbilt University 's medical center , who failed to find any problems in his throat , while a second consultation revealed a lump in his left nostril . Upon its discovery , Stone feared that it might be cancer , and that it would put an end to his career . As a result , Stone quit smoking , although the lump was later discovered not to be cancerous and was successfully removed . While Stone was undergoing treatment , his Greatest Hits , Vol . 1 compilation was released in late 1994 . Also receiving a gold certification , the album comprised nine of his previous hits and the new song " Little Houses " , which debuted on the charts in October 1994 and peaked at No. 7 in early 1995 . After its release , Stone made his acting debut in the 1995 film Gordy , in which he starred as Luke McAllister , a struggling musician . The movie 's soundtrack featured four songs from More Love : " More Love " , " That 's a Lie " , " Wishbone " , and " Dream High " , as well as two other songs that Stone performed : " The Heart I Broke " and " I Could Always Count on You " . 
 = = = 1995 @-@ 1999 : Faith in Me , Faith in You and Make Up in Love = = = 
 Also in 1995 , parent company Sony Music Entertainment chose to move Stone from the Nashville division of Epic Records to that of Columbia Records . This decision was made to give Stone a new promotional team . His only Columbia album , Faith in Me , Faith in You , was released in March of that year , with Stroud again serving as co @-@ producer . This album 's three singles were comparatively less successful than his previous singles , with none reaching Top 10 : the title track peaked at No. 13 , followed by " Sometimes I Forget " at No. 41 ( his first single to miss the Top 40 ) and " Born in the Dark " at No. 12 . Stone suffered a nearly @-@ fatal heart attack in December 1995 and a mild stroke in 1996 , reducing his ability to record and tour . Stone would later remark that he was " lucky " to have survived his health issues in this timespan . One of his few performances in this timespan was at a show in Dollywood , a theme park owned by Dolly Parton , in mid @-@ 1996 . His last charting single for Columbia was " Gone Out of My Mind " , which he recorded for the multi @-@ artist compilation album A Tribute to Tradition in 1998 . 
 Stone signed with Atlantic Records and released Make Up in Love in 1999 under the production of Wally Wilson . A more pop @-@ oriented album than his previous ones , the album produced a minor Top 20 hit in its title track . Its next singles were a cover of R.B. Greaves 's 1969 single " Take a Letter Maria " , which Stone took to number 45 , and " Surprise " , which spent only one week on the country charts , at number 64 . Also included on the album were a duet with Leslie <unk> titled " The Heart Holds On " , and the Bobby Braddock @-@ penned " The Difference Between a Woman and a Man " , which was later recorded by Josh Turner on his 2003 debut album Long Black Train . Stephen Thomas Erlewine gave the album a mixed review , saying that " Since Stone 's voice is pleasant , the music is often pleasant , but it 's hardly memorable . " Andy Turner of Country Standard Time was more favorable , saying that it " does not come off ' too country for country ' yet is still engaging largely because of Stone 's voice — soft with built @-@ in teardrops . " Also in 1999 , Stone and Skip Ewing co @-@ wrote " In the Name of Love " on the only album released by female country duo Redmon & Vale . 
 = = = 2000 @-@ present : The Long Way , In a Different Light , and My Turn = = = 
 In December 1999 , Stone was aboard an airplane which skidded off a snowy runway at O 'Hare Airport in Chicago ; there were no injuries . Stone began piloting ultra @-@ light airplanes as a hobby in 1999 and 2000 . In March 2000 , he suffered a broken left ankle , cracked rib , concussion , and bruised kidney after crashing his plane in Robertson County , Tennessee , and was briefly hospitalized before he resumed touring . Stone later said that the accident made him decide to quit flying planes . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , rumors circulated that Stone had been on one of the hijacked planes ; a spokeswoman for the singer confirmed that he was at home with his family that day . 
 Stone signed to Audium Entertainment in 2002 and recorded The Long Way . This album included seven new songs and acoustic re @-@ recordings of " More Love " , " Born in the Dark " , and " I 'd Be Better Off " . One of the original songs on it was " POW 369 " , which was later recorded by Darryl Worley . Stewart Mason thought that it was " not nearly as <unk> slick " as Stone 's previous albums , but questioned its commercial success . His next album did not come out until 2005 , when he signed to the independent label Lofton Creek Records , recording the album In a Different Light . The album included a cover of " Georgia on My Mind " , which was the first single , and re @-@ recordings of " In a Different Light " and " Why Didn 't I Think of That " . A second album for Lofton Creek , My Turn , followed in 2007 . It was led off by the single " Nice Problem " . William Ruhlmann praised this album for having " a timeless country feel " , also saying that " Stone sings with as much fervor and sincerity as ever . " Ken Tucker of Billboard wrote that " He sounds as good as ever and his music is still relevant " . 
 In 2013 , Stone toured with Bryan White and Shenandoah as part of the " <unk> the 90s Tour " . He also returned to acting , with roles in the films When the Storm God Rides and The Story of Bonnie and Clyde . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Stone married his second wife , <unk> Cohen , in 1982 . The couple separated in July 1994 , and Cohen filed for divorce two months later , accusing Stone of excessive drinking and infidelity . He married Beth Snyder in December 1996 after being engaged to her for a year . As of 2005 , he had one daughter , <unk> , with Beth , and five children from his previous marriages : daughter Michelle and son Daniel from his first marriage , son <unk> and daughter Kala from his marriage to Cohen , and another son , Dustin , who played in Stone 's road band in the 2000s . 
 In 2005 , Stone was sentenced to six months in jail for civil and criminal contempt for failing to release his financial records and failing to pay alimony and child support . Stone was arrested on April 9 , 2009 in Panama City , Florida , for domestic violence against Dustin . They reportedly engaged in a heated dispute over his son 's disabled car and Stone 's drinking . In August 2010 , he was jailed for driving under the influence in Gallatin , Tennessee , and released the same day on $ 3 @,@ 000 bail . 
 On March 29 , 2015 , Stone married fiddler Jade Jack in Oklahoma . 
 = = Musical styles = = 
 Stone is known primarily for his neotraditionalist country sound , his baritone singing voice , and emphasis on ballads . In Country Music : A Biographical Dictionary , Richard Carlin describes him as " a solid country crooner whose style is reminiscent of Merle Haggard . " Steve Huey of Allmusic wrote that Stone " made his name as a lonesome baritone balladeer , though he 's also adept at hard uptempo country . " Zell Miller , author of They Heard Georgia Singing , wrote that Stone has " established himself as a mellow country crooner who is known as ' Mr. Sensitive ' " and " the Dean Martin of country music because of his unique flair for communicating the fragility of a broken heart with his delicate baritone voice and laid @-@ back style . " 
 Kurt Wolff of Country Music : The Rough Guide described Stone 's musical style less favorably . He wrote that Stone seemed " schizophrenic . Half his reputation was established with self @-@ deprecating downers like ' I 'd Be Better Off ( In a Pine Box ) ' , but then he 'd just as easily turn around with a schmaltzy love song like ' Too Busy Being in Love ' . " He compared " I 'd Be Better Off " and " Warning Labels " favorably to Haggard as well , and thought that the change of producers on More Love gave him a " much beefier sound " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Albums 
 Doug Stone ( 1990 ) 
 I Thought It Was You ( 1991 ) 
 From the Heart ( 1992 ) 
 The First Christmas ( 1992 ) 
 More Love ( 1993 ) 
 Greatest Hits , Vol . 1 ( 1994 ) 
 Faith in Me , Faith in You ( 1995 ) 
 Make Up in Love ( 1999 ) 
 The Long Way ( 2002 ) 
 In a Different Light ( 2005 ) 
 My Turn ( 2007 ) 
 Number @-@ one singles 
 " In a Different Light " ( 1991 ) 
 " A Jukebox with a Country Song " ( 1991 @-@ 1992 ) 
 " Too Busy Being in Love " ( 1992 @-@ 1993 ) 
 " Why Didn 't I Think of That " ( 1993 ) 
 = Soul Food Taqueria = 
 Soul Food Taqueria is the third studio album by former professional skateboarder and <unk> Projects @-@ member Tommy Guerrero , released April 8 , 2003 , on Mo ' Wax Records . Recording sessions for the album took place during 2002 and 2003 at the Function 8 record label 's studio in San Francisco , California . Production , instrumentation and songwriting was primarily handled by Guerrero , with contributions from producers Gadget and Monte Vallier . 
 The album consists mostly of downtempo , instrumental and sample @-@ based chill @-@ out music with musical influences such as Latin soul , R & B , trip hop and lo @-@ fi music . It also features only a few vocal contributions from guest artists , which include rapper Lyrics Born and singer Gresham Taylor . Its cover artwork , depicting a taquería that also serves soul food , was designed by artist Stephen Powers . 
 The album was not promoted well , no radio singles were issued , and it did not chart . Despite no commercial and sales success , Soul Food Taqueria was mostly well received by music critics , who commended its diverse style , production quality , and viewed it as a progression for Guerrero from his 2000 album A Little Bit of Somethin ' . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Recording for Soul Food Taqueria took place at the recording studio of the San Francisco @-@ based independent label Function 8 from 2002 to 2003 . Mostly handled by Tommy Guerrero , production for the album also featured audio mixing contributions from producer / engineers Gadget and Monte Vallier . Prior to these sessions , Gadget and Guerrero had previously worked together on independent label projects and collaborations , including their <unk> studio effort , Hoy Yen Ass 'n ( 2000 ) for Function 8 . Most of the instrumentation for the album was employed by Guerrero , while session drummer Chuck Treece and keyboardist Greg Galbreath also contributed to Soul Food Taqueria . All of the album 's material was written and arranged by Tommy Guerrero . 
 The album is primarily sample @-@ based and instrumental , as recording and production followed a lo @-@ fi and downtempo aesthetic . Gadget also assisted in vocal production for the album 's three vocal tracks , " Organism " , " It Gets Heavy " and " Getting It Together " . In contrast to Guerrero 's previous studio album A Little Bit of Somethin ' ( 2000 ) , production for Soul Food Taqueria was more polished , despite Guerrero stating that he is " still down with the fucked up 4 track action " upon the album 's release . During recording , the instrumentation , sequencing and mixing were more detailed than its predecessor 's , as noted by one critic who wrote " everything sounds much more polished and in tune with their surroundings . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 Music writers note that the album was inspired by the San Francisco music scene , with Allmusic 's Bryan Carroll citing the " general street vibe of San Francisco 's Mission district " . BBC Collective editor Matt Walton described the music as " chillout music " . According to one music writer , the title of the album reflects its " spicy fusion of soul , funk , hip @-@ hop and Latin flavors stirred up in an intoxicating downtempo gumbo that is hard to resist " . According to Carmen Johnson of Prefix magazine , the album has Tommy Guerrero , a San Francisco @-@ native , " oozing soul in every track " . She also described the music of Soul Food Taqueria as " an exploration into soulful , bass @-@ heavy trip @-@ hop that combines a lot of twists and sweeps through many genres and styles " . 
 The album 's music mixes 1970s soul music elements with Latin @-@ style grooves , as well as R & B , samba , drum and bass , and trip hop . The songs also have a retro vibe . One writer noted the diverse musical elements of the album , writing that it contains a " hybrid sound that ’ s hard to categorize and easy to enjoy " . Several of the songs on the album are built on laid @-@ back breakbeat samples . A notable influence on the music is the West Coast jazz of Chet Baker . Similar to Guerrero 's previous work , which has been described as " instrumental neo @-@ funk " , Soul Food Taqueria encompasses influences from stripped down folk , jazz , lounge , guitar @-@ blues , rock and minimal funk , as well as indie rock . Despite Guerrero 's musical background , a CMJ columnist noted the album 's similarity to New York City 's experimental music scene , citing artists such as the Beastie Boys , Cibo Matto , <unk> and Luscious Jackson . Lily Moayeri of Remix Magazine noted the similarity of the album 's " low @-@ key soul threaded through the understated funk " to the work of underground artist Money Mark . 
 Guerrero 's guitar work for the album encompasses styles such as blues and flamenco music , and uses chord progressions and four note melodies , creating " nimble and colorful pieces of musical texture " when mixed in with the rest of the tracks ' instrumentation . His guitar playing utilizes a minimal , acoustic and sparse sound and space blended with the live percussion of drummer Chuck Treece , Jupiter @-@ heavy bass lines and keyboardist Greg Galbreath 's synths . Vocals are more prevalent on the album than on Guerrero 's previous recordings , with vocal tracks from rapper Lyrics Born of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> fame , and long time friend and collaborator , lo @-@ fi and indie pop singer @-@ songwriter Gresham Taylor , credited as Gresham for the album . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The minute @-@ long intro track , entitled " <unk> Chile Goat " , is a blues @-@ based guitar instrumental performed alone by Tommy Guerrero . The album opener " Abierto " ( open in Spanish ) consists of low bass lines , allowing for guitar solo interplay that stylistically contrasts the bass , while bells jingle quietly with the drums . " Organism " contains predominant wah @-@ wah guitar effects , which accompany a notable funk groove . " Thank You ( MK ) " is an ode to the tropics and features soft , jazz instrumentation . Guerrero 's guitar arrangement for the song is reminiscent of the music of Brazilian bossa nova musician João Gilberto and American jazz saxophonist Stan Getz , with guitar licks similar to the playing @-@ style of jazz guitarist Wes Montgomery . 
 Accompanied by delicate harmonies , " Tatanka " is a funk @-@ infused and bass @-@ driven track that features intricate percussion and guitar riffs , as well as unique fret @-@ work by Guerrero . The album contains three atmospheric break tracks , " Train of Thought " , " So Many Years Ago " and " And the Day Goes By " . One critic stated that the interludes " render the ambience palpable " . The <unk> " It Gets Heavy " features melancholic lyrics and folk vocals by Gresham Taylor , which are similar to those of singer @-@ songwriter John Secada . " Thin Brown Layer " has a noticeable Latin rhythm and guitar arrangement . The song also contains a predominant hypnotic beat , which , according to one music critic , " makes you feel stoned even after completing a Twelve step program " . " Terra <unk> " , " Another Brother Gone " and " Broken Blood " are built around laid @-@ back grooves and detailed guitar orchestrations . 
 The moody " It Gets Heavy " features Guerrero and Gresham Taylor singing , and is reminiscent of trip hop artist Tricky , contributing to the album 's general sound of hip @-@ hop infected Latin soul . Its lyrics have been described as " socially conscious but thought @-@ provoking " . Cited by critics as the standout track on the album , Bryan Carroll described it as " the sole hip @-@ shaker among a gaggle of moodier pieces " . The bongo @-@ driven track " Lost <unk> " has Guerrero occupying all instruments , and the album 's third vocal track , " Gettin ' It Together " , features rapper Lyrics Born delivering a blend of <unk> and singing , which is a departure from his previous work . One music writer described the album 's closing track , " Falling Awake " , as " the most beautiful song Guerrero ’ s written to date " . The song contains melancholic piano arrangements . Another critic noted " Falling Awake " ' s meditative sound , writing that its light guitar melodies are " slowly ascending on a journey of Satori " . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 The album 's front and back cover artwork , which depict a taquería that serves soul food , was designed by world @-@ renowned graffiti artist and graphic designer Stephen J. Powers , also known as by his moniker <unk> . On September 29 , 2007 , the album 's artwork and other similar works by Powers were displayed at Coney Island 's Dreamland Artist Clubhouse in Brooklyn , New York during his studio visit there . 
 Music journalists have noted the title and artwork as reflective of the album 's musical influences . A columnist for the Santa Fe Reporter later described the artwork as " totally cool , with a blocky style depicting some kind of Miami soul food / taco stand . " Music journalist Kimberley Chun of the San Francisco Bay Guardian wrote of the concept , stating " So what is a soul food taquería ? Do you get a side of collard greens with your <unk> ? " In an interview with Chun , Guerrero discussed the concept and title , stating " It 's just this funny idea I had , growing up in the city – it 's so diverse . The city itself is just down @-@ home , down @-@ to @-@ earth , blue @-@ collar , full of everyday kind of people . My music is along the same lines , just being simple – I just try to be honest in what I do . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The album featured release in three different countries ; the United States on April 8 , 2003 and the United Kingdom on April 14 of that same year on Mo ' Wax Records , and Japan on April 26 , 2003 through the Japanese record label Flavour of Sound Ltd . Released by Flavour of Sound , the Japanese issue of the album contains bonus material previously featured on Guerrero 's Junk Collector EP ( 2001 ) . Soul Food Taqueria was released on the iTunes Store as a digital download on April 28 , 2003 . 
 According to website sources such as Allmusic and Billboard.com , the album has not exhibited any charting in the United States since its release . Soul Food Taqueria received some airplay on the college radio station <unk> . In Canada , it peaked at number 6 on the CKUA Radio Network 's Best of 2003 chart . No promotional or radio singles were released from the album . " Gettin ' It Together " later featured a limited edition single release in 12 " vinyl format on March 22 , 2004 , through the Santa Cruz @-@ based label Galaxia . The cover art for the single was designed by Stephen ( <unk> ) Powers , designer of the album 's artwork . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Soul Food Taqueria was well received by music critics . Exclaim ! editor Noel Dix observed an improvement in production and complexity of instrumentation by Guerrero from his earlier work , and stated , " This record pours so much heart and emotion into it that you ’ re bound to feel its warmth and splendor while it ’ s bumping in your <unk> as you trek the city streets . " Noting that A Little Bit of Somethin ' was criticized as a " lifeless piece of pop @-@ trip @-@ hop " , Brian Ho of Dusted praised Guerrero 's artistic growth and found " everything " to be " an improvement over its <unk> " , writing that the album " is filled to the brim with body and life in a way that few albums can claim " . XLR8R critic Liz Cordingley called the album a " nice case of dubby , electric guitar @-@ driven downtempo " , and called its music " dusty lo @-@ fi soul that is seductively languid " . Joe <unk> of the Washington City Paper praised Guerrero 's minimalist approach to the album 's chill @-@ out sound , as the chill @-@ out music genre mostly features implementation of a slicker production . He also compared the lo @-@ fi grooves of Soul Food Taqueria to " Shuggie Otis with Baja roots " . Carmen Johnson of Prefix Mag called it a " stellar follow @-@ up to 2000 's A Little Bit of Somethin ' " , and commended Guerrero for producing " his own organic , subterranean blend of bohemian blues , hip @-@ hop and salsa that 's creative and adventurous " . Johnson called it " the perfect soundtrack for the lazy days that hearken back to the end of summer . " 
 In a mixed review , Luke McManus of RTÉ compared its songs to " those jazzy Beastie Boys tracks " , and described the sound as " undemanding and smooth " . However , McManus criticized the album 's mood and wrote , " Soporific , over polite and too damn quiet , Soul Food <unk> veers dangerously close to snooze territory . " Bryan Carroll of Allmusic criticized the predominance of " mood pieces " , and stated , " on the whole Soul Food Taqueria fails to stick to the ribs because it simply lacks the proper spice " . Other critics cited Guerrero 's simple , inventive style and sound for the album as one of its better qualities . Bill Campbell of Ink 19 called the album an " exemplary album ... 100 % soul " . He also commended Guerrero 's musicality , " he constructs heartfelt music with a complexity few can pull off successfully " , as well as his guitar playing , as Campbell wrote " his guitar work is subtle and works the spaces between the beats marvelously " . 
 Canadian radio station CKUA ranked the album number 93 on its Best of 2003 Chart . Uptown contributor Anthony Augustine named Soul Food Taqueria as one of the Top 10 albums of 2003 . In a January 2004 issue , <unk> <unk> of Germany 's publication of Rolling Stone ranked the album number two on his " best of list " of 2003 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Tommy Guerrero . 
 * Co @-@ producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from album sleeve liner notes . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Lisa 's Rival = 
 " Lisa 's Rival " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 11 , 1994 . It was the first episode to be written by Mike Scully , and was directed by Mark Kirkland . Winona Ryder guest stars as Allison Taylor , a new student at Springfield Elementary School . Lisa Simpson begins to feel threatened by Allison because she is smarter , younger and a better saxophone player than she is . Their rivalry reaches a climax at the school 's diorama contest , as Lisa plans to sabotage Allison 's entry . The episode 's subplot sees Homer steal a large pile of sugar from a crashed truck , and begin selling it door @-@ to @-@ door . 
 Although written by Scully , the episode was originally pitched by former writer Conan O 'Brien , while the subplot was suggested by George Meyer . It features references to films such as The Fugitive and Scarface , while production of the episode was affected by the 1994 Northridge earthquake . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lisa feels her status as top student in the class is threatened when a new student named Allison Taylor arrives at Springfield Elementary . While Lisa initially admires having another 8 year old who matches her intellectual prowess , she becomes shocked upon learning that in fact Allison is a year younger than her and had been skipped ahead from the 1st grade in addition to which she is also an aspiring saxophone player . 
 Lisa tries to befriend her , though she battles her envy and fears that she will lose her purpose . At a band practice , the two girls end up in a saxophone duel that results in Lisa passing out from over @-@ exertion . Their rivalry comes to a head during Springfield Elementary 's annual diorama building competition . Allison constructs a scene from " The Tell @-@ Tale Heart " , by Edgar Allan Poe . Lisa goes to great efforts to produce a better diorama , a scene from Oliver Twist , but it is immediately destroyed by an electric fan that Lisa utilizes , along with fake snow , to simulate a " bitter snowstorm " . Bart decides to intervene and help Lisa sabotage Allison 's entry so she can win . On the day of the diorama contest , he distracts the other students with his own demonstrations to give Lisa time to switch Allison 's entry with one containing a cow 's heart . After Principal Skinner chases Bart away , he discovers the cow 's heart in the diorama and proceeds to humiliate Allison in front of the entire school . Soon Lisa 's conscience intervenes and she produces the real diorama . 
 However , Skinner is unimpressed by both Lisa 's and Allison 's work and declares Ralph Wiggum 's collection of Star Wars action figures to be the winner . In the end , Lisa and Allison put aside their differences and become friends as they walk off into the sunset , picking up Ralph along the way after he accidentally trips and breaks his action figures . 
 The episode 's subplot follows Homer after he encounters and then steals hundreds of pounds of sugar he finds at the site of Hans Moleman 's truck accident . Homer decides he can get rich by selling the sugar door @-@ to @-@ door . He keeps the sugar in a pile in his back yard , where he obsessively guards it from thieves . Soon , the sugar attracts bees from a local apiary . The beekeepers track the swarm down and offer to buy the bees back from Homer for $ 2 @,@ 000 . Before the transaction can be completed , however , it begins to rain , dissolving the sugar ; the bees fly away , leaving Homer without any money or sugar . 
 = = Production = = 
 Production of the episode was disrupted by the 1994 Northridge earthquake , which also affected the previous episode " Bart of Darkness " . The Film Roman building used by the staff was so badly damaged it had to be condemned . They were relocated to a new building for a year , and much of the animation for the episode was done by people at home . The day after the earthquake , the only staff members who turned up for work were Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein . Overall production of The Simpsons was disrupted for six months , with a month of production time being lost . 
 Although written by Mike Scully , the episode 's original concept was pitched by Conan O 'Brien before he left the show . O 'Brien suggested having an episode about a rival for Lisa , but the rest of the episode 's storyline was written by Scully and other staff members . It was the first episode Scully wrote for the show , and he would later become showrunner . Winona Ryder guest starred as Allison Taylor . She was a fan of the show and was popular amongst the staff . David Mirkin recalled that more writers came to her recording session than any other . Her character 's name was derived from the names of two of Scully 's daughters , Allison and Taylor . The subplot was pitched by George Meyer . Homer 's sugar diatribe was pitched by Meyer off the top of his head and animated by David Silverman , who specifically asked to animate the scene after listening to Dan Castellaneta 's performance . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode contains several references to film , television , literature and music . For example , Milhouse 's sub @-@ story is a reference to the 1993 film The Fugitive . The film is principally parodied in the scene where Milhouse is at the end of a dam drainpipe and dives into a waterfall when being held at gunpoint by an FBI agent resembling Tommy Lee Jones , who uses the film 's famous line " I don 't care " . Homer 's " In America " speech while guarding his sugar pile is a direct reference to one of Tony Montana 's lines in Scarface , and his line " Oh what a world ! " when the sugar melts is the same line used by the Wicked Witch of the West in The Wizard of Oz , when she melts . Additionally , Ralph 's diorama contest entry is just original Star Wars action figures : his collection includes Luke Skywalker , Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi and Chewbacca . Lisa 's hiding of The Tell @-@ Tale Heart diorama under the gym floorboards is a parody of Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Tell @-@ Tale Heart " , while the speech patterns of the beekeeper voiced by Hank Azaria are based on Adam West 's portrayal of Batman . Finally , Lisa 's imagination features her playing in a band with famous backup artists : Art Garfunkel , John Oates and Jim Messina . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Lisa 's Rival " finished tied for 23rd place ( with Dateline NBC ) in the weekly ratings for the week of September 5 to September 11 , 1994 with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 9 . It was the second highest rated show on the Fox Network that week . 
 In a 2008 article , Entertainment Weekly named Winona Ryder 's role as Allison Taylor as one of the sixteen best The Simpsons guest stars , while IGN placed her sixth on their list of the " Top 25 Simpsons Guest Stars . " They also highlighted Ralph 's " classic " lines : " I bent my Wookiee " , and " My cat 's breath smells like cat food . " Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , the authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , stated : " Despite being a Lisa show , it is poor Ralph Wiggum who steals the show with three great irrelevant replies , especially those concerning his cat 's breath . " They also highlighted " great scenes between the Simpson siblings , especially Bart 's idea to conquer Allison using a hose pipe . " 
 = Cyclone Ilona = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Ilona caused moderate damage across the Pilbara region of Western Australia in mid @-@ December 1988 . The system originated from a monsoon trough that coalesced into a tropical low over the Timor Sea on 12 December . The system initially moved southwest , before moving on a more westerly course . Steady intensification occurred and Ilona reached its peak strength on 17 December as a low @-@ end severe tropical cyclone . A southward turn directed the cyclone toward Western Australia , and it made landfall near Mardie Station . The system subsequently degraded over land and dissipated on 19 December . 
 The cyclone 's effects were relatively limited , though locally significant damage was reported in areas such as Dampier and Karratha . Several homes lost their roof and downed power lines left towns without power for several days . No casualties were reported , damage amounted to A $ 1 million ( US $ 725 @,@ 000 ) , and the name Ilona was retired after the season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A monsoon trough was noted along the coast of Australia 's Northern Territory in late November into early December 1988 . This system led to sporadic heavy rain in the region . On 12 December , a tropical low consolidated from the monsoon trough over the Timor Sea , west of Darwin , Northern Territory . Moving southwest , the system skirted the Kimberley coast before turning west . Acquiring gale @-@ force winds by 00 : 00 UTC on 13 December , the low was classified as a Category 1 tropical cyclone and assigned the name Ilona by the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centre ( TCWC ) in Perth , Western Australia . At this time it was situated near Adele Island . Twelve hours later , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also began issuing advisories , dubbing it Tropical Cyclone 03S . <unk> somewhat , Ilona steadily intensified over the following days and achieved severe tropical cyclone status — having ten @-@ minute sustained winds of at least 118 km / h ( 73 mph ) — around 12 : 00 UTC on 15 December . Similarly , the JTWC assessed the system to have reached the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale ( SSHS ) by 18 : 00 UTC . 
 Ilona turned south , and later south @-@ southeast , on 15 December and began a steady approach to Western Australia . Slight intensification took place , with the cyclone achieving its peak strength around 00 : 00 UTC on 17 December with ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 960 hPa ( mbar ; 28 @.@ 35 inHg ) . The JTWC estimated Ilona to be slightly stronger , with maximum one @-@ minute sustained winds of 155 km / h ( 100 mph ) — a Category 2 @-@ equivalent on the SSHS . That day , Ilona passed near the North Rankin gas platform . Around 16 : 00 UTC , the eye of Ilona made landfall near Mardie Station . Around 16 : 30 UTC , the center of Ilona passed over the town , with a five minute period of calm observed . An eye passage was also reported in Fortescue Roadhouse . The cyclone rapidly decayed as it accelerated inland , falling below tropical cyclone strength by 00 : 00 UTC on 19 December , at which time it was situated northeast of Meekatharra . Thereafter , the decaying low turned east and ultimately dissipated later that day just west of the Western Australia – South Australia border . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On 15 December , areas across Pilbara were placed on alert for the storm 's arrival ; however , as the storm continued west , the alert was dropped . The warning was quickly reinstated when forecasts showed Ilona moving south . Officials indicated that residents had roughly 12 hours to fully prepare . 
 Striking Pilbara as a severe tropical cyclone , Ilona caused significant damage in the region ; however , the sparsely populated nature of the region limited the extent of severe damage . Mardie Station was buffeted by hurricane @-@ force winds with gusts up to 174 km / h ( 108 mph ) . An unconfirmed report indicated gusts as high as 220 km / h ( 140 mph ) . These winds uprooted trees , downed power lines , and tore roofs from homes in multiple locales ; extensive damage occurred in Roebourne , Wickham , Dampier , Karratha , Pannawonica , and Tom Price . Homes and caravans sustained damage in Karratha , reportedly the hardest @-@ hit area according to State Emergency Services . Affected areas were without power for several days , and crews from Port Hedland were called in to assist . Heavy rains also accompanied the system , with accumulations exceeding 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) across much of Pilbara , breaking December records at the time ; two @-@ day accumulations exceeded 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) in some locations . The rainfall was mostly beneficial to the region . Offshore , the combined effects of Cyclones Ilona and Orson in March 1989 caused tremendous damage to coral reefs — mainly populated by Acropora — in eastern areas of Mermaid Sound . Turbulent waters killed or broke apart 50 – 100 % of the living coral across all sites in the sound . In coastal Dampier , 12 boats sank , capsized , or were washed ashore . Damage amounted to A $ 1 million ( US $ 725 @,@ 000 ) . 
 Though no casualties were reported , the effects of Ilona were deemed severe enough for its name to be retired after the season . 
 = Chester Rock Light = 
 Chester Rock Light was a light in Chester , Connecticut on the Connecticut River . It was built in 1889 as part of a $ 15 @,@ 000 appropriation by the United States Congress . The 21 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 4 meter ) tall wooden hexagonal pyramidal tower had a black lantern with a 6th order Fresnel lens . The light was first lit on July 1 , 1889 . The tower was replaced in 1912 by a skeleton tower that was subsequently modified in 1927 . Records do not show the deactivation or destruction of the light , but it was believed to have been removed in the 1930s . In the 1990s , the Deep River Historical Society of Deep River , Connecticut wanted to build a replica of the structure for use as a daymark . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Chester Rock Light was constructed in 1889 as part of a $ 15 @,@ 000 appropriation by Congress that included several other beacons . The exact cost of the structure is unknown . Originally constructed as a 21 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 4 meter ) tall wooden hexagonal pyramidal tower , the Chester Rock Light had a black lantern with a 6th order Fresnel lens . First lit on July 1 , 1889 with a fixed red light the light was changed to a fixed white light on December 15 , 1892 . According to the Light List , the light was located on Chester Rock on the west side of the Connecticut River and about .75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) north of Deep River , Connecticut . 
 A Lighthouse Inspection Report from the United States Lighthouse Society from December 1889 states that the hexagonal tower was only accessible by boat . The light 's foundation rested upon the river bottom and was a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 meter ) square crib that was made of yellow pine timbers and sheathed with planks . The crib was filled with stones and protected by riprap . The crib extended up to the high water mark to a frustum of a 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) square pyramid that is reduced to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) at its top and filled with stone . The sides and top are planked and the corners were covered with boiler plate and angle irons . The original light was a hexagonal beacon lantern made of brass and copper . The oil for the light was stored in boxes in the lower portion of the lantern . 
 = = Skeleton tower = = 
 According to the Annual Report of the Lighthouse Board , the tower was struck and carried away by a barge being towed by Sachem , a tugboat , on May 10 , 1912 . The cost of repairs , $ 602 @.@ 40 , was paid by the owner . During the intervening period , a temporary light post was used in its place . Completed on October 22 , 1912 , the replacement skeletal tower was a pyramidal steel structure on a concrete base that held its oil internally . The base of the tower was painted white and the daymark was painted black . The skeleton tower lantern was raised to 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) above the water and its light had about 170 candlepower . 
 It is unknown if a new skeleton tower was installed at a different location than the original tower or if an intervening tower was previously erected in the same location , but the original stone foundation is visible 100 feet ( 30 m ) from the west bank . In 1900 , the geographical coordinates were then given as 41 @.@ 2354 North and 72 @.@ 2602 West , but this differs from the modern GPS location which is 41 @.@ <unk> North and 72 @.@ 2450 West . 
 = = Service = = 
 Service records for Chester Rock Light show that the light was deactivated for the winter of 1911 and 1914 . In 1914 , the light was deactivated between January 12 – 15 and relit between March 14 – 16 . The skeleton tower was modified in 1927 , but there are no records about additional work or action with the light . In 1931 , an article in The Day noted that the skeleton tower was " in recent years " converted to automatic gas beacons . As of 2014 , the skeleton tower is known as Light 35 and features a green flashing light every 4 seconds . 
 In the 1990s , the Deep River Historical Society of Deep River , Connecticut discovered a photo of the light and began to research its history . Joel Severance , chairman of the harbor commission , wanted to build a 28 @-@ foot ( 8 @.@ 5 meter ) tall replica that would primarily function as a daymark and their plan was endorsed by the Connecticut Department of Transportation in the United States Coast Guard and both the town of Deep River and Middlesex County , Connecticut , but it was expected to be denied by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection . In 2000 , the plan was rejected by the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection . 
 = Hull Castle = 
 Hull Castle was an artillery fort in Kingston upon Hull in England . Together with two supporting blockhouses , it defended the eastern side of the River Hull , and was constructed by King Henry VIII to protect against attack from France as part of his Device programme in 1542 . The castle had two large , curved bastions and a rectangular keep at its centre ; the blockhouses to the north and south had three curved bastions supporting guns , and a curtain wall and moat linked the blockhouses and castle . The construction project used material from recently dissolved monasteries , and cost £ 21 @,@ 056 . The town took over responsibility for these defences in 1553 , leading to a long running dispute with the Crown as to whether the civic authorities were fulfilling their responsibilities to maintain them . 
 During the 16th and 17th centuries , the defences were used to imprison Catholic recusants , who were often held in harsh conditions . The castle and blockhouses saw service during the sieges of the English Civil War in the 1640s , and remained in used during the interregnum . After the restoration of Charles II , the buildings were neglected until the King redeveloped the eastern defences of Hull in 1681 , creating a larger fortification called the Citadel . The castle and the South Blockhouse formed part of the new design , although the North Blockhouse was allowed to fall into ruins and finally demolished in 1801 . The former buildings remained in use , with various modifications , until the Citadel was demolished in 1864 to allow the construction of new docks . The foundations survived and have been the subject of archaeological investigations . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 Hull Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Modest defences based around simple blockhouses and towers existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry broke with Pope Paul III over the annulment of his long @-@ standing marriage to Catherine of Aragon . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , who took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . The immediate threat passed , but resurfaced in 1544 , with France threatening an invasion across the English Channel , backed by her allies in Scotland . Henry therefore issued another device to further improve the country 's defences . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Hull Castle was constructed to defend the east side of the town of Kingston upon Hull against a possible French attack ; it was also intended to ensure the loyalty of the population , who had taken part in a revolt against the King in 1536 . Henry had visited Hull in late 1541 and had observed that , although the town had strong walls to the north and west , it lacked adequate defences in the event of an attack from the east , while the harbour was only protected by a " little round brick tower " . Henry issued orders for the existing town defences to be repaired and renovated but , before the work could commence , he changed his mind and issued fresh instructions in early 1542 . John Roberts , a military engineer previously stationed in Guînes , was brought back to England to construct a major system of defences on the east bank of the River Humber , comprising a central castle linked to two large blockhouses . 
 The design of the new defences was probably carried out by Rogers and resembled his earlier work near Calais , although the King probably also made some decisions on the project personally . Sir Richard Long and Michael Stanhope were instructed to oversee the construction of the defences , with Thomas Aldred acting as the project 's paymaster and William Reynolds in the role of master mason . Initial estimates suggested that 530 workers would be needed , including masons , carpenters and plumbers , but more may have been required in practice . Some of the building materials were taken from monastic institutions , which had recently dissolved by Henry ; stone and lead was taken from the nearby Meaux Abbey , further stone from the friaries in Hull and probably also from St Mary 's Church in Hull , which had recently collapsed . At least some of the bricks needed were made in a series of ten kilns beside the site itself . The land needed for the buildings had been seized during the dissolution of the monasteries . By December 1543 , £ 21 @,@ 056 had been spent on the project . 
 The castle was rectangular , with brick and stone foundations and a brick superstructure . It had two large , curved bastions containing chambers on the west and east ends , and a three @-@ storey rectangular keep in the middle , 66 by 50 feet ( 20 by 15 m ) across , set within an inner courtyard . The outer wall was 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) thick and contained a gallery and ports for hand @-@ guns , and supported two tiers of artillery . A moat ran around the outside of the castle . The two @-@ storey tall blockhouses were also built from brick and stone , and each had a square central tower and entrance at the rear , and three curved bastions to the front and sides . Their walls were 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) thick , sloped so as to deflect incoming fire , and supported two tiers of guns ; the interiors were partitioned , to reduce the risk of explosions damaging the entire fortification . The use of bastions adopted some features from the Italian @-@ style of defences then popular on the continent , but their design was imperfect and failed to provide flanking cover or interlink with the neighbouring defences . A crenellated curtain wall , approximately 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) long and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) high , linked the blockhouses and castle , with a wet moat on the eastward side . 
 = = = = Operation = = = = 
 After the construction , Sir Richard Long and Michael Stanhope were placed in command of the castle and blockhouses ; the initial garrison may have been substantial , costing around £ 1 @,@ 000 a year , but this was mostly demobilised at the end of 1542 . Nonetheless , the castle and blockhouses still proved expensive to maintain . As a result , in 1553 , an agreement was reached with the corporation of Hull , under which the town would take over responsibility for their maintenance , in exchange for an annual grant of £ 50 from various local manors . The town provided a bond of £ 2 @,@ 000 as a commitment that it would keep its commitments . The mayor of Hull also took over the role of the Governor of Hull , with " keepers " were appointed by the town to run each of the buildings ; the pasture land behind the fortifications was rented out to bring in income . 
 Arguments soon broke out between the Crown and the corporation over the deal . The Crown argued that the corporation was not adequately maintaining the castle and blockhouses . The Earl of Sussex complained in 1569 that they were in need of repair , and a 1576 survey stated that their gun platforms were in poor condition and that the ditches had become clogged with earth , while coastal erosion had undermined the South Blockhouse . Queen Elizabeth I provided 300 trees to help the repair work and a new jetty was built to protect the southern end of the defences from the sea . The Crown gave 60 trees to the town to help with further repairs in 1581 . Fears of a Spanish invasion resulted in fresh repairs being carried out , and the threat of the Armada in 1588 resulted in proposals to build additional earthworks around the blockhouses , but nothing appear to have actually been carried out . The dispute over maintenance between the Crown and the town finally came to court in 1588 ; the corporation argued that green timber had been used in the original construction work and claimed that they had spent £ 2 @,@ 893 between 1552 and 1587 on the defences : the Crown 's case failed . 
 A new bridge , North Bridge , was built over the River Hull in the 1540s , protected by artillery in the North Blockhouse . From 1577 onwards , the castle and blockhouses began to be used to contain Catholic recusants , with as many as 16 prisoners being known to have been detained at any one time . The ground @-@ floor of the South Blockhouse was often used for this purpose ; the conditions were particularly poor , with contemporary accounts noting that the quarters " have been overflowed with water at high tide , so that they walked , the earth was so raw and moist that their shoes would cleave to the ground " . Another Spanish invasion scare in 1597 led to the castle and blockhouses being put on alert , and the recusants were temporarily removed for security reasons . 
 = = = 17th century = = = 
 The arguments over the maintenance of the castle and blockhouses continued in early 1600s . The town of Hull argued that since the revenues of £ 50 granted in 1553 were insufficient to maintain these defences , they should be allowed to use royal customs duties to assist in the work , particularly in protecting the east bank of the river from erosion . As a result , another court case was brought by the Crown in 1601 . A commission was established to examine the defences and concluded that the position of the castle meant that it was militarily useless , and as a consequence it had not been garrisoned or maintained for many years , resulting in it falling into total disrepair . The commission 's report led to the town carrying repairs to the earthwork defences over the coming year . The Crown dropped its law case , but a third case was brought in 1634 , only to see the Crown pull out of the proceedings once again . By now , the corporation argued it had spent £ 11 @,@ 367 on the defences . 
 Around 1627 , Robert Morton , the mayor of Hull , had an additional rectangular earthwork battery of four guns constructed around the south blockhouse to defend the estuary against a potential Spanish and French invasion threat . The South End Fort was built on the other side of the river from the South Blockhouse at the same time , provided supporting crossfire . In 1634 , a survey showed the North Blockhouse to be mounting 24 pieces of artillery , the castle 29 , and the South Blockhouse 24 guns . Catholic recusants continued to be detained in the castle and blockhouses , where they were ill @-@ treated by the keepers , typically men with strong Puritan sympathies . 
 At the outbreak of the English Civil War in 1642 , Hull sided with Parliament against King Charles I. Hull was besieged by the Royalists in July 1642 , and the South Blockhouse may have been used to drive off a Royalist naval vessel approaching the estuary . In 1643 , the mayor , Thomas Raikes , and the Parliamentarians in Hull concluded that the governor , Sir John Hotham , was planning to seize the castle and the wider town for the King . In a pre @-@ emptive strike in June , Captain Moyer landed 100 troops from the Parliamentary warship the Hercules and took the castle and blockhouses , while Raikes seized the town itself . Hotham was later executed . A further siege followed in 1643 , during which the area to the east of the castle and blockhouses was deliberately flooded by the defenders to provide additional protection . In September , the south bastion of the North Blockhouse was accidentally blown up by one of the defenders , killing five men . 
 The artillery exchanges during the sieges and the activities of the garrisons had caused considerable damage , and at the end of the conflict the military Governor of Hull ordered repairs . The North Blockhouse needed work costing £ 1 @,@ 500 , Hull Castle , £ 300 , and the South Blockhouse , £ 220 . During the interregnum , the fortifications were maintained , despite complaints from the town at the costs , and were used to hold both prisoners of war and political prisoners . Henry Slingsby , for example , was held at the castle before his trial in London . 
 When Charles II was restored to the throne in 1660 , the interregnum army was demobilised ; a guard @-@ force remained in Hull to protect the arsenal there , being officially referred to as the " Hull Blockhouse " garrison . All three sites were garrisoned : surveys reported that the South Blockhouse was in a good condition and held 21 guns , the castle was in a poor condition and held only 8 light guns , and the North Blockhouse was in a " ruinous " condition and held 10 guns . An order was taken to strip the most ruined parts of the North Blockhouse of its timber , bricks and lead to help improve the remainder , supplemented by additional supplies of timber and bricks donated by the Crown , but the material was misappropriated and used , in part , for construction work on the houses of the Governor and his deputy . 
 The defences were neglected for several decades , despite calls for improvements and when the military engineer Sir Martin Beckman visited the sites in 1681 , he concluded that they were " very much out of repair " : the North Blockhouse was " altogether dismantled " , the South Blockhouse needed extensive repairs and the moat had been left to entirely silt up . Recusants continued to be detained in the castle , which was regarded by the national authorities as a particularly suitable prison for this class of prisoner . 
 The Crown decided to construct a new , triangular fortification called the Hull Citadel on the eastern side of the river , incorporating the castle and the South Blockhouse . Beckman was responsible for the design and the work took place between 1681 and 1690 at a cost of over £ 100 @,@ 000 . The South Blockhouse was repaired and strengthened with a water bastion , and formed the south @-@ west corner of the Citadel ; the castle was integrated into the north corner and protected by a new bastion . The intervening curtain wall was partially demolished to make way for the new works , while the last remains of the moat were filled in with clay . By 1699 , the castle itself no longer held any guns , although the South Bastion was equipped with three demi @-@ culverins and four sakers , all which were inoperable due to poor maintenance and the effect of the sea . The new fortifications were protected by a combination of soldiers from the regular Army , from Independent Companies under the control of the governor , and the " Castle Guard " of local soldiers . 
 = = = 18th – 21st centuries = = = 
 The castle and the South Blockhouse continued in use within the Citadel during the 18th and early 19th centuries . In 1746 , the South Blockhouse was redesigned with new embrasures , but the fortifications were largely neglected . During the Napoleonic Wars , the Citadel was extensively repaired ; the South Blockhouse was extensively altered to allow it to hold naval ordnance stores and the castle became an armoury , each wing able to hold 20 @,@ 000 stands of infantry weapons and 3 @,@ 000 cavalry arms . The North Blockhouse and the remnants of the curtain wall beyond the Citadel were in ruins by 1766 ; the blockhouse was let to private contractors , and then demolished altogether between 1801 and 1802 . 
 By the 19th century , extensive docks had grown up around the Citadel and in 1802 the surrounding land was granted to the Hull Dock Company . The Citadel remained in military use until 1848 , by when developments in military technology had made the fortification obsolete . In 1858 there were proposals to turn the site into a public park , but instead the Citadel , including Hull Castle and the South Blockhouse , was demolished in 1864 to make way for an expansion of the docks . 
 From 1969 onwards there have been a range of archaeological investigations around the area . The foundations of the Citadel , which had been too substantial to dismantle in the 19th century , were uncovered during urban regeneration works in 1987 , and archaeological digs have occurred on both the castle and the South Blockhouse sites . The foundations of these two buildings , along with the southern end of the Citadel remains , are protected under UK law as an Ancient Monument . During excavations in 1997 , an iron <unk> was discovered on the site of the South Blockhouse . The weapon , now known as " Henry 's Gun " , is one of only four such guns in the world to have survived from the period and is displayed at the Hull Museums . It was either made by Henry VIII 's gun @-@ maker or acquired from the Low Countries . By 1681 it would have been obsolete and was disposed of in 1681 during the construction of the Citadel . 
 = Erich von Manstein = 
 Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski , known as Erich von Manstein ( 24 November 1887 – 9 June 1973 ) , was a German commander of the Wehrmacht , Nazi Germany 's armed forces during the Second World War . He attained the rank of field marshal . 
 Born into an aristocratic Prussian family with a long history of military service , Manstein joined the army at a young age and saw service on Western Front and Eastern Front during the First World War ( 1914 – 18 ) . He rose to the rank of captain by the end of the war and was active in the inter @-@ war period helping Germany rebuild her armed forces . In September 1939 , during the invasion of Poland at the beginning of the Second World War , he was serving as Chief of Staff to Gerd von Rundstedt 's Army Group South . Adolf Hitler chose Manstein 's strategy for the invasion of France of May 1940 , a plan later refined by Franz Halder and other members of the OKH . Anticipating a firm Allied reaction should the main thrust of the invasion take place through the Netherlands , Manstein devised an innovative tactic — later known as the Sichelschnitt ( " sickle cut " ) — that called for an attack through the woods of the Ardennes and a rapid drive to the English Channel , thus cutting off the French and Allied armies in Belgium and Flanders . Attaining the rank of general at the end of the campaign , he was active in the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941 and the Siege of Sevastopol ( 1941 – 1942 ) , and was promoted to field marshal on 1 July 1942 . He also participated in the Siege of Leningrad . 
 Germany 's fortunes in the war began to take an unfavourable turn later in 1942 , especially in the catastrophic Battle of Stalingrad , where Manstein commanded a failed relief effort ( " Operation Winter Storm " ) in December . Later known as the " backhand blow " , Manstein 's counteroffensive in the Third Battle of Kharkov ( February – March 1943 ) regained substantial territory and resulted in the destruction of three Soviet armies and the retreat of three others . He was one of the primary commanders at the Battle of Kursk ( July – August 1943 ) , one of the largest tank battles in history . His ongoing disagreements with Hitler over the conduct of the war led to his dismissal in March 1944 . He never obtained another command and was taken prisoner by the British in August 1945 , several months after Germany 's defeat . 
 Manstein gave testimony at the main Nuremberg trials of war criminals in August 1946 , and prepared a paper that , along with his later memoirs , helped contribute to the myth of a " clean Wehrmacht " — the myth that the German armed forces were not culpable for the atrocities of the Holocaust . In 1949 he was tried in Hamburg for war crimes and was convicted on nine of seventeen counts , including the poor treatment of prisoners of war and failing to protect civilian lives in his sphere of operations . His sentence of eighteen years in prison was later reduced to twelve , and he served only four years before being released in 1953 . As a military advisor to the West German government in the mid @-@ 1950s , he helped re @-@ establish the armed forces . His successful memoir , Verlorene Siege ( 1955 ) , translated into English as Lost Victories , was highly critical of Hitler 's leadership , and only dealt with the military aspects of the war , ignoring its political and ethical contexts . Manstein died in Munich in 1973 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Manstein was born Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski in Berlin , the tenth son of a Prussian aristocrat and artillery general , Eduard von Lewinski ( 1829 – 1906 ) , and Helene von Sperling ( 1847 – 1910 ) . His father 's family had Kashubian ancestry and was entitled to use the <unk> coat of arms ( <unk> III ) . Hedwig von Sperling ( 1852 – 1925 ) , Helene 's younger sister , was married to Lieutenant General Georg von Manstein ( 1844 – 1913 ) ; the couple was unable to have children , so they adopted Erich . They had previously adopted Erich 's cousin Martha , the daughter of Helene 's and Hedwig 's deceased brother . 
 Manstein 's biological and adoptive fathers were both Prussian generals , as were his mother 's brother and both his grandfathers ( one of them , Albrecht Gustav von Manstein , had led a corps in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 ) . Sixteen relatives on each side of his family were military officers , many of whom rose to the rank of general . Paul von Hindenburg , the future Generalfeldmarschall and President of Germany , was his uncle ; Hindenburg 's wife , Gertrud , was the sister of Hedwig and Helene . 
 Manstein attended the Imperial <unk> , a Catholic Gymnasium in Strasbourg , from 1894 to 1899 . In March 1906 , after six years in the cadet corps in <unk> and Groß @-@ Lichterfelde , he was commissioned into the Third Foot Guards Regiment ( Garde zu Fuß ) as an ensign . He was promoted to lieutenant in January 1907 and in October 1913 began the three @-@ year officer training programme at the Prussian War Academy . However , Manstein only completed the first year of the programme , as when the First World War began in August 1914 all students of the Academy were ordered to report for active service . He never completed the remainder of his general staff officer training . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 = = = First World War = = = 
 During the First World War , Manstein served on both the German Western and Eastern Fronts . At the beginning of the war he was promoted to lieutenant and participated in the invasion of Belgium with the 2nd Guard Reserve Infantry Regiment . In August 1914 he took part in the capture of Namur , the site of a massive citadel surrounded by outlying forts . In September , Manstein 's unit was one of two transferred to East Prussia and attached to the Eighth Army , commanded by Hindenburg . After seeing action in the First Battle of the Masurian Lakes , his unit was soon reassigned to the Ninth Army , which was in the process of advancing from Upper Silesia to Warsaw . Overstretched , the Ninth Army was forced to withdraw in the face of a Russian counterattack , and on 16 November Manstein was wounded during the retreat when he was among a detachment that stormed a Russian entrenchment . He was shot in the left shoulder and the left knee ; one bullet hit his sciatic nerve , causing the leg to be numb . Recovery took six months in hospital in <unk> and Wiesbaden . 
 After a period of home leave , on 17 June 1915 Manstein was reassigned as assistant general staff officer of operations to the Tenth Army , commanded by Max von <unk> . Soon promoted to captain , he learned first @-@ hand how to plan and conduct offensive operations as the Tenth Army undertook successful attacks on Poland , Lithuania , Montenegro , and Albania . During offensive operations at Verdun in early 1916 , Manstein was stationed with <unk> and his staff at a new headquarters near the action . He next served as a staff supply officer under General Fritz von Below and chief of staff Fritz von Lossberg at a command post near the River Somme ; the area was the scene of several battles over the course of the war . British and French operations from July to November 1916 forced a German withdrawal over the winter to the Hindenburg Line , a series of defensive positions between Verdun and Lens . Manstein continued to serve under Below until October 1917 , when he was transferred as chief of staff to the 4th Cavalry Division , serving in Riga during the German occupation of the area . As a result of the signing of the Treaty of Brest @-@ Litovsk in March 1918 , Manstein 's unit was no longer needed on the Eastern Front ; he was reassigned to the 213th Infantry Division near Reims . The German Imperial Army saw some minor successes in the area but was beginning to lose the war . The armistice was signed on 11 November 1918 . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war era = = = 
 Manstein married Jutta Sibylle von Loesch , the daughter of a Silesian landowner , in 1920 . He proposed marriage after having known her for only three days . She died in 1966 . They had three children : a daughter , Gisela ( born 1921 ) , and two sons , Gero ( born 1922 ) and Rüdiger ( born 1929 ) . Gero died on the battlefield in the northern sector of the Eastern Front on 29 October 1942 while serving as a lieutenant in the Wehrmacht . Gisela was married to Major Edel @-@ Heinrich <unk> @-@ <unk> , a highly decorated officer who commanded II . Panzer @-@ Regiment 15 during the Second World War . 
 Manstein remained in the armed forces after the war ended . In 1918 he volunteered for a staff position with the Frontier Defence Force in Breslau ( now Wroclaw ) and served there until 1919 . As part of <unk> II , he participated in the restructuring of the German Imperial Army of 500 @,@ 000 men into the Reichswehr , the army of the Weimar Republic ( restricted to 100 @,@ 000 men by the Versailles Treaty ) . Recognised from an early age as a talented and intelligent commander , Manstein was chosen as one of only 4 @,@ 000 officers permitted under the treaty . In 1921 he was appointed company commander of the sixth company of the 5th Prussian Infantry Regiment and next served as a staff officer for <unk> II and IV , teaching military history and tactics until 1927 . That year he was promoted to major and served with the General Staff at the Reichswehr Ministry in Berlin , visiting other countries to learn about their military facilities and helping to draft mobilisation plans for the army . Promoted to lieutenant colonel , he was given command of the light infantry battalion of the 4th Infantry Regiment , serving with that unit until 1934 . In 1933 the Nazi Party seized power in Germany , thus ending the Weimar period . In violation of the Versailles treaty , the Reichswehr had been secretly re @-@ arming since the 1920s ; the new government formally renounced the Treaty and proceeded with large scale rearmament and expansion of the military . 
 Manstein was moved back to Berlin as full colonel in February 1934 , serving as chief of staff of <unk> III . On 1 July 1935 he was appointed the Head of the Operations Branch of the Army General Staff ( Generalstab des Heeres ) , part of the Army High Command ( Oberkommando des Heeres – OKH ) . During his tenure there , Manstein was one of the people responsible for the development of Fall Rot ( Case Red ) , a defensive plan to protect Germany from attack by France . During this period Manstein came into contact with Heinz Guderian and Oswald Lutz , who advocated drastic changes in warfare , emphasising the role of the Panzer . However , officers like Ludwig Beck , Chief of the Army General Staff , were against such drastic changes , and therefore Manstein proposed an alternative : the development of <unk> ( StuG ) , self @-@ propelled assault guns that would provide heavy direct @-@ fire support to infantry . In World War II , the resulting StuG vehicles proved to be among the most successful and cost @-@ effective German weapons . 
 He was promoted to major general in October 1936 , becoming the Deputy Chief of Staff ( <unk> I ) to General Beck . On 4 February 1938 Manstein was transferred to the command of the 18th Infantry Division in Liegnitz , Silesia , with the rank of Generalleutnant . The transfer meant that Manstein did not receive Beck 's post as Chief of the Army General Staff that August ( Beck had resigned , in spite of Manstein 's urgings not to do so , as he felt Hitler 's intended invasion of Czechoslovakia that October would be premature ) . The position was given to General Franz Halder , who had taken Manstein 's former post as Deputy Chief of Staff . The incident created a lasting hatred between the two men . On 20 April 1939 Manstein delivered a speech at the celebration of Hitler 's 50th birthday , in which he praised Hitler as a leader sent by God to save Germany . He warned the " hostile world " that if it kept erecting " ramparts around Germany to block the way of the German people towards their future " , then he would be quite happy to see the world plunged into another world war . Israeli historian Omer Bartov notes that the rise of officers such as Manstein was part of a tendency for technocratic officers , usually ardent National Socialists , to come to the fore ; his opinion is that the Wehrmacht was fully integrated into the Third Reich , not a separate apolitical organisation independent of the Nazi regime . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Poland = = = 
 On 18 August 1939 , in preparation for Fall Weiss ( Case White ) — the German invasion of Poland — Manstein was appointed Chief of Staff to Gerd von Rundstedt 's Army Group South . Here he worked along with Rundstedt 's Chief of Operations , Colonel Günther Blumentritt , to develop the operational plan . Rundstedt accepted Manstein 's plan calling for the concentration of the majority of the army group 's armoured units into Walther von Reichenau 's 10th Army , with the objective of a decisive breakthrough which would lead to the encirclement of Polish forces west of the River Vistula . In Manstein 's plan , two other armies comprising Army Group South , Wilhelm List 's 14th Army and Johannes Blaskowitz 's 8th Army , would provide flank support for Reichenau 's armoured thrust towards Warsaw , the Polish capital . Privately , Manstein was lukewarm about the Polish campaign , thinking that it would be better to keep Poland as a buffer between Germany and the Soviet Union . He also worried about an Allied attack from the west once the Polish campaign was underway , which would draw Germany into a two @-@ front war . 
 Manstein took part in a conference on 22 August 1939 where Hitler underlined to his commanders the need for the physical destruction of Poland as a nation . After the war , he would state in his memoirs that he did not recognise at the time of this meeting that Hitler was going to pursue a policy of extermination against the Poles . He did become aware of the policy later on , as he and other Wehrmacht generals received reports on the activities of the Einsatzgruppen , the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) death squads tasked with following the army into Poland to kill intellectuals and other civilians . These squads were also assigned to round up Jews and others for relocation to ghettos and Nazi concentration camps . Manstein later faced three charges of war crimes relating to Jewish and civilian deaths in the sectors under his control , and the mistreatment and deaths of prisoners of war . 
 Launched on 1 September 1939 , the invasion began successfully . In Army Group South 's area of responsibility under Rundstedt , the 8th , 10th and 14th Armies pursued the retreating Poles . The initial plan was for the 8th Army , the northernmost of the three , to advance towards Łódź . The 10th Army , with its motorised divisions , was to move quickly towards the Vistula , and the 14th Army was to advance and attempt to encircle the Polish troops in the Kraków area . These actions led to the encirclement and defeat of Polish forces in the Radom area on 8 – 14 September by six German corps . Meanwhile , the German Eighth Army was under attack from the north , so elements of the Fourth , Eighth and Tenth Armies were quickly redeployed with air support in an improvised attempt to cut off any Polish break @-@ out back towards Warsaw . The flexibility and agility of the German forces led to the defeat of nine Polish infantry divisions and other units in the resulting Battle of the Bzura ( 8 – 19 September ) , the largest engagement of the war thus far . The conquest of Poland was quickly over , with the last Polish military units surrendering on 6 October . 
 = = = France = = = 
 Fall Gelb ( " Case Yellow " ) , the initial plan for the invasion of France , was prepared by Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Army Colonel General ( Generaloberst ) Walther von Brauchitsch , Halder , and other members of the OKH in early October 1939 . Like the Schlieffen Plan of World War I , it called for an encirclement attack through the Netherlands and Belgium . Hitler was not satisfied , so revisions of the plan continued throughout October . Manstein was not satisfied with the plan either , as it focused heavily on the northern wing ; he felt an attack from this direction would lack the element of surprise and would expose the German forces to counterattacks from the south . The terrain in Belgium was not well @-@ suited as a base of operations for further attacks on France , so Manstein felt the operation would fail to wipe out the enemy — as it did in the First World War — leading to only partial success and trench warfare . By the end of October Manstein had prepared the outline of a different plan and submitted it to the OKH via his superior , Rundstedt , for whom he was now serving as chief of staff of Army Group A. 
 Manstein 's plan , developed with the informal cooperation of Heinz Guderian , suggested that the Panzer divisions attack through the wooded hills of the Ardennes where no one would expect them , then establish bridgeheads on the River Meuse and rapidly drive to the English Channel . The Wehrmacht would thus cut off the French and Allied armies in Belgium and Flanders . This part of the plan later became known as the Sichelschnitt ( " sickle cut " ) . Manstein 's proposal also included a second thrust outflanking the Maginot Line , which would allow the Wehrmacht to force any future defensive line much further south . 
 The OKH originally rejected the proposal ; Halder in particular said the plan was entirely without merit . However , on 11 November , Hitler ordered the reallocation of the forces needed to make a surprise thrust in Sedan , thus pushing the plan in the direction that Manstein had suggested . When documents outlining details of Fall Gelb fell into the hands of the Belgians on 10 January 1940 , Hitler became even more receptive to change . But Manstein 's superiors , Generals Halder and Brauchitsch , resented Manstein 's repeated insistence that his plan be implemented in place of theirs . Halder had Manstein removed from Rundstedt 's headquarters and sent to Stettin to command the XXXVIII Army Corps on 27 January . Hitler , still looking for a more aggressive plan , approved a modified version of Manstein 's ideas , today known as the Manstein Plan , after meeting with him on 17 February . Manstein and his corps played a minor role during the operations in France , serving under Günther von Kluge 's 4th Army . His corps helped achieve the first breakthrough east of Amiens during Fall Rot ( " Case Red " – the second phase of the invasion plan ) , and was the first to reach and cross the River Seine . The invasion of France was an outstanding military success ; Manstein was promoted to full general and awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 Manstein was a proponent of the prospective German invasion of Great Britain , named Operation Seelöwe . He considered the operation risky but necessary . Early studies by various staff officers determined that air superiority was a prerequisite to the planned invasion . His corps was to be shipped across the English Channel from Boulogne to Bexhill as one of four units assigned to the first wave . But as the Luftwaffe failed to overcome the Royal Air Force during the Battle of Britain , Operation Seelöwe was postponed indefinitely on 12 October . For the rest of the year , Manstein , with little to do , spent time in Paris and at home . 
 = = = Soviet Union = = = 
 In early 1941 the German High Command commenced planning the invasion of the Soviet Union , codenamed Operation Barbarossa . On 15 March Manstein was appointed commander of the LVI Panzer Corps ; he was one of 250 commanders to be briefed for the upcoming major offensive , first seeing detailed plans of the offensive in May . His corps was part of the Fourth Panzer Group under the command of General Erich Hoepner in Wilhelm Ritter von <unk> 's Army Group North . The Army Group was tasked with thrusting through the Baltic States and then advancing on Leningrad . Manstein arrived at the front only six days prior to the launch of the offensive . Operation Barbarossa commenced on 22 June 1941 with a massive German attack along the whole front line . Manstein 's corps was to advance with Georg @-@ Hans Reinhardt 's XLI Panzer Corps to the Dvina River to secure the bridges near the town of Daugavpils . The Soviet forces mounted a number of counterattacks , but those were aimed against Reinhardt 's corps , leading to the Battle of <unk> . Manstein 's corps advanced rapidly , reaching the Dvina River , 315 kilometres ( 196 mi ) distant , in just 100 hours . Overextended and well ahead of the rest of the army group , he fended off a number of determined Soviet counterattacks . After Reinhardt 's corps closed in , the two corps were tasked with encircling the Soviet formations around Luga in a pincer movement . 
 Again having penetrated deep into the Soviet lines with unprotected flanks , his corps was the target of a Soviet counteroffensive from 15 July at <unk> by the Soviet 11th Army , commanded by Nikolai Vatutin . Manstein 's 8th Panzer Division was cut off . Although it was able to fight its way free , it was badly mauled , and the Red Army succeeded in halting Manstein 's advance at Luga . The corps regrouped at Dno . The 8th Panzers were sent on anti @-@ partisan duties and Manstein was given the 4th SS Polizei Division . The attack on Luga was repeatedly delayed . 
 The assault on Luga was still underway when Manstein received orders on 10 August that his next task would be to begin the advance toward Leningrad . No sooner had he moved to his new headquarters at Lake <unk> than he was told to send his men towards Staraya Russa to relieve the X Corps , which was in danger of being encircled . On 12 August the Red Army had launched an offensive with the 11th and 34th Armies against Army Group North , cutting off three divisions . Frustrated with the loss of the 8th Panzer and the missed opportunity to advance on Leningrad , Manstein returned to Dno . His counteroffensive led to a major Soviet defeat when his unit encircled five Soviet divisions , receiving air support for the first time on that front . They captured 12 @,@ 000 prisoners and 141 tanks . His opponent , General Kuzma M. <unk> of the 34th Army , was subsequently court martialed and executed for the defeat . Manstein tried to obtain rest days for his men , who had been constantly fighting in poor terrain and increasingly poor weather since the start of the campaign , but to no avail . They were ordered to advance to the east on Demyansk . On 12 September , when he was near the city , he was informed that he would take over 11th Army of Army Group South in Ukraine . 
 = = = Crimea and the Battle of Sevastopol = = = 
 In September 1941 Manstein was appointed commander of the 11th Army after its previous commander , Colonel @-@ General Eugen Ritter von <unk> , perished when his plane landed in a Soviet minefield . The 11th Army was tasked with invading the Crimean Peninsula , capturing Sevastopol , and pursuing enemy forces on the flank of Army Group South during its advance into the Soviet Union . Hitler 's intention was to prevent the Red Army from using airbases there , and to cut off the Soviet supply of oil from the Caucasus . 
 Manstein 's forces — mostly infantry — achieved a rapid breakthrough during the first days against heavy Soviet resistance . After most of the neck of the Perekop Isthmus had been taken , his forces were substantially reduced , leaving six German divisions and the Romanian Third Army . The rest of the Perekop Isthmus was captured slowly and with some difficulty ; Manstein complained of a lack of air support to contest Soviet air superiority in the region . He next created a mobile reconnaissance unit to press down the peninsula , cutting the road between Simferopol and Sevastopol on 31 October . Simferopol was captured the next day . The 11th Army had captured all of the Crimean Peninsula — except for Sevastopol — by 16 November . Meanwhile , the Red Army had evacuated 300 @,@ 000 personnel out of the city by sea . 
 Manstein 's first attack on Sevastopol in November failed , and with insufficient forces left for an immediate assault , he ordered an investment of the heavily fortified city . By 17 December he launched another offensive , which also failed . On 26 December the Soviet troops landed on the Kerch Straits to retake Kerch and its peninsula , and on 30 December executed another landing near Feodosiya . Only a hurried withdrawal from the area , in contravention of Manstein 's orders , by the 46th Infantry Division under General Hans Graf von <unk> prevented a collapse of the eastern part of the Crimea ; the division lost most of its heavy equipment . Manstein cancelled a planned resumption of the attack and sent most of his forces east to destroy the Soviet bridgehead . The Soviet forces were in a superior position regarding men and materiel as they were able to re @-@ supply by sea , and were therefore pushed by Stalin to conduct further offensives . However , the Soviet troops were unable to capture the critical rail and road access points which would have cut the German lines of supply . 
 For the Battle of the Kerch Peninsula , launched on 8 May 1942 , Hitler finally assigned Manstein major air support . The 11th Army was outnumbered on the ground , so Manstein had them feint an attack in the north while the bulk of the force attacked to the south . The Soviet troops were soon fleeing . Manstein recorded in his memoirs the capture of " 170 @,@ 000 prisoners , 1 @,@ 133 guns and 258 tanks " . Kerch was captured on 16 May . The Wehrmacht lost only 8 @,@ 000 men . 
 After a month 's delay , Manstein turned his attention once more to the capture of Sevastopol , a battle in which Germany used some of the largest guns ever built . Along with large numbers of regular artillery pieces , super @-@ heavy 600 mm ( 24 in ) Karl @-@ Gerät mortars and the 800 mm ( 31 in ) " Dora " railway gun were brought in for the assault . A furious barrage began on the morning of 2 June 1942 . All of the resources of the Luftwaffe 's Luftflotte 4 , commanded by Wolfram von Richthofen , were committed ; the barrage continued for five days before the ground assault began . 
 The 11th Army gained ground during mid @-@ June , focusing their attention on the northern approaches to the city . Casualties were high on both sides as the month dragged on . Aware of the need to act before the German summer offensive of 1942 reduced the availability of reinforcements and supplies , Manstein ordered a surprise attack using amphibious landings across Severnaya Bay on 29 June . The operation was a success ; Soviet resistance crumbled . On 1 July German forces entered the city while the Soviet forces conducted a disorganised evacuation , and Hitler promoted Manstein to Generalfeldmarschall the same day . The entire city was in German hands by 4 July . 
 During the Crimean campaign , Manstein was indirectly involved in atrocities against the Soviet population , especially those committed by Einsatzgruppe D , one of several Schutzstaffel ( SS ) groups that had been tasked with the elimination of the Jews of Europe . Einsatzgruppe D travelled in the wake of Manstein 's 11th Army , and were provided by Manstein 's command with vehicles , fuel , and drivers . Military police cordoned off areas where the Einsatzgruppe planned to shoot Jews to prevent anyone from escaping . Captain Ulrich Gunzert , shocked to have witnessed Einsatzgruppe D massacre a group of Jewish women and children , went to Manstein to ask him to do something to stop the killings . Gunzert states that Manstein told him to forget what he had seen and to concentrate on fighting the Red Army . Gunzert later called Manstein 's inaction " a flight from responsibility , a moral failure " . Eleven of the seventeen charges against Manstein at his later war crimes trial were related to Nazi maltreatment and killing of Jews and prisoners of war in the Crimea . 
 = = = Leningrad = = = 
 After the capture of Sevastopol , Hitler felt Manstein was the right man to command the forces at Leningrad , which had been under siege since September 1941 . With elements of the 11th Army , Manstein was transferred to the Leningrad front , arriving on 27 August 1942 . Manstein again lacked the proper forces to storm the city , so he planned Operation Nordlicht , a bold plan for a thrust to cut off Leningrad 's supply line at Lake Ladoga . 
 However , on the day of his arrival , the Red Army launched the <unk> Offensive . Originally planned as spoiling attack against Georg Lindemann 's 18th Army in the narrow German salient west of Lake Ladoga , the offensive appeared able to break through the German lines , lifting the siege . Hitler , bypassing the usual chain of command , telephoned Manstein directly and ordered him to take offensive action in the area . After a series of heavy battles , he launched a counterattack on 21 September that cut off the two Soviet armies in the salient . Fighting continued throughout October . Although the Soviet offensive was fended off , the resulting attrition meant that the Wehrmacht could no longer execute a decisive assault on Leningrad , and Nordlicht was put on hold . The siege was finally lifted by the Soviet forces in January 1944 . 
 = = = Stalingrad = = = 
 In an attempt to resolve their persistent shortage of oil , the Wehrmacht had launched Fall Blau ( Case Blue ) , a massive offensive aimed against the Caucasian oilfields , in the summer of 1942 . After German air attacks , the 6th Army , led by Friedrich Paulus , was tasked with capturing Stalingrad , a key city on the River Volga . His troops , supported by 4th Panzer Army , entered the city on 12 September . Hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat and street fighting ensued . The Red Army launched a huge counteroffensive on 19 November , codenamed Operation Uranus , which was designed to encircle the German armies and trap them in the city ; this goal was accomplished on 23 November . Hitler , aware that if Stalingrad were lost it would likely never be retaken , appointed Manstein as commander of the newly created Army Group Don ( Heeresgruppe Don ) , tasked with mounting a relief operation named Unternehmen Wintergewitter ( Operation Winter Storm ) , to reinforce the German hold on the city . Manstein 's initial assessment on 24 November was that the 6th Army , given adequate air support , would be able to hold on . 
 Launched on 12 December , Winter Storm achieved some initial success . Manstein 's three Panzer divisions ( comprising the 23rd , 6th , and 17th Panzer Divisions ) and supporting units of the LVII Panzer Corps advanced to within 48 km ( 30 mi ) of Stalingrad by 20 December at the Myshkova River , where they came under assault by Soviet tanks in blizzard conditions . Manstein made a request to Hitler on 18 December that 6th Army should attempt to break out . Hitler was against it , and both Manstein and Paulus were reluctant to openly disobey his orders . Conditions deteriorated inside the city ; the men suffered from lice , the cold weather , and inadequate supplies of food and ammunition . Reichsminister of Aviation Hermann Göring had assured Hitler that the trapped 6th Army could be adequately supplied by air , but due to poor weather , a lack of aircraft , and mechanical difficulties , this turned out not to be the case . On 24 January , Manstein urged Hitler to allow Paulus to surrender , but he refused . In spite of Hitler 's wishes , Paulus surrendered with his remaining 91 @,@ 000 soldiers on 31 January 1943 . Some 200 @,@ 000 German and Romanian soldiers died ; of those who surrendered , only 6 @,@ 000 survivors returned to Germany at the end of the war . Manstein believed he had done his best for the 6th Army . The encircled men saw it differently : 
 His weakness was that he didn 't take a stronger stance against Hitler . One can resign . Or accept the death sentence . If you are totally convinced , and he was , that it was wrong to keep the army in Stalingrad . 
 American historians Williamson Murray and Allan Millett wrote that Manstein 's message to Hitler on 24 November advising him that the 6th Army should not break out , along with Göring 's statements that the Luftwaffe could supply Stalingrad , " ... sealed the fate of Sixth Army " . Historians , including Gerhard Weinberg , have pointed out that Manstein 's version of the events at Stalingrad in his memoir is distorted and several events described there were probably made up . " Because of the sensitivity of the Stalingrad question in post @-@ war Germany , Manstein worked as hard to distort the record on this matter as on his massive involvement in the murder of Jews " , wrote Weinberg . 
 Meanwhile , the Red Army launched an offensive of their own . Operation Saturn was intended to capture Rostov and thus cut off the German Army Group A. However , after the launch of Winter Storm , the Soviet army had to reallocate forces to prevent the relief of Stalingrad , so the operation was scaled down and redubbed " Little Saturn " . The offensive forced Manstein to divert forces to avoid the collapse of the entire front . The attack also prevented the XLVIII Panzer Corps ( comprising the 336th Infantry Division , the 3rd Luftwaffe Field Division , and the 11th Panzer Division ) , under the command of General Otto von Knobelsdorff , from joining up with the LVII Panzer Corps as planned to aid the relief effort . Instead , the XLVIII Panzer Corps held a line along the Chir River , beating off successive Soviet attacks . General Hermann Balck used the 11th Panzer Division to counterattack Soviet salients . On the verge of collapse , the German units were able to hold the line , but the Italian 8th Army on the flanks was overwhelmed and subsequently destroyed . 
 Spurred on by this success , the Red Army planned a series of follow @-@ up offensives in January and February 1943 intended to decisively beat the German forces in southern Russia . After the destruction of the remaining Hungarian and Italian forces during the <unk> – <unk> Offensive , Operation Star and Operation Gallop were launched to recapture Kharkov and Kursk and to cut off all German forces east of Donetsk . Those operations succeeded in breaking through the German lines and threatened the whole southern part of the German front . To deal with this threat , Army Group Don , Army Group B , and parts of Army Group A were united as Army Group South ( Heeresgruppe Süd ) under Manstein 's command in early February . 
 = = = Kharkov operation = = = 
 During their offensives in February 1943 , the Red Army broke through the German lines , retaking Kursk on 9 February . As Army Groups B and Don were in danger of being surrounded , Manstein repeatedly called for reinforcements . Although Hitler called on 13 February for Kharkov to be held " at all costs " , SS @-@ Oberst @-@ Gruppenführer Paul Hausser , commander of the II SS Panzer Corps , ordered the city evacuated on 15 February . Hitler arrived at the front in person on 17 February , and over the course of three days of exhausting meetings , Manstein convinced him that offensive action was needed in the area to regain the initiative and prevent encirclement . Troops were reorganised and reinforcements were pulled into the zone from neighbouring armies . Manstein immediately began planning a counteroffensive , launched on 20 February , that later became known as the " backhand blow " ; Vatutin and the Soviet forces , believing that Manstein would retreat , were taken completely by surprise . By 2 March , the Wehrmacht had captured 615 tanks and had killed some 23 @,@ 000 Soviet soldiers . 
 To reinforce the point that the recapture of Kharkov was important politically , Hitler returned to the front on 10 March . Manstein carefully assembled his available forces along a wide front to prevent their encirclement and recaptured Kharkov on 14 March , after bloody street fighting in the Third Battle of Kharkov . For this accomplishment , he received the Oak Leaves for the Knight 's Cross . Hausser 's II SS Panzer Corps captured Belgorod on 18 March . Manstein 's counteroffensive had not only prevented the disintegration of the entire front , it had regained substantial territory and resulted in the destruction of three Soviet armies and the retreat of three others . Soviet casualties for the preceding month in that sector had been 46 @,@ 000 dead and 14 @,@ 000 taken prisoner . Captured or destroyed were 600 tanks and 1 @,@ 200 pieces of artillery . The spring thaw began by 23 March , ending operations in the area for the time being . Planning was then undertaken to eliminate the enemy salient at Kursk . 
 = = = Operation Zitadelle = = = 
 Manstein favoured an immediate pincer attack on the Kursk salient after the battle at Kharkov , but Hitler was concerned that such a plan would draw forces away from the industrial region in the Donets Basin . In any event , the ground was still too muddy to move the tanks into position . In lieu of an immediate attack , the OKH prepared Operation Zitadelle ( Citadel ) , the launching of which would be delayed while more troops were gathered in the area and the mud solidified . Meanwhile , the Red Army , well aware of the danger of encirclement , also moved in large numbers of reinforcements , and their intelligence reports revealed the expected locations and timing of the German thrusts . 
 Citadel was the last German strategic offensive on the Eastern Front , and one of the largest battles in history , involving more than four million men . By the time the Wehrmacht launched their initial assault on 5 July 1943 , the Soviet forces outnumbered them by nearly three to one . Walther Model was in command of the northern pincer , with the Ninth Army , while Manstein 's Army Group South formed the southern pincer . Both armies were slowed as the tanks were blown up in minefields and caught up in combat on a series of prepared Soviet defensive lines . After five days of fighting Model 's advance was stopped , with the Ninth Panzers suffering 25 @,@ 000 casualties . By 13 July Model 's forces were being drawn away towards Orel , where the Soviet army had launched Operation Kutuzov . Manstein 's forces were able to penetrate the Soviet lines , causing heavy casualties . He reached , but did not enter or capture , Prokhorovka , his first major objective , on 11 July , inflicting serious Soviet losses in the resulting Battle of Prokhorovka . However , on 13 July Hitler called off the failed Kursk offensive ; the Allies had landed in Sicily , so he issued the order for a withdrawal . Manstein protested ; he felt that the Soviet forces had exhausted all their reserves in the area , and he did not want to stop until all his own reserves had been committed . Hitler , however , insisted on calling off the operation . Although Soviet casualties were indeed heavy , modern historians discount the possibility of a successful German continuation of the offensive . 
 = = = From Kursk to the Dnieper = = = 
 Manstein regarded the Battle of Kursk as something of a German victory , as he believed that he had destroyed much of the Red Army 's offensive capacity for the rest of 1943 . This assessment turned out to be incorrect , as the Red Army was able to recover much more quickly than Manstein expected . Manstein moved his panzer reserves to the Mius River and the lower Dnieper , not realising the Soviet activities there were a diversion . A Soviet offensive that began on 3 August put Army Group South under heavy pressure . After two days of heavy fighting , the Soviet troops broke through the German lines and retook Belgorod , punching a 56 km ( 35 mi ) wide hole between Fourth Panzer Army and Armee Abteilung Kempf , tasked with holding Kharkov . In response to Manstein 's demands for reinforcements , Hitler sent the Großdeutschland , 7th Panzers , SS 2nd Das Reich , and SS 3rd Totenkopf Divisions . 
 Construction began of defensive positions along the Dnieper , but Hitler refused requests to pull back , insisting that Kharkov be held . With reinforcements trickling in , Manstein waged a series of counterattacks and armoured battles near <unk> and <unk> between 13 and 17 August , which resulted in heavy casualties as they ran into prepared Soviet lines . On 20 August he informed the OKH that his forces in the Donets river area were holding a too @-@ wide front with insufficient numbers , and that he needed to either withdraw to the Dnieper River or receive reinforcements . Continuous pressure from the Soviet forces had separated Army Group Centre from Army Group South and severely threatened Manstein 's northern flank . When the Red Army threw their main reserves behind a drive to retake Kharkov on 21 – 22 August , Manstein took advantage of this to close the gap between the 4th Panzer and 8th Armies and reestablish a defensive line . Hitler finally allowed Manstein to withdraw back across the Dnieper on 15 September . During the withdrawal , Manstein ordered scorched earth actions to be taken in a zone 20 to 30 kilometres ( 12 to 19 mi ) from the river , and later faced charges at his war crimes trial for issuing this order . Soviet losses in July and August included over 1 @.@ 6 million casualties , 10 @,@ 000 tanks and self @-@ propelled artillery pieces , and 4 @,@ 200 aircraft . German losses , while only one @-@ tenth that of the Soviet losses , were much more difficult to sustain , as there were no further reserves of men and materiel to draw on . In a series of four meetings that September , Manstein tried unsuccessfully to convince Hitler to reorganise the high command and let his generals make more of the military decisions . 
 = = = Dnieper campaign = = = 
 In September 1943 Manstein withdrew to the west bank of the Dnieper in an operation that for the most part was well @-@ ordered , but at times degenerated into a disorganised rout as his exhausted soldiers became " unglued " . Hundreds of thousands of Soviet civilians travelled west with them , many bringing livestock and personal property . Manstein correctly deduced that the next Soviet attack would be towards Kiev , but as had been the case throughout the campaign , the Red Army used maskirovka ( deception ) to disguise the timing and exact location of their intended offensive . Historians Williamson Murray and Allan Reed Millett wrote that many German generals ' " fanatical belief " in Nazi racial theories " ... made the idea that Slavs could manipulate German intelligence with such consistency utterly inconceivable " . The 1st Ukrainian Front , led by Nikolai Fyodorovich Vatutin , met the outnumbered Fourth Panzer Army near Kiev . Vatutin first made a thrust near <unk> , just north of Kiev , and then attacked near <unk> , to the south , on 1 November . The German troops , thinking <unk> would be the location of the main attack , were taken completely by surprise when Vatutin captured the bridgehead at <unk> and gained a foothold on the west bank of the Dnieper . Kiev was liberated on 6 November . The 17th Army was cut off and isolated in the Crimea by the attacking 4th Ukrainian Front on 28 October . 
 Under the guidance of General Hermann Balck , the cities of Zhytomyr and <unk> were retaken in mid @-@ November , but after receiving reinforcements Vatutin resumed the offensive on 24 December 1943 , and the Red Army continued its successful advance . Manstein 's repeated requests to Hitler for more reinforcements were turned down . On 4 January 1944 Manstein met with Hitler to tell him that the Dnieper line was untenable and that he needed to retreat in order to save his forces . Hitler refused , and Manstein again requested changes in the highest levels of the military leadership , but was turned down , as Hitler believed that he alone was capable of managing the wider strategy . 
 In January Manstein was forced to retreat further west by the Soviet offensive . Without waiting for permission from Hitler , he ordered the German XI and <unk> Corps ( consisting of 56 @,@ 000 men in six divisions ) of Army Group South to break out of the Korsun Pocket during the night of 16 – 17 February 1944 . By the beginning of March , the Soviet forces had driven the Wehrmacht well back of the river . Because of Hitler 's directive of 19 March that from that point forward all positions were to be defended to the last man , Manstein 's 1st Panzer Army became encircled on 21 March when permission to break out was not received from Hitler in time . Manstein flew to Hitler 's headquarters in Lvov to try to convince him to change his mind . Hitler eventually relented , but relieved Manstein of his command on 30 March 1944 . 
 Manstein appeared on the cover of the 10 January 1944 issue of Time magazine , above the caption " Retreat may be masterly , but victory is in the opposite direction " . 
 = = = Dismissal = = = 
 Manstein received the Swords of the Knight 's Cross on 30 March 1944 and handed over control of Army Group South to Model on 2 April during a meeting at Hitler 's mountain retreat , the Berghof . Model 's adjutant , Günther <unk> , later described the scene and Manstein 's response : 
 He must have paid him compliments about his strategic skills during the attack operations , but he also said , " I cannot use you in the South . Field Marshal Model will take over . " And Manstein replied , " My Führer ... please believe me when I say I will use all strategic means at my disposal to defend the soil in which my son lies buried . " 
 While on medical leave after surgery to remove a cataract in his right eye , Manstein recovered at home in Liegnitz and in a medical facility in Dresden . He suffered from an infection and for a time was in danger of losing his sight . On the day of the failed 20 July plot , an assassination attempt on Hitler 's life that was part of a planned military coup d 'état , Manstein was at a seaside resort on the Baltic . Although he had met at various times with three of the main conspirators — Claus von Stauffenberg , Henning von Tresckow , and Rudolf Christoph Freiherr von Gersdorff — Manstein was not involved in the conspiracy ; he later said " Preussische <unk> <unk> nicht " – " Prussian field marshals do not mutiny . " Still , the Gestapo placed Manstein 's house under surveillance . 
 When it became obvious that Hitler would not be appointing him to a new post , Manstein bought an estate in East Pomerania in October 1944 , but was soon forced to abandon it as Soviet forces overran the area . His home at Liegnitz had to be evacuated on 22 January 1945 , and he and his family took refuge temporarily with friends in Berlin . While there , Manstein tried to get an audience with Hitler in the Führerbunker , but was turned away . He and his family continued to move further west into Germany until the war in Europe ended with a German defeat in May 1945 . Manstein suffered further complications in his right eye and was receiving treatment in a hospital in <unk> when he was arrested by the British and transferred to a prisoner of war camp near Lüneburg on 26 August . 
