 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Manstein was moved to Nuremberg in October 1945 . He was held at the Palace of Justice , the location of the Nuremberg Trials of major Nazi war criminals and organisations . While there , Manstein helped prepare a 132 @-@ page document for the defence of the General Staff and the OKW , on trial at Nuremberg in August 1946 . The myth that the Wehrmacht was " clean " — not culpable for the events of the Holocaust — arose partly as a result of this document , written largely by Manstein , along with General of Cavalry Siegfried Westphal . He also gave oral testimony about the Einsatzgruppen , the treatment of prisoners of war , and the concept of military obedience , especially as related to the Commissar Order , an order issued by Hitler in 1941 , requiring all Soviet political commissars to be shot without trial . Manstein admitted that he received the order , but said he did not carry it out . 
 Documents from 1941 presented at Nuremberg and at Manstein 's own later trial contradict this claim : He actually received regular reports throughout that summer regarding the execution of hundreds of political commissars . He denied any knowledge of the activities of the Einsatzgruppen , and testified that soldiers under his command were not involved in the murder of Jewish civilians . Otto Ohlendorf , commander of Einsatzgruppe D , contradicted this during his testimony , saying that not only was Manstein aware of what was happening but that the Eleventh Army was involved . In September 1946 , the General Staff and the OKW were declared to not be criminal organisations . 
 After his testimony at Nuremberg , Manstein was interned by the British as a prisoner of war at Island Farm ( also known as Special Camp 11 ) in Bridgend , Wales , where he awaited the decision as to whether or not he would face a war crimes trial . He mostly kept apart from the other inmates , taking solitary walks , tending a small garden , and beginning work on the drafts of two books . British author B. H. Liddell Hart was in correspondence with Manstein and others at Island Farm and visited inmates of several camps around Britain while preparing his best @-@ selling 1947 book On the Other Side of the Hill . Liddell Hart was an admirer of the German generals ; he described Manstein as an operational genius . The two remained in contact , and Liddell Hart later helped Manstein arrange the publication of the English edition of his memoir , Verlorene Siege ( Lost Victories ) , in 1958 . The British cabinet , under pressure from the Soviet Union , finally decided in July 1948 to prosecute Manstein for war crimes . He and three other senior officers ( Walther von Brauchitsch , Gerd von Rundstedt and Adolf Strauss ) were transferred to <unk> to await trial . Brauchitsch died that October and Rundstedt and Strauss were released on medical grounds in March 1949 . Manstein 's trial was held in Hamburg from 23 August to 19 December 1949 . 
 Manstein faced seventeen charges at the trial , three of which pertained to events in Poland and fourteen regarding events in the Soviet Union . Charges included maltreatment of prisoners of war , cooperation with the Einsatzgruppe D in killing Jewish residents of the Crimea and disregarding the welfare of civilians by using " scorched earth " tactics , while retreating from the Soviet Union . The prosecution , led by senior counsel Arthur Comyns Carr , used an order Manstein had signed on 20 November 1941 , based on the Severity Order that had been issued by Field Marshal Walther von Reichenau , to build their case , that Manstein had known about and was complicit with the genocide . The order called for the elimination of the " Jewish Bolshevik system " and the " harsh punishment of Jewry " . Manstein claimed that he remembered asking for a draft of such an order but had no recollection of signing it . American historians Ronald Smelser and Edward Davies wrote in 2008 , that Manstein agreed with Hitler 's idea that the war against the Soviet Union was a war to exterminate Judeo @-@ Bolshevism and that he committed perjury , when he claimed not to remember signing his version of the Severity Order . 
 Manstein 's defence , led by the prominent lawyer Reginald Thomas Paget , argued that the order was justified because many partisans were Jews and so Manstein 's order calling for all Jews to be executed was justified , by his desire to protect his men from partisan attacks . He argued that Manstein was not compelled to disobey orders given by his sovereign government , even if such orders were illegal . Manstein , speaking in his defence , stated that he found the Nazi racial policy to be repugnant . Sixteen other witnesses testified that Manstein had no knowledge of or involvement in genocide . Paget called the " Russians " " savages " , arguing that Manstein showed restraint as a " decent German soldier " , in upholding the laws of war when fighting against the " Russians " , who displayed the most " appalling savagery " . Whether or not Manstein was responsible for the activities of Einsatzgruppe D , a unit not under his direct control but operating in his zone of command , became one of the key points of the trial , the prosecution claimed that it was Manstein 's duty to know about the activities of this unit and also his duty to put a stop to their genocidal operations . Recent scholars , including Benoît Lemay , are of the opinion that he almost certainly perjured himself at his trial and at Nuremberg . 
 Manstein was found guilty on nine of the charges and was sentenced to eighteen years in prison . An uproar ensued among Manstein 's supporters in Britain and in Germany . Liddell Hart lobbied in the British press , and in Germany the sentence was seen as a political decision . The sentence was reduced to 12 years in February 1950 . Paget published a best @-@ selling book in 1951 about Manstein 's career and trial , which portrayed Manstein as an honourable soldier fighting heroically despite overwhelming odds on the Eastern Front and who had been convicted of crimes that he did not commit . The book helped to contribute to the growing cult surrounding Manstein 's name . His release on 7 May 1953 was partly a result of a recurrence of his eye problems but also the result of pressure by Winston Churchill , Konrad Adenauer , Liddell Hart , Paget and others . 
 = = = Antisemitism = = = 
 Antisemitism was common in Germany and throughout Europe during this period , and Manstein 's attitude towards the Jews had its roots in his exposure to and assimilation of these views . His actions were a reflection of his loyalty toward Hitler and the Nazi regime and of his grounding in a sense of duty based on traditional Prussian military values . His criticism of Hitler was based solely on their disagreements over the conduct of the war , not about the regime 's racial policies . Some historians , including Antony Beevor and Benoît Lemay , are of the opinion that Manstein had some Jewish and Slavic ancestry . Manstein was the only Reichswehr officer who opposed the introduction of the Aryan paragraph in 1934 . He sent a letter of protest to General Beck , commenting that anyone who had volunteered to serve in the armed forces had already proven their worth . 
 Lemay speculated that Manstein may have been interested in protecting his two Mischlinge <unk> who were already serving in the Reichswehr . He may have also been concerned about the possibility that he had distant Jewish ancestry . The SS carried out an investigation into Manstein 's ancestry but the report was not completed and the results remain unknown . On the other hand , Manstein believed that Bolshevism and Jews were inextricably linked , that there was a global conspiracy led by the Jews , and that in order to stop the spread of communism it was necessary to remove the Jews from European society . His order of 20 November 1941 , based on the Severity Order of Reichenau , reads in part : 
 Jewish Bolshevik system must be wiped out once and for all and should never again be allowed to invade our European living space ... It is the same Jewish class of beings who have done so much damage to our own Fatherland by virtue of their activities against the nation and civilisation , and who promote anti @-@ German tendencies throughout the world , and who will be the harbingers of revenge . Their extermination is a dictate of our own survival . 
 Manstein did nothing to prevent the killing of Jews and other civilians in the areas where his units were operating , and in which his Eleventh Army actively participated . That Manstein was well aware of the Einsatzgruppen massacres is demonstrated by a 1941 letter he sent to Otto Ohlendorf , in which Manstein demands Ohlendorf hand over the wristwatches of murdered Jews . Manstein felt his men deserved the watches , since they were doing so much to help Ohlendorf 's men with their work . Smelser and Davies note that this letter was the only time that Manstein ever complained about the activities of the Einsatzgruppen . Manstein later stated that he felt the number of Jews killed in the Holocaust was exaggerated . 
 = = = Post @-@ war life and memoirs = = = 
 Along with ten other former senior officers , Manstein was called on in 1955 by the Amt Blank to formulate plans for the re @-@ founding of the German army . On 20 June 1953 , he spoke to the Bundestag , giving his analysis of strategic power considerations and the country 's defence and spoke about whether the country should have a professional army or a conscripted army . His opinion was that the length of service for Bundeswehr conscripts should be at least 18 months , preferably 24 months . His idea to form a reserve force was later implemented . 
 Manstein 's war memoir , Verlorene Siege ( Lost Victories ) , was published in West Germany in 1955 and translated into English in 1958 for worldwide distribution . The book was a highly acclaimed best @-@ seller , critical of Hitler and his leadership style . Historians such as Liddell Hart saw Manstein 's emphasis on the purely military aspects of the war , while ignoring the political and moral aspects , as a way for him to absolve himself and the high command of any responsibility for the events of the Holocaust . His favourable portrayal of himself had an impact on popular opinion ; he became the centre of a military cult which cast him not only as one of Germany 's greatest generals , but also one of the greatest in history . He has been described as a <unk> <unk> und <unk> ( " military cult legend " ) , a general of legendary — almost mythical — ability , much honoured by both the public and historians . Biographers , including Benoît Lemay , feel that his narrow focus on military matters to the exclusion of moral issues cannot be considered ethical . In 1967 Lieutenant General Ernst Ferber of the Bundeswehr encouraged young German soldiers to eschew unconditional obedience to the head of state , and to serve the nation and the German people . 
 Manstein and his wife moved several times after his release from prison , living in Essen and Bonn for a time before settling into a house near Munich in 1958 . The second volume of his memoirs , Aus einem <unk> ( " A Soldier 's Life " ) , covering the period from 1887 to 1939 , was published in 1958 . His wife , Jutta Sibylle von Manstein , died in 1966 . Erich von Manstein died of a stroke on the night of 9 June 1973 at the age of 85 . As the last but one surviving German field marshal ( Ferdinand Schörner died 2 July 1973 ) , he was buried with full military honours , his funeral being attended by hundreds of soldiers of all ranks . His obituary in The Times states " His influence and effect came from powers of mind and depth of knowledge rather than by generating an electrifying current among the troops or ' putting over ' his personality . " Spiegel magazine was much harsher , saying " He assisted in the march to catastrophe — misled by a blind sense of duty . " 
 = = Awards = = 
 Iron Cross of 1914 , 1st and 2nd class 
 Knight 's Cross of the Royal House Order of Hohenzollern with Swords 
 Knight 's Cross , First Class of the Friedrich Order with swords 
 Hanseatic Cross of Hamburg 
 Clasp to the Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 16 September 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 21 September 1939 ) 
 Order of Michael the Brave , 2nd class ( Romania ) 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 19 July 1940 as General der Infanterie and commanding general of the XXXVIII . Armeekorps 
 209th Oak Leaves on 14 March 1943 as Generalfeldmarschall and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Heeresgruppe Süd 
 59th Swords on 30 March 1944 as Generalfeldmarschall and commander @-@ in @-@ chief of Heeresgruppe Süd 
 Eight mentions in the Wehrmachtbericht : 11 , 12 and 31 October 1941 ; 19 and 20 May 1942 ; 2 July 1942 ; 20 March 1943 ; 4 August 1943 
 = Battle of Pegae = 
 The Battle of Pegae ( Bulgarian : <unk> при <unk> ) was fought between 11 and 18 March 921 in the outskirts of Constantinople between the forces of the Bulgarian Empire and the Byzantine Empire during the Byzantine – Bulgarian war of 913 – 927 . The battle took place in a locality called Pegae ( i.e. " the spring " ) , named after the nearby Church of St. Mary of the Spring . The Byzantine lines collapsed at the very first Bulgarian attack and their commanders fled the battlefield . In the subsequent rout most Byzantine soldiers were killed by the sword , drowned or were captured . 
 In 922 the Bulgarians continued their successful campaigns in Byzantine Thrace , capturing a number of towns and fortresses , including Adrianople , Thrace 's the most important city , and Bizye . In June 922 they engaged and defeated yet another Byzantine army at Constantinople , confirming the Bulgarian domination of the Balkans . However , Constantinople itself remained outside their reach , because Bulgaria lacked the naval power to launch a successful siege . The attempts of the Bulgarian emperor Simeon I to negotiate a joint Bulgarian – Arab assault on the city with the Fatimids were uncovered by the Byzantine and countered . 
 The primary sources for the battle are Theophanes Continuatus , Leo the Grammarian 's Chronicle , the continuation of George Hamartolos ' Chronicle and John Skylitzes ' Synopsis of Histories . 
 = = Origins of the conflict = = 
 Although the Byzantine – Bulgarian conflict that began in 913 was provoked by the Byzantines , it was the Bulgarian monarch Simeon I ( r . 893 – 927 ) who was seeking pretext to wage war and fulfil his ambitions to claim an imperial title for himself and to assume the throne of Constantinople . Unable to confront the Bulgarians , the Byzantines reluctantly recognized Simeon I as Emperor of Bulgaria ( in Bulgarian , Tsar ) as early as July 913 but the decision was revoked after a palace coup in Constantinople in 914 . Three years later , in 917 , the main Byzantine forces were routed in the Battle of Achelous and the Bulgarians took the military initiative . In the four year that followed they launched a number of successful campaigns , reaching the walls of Constantinople and the Isthmus of Corinth . 
 Simeon I planned to secure his position in Constantinople through a marriage between his daughter and the infant Emperor Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) , thus becoming basileopator ( father @-@ in @-@ law ) and guardian of Constantine VII . However , in 919 Admiral Romanos Lekapenos married his daughter to Constantine VII and in 920 proclaimed himself senior emperor , ruining Simeon I 's ambitions to ascend the throne by diplomatic means . Until his death , the Bulgarian monarch never recognized the legitimacy of Romanos ' accession to the throne . Thus , in the beginning of 921 Simeon I did not reply to a proposal of the Ecumenical Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos to betroth one of his daughters or sons to a progeny of Romanos I and sent his army into Byzantine Thrace , reaching Katasyrtai in the outskirts of Constantinople . Romanos I retaliated with a campaign under Pothos Argyros , who reached the town of Aquae Calidae , near modern Burgas , but part of his army was ambushed and destroyed by the Bulgarians . 
 = = The battle = = 
 The Byzantine campaign to Aquae Calidae and the threat in a letter by Nicholas Mystikos that numerous Byzantine troops were preparing to invade Bulgaria caused Simeon I to act quickly . He ordered a large army under kavhan ( i.e. first minister ) Theodore <unk> to head for Constantinople while Simeon I himself prepared another host to besiege the capital of the Theme of Thrace , Adrianople . Theodore <unk> marched swiftly through the Strandzha Mountains and reached the locality Pegae ( i.e. " the spring " ) at the outskirts of Constantinople in the beginning of March 921 . 
 Romanos I was concerned that the Bulgarians would burn the palaces in Pegae and sent " sufficient troops " under the Domestic of the Schools Pothos Argyros , his brother Leo Argyros , the admiral Alexios Mosele and John the Rhaiktor . The Byzantine army was composed of troops of the tagmata , the Hetaireia ( i.e. the imperial guard ) and the navy . 
 The two armies clashed at Pegae in the fifth week of the Great Lent , between 11 and 18 March 921 . The Byzantine commanders formed their battle lines in the lowlands near the springs , while the Bulgarians occupied the higher ground . The Bulgarians charged with dreadful battle cry . Their initial blow was irresistible and the Byzantine lines broke . John the Rhaiktor immediately fled and a certain Photinus , son of <unk> , was killed along with many others while trying to protect him . John the Rhaiktor barely escaped aboard of a dromon . Alexios Mosele , who fled in full armour , drowned with his <unk> while attempting to board a ship . The brothers Pothos and Leo Argyros managed to find shelter in a nearby fortress . In the subsequent rout most of the Byzantine soldiers were killed by the sword , drowned or were captured by the Bulgarians . After the battle the Bulgarians burned the palaces in Pegae and looted the area north of the Golden Horn waterway on the opposite shore of the walls of Constantinople . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 While the Bulgarian army operated successfully in the vicinity of Constantinople , Simeon I was preparing another major campaign in Thrace . Before leaving the capital , Preslav , Simeon I sent a letter to Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos in which he rebuffed the proposal for a dynastic marriage with the family of Romanos I. He insisted that peace was only possible on condition that Romanos I renounce the Byzantine throne in favour of himself . The Bulgarian monarch denied the accusations of Mystikos that he was responsible for the terrible war and instead blamed the eunuchs of Empress Zoe Karbonopsina , who had rebuffed his proposal to betroth his daughter to Constantine VII in 914 and had attacked Bulgaria in 917 . 
 At the head of his army , Simeon I marched from Preslav through the Balkan Mountains and the valley of the river <unk> and besieged Adrianople . While the bulk of the Bulgarian forces were concentrated in Thrace , the Byzantines bribed the Serbian prince Pavle <unk> , who was a Bulgarian protégé , to switch sides . The Bulgarians answered with a successful intervention in Serbia , easily gained control of the country and placed in power another Bulgarian candidate , <unk> <unk> . The conflict in Serbia distracted the Bulgarian military operations against the Byzantine Empire for the rest of 921 . 
 In 922 the Bulgarians renewed their offensive in Thrace to divert the Byzantines from the clandestine negotiations with the Fatimid Caliphate to form a Bulgarian – Arab alliance for a joint assault of Constantinople . Simeon I remained at the siege of Adrianople while another army was sent to the Byzantine capital . In June 922 the Bulgarians engaged and defeated yet another Byzantine army . A few weeks later Adrianople surrendered . In the meantime , the Byzantines captured the ship with the Bulgarian and Fatimid envoys on its way back to Bulgaria . Romanos I thus learned about the negotiations and outbid the Bulgarians . 
 = Voalavo antsahabensis = 
 Voalavo antsahabensis , also known as the eastern voalavo , is a rodent in the family Nesomyidae which occurs in the Anjozorobe forest of eastern Madagascar . Although surveys before 2002 failed to record the species , it is common in some places . However , it is threatened by habitat loss because of slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture . The species was formally described in 2005 and is most closely related to the only other species of Voalavo , Voalavo gymnocaudus from northern Madagascar . 
 The two species of Voalavo are only subtly different in morphology . With a body mass of 20 @.@ 7 to 22 @.@ 6 g ( 0 @.@ 73 to 0 @.@ 8 oz ) , V. antsahabensis is a small rodent . It has a longer tail than V. gymnocaudus , as well as a longer rostrum ( front part of the skull ) and diastema ( gap between the incisors and molars ) , but shorter molar rows . The two species also differ in details of the configuration of the palate . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Voalavo antsahabensis was first recorded in 2002 , when three individuals were captured in Madagascar 's Anjozorobe forest . In 2005 , the species was formally described by Steven Goodman and colleagues as Voalavo antsahabensis , the second species in the genus Voalavo . The only previously known species , Voalavo gymnocaudus , occurs further to the north , in the Northern Highlands . The sequences of the cytochrome b gene differ by about 10 % in these two species . The specific name , antsahabensis , derives from the name of the village of <unk> , which is near the place where the holotype was found . The common name " Eastern Voalavo " has been used for this species . 
 = = Description = = 
 Species of Voalavo are small rodents with a delicate skull and without a tuft at the tip of the tail ( as present in the closely related genus Eliurus ) . V. antsahabensis is similar to V. gymnocaudus and differs only in subtle characters . The tail is shorter in V. antsahabensis , but the head and body is slightly longer , as is the ear . However , the latter two apparent contrasts may be the result of differences in measurement technique . In both species , the final 25 to 30 mm ( 1 to 1 @.@ 2 in ) of the tail are covered with white hairs . In three specimens of V. antsahabensis , head and body length ranges from 88 to 91 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 to 3 @.@ 6 in ) , tail length is 106 to 114 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 to 4 @.@ 5 in ) , hindfoot length 19 to 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 75 to 0 @.@ 79 in ) , ear length 15 to 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 59 to 0 @.@ 63 in ) , and body mass 20 @.@ 7 to 22 @.@ 6 g ( 0 @.@ 73 to 0 @.@ 8 oz ) . 
 In the skull , Voalavo antsahabensis has a significantly longer rostrum ( the front part of the skull ) and diastema ( the gap between the incisors and the molars ) . Furthermore , V. antsahabensis has shorter molar rows in both the upper and lower jaws . The back end of the incisive foramina ( openings in the front part of the palate ) , which is located in front of the first molars , is rounded in V. antsahabensis , but angular in V. gymnocaudus . The sutures of the maxillary and palatine bones ( the line where the two bones , part of the skull , join ) are straight and parallel to each other , the toothrows , and the midline of the skull in V. antsahabensis ; in V. gymnocaudus , in contrast , they are more curved . Statistical analysis of measurements of the skull and teeth clearly separates the two species of Voalavo . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Voalavo antsahabensis is only known from the forests at Anjozorobe , on the eastern margin of Madagascar 's Central Highlands . Among the specimens found in 2002 , two were captured at 1425 m ( 4680 ft ) altitude on a Uapaca densifolia branch , about 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) over the ground , in moist montane forest , and a third was caught on the ground at 1275 m ( <unk> ft ) altitude . This last specimen , a male , had its testicles located in the scrotum , and therefore was reproductively mature , even though its skull bones were not completely fused , indicating it was not yet <unk> mature . Before it was collected in 2002 , the species was not recorded in earlier biological surveys of Anjozorobe , taking place in 1977 – 1986 and 1996 ; whether this is because the animal is difficult to collect , because its abundance varies from year to year , or because its distribution is patchy is unknown . Goodman and colleagues argued on the basis of this example that rapid surveys may not necessarily yield complete inventories of the fauna of an area . Later surveys in 2005 and 2006 did find it at several other sites in the region , at some of which it was abundant . Anjozorobe is about 450 km ( 280 mi ) from the nearest occurrence of V. gymnocaudus , and most of the intervening area contains montane forest . However , this forest zone is bisected by the low @-@ lying <unk> Window , which may serve as a barrier between the two species of Voalavo . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Voalavo antsahabensis is listed as " Endangered " on the IUCN Red List because of its small , vulnerable range ; the Anjozorobe forest is threatened by the practice of slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture ( tavy ) . However , its habitat has been designated as a protected area , the Couloir Forestier d <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = The Sontaran Stratagem = 
 " The Sontaran Stratagem " is the fourth episode of the fourth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who , which depicts the adventures of a time @-@ travelling humanoid alien known as the Doctor . The episode was broadcast on BBC One on 26 April 2008 . The episode and its sequel , " The Poison Sky " , were written by Helen Raynor , who previously wrote the linked episodes " Daleks in Manhattan " and " Evolution of the Daleks " in the third series . 
 " The Sontaran Stratagem " features the first appearance of the alien Sontarans to the series since the 1985 Colin Baker story The Two Doctors , as well as former companion Martha Jones ( Freema Agyeman ) , last seen in " Last of the Time Lords " . The episode takes place on present @-@ day Earth , where Martha and UNIT summon the Doctor ( David Tennant ) for assistance concerning ATMOS ( Atmospheric Omission System ) , a revolutionary piece of green technology installed in 400 million cars worldwide . ATMOS is later revealed to be part of a Sontaran plot to poison the atmosphere . 
 Show runner Russell T Davies had considered making the Sontarans return since the revival of the series and wanted to show changes in Martha 's personality after her departure . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 06 million viewers after its original broadcast , with an Appreciation Index of " 87 " . Critics gave generally positive reviews , praising the return of the Sontarans , Christopher Ryan 's portrayal as Staal , and Raynor 's writing ; some stated Raynor improved from her previous episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Martha Jones , a former companion of the Doctor , calls him to ask for assistance during an investigation by UNIT ( Unified Intelligence Taskforce ) . Minutes after the Doctor 's craft , the TARDIS , materialises in contemporary Britain , Martha authorises the raid of an ATMOS factory . The Doctor introduces his companion Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) to Martha and UNIT ; Donna instantly befriends Martha , but is concerned about UNIT 's ethics and asks the Doctor why he is associated with them ; the Doctor ambiguously replies he used to work for them in the " 70s or 80s . " 
 ATMOS is marketing a satellite navigation system developed by young prodigy Luke Rattigan ( Ryan Sampson ) . The system also reduces carbon dioxide emissions to zero ; UNIT requested the Doctor 's help because the technology is not contemporary and might be alien . UNIT are also concerned about fifty @-@ two simultaneous deaths occurring spontaneously several days earlier . The Doctor travels to Rattigan 's private school to investigate the system and discovers that the recent events have been plotted by an alien warrior race known as the Sontarans . 
 The Sontarans are part of a battlegroup led by General Staal , " the undefeated " ( Christopher Ryan ) . Instead of an outright invasion , they are taking control with a combination of human clones , mind control , and ATMOS ; Martha is captured by two of the controlled humans and cloned to provide a mole within UNIT . 
 Meanwhile , Donna returns home to warn her mother Sylvia ( Jacqueline King ) and grandfather Wilfred Mott ( Bernard Cribbins ) about the Doctor , having been advised to do so by Martha . Concerned about the implications of telling the truth , Donna decides against warning her mother . The Doctor investigates the ATMOS device attached to Donna 's car and discovers a secondary function : the device can emit a poisonous gas . Wilfred attempts to take the car off the road , but is trapped when Staal activates all 400 million ATMOS devices installed in cars worldwide . The episode 's cliffhanger depicts Donna shouting for help while the Doctor stares helplessly at a street full of cars emitting the gas , while on their ship orbiting the planet , the Sontarans prepare themselves for battle . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The episode features the return of the Sontarans , who last appeared in the 1985 serial The Two Doctors ; a central appearance by UNIT ; and Martha Jones , who had last appeared in " Last of the Time Lords " and made special guest appearances in the Torchwood episodes " Reset " , " Dead Man Walking " , and " A Day in the Death . " The brief that executive producer Russell T Davies gave to writer Helen Raynor included the terms " Sontarans " , " military " , and " Martha 's back " . 
 This episode continues the pattern of having monsters from the classic series return in the new one . Davies commented that the Sontarans were " always on his list " of villains to resurrect . The time and location of the episode was chosen because every previous Sontaran story except for The Invasion of Time was set on Earth . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Martha 's departure allowed Davies to change the character 's personality . In her reappearance , she is more mature and equal to the Doctor , as opposed to the third series , in which she was in love with him . The writers debated several aspects of her character , her status and reaction to Donna in particular . Raynor elected to emphasise Martha 's medical career over her military career , and avoided a " handbags at dawn " scenario because she felt it would rehash Rose Tyler 's ( Billie Piper ) initial opinion of former companion Sarah Jane Smith ( Elisabeth Sladen ) from the second series episode " School Reunion " . 
 The episode is the first major appearance of UNIT since the show 's revival . Their name has changed from United Nations Intelligence Taskforce to Unified Intelligence Taskforce at the request of the United Nations , who cited the political climate and potential " brand confusion " as reasons for disassociation . The new acronym was coined by Davies after several meetings among the scriptwriters . The UNIT privates Gray and Wilson were specifically written as " alien fodder " . The episode refers to inconsistencies in dating UNIT stories when the Doctor is unsure whether he worked for UNIT in the 1970s or 1980s . 
 Raynor initially envisioned the poisonous gas would be emitted by factories , but changed it in later drafts to cars for several reasons : the episode would provide social commentary and the idea of an " evil <unk> system " was " much more <unk> " and " irresistible " . Davies thought the concept was " so very Doctor Who " . Because the series was produced out of order , the " ATMOS " subplot was seeded in the previous episode " Partners in Crime " . The " fifteenth broken moon " of the Medusa Cascade is also mentioned . The Medusa Cascade was previously mentioned in " Last of the Time Lords " , " Partners in Crime " , and in " The Fires of Pompeii " . In the episode , a system installed in a UNIT jeep <unk> explodes ; originally , Raynor wanted it to be a large explosion , but reduced the explosion to several sparks to reduce costs and to lampoon an action movie cliché . 
 The episode , like " Aliens of London " and " The Lazarus Experiment " , properly introduces the lead companion 's family . Unlike the Tyler or Jones families , both Sylvia Noble and Wilfred Mott had met the Doctor before ( in " The Runaway Bride " and " Voyage of the Damned " , respectively ) , providing Raynor with an additional subplot . <unk> dialogue explains Mott 's absence from " The Runaway Bride " by the character having had Spanish flu . Wilfred 's positive opinion of the Doctor is different from Sylvia 's , who , according to Tennant , joined " a long line of mothers that don 't quite get the Doctor " ; Davies had wanted a family member who trusted the Doctor since the show 's revival . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The opening scene , which depicts the system driving reporter Jo Nakashima into the canal , was filmed at Cardiff 's docks . The scene was the first time a car @-@ cannon had been used since 2005 , and was required to be completed in one shot . The car fired into the canal was removed immediately afterwards to clear the shipping route . Scenes at the Rattigan Academy were filmed at Margam Country Park , Port Talbot from 23 to 26 October 2007 . The London skyline and gas were added in post @-@ production by The Mill . 
 When interviewed on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross , Catherine Tate stated that she had been filming alongside ten actors playing Sontarans for two weeks before she realised that there were actors inside the Sontaran costumes . She had assumed the Sontarans " ran on electricity " . It was not until an actor removed his helmet to reveal his real face that she realised her mistake . She stated she was " freaked out " by this and said she " nearly died " . 
 Despite the Sontarans ' clone culture being asserted in the classic series , " The Sontaran Strategem " is the first episode to depict the cloning process . Originally , all of the factory workers were to be clones , but Raynor reduced this to only Martha to solve continuity problems with the second part . The template clone was portrayed by Ruari Mears , who wore a prosthetic mask that took longer to apply than any he had previously worn . The scenes involving the cloning tank were filmed in a Welsh shampoo factory and reused a prop from " The Fires of Pompeii " as the tank which contained the clone . Davies and Agyeman enjoyed the scenes set in the cloning room ; Agyeman liked playing an " evil companion " , who she and Davies felt made the real Martha " warmer " , and Davies thought Privates Gray and Harris discovering the tank in a darkened room was " classic Doctor Who " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 " The Sontaran Strategem " was the most @-@ watched programme in its timeslot , with 7 @.@ 06 million viewers . The episode was the second most @-@ watched programme of the day , beaten by Britain 's Got Talent , and was the seventeenth most @-@ watched programme of the week . The episode 's Appreciation Index was 87 ( considered " Excellent " ) , the highest figure recorded on its airdate . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Mark Wright of The Stage commented overall that the episode as " about as deliciously old @-@ fashioned as new Who gets , " stating that the script was " a deftly simple premise that makes you wonder why you didn 't think of it yourself " , and that Tate 's character moved away from the caricature in " The Runaway Bride " . Wright also praised Agyeman for " effortlessly " portraying Martha and her evil cloned counterpart . A fan of the Sontarans , Wright reacted positively to their return and redesign . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy rated the episode four stars out of five . Rawson @-@ Jones felt the narrative was well plotted and paced , and felt Helen Raynor 's writing had improved from " Daleks in Manhattan " . Rawson @-@ Jones also praised the reintroductions of UNIT , Martha , Donna 's family and the Sontarans , the interaction between Donna and Martha , and Christopher Ryan 's portrayal of Staal , but felt <unk> 's voice was " distinctly lacklustre . " The episode 's direction by Douglas Mackinnon also received criticism , particularly the scenes in the clone room . In the end , Rawson @-@ Jones felt that the first part 's effectiveness lies on how much the viewers wish to tune in to see " The Poison Sky " . 
 Matt Wales of IGN rated the episode a " good " 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 , stating that despite the episode 's premise , it came " perilously close to greatness , " and praised Raynor 's " crackling script which graciously walked the tightrope between balls @-@ out farce and affectionate sci @-@ fi pastiche " . Wales noted that Tennant and Tate " relished " the perpetual swings from " square @-@ jawed serious " to " faintly sadistic subversion " , to mess with audience expectations . Ryan 's performance as Staal was again praised , but Wales felt Agyeman still displayed " the charisma and range of a dead fish , despite Martha 's transformation from lovesick sap to Ripley @-@ esque super soldier . " Wales summed up that the episode " did pretty much everything a two @-@ part opener should – swiftly shifting the pieces into place for next week 's inevitably bombastic showdown . " Alan Stanley Bear of Airlock Alpha called " The Sontaran Strategem " an " exciting and nostalgic adventure " , and said that the episode lives up to the show 's reputation for transforming a normal object , in this case the car , to a " global killer " . Bear praised the episode for Donna and Martha 's introduction being opposite to Rose Tyler and Sarah Jane Smith 's in " School Reunion " , for providing a human element in the subplot where Donna visits her grandfather , and for the episode 's cliffhanger . However , Bear wrote that it took too long to " get to the point " , and criticized the " bland Sontaran dialogue and the cliched simplicity of mind control " , which he felt " reduced what could have been a fantastically intricate story piece into Saturday morning cartoon material . " 
 John Beresford of TV Scoop thought the episode lived up to many of his expectations , with sharp dialogue and some humour , a well @-@ plotted story , and a good pace overall with a " heap of action " , despite the episode 's slow start . Beresford also praised the reintroduction of UNIT from the " old , tired UNIT " to a " newly revamped and spiffy UNIT with lots of cool gadgets " , the Doctor 's meeting with Rattigan , calling the scene " an inspired piece of writing " , and the episode 's cliffhanger , calling it " the best yet " . He also believed the ATMOS idea worked well . The only weak spot Beresford noted was that the Sontarans appeared to have been softened from their previous appearance , stating that Staal would " shoot first and ask questions later . " 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Sontaran Stratagem " / " The Poison Sky " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Florida State Road 826 = 
 State Road 826 ( SR 826 ) is a bypass route around the greater Miami area , extending approximately 30 miles ( 48 km ) in a northeasterly arc from U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) in Pinecrest to its terminus at State Road A1A in Sunny Isles Beach . Between its southern terminus and the Golden Glades Interchange , State Road 826 is known as the Palmetto Expressway , a heavily traveled freeway with portions of the road carrying in excess of 250 @,@ 000 vehicles a day . Unlike many of the other expressways in Miami @-@ Dade County , the Palmetto Expressway is <unk> . East of the interchange , State Road 826 is a surface road connecting North Miami and North Miami Beach to Sunny Isles Beach over the Intracoastal Waterway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Palmetto Expressway = = = 
 State Road 826 begins at an interchange with US 1 in Pinecrest , just south of the <unk> Mall , and heads north as the Palmetto Expressway into Kendall . The first interchange , less than a mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of US 1 , is with Kendall Drive ( SR 94 ) , which provides access to the mall . SR 826 continues north , crossing under the Snapper Creek Expressway ( SR 878 ) without an interchange before meeting Sunset Drive ( SR 986 ) at a diamond interchange . It then leaves Kendall , continuing into Glenvar Heights with an interchange with Southwest 56th Street / Miller Drive , which provides access to the University of Miami . About half a mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) later , the Don Shula Expressway ( SR 874 ) merges with the Palmetto Expressway at its northern terminus , with a southbound exit and a northbound entrance point . Between this interchange and the next ( at Bird Road / SR 976 ) , SR 826 forms the border between Glenvar Heights and Olympia Heights ; past it , the expressway marks the boundary between Westchester and Coral Terrace . After an exit with Southwest 24th Street / Coral Way , the expressway meets the Tamiami Trail ( US 41 ) , providing access to Florida International University . This interchange also marks the Tamiami Trail 's entrance into incorporated Miami , the boundary of which lies on the eastern side of the expressway . 
 North of the Tamiami Trail interchange , the Palmetto Expressway forms the eastern boundary of Fontainebleau as it continues north to an exit with Flagler Street ( SR 968 ) , the east @-@ west baseline for Miami @-@ Dade County roads . The freeway then has an interchange with the Dolphin Expressway ( SR 836 ) just south of Doral , creating access to Miami International Airport . This interchange is currently being improved due to the current configuration causing severe congestion . Now forming Doral 's eastern boundary , SR 826 continues north to Northwest 25th Street , which connects to the western end of the airport , followed by an exit with Doral Boulevard ( SR 948 ) that links to the Doral Golf Resort & Spa , and then an exit with Northwest 58th Street . After a brief crossing through unincorporated Miami @-@ Dade County , the expressway reaches an interchange with the Hialeah Expressway ( SR 934 ) in Medley adjacent to the Palmetto Metrorail station , followed by a diagonal interchange with US 27 at the southern end of Hialeah Gardens and Hialeah . It then enters Hialeah proper just after an interchange with Northwest 103rd Street ( SR 932 ) , which allows access to the Westland Mall . An exit with Northwest 122nd Street then follows . 
 At the boundary between Hialeah and Miami Lakes , SR 826 reaches an interchange with the national southern terminus of Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and the western termini of the <unk> Parkway ( SR 924 ) and SR 916 . The Palmetto Expressway goes into Miami Lakes , interchanges with Northwest 154 Street , then turns through 90 degrees to the east at a point known as " The Big Curve " . The road then proceeds straight east , forming the boundary between Miami Lakes and Country Club , soon interchanging with Northwest 67th Avenue . At the next exit , Red Road ( SR 823 ) , the expressway forms the boundary between an unincorporated section of Miami @-@ Dade County and Miami Gardens , with the expressway entering the city proper at the next exit , Northwest 47th Avenue . The expressway then passes to the north of Florida Memorial University before the Northwest 37th Avenue exit , where it creates the northern border of St. Thomas University 's campus . Still in Miami Gardens , SR 826 then has exits with Northwest 27th Avenue ( SR 817 ) , Northwest 17th Avenue and Northwest 12th Avenue before reaching the Golden Glades Interchange . 
 SR 826 takes a convoluted path through the Golden Glades Interchange . It first meets the connector ramps between Florida 's Turnpike and Interstate 95 ( I @-@ 95 ) , allowing access from northbound SR 826 to I @-@ 95 southbound as well as US 441 / SR 9 southbound , and from the Turnpike southbound and I @-@ 95 northbound to southbound SR 826 . After turning to the northeast , SR 826 moves off its mainline at the next exit onto the mainline of the Turnpike which passes over it ; SR 826 's former mainline , meanwhile , continues on as an at @-@ grade extension of Northwest 7th Avenue to US 441 northbound . Traffic moving from eastbound SR 826 to the northbound Turnpike must pass through an <unk> intersection here . Headed back southeast , SR 826 first crosses over the former Seaboard Coast Line railroad , begins to form the northern boundary of Golden Glades , then passes under the I @-@ 95 's express lanes , meeting the onramp between I @-@ 95 southbound and the Turnpike northbound , and the onramp between southbound US 441 and eastbound SR 826 . It then passes over Interstate 95 proper , which lies between the southbound and northbound carriageways of US 441 , as it swings back to the northeast and then to the east once more . Here it meets its last three ramps , one which allows access from US 441 and I @-@ 95 northbound to eastbound SR 826 , another from westbound SR 826 to US 441 and I @-@ 95 southbound , and from westbound SR 826 to northbound US 441 . SR 826 resumes its east @-@ west orientation once more at a signalised intersection with Northwest 2nd Avenue , marking the end of SR 826 's expressway . 
 = = = Non @-@ expressway section = = = 
 State Road 826 heads east from the Golden Glades Interchange as Northwest 167th Street , a six @-@ laned surface road , along the boundary between Golden Glades and North Miami Beach . Through here , the road is also known as North Miami Beach Boulevard , lined with shops , offices , hotels and other commercial services . Two blocks after leaving the interchange , the road crosses North Miami Avenue , the longitudinal baseline for Miami @-@ Dade County ; thus , the road becomes Northeast 167th Street once it passes this point . Approximately 0 @.@ 75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) later , SR 826 intersects with Northeast 6th Avenue ( SR 915 ) . Two blocks later , at Northeast 8th Avenue , North Miami Beach Boulevard starts to swing to the southeast , leaving Northeast 167th Street 's orientation , reaching Northeast 163rd street approximately 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) later at Northeast 12th Avenue , and taking its eastbound orientation . It immediately passes the Mall at 163rd Street on its left , continuing on as a shopping strip for another 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) where it meets the northern terminus of SR 909 at the West Dixie Highway . One block later , after crossing the Florida East Coast Railway tracks , SR 826 meets US 1 once more at Biscayne Boulevard . 
 To the east of US 1 , SR 826 's character changes as it passes through mangroves and crosses the <unk> River , having expanded to eight lanes . With North Miami Beach lying to the north and North Miami to the south of the road , SR 826 passes between more mangroves to its south and more businesses to the north as it approaches the Intracoastal Waterway . Here , the road splits into separate eastbound and westbound streets before it crosses the Waterway over a drawbridge in each direction , and enters Sunny Isles Beach . Apartment buildings line the outside of the two road @-@ halves , with some commercial services in the middle , as it continues on for another 0 @.@ 36 miles ( 0 @.@ 58 km ) to SR 826 's northern terminus at Collins Avenue ( SR A1A ) , one block shy of the Atlantic Ocean . A flyover allows traffic on northbound SR A1A to move onto westbound SR 826 without having to stop twice for eastbound SR 826 traffic and to cross SR A1A . 
 = = = Traffic volume = = = 
 The traffic volume along SR 826 's entire length is measured by the Florida Department of Transportation . The busiest sections of SR 826 are in the vicinity of the Miami International Airport and the nearby industrial area to its west , with over 200 @,@ 000 daily vehicle movements counted between the Dolphin Expressway at Fontainebleau and the Northwest 122nd Street / West 68th Street exit in Hialeah , peaking in the vicinity of SR 934 in Medley with over 250 @,@ 000 vehicle movements each day . 
 Traffic volumes decrease to the south of the Dolphin Expressway , particularly south of the Don Shula Expressway merge ; however , unlike the rest of SR 826 ( including its surface road portion ) , much of its peak traffic flow is uni @-@ directional . Indeed , at the Palmetto Expressway 's southern end , between US 1 and Kendall Drive , traffic moves almost exclusively in the peak direction . 
 Northwards , traffic volumes decrease after the interchange with I @-@ 75 and the <unk> Parkway , with a reported drop of approximately 60 @,@ 000 daily vehicle movements north of the interchange . As the Palmetto Expressway rounds the Big Curve and heads eastwards , the traffic volume steadily increases to a maximum of 164 @,@ 000 daily vehicle movements just prior to the Golden Glades Interchange as it collects traffic from the north – south routes in the Miami Gardens area . 
 East of the interchange , where SR 826 becomes a surface road , the traffic volumes are more than halved in comparison to SR 826 's expressway sections , with a recorded figure of 64 @,@ 500 daily vehicle movements . This figure steadily decreases eastwards along SR 826 , with only 46 @,@ 000 daily vehicle movements recorded near its eastern terminus with SR A1A in Sunny Isles Beach . 
 = = History = = 
 State Road 826 's designation originally applied to a two @-@ lane road ( Golden Glades Drive , Northwest 167th Street ) connecting US 27 to US 441 in the vicinity of the Golden Glades Interchange . 
 In 1956 , plans were unveiled for several expressways throughout Dade County . The routes proposed were a North @-@ South Expressway ( now part of I @-@ 95 ) , an East @-@ West Expressway ( now the Dolphin Expressway ) , a 36th Street Expressway ( now the Airport Expressway ) , the Biscayne Bay <unk> ( a proposed downtown loop , never built ) , a Dixie Expressway ( proposed ; most was never built , a portion became I @-@ 95 ) , and the Palmetto Road Expressway . In 1957 , Dade County Commissioner Ralph Fossey proposed an alternative alignment of the Palmetto Expressway . The new alignment would begin at Miller Road ( Southwest 56th Street ) and then turn southwesterly to follow the Seaboard Coast Line railroad tracks for about 10 miles ( 16 km ) . The route would then turn south at Southwest 117th Avenue and follow it into US 1 . While the alternate route plan ultimately failed , eventually the Don Shula Expressway , a northeast @-@ southwest expressway , was built along the railroad tracks in the 1970s . 
 In 1958 , the State Road Department started construction on the bypass expressway under their authority . A north – south section along West 77th Avenue ( Palmetto Road ) was built to connect US 1 in Pinecrest to an improved Golden Glades Drive ( complete with 90 degree eastward turn ) and the portion of Northwest 167th Street west of the curve would be abandoned . Many land owners were forced to sell their property to the county to make way for the construction of the expressway . The Palmetto Bypass Expressway was opened in June 1961 at the cost of $ 30 million , four years after the opening of Florida 's Turnpike and six months before the opening of Dade County 's second expressway , the Airport Expressway ( SR 112 ) . 
 The completion of the Palmetto Expressway ( the " Bypass " faded from public usage in the 1960s ) and the building of Interstate 95 were the impetus of the construction of the massive Golden Glades Interchange involving Florida 's Turnpike , US 441 , Interstate 95 , and SR 9 . 
 When the Palmetto Expressway was first opened , it went through tracts of woodland and farmland which have since been urbanized . Originally there were four at @-@ grade intersections in Hialeah and Miami Lakes which were either transformed into full interchanges or blocked off in the 1970s . In addition , increasing traffic loads on the Palmetto prompted plans for extending Florida 's Turnpike to " bypass the bypass . " In 1974 , the Homestead Extension of Florida 's Turnpike was opened to traffic four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the west of the Palmetto to reduce the traffic demands on Miami 's original bypass . 
 The Florida Department of Transportation recently completed a project on a 16 @.@ 7 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 26 @.@ 9 km ) section of the Palmetto Expressway from the southern terminus to just north of the Northwest 154th Street interchange , widening the highway by two lanes ( from eight lanes to ten and ten lanes to twelve ) and improving the interchanges . Reconstruction of the Miller Drive , Bird Road and Don Shula Expressway interchanges began in 2008 , and was completed around 2012 . The Dolphin @-@ Palmetto Interchange construction began on November 30 , 2009 , and will be completed in 2015 . 
 The Florida Department of Transportation is in the process of adding express lanes on the Palmetto Expressway between West Flagler Street and Northwest 154th Street , which will connect with new express lanes on Interstate 75 . This will result in four regular and two express lanes , similar to 95 express . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Miami @-@ Dade County . All exits are unnumbered . 
 = Ned Lamont = 
 Edward Miner " Ned " Lamont , Jr . ( born January 3 , 1954 ) is an American businessman and politician . In 2006 he defeated the prominent incumbent Senator , Joe Lieberman , for Connecticut 's Senatorial Democratic nomination ( 52 percent vs. 48 percent ) , who instead opted to run as a candidate under his Connecticut for Lieberman Party . Lamont finished second with 39 percent , compared to Lieberman 's 49 percent and Republican Alan Schlesinger 's 9 percent . In 2010 he ran for the Democratic nomination for Governor of Connecticut , but lost to Dan Malloy , the eventual winner of the election . 
 Lamont founded and chaired Campus <unk> ( formerly Lamont Digital Systems ) , which provides video and data services to U.S. college campuses . He is currently a faculty member and Chair of the Arts and Sciences Public Policy Committee at Central Connecticut State University , where he was named by the Board of Trustees as Distinguished Professor of Political Science and Philosophy . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Lamont was born on January 3 , 1954 , in Washington , D.C. to Camille Helene ( née <unk> ) and Edward Miner Lamont , and is the great @-@ grandson of former J. P. Morgan & Co. chairman Thomas W. Lamont . His mother was born in San Juan , Puerto Rico , to American parents . His father , an economist , worked on the Marshall Plan and later served in Department of Housing and Urban Development during the Nixon administration . Lamont attended Phillips Exeter Academy , where he served as president of the student newspaper , The <unk> . After graduating Phillips Exeter in 1972 , Lamont earned a Bachelor of Arts from Harvard College in 1976 and an M.B.A. from the Yale School of Management in 1980 . 
 = = Business career = = 
 In 1977 Lamont began working for The Black River Tribune , a small newspaper in Ludlow , Vermont . After receiving his M.B.A. from Yale , Lamont entered the cable television industry , managing the start @-@ up of Cablevision 's operation in Fairfield County , Connecticut . In 1984 he founded his own cable television company , Lamont Digital Systems ( now known as Campus <unk> ) , which provides satellite and telecommunication services to colleges and universities . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Before running for the United States Senate , Lamont was elected and served as a selectman in the town of Greenwich , Connecticut for one term . Lamont also served for three terms on the town finance board and chaired the state investment advisory council , which oversees the investment of the state pension funds . 
 = = = 2006 U.S. Senate election = = = 
 On March 13 , 2006 , Lamont officially announced his campaign for the United States Senate against incumbent Joe Lieberman . 
 On July 6 , Lamont faced off against Lieberman in a 51 @-@ minute televised debate which covered issues such as the Iraq War , energy policy , and immigration . Lieberman argued that he was being subjected to a " litmus test " on the war , insisted that he was a " bread and butter Democrat " , and on a number of occasions asked , " who is Ned Lamont ? " During the debate Lieberman asked Lamont if he would disclose his income tax returns , which he afterwards did . 
 Lamont focused on Lieberman 's supportive relationship with Republicans , telling him " if you won 't challenge President Bush and his failed agenda , I will . " He criticized Lieberman 's vote for the Energy Policy Act of 2005 , which Lamont dubbed the " Bush / Cheney / Lieberman energy bill . " In response to Lamont 's assertion that he supported Republican policies , Lieberman stated that he had voted with the Democratic caucus in the Senate 90 percent of the time . Lamont argued that the then three @-@ term incumbent lacked the courage to challenge the Bush administration 's handling of the Iraq War . 
 On July 30 , The Sunday Times reported that former President Bill Clinton was believed to have warned Lieberman not to run as an independent if he lost the primary to Lamont . Throughout the election , Lamont significantly funded his own campaign , with donations exceeding $ 12 @.@ 7 million , as he had pledged not to accept money from lobbyists . 
 Lamont won the primary with 51 @.@ 79 percent of the vote as opposed to Lieberman 's 48 @.@ 21 percent ; it was the only Senate race in 2006 where an incumbent lost re @-@ nomination . In his concession speech , Lieberman announced that he would stand by his prior statements that he 'd run as an independent if he lost the Democratic primary . Lieberman won the general election with approximately 50 percent of the vote ; exit polls showed that Lieberman won the vote of 33 percent of Democrats , 54 percent of independents , and 70 percent of Republicans . 
 = = = Post @-@ election = = = 
 Lamont was one of the key supporters in Connecticut for the Chris Dodd presidential campaign . After Dodd dropped out of the race , Lamont became the Connecticut campaign co @-@ chair for Barack Obama 's presidential campaign . Lamont was credited with attracting the types of voters he brought to Obama 's successful campaign in the Connecticut Democratic primary . In March 2008 , Lamont was elected as a Congressional district @-@ level delegate from Connecticut to the 2008 Democratic National Convention , pledged to Barack Obama . 
 Research 2000 polls commissioned by the blog Daily Kos in 2007 and 2008 found that Lamont would win a Senate rematch with Joe Lieberman by growing margins . In February 2009 Lamont stated that he was not considering another campaign for Senate . 
 On November 4 , 2009 , Lamont reported that he would create an exploratory committee for the race for Governor of Connecticut in 2010 , and on February 17 , 2010 , he officially announced his candidacy . On May 22 , 2010 , he was defeated for the Democratic nomination by former Stamford mayor Dan Malloy . Lamont received 582 votes ( 32 percent ) to Malloy 's 1 @,@ 232 votes ( 68 percent ) . Since Lamont won more than fifteen percent of the vote , he appeared on the primary ballot on August 10 , 2010 . He lost the primary election to Malloy , who received 57 @.@ 6 percent of the vote to Lamont 's 42 @.@ 4 percent . 
 = = Academia = = 
 After the election , Lamont entered academia . He served as a teaching fellow at the Harvard Institute of Politics , and is currently an adjunct faculty member and Chair of the Arts and Sciences Public Policy Committee at Central Connecticut State University , where he was named by the Board of Trustees as Distinguished Professor of Political Science and Philosophy . 
 = = Memberships = = 
 Lamont serves on the Board of Directors of Conservation Services Group , Mercy Corps , the Norman Rockwell Museum , and the Connecticut Council for Education Reform . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1983 Ned Lamont married Ann Huntress . They have three children . Ann is a venture capitalist , serving as a managing partner at Oak Investment Partners ; in 2007 she was named number 50 in Forbes ' Midas List . 
 = WASP @-@ 17b = 
 WASP @-@ 17b is an exoplanet in the constellation Scorpius that is orbiting the star WASP @-@ 17 . Its discovery was announced on 11 August 2009 . It is the first planet discovered to have a retrograde orbit , meaning it orbits in a direction counter to the rotation of its host star . This discovery challenged traditional planetary formation theory . In terms of diameter , WASP @-@ 17b is the second @-@ largest exoplanet discovered yet , and at half Jupiter 's mass , this makes it the most puffy planet known . On 3 December 2013 , scientists working with the Hubble Space Telescope reported detecting water in the atmosphere of the exoplanet . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 A team of researchers led by David Anderson of Keele University in Staffordshire , England , discovered the gas giant , which is about 1 @,@ 000 light years ( 300 parsecs ) from Earth , by observing it in transit its host star WASP @-@ 17 . Such photometric observations also reveal the planet 's size . The discovery was made with a telescope array at the South African Astronomical Observatory . Due to the involvement of the Wide Angle Search for Planets SuperWASP consortium of universities , the exoplanet , as the 17th found to date by this group , was given its present name . 
 Astronomers at the Observatory of Geneva were then able to use characteristic red shifts and blue shifts in the host star 's spectrum as its radial velocity varied over the course of the planet 's orbit to measure the planet 's mass and obtain an indication of its orbital eccentricity . Careful examination of the Doppler shifts during transits also allowed them to determine the direction of the planet 's orbital motion relative to its parent star 's rotation via the Rossiter – McLaughlin effect . 
 = = Special properties = = 
 WASP @-@ 17b has a radius 1 @.@ 5 – 2 times that of Jupiter and about half the mass . Thus its mean density is between 0 @.@ 08 and 0 @.@ 19 g / cm3 , compared with Jupiter 's 1 @.@ 326 g / cm3 and Earth 's 5 @.@ 515 g / cm3 ( the density of water is 1 g / cm3 ) . The unusually low density is thought to be a consequence of a combination of the planet 's orbital eccentricity and its proximity to its parent star ( less than one seventh of the distance between Mercury and the Sun ) , leading to tidal flexing and heating of its interior . The same mechanism is behind the intense volcanic activity of Jupiter 's moon Io . 
 WASP @-@ 17b is thought to have a retrograde orbit ( with a sky @-@ projected inclination of the orbit normal against the stellar spin axis of about 149 ° , not to be confused with the line @-@ of @-@ sight inclination of the orbit , given in the table , which is near 90 ° for all transiting planets ) , which would make it the first planet discovered to have such an orbital motion . It was found by measuring the Rossiter – McLaughlin effect of the planet on the star 's Doppler signal as it transited , in which whichever of the star 's hemispheres is turning toward or away from Earth will show a slight blueshift or redshift which is dampened by the transiting planet . Scientists are not yet sure why the planet orbits opposite to the star 's rotation . Theories include a gravitational slingshot resulting from a near @-@ collision with another planet , or the intervention of a smaller planet @-@ like body working to gradually change WASP @-@ 17b 's orbit by tilting it via the Kozai mechanism . 
 = Roy Dowling = 
 Vice Admiral Sir Roy Russell Dowling , KCVO , KBE , CB , DSO ( 28 May 1901 – 15 April 1969 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . He served as Chief of Naval Staff ( CNS ) , the RAN 's highest @-@ ranking position , from 1955 until 1959 , and as Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( COSC ) , forerunner of the role of Australia 's Chief of the Defence Force , from 1959 until 1961 . 
 Born in northern New South Wales , Dowling entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1915 . After graduating in 1919 he went to sea aboard various Royal Navy and RAN vessels , and later specialised in gunnery . In 1937 , he was given command of the sloop HMAS Swan . Following the outbreak of World War II , he saw action in the Mediterranean theatre as executive officer of the Royal Navy cruiser HMS Naiad , and survived her sinking by a German U @-@ boat in March 1942 . Returning to Australia , he served as Director of Plans and later Deputy Chief of Naval Staff before taking command of the light cruiser HMAS Hobart in November 1944 . His achievements in the South West Pacific earned him the Distinguished Service Order . 
 Dowling took command of the RAN 's first aircraft carrier , HMAS Sydney , in 1948 . He became Chief of Naval Personnel in 1950 , and Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet in 1953 . Soon after taking up the position of CNS in February 1955 , he was promoted to vice admiral and appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath . As CNS he had to deal with shortages of money , manpower and equipment , and with the increasing role of the United States in Australia 's defence planning , at the expense of traditional ties with Britain . Knighted in 1957 , Dowling was Chairman of COSC from March 1959 until May 1961 , when he retired from the military . In 1963 he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order and became Australian Secretary to Queen Elizabeth II , serving until his death in 1969 . 
 = = Pre @-@ war career = = 
 Roy Russell Dowling was born on 28 May 1901 in <unk> , a township on the Tweed River in northern New South Wales . His parents were sugar cane inspector Russell Dowling and his wife Lily . The youth entered the Royal Australian Naval College ( RANC ) at Jervis Bay , Federal Capital Territory , in 1915 . An underachiever academically , he excelled at sports , and became chief cadet captain before graduating in 1918 with the King 's Medal , awarded for " gentlemanly bearing , character , good influence among his fellows and officer @-@ like qualities " . The following year he was posted to Britain as a midshipman , undergoing training with the Royal Navy and seeing service on HMS Ramillies and HMS <unk> . By January 1923 he was back in Australia , serving aboard the cruiser HMAS Adelaide . He was promoted to lieutenant in March . In April 1924 , Adelaide joined the Royal Navy 's Special Service Squadron on its worldwide cruise , taking in New Zealand , Canada , the United States , Panama , and the West Indies , before docking in September at Portsmouth , England . There Dowling left the ship for his next appointment , training as a gunnery officer and serving in that capacity at HMS Excellent . 
 After his return to Australia in December 1926 , Dowling spent eighteen months on HMAS Platypus and HMAS Anzac , where he continued to specialise in gunnery . In July 1928 , he took on an instructional role at the gunnery school in Flinders Naval Depot on Western Port Bay , Victoria . He married Jessie Blanch in Melbourne on 8 May 1930 ; the couple had two sons and three daughters . Jessie accompanied him on his next posting to Britain commencing in January 1931 . He was promoted to lieutenant commander on 15 March , and was appointed gunnery officer on the light cruiser HMS Colombo in May . Dowling returned to Australia in January 1933 , and was appointed squadron gunnery officer aboard the heavy cruiser HMAS Canberra that April . The ship operated mainly within Australian waters over the next two years . In July 1935 , Dowling took charge of the gunnery school at Flinders Naval Depot . He was promoted to commander on 31 December 1936 . The following month , he assumed command of the newly commissioned Grimsby @-@ class sloop HMAS Swan , carrying out duties in the South West Pacific . Completing his tenure on Swan in January 1939 , he was briefly assigned to the Navy Office , Melbourne , before returning to Britain in March for duty at HMS Pembroke , where he awaited posting aboard the yet @-@ to @-@ be @-@ commissioned anti @-@ aircraft cruiser , HMS Naiad . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Dowling became executive officer on HMS Naiad when the ship was commissioned in 1940 . Following service with the British Home Fleet , the cruiser transferred to the Mediterranean Station in May 1941 , where she took part in the Battle of Crete . She was involved in action against German torpedo boats on the night of 20 / 21 May . On 22 May , after engaging a German destroyer with HMAS Perth , Naiad was severely damaged by air attack . Following repairs , she became flagship of the 15th Cruiser Squadron and conducted shore bombardments in support of Allied troops during the Syrian campaign in June and July . She also escorted convoys resupplying Malta . In December , Naiad participated in the First Battle of Sirte against Italian naval forces . On 11 March 1942 , she was torpedoed by a German U @-@ boat off the Egyptian coast , and sank in just over twenty minutes . Dowling remained in the water for an hour and a half before being rescued by a destroyer . 
 Having survived Naiad 's sinking , Dowling returned to Australia and was appointed Director of Plans at the Navy Office in July 1942 . In September the following year he was made Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff ( DCNS ) and raised to acting captain ; his rank became substantive in June 1944 . As DCNS , he was involved in planning the post @-@ war Navy 's composition , which for the first time was to include aircraft carriers . He defined the functions of maritime power in October 1943 as : 
 ( i ) Maintenance of our lines of sea communications , 
 ( ii ) Destruction of the enemy 's lines of sea communications , 
 ( iii ) Attack on the enemy 's strategic positions in combined operations with Army and Air Force , 
 ( iv ) Defence of our bases . 
 In November 1944 , Dowling was given command of the light cruiser HMAS Hobart , which had been undergoing repair and refit in Sydney since being torpedoed by a Japanese submarine in the Solomons on 20 July 1943 . Dowling took her on her shakedown cruise to Melbourne on 30 December , before embarking for the South West Pacific Area in February 1945 . The following month , Hobart supported the US forces that recaptured Cebu during the liberation of the Philippines . She bombarded Tarakan Island prior to the Allied invasion on 1 May and , later that month , covered the Australian 6th Division 's operations at Wewak . The cruiser supported the Allied landings on Brunei in June , and on Balikpapan in July . For his " outstanding courage , skill and initiative " during these operations , Dowling was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , gazetted on 6 November 1945 . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Dowling joined the Australian contingent at the surrender of Japan in Tokyo Bay on 2 September 1945 . Following the cessation of hostilities , Hobart became flagship of HM Australian Squadron , and Dowling flag captain and chief of staff to Commodore John Collins , the squadron commander . The war had taken a toll on Dowling 's health , and he required leave before commencing his next appointment in May 1946 as Director of Ordnance , Torpedoes and Mines at the Navy Office . Rear Admiral James Goldrick , in the Australian Dictionary of Biography , observed that Dowling " was thrust into the highest positions of the RAN largely as a result of the heavy casualties of World War II " . When John Armstrong — the only similarly qualified and more senior Navy captain — was pronounced unfit for seagoing duty , Dowling was given the chance to command Australia 's first aircraft carrier , HMAS Sydney , commissioned in England on 16 December 1948 . In April the following year , two months after the ship 's belated acceptance into service due to teething troubles , Dowling embarked Sydney for Australia with two squadrons of fighters aboard . In June 1950 , he was promoted to commodore and appointed Second Naval Member and Chief of Naval Personnel , serving in this capacity until the end of 1952 . His term coincided with the outbreak of the Korean War , and resultant increased demands on manpower . Dowling was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in the 1953 New Year Honours , before travelling to London to attend the Imperial Defence College . Raised to rear admiral in July 1953 , he returned home to take up the post of Flag Officer Commanding HM Australian Fleet that December , serving through the following year . He had to preside over cutbacks to operations brought on by government stringency after the end of the Korean War . 
 On 24 February 1955 , Dowling succeeded Vice Admiral Sir John Collins as First Naval Member , Australian Commonwealth Naval Board , and Chief of Naval Staff ( CNS ) . He was promoted to vice admiral on 7 June , and appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath ( CB ) in the Queen 's Birthday Honours two days later . On 15 June , he joined fellow chiefs of staff Lieutenant General Henry Wells and Air Marshal John McCauley , Prime Minister Robert Menzies , and senior government members in approving a draft directive for the role of the Far East Strategic Reserve ( FESR ) ; this made Commonwealth forces available for the fight against communist insurgents in Malaya , as well as for the security of Malaya and Singapore against external aggression . The Navy 's contribution to the FESR was to be at least two destroyers or frigates on an ongoing basis , as well as a yearly visit by an aircraft carrier . The destroyers HMAS Arunta and HMAS Warramunga , already in the region on an exercise , were immediately committed , and Dowling flew to Singapore to personally announce the plan and the reasons for it to the ships ' crews . 
 Dowling was an early advocate for the establishment of an Australian submarine fleet ; in 1963 , after several false starts , the first of six Oberon @-@ class submarines was ordered . As part of a general Western trend that viewed with alarm the increasing capability of the Soviet Navy 's surface fleet , Dowling also worked to improve the offensive power of the Fleet Air Arm . In March 1956 , he went so far as proposing purchase of nuclear weaponry for the RAN 's De Havilland Sea Venoms . During much of Dowling 's remaining time as CNS , faced with the obsolescence of HMAS Sydney and in accordance with its two @-@ carrier policy , the Navy tried unsuccessfully to acquire a new and larger aircraft carrier to augment HMAS Melbourne . Believing in the maintenance of traditionally close ties between the RAN and the Royal Navy , he worked to coordinate his policies as CNS with those of Britain 's First Sea Lord , Earl Mountbatten . Taking into account the provisions of the ANZUS treaty and the absence of suitable supplies from Britain , the RAN began to turn reluctantly towards the United States in terms of strategy and equipment , as Dowling explained to Mountbatten : 
 We now find ourselves at the crossroads because we very much doubt whether the United Kingdom can provide us with what we want in the future . We have no wish to become Americans but there is a strong belief in this country that the sensible course of action for Australians is to acquire war equipment from the United States now . Our very telling reason is of course that , certainly in a global war , our salvation in the Pacific will depend chiefly on the aid of that country . For that we are not less loyal members of the Empire . 
 Other issues facing the RAN during Dowling 's term as CNS were its relegation — since the beginning of the 1950s — to third place behind the other armed forces in terms of Federal budget allocations , its replacement by the RAAF as the country 's first line of defence , and a shortage of manpower . Dowling himself considered " separation from families , lack of houses , over employment , high wages and overtime payment in <unk> street " as the causes for the Navy 's inability to attract and retain personnel ; the Allison Report in 1958 resulted in various improvements to service conditions , which helped reduce wastage . The RANC had moved to Flinders Naval Depot in 1930 , and Dowling was pleased to be able to oversee its return to Jervis Bay in 1958 , the year before he relocated the office of the CNS to Canberra . 
 Dowling was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) in the 1957 New Year Honours , and completed his term as CNS on 23 February 1959 . On 23 March he took over from Sir Henry Wells as Chairman of the Chiefs of Staff Committee ( COSC ) , a role foreshadowing that of the latter @-@ day Chief of the Defence Force . He was succeeded as CNS by Vice Admiral Henry Burrell . Happily surprised by his appointment as Chairman of COSC , Dowling hoped to transform the position such that it would exercise command authority over the service chiefs , but in this he was to be disappointed . The position 's rank remained the same as the heads of the Army , Navy and Air Force , and was only responsible for putting their views on military matters to the Minister for Defence . Other setbacks during his tenure included the Defence Department 's decision — rescinded after his term — to disband the Fleet Air Arm , and the Federal government 's failure to back him when he announced at a SEATO press conference in March 1961 that Australia was prepared to intervene militarily in the second Laotian crisis should it become necessary . In September 1959 , during the first Laotian crisis , the Australian government had authorised Dowling to commit " an infantry battalion , a squadron of RAAF fighters , air transport , and two RAN destroyers " to support US and SEATO forces , but no intervention took place . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Dowling retired from the military on 27 May 1961 and was succeeded as Chairman of COSC by Air Marshal Sir Frederick Scherger . Though keen to secure a diplomatic appointment , nothing was offered to him and , as a practising Anglican , he instead busied himself with church affairs in Canberra . In July 1962 , the government gave him responsibility for organising Queen Elizabeth II 's upcoming royal tour . In this role he was required to liaise with the state governments to plan the Queen 's itinerary , and to become a member of the royal household for the duration of the tour , the first time an Australian tour planner had been given such close access to a visiting monarch . He was rewarded with appointment as a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( KCVO ) as of 27 March 1963 , and became Australian Secretary to the Queen on 1 November the same year . Dowling was also the Australian Red Cross Society 's Canberra chairman from 1962 to 1967 ; at the time he took over the chairmanship , Lady Dowling was acting president of the organisation , in the absence of Lady William Oliver . Roy Dowling died of a heart attack on 15 April 1969 in Canberra Hospital . He was given a naval funeral at St John 's Church , and cremated . His wife and five children survived him . 
 = French ironclad Montcalm = 
 The French ironclad Montcalm was a wooden @-@ hulled armored corvette built for the French Navy in the mid @-@ 1860s . She was named after Major General Montcalm who lost the Battle of the Plains of Abraham in 1759 . She played a minor role in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 where she captured one Prussian sailing ship . Montcalm spent most of her later career abroad , either in Chinese waters or the Pacific Ocean . The ship was condemned in 1891 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The Alma @-@ class ironclads were designed as improved versions of the armored corvette Belliqueuse suitable for foreign deployments . Unlike their predecessor the Alma @-@ class ships were true central battery ironclads as they were fitted with armored transverse bulkheads . Like most ironclads of their era they were equipped with a metal @-@ reinforced ram . 
 Montcalm measured 68 @.@ 75 meters ( 225 ft 7 in ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 14 @.@ 13 meters ( 46 ft 4 in ) . She had a mean draft of 6 @.@ 66 meters ( 21 ft 10 in ) and displaced 3 @,@ 889 metric tons ( 3 @,@ 828 long tons ) . Her crew numbered 316 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod steam engine driving a single propeller . Her engine was powered by four oval boilers . On sea trials , the engine produced 1 @,@ 830 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 360 kW ) and the ship reached 11 @.@ 65 knots ( 21 @.@ 58 km / h ; 13 @.@ 41 mph ) . Montcalm carried 250 metric tons ( 250 long tons ) of coal which allowed the ship to steam for 1 @,@ 460 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 700 km ; 1 @,@ 680 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She was barque @-@ rigged and had a sail area of 1 @,@ 438 square meters ( 15 @,@ 480 sq ft ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Montcalm mounted her four 194 @-@ millimeter ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) Modèle 1864 breech @-@ loading guns in the central battery on the battery deck . The other two 194 @-@ millimeter guns were mounted in barbettes on the upper deck , sponsoned out over the sides of the ship . The four 120 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns were also mounted on the upper deck . She may have exchanged her Mle 1864 guns for Mle 1870 guns . The armor @-@ piercing shell of the 20 @-@ caliber Mle 1870 gun weighed 165 @.@ 3 pounds ( 75 @.@ 0 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 7 @.@ 83 long tons ( 7 @.@ 96 t ) . The gun fired its shell at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 739 ft / s ( 530 m / s ) and was credited with the ability to penetrate a nominal 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 320 mm ) of wrought iron armour at the muzzle . The guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Montcalm had a complete 150 @-@ millimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wrought iron waterline belt , approximately 2 @.@ 4 meters ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) high . The sides of the battery itself were armored with 120 millimeters ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) of wrought iron and the ends of the battery were closed by bulkheads of the same thickness . The barbette armor was 100 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick , backed by 240 millimeters ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) of wood . The unarmored portions of her sides were protected by 15 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) iron plates . 
 = = Service = = 
 Montcalm was laid down at Rochefort on 26 October 1865 and launched on 16 October 1868 . The ship began her sea trials on 16 June 1869 and was then sent to the Mediterranean until May 1870 . During the Franco @-@ Prussian War , she captured the German barque Union in the North Sea and watched the Prussian corvette Arcona in Portuguese waters . She cruised the North and South Atlantic before being put in reserve on 1 August 1871 at Cherbourg . Recommissioned on 20 October 1873 , she sailed for China on 5 January 1874 to relieve the armored corvette Belliqueuse as flagship of the China Station . Montcalm arrived back in Cherbourg on 20 May 1876 and was reduced to reserve from 1878 to 1880 . In 1882 , she became flagship for the Pacific division under command of Rear Admiral <unk> . Back to Cherbourg in 1884 , she remained there until 2 April 1891 when she was condemned . 
 = Three Mile Island : A Nuclear Crisis in Historical Perspective = 
 Three Mile Island : A Nuclear Crisis in Historical Perspective is a scholarly history of the Three Mile Island accident , written by J. Samuel Walker and published in 2004 . Walker is the Nuclear Regulatory Commission 's historian and his book is the first detailed historical analysis since the accident . 
 The 1979 accident at Three Mile Island Nuclear Power Station in Pennsylvania was " the single most important event in the fifty @-@ year history of nuclear power regulation in the United States " , according to Walker . Many commentators have seen the event as a turning point for the nuclear power industry in the United States . 
 = = Author = = 
 Three Mile Island is J. Samuel Walker 's fourth book as the official historian of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission ( NRC ) . In the book 's preface , Walker tells readers that he had complete independence in its authorship — that the NRC placed no restrictions on what could be said . However , Walker provides an historical account and does not assess the performance of the NRC . 
 = = Background and introduction = = 
 The Three Mile Island power station is near Harrisburg , Pennsylvania in the United States . The accident described in Three Mile Island began on Wednesday , March 28 , 1979 , and ultimately resulted in a partial core meltdown in Unit 2 of the nuclear power plant . Unit 2 's pressurized water reactor was of 900 MWe capacity . The scope and complexity of this reactor accident became clear over the course of five days , as a number of agencies at the local , state and federal levels tried to solve the problem and decide whether the ongoing accident required an emergency evacuation , and to what extent . 
 Walker 's objective in Three Mile Island was to write a comprehensive and authoritative history that would serve as an authoritative record for both the interested public and the NRC . The book provides a detailed account of the causes of the accident and the response to it by the NRC , the state of Pennsylvania , and the White House . 
 The early chapters of Three Mile Island provide historical background for the accident , giving a short overview of the expansion of commercial nuclear power , supported by government , in the 1960s and 1970s . The emerging controversy during that period over nuclear power safety is also examined . The public were concerned about the risk of nuclear accidents and about routine low @-@ level releases of radioactivity . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The main part of the book consists of six chapters , with a chapter covering each of the five days ( Wednesday , March 28 , 1979 , to Sunday , April 1 , 1979 ) of the crisis stage of the accident and another chapter covering its immediate effects . Walker draws on a wide range of sources , but mainly on the report of the Kemeny Commission , which President Carter appointed immediately after the accident , and the <unk> Report , which resulted from the NRC 's own inquiry . 
 The chain of events that led to the crisis at the TMI plant included several minor equipment failures that operator errors drastically compounded , resulting in a major accident . The Three Mile Island accident is largely seen as a failure of crisis management . According to one reviewer of the book : 
 Reactor operators were not trained to deal with accident conditions , and the NRC had not established effective communication with utilities . Moreover , once the accident occurred , the lines of authority proved to be ill defined . The public received conflicting reports that caused needless panic and evacuations . It was these systemic weaknesses in the regulatory system that allowed gifted people to make the mistakes they did . 
 Large portions of the TMI @-@ 2 reactor core melted , though the fact that a meltdown had occurred was not established until 1985 . The greatest concern during the TMI accident was a hydrogen bubble in the top of the pressure vessel which held the core : 
 Although opinions differed , some reactor experts feared that over time the hydrogen bubble might become flammable or , less likely , explosive by combining with free oxygen in the vessel . If the bubble burned or exploded , it could rupture the pressure vessel and force the damaged reactor core into the containment building . The loss of the vessel would not make a breach of containment inevitable , but it would increase the risk of a disastrous release of radioactivity . 
 In the end , the Three Mile Island accident , though it " caused a grave crisis , did not produce a public health disaster " . The pressure vessel held when faced with a core meltdown and there was no breach of the power plant 's containment structure . Only " tiny amounts of the most dangerous forms of volatile radiation escaped to the atmosphere " . It took 11 years to clean up TMI @-@ 2 and this cost about US $ 1 billion . 
 Walker suggests that the TMI accident incited widespread criticism of nuclear power technology , the nuclear industry , and the NRC . Critics faulted the industry and the NRC for their poor performance both before and after the accident . The international attention garnered by the crisis redoubled the determination of , and enhanced the credibility of , the anti @-@ nuclear movement . Arguably , the United States nuclear industry has never recovered . 
 Walker reports that " studies looking for long @-@ term radiation effects resulting from the accident have reached conflicting conclusions " , but it seems " that any increase in cancers is slight enough to have occurred by chance " . 
 = = Conclusions = = 
 Walker concludes that the TMI @-@ 2 accident left a mixed legacy . It did force regulatory and operational improvements on a reluctant industry , but it also increased opposition to nuclear power . In Walker 's analysis , neither the critics nor proponents are completely vindicated . Anti @-@ nuclear advocates were right : a nuclear accident was likely , and the industry was not prepared for it . But their predicted worst @-@ case accident , called the " China Syndrome " , did not eventuate . For its part , the industry said that it had reformed itself , but perhaps by then few were listening . 
 = = Reception = = 
 There have been several published reviews of Three Mile Island . John F. Barber from The University of Texas states that Walker 's insightful book captures the " high human drama surrounding the TMI accident " , sets it in the context of the contentious debate over nuclear power in the seventies , and discusses the social , technical , and political issues it raised . Walker 's authoritative account of the days and events surrounding the TMI accident captures the complexities of the situation , clears up some misconceptions , and discusses the aftermath and implications . According to Barber , Walker provides " thoughtful and sober grounds for the continued debate over the role of nuclear power in our contemporary world " . 
 In a review for Times Higher Education , Jack Harris says that Walker is an extremely good writer and even those who do not specialise in technical fields will derive enjoyment from the book . According to Harris , Walker has unique experience as historian to the NRC which has placed him in an unrivalled position to tell the TMI story . But Harris identifies some omissions in the book . There is little on the other two major nuclear that threatened large civilian populations : the Windscale fire ( UK , October 1957 ) , and the Chernobyl disaster ( Ukraine , April 1986 ) . Harris states that Windscale threw up similar problems to TMI , particularly relating to whether large @-@ scale evacuations should have been initiated , but he could find no reference to the Windscale accident in the book 's index which is surprising in a book that aims to put TMI in historical perspective . 
 In a review for New Scientist , Rob Edwards states that Walker provides a lucid account of the Three Mile Island accident , which is " riveting because of its detail " . It gives a graphic insight into the chaos and confusion of the five @-@ day crisis , and shows how the nuclear industry , the regulators and the government all " initially played down the risks , then had to eat their words " . Some 144 @,@ 000 people were evacuated , but Walker points out that " if the full extent of the core meltdown had been known at the time , hundreds of thousands more would have been told to go " . Edwards says a " catastrophe was avoided — but only by luck " . 
 Thomas <unk> from Central Washington University recommended the book " for all libraries and students of politics , government bureaucracy , and environmental history " . 
 Bernard L. Cohen , from the University of Pittsburgh , criticized the book in terms of the scope and quality of its technical content : " The book contains little technical information , and many of the technical explanations that do appear range from inadequate to misleading to incorrect . " 
 = The Battle ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " The Battle " is the eighth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation and was originally aired on November 16 , 1987 , in broadcast syndication . The episode was written by Herbert Wright , based on a story by Larry Forrester , and directed by Rob Bowman . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship Enterprise @-@ D. In this episode , Captain Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) is given his former vessel , the Stargazer , as a gift by the Ferengi <unk> Bok ( Frank <unk> ) who intends to use it to take revenge upon the Enterprise captain . 
 The Stargazer was to originally be represented by the movie @-@ era Enterprise model , but producers were convinced to use a design which had appeared on a model in Picard 's ready room in the series pilot . Several camera and compositing techniques were used by Bowman in filming the scenes aboard the bridge of the Stargazer , which was also a re @-@ dressed movie @-@ era Klingon Bird of Prey bridge set . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Enterprise meets with a Ferengi vessel whose captain , <unk> Bok , requests a meeting with Captain Picard . Picard meanwhile is suffering from persistent headaches and seeks the help of Doctor Beverly Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) . She scans Picard , but can not find what is causing them . Meanwhile , on the bridge , Wesley Crusher ( Wil Wheaton ) reports that a second vessel is approaching . Lt. Geordi La Forge ( LeVar Burton ) identifies it as a Federation Constellation @-@ class starship . 
 Bok and his first officer Kazago ( Doug <unk> ) transport to the bridge of the Enterprise . He announces that the newly arrived ship is a gift for " the hero of Maxia . " After Picard fails to get the reference , Data ( Brent Spiner ) reminds him that nine years ago , at Maxia , he was attacked by an unidentified aggressor which he destroyed . Bok angrily shouts that ship in question was Ferengi . The ship is identified as the U.S.S. Stargazer , Picard 's former command . Bok explains that he found the ship as a derelict and offers it to Picard for free . Picard explains that at Maxia , the Stargazer was heavily damaged before Picard executed an action which would come to be known as the " Picard Maneuver " . Using the warp drive , Picard ordered a short warp jump directly resulting in the enemy vessel 's light speed based sensors briefly detecting the ship in two places at once and allowing Picard to win the battle . Due to the damage , the crew of the Stargazer abandoned ship after the battle . 
 Picard and an away team board the Stargazer , and he orders a chest of his belongings to be sent to the Enterprise . Hidden in the chest is an orb , which glows brighter as Bok activates it , causing Picard to be hit by a wave of pain . Dr. Crusher orders him back to the Enterprise . Data meanwhile finds a discrepancy in the Stargazer 's logs stating that the Ferengi were attacked under a flag of truce . Upon further investigation , Data and La Forge report to Commander William Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) that the logs were certainly faked . Dr. Crusher and Counselor Deanna Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) discuss the Captain , and Wesley shows them some unusual activity from the Ferengi ship . They head to inform Riker to alert him to the signals , who is informed by the Enterprise computer that Picard has transported to the Stargazer . 
 Picard finds Bok waiting for him , who has another orb . Bok explains that it was his son in command of the Ferengi vessel at Maxia , and he came here seeking his revenge . He places the orb down and leaves Picard on the Stargazer bridge . The orb lights up once more , leaving Picard believing he is once again at the Battle of Maxia . On the Enterprise , Lt. Tasha Yar ( Denise Crosby ) and Lt. Worf ( Michael Dorn ) discover the orb brought over from the Stargazer in Picard 's chest . They take it to Riker as the Stargazer powers up its weapon systems . Riker hails the Ferengi vessel and speaks to Kazago , who is suspicious at the sight of the orb , which is a banned device . He promises to investigate . 
 Riker subsequently hails the Stargazer but Picard continues to believe he is being attacked by the Enterprise . Knowing the Picard Maneuver is coming , Riker asks Data to devise a counter . Picard jumps the Stargazer to warp , executing the Picard Maneuver . Data , expecting the move , uses the Enterprise 's tractor beam to seize the real Stargazer and limit its field of fire . Riker tells Picard about the orb ; Picard seems to understand and fires his phaser at the orb , causing it to explode . After a few moments , Picard hails the Enterprise and requests a transport . Kazago hails Riker to inform him that Bok has been relieved of command " for engaging in this unprofitable venture " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Battle " marked the second appearance of the Ferengi , but executive producer Rick Berman thought that they still didn 't make a decent major adversary . Larry Forester 's script , his second for The Next Generation , originally featured several scenes on board the Ferengi ship to cast further light on their culture but they were all ultimately cut before filming . Bok would return in the seventh season episode " Bloodlines " , although the role would be recast with Lee Arenberg gaining the role instead of Frank <unk> . 
 Rob Bowman used a couple of specific camera techniques for the scenes on board the Stargazer during Picard 's hallucinations . A steadicam attached to a cameraman was used to show a slight unsteadiness , and each of the Stargazer crew members were filmed individually on the bridge against a smoke background before being superimposed together . He explained , " we went dark in a lot of scenes and we did different angles and things the show hadn 't done yet . For me , it was a real creative stretch and it felt great for the show . " The bridge itself was a re @-@ dress of the film @-@ era Klingon Bird of Prey bridge . The term " Picard Maneuver " was later used offscreen to refer informally to Patrick Stewart 's habit of tugging his uniform shirt down , and the Battle of Maxia itself was described in the first chapter of the pre @-@ TNG era novel The Buried Age . 
 The Constellation @-@ class starship first appears in " Encounter at Farpoint " as a desktop model in Picard 's ready room . Rick Sternbach constructed the model by kitbashing Ertl kits of the movie Enterprise , using parts from other models such as the VF @-@ 1 Valkyrie to add detail . Greg Jein used Sternbach 's and Andrew Probert 's designs to create the four @-@ foot shooting model of the USS Stargazer for " The Battle " . In the original script , the Stargazer was to be a redress of the movie @-@ era Constitution @-@ class Enterprise model that first appeared in Star Trek : The Motion Picture ; Probert and Sternbach persuaded the producers not to reuse the movie Enterprise model , and the " Constellation " -class label was chosen so that it could match LeVar Burton 's lip movement to <unk> dialogue . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Battle " aired in broadcast syndication during the week commencing November 15 , 1987 . It received Nielsen ratings of 10 @.@ 5 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This rating was lower than those received by the episodes broadcast both before and afterwards . Staff writer Maurice Hurley later said that the episode was " pretty good " because of the performance of Patrick Stewart . He originally didn 't think much of the episode as it included the Ferengi , who he felt didn 't work as an adversary at all . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched the episode after the end of the series . Zack Handlen reviewed the episode for The A.V. Club in April , 2010 . He thought that the Ferengi were a " one note " opponent for the crew , but that in this episode they weren 't as bad as they were in " The Last Outpost " . He thought that the plot made the crew look a little silly , saying " Put it this way : if somebody showed up at your door and said , " Hey , we want to give you this weapon you used to murder a bunch of guys we knew years ago , " wouldn 't you be a little suspicious ? " He gave the episode an overall mark of C + . James Hunt reviewed the episode for the website " Den of Geek " in November 2012 , and said that it was the best episode of the series up until that point . He thought that little touches such as the Stargazer using the movie @-@ era effect for warp drive was a cute touch as it was meant to be an older ship than the Enterprise but also pointed out that " it also means that the Picard Manoeuvre is completely invalidated , because you literally see the ship move from point A to B before the original disappears " . He felt that the conflict between Picard and Bok was well realised , and that the characterisation was good . 
 Keith DeCandido re @-@ watched the episode for Tor.com in June 2012 , saying that it was a solid episode and that Patrick Stewart did " a stellar job , modulating from pained to confused to nostalgic to frustrated to crazy , all quite convincingly . " He said that the downside of the episode was that Troi and Wesley Crusher were not well used , while the revelation of the orb so early in the episode prevented any suspense being built up . He said that the episode worked because it concentrated on Picard , and gave it a score of six out of ten . Jamahl Epsicokhan at his website " Jammer 's Reviews " gave the episode two and a half out of four , saying that it was slow paced but that the storyline had a " psychological component that 's sometimes effective " . Cast member Wil Wheaton watched " The Battle " for AOL TV in February 2007 . He felt that the plot had similar themes to Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan , in that a father sought revenge following the death of his son . He thought that the writing was weak overall , and that the episode purely worked because of the ability of Patrick Stewart as Captain Picard . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The first home media release of " The Battle " was on VHS cassette was on July 1 , 1992 in the United States and Canada . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 , and was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = An @-@ Nasir Ahmad , Sultan of Egypt = 
 An @-@ Nasir Shihab ad @-@ Din Ahmad ibn Muhammad ibn Qalawun , better known as an @-@ Nasir Ahmad , ( 1316 – 16 July 1344 ) was the Bahri Mamluk sultan of Egypt , ruling from January to June 1342 . A son of Sultan an @-@ Nasir Muhammad , he became embroiled in the volatile succession process following his father 's death in 1341 . An @-@ Nasir Ahmad lived much of his life in the desert fortress of al @-@ Karak in Transjordan and was reticent to assume the sultanate in Cairo , preferring al @-@ Karak , where he was closely allied with the inhabitants of the city and the Bedouin tribes in its vicinity . His Syrian partisans , emirs Tashtamur and Qutlubugha al @-@ Fakhri , successfully maneuvered to bring Syria under an @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's official control , while sympathetic emirs in Egypt were able to oust the Mamluk strongman Emir Qawsun and his puppet sultan , the five @-@ year @-@ old half @-@ brother of an @-@ Nasir Ahmad , al @-@ Ashraf Kujuk . An @-@ Nasir Ahmad eventually assumed the sultanate after frequently delaying his departure to Egypt . 
 An @-@ Nasir Ahmad was known to be a seclusive sultan , surrounding himself with his coterie of supporters from al @-@ Karak , rarely making direct contact with the Mamluk emirs of Egypt and avoiding the public view . Two months into his reign , he relocated to al @-@ Karak with substantial sums from the treasury and several horses and senior administrative officials . He ruled from the desert fortress , leaving a deputy , Emir <unk> al @-@ <unk> , to oversee affairs in Egypt on his behalf . His unorthodox rule , alleged frivolity , and his execution of loyal partisans , namely Tashtamur and Qutlubugha , led to an @-@ Nasir Ahmad being deposed from the sultanate by his half @-@ brother , as @-@ Salih Isma 'il . He remained in the fortress of al @-@ Karak , which the Mamluks besieged at least seven times , until being captured in July 1344 . He was killed later that month on the orders of as @-@ Salih Isma 'il . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Ahmad was born in 1316 or 1318 . His father was Sultan an @-@ Nasir Muhammad and his mother was Bayad , a singer and a slave girl freed by Emir Bahadur As and possibly given to an @-@ Nasir Muhammad . At the time of his birth , Ahmad was an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's only son ( three other sons had died before Ahmad was born ) and the only son of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad born to Bayad . Bayad and an @-@ Nasir Muhammad later divorced and the former married Maliktamur al @-@ <unk> , an emir who became Ahmad 's stepfather . As a youth , Ahmad spent frequent bouts of time in the desert fortress of al @-@ Karak under orders from his father . He was first sent there in 1324 under supervision and with a large budget to begin training in horsemanship and hunting . He was sent again in April 1326 . Since Ayyubid times , but particularly during an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's reign , al @-@ Karak , which was isolated from the other Mamluk centers , became akin to a private academy for young Mamluk emirs where they could gain and perfect chivalric skills . Thus , Ahmad 's residency in al @-@ Karak was intended to imbue in him knightly qualities . While at al @-@ Karak , Ahmad was under the supervision of its governor , Bahadur al @-@ Badri . Nothing about Ahmad in the Mamluk @-@ era sources is known between 1326 and 1331 . 
 In May 1331 , Ahmad was recalled to Cairo , under the escort of Badri , where he was made an emir . His allotment of an emirate occurred on 30 September with much pomp and festivities . The following day , Ahmad left Cairo for al @-@ Karak . Sometime in 1331 , prior to Ahmad 's arrival in Cairo , Bayad died . Her widower , Maliktamur , was appointed governor of al @-@ Karak concurrent with Ahmad and Badri 's arrival in Cairo . Maliktamur was ordered to raise Ahmad and ensure his education . In 1332 , Ahmad and his brother Abu Bakr , who had also been at al @-@ Karak at the time , met an @-@ Nasir Muhammad and the latter 's favored son and Ahmad 's much younger brother , Anuk , at the Red Sea town of Aqaba , south of al @-@ Karak . From there , they were to accompany their father to Mecca for the Hajj pilgrimage , but at the last minute , an @-@ Nasir Muhammad sent Ahmad , Abu Bakr and Anuk to al @-@ Karak under Maliktamur 's care . Nothing is known about Ahmad 's life between the latter event and 1337 . 
 Ahmad was recalled to Cairo in 1337 by his angered father after the latter learned that Ahmad had been intimately associating with the <unk> of al @-@ Karak . Upon Ahmad 's arrival , an @-@ Nasir Muhammad saw to it that Ahmad be married to <unk> <unk> , a daughter of one of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's leading emirs . Ahmad returned to al @-@ Karak with his wife , who had been growing increasingly ill . At some point that year , Ahmad fell out with Maliktamur and requested from his father that the governorship of Mamlakat al @-@ Karak ( al @-@ Karak Province ) be transferred to him , a request which an @-@ Nasir Muhammad acceded to . Ahmad thus became the governor of the fortresses of al @-@ Karak and <unk> , although an @-@ Nasir Muhammad appointed an <unk> ( majordomo ) , Emir <unk> , to supervise him . 
 = = = Relationship with Shuhayb = = = 
 <unk> reported back to an @-@ Nasir Muhammad that Ahmad was behaving poorly , dressing as a Bedouin and was spending much of his time drinking with a Bedouin boy , Shuhayb , with whom Ahmad had fallen in love with . As a consequence for his behavior , Ahmad was ordered by an @-@ Nasir Muhammad to return to Cairo with Shuhayb in March 1339 . Ahmad was received without fanfare and Shuhayb was jailed . In protest at the latter action , Ahmad forsook food and isolated himself to his quarters in the Cairo Citadel . An @-@ Nasir Muhammad sent his two most senior emirs , Bashtak and Qawsun , to persuade or threaten Ahmad to abandon his relationship with Shuhayb , but to no avail ; Ahmad told the emirs if " this young man [ Shuhayb ] is punished , I will kill myself ! " Ahmad also refused an offer from his father that would have transferred one hundred of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's mamluks to Ahmad 's service in return for Ahmad 's abandonment of Shuhayb . An @-@ Nasir Muhammad ultimately relented and abandoned hopes that Ahmad could succeed him as sultan . Instead , he released Shuhayb and made Ahmad an emir of forty mounted mamluks ( the second highest Mamluk military rank ) . Ahmad was also made to stay in Egypt , while Abu Bakr was sent to al @-@ Karak , likely replacing Ahmad as governor of the province . 
 In 1341 , Shuhayb and a eunuch entered into a dispute related to a pigeon racing competition , in which the eunuch mistreated Shuhayb . In response , Ahmad had the eunuch severely beaten , and when news of the incident reached an @-@ Nasir Muhammad , the latter attempted to force Ahmad to banish Shuhayb , again sending emirs Qawsun and Bashtak to communicate his demands to Ahmad . Ahmad refused , stating to Qawsun and Bashtak that while they each had a hundred young boys and girls , he had " contented " himself " with regard to worldly pleasures with only this boy because he has shared my exile , having left his family . How can I expel him ? If the sultan commands that I do so , then let him expel me too " . Ahmad was indeed expelled to <unk> , accompanied by Maliktamur . However , upon the intervention of some of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's emirs , wives and his harem , an @-@ Nasir Muhammad decided to have Ahmad return to Cairo while Ahmad was still on his way to <unk> , although he first sold all of Ahmad 's horses . An @-@ Nasir Muhammad also ultimately decided to send Ahmad back to al @-@ Karak with Maliktamur , who was also reappointed governor of Mamlakat al @-@ Karak . 
 = = Conflict over the sultanate = = 
 An @-@ Nasir Muhammad died in June 1341 . His reign was marked by a centralization of autocratic power in the Mamluk Sultanate . Shortly before his death , an @-@ Nasir Muhammad discussed his succession with his two senior emirs , Qawsun and Bashtak . The latter supported Ahmad 's nomination , but Qawsun supported Ahmad 's younger brother Abu Bakr . An @-@ Nasir Muhammad also favored Abu Bakr and believed Ahmad was unfit to rule . He rejected Bashtak 's suggestion , stating " As for Ahmad , who is in al @-@ Karak , do not let him cross [ the soil of ] Egypt ; do not put him in charge of anything , because he would cause the ruin of the state ! " Following an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's death , In May or June 1341 , Abu Bakr was proclaimed sultan , but was virtually a ceremonial ruler , with Qawsun holding the reins of power as mudabbir al @-@ dawla ( organizer of the state ) , in effect the strongman of Egypt . He imprisoned Abu Bakr in the Upper Egyptian city of Qus where he was executed on trumped up charges of frivolity . Qawsun thereafter arranged for an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's five @-@ year @-@ old son , al @-@ Ashraf Kujuk , to be declared sultan , further consolidating Qawsun 's power . 
 Ahmad was in al @-@ Karak at the time of Abu Bakr 's execution and Qawsun called on him to report to Cairo , ostensibly to assume the sultanate . However , Ahmad viewed the invitation Cairo as a ruse by Qawsun to eliminate him . He responded in September 1341 that he would not report to Cairo unless the leading emirs of the sultanate appeared before him in al @-@ Karak and gave him their oaths of loyalty and on the condition that his other brothers imprisoned in Qus would be relocated to al @-@ Karak . Ahmad concurrently sent letters to the Mamluk emirs of Syria requesting their support against Qawsun , who proceeded to besiege al @-@ Karak to coerce Ahmad to depart for Cairo . The siege was commanded by the Syrian emir , Qutlubugha al @-@ Fakhri , while Ahmad had the support of al @-@ Karak 's inhabitants and the Bedouin tribes of the vicinity . Twenty days into his siege , Qutlubugha defected from Qawsun , recognized Ahmad as sultan and promised the latter his unconditional support . Qutlubugha was persuaded to defect from Qawsun by the Mamluk na 'ib ( governor ) of Aleppo , Tashtamur . The latter argued that Qutlubugha should support Ahmad out of respect for the bonds of loyalty they owed to Ahmad 's father , their master . From then on , Ahmad gained the honorific prefix of an @-@ Nasir , like his father . 
 Qutlubugha 's recognition of Ahmad as sultan was officially an act of mutiny since it was done while al @-@ Ashraf Kujuk technically held office . It led to divisions among the Syrian Mamluk leadership , with the governors of Safad , Tripoli and Homs led by Altunbugha al @-@ <unk> of Damascus supporting Qawsun , while Tashtamur , Qutlubugha , the governor of Gaza , the Al Fadl tribe of Palmyra , and a number of Damascene emirs supporting an @-@ Nasir Ahmad . As Altunbugha left Damascus to lead an expedition against Tashtamur , pursuing the latter to southeastern Anatolia , Qutlubugha moved into Damascus where he proclaimed an @-@ Nasir Ahmad sultan and began to reorganize the bureaucracy with the support of Damascene emirs opposed to Altunbugha . Qutlubugha prepared to strike Altunbugha , who attempted to wrest back control of Damascus , but most of his forces defected and he escaped to Cairo . Afterward , the governors of Damascus , Safad , Gaza , Hama , and Baalbek formally recognized an @-@ Nasir Ahmad as sultan , with apparent popular support . Nonetheless , Ahmad insisted that he remain in al @-@ Karak instead of assuming the sultanate in Damascus unless Tashtamur , his most loyal supporter , accompanied him to Damascus from Anatolia . In the meantime , he gave Qutlubugha the authority to appoint Syrian governors as the new na 'ib al @-@ saltana ( viceroy ) of Syria . At one point during the political machinations in al @-@ Karak , some of Ahmad 's mamluks killed Shuhayb , an act which emotionally traumatized Ahmad . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Qawsun 's position in Egypt was precarious and he was ultimately arrested , along with Altunbugha , in Alexandria . Afterward , a delegation of Egypt @-@ based emirs , namely <unk> ibn Baba , Baybars al @-@ Ahmadi and <unk> Amir Shikar , arrived in al @-@ Karak to inform an @-@ Nasir Ahmad of Qawsun 's ouster and to invite him to Cairo to assume the sultanate , to which an @-@ Nasir Ahmad refused . On 21 January 1342 , al @-@ Ashraf Kujuk was dethroned and an @-@ Nasir Ahmad declared sultan despite the latter 's absence from Cairo . Qutlubugha expected an @-@ Nasir Ahmad to meet him in Damascus where the two men could march from there to Cairo triumphantly in royal procession , but an @-@ Nasir Ahmad opted for a more low @-@ key procession from Gaza , which frustrated Qutlubugha , more so when an @-@ Nasir Ahmad did not show up in Gaza . Instead , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad departed for Cairo without Qutlubugha in February , reaching Cairo in mid @-@ March . In Bedouin attire , he affirmed his title and declared " I was not yearning for royalty , and found that place [ al @-@ Karak ] adequate . 
 In Cairo , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad did not partake in the usual royal feast and the public prayer during the Eid al @-@ Fitr holiday . He surrounded himself with his coterie of supporters from al @-@ Karak , refused to meet directly with the Mamluk emirs of Egypt , avoided the public view , and was generally seclusive . He ordered Qawsun and Altunbugha as well as the governor of Qus who oversaw the execution of Abu Bakr to be executed . He assigned many of his unqualified supporters from al @-@ Karak to senior administrative offices , to the chagrin of the Mamluk emirs in Egypt . Tashtamur played an integral role in an @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's administration . However , Tashtamur 's arbitrary conduct in office and his selective approach to an @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's orders turned the latter against him , and with support from the leading Mamluk emirs who were also frustrated with Tashtamur , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad had Tashtamur imprisoned in May 1342 . In addition , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad ordered Qutlubugha to be confined to Damascus , while Mamluk emirs in Egypt sought to eliminate Qutlubugha . The latter was able to leave Egypt unharmed , but before reaching Beisan from Jenin , he was arrested by the governor of Safad , Baybars al @-@ Ahmadi , who extradited him to Egypt . 
 By the end of May , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad decided to rule the sultanate from al @-@ Karak , the only place he felt secure from Mamluk plots , real or perceived . He departed with large sums from the sultan 's treasury , huge numbers of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's Arabian horses and livestock , and was accompanied by the arrested emirs , Tashtamur and Qutlubugha , along with <unk> supporters , the <unk> ( chief market inspector ) of Cairo and the chief scribe . He also sought to relocate Caliph al @-@ Hakim II to al @-@ Karak , and managed to install him in Gaza , ostensibly as an interim headquarters . An @-@ Nasir Ahmad reached al @-@ Karak relatively quickly ( in six days ) . He had left Cairo in the care of his newly @-@ appointed deputy , the governor of Gaza , <unk> al @-@ <unk> . From al @-@ Karak , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad issued decrees that reached Cairo through a mediator from al @-@ Karak ; an @-@ Nasir Ahmad rarely communicated directly with the Mamluks of Egypt , preferring to use mediators instead . According to al @-@ Maqrizi , Ahmad 's " most important confidant among the people of al @-@ Karak " was <unk> ibn Yusuf ibn Tayyi , the commander of Arab forces in the fortress . He was repeatedly asked to return to Cairo by the Mamluks of Egypt , but refused each time . 
 In al @-@ Karak , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad had Tashtamur and Qutlubugha executed for unclear reasons . The move to execute them appalled the public , with whom an @-@ Nasir Ahmad was steadily losing credibility with . The executions were seen as a testament of an @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's ingratitude to the men who had supported him and virtually installed him as sultan . Historian Joseph <unk> argues that it was because Tashtamur and Qutlubugha compelled him to assume the sultanate and remove him from his self @-@ imposed isolation in al @-@ Karak that made an @-@ Nasir Ahmad resentful toward them . 
 = = Deposition and death = = 
 In Cairo , the senior Mamluk emirs resolved to depose an @-@ Nasir Ahmad and replace him with his half @-@ brother as @-@ Salih Isma 'il in June 1342 . The decision was supported by the governors of the Syrian provinces , who defected from an @-@ Nasir Ahmad after learning of the executions of Tashtamur and Qutlubugha and reports of an @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's decadent behavior in al @-@ Karak . Despite being dethroned and not having apparent ambitions outside of al @-@ Karak , an @-@ Nasir Ahmad was still viewed as a threat by the sultan ; an @-@ Nasir Muhammad had been exiled in al @-@ Karak when he marched to Cairo and seized the throne . Seven expeditions against an @-@ Nasir Ahmad were launched between his deposition and 1344 . Each siege was aborted . They often lasted for a few months , cost huge sums , and at times , ended with the dismissal of officers . The Mamluks had difficulty gaining the key support of the local Bedouin tribes , who were allies of an @-@ Nasir Ahmad . 
 In the summer of 1344 , <unk> , whose supporters and kinsmen served as Ahmad 's well @-@ spring of support , defected to the sultan 's army . The local defectors informed besieging Mamluks of a vulnerability in al @-@ Karak 's defenses . With this intelligence , on 4 July , the Mamluks , under the command of Emir Sanjar al @-@ Jawli , entered the fortress and captured an @-@ Nasir Ahmad , who had been wounded and was treated with respect by his captors . Still suspicious of his Egyptian captors , he refused to eat meals provided by them , only agreeing to eat food handled by his al @-@ Karak partisans . He was sent to Cairo , where as @-@ Salih Isma 'il secretly ordered to have him decapitated by a mercenary on 16 July . An @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's head was brought to the Cairo Citadel where it was displayed . His body was buried at the foot of the fortress of al @-@ Karak . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 An @-@ Nasir Ahmad 's four @-@ month reign was judged to be a disappointment by Mamluk @-@ era historians . Ibn Iyas wrote that expectations of an @-@ Nasir Ahmad being a " victorious lion " upon his ascension to the sultanate ended with him receiving the appellation of the " crazy teacher " , while Ibn Hajar al @-@ Asqalani wrote that he was " truly a terrible administrator , a hedonist and a drunkard " . Ibn <unk> asserted that an @-@ Nasir Ahmad was thoughtless , frivolous and the worst of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad 's sons . Al @-@ Maqrizi repeated the alleged warning of an @-@ Nasir Muhammad that an @-@ Nasir Ahmad should never " enter Egypt ... for he will be a ground for the ruin of the monarchy " . 
 = Preity Zinta = 
 Preity Zinta ( pronounced [ <unk> ̪ i <unk> ] ; born 31 January 1975 ) is an Indian film actress . She has appeared in Hindi films of Bollywood , as well as Telugu , Punjabi and English language films . After graduating with a degree in criminal psychology , Zinta made her acting debut in Dil Se .. in 1998 followed by a role in Soldier the same year . These performances earned her a Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut , and she was later recognised for her role as a teenage single mother in Kya Kehna ( 2000 ) . She subsequently established a career with a variety of character types ; her film roles along with her screen persona have been credited with contributing to a change in the concept of a Hindi film heroine , and won her several accolades . 
 Zinta received the Filmfare Award for Best Actress in 2003 for her performance in the romantic drama Kal Ho Naa Ho . She went on to play the lead female role in two consecutive annual top @-@ grossing films in India , the science fiction film Koi ... Mil Gaya ( 2003 ) , which is her biggest commercial success , and the star @-@ crossed romance Veer @-@ Zaara ( 2004 ) , which earned her critical acclaim . She was later noted for her portrayal of independent , modern Indian women in Salaam Namaste ( 2005 ) and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna ( 2006 ) , top @-@ grossing productions in overseas markets . These accomplishments have established her as a leading actress of Hindi cinema . Her first international film role was in the Canadian film Heaven on Earth , for which she was awarded the Silver Hugo Award for Best Actress at the 2008 Chicago International Film Festival . 
 In addition to acting in films , Zinta has written a series of columns for BBC News Online South Asia , is a social activist , a television presenter , and a regular stage performer . She is the founder of the production company PZNZ Media and , along with ex @-@ boyfriend Ness Wadia , a co @-@ owner of the Indian Premier League cricket team Kings XI Punjab . She is known in the Indian media for publicly speaking her mind and openly expressing her opinions , and consequently has sparked the occasional controversy . These controversies include her being the only witness not to retract in court her earlier statements against the Indian mafia during the 2003 Bharat Shah case , for which she was awarded the Godfrey Phillips National Bravery Award . 
 = = Early life and background = = 
 Zinta was born into a family from <unk> in Shimla district , Himachal Pradesh . Her father , <unk> Zinta , was an officer in the Indian Army . He died in a car accident when she was 13 years old ; the accident also involved her mother , <unk> , who was severely injured and consequently remained bedridden for two years . Zinta called the tragic accident and her father 's death a significant turning point in her life , which forced her to mature rapidly . She has two brothers ; <unk> and Manish , a year older and a year younger respectively . <unk> is a commissioned officer in the Indian Army , while Manish lives in California . 
 Zinta , who describes herself as a tomboy as a child , has emphasised her father 's military background as having a lasting impression on how family life was conducted . He asserted the importance of discipline and punctuality to the children . She studied at the Convent of Jesus and Mary boarding school in Shimla . Although she confesses to loneliness in the boarding school , she noted that it was compensated by her finding a " ... perfect set of friends " there . As a student , she developed a love for literature , particularly the works of William Shakespeare and poetry . According to Zinta , she enjoyed schoolwork and received good grades ; in her free time she played sports , especially basketball . 
 Upon graduating from the boarding school ( The Lawrence School <unk> ) at age 18 , Zinta enrolled at St. Bede 's College , Shimla . She graduated college with an English honours degree , and then started a graduate programme in psychology . She earned a postgraduate degree in criminal psychology , but later took up modelling . Zinta 's first television commercial was for Perk chocolates , the result of a chance meeting with a director at a friend 's birthday party in 1996 . The director persuaded Zinta to audition for the spot , and she was selected . Afterwards , she appeared in other catalogues and commercials , including one for the soap <unk> . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 = = = Debut and early roles ( 1998 – 99 ) = = = 
 In 1997 , Zinta met Shekhar Kapur when she accompanied a friend to an audition , and was asked if she would audition too . Upon seeing her audition , Kapur insisted that she become an actress . She was originally scheduled to make her screen debut in Kapur 's Tara Rum Pum Pum opposite Hrithik Roshan , but the filming was cancelled . Kapur later recommended her for director Mani Ratnam 's Dil Se ... Zinta often recalls that when she joined the film industry , her friends teased her that she would typically " wear white saris and dance in the rain " , thereby motivating her to play different parts . 
 Zinta commenced shooting for Kundan Shah 's Kya Kehna , whose release was delayed until 2000 . The delay of another film , Soldier , meant that her first release was Dil Se .. ( 1998 ) opposite Shahrukh Khan and Manisha Koirala . She was introduced as Preeti Nair , a middle @-@ class Delhi girl and Khan 's fiancée . The film was considered an unusual launch for a newcomer , as her role called for only 20 minutes of screen time . However , she was eventually noticed for her role , particularly for the forthright character she played . Her scene with Khan , in which she asked him , " Are you a virgin ? " , became well @-@ known , and her portrayal earned her a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress . She played her first leading role in the action @-@ drama Soldier ( 1998 ) , a commercial hit of the year . She won the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut for her performance in both Dil Se .. and Soldier . 
 Zinta next acted in two Telugu films , <unk> <unk> ( 1998 ) , opposite Venkatesh ; and Raja <unk> ( 1999 ) , opposite Mahesh Babu . She followed with the leading role alongside Akshay Kumar in Sangharsh , a thriller directed by Tanuja Chandra and written by Mahesh Bhatt . Zinta portrayed the character of <unk> Oberoi , a CBI officer who falls in love with a captured killer played by Kumar . Having been impressed with Zinta 's work in Dil Se , Chandra approached her for the part after several leading actresses had refused the offer , which Zinta viewed as an opportunity to expand her range . Sangharsh was not a box @-@ office success , although Zinta 's performance received favourable comments by critics . An article published by The Tribune upon the film 's release described her performance as " an amazing act " in an " intense film " , documenting her career path thus far with the observation , " She wowed the audiences with her cameo in Dil Se , then she zapped the viewers with her sensuality in Soldier and now Preity Zinta is all set to shock everybody with her stark performance [ in Sangharsh ] . " 
 = = = Breakthrough and career fluctuations ( 2000 – 02 ) = = = 
 Zinta 's first role in 2000 was in the drama Kya Kehna , which unexpectedly became a box @-@ office success . The film addressed themes of single parenthood and teenage pregnancy , and gained Zinta wider recognition from the public as well as film critics . Her portrayal of Priya Bakshi , a teenage single mother who fights social prejudice , earned her several award nominations , including her first nomination for Best Actress at the Filmfare Awards . Anupama Chopra from India Today reported that Zinta belonged to a new breed of Hindi film actors that breaks away from character stereotypes . 
 Later that year , Zinta starred in Vidhu Vinod Chopra 's drama Mission Kashmir alongside Sanjay Dutt and Hrithik Roshan . Set in the valley of Kashmir during the Indo @-@ Pakistani conflicts , the film dealt with the topic of terrorism and crime . Zinta 's role was that of Sufiya Parvez , a TV reporter and Roshan 's childhood love . A review in The Hindu said about her performance , " Preity Zinta is her usual cherubic self and lends colour to the otherwise serious proceedings " . It was an economic success , becoming the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of the year in India . 
 In 2001 , Zinta earned positive reviews for her role in Farhan Akhtar 's National Film Award @-@ winning Dil Chahta Hai . Depicting the contemporary routine life of Indian affluent youth , it is set in modern @-@ day urban Mumbai and focuses on a major period of transition in the lives of three young friends ( Aamir Khan , Saif Ali Khan and Akshaye Khanna ) . Zinta starred as Aamir Khan 's love interest , Shalini . Dil Chahta Hai was popular with critics , some of whom noted it broke new ground by introducing a realistic portrayal of Indian youth . The film was a moderate box @-@ office success in India ; it performed well in the big cities but failed in the rural areas , which was attributed by critics to the urban @-@ oriented lifestyle it presented . Rediff.com wrote of Zinta that she " ... is beautiful and vibrant , wavering between endearingly naive and confused " . 
 Three more 2001 releases featured Zinta , including Abbas @-@ Mustan 's romantic drama Chori Chori Chupke Chupke , which was released after a one @-@ year delay due to the trial of producer Bharat Shah . This film was one of the first Bollywood films to address the controversial issue of surrogate childbirth . Zinta played the role of Madhubala , a golden @-@ hearted prostitute hired as a surrogate mother . Initially reluctant to play the part , she eventually accepted it at the directors ' persuasion and , to prepare for it , visited several bars and nightclubs at Mumbai 's red @-@ light areas to study the lingo and mannerisms of sex @-@ workers . She received a second Best Supporting Actress nomination at the Filmfare Awards for her performance , of which reviewer Sukanya Verma wrote , " Preity Zinta , who clearly has the meatiest part of all , makes the best of it . Her transformation from the cocky and unabashed prostitute to a sensitive and warm person is amazingly believable . " 
 In 2002 , Zinta collaborated once again with director Kundan Shah , as the protagonist in the family drama Dil Hai <unk> , alongside Rekha , Mahima Chaudhry and Arjun Rampal . She played <unk> , an adopted daughter craving love , a role she identified with due to its rebellious nature . Billed as a star vehicle for Zinta , Dil Hai <unk> did not succeed financially , but her portrayal was uniformly acclaimed by critics , with those critical of the film marking her presence as its main highlight . Taran Adarsh from Bollywood Hungama noted , " ... Preity Zinta , in an author @-@ backed role ... steals the show with a sterling performance . Her scenes with Rekha ( second half ) and Alok Nath ( pre @-@ climax ) are simply outstanding . Here 's a performance that is sure to win accolades from the junta and critics whole @-@ heartedly . " 
 = = = Success ( 2003 – 06 ) = = = 
 Zinta was the female lead in India 's three highest @-@ grossing films of 2003 : The Hero : Love Story of a Spy , Koi ... Mil Gaya and Kal Ho Naa Ho . The Hero , co @-@ starring Sunny Deol and Priyanka Chopra , is a patriotic drama about a spy network involving terrorists and an Indian army officer . Zinta played the part of Reshma , a villager who falls in love with the officer and becomes part of this network . The film , involving stunts never seen before in the cinematic history of Bollywood , became the most expensive Hindi film ever produced at the time . Despite being the third highest @-@ grossing film of that year , it failed to recover its production costs at the box office . She next starred in Honey Irani 's directorial debut , Armaan , alongside Amitabh Bachchan and Anil Kapoor . This drama is set in a hospital and follows the travails of its personnel and its principal , Dr. Akash , who struggles arduously to sustain the institution financially . Zinta played Akash 's schizophrenic wife Sonia Kapoor , a role written specially for her and which she liked because it let her " give vent to all [ her ] frustrations " . The film received predominantly positive reviews , and Zinta was particularly praised . Khalid Mohamed called her a " peppy scene @-@ stealer , achieving her manic mood swings dexterously . " For her performance , she received nominations for Best Performance in a Negative Role at different award ceremonies , including Filmfare . 
 Rakesh Roshan 's science @-@ fiction film Koi ... Mil Gaya , about a developmentally disabled young man ( played by Hrithik Roshan ) coming in contact with an alien , followed . Zinta played the role of Nisha , a young woman whom Roshan befriends and later falls in love with . She received another Best Actress nomination at the Filmfare for the role . The film was a financial and critical success and became the most popular film of the year , as well as Zinta 's highest @-@ grossing film , with a domestic total of ₹ 680 million ( US $ 10 million ) . It won the Filmfare Award for Best Movie , among others , and went on to spawn two superhero films as sequels — Krrish and Krrish 3 — making it the first of the Krrish film series , beyond which Zinta did not proceed . 
 Zinta 's final release of 2003 was Kal Ho Naa Ho , a tear @-@ jerking romantic drama set in New York City . It was directed by Nikhil Advani and written by Karan Johar , co @-@ starring Jaya Bachchan , Shahrukh Khan and Saif Ali Khan . The film was received favourably by critics and became India 's second @-@ biggest hit of the year after Koi ... Mil Gaya . It also did well internationally and became India 's top @-@ grossing film of the year overseas , earning over ₹ 750 million ( US $ 11 million ) worldwide . Zinta played the role of Naina Catherine Kapur , an insecure and angry young Indian @-@ American woman who falls in love with a man who has a fatal heart disease . She won several awards for her performance , including the Filmfare Award for Best Actress . Writing for Stardust , critic Ram Kamal Mukherjee asserted that the movie rested " wholly and solely " on Zinta 's " astounding performance " , further noting her for having " skillfully handled the hues of the complex character . " Derek Elley of Variety wrote , " Zinta , who 's been carving a growing following the past three years or so , has never been better , definitively moving from <unk> roles to a charismatic young woman with her sexy , assured Naina . " 
 In 2004 she starred as TV journalist <unk> Dutta in Farhan Akhtar 's war drama Lakshya , alongside Hrithik Roshan . The film was based on the historical events of the 1999 Kargil War ; Zinta 's character was modelled after TV journalist <unk> Dutt , the only female reporter who covered the conflict . The film was a critical success , yet her performance received mixed reviews ; <unk> Joshi of Outlook likened her to " a teenybopper trying to do a TV newsreading skit for her college fest " and Rediff.com concluded , " Zinta has quite a good role and a good deal of footage in the film , and she does a fairly decent job of it without ever being spectacular . " Later that year , Yash Chopra cast her opposite Shahrukh Khan as the female lead in the love saga Veer @-@ Zaara , the top @-@ grossing Hindi film of that year both in India and abroad , with revenues of over ₹ 940 million ( US $ 14 million ) worldwide . The film , which relates the love story of an Indian officer , Veer Pratap Singh , and a Pakistani woman , Zaara <unk> Khan , had a strong international release , including a screening at the Berlin Film Festival , and won several Best Movie awards at major Indian award functions . For her portrayal of Zaara , a role which required her to master the fine nuances of Urdu language , Zinta received her fourth Filmfare Best Actress nomination . Variety hailed her as " the most interesting young actress of her generation , " writing that she " is her usual lively self as the willful Zaara . " Veer @-@ Zaara was Zinta 's second highest @-@ grossing film and third major success in two consecutive years . It marked the beginning of her work with Yash Raj Films , one of the largest production houses in Bollywood . 
 In 2005 , Zinta appeared in two films . Her first release was the folk comedy <unk> <unk> Pyaar Karen , co @-@ starring Govinda , a production that had been delayed since 2002 . The film garnered negative reviews and poor box office returns . Zinta 's role was small , and was not well received . She next starred opposite Saif Ali Khan in Siddharth Anand 's comedy @-@ drama Salaam Namaste . Produced by Yash Raj Films , it was the first Indian feature to be filmed entirely in Australia and went on to become the year 's highest @-@ grossing Bollywood production outside of India , earning ₹ 570 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 5 million ) internationally . The film tells the story of a contemporary cohabiting Indian couple and their subsequent struggle with an unexpected pregnancy . Zinta played the female protagonist Ambar Malhotra , a single modern young woman who leaves India to make her own life in Melbourne . Salaam Namaste received mostly positive reviews , and Zinta 's performance earned her nominations for Best Actress at a number of award ceremonies . Taran Adarsh referred to her as " terrific " and argued that she gave " her most accomplished performance to date " . The New York Times noted , " She is cheerleader @-@ homecoming queen @-@ fraternity sweetheart pretty , so even when her characters are being unkind it 's hard not to like her . " 
 Zinta received further success in 2006 , starring in Karan Johar 's drama Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna with an ensemble cast including Amitabh Bachchan , Shahrukh Khan , Abhishek Bachchan , Rani Mukerji and Kirron Kher . The film became one of the biggest box @-@ office hits in India , earning ₹ 635 million ( US $ 9 @.@ 4 million ) , and grossed over ₹ 496 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 4 million ) abroad , the biggest Bollywood success of all @-@ time in the overseas market up until then . It was her fourth overseas top @-@ earner in four consecutive years . The film tells the story of two unhappily married couples in New York , and an ensuing extramarital affair . Zinta played the role of Rhea Saran , an ambitious fashion magazine editor . She described the role as an attempt to shed her vivacious public image . The Indian Express concurred that this was successful : " The lady has not just looked glamorous but she has walked with poise , sat with grace , smiled with composure and spoken with calmness . Who would have thought that the bubbly girl could so skilfully shed her age @-@ old tag and walk away as the don 't @-@ mess @-@ with @-@ me lass . So all those who are in search of the peppy Preity , well guys you 've dialed the wrong number this time . " 
 Zinta 's next release of 2006 was <unk> <unk> 's romantic musical Jaan @-@ E @-@ Mann , a story set in the United States about two men , played by Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar , who love the same woman . The film opened to mixed reviews from critics and its eventual box @-@ office profit was poor . Zinta played the role of Piya , the cynosure of two men . She was mostly criticised for taking a role of minimal importance , though her performance was generally well received . Raja Sen labelled her role an " ornament throughout , " but further stated that she " comes vividly alive in the film 's last scene , a moment that makes you lament why filmmakers today don 't let the <unk> actress have more fun instead of forcing her to sob copiously . She doesn 't have much to do in Jaan @-@ E @-@ Mann , but looks appropriately attractive . " Zinta said that the film was a great relief after the more emotionally intense Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna , as Jaan @-@ E @-@ Mann was " easy , happy and much more simple " . 
 = = = New career moves , hiatus , and launch of PZNZ media ( 2007 – present ) = = = 
 In 2007 , Zinta portrayed a British Pakistani woman , Alvira Khan , in her third project with Yash Raj Films , Shaad Ali 's comedy Jhoom Barabar Jhoom , alongside Abhishek Bachchan , Bobby Deol and Lara Dutta . The film was a critical and commercial failure in India , and several critics panned her performance ; The Times of India described her as " too plastic " and Rediff.com concluded , " From accent to emotion , Preity is plain and simple insufferable in this film . " 
 Following the failure of two of her commercial releases , Zinta began working with art film directors , and turned towards neo @-@ realistic films , known in India as parallel cinema . She acted in her first English film , Rituparno Ghosh 's The Last Lear , as a struggling film actress opposite Amitabh Bachchan . The film premiered at the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival , and was received well . Later reviews in India were approving , with Rajeev Masand writing , " Preity Zinta gets through her scenes competently , never allowing her cute @-@ as @-@ a @-@ button image to take away from the impact she makes here as a conflicted , mature woman . " Initially dismissive of art films , Zinta eventually spoke of her first venture into the genre , confessing , " I did think with art films that they don 't pay you , they don 't feed you , but I was wrong , and I 'm so happy to be here . " 
 Zinta next starred in Samir <unk> 's Heroes ( 2008 ) , a road movie about two final @-@ year film students who , as a part of their assignment , travel a thousand miles across North India to deliver three un @-@ posted letters written by army personnel who lost their lives during the 1999 Kargil war to their families . The story unfolds the journey of these students in three chapters and follows how they meet and are inspired by the families of the soldiers . Zinta is featured in the first chapter as Salman Khan 's war widow , Kuljeet Kaur , a woman who becomes the sole breadwinner of the family and single @-@ handedly raises her son . In preparation for the role , Zinta attended Anupam Kher 's acting school , " Actor Prepares " , to learn the dialect and mannerisms of a Punjabi woman . The film was released to a mixed critical reaction , but her performance received rave reviews ; Anand Singh of Hindustan Times wrote , " <unk> is merely interested in wringing tears the old @-@ fashioned way , and not in starting a debate . He succeeds — mainly because Preity Zinta brings to a role a gravitas and dignity that is seen on the faces of ordinary women — this may be her coming of age as an actress . " 
 By April 2008 , Zinta had completed shooting for <unk> Barua 's drama Har Pal . In the same year she played the leading role of Chand in Deepa Mehta 's Canadian film Heaven on Earth , a Punjabi language mystical drama based on the true story of a young Indian woman who , post an arranged marriage to a non @-@ resident Indian man from Canada , migrates to Toronto and becomes a victim of severe domestic abuse . Expressing her desire for " a new kind of acting challenge " , Zinta described Mehta as one director she was longing to work with in order to fulfill it . To prepare for the part , she read and watched several books and documentaries on domestic violence . As the film was to be shot entirely in Punjabi , a language that was totally alien to her , she learnt it in a crash course of fifty days . She was emotional during the making of the film : " I never knew a character would affect me so deeply . I 've become completely withdrawn and introspective ... I can 't snap out of the character . " She eventually called it her most challenging project , as it helped her " shed everything that Preity Zinta was about . " Heaven on Earth was first screened at several film festivals and , upon release , garnered career @-@ best reviews for Zinta . Her performance earned her the Silver Hugo Award for Best Actress at the 2008 Chicago International Film Festival , for " her strong yet subtle performance as a woman struggling to keep her dreams despite brutal realities . " Among other awards , she was acknowledged with Best Actress nominations at several award functions in Canada , including the Genie Award by the Academy of Canadian Cinema and Television , and the Vancouver Film Critics Circle . 
 Following Heaven on Earth , Zinta took a two @-@ year sabbatical from films , later explaining that she had chosen to focus on her work with her cricket team . In 2011 she launched her own production company , PZNZ Media . Two years later and following numerous delays , she starred in her first film under the banner — the Prem Raj @-@ directed romantic comedy <unk> in Paris , which she also co @-@ wrote . An Indo @-@ French collaboration , the film saw Zinta as a half @-@ Indian half @-@ French Parisian woman alongside <unk> <unk> and Isabelle Adjani . Zinta 's role required her to learn French and follow a strict diet and fitness regime , for which she hired the services of celebrity trainer Tracy Anderson . Whilst the film bombed at the box office and received mostly negative reviews , Zinta 's performance attracted a mixed critical reception . Sonia Chopra of Sify called her " hugely likeable " , and added that she is a " good actress , astute producer and ... writer . " Shilpa Jamkhandikar from Deccan Herald , critical of both the film and Zinta 's work , concluded a scathing review by calling it " a mediocre film , one that was supposed to showcase one of our favourite leading ladies , but instead just shows us what a shadow of her past she ’ s become . " 
 As of December 2015 , Zinta is currently filming for Neeraj Pathak 's action comedy <unk> <unk> . She will be seen opposite Sunny Deol in the role of an aggressive Varanasi @-@ based wife . 
 = = Other work = = 
 = = = Column writing = = = 
 In 2004 , Zinta joined a group of South Asian commentators for BBC News Online . She expressed joy at participating in the project , saying , " I am pretty outspoken and have my own view on every subject . So it will be a good platform for me to air my views . " Her first column , " The changing face of Bollywood " , published in January 2004 , discussed the evolution of Bollywood in the past decade . The column became one of the site 's ten most read stories of the day . In her second column , " Odds stacked against Indian women " , Zinta analysed the eve teasing phenomenon in India , and criticised those who practice it . She wrote , " Incidences like these take away a woman 's dignity , her space and her freedom ... why the state is so helpless in protecting the women . Why should women feel unsafe in a country which had an internationally revered woman prime minister ? " The column caught the attention of readers worldwide , and she received thousands of e @-@ mails about it . It was applauded particularly by women for its stand against abuse of Indian women . Her third column , " The darkness that all actors fear " , was a more personal column and dealt with her stardom , fans , insecurity and fears as an actor . Her fourth and final column , titled " Facing death in Sri Lanka and Thailand " , described her two near @-@ death experiences in late 2004 . 
 = = = Stage performances and television presenting = = = 
 Zinta has taken part in several stage shows and world tours since 2001 . Her first world tour , a series of concerts called Craze 2001 , was performed across the U.S. alongside Anil Kapoor , Aamir Khan , Aishwarya Rai and Gracy Singh . The show faced early cancellation due to the 11 September 2001 attacks , and the team prepared to return to India as soon as possible . However , the shows continued successfully in Canada . In 2002 , she participated in the show From India With Love in the UK , along with Amitabh Bachchan , Aamir Khan , Shah Rukh Khan and Aishwarya Rai . It took place at two outdoor venues , Manchester 's Old Trafford and London 's Hyde Park , with over 100 @,@ 000 spectators . Zinta 's largest world tour was in 2004 , when she joined a group of stars ( Shah Rukh Khan , Rani Mukerji , Saif Ali Khan , Arjun Rampal and Priyanka Chopra ) in the Temptation 2004 tour . <unk> in over 22 countries across the world , it became Bollywood 's most prominent international concert . In 2006 , Zinta was part of the Heat 2006 world tour , along with Akshay Kumar , Saif Ali Khan , Sushmita Sen and Celina Jaitley . The Unforgettable Tour ( 2008 ) saw Zinta performing with the Bachchan family and Ritesh Deshmukh in a 40 @-@ day show staged in 11 cities across North America , Europe and the Caribbean . In December 2012 , Zinta returned to the stage with the Temptation Reloaded concert in Jakarta ( joined by Shah Rukh Khan , Rani Mukerji and Bipasha Basu ) . 
 In 2011 , Zinta made her television debut as the host of the show Guinness World Records – Ab India <unk> on Colors Channel . An Indian version of Guinness Book of World Records , the show premiered on 18 March to an audience measurement of 3 @.@ 3 rating points , which made it occupy the 7th position on the chart of celebrity @-@ driven reality shows on Hindi entertainment channels . In a four @-@ star review for Hindustan Times , critic <unk> Dubey wrote , " Preity is a riot . She ’ s vivacious and knows exactly when she needs to be serious and when she can crack jokes . " Later that year , Zinta started hosting the celebrity @-@ based chat show Up Close & Personal with PZ , shot at her own penthouse in Mumbai and broadcast on the newly launched channel UTV Stars . The first episode aired on 3 September . In 2015 , Zinta featured as a talent judge for the seventh season of the dance reality show Nach Baliye . 
 = = = Humanitarian work = = = 
 During her years in the film industry , Zinta has been involved with different charitable organisations and has particularly supported women 's causes in India , for instance protesting against female infanticide . She has also participated in AIDS awareness drives and campaigns to clean up Mumbai . 
 In 2005 , along with other Bollywood stars , Zinta performed at the HELP ! Telethon Concert raising money for the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . The following year , as an ambassador of the Godfrey Phillips National Bravery Movement , Zinta attended a blood donation camp organised by the Rotary Club of Delhi and the Godfrey Phillips Awards . She lent her support to the cause of women 's empowerment and promoted blood donation . She said , " <unk> blood doesn 't kill one but goes on to save somebody 's life .... Once blood is donated it becomes universal and might be used by anyone in need , irrespective of community , caste or region . It binds people together . " 
 In 2007 , Zinta visited Hisar , Haryana , where she spent a day at the army training base to boost the morale of the <unk> troops . The visit was conducted for an NDTV show , Jai Jawan , on which entertainers and actors visit Indian troops . While there , she also met children with disabilities at a special school maintained by the army . In August , along with Mumbai @-@ based artist Gurcharan Singh , Zinta painted for the cause of street children for the non @-@ governmental organisation Khushi . In December , she joined the efforts of the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ( UNODC ) to curb human trafficking in India . She spoke on behalf of awareness against the practice , the need for protection and rehabilitation for those rescued from it , and punishment for perpetrators . 
 In 2009 , on her 34th birthday , Zinta adopted 34 girls from the Mother Miracle orphanage in Rishikesh and took the responsibility of financially supporting their education , food and clothing . She expressed her excitement at doing so : " I 've adopted 34 girls . I 'll be looking after their entire upbringing from education to food , clothes etc . You 've no idea how wonderful it feels to hear the excited chatter of all these girls together . " 
 In January 2010 , Zinta was appointed the brand ambassador of The <unk> Trust , an organisation that works for the welfare of widows and their children . She said , having lost her father at 13 , she could relate to the problems faced by widowed women . Later in the year , she joined the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV / AIDS ( UNAIDS ) as their Goodwill Ambassador in India , to promote public awareness on HIV prevention , treatment and support , with emphasis on women and children , and combat discrimination against it . Speaking of her appointment , Zinta expressed hope to be " the voice for the voiceless " and bring about a " transformation in the minds of people " through collaborative work . In October 2010 , Zinta was awarded an Honorary Doctorate of Arts from the University of East London . It was awarded in honour of both her cultural contribution and her humanitarian work , with the citation describing her as " an international actress , pioneering star of Hindi cinema and devoted humanitarian . Preity has carved a path for women to follow . " 
 = = = Ownership of IPL cricket team = = = 
 Along with Ness Wadia , Mohit Burman and others , Zinta acquired ownership rights in 2008 for the Mohali @-@ based Twenty20 cricket team of the Indian Premier League ( IPL ) . The group paid $ 76 million to acquire the franchise , and had since named the team Kings XI Punjab . Until 2009 , Zinta was the only woman to own an IPL team , and was the league 's youngest owner . She has been involved with launching ticket sales and promoting the team . She said , " My involvement with the team is total . I am extremely passionate about our team and I do believe that I am the team 's good luck factor , so I want to be there for everything . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Zinta used to visit her native town Shimla when she was not busy shooting . In 2006 , she moved into her own home in Mumbai . She does not identify with any particular religion . In an interview with The Times of India , she comments , " I believe in good deeds , in karma , I don 't believe in going to temples . For me , religion is very personal . It 's all about having faith ... We have heard and read that all religions are equal . Now I am increasingly believing in this . " She narrowly escaped death twice in late 2004 : first after an explosion at a Temptation concert in Colombo , Sri Lanka ; and second during the Indian Ocean earthquake . 
 Zinta has been the subject of several controversies . In 2003 , as a witness in the Bharat Shah case , she testified against the Indian mafia . Bharat Shah , the <unk> of one of her films , Chori Chori Chupke Chupke , was arrested in 2000 for having connections with Chhota Shakeel , a Mumbai underworld boss . Unlike several of her colleagues , Zinta repeated in court her earlier statement that she had received extortion threats from the mafia during the shooting of the film . After her testimony , she was given witness protection and was forced to stay out of the public eye for two months . Thirteen other witnesses before her , including celebrities Salman Khan and Shahrukh Khan , were witnesses in the case but later retracted their earlier statements . Zinta was the only witness who did not become hostile to the prosecution ; the nation responded positively to her actions . Consequently , she was the first recipient of Godfrey 's Mind of Steel Award at the annual Red and White Bravery Awards , given to her for the " courageous act " of standing against the Mumbai Underworld . On receiving the award , she said , " To be brave is not to be fearless . It is when you fear and you get over it , then you can be called brave . I am human . It is not that I fear nothing . But getting over a fear is a continuous process and I have been successful so far . " Since 2006 , Zinta has been the brand ambassador for the Godfrey Phillips Bravery awards . 
 Tabloids have often linked Zinta romantically with other Bollywood stars , but she has strongly denied any such rumours . In 2000 , Zinta began dating model Marc Robinson . They separated the following year , and according to Zinta remained on good terms . Asked in Filmfare about their break @-@ up , she spoke of " Very , very fond memories of the times we were together and I 'd like to keep it to that " . Zinta dated the Bombay Dyeing heir , businessman Ness Wadia from February 2005 until May 2009 . Their relationship was often reported on by the media , with frequent speculation about an engagement or a break @-@ up . On June 13 , 2014 , Zinta filed a complaint to the Mumbai police against Ness Wadia alleging he had molested , threatened and abused her at an IPL match at the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai on 30 May . Wadia has denied the allegations . 
 On 29 February 2016 , Zinta married her long @-@ time American partner Gene Goodenough at a private ceremony in Los Angeles . Goodenough is Senior Vice President for Finance at <unk> Energy , a US @-@ based hydroelectric power company . 
 = = Media image and artistry = = 
 Zinta is particularly known in the Indian media for her straightforward nature and for honestly expressing her forthright opinions in public , be it about her on @-@ screen or off @-@ screen life or raising a voice against social injustice . While she does not believe she is " as tough as people portray [ her ] to be , " she asserts having no qualms about speaking her mind , even if faced with surmounting opposition , as long as she stands " by what 's right . " These features were noted during the Bharat Shah Case , when she testified against the underworld ; following this incident she was often called by journalists " The only man in Bollywood " , a label she was unhappy with for its underlying anti @-@ feminist connotations . Film actor Amitabh Bachchan , describing her as " frank and painfully honest , " lauded her " drive and guts in a world that can be most cruel to a single girl . " Author and columnist Shobhaa De , while commending her for lodging a molestation complaint against Ness Wadia in 2014 , expressed concern regarding Zinta 's repeated quest for justice , believing it could eventually play against her : " India is not terribly kind to strong @-@ willed , outspoken women who are dubbed ' trouble makers ' if they dare to raise their voices , especially against men . Zinta is such a woman . " 
 Her characteristic dimple has been cited by the media as her trademark . At the beginning of her career , she was often described by the press as having a vivacious personality and a bubbly , outgoing persona , an image she had confessed to disliking . According to film critic Sukanya Verma , Zinta 's energetic nature extends from her real @-@ life into her appearances in films and is an integral part of her technique . In an article discussing Hindi film actresses and their flair for comedy , Verma wrote , " What can you say about an actress who giggles non @-@ stop in a tone that is anything but prim and <unk> ? She is carefree . She is animated . She talks non @-@ stop . She laughs all the time . She has a chilled out sense of humour . And a tomboyish streak too . Preity Zinta is all that and more . All this greatly contributes to her style of acting . " 
 Director Tanuja Chandra , while filming Sangharsh in 1998 , ascribed Zinta 's screen appeal to her lack of acting pretense , commenting , " She doesn 't act , she 's so real that you just can 't look away from her " . Reviewing Chori Chori Chupke Chupke for Hindustan Times , Vinayak Chakravorty noted that " there is an admirable zest that Preity pumps into every role she does " . Farhan Akhtar , who directed her in two movies , believes she is an actress who " can mould herself — the way she speaks , works and her body language — and adapt herself to roles , " while Vidhu Vinod Chopra ( director of Mission Kashmir ) credits her with the ability to " make the viewer believe even in the most convoluted situation . " In a review of Salaam Namaste , Australian film critic Jake Wilson observed , " While Preity Zinta isn 't the subtlest actress , she 's quite a comedienne — for a Hollywood equivalent to her combination of beauty , high @-@ strung emotion and facial gymnastics you might have to go back to Natalie Wood . " American critic Derek Elley considers her to be " one of Bollywood ’ s best pure actresses . " 
 Following her portrayal of such characters as those in Sangharsh , Kya Kehna , Chori Chori Chupke Chupke , Salaam Namaste and Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna , Zinta gained a reputation for playing roles that go against Indian traditional mores and was often recognised for her versatility . Critics attributed her roles in these films as to establishing a new image for leading actresses in Bollywood . Karan Johar cites her as " a new @-@ wave actress " who has the advantage of working at a time when " films portray a woman who knows her mind " . In the book Once Upon a Time in Bollywood , it is stated that Zinta " resists patriarchal constraints through her modern lifestyle and the controversial roles she chooses . " 
 Zinta is one of the best @-@ known celebrities in India ; at her career peak she was one of Hindi cinema 's most celebrated and highest @-@ paid stars and was acknowledged for having managed a career without any traditional assistance or family relations in the film industry . In 2003 , Zinta appeared in the number one spot on Rediff 's " Top Bollywood Female Stars " . She was ranked second for the following three years . She has been featured frequently on other Rediff lists , including " Bollywood 's Most Beautiful Actresses " , " Bollywood 's Best Dressed Women " and " Women of Many Faces " . Between 2006 and 2008 Zinta made three consecutive appearances at the Cannes Film Festival . At first she attended the 2006 Film Festival along with filmmaker Karan Johar to represent the Hindi film industry and promote Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna , returning in later years as the brand ambassador of Chopard , the maker of luxury watches and jewellery . In September 2006 , the UK magazine Eastern Eye ranked her among " Asia 's Sexiest Women " . In 2010 , Time magazine selected her as one of the candidates for its list of the world 's 100 most influential people . She was the only Indian actress nominated for the poll and eventually did not make it to the final list , ranked at 144 . This was followed , however , by a marked period of decline in her popularity when she restricted her work in films , which was further decreased with the debacle of her self @-@ produced comeback vehicle . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = = = Selected filmography = = = 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Among Zinta 's film awards are two Filmfare Awards — Best Female Debut for Dil Se .. and Soldier , and Best Actress for Kal Ho Naa Ho . 
 = Waking Up the Neighbours = 
 Waking Up the Neighbours is the sixth studio album by Canadian singer / songwriter Bryan Adams released in 1991 . The album was recorded at Battery Studios in London , and at The Warehouse Studio in Vancouver , mixed at Mayfair Studios in London , and mastered by Bob Ludwig at Masterdisk in New York City . " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " was number one on the British charts for a record @-@ breaking 16 weeks . The album sold more than 16 million copies worldwide . 
 The album was also notable in Canada for creating controversy concerning the system of Canadian content . Although Adams was one of Canada 's biggest recording stars at the time , the nature of his collaboration with the British – Zambian Mutt Lange , combined with the fact that the album was not primarily recorded in Canada , meant that , under the rules in force until 1991 , the Adams / Lange @-@ written songs on Waking Up the Neighbours did not qualify as Canadian content . As a result of Adams ' complaints , in September of that year , the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission ( CRTC ) announced that the Canadian content rules would be broadened . The regulations already accounted for collaborative writing between Canadians and non @-@ Canadians where the lyricist and musical composer worked separately . As of September 1991 , the regulations were tweaked to recognize partnerships where two ( or more ) collaborators each contributed equally to both the lyrics and to the music , as was the case with Adams and Lange . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Recording and production = = = 
 The album was recorded at Battery Studios in England and the Warehouse Studios in Canada . Recording began in March 1990 , and along with mixing , finished in June 1991 . Robert John " Mutt " Lange , previously known for his work with AC / DC , Foreigner , and Def Leppard , was helping Adams ' writing the songs for his next album . Adams ' spent much of his time in Hindhead and London , England with Lange working on his sixth album . 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " is a song co @-@ written and performed by Bryan Adams , featured on the soundtrack for the film Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves in 1991 . It was an enormous chart success internationally , spending seven weeks at number one in the United States ' Billboard Hot 100 , sixteen consecutive weeks at number one on the UK Singles Chart ( the longest in British chart history ) , eleven weeks on the Dutch Top 40 and nine weeks at number one on the Canadian singles chart in Canada . The song won a Grammy Award for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television at the 1992 Grammy Awards , and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Song of 1991 . 
 It was the most successful single off the album , and has become one of the most successful songs of all time . The song came about when Adams was approached to write something by the producers of the upcoming Kevin Costner film , Robin Hood : Prince of Thieves , and was asked to work on a theme song . He was provided a tape of orchestration written by the composer of the film score , Michael Kamen . With this , he and Lange used a section of Michael 's orchestration and created " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " , which was then placed deep into the closing credits of the film when it opened on June 14 , 1991 . The song went to number one the week before the film 's release and went on to top the charts in 16 countries and sold over 10 million copies worldwide , becoming one of the biggest selling singles of all time . The song was nominated for an Academy Award but won a Grammy Award for Best Song from a Motion Picture . Years later when the BBC asked Bryan ( about the recent acoustic live version from his Bare Bones CD ) , " Do you ever get bored of hearing your record @-@ breaking hit ' Everything I Do ' ? " Bryan said 
 " Of course not . What a silly question . " 
 Julien Temple directed the music video for " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " ; it was shot in Sheffield , England over May 17 – 18 , 1991 . 
 " Can 't Stop This Thing We Started " was the second single from the album . A rock song in contrast to " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " , it peaked at # 2 on the Billboard Hot 100 behind Prince 's " Cream " . " Can 't Stop This Thing We Started " received two nominations at the Grammy Awards of 1992 for Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance , Solo , winning none . 
 " There Will Never Be Another Tonight " was the third single from the album . The title came from a fragment Bryan Adams and Jim Vallance wrote in late 1980s . The phrase was written into the song in the end of 1990 and released on Adams ' album in 1991 . 
 " Thought I 'd Died and Gone to Heaven " was the fourth single released from Waking up the Neighbours . Written by Mutt Lange and Bryan Adams the song was the first song written for the album . " Thought I 'd Died and Gone to Heaven " reached # 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 and # 14 on the Mainstream Rock Tracks . In the UK , it reached # 8 . 
 " All I Want Is You " , " Do I Have to Say the Words ? " ( # 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 ) and " Touch the Hand " where also released as singles but didn 't get the heavy rotation as the first four singles released . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Waking Up the Neighbours co @-@ produced by Adams and Mutt Lange and peaked at number six on the Billboard 200 . The album was released in September 1991 and album and single topped the charts in many countries with " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " spending record @-@ breaking 16 weeks at number one on UK Singles Chart and topped the charts in 17 countries . It also made record @-@ breaking sales of 4 million copies in the US . Canadian content regulations were revised in 1991 to allow radio stations to credit airplay of this album towards their legal requirements to play Canadian music . The album has become Adams second best @-@ selling album worldwide . Adams won a Grammy Award in 1992 for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television for " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " . 
 Waking Up the Neighbours included other hit singles including " Can 't Stop This Thing We Started " , " There Will Never Be Another Tonight " , " Thought I 'd Died and Gone to Heaven " , " All I Want Is You " , " Do I Have to Say the Words ? " and " Touch the Hand " and all had accompanying music videos . All of these songs including " Do I Have to Say the Words ? " placed on the Billboard Hot 100 . " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " was the most successful song from Waking Up the Neighbours on the rock charts , reaching number 10 on the Mainstream Rock Charts and number 1 on the Billboard Hot 100 . " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " arguably became Adams ' most recognizable and popular song . Its music video received heavy airplay on music television . 
 = = Canadian content = = 
 The album caused controversy in Canada concerning the system of Canadian Content . Although Adams was one of Canada 's biggest recording stars at the time , the specific nature of his collaboration with non @-@ Canadians , coupled with his decision to primarily record the album outside Canada , meant that the album and all its songs were not considered Canadian content for purposes of Canadian radio airplay . Under the system then in place , to qualify as Canadian content , a piece of recorded music had to meet any two of the following four criteria : 
 1 ) the artist was Canadian 
 2 ) the track was completely recorded in Canada 
 3 ) the music was entirely written by a Canadian ( or Canadians ) 
 4 ) the lyrics were entirely written by a Canadian ( or Canadians ) 
 As Adams co @-@ wrote both the music and the lyrics with non @-@ Canadian Mutt Lange , and he did not primarily record the album in Canada , he only fulfilled one of the criteria . As a result , under CRTC regulations none of the album 's songs were considered Canadian content , thereby limiting the amount of radio play it could receive in Canada . 
 In protest , Adams briefly threatened to boycott Canada 's annual Juno Awards , where his album had been almost completely ignored by the awards committee . He did end up winning the Entertainer of the Year Award ( voted on by the public ) and Producer of the Year Award . 
 Adams publicly criticised the CRTC policy , calling it " a disgrace , a shame ... stupidity " . He continued his attack with ; 
 " You 'd never hear Elton John being declared un @-@ British ... It 's time to abolish the CRTC . Not everyone agrees . " 
 It was also noted that if Adams had written all the lyrics , and Lange all the music ( or vice versa ) , the collaboration would have counted as Canadian content ( as long as it was recorded by a Canadian artist such as Adams , or had it been recorded in Canada ) . 
 As a result of the controversy , in September of that year , the Canadian Radio @-@ television and Telecommunications Commission announced that Canadian content rules would be changed . The new regulation allows non @-@ Canadians to contribute up to 50 % of the finished content to each of both the music and the lyrics of a recorded piece , and still qualify for Canadian content status — provided the recording artist is Canadian , or the song is recorded in Canada . Accordingly , the Adams / Lange songs , and the Adams / Lange / Vallance songs on the album now count as Canadian content , as Jim Vallance is also Canadian . However , the Adams / Lange / Kamen co @-@ write " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " still does not count as Canadian content , as two of the three writers are non @-@ Canadians , and the track was not recorded in Canada . 
 = = Waking Up the Nation tour = = 
 Before releasing the album , Adams had already started a tour promoting it , and on June 8 , 1991 , he held large concerts in Europe co @-@ headlining with ZZ Top . Shortly after the tour started , " ( Everything I Do ) I Do It for You " was released as the debut single for the album . The single became a worldwide hit . Adams further supported the new album with his tour Waking Up the World , which started in October 1991 and ran through May 1993 . On October 4 , 1991 , the world tour started in Belfast , Northern Ireland . On December 18 , 1991 , Adams played his two first @-@ ever shows in Reykjavík , Iceland . After his tour in Europe , as well as a concert at Wembley Stadium attended by more than 72 @,@ 000 people , Adams left for the United States , where he performed at the Ritz Theatre on January 10 . That concert sold out in less than 20 minutes . In attendance were Ben E. King and Nona Hendrix . The Canadian leg of the ' Waking Up the World ' Tour kicked off in Sydney , Nova Scotia on January 13 , 1992 , and wrapped up with a standing room only concert in Vancouver , British Columbia , on January 31 . In February 1992 , he toured New Zealand and Australia for 7 dates , kicking off with a press conference in Sydney . On February 21 the tour headed to Japan for close to a dozen shows in 6 cities . Bryan taped an interview with MuchMusic 's Terry Dave Mulligan in Calgary , Alberta and the air date was scheduled for mid @-@ March . The tour continued through several European countries in June 1992 , including Italy , Germany , the Netherlands and Scandinavia , and in July 1992 , Bryan performed for the first time in Hungary and Turkey . September through December 1993 saw the tour in the U.S. The Asian tour headed to Thailand , Singapore , Japan , and Hong Kong in February , 1993 , before returning to the U.S. during March through May . It is interesting to note that Adams ' visit to South Africa during his Waking Up the World tour , following the release of Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners from prison and the unbanning of black political parties , has been left relatively undocumented . Adams ' concert at Cape Town 's Green Point stadium during the tour was called one of his most emotional and memorable performances . Coca @-@ Cola became the official sponsor of the event and a commercial featured the song " House Arrest " with Adams and his band playing the song in a neighborhood . The commercial featured actress Neve Campbell . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bryan Adams — rhythm guitar , vocals , co @-@ producer 
 Keith Scott — lead guitar 
 Tommy Mandel — Hammond organ 
 Dave Taylor — bass 
 Mickey Curry — drums 
 + 
 Larry Klein — bass 
 Phil Nicholas — keyboards and programming 
 Robbie King — Hammond organ 
 Bill Payne — piano and Hammond organ 
 Ed Shearmur — keyboards 
 The Tuck Back Twins — background vocals 
 Andrew Catlin — photography 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = M @-@ 59 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 59 is an east – west state trunkline highway that crosses the northern part of Metropolitan Detroit in the US state of Michigan . It runs between Howell at Interstate 96 ( I @-@ 96 ) and I @-@ 94 on the Chesterfield – Harrison township line near the Selfridge Air National Guard Base . While primarily a multi @-@ lane surface highway , it is a full freeway from just east of the Pontiac downtown near Opdyke Road to just east of the Mound Road / Merrill Road exit in Utica . The various surface highway segments are named either Highland Road , Huron Street or Hall Road , with the latter known as an area for shopping and dining . The rural sections west of Pontiac pass through Oakland County lake country crossing through two state recreational areas . 
 M @-@ 59 was first designated with the rest of the original state trunkline highway system by July 1 , 1919 between Pontiac and Mt . Clemens . Extensions on both ends brought the termini as far as Howell and New Baltimore before the current termini were established in the 1960s . M @-@ 59 was expanded into a freeway in the late 1960s and early 1970s , with additional expansions in the 1980s and 1990s to create the divided highway sections . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 59 starts at I @-@ 96 in Howell Township as Highland Road near a large outlet mall . Highland Road carries M @-@ 59 concurrently with the westernmost section of Business Loop I @-@ 96 ( BL I @-@ 96 ) . Highland Road widens out into a boulevard south of the county airport before the roadway reaches Grand River Avenue . At this intersection , BL I @-@ 96 departs to the southwest . This section of Howell is mostly residential with tree @-@ lined streets . The boulevard section ends near Thompson Lake and M @-@ 59 continues east through rural Livingston County as a two @-@ lane highway crossing forested and residential areas . Halfway across Hartland Township , M @-@ 59 meets the US Highway 23 ( US 23 ) freeway near the Hartland Plaza Shopping Center , and Highland Road widens out to a boulevard divided highway again . The route passes several small lakes and continues east into Oakland County . Running through the Highland State Recreational Area , M @-@ 59 swings to the north through rural Oakland County 's lake country which comprises several lakes in dense forest lands and residential subdivisions that form the northern edge of the Metropolitan Detroit area . There is a brief gap in the Highland SRA where M @-@ 59 narrows back to two @-@ lane road . Near Brendel Lake and the Alpine Valley Ski Area , Highland Road narrows back to two lanes for the final time . The narrowed roadway continues east , crossing the southern edge of Pontiac Lake in the state recreational area of the same name . 
 The next major landmark along M @-@ 59 is the Oakland County International Airport in Waterford Township . Highland Road begins to curve back to the south through denser suburbs as it approaches the outskirts of Pontiac . The Highland Road name gives way to Huron Street near Sylvan Lake , and M @-@ 59 crosses Telegraph Road , which carries US 24 and marks the boundary with Pontiac . Eastbound M @-@ 59 continues along Huron Street into downtown Pontiac where it crosses the northern end of Woodward Avenue , which is part of the two business loops that encircle the central business district while westbound M @-@ 59 bypasses downtown Pontiac as it follows the northern loop of Woodward . East of downtown Pontiac , M @-@ 59 widens out into a full freeway . This freeway provides access to the south side of the Pontiac Silverdome , former home of the Detroit Lions . To the east of the stadium in Auburn Hills is the cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 75 and the North American corporate headquarters of car maker Chrysler . Continuing east through the northern Detroit suburbs , the M @-@ 59 freeway curves back to the south and crosses into Macomb County at the Dequindre Road interchange . Trucks carrying explosive or flammable cargo are required to exit the M @-@ 59 freeway and use the parallel service drive through the Mound Road @-@ Merrill Road interchange just west of Utica . 
 The M @-@ 59 freeway crosses the border between Sterling Heights and Shelby Township and ends at Van Dyke Avenue in Utica , where M @-@ 59 becomes a boulevard called Hall Road . The highway crosses the Clinton River and the southern end of the M @-@ 53 freeway . This section of the highway is somewhat of a " main street " in Macomb County , as it is home to a wide variety of shopping and dining including Lakeside Mall in Sterling Heights and The Mall at Partridge Creek in Clinton Township . Although it is neither officially designated nor commonly referred to as such , the Hall Road portion of M @-@ 59 is coextensive with " 20 Mile Road " in the Detroit Mile Road system . Near its eastern terminus , M @-@ 59 crosses both M @-@ 97 ( Groesbeck Highway ) and M @-@ 3 ( Gratiot Avenue ) . East of Gratiot , Hall Road is called the William P. Rosso Highway . M @-@ 59 ends at the freeway interchange with I @-@ 94 while Rosso Highway continues along the northern edge of Selfridge Air National Guard Base to Lake St. Clair . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 59 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 between M @-@ 10 ( now Bus . US 24 ) in Pontiac and M @-@ 19 ( later US 25 and now M @-@ 3 ) in Mt . Clemens . It would be moved to follow Hall Road exclusively on the east end in 1932 . The west end was extended in 1936 to end at the Livingston – Oakland county line . The extension to US 23 in Hartland was finished by 1938 . The east end was extended again in 1939 along US 25 and over to M @-@ 29 in New Baltimore . The east end was rerouted again between Mt . Clemens and New Baltimore over another former alignment of M @-@ 29 in late 1947 or early 1948 . The eastern terminus was truncated to M @-@ 29 east of US 25 / Gratiot Avenue in 1961 . 
 Another extension on the west end moved M @-@ 59 to end at US 16 in Howell by 1960 . The west end was extended with the new BL I @-@ 96 in Howell to end at the newly opened I @-@ 96 freeway in 1963 . The east end was rerouted to end at I @-@ 94 in 1964 . 
 M @-@ 59 was converted into a freeway starting in 1966 with the first segment between Pontiac and Rochester . A second segment opened in 1972 east to Utica . Segments were converted to divided highway in Oakland County in 1984 through 1986 . The east end was reconstructed in 1995 – 97 and converted to a six- to eight @-@ lane divided highway . The freeway was extended east in 1998 to Van Dyke Avenue in Utica . 
 In 2010 , MDOT started the process of expanding M @-@ 59 from two lanes to three in each direction between Crooks Road and Ryan Road , using funding from the Federal stimulus bill of 2009 . With this improvement , M @-@ 59 is now at least three lanes each way from I @-@ 75 to I @-@ 94 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Tara ( Ramayana ) = 
 In the Hindu epic Ramayana , Tara ( Sanskrit : <unk> , <unk> , literally " star " ; ) is the Queen of Kishkindha and wife of the monkey ( vanara ) King Vali . After being widowed , she becomes the Queen of Sugriva , Vali 's brother . 
 Tara is described as the daughter of the monkey physician Sushena in the Ramayana , and in later sources , as an apsara ( celestial nymph ) who rises from the churning of the milky ocean . She marries Vali and bears him a son named Angada . After Vali is presumed dead in a battle with a demon , his brother Sugriva becomes king and appropriates Tara ; however , Vali returns and regains Tara and exiles his brother , accusing him of treachery . 
 When Sugriva challenges Vali to a duel , Tara wisely advises Vali not to accept because of the former 's alliance with Rama — the hero of the Ramayana and an avatar of the god Vishnu — but Vali does not heed her , and dies from Rama 's arrow , shot at the behest of Sugriva . The Ramayana and its later adaptations emphasize Tara 's lamentation . While in most vernacular versions , Tara casts a curse on Rama by the power of her chastity , in some versions , Rama enlightens Tara . 
 Sugriva returns to the throne , but spends his time carousing and fails to act on his promise to assist Rama in recovering his kidnapped wife , Sita . Tara — now Sugriva 's queen and chief diplomat — is then instrumental in reconciling Rama with Sugriva after pacifying Lakshmana , Rama 's brother , who was about to destroy Kishkinda in retribution for Sugriva 's perceived treachery . After this incident , Tara is only mentioned in passing references , as the mother of Angada and Queen of Sugriva , as the story moves from Kishkindha to the climatic battle in Lanka to retrieve Sita . 
 Tara 's intelligence , presence of mind , courage , and devotion to her husband Vali is praised . She is extolled as one of the panchakanya ( " five ( revered ) women " ) , the recital of whose names is believed to dispel sin . 
 = = Birth and early life = = 
 In the Ramayana , Tara is addressed by Vali as the daughter of the vanara physician Sushena . Sometimes , verses are added in the Bala Kanda , the first book of the Ramayana , which describe principal monkeys created by various deities : Vali and Sugriva are described as sons of the king of the gods , Indra and the sun @-@ god Surya respectively ; while Tara is described as the daughter of Brihaspati , the guru of the gods . The 12th century Tamil Ramavataram and the Telugu Ranganatha <unk> state that Tara and Ruma rose , along with other apsaras , from the ocean of milk during its churning by the gods and the demons , to acquire the elixir of life ( amrita ) . In the Theyyam drama tradition of Kerala , the gods tire and request Vali to help in the churning . When Vali just starts churning , Tara rises from the ocean and thus is gifted to Vali . 
 According to the Javanese wayang puppet tradition , Tara ( Dewi Tara ) is the apsara daughter of Indra and his wife <unk> . Her siblings include a sister called Dewi <unk> , the consort of the demon @-@ king of Lanka , Ravana ( <unk> ) and brothers <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 While the Ramayana states that Tara first weds Vali , some Ramayana adaptations sometimes present a polyandrous relationship between Tara , Vali and Sugriva . The Ranganatha Ramayana states that Tara is given to Vali and Sugriva as a reward for helping the gods . A Tamil folk tale tells that after the amrita emerged , Tara rises and is given as a common wife to both Vali and Sugriva . In the Mahabharata , there is a reference to Vali and Sugriva fighting over an unnamed woman , who the mythologist Bhattacharya believes to be Tara . 
 Some Ramayana retellings including some Mahabharata versions , the Narasimha Purana and the Mahanataka portray Tara as originally Sugriva 's wife that Vali snatched . The Thai Ramakien says that the gods give Vali and Sugriva a trident and Tara respectively , but Vali grabs Tara too and marries her . The Balinese dance <unk> and the wayang tradition also tells that Tara was married to Sugriva ( <unk> ) initially , but appropriated by Vali ( <unk> ) . 
 In all versions , Angada is born from Tara 's marriage to Vali . 
 In the Ramayana , Vali goes to fight the demon Mayavi in a cave and instructs Sugriva to close the door of the cave if blood flows out from the cave , implying that he has been killed , but if milk flows out , it indicates that Mayavi is dead . After a year of combat , the dying demon turns the colour of his milky blood to red by sorcery . Sugriva believes that Vali is dead and closes the only opening to the cave . Sugriva also appropriates — sometimes interpreted as marriage — Vali 's " widow " Tara . After Vali returns , rejecting Sugriva 's explanation , he exiles Sugriva and not only re @-@ acquires Tara , but also seizes Ruma , Sugriva 's wife , in retaliation . While Vali 's act of usurping Ruma when her husband is alive is universally criticized by Ramayana commentators , they excuse Sugriva 's taking of Tara , as his wife , as he believed she was widowed . 
 In the wayang variant , Vali ( <unk> ) goes to battle the demon brother @-@ rulers of Kishkinda , <unk> and <unk> , in the cave . Similar to the Ramayana , Sugriva ( <unk> ) presumes Vali dead . The gods crown Sugriva the king of Kishkinda and grant him Tara as a reward for aiding his " dead " brother . Vali returns and instigated by Ravana , seizes Tara and the kingdom . 
 = = Death of Vali = = 
 After his wife Sita is kidnapped by the demon @-@ king Ravana , Rama and his brother Lakshmana wander the forest searching for her . Upon meeting the monkey @-@ warrior Hanuman , they are taken to the exiled Sugriva . Rama forms an alliance with Sugriva , whom he will help ; in order to defeat Vali and regain his wife Ruma and his kingship . In return Sugriva will aid in the search for Sita . As agreed , Sugriva challenges Vali in the wrestling contest , but Rama is unable to distinguish between the two fighters and Sugriva loses the contest . Rama explains his predicament to Sugriva and tells him to re @-@ challenge Vali , but this time , Rama garlands Sugriva to differentiate him from Vali . 
 = = = Tara 's warning = = = 
 In the Kishkindha Kanda of the Ramayana , when Sugriva re @-@ challenges Vali for combat , Tara suggests that " appearances are deceptive " and normally , a combatant would not return so soon to a fight again after a decisive defeat . Having heard of the growing friendship between Sugriva and Rama , she cautions Vali . She urges him to forgive Sugriva , to anoint him as the crown prince , as a diplomatic move , and live peacefully with him , and also befriend the exalted Rama . Tara begs Vali to act on her advice , but acknowledging Tara 's love and devotion , Vali argues that a warrior like him cannot refuse a challenge ; despite this , he promises to not kill Sugriva , but just crush his pride . 
 In the Mahabharata retelling , when Sugriva re @-@ challenges Vali , Tara dissuades Vali from going to the fight and points out that Sugriva may have found a protector . Tara , described as lustrous like the moon , is praised by Vali as one who understands the language of all creatures and is astute to clarify her statement . Tara warns him about Sugriva 's alliance with Rama and the plotting of Vali 's death at the hands of Sugriva and his advisers . Vali not only disregards Tara 's advice , but also suspects Tara of cheating on him with Sugriva . Vali leaves , speaking harshly to Tara . 
 In Kamban 's Ramavataram , Tara warns about Rama 's plans to kill Vali . However , Vali dismisses her warning as unfounded , arguing that Rama , a man of dharma , would not shoot him when he and Sugriva are in a duel . Vali leaves , promising Tara that he will slay Sugriva . 
 = = = Tara 's lamentation = = = 
 In the Bala Kanda Book of the Ramayana , where the whole work is summarized , the lamentation of Tara is mentioned as a significant event . 
 Ignoring Tara 's sound advice , Vali engages in combat with Sugriva . While fighting , Rama shoots an arrow at Vali from behind , fatally wounding him . The news of Vali 's death reaches Tara ; she rushes to him with Angada . She sees monkeys running in terror on the way . They advise her to go back to the palace and consecrate Angada as the king . Tara refuses and says that she needs to see her husband first , leading them back to Vali . Embracing the dying Vali , Tara laments his death while reproaching Sugriva and Rama . Tara accepts Vali 's death as punishment for seizing Ruma and exiling Sugriva . 
 In North Indian manuscripts of the Ramayana , some interpolations elaborate Tara 's lament . Tara mentions the hardships of widowhood and prefers death to it . She blames Rama for unjustly killing Vali and tells him that if they had forged an alliance , Vali could have helped him recover Sita . Tara invokes the power of her chastity and curses Rama so that he will soon lose Sita after he regains her . She declares that Sita will return to the earth . The curse also appears in the North @-@ western Indian manuscripts . In several vernacular adaptations of the Ramayana like the Oriya <unk> Ramayana by Sarala Dasa , Tara 's curse is reiterated . Apart from the usual curse to Rama of his separation from Sita , in the Bengali Krittivasi Ramayana , Tara additionally curses Rama that in his next birth , he will be killed by Vali . The Mahanataka and the Ananda Ramayana narrate that Vali is reborn as the hunter who kills Krishna , Rama 's next birth . 
 Hanuman consoles Tara , telling her to look towards the future of her son , Angada . Hanuman suggests that Angada be consecrated as king , compensating her loss but Tara declares that since his uncle Sugriva is alive , it is inadvisable . With his last breath , Vali confesses his folly of abandoning Sugriva and urges Angada and Tara to support Sugriva . He declares that : 
 " Tara is ... thoroughly knowledgeable about deciding subtle matters and about various portents . Whatever she says is right should be done without doubt , for nothing Tara believes turns out to be otherwise . " 
 Vali requests Rama to take care that Tara is not insulted and advises Sugriva to unquestioningly follow her advice . 
 Vali dies in the embraces of Tara , who mourns his death in a painful and rebuking speech . According to <unk> , Tara 's lament has been significantly expanded , if not added completely , over the centuries . In South Indian manuscripts , some later interpolations elaborate Tara 's lament , in which Tara asks Rama to kill her and lead her to Vali . Rama consoles Tara , saying that she should accept the preordained destiny . Rama guarantees her that her rights and those of Angada will be protected and that she will enjoy " continued comfort " . He tells her that a wife of a hero should not hold personal sorrow . 
 In the Adhyatma Ramayana , while Tara wails over the death of Vali , Rama preaches to her , saying that the body is ephemeral , while only the soul is eternal ; he tells her she should not grieve over the decay of Vali 's body . Tara questions him asking " if the body is destructible , why does one feel pleasure and pain " . Rama informs her that due to <unk> ( egoism ) the mind is chained in bondage to desires . He declares that Tara will remain untouched by karma and be emancipated from the bondage of life . Having heard his sermon , and because she had been devoted to him in a previous birth , Tara thus becomes free of egoism and undergoes self @-@ realization . This discourse of Rama also appears in Tulsidas 's Ramacharitamanasa , but it is curtailed to just two verses and is possibly borrowed from the former text . Rama says that the body is perishable , but the soul is immortal and listening to this , the enlightened Tara bows to Rama and gains the boon of supreme devotion . 
 A Ramayana version portrays her as trying to stabilize the kingdom after Vali 's death in her arms . She declares that " With his last breath , King Vali begs you , his faithful subjects , to follow his brother [ Sugriva ] as your rightful king . " Angada cremates Vali , aided in the funeral rites by Tara and Sugriva . 
 = = Marriage to Sugriva = = 
 After Vali 's death , Sugriva acquires Vali 's kingdom as well as Tara . The Ramayana does not record any formal marriage or any ritual purification — like the trial by fire Sita had to undergo when she is reacquired by Rama from Ravana — that Tara must undertake to marry Sugriva or return to Vali following his return from " the dead " . The lack of the description of formal marriage suggests , according to some critics , that Tara 's relationship to Sugriva is neither widow re @-@ marriage nor polyandry , but simply appropriation by Sugriva . In the references of the coronation of Sugriva as king , Angada is also described as the heir @-@ apparent crown prince , while Tara is mentioned as Sugriva 's wife . The Adhyatma Ramayana declares that Sugriva acquires Tara . 
 While Vali 's acquisition of Ruma — the elder brother taking his younger sister @-@ in @-@ law as wife — is universally condemned ; however as in Tara 's case , the elder brother 's widow marrying her younger brother @-@ in @-@ law seems to be a social norm . <unk> Sharma considers that Rama 's silence on the marriage of Tara and Sugriva does not signal non @-@ acceptance of the act , but rather that he is not concerned with the issue of the sexual relations of the " loose " <unk> <unk> , in which Tara and Ruma exchange hands between the brothers . The Ramayana mentions that Sugriva indulges in sexual pleasures of women , including Ruma and Tara , who " he coveted " . In the Ramayana however , Angada criticizes Sugriva for his lustful marriage to his elder sister @-@ in @-@ law Tara , who is like a mother to him . Though a political marriage , Tara serves Sugriva loyally . 
 The commentaries of the Ramayana suggest that it would be right for Sugriva to marry the widowed Tara . The <unk> of Kataka Madhava <unk> says that this was right as they were animals . The Tilaka by <unk> Bhatt ( <unk> ) justifies Sugriva 's marriage to Tara since Sugriva was her dead husband 's brother . It further states that Tara should remarry , as she did not belong to the first three castes and was young . Tara 's action of taking Sugriva as her husband after Vali 's death is seen as her attempt to secure the futures of Angada and the kingdom . 
 In some rare instances like in Ramavataram , Tara does not remarry . Sugriva treats her as a mother figure and salutes her . 
 = = Tara pacifies Lakshamana = = 
 The rainy season ensues and ends , and Rama in despair fears that Sugriva has forgotten his promise to help him trace and recover Sita . Rama sends Lakshmana to Kishkindha to remind the complacent monarch of his promise to help . Irritated that the city is barricaded , Lakshmana kicks down the city gate and threatens to destroy Sugriva and the monkey kingdom with his divine power . Lakshmana is unable to tolerate Sugriva breaking his vow to Rama , enjoying material and sensual pleasures , while Rama suffers alone . 
 When the agitated Lakshamana — reaching the inner chambers of Sugriva and his harem — reproaches Sugriva for being ungrateful to Rama and forgetting his promise , the critical edition of the Ramayana states that Tara voluntarily intervenes to calm the wrath of Lakshamana . In some Ramayana adaptations and North @-@ western Indian manuscripts of Ramayana , it is Tara , not Ruma in whom Sugriva is engrossed when <unk> arrives . The South Indian manuscripts portray the drunk Sugriva , who is engrossed in lustful revel , as being ignorant of Lakshmana 's anger and sending Tara to pacify him , in some versions , even though she is drunk . Though intoxicated with " half @-@ closed eyes and unsteady gait " , Tara manages to disarm Lakshamana . The intoxication of Tara is also described in the original Ramayana , but in a different context . Tara is described as having made it a habit to visit Sugriva always in a tipsy state , before indulging in the " new pleasures of love " . 
 The Ramayana narrates : Tara says that Sugriva is mindful that through Rama , Sugriva has gained the kingship , Ruma , and herself . She defends Sugriva saying that even the great sage Vishwamitra was tempted by pleasure , Sugriva — a mere forest dwelling monkey — is fatigued by his past hardships and is relaxing , but not partaking in carnal pleasures . Tara informs Sugriva that Vali told her that Ravana is a mighty king with several rakshasas in his service . She reminds Lakshamana that without an ally like Sugriva , Rama cannot defeat such a powerful foe . Tara informs him that Sugriva has summoned all monkey commanders and troops to the capital . The Adhyatma Ramayana also presents a similar description , where Tara , Angada , and Hanuman are sent by Sugriva to calm Lakshmana . In a condensed one @-@ verse description , the Ramacharitamanasa says that Tara and Hanuman were dispatched by Sugriva and were successful in appeasing Lakshmana by singing Rama 's praises . In the Ramavataram , though not Sugriva 's consort , Tara pacifies Lakshamana . The usual epithet of Tara , lustrous as the moon , in the Ramavataram signifies her white clothes , the sign of a widow . Lakshamana is reminded of his own widowed mother seeing Tara . 
 Pacified by Tara and praised further by Sugriva , Lakshmana begs for Sugriva 's pardon for abusing him . It is only through the diplomatic intervention of Tara that the crisis is averted . 
 = = Commentary = = 
 Ahalya Draupadi Kunti Tara Mandodari <unk> 
 panchakanya <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> 
 Remembering ever the virgins five <unk> , Draupadi , Kunti , Tara and Mandodari 
 Destroys the greatest of sins . 
 Orthodox Hindus remember the Panchakanya : the five virgins or maidens , in this daily morning prayer ; though none of them is considered an ideal woman , who could be emulated . Tara , with Ahalya and Mandodari , belong to the Ramayana , while the rest are from the Mahabharata . 
 V. R. Devika , author of Tara : Unsung heroine describes her as a woman " treated like an equal and her opinion mattered as if she were one of the lieutenants . " The Ramayana presents Tara as a woman , intensely loved and respected by Vali , her husband . Her regard is so great that her counsel to Vali sometimes have a commanding tone . Pradip Bhattacharya , author of the book <unk> : Women of Substance describes Tara as " a woman of unusual intelligence , foresight and confidence . " Tara 's devotion to her husband is also praised . 
 = Crossroads to Crime = 
 Crossroads to Crime is a 1960 British crime film , the first and only to be directed by television producer Gerry Anderson , and also the only feature @-@ length film to be made by his production company , AP Films . Known for Thunderbirds and his other " Supermarionation " TV series of the 1950s and 1960s , which were mostly science fiction and featured marionette puppet characters , Anderson accepted an offer from distributors Anglo @-@ Amalgamated to shoot a one @-@ hour , low @-@ budget B movie when no TV network could be found to distribute Supercar . The first of Anderson 's productions to use live actors , Crossroads to Crime is about the investigations of a police constable ( Anthony Oliver ) who , working alone , confronts and brings down a gang of vehicle hijackers . 
 Filmed mainly on location in England between May and June 1960 , the film 's cast includes a number actors who would appear in later Anderson productions . The score was composed by Barry Gray , who – along with other members of the production staff , such as director of photography John Read and editor David Elliott – would also continue his association with Anderson . A box office disappointment , Crossroads to Crime has attracted mostly negative critical opinion since its release in November 1960 . Although praised by one source as a fair " cops and robbers " -style thriller , criticism has been directed at the quality of the writing , editing and set design , as well as its low budget . The film has been broadcast at least once on British TV since the end of its brief theatrical run and was released on DVD in 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While on foot patrol , Police Constable Don Ross ( Anthony Oliver ) chances upon a gang of lorry hijackers operating from the back of a transport café . After seeing Diamond ( George Murcell ) and Johnny ( David Graham ) drive off in a car with the manageress , Connie Williams ( Miriam Karlin ) , apparently being held hostage in the back seat , Ross jumps onto and clings to the vehicle 's side ; however , he is quickly thrown into the road , suffering a head injury . Pretending to have come across the disorientated officer purely by chance , Diamond and Johnny drop Ross off at his home . Later , Williams is brought before the hijackers ' wealthy ringleader , Miles ( Ferdy Mayne ) , who warns her not to betray the gang to the authorities . 
 Despite strong evidence linking the gang to a spate of vehicle thefts along the A1 road , Ross is unable to persuade his superior , Sergeant Pearson ( Arthur Rigby ) , to investigate the café . He therefore pursues the matter on his own , confronting Diamond with his knowledge and forcing the gangster to bribe him in exchange for his silence . When Pearson learns of Ross ' private investigation , he threatens the officer 's job , causing tension between Ross and his wife Joan ( Patricia Heneghan ) . 
 Ross continues to gather evidence while the hijackers capture a shipment of cigarettes worth £ 10 @,@ 000 . As the gang prepare to make one last raid – their target being a £ 20 @,@ 000 haul of nickel ingots – Ross himself joins the operation with the aim of exposing Miles . Having uncovered the truth behind Ross 's actions , Diamond pulls a gun on the officer and chases him through the cellars underneath the café . Wounding Ross with one of his bullets , Diamond eventually corners him , only to be shot dead by Johnny – an undercover detective who has successfully infiltrated the gang . Johnny informs Ross that the authorities are already aware of Miles ' location and that he and the rest of the gang will soon be apprehended . Ross returns to his former life as an ordinary beat constable . 
 = = Production = = 
 Following the success of Four Feather Falls , in 1960 Gerry Anderson approached Anglo @-@ Amalgamated for work after broadcaster Granada Television rejected his plans for a new Supermarionation television series , which would ultimately become Supercar . Known for distributing such films as the Carry On series , Anglo @-@ Amalgamated had helped to commission Four Feather Falls after responding positively to its pilot episode . It often produced low @-@ budget B movies with short running times to increase the amount of British @-@ made content in its output . Desperate for a project from Anglo @-@ Amalgamated 's founders Nat Cohen and Stuart Levy , and keen to establish himself as a film director , Anderson agreed to make such a title without a contract and on a low budget of £ 16 @,@ 250 ( equivalent to £ 337 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) . Alun Falconer , writer of the Peter Sellers thriller Never Let Go and the crime drama The Unstoppable Man , wrote the script . As an in @-@ joke , Four Feather Falls is mentioned in the film 's dialogue when two young men consider a tune from the TV series ' soundtrack while searching for records to play on the transport café 's jukebox . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Impressed by his performance in a West End production of the Agatha Christie murder mystery The Mousetrap , Anderson cast actor Anthony Oliver in the leading role of Police Constable Don Ross . David Graham , who appears as undercover agent Johnny , had starred in a 1957 episode of the TV series Martin Kane , Private Investigator that Anderson had directed . A number of the cast contributed to later Anderson productions : George Murcell ( Diamond ) provided the voices of Professor <unk> and <unk> in the first series of Supercar , while Graham voiced various characters in Stingray and Thunderbirds . 
 Anderson remembers that Ferdy Mayne ( Miles ) occasionally misinterpreted the script . A scene between Oliver and Miriam Karlin ( Connie Williams ) at the café was re @-@ mounted several times when Karlin repeatedly " upstaged " Oliver , changing the arrangement of the scene with the result that the other actor 's face was hidden from the camera . Terence Brook , who was cast based on his " tough @-@ guy " appearance in an advertisement for Strand cigarettes , was doubled by editor and second unit director David Elliott for a stunt sequence in which gang member Harry jumps off the back of a lorry . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming was conducted in and around Slough , Buckinghamshire and Maidenhead , Berkshire over five weeks between May and June 1960 . The Slough location shooting made use of the AP Films Studio itself ( doubling as the gang 's warehouse ) , a café on the other side of the road ( as the main hideout ) , the woods of Burnham Beeches and various points along the A4 road . <unk> Studios in Shepperton , Surrey was also used briefly for filming . On one occasion , when the production had fallen behind schedule and night filming inside the café had run into the morning , the crew attached black drapes to the windows to block out the dawn sunlight and allow the shoot to finish . 
 A number of production staff – including Elliott and John Read , the director of photography – would continue to be employed by AP Films . Anderson 's future wife , Sylvia , performed the uncredited role of continuity supervisor under her maiden name , <unk> . After the filming was completed , Anderson and his first wife divorced and he was remarried to Sylvia . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Composer Barry Gray recorded his musical score in six hours on 21 June 1960 . The music accompanying the opening credits was recycled for the Supercar episode " The White Line " , the Fireball XL5 episode " The Robot Freighter Mystery " and the Captain Scarlet and the Mysterons episode " Manhunt " ; it was also released on the Fanderson soundtrack sampler International Concerto and Other Classic Themes in 2005 . In a biography of Gray , it is suggested that the instrumental character of the soundtrack is emulated by later Anderson TV series , such as Thunderbirds . 
 To secure a family @-@ friendly U certificate from the British Board of Film Classification , Elliott dubbed over expletives such as " bloody " ( which was replaced with the milder " ruddy " ) . In addition , to make the film more accessible to American audiences , references to " quid " ( a British slang term for the pound sterling ) were also changed during post @-@ production . The BBFC certified the film U on 26 July 1960 . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The tagline for the November 1960 theatrical release was " £ 20 @,@ 000 the Prize and Death the Price ! " During the 1960s , the film was incorporated into the Edgar Wallace Mysteries B @-@ movie series ( also distributed by Anglo @-@ Amalgamated ) and re @-@ edited with new opening credits . Crossroads to Crime has been transmitted at least once on British TV since the 1960s . A print of the film is owned by the British Film Institute , which screened it at the National Museum of Photography , Film and Television 's <unk> Cinema , Bradford in 1997 to commemorate Anderson 's career in TV and film @-@ making . 
 Crossroads to Crime was not released in any home video format until a Region 2 DVD was published by Network Distributing in 2013 . The DVD version of the film is introduced by the newer " Edgar Wallace Presents " credits , with the originals provided as an extra feature . Also included is a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes film , Remembering Crossroads to Crime , featuring interviews with the Andersons , editor David Elliott and actor David Graham . The BBFC has re @-@ classified the film PG for " moderate violence " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On top of a poor commercial showing at the box office in 1960 , critical reception to Crossroads to Crime has remained consistently negative . Anderson once called it " possibly the worst film ever made " , while Elliott considers it " awful " . Cohen and Levy were similarly unimpressed and offered Anderson no further commissions for Anglo @-@ Amalgamated . During the promotional campaign for Thunderbirds Are Go , made by AP Films ' successor company Century 21 and released in 1966 , Sylvia Anderson said of the earlier film , " The less said about it , the better " ; she has since commented that it " hardly ranks as one of our best efforts " . A contemporary review in Monthly Film Bulletin was more positive : " Quick off the mark , this modest little thriller soon settles down into a routine ' cops and robbers ' format , efficient if not always too convincing . " Stronger praise came in the October 1960 issue of Kine Weekly , which commended Crossroads to Crime as being " refreshingly free from pretence " , adding : " The film 's moral is lofty , its tender domestic asides encourage feminine interest , and the climax is a corker . " 
 Simon Archer and Marcus Hearn , writers of Anderson 's official biography , describe Mayne as the film 's " saving grace " . However , they consider Gray 's music overbearing and unsuited to the subject matter , commenting , " Its innovative combination of booming brass and twangy electric guitar was possibly intended to evoke the contemporary sounds of Stanley Black or John Barry , but fell wide of the mark on both counts . " Crossroads to Crime is summed up as " irredeemably compromised by its prosaic settings , convoluted screenplay and minuscule budget " . Stephen La Rivière , writer of Filmed in Supermarionation : A History of the Future , notes that it is " remembered with dread " , describing the " wafer @-@ thin " story is a " tedious affair " before criticising the editing for producing a finished version that is " more than a little rough around the edges " . He suggests that what little attention Crossroads to Crime receives is attributable to the fact that the Andersons would go on to produce the highly successful Thunderbirds . 
 = BR Standard Class 6 = 
 The Standard class 6 , otherwise known as the Clan Class , was a class of 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific tender steam locomotive designed by Robert Riddles for use by British Railways . Ten locomotives were constructed between 1951 and 1952 , with a further 15 planned for construction . However , due to acute steel shortages in Britain , the order was continually postponed until it was finally cancelled on the publication of the 1955 Modernisation Plan for the re @-@ equipment of British Railways . 
 The Clan Class was based upon the Britannia Class design , incorporating a smaller boiler and various weight @-@ saving measures to increase the route availability of a Pacific @-@ type locomotive for its intended area of operations , the west of Scotland . The Clan Class received a mixed reception from crews , with those regularly operating the locomotives giving favourable reports as regards performance . However , trials in other areas of the British Railways network returned negative feedback , a common complaint being that difficulty in steaming the locomotive made it hard to adhere to timetables . Reports exist that suggest a degree of the disappointment with these locomotives was attributable to their being allocated to Class 7 work where they were only a Class 6 in reality ; a problem put down to their very similar appearance to the BR Standard Class 7 . 
 Some of the Clan Class locomotives took their names from the Highland Railway Clan Class which was being withdrawn from service at the time , indicating further their intended area of operations . The class was ultimately deemed a failure by British Railways , and the last was withdrawn in 1966 . None survived into preservation , although a project to build the next locomotive in line , number 72010 Hengist , is progressing . The frame plates are presently at Riley & Son Ltd. at Bury awaiting further parts to commence assembly of the frame structure . 
 = = Background = = 
 Under the initial scheme for the creation of a series of British Railways standard locomotives , larger passenger and mixed traffic types were intended to be of the 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific wheel arrangement , the main advantage of which was that it could be fitted with a wide firebox capable of burning a range of coal types ( and qualities ) . The Pacifics were originally intended to be produced in four power groups : 8 , 7 , 6 , and 5 , according to the system of power ratings inherited from the <unk> constituent company . Power groups 7 , 6 & 5 were to be for mixed traffic ( MT ) service . The whole standardisation programme was launched with the building of the 7MT Britannia design in 1951 ; in the event , the <unk> proposal was dropped in favour of an updated version of the highly successful Stanier mixed traffic 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 . It was further appreciated that a Pacific of <unk> power could be built with a high enough route availability to fulfil all remaining requirements ; this had been amply demonstrated by Oliver Bulleid , Chief Mechanical Engineer of the Southern Railway , who had developed a lighter version of his large 3 @-@ cylinder Merchant Navy Class in 1945 . <unk> Bulleid , Oliver Bulleid 's son , advocated that the resultant Light Pacifics had " almost 90 % " route availability on the Southern railway network . The advantages of such a locomotive for use on some of the heavily restricted main lines in Scotland , such as the Dumfries to Stranraer line , had been further demonstrated by the remarkable performance of Light Pacific number <unk> Yeovil on the ex Highland Railway line to Inverness during the British Railways 1948 Locomotive Exchange Trials . During these trials the locomotive showed that a Light Pacific had the potential to revolutionise the timetable over this difficult trunk route . As the general policy of the Railway Executive was to eliminate as far as possible the perceived complication of multi @-@ cylinder locomotives , an equivalent 2 @-@ cylinder Pacific was produced by mounting a smaller and lighter boiler on the standard 7MT chassis . 
 = = Design details = = 
 The arrangement consisted of a modified Standard Class 7 boiler , with smaller steel cylinders and other modifications to save weight and hence increase route availability . The wider firebox , designed for use with cheaper imported coal , was also utilised to spread its weight evenly over the axles , whilst the standard smokebox completed the boiler , which at 225 lbf / in ² was rated at a lower working pressure than that of the Britannias . A single chimney was incorporated into the design , although this was to create problems later on , due to its small diameter , which reduced the choke area that allowed the fierce exhaust blast to escape , reducing the overall efficiency of the locomotive . Similarities with the Britannias rested with the frames , tenders and running gear , allowing easy standardisation of parts common with other classes . The design was fitted with a standard set of two Walschaerts valve gear systems , and all members of the class were equipped with 4 @,@ 200 gallon BR 1 tenders . 
 Following experience of occasional cracks appearing in the frame plates near the spring brackets , had the second batch of Class 6 Standard Pacifics been built , the chassis would have been rearranged to be similar to that used on the solitary Class 8 Pacific . This would have resulted in the locomotive riding on three cast steel Combined Frame Stretcher & Spring Brackets carrying the 10 front @-@ most spring brackets and lengthened spring brackets behind the rear driven axle . These Combined Frame Stretcher & Spring Brackets are often referred to as " sub @-@ frames " . ( Perhaps remarkably , the rearmost spring brackets were not to be integrated into a single cast combined sub @-@ frame / pony truck pivot stretcher . The pony truck pivot stretcher being a separate fabrication ) . 
 Unlike the smaller BR Standards the exhaust steam manifold within the smokebox saddle ( along with the BR Standard Class 7 engines ) was a steel casting that was welded into the saddle . Other original drawings confirm the exhaust steam manifold was a steel fabrication in the smaller BR standards . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 Designed at the drawing offices of Derby Works , the new class was constructed at British Railways ' Crewe Works between 1951 and 1952 . The initial order was for 25 locomotives , but such was the immediacy of demand regarding a smaller version of the Britannias that a batch of 10 was rushed through construction before teething problems had been ironed out at the British Railways testing station at Rugby . No more were constructed due to the steel shortages of the 1950s , and onset of the British Railways Modernisation Plan from 1954 . 
 = = = Initial modifications = = = 
 After initial running @-@ in , <unk> was quoted as discerning a distinct " <unk> " in their steaming , and although they missed their appointment at the Rugby Testing Station due to late completion , some modifications were carried out , most notably to the diameter of the blastpipe , resulting in better steaming and increased power . Initially , the return cranks on the main driving wheels were of LNER block @-@ type as seen on Arthur Peppercorn 's A1s and A2s , but this was changed to the simpler LMS four @-@ stud fitting . With time , enough information was gathered from operational feedback from crews to allow modifications to be applied to the further 15 locomotives on order in the second batch , had they been built . 
 = = = Naming the locomotives = = = 
 The choice of locomotive names came from engineer and future railway historian Ernest Stewart Cox 's desire to replicate the near extinct Ex @-@ Highland Railway 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 Clan Class , therefore representing Scotland in the new organisation . The first of the class , No. 72000 Clan Buchanan , was treated to a special ceremony at Glasgow Central station on 15 January 1952 at which the Lord Provost unveiled its nameplates . Five of these names had previously been used on Highland Railway locomotives . The first five of the planned second batch of 15 locomotives were intended for use on BR 's Southern Region ; these were allocated names Hengist , Horsa , Canute , Wildfire and Firebrand , which had all been previously used on locomotives in southern England . The following ten were to be allocated to Scotland and were allocated further " Clan " names , all of which were new . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The Clan Class had a mixed reception when first introduced to British Railways locomotive crews because there were only 10 locomotives in a class that was mostly confined to the North West of the railway network . This was due to the fact the low number of class members prevented effective training of locomotive crews throughout the nationalised network , and a degree of partisanship amongst crews towards newer locomotives further ensured this . The entire class was also based predominantly at two depots throughout their working lives , these being Glasgow Polmadie and Carlisle Kingmoor , compounding their restricted circulation . However , factors such as these meant that they spent most of their short careers out of the limelight that the Britannias had , resulting in a relatively camera shy class of locomotive . Crews that used them on regular duties displayed their liking for the locomotives , and as such , could produce good work . However , the predominant number of crews who were unfamiliar with the Clans found them difficult to handle , leading to an undeservedly bad reputation . 
 The poor steaming characteristics of the class had been the result of rushed production , which was another factor that led to the bad reputation of the Clan Class . Furthermore , they suffered from complaints regarding a lack of pulling power , although this can be attributed to indifferent handling and firing techniques , which certainly did not help the situation . However , had the Modernisation Plan been delayed , and the correct amount of investment made for undertaking the relevant modifications , such as streamlining of the steam passages and increased diameter blastpipe in a double @-@ chimney layout , the Clans would have been free @-@ steaming workhorses worthy of complementing the ' Britannias ' . Without modification , they were still capable machines when handled properly , as various feats testifying this included regular ascents of Shap and Beattock with 14 carriages without the assistance of a banking locomotive . Other arduous duties that the class frequently undertook were the regular turns on the Settle to Carlisle route , which has some of the steepest gradients and harshest working conditions of any British mainline . The Midland region was always short of top @-@ link motive power and the Clan Class proved to be a very welcome addition to the fleet . 
 The engines also performed on Glasgow – Crewe , Manchester and Liverpool services , Edinburgh – Leeds services , Carlisle – Bradford services , and finally the Stranraer Boat Train workings . As more crews got used to them , the class could be found far from home territory at destinations as diverse as Aberdeen , Inverness , Port Talbot , Newcastle upon Tyne , Bristol , and even London . Clan number <unk> to this day remains the only Pacific locomotive to have worked over the West Highland Line , the result of a successful trial held in early 1956 to ascertain whether a Pacific type could traverse this steeply graded line . Having passed that test , a tribute to the versatility of the class , Clan Cameron was allowed to work special trains for the Clan Cameron gathering that took place in June of that year . 
 In August 1958 , number <unk> was tested on the Eastern Region , being based at Stratford MPD , though a preference for the Britannias meant that this sojourn was short @-@ lived , lasting only a month . The locomotive was utilised on services from London Liverpool Street to Norwich , Clacton , and Harwich . At first they were mistakenly allocated Class 7 duties , in which the Clans , although capable , were not able to keep to their allotted timings . This was part of the trials for the West Highland Line services mentioned earlier , but the locomotive was rejected for such duties on the grounds that they were " no better than a good B1 " . The result of these trials was that as both Standard Class 7 and 8 locomotives were moved north in 1961 after dieselisation started in earnest , the Clans were downgraded to secondary work . Maintenance was initially undertaken at Crewe Works , but responsibility was transferred to Cowlairs Works in the spring of 1958 . More varied work was allocated to them as their reliability improved , including working portions of the Thames @-@ Clyde Express and the Queen of Scots Pullman . They also deputised for the many failed diesel locomotives that plagued the network at the time , and were extensively used on freight workings . 
 Most Scottish and Midland region crews that used them regularly took to the class , and found that if used properly , running times were kept with ease . These crews rated them the most sure @-@ footed of any Pacifics available on the Midland Region , though other crews who tested them claimed that the Clans were prone to slipping , though this was the case with most Pacific designs . Despite the various successes of the Clans , the class was generally regarded as a failure , even with overall performance being just short of Riddles ' aims . However , the premise of all British Railways Standard designs was for a hard working , easily maintained , economical , highly available , and all @-@ purpose locomotive . In these respects , the Clans were highly successful . 
 = = = Proposed second batch and withdrawal = = = 
 Prior to the publishing of the Modernisation Plan advocating the change @-@ over to diesel traction , there was a proposal to construct a second batch of the Clan Class , which was accepted as Crewe Works Order Lot 242 . This authorised the construction of a further batch of fifteen Clans that included modifications to the original design . Originally scheduled for 1952 with frames constructed for 72010 Hengist , acute steel shortages meant that the order was continually rescheduled until the publication of the British Railways Modernisation Plan finally halted the project . The initial name allocations for the new batch would seem to suggest several operating the Kent coast trains , hauling the Golden Arrow and other expresses , so that some of this batch would have been allocated to the Southern Region . 
 The first locomotives to be withdrawn from service were the Polmadie locos 72000 @-@ <unk> en masse in December 1962 , where after being moved first to Glasgow Parkhead and stored , they were eventually moved to Darlington for scrapping in 1964 . Of the Kingmoor allocation , the first , number <unk> , was withdrawn in April 1965 , whilst the final loco was <unk> on 21 May 1966 from Carlisle Kingmoor shed . When No <unk> Clan MacLeod was finally scrapped in August 1966 , it rendered the class extinct . Though this locomotive served British Railways for only fourteen years and three months , it was the longest serving Clan . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 The livery of the Clans was a continuation of the standard British Railways Brunswick green applied to express passenger locomotives after nationalisation , lined in orange and black . The class was given the power classification <unk> . Following on from the Britannias , the Clans were numbered under the British Railways standard numbering system in the <unk> series . The locomotives were numbered between 72000 and <unk> , and featured brass nameplates with a black background , located on the smoke deflectors , though towards the end of their working lives , some nameplates were painted with a red background . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 None of the original engines survived into preservation , however progress is being made by a Registered Charity ( No. <unk> ) , the Standard Steam Locomotive Company , on constructing a new locomotive that would have been the first of the uncompleted batch of 15 , number 72010 Hengist . As 999 BR standard steam locomotives were built in the years up to 1960 the builders consider this is the 1000th locomotive build to be commenced to a British Railways standard design . The Standard Steam Locomotive Company believes that significant costs will be avoided as many of the required cast parts can be made from patterns held by fellow members of the British Railways Standard Locomotive Owners Group ( <unk> ) . 
 At present the group are concentrating on amassing the many frame components at their Midlands storage facility prior to assembly before relocation to the Great Central Railway in Leicestershire . Due to an issue with the Frame plates and horn guides being out of true a new set have been manufactured and delivered to Ian Riley & Son ( Bury ) Ltd ( 24 / 4 / 2014 ) . The remaining components are in a queue with an aim to start frame assembly in late 2014 or 2015 . 
 = Bolesław Prus = 
 Bolesław Prus ( pronounced : [ <unk> <unk> ' <unk> ] ; 20 August 1847 – 19 May 1912 ) , born Aleksander Głowacki , is a leading figure in the history of Polish literature and philosophy and a distinctive voice in world literature . 
 As a 15 @-@ year @-@ old he joined the Polish 1863 Uprising against Imperial Russia . Shortly after his 16th birthday , he suffered severe battle injuries . Five months later he was imprisoned for his part in the Uprising . These early experiences may have precipitated the panic disorder and agoraphobia that would dog him through life , and shaped his opposition to attempting to regain Poland 's independence by force of arms . 
 In 1872 at age 25 , in Warsaw , he settled into a 40 @-@ year journalistic career that highlighted science , technology , education , and economic and cultural development . These societal enterprises were essential to the endurance of a people who had in the 18th century been partitioned out of political existence by Russia , Prussia and Austria . Głowacki took his pen name " Prus " from the appellation of his family 's coat @-@ of @-@ arms . 
 As a sideline he wrote short stories . Succeeding with these , he went on to employ a larger canvas ; over the decade between 1884 and 1895 , he completed four major novels : The Outpost , The Doll , The New Woman and Pharaoh . The Doll depicts the romantic infatuation of a man of action who is frustrated by his country 's backwardness . Pharaoh , Prus ' only historical novel , is a study of political power and of the fates of nations , set in ancient Egypt at the fall of the 20th Dynasty and New Kingdom . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Aleksander Głowacki was born 20 August 1847 in Hrubieszów , now in southeastern Poland , very near the present @-@ day border with Ukraine . The town was then in the Russian @-@ controlled sector of partitioned Poland , known as the " Congress Kingdom " . Głowacki was the younger son of Antoni Głowacki , an estate steward at the village of <unk> , in Hrubieszów County , and <unk> <unk> , née Trembińska . In 1850 , when the future Bolesław Prus was three years old , his mother died ; the child was placed in the care of his maternal grandmother , <unk> Trembińska of Puławy , and , four years later , in the care of his aunt , <unk> <unk> of Lublin . In 1856 Prus was orphaned by his father 's death . In 1862 Prus ' brother Leon , a teacher thirteen years his senior , took him to Siedlce , then to Kielce . 
 Soon after the outbreak of the Polish January 1863 Uprising against Imperial Russia , 15 @-@ year @-@ old Prus ran away from school to join the insurgents . He may have been influenced by his brother Leon , who subsequently became one of the insurrection 's leaders . During the Uprising , Leon developed a mental illness that he would suffer from until his death in 1907 . 
 On 1 September 1863 , twelve days after his sixteenth birthday , Prus took part in a battle against Russian forces at a village called <unk> , four kilometers south of Siedlce . He suffered contusions to the neck and gunpowder injuries to his eyes , and was captured unconscious on the battlefield and taken to hospital in Siedlce . This experience may have caused his subsequent lifelong agoraphobia . 
 Five months later , in early February 1864 , for his role in the Uprising Prus was arrested and imprisoned at Lublin Castle . In early April a military court sentenced him to forfeiture of his nobleman 's status and resettlement on imperial lands . On 30 April , however , the Lublin District military head credited Prus ' time spent under arrest and , on account of the 16 @-@ year @-@ old 's youth , decided to place him in the custody of his uncle Klemens Olszewski . On 7 May Prus was released and entered the household of Katarzyna Trembińska , a relative and the mother of his future wife , Oktawia Trembińska . 
 Prus enrolled at a Lublin gymnasium ( secondary school , where he was a student of Józef Skłodowski , grandfather of future Nobel laureate Maria Skłodowska @-@ Curie ) . Graduating on 30 June 1866 , at nineteen he matriculated in the Warsaw University Department of Mathematics and Physics . In 1868 , indigence forced him to break off his university studies . 
 In 1869 he enrolled in the Forestry Department at the Agriculture and Forestry Institute in Puławy , a historic town where he had spent some of his childhood and which , 15 years later , would be the setting for his striking 1884 micro @-@ story , " Mold of the Earth " , comparing human history with the mutual aggressions of blind , mindless colonies of molds that cover a boulder adjacent to the Temple of the Sibyl . Aleksander was soon expelled from the Institute for his Polish @-@ patriot 's stance in Russian @-@ language class . 
 Henceforth he studied on his own while supporting himself mainly as a tutor . As part of his program of self @-@ education , he translated and summarized John Stuart Mill 's Logic . 
 In 1872 he embarked on a career as a newspaper columnist , while working several months at the Evans , <unk> and Rau Machine and Agricultural <unk> Works in Warsaw . 
 In 1873 Prus delivered two public lectures which illustrate the breadth of his scientific interests : " On the Structure of the Universe , " and " On Discoveries and Inventions . " The latter lecture , subsequently printed as a pamphlet , is a remarkably prescient contribution to what would , in the following century , become the field of <unk> ( " the science of science " ) . 
 = = = Columnist = = = 
 As a newspaper columnist , Prus commented on the achievements of scholars and scientists such as John Stuart Mill , Charles Darwin , Alexander Bain , Herbert Spencer and Henry Thomas Buckle ; urged Poles to study science and technology and to develop industry and commerce ; encouraged the establishment of charitable institutions to benefit the underprivileged ; described the fiction and nonfiction works of fellow writers such as H.G. Wells ; and extolled man @-@ made and natural wonders such as the Wieliczka Salt Mine , an 1887 solar eclipse that he witnessed at Mława , planned building of the Eiffel Tower for the 1889 Paris Exposition , and Nałęczów , where he vacationed for 30 years . 
 His " Weekly Chronicles " spanned forty years ( they have since been reprinted in twenty volumes ) and would help prepare the ground for the 20th @-@ century blossoming of Polish science and especially mathematics . " Our national life , " wrote Prus , " will take a normal course only when we have become a useful , indispensable element of civilization , when we have become able to give nothing for free and to demand nothing for free . " The social importance of science and technology would recur as a theme in his novels The Doll ( 1889 ) and Pharaoh ( 1895 ) . 
 Of contemporary thinkers , the one who most influenced Prus and other writers of the Polish " Positivist " period ( roughly 1864 – 1900 ) was Herbert Spencer , the English sociologist who coined the phrase , " survival of the fittest . " Prus would call Spencer " the Aristotle of the 19th century " and write : " I grew up under the influence of <unk> evolutionary philosophy and heeded its counsels , not those of <unk> or Comtean philosophy . " Prus interpreted " survival of the fittest , " in the societal sphere , as involving not only competition but also cooperation ; and he adopted Spencer 's metaphor of society as organism . He would use this metaphor to striking effect in his 1884 micro @-@ story " Mold of the Earth , " and in the introduction to his 1895 historical novel , Pharaoh . 
 After Prus began writing regular weekly newspaper columns , his finances stabilized , permitting him on 14 January 1875 to marry a distant cousin on his mother 's side , Oktawia Trembińska . She was the daughter of Katarzyna Trembińska , in whose home he had lived , after release from prison , for two years in 1864 – 66 while completing secondary school . The couple adopted a boy , Emil <unk> ( born 11 September 1886 , the son of Prus ' brother @-@ in @-@ law Michał <unk> , who had died on 10 November 1888 ) . Emil would be the model for Rascal in chapter 48 of Prus ' 1895 novel , Pharaoh . On 18 February 1904 , aged seventeen , Emil fatally shot himself in the chest on the doorstep of an unrequited love . 
 It has been alleged that in 1906 , aged 59 , Prus had a son , Jan <unk> Sacewicz . The boy 's mother was Alina Sacewicz , widow of Dr. Kazimierz Sacewicz , a socially conscious physician whom Prus had known at Nałęczów . Dr. Sacewicz may have been the model for Stefan Żeromski 's Dr. <unk> in the novel , <unk> <unk> ( Homeless People ) — a character resembling Dr. Stockman in Henrik Ibsen 's play , An Enemy of the People . Prus , known for his affection for children , took a lively interest in little Jan , as attested by a prolific correspondence with Jan 's mother ( whom Prus attempted to interest in writing ) . Jan Sacewicz would become one of Prus ' major legatees and an engineer , and die in a German camp after the suppression of the Warsaw Uprising of August – October 1944 . 
 Though Prus was a gifted writer , initially best known as a humorist , he early on thought little of his journalistic and literary work . Hence at the inception of his career in 1872 , at age 25 , he adopted for his newspaper columns and fiction the pen name " Prus " ( " Prus I " was his family coat @-@ of @-@ arms ) , reserving his actual name , Aleksander Głowacki , for " serious " writing . 
 An 1878 incident illustrates the strong feelings that can be aroused in susceptible readers of newspaper columns . Prus had criticized the loud , inappropriate behavior of some youths at a lecture about the poet Wincenty Pol . The University of Warsaw students in question demanded that Prus retract what he had written . He refused , and on 26 March 1878 several of them surrounded him outside his home , to which he had returned in the company of two fellow writers ; one of the students , Jan Sawicki , then slapped Prus ' face . Prus summoned police but subsequently declined to press charges . Seventeen years later , during his 1895 visit to Paris , Prus refused , by some accounts , to meet with one of his assailants , blaming them for having " ruined [ his ] life , " perhaps by having caused or exacerbated his agoraphobia . 
 In 1882 , on the recommendation of an earlier editor @-@ in @-@ chief , the prophet of Polish Positivism , Aleksander <unk> , Prus succeeded to the editorship of the Warsaw daily Nowiny ( News ) . The newspaper had been bought in June 1882 by financier Stanisław Kronenberg . Prus resolved , in the best Positivist fashion , to make it " an observatory of societal facts " — an instrument for advancing the development of his country . After less than a year , however , Nowiny — which had had a history of financial instability since changing in July 1878 from a Sunday paper to a daily — folded , and Prus resumed writing columns . He continued working as a journalist to the end of his life , well after he had achieved success as an author of short stories and novels . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 In time , Prus adopted the French Positivist critic Hippolyte Taine 's concept of the arts , including literature , as a second means , alongside the sciences , of studying reality , and he devoted more attention to his sideline of short @-@ story writer . Prus ' stories , which met with great acclaim , owed much to the literary influence of Polish novelist Józef Ignacy Kraszewski and , among English @-@ language writers , to Charles Dickens and Mark Twain . His fiction would also be influenced by French writers Victor Hugo , Gustave Flaubert , Alphonse Daudet and Émile Zola . 
 Prus wrote several dozen stories , originally published in newspapers and ranging in length from micro @-@ story to novella . Characteristic of them are Prus ' keen observation of everyday life and sense of humor , which he had early honed as a contributor to humor magazines . The prevalence of themes from everyday life is consistent with the Polish Positivist artistic program , which sought to portray the circumstances of the populace rather than those of the Romantic heroes of an earlier generation . The literary period in which Prus wrote was ostensibly a prosaic one , by contrast with the poetry of the Romantics ; but Prus ' prose is often a poetic prose . His stories also often contain elements of fantasy or whimsy . A fair number originally appeared in New Year 's issues of newspapers . 
 Prus long eschewed writing historical fiction , arguing that it must inevitably distort history . He criticized contemporary historical novelists for their lapses in historic accuracy , including Henryk Sienkiewicz 's failure , in the military scenes in his Trilogy portraying 17th @-@ century Polish history , to describe the logistics of warfare . It would only be in 1888 , when Prus was forty , that he would write his first historical fiction , the stunning short story , " A Legend of Old Egypt . " This story would , a few years later , serve as a preliminary sketch for his only historical novel , Pharaoh ( 1895 ) . 
 Eventually Prus would compose four novels on what he had referred to in an 1884 letter as " great questions of our age " : The Outpost ( Placówka , 1886 ) on the Polish peasant ; The Doll ( Lalka , 1889 ) on the aristocracy and townspeople and on idealists struggling to bring about social reforms ; The New Woman ( <unk> , 1893 ) on feminist concerns ; and his only historical novel , Pharaoh ( Faraon , 1895 ) , on mechanisms of political power . The work of greatest sweep and most universal appeal is Pharaoh . Prus ' novels , like his stories , were originally published in newspaper serialization . 
 After having sold Pharaoh to the publishing firm of <unk> and Wolff , Prus embarked , on 16 May 1895 , on a four @-@ month journey abroad . He visited Berlin , Dresden , Karlsbad , Nuremberg , Stuttgart and Rapperswil . At the latter Swiss town he stayed two months ( July – August ) , nursing his agoraphobia and spending much time with his friends , the promising young writer Stefan Żeromski and his wife Oktawia . The couple sought Prus ' help for the Polish National Museum , housed in the Rapperswil Castle , where Żeromski was librarian . 
 The final stage of Prus 's journey took him to Paris , where he was prevented by his agoraphobia from crossing the Seine River to visit the city 's southern Left Bank . He was nevertheless pleased to find that his descriptions of Paris in The Doll had been on the mark ( he had based them mainly on French @-@ language publications ) . From Paris he hurried home to recuperate at Nałęczów from his journey , the last that he would make abroad . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 Over the years , Prus lent his support to many charitable and social causes . But there was one event he would come to rue for the broad criticism it brought him : his participation in welcoming Russia 's tsar during Nicholas II 's 1897 visit to Warsaw . As a rule , Prus did not affiliate himself with political parties , as this might compromise his journalistic objectivity . His associations , by design and temperament , were with individuals and select worthy causes rather than with large groups . 
 The disastrous January 1863 Uprising had persuaded Prus that society must advance through learning , work and commerce rather than through risky social upheavals . He departed from this stance , however , in 1905 , when Imperial Russia experienced defeat in the Russo @-@ Japanese War and Poles demanded autonomy and reforms . On 20 December 1905 , in the first issue of a short @-@ lived periodical , <unk> ( Youth ) , he published an article , " Oda do młodości " ( " Ode to Youth " ) , whose title harked back to an 1820 poem by Adam Mickiewicz . Prus wrote , in reference to his earlier position on revolution and strikes : " with the greatest pleasure , I admit it — I was wrong ! " 
 In 1908 Prus serialized , in the Warsaw Tygodnik <unk> ( Illustrated Weekly ) , his novel <unk> ( Children ) , depicting the young revolutionaries , terrorists and anarchists of the day — an uncharacteristically humorless work . Three years later a final novel , <unk> ( Changes ) , was to have been , like The Doll , a panorama of society and its vital concerns . However , in 1911 @-@ 12 the novel had barely begun serialization in the Illustrated Weekly when its composition was cut short by Prus ' death . 
 Neither of the two late novels , Children or Changes , is generally regarded as part of the essential Prus canon , and Czesław Miłosz has called Children one of Prus ' weakest works . 
 Prus ' last novel to meet with popular acclaim was Pharaoh , completed in 1895 . Depicting the demise of ancient Egypt 's Twentieth Dynasty and New Kingdom three thousand years earlier , Pharaoh had also reflected Poland 's loss of independence a century before in 1795 — an independence whose post @-@ World War I restoration Prus would not live to see . 
 On 19 May 1912 , in his Warsaw apartment at 12 Wolf Street ( ulica <unk> 12 ) , near Triple Cross Square , Prus ' forty @-@ year journalistic and literary career came to an end . 
 The beloved agoraphobic author was mourned by the nation he had striven , as soldier , thinker and writer , to rescue from oblivion . Thousands attended his 22 May 1912 funeral service at St. Alexander 's Church on nearby Triple Cross Square ( Plac <unk> <unk> ) and his interment at Powązki Cemetery . 
 Prus ' tomb was designed by his nephew , the noted sculptor Stanisław <unk> . On three sides it bears , respectively , the novelist 's name , Aleksander Głowacki , his years of birth and death , and his pen name , Bolesław Prus . On the fourth side is the Polish @-@ language inscription " <unk> <unk> " ( " Heart of hearts " ) , borrowed from the Latin " Cor <unk> " on the tomb of English Romantic poet Percy Bysshe Shelley in Rome 's Protestant Cemetery . Below this inscription stands the figure of a little girl embracing the tomb — a figure emblematic of Prus ' well @-@ known empathy and affection for children . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 On 3 December 1961 , nearly half a century after Prus ' death , a museum devoted to him was opened in the 18th @-@ century Małachowski Palace at Nałęczów , near Lublin in eastern Poland . Outside the palace is a sculpture of Prus seated on a bench . Another statuary monument to Prus at Nałęczów , sculpted by Alina <unk> , was unveiled on 8 May 1966 . It was at Nałęczów that Prus vacationed for thirty years from 1882 until his death , and that he met the young Stefan Żeromski . Prus stood witness at Żeromski 's 1892 wedding and generously helped foster the younger man 's literary career . 
 While Prus espoused a positivist and realist outlook , much in his fiction shows qualities compatible with pre @-@ 1863 @-@ Uprising Polish Romantic literature . Indeed , he held the Polish Romantic poet Adam Mickiewicz in high regard . Prus ' novels in turn , especially The Doll and Pharaoh , with their innovative composition techniques , blazed the way for the 20th @-@ century Polish novel . 
 Prus ' novel The Doll , with its rich realistic detail and simple , functional language , was considered by Czesław Miłosz to be the great Polish novel . 
 Joseph Conrad , during his 1914 visit to Poland just as World War I was breaking out , " delighted in his beloved Prus " and read everything by the ten @-@ years @-@ older , recently deceased author that he could get his hands on . He pronounced The New Woman ( the first novel by Prus that he read ) " better than Dickens " — Dickens being a favorite author of Conrad 's . Miłosz , however , thought The New Woman " as a whole ... an artistic failure ... " Zygmunt <unk> similarly faulted The New Woman 's loose , tangential construction ; but this , in his view , was partly redeemed by Prus ' humor and by some superb episodes , while " The tragedy of Mrs. Latter and the picture of [ the town of ] <unk> are among the peak achievements of [ Polish ] novel @-@ writing . " 
 Pharaoh , a study of political power , became the favorite novel of Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin , prefigured the fate of U.S. President John F. Kennedy , and continues to point analogies to more recent times . Pharaoh is often described as Prus ' " best @-@ composed novel " — indeed , " one of the best @-@ composed [ of all ] Polish novels . " This was due in part to Pharaoh having been composed complete prior to newspaper serialization , rather than being written in installments just before printing , as was the case with Prus ' earlier major novels . 
 The Doll and Pharaoh are available in English versions . The Doll has been translated into sixteen languages , and Pharaoh into twenty . In addition , The Doll has been filmed several times , and been produced as a 1977 television miniseries , Pharaoh was adapted into a 1966 feature film . 
 In 1897 @-@ 99 Prus serialized in the Warsaw Daily Courier ( Kurier <unk> ) a monograph on The Most General Life Ideals ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , which systematized ethical ideas that he had developed over his career regarding happiness , utility and perfection in the lives of individuals and societies . In it he returned to the society @-@ organizing ( i.e. , political ) interests that had been frustrated during his Nowiny editorship fifteen years earlier . A book edition appeared in 1901 ( 2nd , revised edition , 1905 ) . This work , rooted in Jeremy Bentham 's Utilitarian philosophy and Herbert Spencer 's view of society @-@ as @-@ organism , retains interest especially for philosophers and social scientists . 
 Another of Prus ' learned projects remained incomplete at his death . He had sought , over his writing career , to develop a coherent theory of literary composition . Notes of his from 1886 @-@ 1912 were never put together into a finished book as he had intended . His precepts included the maxim , " Nouns , nouns and more nouns . " Some particularly intriguing fragments describe Prus ' combinatorial calculations of the millions of potential " individual types " of human characters , given a stated number of " individual traits . " 
 A curious comparative @-@ literature aspect has been noted to Prus ' career , which paralleled that of his American contemporary , Ambrose Bierce ( 1842 – 1914 ) . Each was born and reared in a rural area and had a " Polish " connection ( Bierce , born five years before Prus , was reared in Kosciusko County , Indiana , and attended high school at the county seat , Warsaw , Indiana ) . Each became a war casualty with combat head trauma — Prus in 1863 in the Polish 1863 @-@ 65 Uprising ; Bierce in 1864 in the American Civil War . Each experienced false starts in other occupations , and at twenty @-@ five became a journalist for the next forty years ; failed to sustain a career as editor @-@ in @-@ chief ; achieved celebrity as a short @-@ story writer ; lost a son in tragic circumstances ( Prus , an adopted son ; Bierce , both his sons ) ; attained superb humorous effects by portraying human egoism ( Prus especially in Pharaoh , Bierce in The Devil 's Dictionary ) ; was dogged from early adulthood by a health problem ( Prus , agoraphobia ; Bierce , asthma ) ; and died within two years of the other ( Prus in 1912 ; Bierce presumably in 1914 ) . Prus , however , unlike Bierce , went on from short stories to write novels . 
 In Prus ' lifetime and since , his contributions to Polish literature and culture have been memorialized without regard to the nature of the political system prevailing at the time . His 50th birthday , in 1897 , was marked by special newspaper issues celebrating his 25 years as a journalist and fiction writer , and a portrait of him was commissioned from artist Antoni <unk> . 
 The town where Prus was born , Hrubieszów , near the present Polish @-@ Ukrainian border , is graced by an outdoor sculpture of him . 
 A 1982 plaque on Warsaw University 's administration building , the historic Kazimierz Palace , commemorates Prus ' years at the University in 1866 @-@ 68 . Across the street ( Krakowskie Przedmieście ) from the University , in Holy Cross Church , a 1936 plaque by Prus ' nephew Stanisław <unk> , featuring Prus ' profile , is dedicated to the memory of the " great writer and teacher of the nation . " 
 On the front of Warsaw 's present @-@ day ulica <unk> 12 , the site of Prus ' last home , is a plaque commemorating the earlier , now @-@ nonexistent building 's most famous resident . A few hundred meters from there , ulica <unk> <unk> ( Bolesław Prus Street ) <unk> into the southeast corner of Warsaw 's Triple Cross Square . In this square stands St. Alexander 's Church , where Prus ' funeral was held . 
 In 1937 , plaques were installed at Warsaw 's Krakowskie Przedmieście 4 and 7 , where the two chief characters of Prus ' novel The Doll , Stanisław <unk> and Ignacy <unk> , respectively , were deduced to have resided . On the same street , in a park adjacent to the Hotel Bristol , near the site of a newspaper for which Prus wrote , stands a twice @-@ life @-@ size statue of Prus , sculpted in 1977 by Anna <unk> @-@ <unk> ; it is some 12 feet tall , on a minimal pedestal as befits an author who walked the same ground with his fellow men . 
 Consonant with Prus ' interest in commerce and technology , a Polish Ocean Lines freighter has been named for him . 
 For 10 years , from 1975 to 1984 , Poles honored Prus ' memory with a 10 @-@ złoty coin featuring his profile . In 2012 , to mark the 100th anniversary of his death , the Polish mint produced three coins with individual designs : in gold , silver , and an aluminum @-@ zinc alloy . 
 Prus ' fiction and nonfiction writings continue relevant in our time . 
 = = Works = = 
 Following is a chronological list of notable works by Bolesław Prus . Translated titles are given , followed by original titles and dates of publication . 
 = = = Novels = = = 
 Souls in Bondage ( <unk> w <unk> , written 1876 , serialized 1877 ) 
 Fame ( <unk> , begun 1885 , never finished ) 
 The Outpost ( Placówka , 1885 – 86 ) 
 The Doll ( Lalka , 1887 – 89 ) 
 The New Woman ( <unk> , 1890 – 93 ) 
 Pharaoh ( Faraon , written 1894 – 95 ; serialized 1895 – 96 ) 
 Children ( <unk> , 1908 ; approximately the first nine chapters had originally appeared , in a somewhat different form , in 1907 as Dawn [ <unk> ] ) 
 Changes ( <unk> , begun 1911 – 12 ; unfinished ) 
 = = = Stories = = = 
 " The Old Lady 's Troubles " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1874 ) 
 " The Palace and the <unk> " ( " Pałac i <unk> , " 1875 ) 
 " The Ball Gown " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1876 ) 
 " An Orphan 's Lot " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1876 ) 
 " Eddy 's Adventures " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1876 ) 
 " Damned Luck " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1876 ) 
 " The Old Lady 's Casket " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1878 ) 
 " Stan 's Adventure " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1879 ) 
 " New Year " ( " Nowy <unk> , " 1880 ) 
 " The Returning Wave " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1880 ) 
 " <unk> " ( 1880 ) 
 " <unk> " ( 1880 ) 
 " The Convert " ( " <unk> , " 1880 ) 
 " The Barrel Organ " ( " <unk> , " 1880 ) 
 " One of Many " ( " <unk> z <unk> , " 1882 ) 
 " The <unk> " ( " <unk> , " 1882 ) 
 " Him " ( " On , " 1882 ) 
 " Fading Voices " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1883 ) 
 " Sins of Childhood " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1883 ) 
 " Mold of the Earth " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1884 — a striking micro @-@ story that portrays human history as an unending series of conflicts among mindless , blind colonies of molds ) 
 " The Living Telegraph " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " Orestes and <unk> " ( " Orestes i <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " Loves — Loves Not ? ... " ( " <unk> — nie <unk> ? ... " 1884 ) 
 " The Mirror " ( " <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " On Vacation " ( " Na <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " An Old Tale " ( " Stara <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " In the Light of the Moon " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " The Mistake " ( " <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " Mr. <unk> and His Farm " ( " Pan <unk> i jego folwark , " 1884 ) 
 " Musical Echoes " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1884 ) 
 " In the Mountains " ( " W <unk> , " 1885 ) 
 " Shades " ( " <unk> , " 1885 — an evocative meditation on existential themes ) 
 " <unk> " ( 1885 ) 
 " A Strange Story " ( " <unk> historia , " 1887 ) 
 " A Legend of Old Egypt " ( " Z legend dawnego <unk> , " 1888 — Prus ' first piece of historical fiction ; a stunning debut , and a preliminary sketch for his only historical novel , Pharaoh , which would be written in 1894 – 95 ) 
 " The Dream " ( " Sen , " 1890 ) 
 " Lives of Saints " ( " Z <unk> świętych , " 1891 – 92 ) 
 " Reconciled " ( " <unk> , " 1892 ) 
 " A Composition by Little Frank : About Mercy " ( " Z <unk> <unk> <unk> . O <unk> , " 1898 ) 
 " The Doctor 's Story " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1902 ) 
 " Memoirs of a Cyclist " ( " Ze <unk> <unk> , " 1903 ) 
 " Revenge " ( " <unk> , " 1908 ) 
 " Phantoms " ( " <unk> , " 1911 , first published 1936 ) 
 = = = Nonfiction = = = 
 On Discoveries and Inventions : A Public Lecture Delivered on 23 March 1873 by Aleksander Głowacki [ Bolesław Prus ] , Passed by the [ Russian ] Censor ( Warsaw , 21 April 1873 ) , Warsaw , Printed by F. <unk> , 1873 . 
 " Travel Notes ( Wieliczka ) " [ " <unk> z <unk> ( Wieliczka ) , " 1878 — Prus ' impressions of the Wieliczka Salt Mine ; these would help inform the conception of the Egyptian Labyrinth in Prus 's 1895 novel , Pharaoh ] 
 " A Word to the Public " ( " <unk> do <unk> , " 11 June 1882 — Prus ' inaugural address to readers as the new editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the daily , Nowiny [ News ] , famously proposing to make it " an observatory of societal facts , just as there are observatories that study the movements of heavenly bodies , or — climatic changes . " ) 
 " Sketch for a Program under the Conditions of the Present Development of Society " ( " <unk> <unk> w <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> , " March 23 – 30 , 1883 — swan song of Prus ' editorship of Nowiny ) 
 " With Sword and Fire — Henryk Sienkiewicz 's Novel of Olden Times " ( " Ogniem i <unk> — <unk> z <unk> lat <unk> <unk> , " 1884 — Prus ' review of Sienkiewicz 's historical novel , and essay on historical novels ) 
 " The Paris Tower " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1887 — whimsical <unk> involving the Eiffel Tower , the world 's tallest structure , then yet to be constructed for the 1889 Paris Exposition Universelle ) 
 " Travels on Earth and in Heaven " ( " <unk> po <unk> i <unk> , " 1887 — Prus ' impressions of a solar eclipse that he observed at Mława ; these would help inspire the solar @-@ eclipse scenes in his 1895 novel , Pharaoh ) 
 " A Word about Positive Criticism " ( " <unk> o <unk> <unk> , " 1890 — Prus ' part of a polemic with Positivist guru Aleksander <unk> ) 
 " Eusapia Palladino " ( 1893 — newspaper column about <unk> séances held in Warsaw by the Italian Spiritualist , Eusapia Palladino ; these would help inspire similar scenes in Prus ' 1895 novel , Pharaoh ) 
 " From Nałęczów " ( " Z <unk> , " 1894 — Prus ' paean to the salubrious waters and natural and social environment of his favorite vacation spot , Nałęczów ) 
 The Most General Life Ideals ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , 1905 — Prus 's system of pragmatic ethics ) 
 " Ode to Youth " ( " Oda do młodości , " 1905 — Prus ' admission that , before the Russian Empire 's defeat in the Russo @-@ Japanese War , he had held too cautious a view of the chances for an improvement in Poland 's political situation ) 
 " Visions of the Future " ( " <unk> <unk> , " 1909 — a discussion of H.G. Wells ' 1901 futurological book , Anticipations , which predicted , among other things , the defeat of German imperialism , the ascendancy of the English language , and the existence , by the year 2000 , of a " European Union " that would include the Slavic peoples of Central Europe ) 
 " The Poet , Educator of the Nation " ( " Poeta <unk> narodu , " 1910 — a discussion of the cultural and political principles imparted by the Polish poet Adam Mickiewicz ) 
 " What We ... Never Learned from the History of Napoleon " ( " <unk> nas ... nie <unk> <unk> <unk> " — Prus 's contribution to the 16 December 1911 issue of the Warsaw Illustrated Weekly , devoted entirely to Napoleon ) 
 = = Translations = = 
 Prus ' writings have been translated into many languages — his historical novel Pharaoh , into twenty ; his contemporary novel The Doll , into at least sixteen . Works by Prus have been rendered into Croatian by a member of the Croatian Academy of Sciences and Arts , Stjepan Musulin . 
 = = Film versions = = 
 1966 : Faraon ( Pharaoh ) , adapted from the novel Pharaoh , directed by Jerzy <unk> [ 3 ] . 
 1968 : Lalka ( The Doll ) , adapted from the novel The Doll , directed by Wojciech Jerzy Has [ 4 ] . 
 1977 : Lalka ( TV serial , The Doll ) , adapted from the novel The Doll , directed by Ryszard Ber . 
 1979 : Placówka ( The Outpost ) , adapted from the novel The Outpost , directed by Zygmunt <unk> . 
 1982 : <unk> pani Latter ( Mrs. Latter 's Boarding School ) , adapted from the novel The New Woman , directed by Stanisław <unk> . 
 = Eardwulf of Northumbria = 
 Eardwulf ( fl . 790 – c . 830 ) was king of Northumbria from 796 to 806 , when he was deposed and went into exile . He may have had a second reign from 808 until perhaps 811 or 830 . Northumbria in the last years of the eighth century was the scene of dynastic strife between several noble families : in 790 , the then @-@ king Æthelred I attempted to have Eardwulf assassinated . Eardwulf 's survival may have been viewed as a sign of divine favour . A group of nobles conspired to assassinate Æthelred in April 796 and he was succeeded by Osbald : Osbald 's reign lasted only twenty @-@ seven days before he was deposed and Eardwulf became king on 14 May 796 . 
 Little is recorded of Eardwulf 's family , though his father , also named Eardwulf , is known to have been a nobleman . Eardwulf was married by the time he became king , though his wife 's name is not recorded . It is possible he later wed an illegitimate daughter of Charlemagne . In 798 , early in his reign , Eardwulf fought a battle at Billington Moor against a nobleman named Wada , who had been one of those who killed King Æthelred . Wada was defeated and driven into exile . In 801 , Eardwulf led an army against Coenwulf of Mercia , perhaps because of Coenwulf 's support for other claimants to the Northumbrian throne . 
 Eardwulf was deposed in 806 and according to a Frankish record , returned to his kingdom in 808 . No record has survived of his death or the end of his reign : dates from 811 to 830 have been suggested . He was possibly buried at the Mercian royal monastery of Breedon on the Hill , which carries a dedication to Saint Mary and Saint Hardulph , with whom Eardwulf is identified by several historians . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the latter half of the eighth century , the Northumbrian succession included a long series of murdered and deposed kings , as several royal lines contended for the throne . The main lines were those of Eadberht , Æthelwald Moll and Alhred . In the eight years before Eardwulf 's accession , all three of these dynastic lines were involved in the struggle for kingship : on 23 September 788 , King Ælfwald I , grandson of Eadberht , was murdered by the patricius <unk> near Hexham , and Ælfwald 's cousin Osred became king . Osred , who was of Alhred 's line , was deposed after a year , and Æthelred , son of Æthelwald Moll , who had been deposed in 778 at a young age , was restored to the kingship , resuming the title Æthelred I. 
 Some Anglo @-@ Saxon kings are known to have been killed by their households or in open warfare against rivals , but overall the record is very sparse . The evidence as regards the deposition of kings is equally limited . Only two eighth @-@ century depositions offer any context , those of Æthelwald Moll in Northumbria and Sigeberht of Wessex . In both cases the decision is presented as that of some form of council . 
 This record of disputed succession was by no means unique to Northumbria , and the kingdoms of Mercia and Wessex experienced similar troubles during the eighth and ninth centuries . In Wessex , from the death of Centwine in 685 to Egbert 's seizure of power in 802 , the relationships between successive kings are far from clear and few kings are known to have been close kinsmen of their predecessors or successors . The same may be true of Mercia from the death of Ceolred in 716 until the disappearance of the Mercian kingdom in the late ninth century . 
 Kings did not rule alone , but rather governed together with the leading churchmen and nobles . While Northumbria lacks the body of charters which shed light on the institutions of the southern Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , sufficient evidence survives for historians to reconstruct some aspects of Northumbrian political life . The evidence for Northumbria survives largely in Latin documents , and these use the words dux and patricius to describe the leading noblemen of the kingdom . The word dux is usually translated by the Old English word ealdorman . The historian Alan Thacker estimates that there were about eight men holding the title of dux in late Northumbria . The title patricius is usually translated as patrician , which ultimately means noble , but in the latter days of the Roman Empire represented a high @-@ ranking position , second only to the emperor . The meaning of the title in Northumbria is unclear , but it appears that there was only one patricius . While it may be simply an alternative to dux , it might represent a position approximating to that of the Mayor of the Palace in late Merovingian Francia . 
 The church in Northumbria was one of the major landowners , perhaps second only to the king . At the head of the Northumbrian church was the Archbishop of York , an office held by Eanbald I to 796 , Eanbald II until some time after 808 , and then by Wulfsige to around 830 . Immediately below the archbishop were three bishops : the bishop of Lindisfarne , the bishop of Hexham and the bishop of Whithorn . The typically long term of office of senior clerics meant that kings often had to work with men appointed by their predecessors , with whom their relations might be difficult . 
 = = Relations with other states = = 
 Northumbria 's southern neighbour Mercia was , under the rule of kings Æthelbald , Offa and Coenwulf , the dominant kingdom in Anglo @-@ Saxon England . Offa , the greatest of the three , ruled Mercia until 796 , followed soon after by Coenwulf . Offa 's dominance was secured in part by marriage alliances with the other major kingdoms : Beorhtric of Wessex and Æthelred of Northumbria were married to his daughters . Further afield , Charlemagne , the pre @-@ eminent ruler in the Christian West , appears to have taken an active interest in Northumbrian affairs . Charlemagne initially ruled Francia and parts of Italy , but by 796 had become master of an empire which stretched from the Atlantic Ocean to the Great Hungarian Plain . He was a staunch defender of the Papacy , and in the popes and the church hierarchy he had allies whose influence extended to Northumbria and beyond . Events in southern Britain to 796 have sometimes been portrayed as a struggle between Offa and Charlemagne , but the disparity in their power was enormous , and Offa and then Coenwulf were clearly minor figures by comparison . 
 Early evidence of friendly relations between Charlemagne and Offa is tempered by signs of strain . Charlemagne sheltered two exiles from England at his court : Odberht of Kent ( probably Eadberht Praen ) and Egbert of Wessex . Eadberht Praen ruled the Kingdom of Kent for a short time after Offa 's death , but was deposed by Coenwulf . Egbert was more successful , taking and holding the throne of Wessex in 802 . It is clear that Mercian and Frankish interests could not always be reconciled and Frankish policy then moved towards support for Offa 's opponents . To Charlemagne this primarily meant Northumbria : according to Patrick Wormald , " Charlemagne ... saw England as if it were ruled by two kings only : Æthelred ruling Northumbria and Offa ruling everything to the south " . Frankish support for Northumbria thus appears to have been driven by a desire to counter Mercian influence in southern Britain , an area with long @-@ standing ties to Francia . It has also been suggested that Charlemagne 's interest in Northumbria was motivated by a desire for co @-@ operation against Viking raiders , who had first appeared in Northumbria in the early 790s . Alternatively it may be that Charlemagne 's conception of the sphere of his authority included Britain , which had once been part of the Roman Empire . 
 Initially , both Charlemagne and Offa appear to have shared a common interest in supporting King Æthelred , Offa 's son @-@ in @-@ law . Shortly before Æthelred was murdered in 796 , an embassy from Francia delivered gifts for the king and his bishops . When Charlemagne learned of Æthelred 's killing he was enraged , called the Northumbrians " that treacherous , perverse people ... who murder their own lords " , and threatened retribution . His ambassadors , who had travelled on to Ireland and were then returning home , were ordered back to Northumbria to recover the presents . Charlemagne in time became a supporter of Eardwulf . Eardwulf is said to have married to one of Charlemagne 's daughters , but if this is correct she must have been illegitimate , as the marriages of all the legitimate daughters are known . Coenwulf , on the other hand , who became king of Mercia shortly after Eardwulf 's accession , is recorded as having fought with Eardwulf in 801 . 
 = = Early life and accession = = 
 Eardwulf was not , so far as is known , connected to any of the factions that had been warring for the throne up to the mid @-@ 790s . Nothing is definitely known of his background , though Symeon of Durham 's History of the Kings , an early twelfth @-@ century work based on the lost late tenth @-@ century chronicle of Byrhtferth , records that his father 's name was also Eardwulf , and both father and son are given the title dux . Historian Barbara Yorke has proposed that he was a descendant of one <unk> who ( according to Symeon of Durham ) was killed in 740 on the orders of King Eadberht . This <unk> may be identified with King Eadwulf 's son of the same name . Eardwulf 's father may have been one of the two <unk> whose deaths are recorded by Symeon of Durham in 774 and 775 . 
 Eardwulf appears to have been an enemy of Æthelred I. He first appears in the historical record circa 790 , when Symeon of Durham reports that : 
 Eardulf was taken prisoner , and conveyed to Ripon , and there ordered by the aforesaid king [ Æthelred ] to be put to death without the gate of the monastery . The brethren carried his body into the church with Gregorian chanting , and placed it out of doors in a tent ; after midnight he was found alive in the church . 
 A letter from Alcuin to Eardwulf suggests that this fortunate recovery was seen as being miraculous . 
 Eardwulf 's whereabouts after his recovery are not known . In surviving King Æthelred 's anger he was more fortunate than Ælfwald 's sons , who were drowned on Æthelred 's orders in 791 . Osred returned from exile but was betrayed , and killed by Æthelred 's command on 14 September 792 . Æthelred himself was assassinated on 18 April 796 , perhaps at Corbridge , by conspirators led by the dux Ealdred . Æthelred was followed as king by Osbald , whose antecedents are unknown : he was deposed after twenty @-@ seven days and fled to the land of the Picts with a few supporters . 
 = = King = = 
 Eardwulf became king on 14 May 796 . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records that he was consecrated by Eanbald I , Archbishop of York , and Bishops Æthelberht , <unk> and <unk> , at York Minster on 26 May 796 . 
 Eardwulf was evidently married before he became king , as Alcuin reproached him for abandoning his wife for a concubine soon after his coronation . This strained relations with the new Archbishop Eanbald II — Eanbald I had died in the year of Eardwulf 's coronation . Alcuin , while condemning secular oppression of the church , affected surprise that while the Archbishop Eanbald was travelling he was accompanied by a large retinue , including soldiers , and that he received and protected the king 's enemies . Eanbald was presumably in conflict with Eardwulf over property , but it is likely that he also supported rivals for Eardwulf 's throne . 
 Although Æthelred had been Eardwulf 's enemy , Æthelred 's killers proved to be equally hostile to Eardwulf . In 798 a dux named Wada , who was one of those who had killed King Æthelred , fought with Eardwulf on Billington Moor , near Whalley , Lancashire . Wada was put to flight and may have gone into exile in Mercia . He may have hoped to restore Osbald to the throne . The evidence for Osbald 's continued ambition is a letter that Alcuin wrote to him , probably in 798 , in which Alcuin attempted to dissuade Osbald from further interventions in Northumbrian affairs . Alcuin 's arguments appear to have succeeded , since Osbald is known to have become an abbot by 799 ( when his death is recorded ) , implying that he had given up his ambitions . 
 Two further challenges to Eardwulf are recorded within the next two years , both apparently from among the noble lines that had been fighting for the throne over the previous decades . In 799 , a dux named Moll was killed by Eardwulf 's " urgent command " . Moll 's name has suggested that he was a kinsman of the late King Æthelred , whose father was Æthelwald Moll . The following year , Ealhmund , " the son of King Alhred , as some say " , was killed by Eardwulf 's men . Ealhmund was remembered at Derby , in the neighbouring kingdom of Mercia , as a saint . 
 King Coenwulf of Mercia may have supported the unfortunate Ealhmund , and Symeon of Durham wrote that in 801 : 
 Eardwulf , king of the Northumbrians , led an army against Coenwulf , king of Mercians , because he had given asylum to his enemies . He also , collecting an army , obtained very many auxiliaries from other provinces , having made a long expedition among them . At length , with the advice of the bishops and chiefs of the Angles on either side , they made peace through the kindness of the king of the Angles . 
 This settlement ended open warfare , but Eardwulf was deposed in 806 , in unknown circumstances . Letters between Charlemagne and Pope Leo III suggest that Coenwulf had a hand in Eardwulf 's removal . According to the thirteenth @-@ century chronicler Roger of Wendover , Eardwulf was replaced by King Ælfwald II , about whom nothing else is known from the written sources , although coins issued in his reign have survived . 
 As the case of Ælfwald shows , while the written sources for later Northumbria are few and often written down centuries after the events they describe , archaeological evidence from coinage is independent of the surviving annals . Anglo @-@ Saxon coins usually named the king on whose orders they were issued and sometimes named the mint where they were struck — Northumbrian coinage names York as the place of issue — and the moneyer who produced them . Their weight and silver content can be compared with other reigns , providing a hint of the prevailing economic conditions , and the style and size may also throw light on cultural influences when the coins are compared with those of neighbouring kingdoms and with other forms of art . The evidence of Northumbrian coinage is particularly valuable in the ninth century , when contemporary written evidence all but disappears . 
 From the 740s until the end of the Northumbrian kingdom , coins were issued by most kings , although in variable quantities . Until recently no coins from Eardwulf 's reign were known , which suggested that it may have been a time of instability , or perhaps that the kingdom was impoverished by the payment of tribute to Offa and Coenwulf of Mercia . It is now known that the issue of new coins continued during Eardwulf 's reign , as two of his coins were identified in the 1990s . Issues of new currency appear to have been limited under Eardwulf , and significant numbers of Northumbrian coins are not again attested until the reign of Eardwulf 's son Eanred . 
 = = Exile and return = = 
 Like many of his predecessors , Eardwulf took to exile when he was deposed . Unlike kings with ties to Lindisfarne , who appear to have chosen exile among the Picts , Eardwulf was linked to Ripon and chose a southerly exile . The next reports of Eardwulf are in Frankish sources : 
 Meanwhile the king of the Northumbrians from the island of Britain , Eardwulf by name , being expelled from his kingdom and native land , came to the emperor while he was still at Nijmegen , and after he had made known the reason for his coming , he set out for Rome ; and on his return from Rome he was escorted by envoys of the Roman pontiff and of the lord emperor back into his kingdom . At that time Leo III ruled over the Roman church , and his messenger , the deacon Ealdwulf from that same Britain , a Saxon by race , was sent to Britain , and with him two abbots , <unk> the notary and <unk> of St. Omer , sent by the emperor . 
 A surviving letter of Leo III to Charlemagne confirms that Eardwulf visited Rome and stayed at Charlemagne 's court . 
 The Frankish source is clear that Eardwulf was " returned to his kingdom " , but surviving Anglo @-@ Saxon sources have no record of a second reign . Historians disagree as to whether Ælfwald was replaced by Eardwulf , who would thus have reigned a second time from 808 to 811 or 812 , or whether the reign of Eardwulf 's son Eanred began in 808 . 
 Recent studies , based on the discovery of a penny of Eanred for which a date no earlier than c . 850 is proposed , suggest a very different dating for ninth @-@ century Northumbrian kings . From this , it is argued that Eardwulf 's second reign ended circa 830 , rather than in the years soon after 810 , and that the reigns of subsequent kings should be re @-@ dated accordingly : Eanred from 830 to 854 , Æthelred II from 854 to 862 , <unk> in 858 , and <unk> from 862 to 867 . 
 Eardwulf is identified by historians with the Saint Hardulph or <unk> , to whom the Mercian royal church of Saint Mary and Saint Hardulph at Breedon on the Hill is dedicated . The connection , though unproven , has been made by several historians and is uncontroversial . Supporting evidence comes from a twelfth @-@ century list of the burial places of saints compiled at Peterborough . This calls the Saint Hardulph to whom Breedon was dedicated " <unk> rex " — King Eardwulf — and states that he was buried at Breedon . 
 A panelled stone structure in the church , carved with processions of bearded and robed figures under arches , seems to reproduce details found in the Book of Cerne , a work associated with Bishop Æthelwold of Lichfield ( 818 – 830 ) . The panels , which may originally have been the outer part of a sarcophagus built to hold the remains of a high status person such as Saint Hardulph , are dated by their similarity to the illustrations in the Book of Cerne to the first third of the ninth century . According to a medieval calendar of saints , the Benedictine monks at Breedon celebrated Hardulph 's feast day on 21 August . 
 The death of Eardwulf is not recorded . Although he had faced considerable opposition and had been driven into exile , he succeeded in founding a dynasty . His son Eanred and grandson Æthelred ( II ) ruled Northumbria for most of its remaining existence as an independent kingdom . 
 = Hurricane Edna = 
 Hurricane Edna was a deadly and destructive major hurricane that impacted the United States East Coast in September of the 1954 Atlantic hurricane season . It was one of two hurricanes to strike Massachusetts in that year , the other being Hurricane Carol . The fifth tropical cyclone and storm of the season , as well as the fourth hurricane and second major hurricane , Edna developed from a tropical wave on September 2 . Moving towards the north @-@ northwest , Edna skirted the northern Leeward Islands as a tropical depression before turning more towards the west . The depression attained tropical storm status to the east of Puerto Rico and strengthened further to reach hurricane status by September 7 . The storm rapidly intensified and reached its peak intensity of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) north of the Bahamas before weakening to Category 2 status near landfall in Massachusetts on September 11 . Edna transitioned into an extratropical cyclone in Atlantic Canada before its remnants dissipated in the northern Atlantic . 
 Edna caused 20 fatalities throughout its lifetime as a tropical cyclone , as well as a moderate amount of damage . It first caused rainfall @-@ induced flooding in Puerto Rico , and it later brushed the Bahamas . High waves affected the coastline of North Carolina . Edna resulted in the heaviest day of rainfall in New York City in 45 years , while strong waves cut off Montauk from the remainder of Long Island . There were six highway deaths in the state , and $ 1 @.@ 5 million in crop damage . There were widespread evacuations in southern New England , after Hurricane Carol struck the same area only 11 days prior . Strong winds caused extensive power outages for 260 @,@ 000 people , including nearly all of Cape Cod . Edna became the costliest hurricane in the history of Maine , where the hurricane caused flooding that washed out roads and rail lines . There were 21 deaths in New England , eight of whom in Maine due to drownings . Later , high winds severely damaged crops in Atlantic Canada . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Edna originated in an easterly tropical wave which modern research has estimated to have spawned a tropical depression east of the Caribbean Sea on September 2 , 1954 . The low pressure area was not observed in real time until several days later , on September 5 , while situated between Puerto Rico and The Bahamas . Near the disturbance , a ship reported heavy squalls and wind gusts to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Additionally , the island of Puerto Rico experienced torrential rainfall in association with the storm . Operationally , the system was not recognized to have organized into a tropical cyclone until September 6 ; it is listed in the Atlantic hurricane database as achieving tropical storm intensity early on September 4 . Edna proceeded west @-@ northwestward , bypassing Hispaniola to the north , and by September 7 it had strengthened into a minimal hurricane on the present @-@ day Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 Initially a rather small storm in terms of physical size , the hurricane steadily intensified throughout the day . Reconnaissance aircraft flew into the storm frequently to take observations on the cyclone 's structure . The center of circulation passed near San Salvador Island , and on September 8 , Edna further strengthened into a Category 3 major hurricane while broadly curving northward . Reconnaissance flights indicated a maturing and evolving eye , approximately 20 mi ( 32 km ) in diameter . The overall circulation increased in size as banding features became more well @-@ defined . The storm reached its peak winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) and maintained them for over two days . However , reconnaissance data was at times inconsistent and inaccurate , leading to suspicious and unlikely jogs in the storm 's track . The cause of these errors is attributed to misinterpretation of radar information . 
 Midday on September 9 , while tracking nearly due north , Edna 's minimum central barometric pressure fell to 968 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) , but is believed to have leveled off shortly thereafter . The radius of hurricane @-@ force winds increased , and the storm may have become asymmetrical , with convection concentrated to the right of the center , although this was not confirmed due to a lack of data . An approaching weak frontal boundary spread overcast conditions over the Eastern Seaboard north of North Carolina . By September 10 , Edna was located just south of Cape Hatteras , passing east of the Outer Banks early the next day . As the hurricane accelerated to the northeast , it began to deteriorate and weaken . Closely following the recent track of Hurricane Carol , Edna approached New England , but diverged from Carol 's track upon skirting the eastern coast instead of moving inland . Weather reporting stations in the Mid @-@ Atlantic States reported rapid clearing as the storm gained latitude , while heavy rain and gusty winds enveloped New England . On September 11 , Edna passed directly over Cape Cod after weakening to Category 2 status , although surface weather analysis depicted a central pressure of 950 mbar ( 28 inHg ) . It subsequently tracked just east of Eastport , Maine . The storm continued northeastward into Atlantic Canada and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone , although the exact time of this transition is unknown . The storm 's extratropical remnants reemerged into the northern Atlantic after crossing eastern Canada and were last noted on September 15 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 In advance of the storm , hurricane warnings were issued for parts of The Bahamas and South Florida , as winds of up to hurricane force were expected . Farther to the north , storm warnings were posted from Myrtle Beach , South Carolina to Eastport , Maine . Along the coast of North Carolina and the Virginia Capes , where gale @-@ force winds and high tides were expected , residents were advised to take precautions . In New York City , it was to be considered " a miracle " if Edna did not strike the area directly , and the storm was predicted to be one of the most severe hurricanes in the history of the New York Weather Bureau . In the 24 hours before the storm struck , New York Telephone received 361 @,@ 392 calls , which was the third highest volume the company ever recorded . In the Montauk area , 500 residents evacuated their homes by early September 11 , while all businesses closed in Westerly , Rhode Island . Businesses in Providence , which was flooded during Hurricane Carol , prepared sandbags to mitigate flooding . Most beach homes had closed for the summer season , and hundreds of people who lived along the southern New England coast evacuated . Other threatened areas were evacuated , including Milford , Connecticut , where 3 @,@ 000 families left their homes . Sirens alerted other residents to remain indoors and drivers to stay off the highways . Along the coast of Connecticut , bus and train service was halted . A state of emergency was declared in New London , and mail service was canceled in some areas . On September 10 , the Navy ordered the evacuation of hundreds of warships and aircraft . Coast Guard planes evacuated from Rhode Island and Massachusetts . About 40 Red Cross shelters , which were opened during Hurricane Carol 11 days prior , were reopened to provide food . Officers at Fort Devens sent 40 trucks with cots , blankets , and generators to areas expected to be struck by the storm . Advance warning was credited with a lower death toll in Edna than Carol . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = West Indies = = = 
 On September 7 , a bulletin from San Juan , Puerto Rico reported extensive , flood @-@ inducing rainfall along the western and southern coasts of the island . Over 10 in ( 250 mm ) of precipitation fell within a two @-@ day period . The easternmost islands of The Bahamas , including San Salvador , experienced gale @-@ force winds and high seas . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Edna 's path near North Carolina was about 50 mi ( 80 km ) east of Carol . Winds blew at up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) along the shore , accompanied by strong surf , although no fatalities or major property damage resulted from the storm . Tides at Norfolk , Virginia were only slightly above normal during the storm 's passage to the east , and winds were moderate in strength . Peripheral rainfall in Maryland and Delaware eased drought conditions . In coastal New Jersey , northwesterly winds reached 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , and Long Branch received around 4 in ( 100 mm ) of rainfall . Further north , Long Island also suffered moderate to strong winds , blowing from the north at their peak . A Weather Bureau station in New York City recorded 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) winds midday on September 11 . Rainfall reached 4 @.@ 98 in ( 126 mm ) in the city , becoming the wettest day in 45 years . The storm cut off Montauk Point on eastern Long Island at its height , prompting the Coast Guard to temporarily relocate 500 families . Rainfall in Suffolk County amounted to 9 in ( 230 mm ) . Crop damage in New York was estimated at $ 1 @.@ 5 million , and six people died in the city due to highway deaths . 
