 When Edna struck New England , it was moving quickly to the northeast at 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . It struck eastern Massachusetts about 100 mi ( 160 km ) east of where Hurricane Carol struck only a week prior . Hurricane @-@ force winds affected much of the coastline , with peak gusts of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) on Martha 's Vineyard offshore Massachusetts , and 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) on Block Island offshore Rhode Island . Along the coast , wind gusts peaked at 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) at Hyannis , Massachusetts . The high winds caused widespread power outages , including for nearly all of Cape Cod . The storm surge reached 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) along the Massachusetts coast , causing flooding and heavy boating damage . Further west , there was lesser coastal flooding , although heavy rainfall after previously wet conditions caused urban and stream flooding ; rainfall peaked at around 11 in ( 280 mm ) . Damage in Connecticut and Rhode Island was mainly in areas already affected by Hurricane Carol . Several streets were washed out , and rivers rose above flood stage . 
 Damage was heaviest in Maine , estimated at $ 25 million , which made Edna the costliest hurricane in the state 's history . Strong wind gusts , reaching 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) , and heavy rainfall , peaking at 7 @.@ 49 in ( 190 mm ) , extended into the state ; these were considered the heaviest rains in the state in 58 years . The Androscoggin and Kennebec rivers both reached above @-@ normal levels , causing flooding and washing out roads . In Augusta , the Kennebec River reached 20 @.@ 5 ft ( 6 @.@ 2 m ) , which was 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) above the peak level after the spring snow melt . Flooding entered basements , affected fields , and covered bridges . In West Peru , the floods washed out a bridge that was under construction . In addition , the winds downed trees , which blocked widespread roads and caused power outages in 18 % of the state . Washed out roads and rail lines cut off the state from the rest of New England . In Lewiston , a trapped car in 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) deep waters required rescue by boat . Another stranded family was rescued after seven hours in Unity , in which one child and a rescuer were killed . There were eight deaths in the state , most of whom related to cars being swept away by floods . 
 There were 21 deaths in New England , including eight drownings in Maine . Throughout the United States , damage was estimated at $ 42 @,@ 815 @,@ 000 . Damage was less from Edna than from Carol , primarily due to its strongest winds not occurring at the time of highest tides , and its track farther to the east . Throughout New England , 260 @,@ 000 people lost power , most of whom in Massachusetts . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 While rapidly losing characteristics of a tropical cyclone , Edna traversed central New Brunswick . In contrast with the smaller , more compact Hurricane Juan , which struck Atlantic Canada in 2003 , Edna was a much larger storm with strong winds extending hundreds of miles from the center . The tightest pressure gradient was focused on the east side of the storm , over mainland Nova Scotia . Edna brought down approximately 700 million board feet of timber , and although the amount of trees the storm destroyed was comparable to that of Juan , its effects were more widespread and not as locally severe . Sustained winds reached 160 km / h ( 99 mph ) at Yarmouth and 95 km / h ( 59 mph ) at Halifax . The intense winds downed power and telephone lines and destroyed many barns ; one such structural collapse killed a man , and livestock were lost throughout the region . Other damage to property included several fallen chimneys , a toppled church steeple in Pictou , and roof failures . In Kentville , an apartment building undergoing construction was destroyed . Approximately $ 3 million CAD in apple crops were decimated , while in Yarmouth , both live lobsters and lobster pots were lost . Debris blocked streets across the province , and at least 800 m ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) of road was washed out . Damage in Nova Scotia totaled $ 6 million CAD : in the aftermath , Yarmouth and Kentville declared states of emergency . 
 In New Brunswick , the storm dropped 130 mm ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) of rain and produced winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Wind damage was less significant than in Nova Scotia , although still evident in structures and utility lines . A theatre in McAdam was destroyed , and several people were injured across the area . The storm flooded streets in St. Stephen . About 400 salmon , valued at $ 10 @,@ 000 CAD , were lost in Dalhousie . Total damage in the province is estimated at $ 1 @.@ 78 million CAD . Elsewhere , power outages were reported in Montreal . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In Maine , 20 counties were declared states of emergency . After the storm , Southern New England Telephone sent a crew of 100 workers in 50 trucks to Maine to assist in restoring power . Power was quickly restored , and in some places the outages were less severe than during Carol . For only the third time in its history , the Portland Evening Express was not delivered due to the storm . Most primary roads were re @-@ opened by two days after the storm , although rural areas and rail lines took longer to repair . There was a temporary travel ban for all but emergency vehicles in Maine due to washed out roads . Affecting densely populated portions of the state , Edna struck the day before the governor race between Republican Burton M. Cross and Democratic Edmund Muskie . Before the election , politicians commented how a suppressed turnout as a result of the storm would benefit Muskie , in a state where no Democrat had won governorship since 1934 . Muskie ultimately won the election in a close race , which saw a lower turnout than 1950 , likely due to Edna suppressing the rural , Republican turnout . 
 After a survey from the Federal Civil Defense Administration described damage as " tremendous " , President Dwight Eisenhower declared portions of Maine as a disaster area , which allocated federal funding for relief . The president also authorized additional aid to Rhode Island and Massachusetts due to additional damage there from Edna . Due to the severity of the storm , the name Edna was retired after this usage , for ten years before it was reintroduced for the 1968 season . At the 1969 Interdepartmental Hurricane Conference , it was proposed that the names Edna , Carol , and Hazel be permanently retired because of their importance to the research community . Despite the proposal , the name Edna was added to the 1972 naming list , but was ultimately unused . 
 = Tom Johnson ( bareknuckle boxer ) = 
 Tom Johnson ( born Tom Jackling ; c . 1750 – 21 January 1797 ) was a bare @-@ knuckle fighter who was referred to as the Champion of England between 1784 and 1791 . His involvement in pugilistic prizefighting is generally seen to have coincided with a renewed interest in the sport . Although a strong man , his success was largely attributed to his technical abilities and his calm , analytical approach to despatching his opponents . But Johnson was less prudent outside the ring ; he was a gambler and considered by many of his acquaintances to be an easy mark . He is thought to have earned more money from the sport than any other fighter until nearly a century later , but much of it was squandered . 
 Johnson 's first fight probably took place in June 1783 against Jack Jarvis , after he had unintentionally slighted the wagon driver and professional fighter . Jarvis challenged Johnson to fight him as a matter of honour , and was comprehensively beaten in the resulting match . Johnson 's success encouraged him to take up the sport professionally . By June 1784 he had declared himself to be the champion , although whether of England or the world is uncertain . 
 In the later years of his fight career , and for some time after it ended , he acted as a second for other prominent fighters and ran a public house . His dissipation outside the ring appears to have resulted in his decision to leave England for Ireland , where he continued to tutor other boxers but eventually resorted to gambling to earn a living . He died a broken man , both physically and financially . 
 Johnson was inducted into the Pioneer category of the International Boxing Hall of Fame in 1995 . 
 = = Life before boxing = = 
 Tom Johnson was born in Derby , England in about 1750 , although at least one early historian of boxing , Pierce Egan , states that Johnson was born in Yorkshire . His birth name was Thomas Jackling , but he used the name Tom Johnson throughout his fight career . 
 Johnson moved to London at a young age and spent the next twenty years or so working as a corn porter , loading and unloading sacks of corn from a wharf near to Old Swan Stairs , ( Upper ) Thames Street . 
 His selflessness and strength were exemplified during this period by the assistance that he gave to a fellow worker who had become ill . Johnson would carry two sacks of corn on each journey between the wharf and the grain warehouse , rather than the usual single sack , up an incline so steep that it was known as Labour @-@ in @-@ vain @-@ hill . He gave the extra money he earned to the family of the sick man until he was able to return work . 
 = = Background to 18th @-@ century prizefighting = = 
 Prizefighting in early 18th @-@ century England took many forms rather than just pugilism , which was referred to by noted swordsman and then boxing champion James Figg as " the noble science of defence " . But by the middle of the century the term was generally used to denote boxing fights only . The appeal of prizefighting at that time has been compared to that of duelling ; historian Adrian Harvey says that : 
 Patriotic writers often extolled the manly sports of the British , claiming that they reflected a courageous , robust , individualism in which the nation could take pride . <unk> was regarded as humane and fair and its practice was presented in chivalrous terms . It was also a symbol of national courage , embodying the worth which Englishmen placed upon their own individual honour . The French , it was argued , did not like pugilism because they were not a free people and relied on the authorities to resolve their disputes . By contrast , the British dealt with their own problems in a straightforward manner , according to established rules of fair play . 
 From a legal standpoint prizefights ran the risk of being classified as disorderly assemblies , but in practice the authorities were mainly concerned about the number of criminals congregating there . Historian Bohun Lynch has been quoted as saying that pickpocketing was rife , and that fights between the various supporters were common . However , the patronage of the aristocracy and the wealthy ensured that any legal scrutiny was generally benign , in particular because fights could take place on private estates . This patronage also explains why London was the centre for the sport ; people of wealth tended to congregate in the city during the winter months and in the summer dispersed to their country estates . From 1786 , just as Johnson was rising to prominence , there was increased support for the sport because of the interest shown in it by the Prince of Wales ( later King George IV ) and his brothers , the future King William IV and Duke of Kent . This renewed interest followed a period of malaise which had in large part been due to corruption in the form of " fixing " the fights . 
 Jack Broughton , a celebrated boxing champion ( and another who was also a swordsman ) , had gone some way to defining the rules of prizefighting in 1743 , based on earlier work by Figg , but by Johnson 's time the rules were still interpreted very loosely . The style of fighting was also very different from modern boxing ; the contestants stood facing each other squarely with their feet in line and their fists raised level in front of them , rather than the present @-@ day stance of generally having one foot slightly in front of the other and one fist leading . Brute strength was the primary factor for success and knock @-@ downs were frequent , a consequence of the instability inherent in the positioning of the fighters ' feet . Rounds were not timed but instead lasted until a man was knocked down , with fighters permitted to wrestle each other to the ground . Moving around the ring , known as shifting , was deprecated and sometimes explicitly prohibited by the rules for a fight ; going to ground without being hit could lead to claims that the man still standing had won . The fighters usually each provided an umpire of their choice , and there might also be a third , independent umpire present , to adjudicate between them . 
 = = Career as a fighter = = 
 = = = Early period = = = 
 Johnson probably began fighting in June 1783 , at the age of thirty @-@ three , although Brailsford suggests it was 1781 or slightly earlier . Johnson had unintentionally slighted a carman ( horse @-@ drawn wagon driver ) and fighter called Jack Jarvis , who then called for Johnson to fight him as a matter of honour . Johnson comprehensively battered the experienced Jarvis at Lock 's Fields , and his name came to the attention of professional fighters . At that time Johnson had no intention of earning a living from the sport , but he became so goaded by a professional known as The Croydon Drover that a fight was arranged for March 1784 , at Kennington Common . Johnson beat the Drover to a pulp in 27 minutes and decided to become a professional . 
 The success against the Drover was followed by a victory against the ageing professional Stephen " Death " Oliver in June . The fight , which took place at Blackheath in front of thousands of people , was over in a time stated as being either 18 or 35 minutes . Johnson subsequently declared himself to be the champion and challenged all @-@ comers . Most contemporary and near @-@ contemporary accounts , such as those of Egan , regard this title of champion to mean Champion of England but Barrett O 'Hara , writing in 1909 , listed Johnson as the fourteenth World Heavyweight Champion . At the time of Johnson 's victory , the holder of title of champion was disputed . The previous holder , Duggan Fearns , had disappeared and Harry Sellers , the man Fearns had beaten to win the title in a fight that lasted 90 seconds and was alleged to have been fixed , had died . 
 Johnson did not fight again until he beat Bill Love , a butcher , at Barnet on 11 or 13 January 1786 in a contest that lasted five minutes and offered a prize of 50 guineas . He then beat Jack Towers the following month at the same place . 
 The final fight of Johnson 's early period , during which the stake money was relatively low , was his comprehensive win over a ponderous fighter called Fry for a prize of 50 guineas at Kingston . The fight , which lasted less than 30 minutes , ended with Fry badly beaten up and Johnson with barely a scratch on him . This fight did not attract many supporters of the sport ; it took place on 6 June 1786 and was therefore during the period when the wealthy were away from London . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 Johnson had developed to be an exceptional fighter , and a rarity in his day because he used his brain as well as his strength . A barrel @-@ chested man , he weighed around 196 pounds ( 89 kg ) and his height was variously stated in the range of 5 ' 8 " ( 1 @.@ 73 m ) to 5 ' 10 " ( 1 @.@ 78 m ) . He was known for his coolness under pressure and he took time to analyse his opponent 's strengths , weaknesses and technique . He did not retreat from the fight but avoided risk and was careful not to expose himself too much to attack , although his guard was described as " inelegant " by Egan . That writer also explained that he " worked round his antagonist in a way peculiar to himself , that so puzzled his adversary to find out his intent , that he was frequently thrown off his guard , by which manoeuvring Johnson often gained the most important advantages . " All of this meant that his fights were not usually of short duration ; he made certain of the outcome rather than risking anything . 
 Having exhausted challengers in London , he took on Bristolian professional Bill Warr for 200 guineas at Oakhampton , Berkshire on 18 January 1787 , although the manner of his victory on this occasion was " scarcely worthy of being called a fight " , according to The Sportsman 's Magazine . Warr had to resort to shifting and falling to the ground in order to stay in the contest , and as both tactics were regarded as underhand he attracted the ire of the crowd . He survived for almost 90 minutes until a choice blow from Johnson caused Warr to run from the ring , despite the protestations of his second . 
 A hiatus in Johnson 's boxing career followed , with no challengers coming forward until the Irish champion Michael Ryan took an interest . The fight at <unk> , then in Buckinghamshire , on either 18 or 19 December 1787 saw Richard Humphries ( " The Gentleman Boxer " ) acting as Johnson 's second and Daniel Mendoza as his bottle @-@ holder . Ryan was the favourite to win before the fight , and he had Johnson reeling against the rails of the ring with a blow to the head after almost 20 minutes had elapsed . Humphries ' second stepped in to prevent a second strike and this enraged the crowd because they believed Ryan could continue hitting until Johnson fell to the ground . They encouraged Ryan to declare himself victor as a consequence of this foul but he refused , as he wanted to win by means other than a technicality . He allowed Johnson to recover and then , in the space of the next ten minutes , lost the bout . 
 = = = Financial security = = = 
 The nature of the fight with Ryan led to a much anticipated re @-@ match at Cassiobury Park , Hertfordshire on 11 February 1789 . At stake was prize money of 600 guineas , as well as Johnson 's title of champion . Humphries again acted as Johnson 's second and a man called Jackson was his bottle @-@ holder . The fight consisted of one round of mutually displayed skill , during which Johnson was felled , and thereafter was brutal passion . Egan described it as 
 The set @-@ to was one of the finest ever witnessed and much science was displayed ; the parries and feints eliciting general admiration ... [ The second round ] was terrible beyond description – science seemed forgotten – and they appeared like two blacksmiths at an anvil , when Ryan received a knock @-@ down blow . The battle was well sustained on both sides for some time ; but Ryan 's passion getting the better of him , he began to lose ground . Ryan 's head and eyes made a dreadful appearance and Johnson was severely punished . 
 It was over in 33 minutes , when Ryan gave up the fight . One spectator , a Mr Hollingsworth , who was a corn factor and had at one time employed Johnson , was so impressed and pleased with how much he had made from betting on Johnson that he settled a £ 20 per annum gift for life on the fighter . 
 A proposed bout later in the same year against Ben Bryan ( sometimes known as Ben Brian , Ben Brain or Ben Bryant ) came to nothing . Bryan had been a collier in Kingswood , Bristol before moving to London to fight . He was seen as a strong potential challenger , having already won two fights in the provinces and then won against John Boone ( known as " The Fighting Grenadier " ) , a man called <unk> , and Tom Tring . The prize money was set at £ 1000 , but Bryan became ill and had to withdraw , forfeiting his staked deposit of £ 100 . 
 Later in 1789 fighters from the Birmingham area issued a series of challenges to opponents based around London , intended to demonstrate the level of organisation and confidence among the Birmingham boxers and their supporters . Three of the challenges were accepted , including that from Isaac Perrins to Tom Johnson . Perrins , who has been described as " the knock @-@ kneed <unk> from Soho " , had already issued a general challenge , offering to fight any man in England for a prize of 500 guineas , having beaten all challengers in the counties around Birmingham . 
 The Perrins – Johnson fight took place at Banbury on 22 October 1789 , billed as a battle between Birmingham and London as well as for the English Championship . The venue had been intended to be Newmarket during a race meeting but permission could not be obtained . The two men were about the same age but physically very different . Perrins stood 6 ' 2 " ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) tall and weighed 238 pounds ( 108 kg ) . It was claimed that he had lifted 896 pounds ( 406 kg ) of iron with ease , and he was " universally allowed to possess much skill and excellent bottom " . That is , it was acknowledged that he was skillful and courageous . The physical mismatch was later described as a fight between Hercules , in the form of Perrins , and a boy . 
 The first five minutes of competition saw neither man strike a blow and then when Perrins tried to make contact Johnson dodged and felled Perrins in return . Although Perrins recovered to hold the upper hand in the first few rounds , Johnson then began to dance around the ring , forcing Perrins to follow in order to make a fight of it . This was the first time in his career that Johnson had found it necessary to resort to this tactic of shifting . It confused Perrins because of it being contrary to the custom at the time , but the rules for this particular fight did not prevent it . Nor did they specify what should happen if a contestant fell to the ground , which is what Johnson did in order to avoid being hit – this action was thought by the spectators to be unsporting but was permitted by the two umpires . Before long both fighters showed signs of their opponent 's attacks , with first Perrins and then Johnson suffering cut eyes and then further damage to their faces . By the fight 's end Perrins ' head " had scarcely the traces left of a human being " , according to Egan in his history of boxing . The contest lasted 62 rounds , which took a total of 75 minutes to complete , until Perrins became totally exhausted . Tony Gee has said that 
 Perrins had overwhelming physical advantages but , owing to his naïvety , no clause was inserted in the articles of agreement to prevent " shifting " ... Moreover , Perrins was inexperienced in the subterfuges of the sport and found himself outwitted by his artful adversary . 
 Perrins ' supporters had gambled heavily on him because of his reputation and his advantage in size . In the event it was a major supporter of Johnson , a Thomas Bullock , who gained ; he won £ 20 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to £ 220 @,@ 000 as of 2010 ) from his bets in favour of Johnson and gifted the victor £ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 The event was recorded in The Gentleman 's Magazine of that month : 
 ... a great boxing match took place ... between two <unk> , Perrins and Johnson : for which a turf stage had been erected 5 foot 6 inches high , and about 40 feet square . The combatants set @-@ to at one in the afternoon ; and , after sixty @-@ two rounds of fair and hard fighting , victory was declared in favour of Johnson , exactly at fifteen minutes after two . The number of persons of family and fortune , who interested themselves in this brutal conquest , is astonishing : many of whom , it is proper to add , paid dearly for their diversion . 
 The contestants received 250 guineas each , with Johnson also receiving two @-@ thirds of the entrance takings ( after costs ) and Perrins receiving the other third . The net takings were £ 800 , and the number of spectators was variously stated as being 3 @,@ 000 or 5 @,@ 000 . Johnson called on Perrins and left him a guinea to buy himself a drink before leaving Banbury . The fight had proved to be " one of the hardest , cleanest and most brilliant encounters that ever took place " . As O 'Hara put it , " The stevedore at 33 has become at 39 the Croesus of the ring . " 
 Copper medals were struck to commemorate each of the contestants . The obverse side of these contained a picture of the respective fighter ; the reverse had the Latin inscription Bella ! <unk> bella ! ( a quotation from Virgil which can be translated as " wars , horrible wars " ) and the words " Strength and magnanimity " in the case of Perrins , and " Science and intrepidity " for that of Johnson . Chaloner has speculated that these may have been produced by Perrins ' employers , Boulton and Watt , and says that they bear similarities with the work of a French die maker called <unk> who was supplying the firm with industrial items from at least 1791 . The National Portrait Gallery holds two pictures of the Banbury fight , one an etching published by George <unk> in 1812 , and the other by Joseph <unk> in 1789 . 
 = = = Last fight = = = 
 Ben Bryan now challenged Johnson once more . He had recovered from his previous illness and won a fight at Banbury against <unk> , another of the Birmingham challengers , on the day after Johnson 's victory against Perrins . Subsequently Bryan had drawn a 180 @-@ round contest with Bill Hooper , also known as " The Tinman " , regarding which The Sportsman 's Magazine claimed " A more ridiculous match never took place in the annals of pugilism . " 
 The Duke of Hamilton supplied Bryan 's stake to fight Johnson in a contest for a prize of 500 guineas held at Wrotham , Kent . Although it is thought that he held property worth £ 5 @,@ 000 by the end of the 1780s , and had earned the equivalent of US $ 125 @,@ 000 in 1789 alone ( including money earned from betting on himself ) , Johnson had to rely on friends to provide his stake because he had spent all of his money . He was a gambling man and an " easy mark " , attracting people who gladly took his money from him . Brailsford has commented that this dissipation in his personal life was at odds with his cautious , calculated approach when in the prize ring . 
 Johnson was a clear favourite to win the match , which took place on 17 January 1791 and attracted even more spectators than had been present for the Perrins fight . He had Joe Ward as his second and Mendoza as his bottle holder , with those roles for Bryan being filled by Warr and Humphries . The brutality of the initial fighting was shared by both men . Johnson 's nerve failed him , as did his command of the techniques that had served him well . O 'Hara describes that he fought " like a wild man " and , throwing caution to the wind , broke a metacarpal in his middle finger after the momentum created by throwing a wild punch caused him to crash into the ring rail and then to the floor . This was the turning point , and O 'Hara describes the situation as , " <unk> beaten , his fists useless , his eyes closed , bathed in blood , and without the chance even of turning the tide with a lucky punch , he refuses to surrender . " He had to resort to shifting once more and eventually to wrestling with the hair of Bryan , which generated much disapprobation among the crowd . Eventually Bryan forced Johnson to the floor and beat him unconscious . Johnson had lost the fight , and his status as champion , in 21 minutes . Egan speculated that Johnson 's change in style , evident from the outset of the fight might have been due to either genuine concern about Bryan 's abilities or from his gambling problems ; either way , " there was a miserable falling off in him altogether ! " 
 Egan wrote that Johnson was the nearest any boxer had come to matching the skill of Jack Broughton . He was thought to have earned more money during his reign as champion than any other fighter until John L. Sullivan almost a century later . Jack Anderson , a modern historian of the sport , has summarised the early boxing writers as agreeing the period of Johnson 's reign as champion " rescued the declining sport and heralded the beginning of a golden age " . 
 = = Life after boxing = = 
 Johnson acted as second to various fighters around the period of his rise and fall . He performed this duty for Tom Tyne ( " The Tailor " ) at Croydon on 1 July 1788 and at Horton Moor on 24 March 1790 , having previously done so for a fighter called Savage who had taken on Jack Doyle at Stepney Fields on 22 November 1787 . He also acted twice for Humphries , in his fights against Mendoza at Odiham on 9 January 1788 , when Mendoza sprained his ankle on the slippery surface , and at Stilton on 9 May 1789 . There was much controversy at the latter , with O 'Hara reporting that this caused Mendoza 's second , a Captain Brown , to call Johnson a blackguard ; Johnson responded by threatening " to punch Brown into Eternity . " Johnson switched fighters and seconded Mendoza against Humphries at Doncaster on 29 September 1790 , and again in a contest against Warr near Croydon in May 1792 . Similarly , he acted as second for Hooper when he fought George Maddox at Sydenham Common on 10 February 1794 and for Tom " Paddington " Jones at Blackheath on 10 May 1794 . Other occasions when he acted as second include for John Jackson ( near to Croydon , 9 June 1788 ; and against Mendoza at Hornchurch on 15 April 1795 ) , and Joe Ward ( at Hyde Park , date unknown ) . 
 After his defeat by Bryan he bought and ran a public house , The Grapes , in Duke Street , Lincoln 's Inn Fields , London . Retired <unk> at that time often received the proceeds of a financial collection from their supporters to enable them to buy a licence to operate such premises : " today 's fighter was merely tomorrow 's publican in waiting " . In a 1901 review of sporting prints titled The old and new pugilism , which lamented the passing of the style and the discipline of prize @-@ fighting , " the goal of the successful pugilist was a sporting public house ... they were generally in side or back streets , where the house did not command a transient trade . Most of these sporting " pubs " had a large room at the back or upstairs , which was open one night a week ( preferably Saturday ) , for public sparring , which was always conducted by a pugilist of some note . " 
 The Grapes soon became known as a haunt of gamblers and criminals , which probably lost Johnson his licence to operate the premises . Subsequently he sought wagers at horse race meetings and cockpits , refusing to pay if he lost and instead challenging the victor to a fight . Johnson moved to Copper Alley , Dublin , but had to leave after magistrates determined that his premises were " not proving so consonant to the principles of propriety , as was wished " . He then went to Cork , where he tried to earn a living by teaching boxing . Finding that unrewarding he turned once again to gambling , and according to Dennis Brailsford " His deterioration was rapid . Both his health and his spirit were broken " . He died in Cork on 21 January 1797 , aged 47 . 
 Johnson tutored George <unk> ( The Brewer ) and was at least a supporter of Jones , on whom he once bet £ 100 to win a fight . He also taught a man called Simpson , who went on to fight Jones in 1804 . 
 Johnson 's brother , Bill Jackling , also did some boxing . He lost to Elias Spray some time prior to Spray 's 1805 fight against Joseph <unk> , a perennial challenger for the championship . 
 = P @-@ 9 Project = 
 The P @-@ 9 Project was the codename given during World War II to the Manhattan Project 's heavy water production program . The Cominco plant at Trail , British Columbia , was upgraded to produce heavy water , and three plants were constructed by DuPont in the United States , at the Morgantown Ordnance Works , near Morgantown , West Virginia ; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works , near Dana and Newport , Indiana ; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works , near Childersburg and Sylacauga , Alabama . The American plants became operational in 1943 , and were closed in 1945 . The Canadian plant at Trail continued in operation until 1956 . Three nuclear reactors were built using the heavy water produced by the P @-@ 9 Project : Chicago Pile 3 at Argonne , and ZEEP and NRX at the Chalk River Laboratories in Canada . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Heavy water is a form of water that contains a larger than normal amount of the hydrogen isotope deuterium , also known as heavy hydrogen , rather than the common hydrogen @-@ 1 isotope that makes up most of the hydrogen in ordinary water . Deuterium was discovered by Harold Urey in 1931 and he was later able to concentrate it in water . His mentor Gilbert Newton Lewis isolated the first sample of pure heavy water by electrolysis in 1933 . 
 Although a scientific curiosity from the start , considerable interest in heavy water was aroused in 1939 when Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski suggested that heavy water could be used as a neutron moderator in a nuclear reactor using natural uranium . They carried out experiments on uranium using ordinary water , but had found that the hydrogen atoms absorbed neutrons , thus preventing the desired chain reaction . Heavy water though , was an ideal moderator . The Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) put Hugh S. Taylor , a British physicist at Princeton University in charge of heavy water research . Taylor and Urey began looking at means for producing heavy water on an industrial scale . For his plutonium project , Arthur H. Compton requested 2 stone ( 28 lb ; 13 kg ) of it . The heavy water project was codenamed the " P @-@ 9 Project " in October 1942 . 
 The problem with using heavy water was that it was scarce , and scientists could not readily acquire the quantities required by a reactor . At Columbia University in the United States , Enrico Fermi and Leó Szilárd attempted to use graphite as a moderator instead . This turned out to be possible , but the graphite had to be very pure , as impurities , particularly boron , tended to absorb neutrons . On 2 December 1942 , Fermi 's team initiated the first artificial self @-@ sustaining nuclear chain reaction in an experimental reactor known as Chicago Pile @-@ 1 . For the Manhattan Project , this was a crucial step towards the manufacture of plutonium in a reactor for use in an atomic bomb , but much larger reactors were required for mass production . 
 = = Trail = = 
 Cominco had been involved in heavy water research since 1934 , and produced it at its smelting plant in Trail , British Columbia . On 26 February 1941 , the Canadian National Research Council inquired about its ability to produce heavy water . This was followed on 23 July 1941 by letter from Taylor that offered a National Defense Research Committee ( NDRC ) contract to produce 2 @,@ 000 pounds ( 910 kg ) , for which the NDRC was prepared to pay $ 5 per pound for low @-@ grade and $ 10 for high @-@ grade heavy water . At the time it was selling for up to $ 1 @,@ 130 a pound . 
 Cominco 's president , Selwyn G. Blaylock , was cautious . There might be no post @-@ war demand for heavy water , and the patent on the process was held by Albert Edgar Knowles , so a profit @-@ sharing agreement would be required . In response , Taylor offered up $ 20 @,@ 000 for plant modifications . There the matter rested until 6 December 1941 , when Blaylock had a meeting with the British physicist G. I. Higson , who informed him that Taylor had become discouraged with Cominco , and had decided to find an alternative source of heavy water . Blaylock invited Taylor to visit Trail , which he did from 5 to 8 January 1942 . The two soon found common ground . Blaylock agreed to produce heavy water at Trail , and quickly secured approval from the Chairman of the Board , Sir Edward Beatty . A contract was signed on 1 August 1942 . 
 To the existing $ 10 million plant consisting of 3 @,@ 215 cells consuming 75 MW of hydroelectric power , secondary electrolysis cells were added to increase the deuterium concentration in the water from 2 @.@ 3 % to 99 @.@ 8 % . For this process , Taylor developed a platinum @-@ on @-@ carbon catalyst for the first three stages while Urey developed a nickel @-@ <unk> one for the fourth stage tower . Seven new parcels of land were acquired totalling 0 @.@ 474 acres ( 0 @.@ 192 ha ) were leased by the U.S. government . Construction was undertaken by Stone & Webster . The final cost was $ 2 @.@ 8 million . The Canadian Government did not officially learn of the project until August 1942 , shortly before construction began the following month . It was completed on 30 June 1943 , at a cost of $ 2 @,@ 604 @,@ 622 . 
 Production rose steadily from 15 pounds ( 6 @.@ 8 kg ) in June 1943 to 326 pounds ( 148 kg ) in January 1944 , 1 @,@ 055 pounds ( 479 kg ) in January 1945 and 1 @,@ 305 pounds ( 592 kg ) in January 1946 . The running cost of the plant averaged $ 32 @,@ 979 per month over the period from June 1943 to December 1946 , when the Manhattan Project was replaced by the Atomic Energy Commission . This worked out to $ 39 per pound . Trail 's heavy water production continued until 1956 . 
 = = American sites = = 
 The Director of the Manhattan Project , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , had , in November 1942 , recruited DuPont as the prime contractor for the construction of a plutonium production complex Although DuPont 's preferred designs for the nuclear reactors were helium cooled and used graphite as a moderator , DuPont still expressed an interest in using heavy water as a backup , in case the graphite reactor design proved infeasible for some reason . For this purpose , it was estimated that 3 short tons ( 2 @.@ 7 t ) of heavy water would be required per month . As the plant at Trail , which was then under construction , could produce 0 @.@ 5 short tons ( 0 @.@ 45 t ) per month , more capacity was required . 
 Groves therefore authorized DuPont to establish additional heavy water facilities at the Morgantown Ordnance Works , near Morgantown , West Virginia ; at the Wabash River Ordnance Works , near Dana and Newport , Indiana ; and at the Alabama Ordnance Works , near Childersburg and Sylacauga , Alabama . Although known as Ordnance Works and paid for under Ordnance Department contracts , they were built and operated by the United States Army Corps of Engineers . Locating them at Ordnance plants saved the cost of acquiring land , since it was already owned by the government , and they already had personnel and utilities , including steam generating equipment . The three American plants used a process different from Trail 's ; heavy water was extracted by distillation , taking advantage of the slightly higher boiling point of heavy water . This was not considered to be an efficient process , but it was known to work and scale to an industrial process , and therefore represented less risk than other proposals . <unk> , Wabash and Alabama were expected to produce 0 @.@ 4 short tons ( 0 @.@ 36 t ) , 1 @.@ 2 short tons ( 1 @.@ 1 t ) and 0 @.@ 8 short tons ( 0 @.@ 73 t ) respectively of heavy water per month , with a concentration of 99 @.@ 75 % . 
 = = = Morgantown = = = 
 Works at Morgantown were undertaken by DuPont under a cost @-@ plus fixed fee contract , as was the works at Wabash and Alabama . Construction commenced on 7 January 1943 , and was substantially completed ahead of the 1 September scheduled date . The facilities were progressively brought into operation between 29 May and 28 August 1943 . The cost was $ 3 @,@ 490 @,@ 069 . DuPont 's fixed fee was originally $ 154 @,@ 882 , but this was voluntarily reduced to $ 88 @,@ 588 because the cost of construction was considerably less than the $ 6 @,@ 034 @,@ 000 originally estimated . 
 The electrolytic finishing plant was established at Morgantown because that plant was under the control of DuPont 's Ammonia Division . At this plant the output from the distillation plants , which was about 90 % heavy water , was broken down by electrolysis into hydrogen and oxygen . The light hydrogen tends to be drawn off first , leaving the heavy water behind . This process was repeated through several stages to yield a finished product that was 99 @.@ 75 % heavy water . 
 = = = Wabash = = = 
 Construction commenced on 23 January 1943 , and was substantially completed on 22 October . Stages of the P @-@ 9 distillation plant became operational between 17 June and 18 September 1943 . Total cost was $ 7 @,@ 493 @,@ 157 , including DuPont 's fee of $ 152 @,@ 472 , which was voluntarily reduced from $ 272 @,@ 776 because the plant was constructed for substantially less than the allocated $ 13 @,@ 665 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Alabama = = = 
 Construction commenced on 11 February 1943 , and was completed on 15 November . Stages of the P @-@ 9 distillation plant became operational between 29 May and 4 September 1943 . Total cost was $ 3 @,@ 466 @,@ 171 , including DuPont 's fee of $ 70 @,@ 368 , which was voluntarily reduced from $ 184 @,@ 680 because the plant was constructed for substantially less than the allocated $ 8 @,@ 285 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Production = = 
 The three American plants never achieved the intended production of 4 @,@ 800 pounds ( 2 @,@ 200 kg ) per month . A series of suggestions for improving production was considered , and the most promising were carried out . The most successful of these was the reconstruction of the first stage towers at Morgantown to reduce leakage , which resulted in a considerable improvement in performance . However , by this time , early 1945 , it was decided that production was sufficient , and the expense of doing this at the other plants could not be justified . 
 The P @-@ 9 distillation plant at Alabama was closed in June 1945 , that at Wabash in July , and the one at Morgantown in August . The electrolytic finishing plant at Morgantown was closed in September . Intermediate product remaining when the plants were closed was sent to Trail . This resulted in approximately 1 @,@ 600 pounds ( 730 kg ) of extra production at Trail . Between February 1944 and August 1945 , the electrolytic finishing plant at Morgantown , which finished the product for all three plants , produced an average of 2 @,@ 277 pounds ( 1 @,@ 033 kg ) per month , for a total of 43 @,@ 253 pounds ( 19 @,@ 619 kg ) . 
 The electrolytic finishing plant also processed 3 @,@ 151 pounds ( 1 @,@ 429 kg ) from heavy water recovered from Germany by the Manhattan Project 's Alsos Mission . The average monthly production cost was $ 72 @,@ 000 for Morgantown , $ 154 @,@ 000 at Alabama and $ 197 @,@ 400 at Wabash , for a total of $ 423 @,@ 400 . Thus , heavy water cost $ 186 per pound , excluding the $ 11 @,@ 967 @,@ 000 cost of the plants . If this is included , it cost $ 550 per pound , compared to $ 111 per pound at Trail . 
 Intermediate product was shipped from Wabash and Alabama by rail in sealed metal containers . The finished product was shipped by rail from Morgantown via the Monongahela Railway and Trail via the Canadian Pacific Railway to the Manhattan Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago . Heavy water from Trail was used for Chicago Pile 3 at Argonne , the first reactor using heavy water and natural uranium . Designed by Eugene Wigner and built under the direction of Walter Zinn , it went critical on 15 May 1944 . An allocation of heavy water was used by the Chalk River Laboratories to build ZEEP under Kowarski 's direction , which went critical in September 1945 . This was followed by its NRX rector in 1947 , which was also moderated by heavy water . Like CP @-@ 3 and ZEEP it was used for scientific research , and not for plutonium production . 
 Demand for heavy water increased in the early 1950s . The heavy water facility at Wabash , now renamed the Dana Plant by the Atomic Energy Commission , was reopened , and DuPont resumed production of heavy water in May 1952 . The site was used a pilot plant for a new production process using hydrogen sulphide . The heavy water facility was closed again in early 1957 . The facility , and a larger complex at the Savannah River Site had fulfilled its purpose , supplying heavy water for the plutonium production reactors at Savannah River . 
 = Affliction ( Star Trek : Enterprise ) = 
 " Affliction " is the fifteenth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series Star Trek : Enterprise , and originally aired on February 18 , 2005 . The script was written by Mike Sussman from a story by executive producer Manny Coto . It was the second episode of Enterprise to be directed by Michael Grossman . The episode is the first of a two @-@ part story , which concludes with " Divergence " . 
 Set in the 22nd century , the series follows the adventures of the first Starfleet starship Enterprise , registration NX @-@ 01 . In this episode , the crew investigate the kidnapping of Doctor Phlox ( John Billingsley ) , and the ship is attacked by a new type of Klingon . Meanwhile , Phlox is taken to a Klingon colony to work on a cure for a plague whose effects include the removal of the Klingon 's cranial ridges . 
 The episode sought to answer the question of why Klingons looked different in Star Trek : The Original Series than in other series of the franchise . It featured a number of guest stars who had previous connections to the franchise , including James Avery who was in the running for the part of Worf in The Next Generation , John Schuck who played a Klingon Ambassador in two Star Trek films , and Eric Pierpoint who had appeared in several other episodes of Star Trek previously . Some of the standing sets were redressed to appear as the interior of the Columbia , and some scenes were filmed outside at the Paramount Studios lot in Los Angeles , California . The initial ratings equalled the highest ratings of the fourth season , and although critical reception was mixed , it has subsequently been considered to be one of the best story @-@ lines to be featured on Enterprise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Enterprise returns to Earth in time for the launch of the second NX class starship , Columbia , and Commander Tucker prepares for his transfer . Meanwhile , Ensign Sato and Doctor Phlox are attacked in San Francisco , and Phlox is kidnapped . Captain Archer and Lieutenant Reed investigate the scene , and Reed is given a secret assignment by a secretive agent that he seems to know . Commander T 'Pol , seeking information from Sato , conducts her first mind @-@ meld , and the two realize that the attackers spoke Rigelian . They discover that a Rigelian freighter recently left orbit and head off in pursuit . 
 On Columbia , Tucker ruffles a few feathers with his new team , and Captain Hernandez asks the reasons behind his transfer . Later , T 'Pol and Tucker have a shared vision despite being on different ships . Enterprise locates a destroyed Rigelian ship , and while investigating , they are suddenly attacked and boarded . MACOs repel the attack and a captured alien is taken to Sickbay , where scanners show that he is in fact Klingon . Archer then discovers Reed 's complicity in evidence tampering and confines him to the brig . Archer also learns that the boarders sabotaged the ship , and he orders maximum speed in order to prevent the warp core from overloading . The ship increases speed to warp 5 @.@ 2 , the fastest it has ever been . 
 Phlox is taken to Qu <unk> , a Klingon colony where General K 'Vagh and Doctor Antaak seek his help to cure a Klingon plague . To Phlox 's horror , K 'Vagh kills an infected Klingon so that an autopsy can be performed . Phlox determines that the victims DNA has been supplemented with that of a genetically augmented human . Phlox also learns from Antaak that they experimented with augmented DNA after the events seen in " Borderland " , but it self @-@ mutated and escaped . Antaak and Phlox are told that they have five days to cure the outbreak before it is too late . Antaak suggests that the only course of action is to create stable augmented Klingons , but Phlox refuses to assist further . 
 = = Production = = 
 The storyline in " Affliction " answers an ongoing question which had begun with the pilot episode of Enterprise , " Broken Bow " . In The Original Series , Klingons appeared mostly human , with no applied prosthetics . However , in Star Trek : The Motion Picture , they first appeared with forehead ridges and continued to appear this way through the remaining movies as well as The Next Generation , Deep Space Nine and Voyager . The DS9 episode " Trials and Tribble @-@ ations " references the change , with Chief O 'Brien suggesting that Klingons had been genetically modified and Doctor Bashir assuming a viral mutation had taken place . 
 Theories created by fans included the idea that the ridgeless Klingons were from a specific part of the home world , but this was discounted when three ridgeless Klingons from The Original Series appeared with ridges in the Deep Space Nine episode " Blood Oath " . The Original Series had a restricted budget , and there was no funding for any prosthetic make @-@ up for the Klingons until The Motion Picture . During The Original Series , it was decided to use them more frequently than the Romulans , whose prosthetics were more expensive . The original ridgeless design was created after suggestions by John Colicos , who based them on Genghis Khan and the people of the 13th and 14th century Mongol Empire . When " Broken Bow " aired , it featured Klingons with forehead ridges , despite the series being set prior to The Original Series . On the episode 's script , the old style Klingons were referred to as " type @-@ two " and " semi @-@ Klingons " . 
 The storyline was one of several in the fourth season of Enterprise which show runner Manny Coto sought to connect the series to The Original Series . Coto also revealed in an interview with the Chicago Tribune that the episode would see the start of Section 31 . The episode also featured the first appearance on @-@ screen of the <unk> , despite first being mentioned in The Original Series and again in DS9 . " Affliction " marks the fifth writing credit of the fourth season for Michael Sussman , while director Michael Grossman had previously directed the episode " Hatchery " . 
 Filming took place from December 3 , 2004 through to December 12 . Several of the standing sets were redressed to appear as the locations on the USS Columbia , including the bridge , Captain 's mess and the engineering section . The exterior scenes where Phlox and Hoshi were attacked were filmed on the Paramount lot in Los Angeles . As the New York streets backlot had already been used earlier in the season for the opening episode " Storm Front " , this sequence was instead filmed in the area between the studio 's Administration building and a building which had previously doubled for the high school in the sitcom Happy Days . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 James Avery was cast as the Klingon General K ’ <unk> . He underwent a three @-@ hour make @-@ up process for the role , something he later described as a nightmare . He had previously been involved with Star Trek in 1987 , when he was the runner up to Michael Dorn to be cast as Worf in The Next Generation . He became better known as Phil Banks in The Fresh Prince of Bel @-@ Air . " Affliction " also featured a cameo by Marc Worden as a Klingon prisoner , who had previously appeared in the Deep Space Nine episodes " Sons and Daughters " and " You are <unk> Invited ... " as Worf 's son , Alexander <unk> . 
 John Schuck was cast as the Klingon doctor Antaak , having previously appeared as the Klingon Ambassador in both Star Trek IV : The Voyage Home and Star Trek VI : The Undiscovered Country . Schuck had also appeared in episodes of both Deep Space Nine and Voyager . Eric Pierpoint had previously appeared in several episodes of Star Trek across the various television series , including the TNG episode " Liaisons " as well as episodes of DS9 and Voyager . He had also appeared in the Enterprise episode " Rogue Planet " . 
 Brad <unk> appeared as a Rigelian in this episode in his second appearance on Enterprise , he too had also previously appeared in episodes of DS9 and Voyager . The other <unk> were played by stuntmen Brian Williams and Tom Dupont , whilst Linda Park was stunt @-@ doubled by Diana <unk> . It was the second appearance of Seth MacFarlane , the creator of the animated television show Family Guy , in a role in Enterprise . He had previously appeared as an unnamed character in the third season episode " The Forgotten " but gains the name Ensign Rivers in " Affliction " . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Affliction " originally aired on UPN , on February 18 , 2005 . It received a 1 @.@ 8 / 3 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This equals the ratings received by the previous episode , " The Aenar " , which received the highest ratings of the fourth season so far . It finished behind programs on NBC , The WB , ABC , CBS and Fox . 
 Michelle Erica Green reviewed this episode for TrekNation , and described it as a " rollicking good ride " . She thought that linking the reason for the Klingons ' appearance change to the augmented humans from earlier in the season was a clever idea , but the introduction of Section 31 was suspect as they hadn 't been mentioned at all through the season three Xindi arc . She was pleased with the level of detail shown on screen , such as the <unk> and Tucker changing the patch on his uniform when he transfers to the Columbia . Green said that John Billingsley " excels " in this episode , and that the ending was " perfect " . Jamahl Epsicokhan on his website " Jammer 's Reviews " , gave the episode a score of three out of four , saying that it was " solid and entertaining , but with no real signs of greatness " and thought that the cliffhanger ending was unnecessary . The two part story featuring the episodes " Affliction " and " Divergence " were subsequently ranked the fifth best story of Enterprise by Den of Geek writer James Hunt . 
 The only home media release of the episode is on DVD ; having been released as part of the season four box set on November 1 , 2005 in the United States . The Blu @-@ ray edition was released on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = Sylvester ( singer ) = 
 For the mayor of Kansas City , Missouri see : Sly James 
 Sylvester James , Jr . ( September 6 , 1947 – December 16 , 1988 ) , who used the stage name of Sylvester , was an American singer @-@ songwriter . Primarily active in the genres of disco , rhythm and blues , and soul , he was known for his flamboyant and androgynous appearance , falsetto singing voice , and hit disco singles in the late 1970s . 
 Born in Watts , Los Angeles , to a middle @-@ class African @-@ American family , Sylvester developed a love of singing through the gospel choir of his Pentecostal church . Leaving the church after the congregation expressed disapproval of his homosexuality , he found friendship among a group of black cross @-@ dressers and transgender women who called themselves The Disquotays . Moving to San Francisco in 1970 at the age of 22 , Sylvester embraced the counterculture and joined the avant @-@ garde drag troupe The Cockettes , producing solo segments of their shows which were heavily influenced by female blues and jazz singers like Billie Holiday and Josephine Baker . During the Cockettes ' critically panned tour of New York City , Sylvester left them to pursue his career elsewhere . He came to front Sylvester and his Hot Band , a rock act that released two commercially unsuccessful albums on Blue Thumb Records in 1973 before disbanding . 
 Focusing on a solo career , Sylvester signed a recording contract with Harvey Fuqua of Fantasy Records and obtained three new backing singers in the form of Martha Wash , <unk> Rhodes – the " Two Tons O ' Fun " – and Jeanie Tracy . His first solo album , Sylvester ( 1977 ) , was a moderate success . This was followed with the acclaimed disco album Step II ( 1978 ) , which spawned the singles " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " and " Dance ( Disco Heat ) " , both of which were hits in the U.S. and Europe . Distancing himself from the disco genre , he recorded four more albums – including a live album – with Fantasy Records . After leaving this label , he signed to Megatone Records , the dance @-@ oriented company founded by friend and collaborator Patrick Cowley , where he recorded four more albums , including the Cowley penned hit Hi @-@ NRG track " Do Ya Wanna Funk . " An activist who campaigned against the spread of HIV / AIDS , Sylvester died from complications arising from the virus in 1988 , leaving all future royalties from his work to San Francisco @-@ based HIV / AIDS charities . 
 During the late 1970s , Sylvester gained the moniker of the " Queen of Disco " and during his life he attained particular recognition in San Francisco , where he was awarded the key to the city . In 2005 , he was posthumously inducted into the Dance Music Hall of Fame , while his life has been recorded in a biography and made the subject of both a documentary and a musical . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood : 1947 – 62 = = = 
 Sylvester James was born on September 6 , 1947 in the Watts district of Los Angeles , California , into a middle @-@ class family . His mother , Letha Weaver , had been raised near Palestine , Arkansas into a relatively wealthy African @-@ American family who owned their own farmland . Letha 's biological mother , <unk> Weaver , was unmarried and too sickly to care for her child , so <unk> 's sister Julia , known to the family as <unk> , became Letha 's adoptive mother . In the late 1930s , Julia and her husband took part in the Great Migration of African @-@ Americans out of the Southern United States , relocating to Watts . 
 It was here that Letha was largely raised and where she met and married her first husband , Sylvester " Sweet " James , with the couple moving into a small cottage owned by Letha 's parents . Their first child , named Sylvester after his father , was followed by the birth of John Wesley in 1948 and Larry in 1950 . Sylvester and his brothers became better known in their predominantly African @-@ American community by their nicknames , with Sylvester 's being " <unk> . " Sylvester considered his father to be a " lowlife " because he was an adulterer and left his wife and children when the boys were still young . Letha and her three sons moved to a downtown housing project at Aliso Village before moving back into her parental home at 114th Street in Watts . 
 Letha was a devout adherent of the Pentecostal denomination of Christianity , regularly attending the Palm Lane Church of God in Christ in South Los Angeles . Sylvester and his brothers accompanied her to the church 's services , where he developed a particular interest in gospel music . Having been an avid singer since the age of three , Sylvester regularly joined in with gospel performances ; he sang the song " My Buddy " at the funeral of one of the other children in the Park Lane congregation . The young Sylvester was often accused of effeminacy and recognized his own homosexuality from an early age . At the age of eight , he engaged in sexual activity with a far older man at the church — at the time rumored to be the church organist — although he would always maintain that this was consensual and not an example of sexual molestation . Sylvester was taken to a doctor after receiving injuries during anal sex with this man ; it was the doctor who informed Letha that her son was gay , something that she could not accept , viewing homosexual activity as a perversion and a sin . News of Sylvester 's homosexual activity soon spread through the church congregation , and feeling unwelcome , he ceased his attendance at age 13 . 
 During Sylvester 's childhood , his mother gave birth to three more children by different fathers before marrying Robert " Sonny " Hurd in the early 1960s , with whom she adopted three foster children . A supervisor at aerospace manufacturer North American Rockwell , Hurd 's job increased the family income and they were able to move into a more expensive , predominantly Euro @-@ American neighborhood north of Watts . The relationship between Sylvester and both his mother and stepfather was strained ; in the midst of one argument with his mother , Sylvester decided to leave their house permanently . 
 = = = The Disquotays : 1962 – 70 = = = 
 Now homeless , Sylvester spent much of the next decade staying with friends and relatives , in particular his grandmother Julia , who expressed no disapproval of his homosexuality , having been a friend of a number of gay men in the 1930s . On occasion , he returned to his mother and step @-@ father 's house for a few days at a time , particularly to spend time with his younger sisters , Bernadette and <unk> . Aged 15 , he began frequenting local gay clubs and built up a group of friends from the local gay black community , eventually forming themselves into a group which they called the Disquotays . Sylvester 's best friend among the Disquotays was a trans woman named Duchess , who earned her money as a prostitute , a job that Sylvester refused to engage in . The group held lavish house parties , sometimes at the home of their friend , rhythm and blues singer Etta James , in which they dressed up in female clothing and wigs , constantly trying to outdo one another in appearance . 
 Sylvester 's boyfriend during the latter part of the 1960s was a young man named Lonnie Prince ; well @-@ built and attractive , many of Sylvester 's friends described the pair as being " the It couple " . Sylvester often hitchhiked around town while in female dress ; such activity carried a risk of arrest and prosecution , for cross @-@ dressing was then illegal in California . Although avoiding imprisonment for this crime , he was arrested for shoplifting on several occasions . He found work in a variety of different professions , including cooking in McDonalds — where he was fired for refusing to wear a hairnet — cashier at an airport parking garage , working in a hair salon , at a department store , and as a make @-@ up artist at a mortuary , preparing the corpses for their funerals . In the 1960s , the African @-@ American Civil Rights Movement was at its peak , but Sylvester and his friends did not take an active role within it . During the Watts Riots between members of the black community and the predominantly white police force , they joined in with the widespread rioting and looting , stealing wigs , hairspray , and lipstick . 
 Although he had little interest in formal education and rarely attended classes , Sylvester was enrolled at Jordan High School . He graduated in 1969 at the age of 21 ; in his graduation photograph , he appeared in drag wearing a blue chiffon prom dress and beehive hairstyle . By the end of the decade , the Disquotays had begun to drift apart , with a number of them abandoning cross @-@ dressing and others recognizing that they were trans women and undergoing sex reassignment surgery . Sylvester always considered himself male and began to tone down the feminine nature of his clothing , aiming for a more androgynous look which combined male and female styles and which was influenced by the fashions of the hippie movement . 
 = = = The Cockettes : 1970 – 72 = = = 
 At Los Angeles ' Whisky a Go Go bar , Sylvester met Reggie <unk> , who invited him to move to the city of San Francisco in Northern California in order to join the " Chocolate Cockettes " — black members of an avant @-@ garde performance art drag troupe known as The Cockettes . Founded by drag queen Hibiscus in 1970 , the Cockettes parodied popular culture , were involved in the Gay Liberation movement , and were influenced by the ethos of the hippie movement , living communally , embracing free love , and consuming mind @-@ altering substances like marijuana and LSD . With the Disquotays disbanded , Sylvester had tired of Los Angeles , and was attracted by San Francisco 's reputation as a gay and counter @-@ cultural haven . Arriving in the city , he stayed in the Cockettes ' communal home for several days . They were impressed with his falsetto singing voice and his ability to play the piano , asking him to appear in an upcoming show , Radio Rodeo . Sylvester agreed , and one of his first performances involved singing the theme song of The Mickey Mouse Club while dressed in a cowgirl skirt . Moving into the Cockettes ' communal residence , he soon found the flat too crowded and had difficulty with the lack of privacy ; after a year he moved into a new house on Market Street with two fellow Cockettes . 
 Although a significant member of the troupe , Sylvester remained a relatively isolated figure ; not only was he one of very few African @-@ American members , he eschewed the group 's more surrealist activities for what he saw as classier , more glamorous performances onstage . In the Cockettes ' performances , he was usually given an entire scene to himself , often with little relevance to the narrative and theme of the rest of the show , although through doing so , he gained his own following . With a piano player named Peter <unk> , Sylvester worked on solo scenes in which he exhibited his interest in blues and jazz by imitating several of his musical idols like Billie Holiday and Josephine Baker . Adding to his image , Sylvester used the pseudonym " Ruby Blue " and described himself as " Billie Holiday 's cousin once removed . " Fascinated by black musical heritage , he read up on the subject and became a collector of " <unk> " ; in some of his <unk> performances , he played up to racial stereotypes of African @-@ Americans in order to ridicule the stereotypes themselves . 
 In 1970 , Sylvester entered into an open relationship with Michael Lyons , a young Euro @-@ American , and soon proposed marriage to him . Although same @-@ sex marriage was not legally recognised in the U.S. , the couple held a wedding in the Shakespeare Garden of Golden Gate Park . At the invite of the manager of the Palace Theater , Sylvester appeared in a spoof film , Tricia 's Wedding , which parodied the marriage of Tricia Nixon Cox , daughter of President Richard Nixon . In the film , Sylvester played the role of both Coretta Scott King and the African ambassador Uma King . In 1971 , Sylvester was given a one @-@ man show , Sylvester Sings , at the Palace Theater , for which he was accompanied by <unk> . He nevertheless remained a part of the <unk> troupe during their divisive split , in which Hibiscus and his followers left to form the Angels of Light . Following Hibiscus ' departure , the Cockettes began to gain increasing media attention , with celebrities such as Rex Reed , Truman Capote , and Gloria Vanderbilt enthusing about their performances . Rolling Stone magazine singled out Sylvester 's performances for particular praise , describing him as " a beautiful black androgyne who has a gospel sound with the heat and shimmer of Aretha [ Franklin ] ' s " . 
 The success led the troupe to take their show to New York City , a city with a long history of drag culture . Arriving in November 1971 , they immersed themselves in the city 's avant @-@ garde , attending parties held by Andy Warhol and Screw magazine . Spending so much of their time partying , most of the Cockettes did not rehearse , the exception being Sylvester , who wanted to perfect his act . Although the Cockettes ' performance at the Anderson Theater was panned by critics , Sylvester 's act was widely praised as a highlight of the show . Realizing that he had far better prospects as a solo artist , on the second New York performance he opened his act by telling the audience , " I apologize for this travesty that I 'm associated with " , while on the seventh he announced that he would be leaving the Cockettes altogether . 
 = = Emerging solo career = = 
 = = = Sylvester and his Hot Band : 1972 – 74 = = = 
 Returning to San Francisco , Sylvester was offered the opportunity to record a demo album by Rolling Stone editor Jann Wenner . Financed by A & M Records , the album featured a cover of Bonnie Bramlett and Leon Russell 's song " Superstar , " which had been a recent hit single for The Carpenters ; nevertheless , A & M felt that the work was not commercially viable and declined to release the album . For the album , Sylvester and his manager Dennis Lopez had assembled a group of heterosexual white males — Bobby Blood on trumpet , Chris Mostert on saxophone , James Q. Smith on guitar , Travis Fullerton on drums , and Kerry Hatch on bass — whom he named The Hot Band . After A & M 's initial rejection , the band provided two songs for Lights Out San Francisco , an album compiled by San Francisco 's <unk> radio and released on the Blue Thumb label . Gaining a number of local gigs , they were eventually asked to open for English glam rock star David Bowie at the Winterland Ballroom ; the gig did not sell particularly well , and Bowie later commented that San Francisco did not need him , because " They 've got Sylvester , " referring to their shared preference for androgyny . 
 In early 1973 , Sylvester and The Hot Band were signed by Bob Krasnow to Blue Thumb . On this label , they produced their first album , in which they switched their sound from blues to the more commercially viable rock , while the Pointer Sisters were employed as backing singers . Sylvester named this first album Scratch My Flower due to a gardenia @-@ shaped scratch @-@ and @-@ sniff sticker adhered to the cover , although it was instead released under the title of Sylvester and his Hot Band . The album consisted primarily of covers of songs by artists such as James Taylor , Ray Charles , Neil Young , and Leiber and Stoller . Described by one of Sylvester 's biographers as lacking in " the fire and focus of the live shows " , it sold poorly on release . 
 Sylvester and his Hot Band toured the United States , receiving threats of violence in several Southern states , where widespread conservative and racist attitudes led to antagonism between the band and locals . In late 1973 , the band recorded their second album , Bazaar , which included both cover songs and original compositions by bassist Kerry Hatch . Hatch later commented that the Hot Band found the album more satisfactory than its predecessor , but nevertheless it again sold poorly . The music journalist Peter Shapiro believed that on these Blue Thumb albums , Sylvester 's " cottony falsetto was an uncomfortable match with guitars " and that they both had " an unpleasantly astringent quality " . Finding Sylvester difficult to work with , and frustrated by his lack of commercial success , the Hot Band left Sylvester in late 1974 , after which Krasnow cancelled his recording contract . At the same time , Sylvester 's relationship with Lyons ended , with Lyons himself moving to Hawaii . 
 = = = Two Tons O ' Fun and Sylvester : 1974 – 77 = = = 
 Now without the Hot Band or a recording contract , Sylvester set himself up with a new band , The Four As , and a new set of backing singers , two black drag queens named Jerry Kirby and Lady Bianca . With this new entourage , he continued to perform at a number of local venues including Jewel 's Catch One which a bar in West Hollywood , but reviewers were unimpressed with the new line @-@ up , most of whom abandoned Sylvester in December 1974 . After a brief sojourn in England , Sylvester returned to San Francisco and assembled three young drag queens to be <unk> singers : Arnold <unk> , Leroy Davis , and Gerry Kirby . Nevertheless , although he performed at such events as the 1975 Castro Street Fair , success continued to elude him , and he eventually fired <unk> , Davis , and Kirby . 
 Employing Brent Thomson as his new manager , she suggested that Sylvester rid himself of his androgynous image and wear more masculine clothing in order to gain a recording contract ; as she put it , " nobody is giving out recording contracts to drag queens . " Thomson opened auditions for new backing singers , with Sylvester being captivated by one of those auditioning , Martha Wash . Sylvester asked her if she had another large black friend who could sing , after which she introduced him to <unk> Rhodes . Although he referred to them simply as " the girls " , Wash and Rhodes named themselves the Two Tons O ' Fun , and continued to work with Sylvester intermittently until his death , developing a close friendship with him . They were soon joined by bassist John Dunstan and keyboard player Dan Reich . 
 Playing gay bars such as The Stud and The <unk> , in September 1976 Sylvester and his band gained a regular weekend job at The Palms nightclub on Polk Street , performing two or three sets a night ; most of these were covers , but some were original compositions by Sylvester and his then @-@ guitarist Tip Wirrick . It was through this show that Sylvester came to the attention of Motown producer Harvey Fuqua , and Fuqua subsequently signed Sylvester onto a solo deal with Fantasy Records in 1977 . 
 In the middle of that year , he recorded his third album , the self @-@ titled Sylvester , which featured a cover design depicting Sylvester in male attire . The songs included on the album were influenced by dance music , and included Sylvester 's own compositions , such as " Never Too Late , " as well as covers of hits like Ashford & Simpson 's " Over and Over . " Many reviewers noted that Sylvester 's image had been altered since his early career , moving him away from the glittery androgynous appearance to that of a more conventional rhythm @-@ and @-@ blues singer which would have wider commercial appeal . Released as a single , Sylvester 's " Over and Over " proved a minor hit in the U.S. , but was more successful in Mexico and Europe . Building on the album 's release , Sylvester toured Louisiana and then Mexico City . 
 = = = Step II and disco success : 1978 = = = 
 Sylvester 's fame increased following the release of his solo album , and he was employed to perform regularly at The Elephant Walk gay bar in the Castro , an area of San Francisco known as a gay village . He became a friend of Harvey Milk — known locally as the " Mayor of Castro Street " — who was the first openly gay man to be elected to public office in California , and performed at Milk 's birthday party that year . In the spring of 1978 , Sylvester successfully auditioned for a cameo appearance in the film The Rose starring gay icon Bette Midler . In the film , he plays one of the drag queens singing along to Bob Seger 's " Fire Down Below , " in a single scene that was filmed in a run @-@ down bar in downtown Los Angeles . 
 Sylvester released his second solo album , Step II , in September 1978 . For this release , he was particularly influenced by the genre of dance music known as disco which was then becoming increasingly popular across the Western world . Disco was closely associated with the gay , black , and Latino communities in the U.S. and dominated by black female artists like Donna Summer , Gloria Gaynor , and Grace Jones , with Sylvester initially being unsure that it was a suitable genre for him to work in ; he nevertheless recognized its increasing commercial potential . During production of the album , Sylvester invited the musician Patrick Cowley to join his studio band , being impressed by Cowley 's innovative techniques using synthesizers . The album landed Cowley a job as a back @-@ up musician on Sylvester 's subsequent world @-@ wide tours , and the two started a close friendship and collaboration . Once again co @-@ produced by Harvey Fuqua and released on Fuqua 's Fantasy label , Step II contained two disco songs that were subsequently released as singles , " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) , " written by James Wirrick , and " Dance ( Disco Heat ) , " written by Eric Robinson . 
 Both singles proved commercial hits both domestically and abroad , topping the American dance chart and breaking into the U.S. pop charts . The album itself was also a success , being certified gold , and was described by Rolling Stone magazine as being " as good as disco gets . " In his history of disco , Shapiro described " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " as Sylvester 's " greatest record " , " the cornerstone of gay disco " , and " an epochal record in disco history " . Shapiro noted that Sylvester 's work brought together elements from both of the main strands of disco ; the " gospel / R & B tradition " and the " mechanical , piston @-@ pumping beats " tradition , but that in doing so he went " way beyond either " . Shapiro expressed the view that " Sylvester propelled his falsetto far above his natural range into the ether and rode machine rhythms that raced toward escape velocity , creating a new sonic lexicon powerful , camp , and otherworldly enough to articulate the exquisite bliss of disco 's dance floor utopia " . 
 In both August and December 1978 , Sylvester visited London , England to promote his music ; he proved hugely popular in the city , performing at a number of different nightclubs and being mobbed by fans . It was while in the city that he filmed the music video for " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " . Back in the U.S. , Sylvester began to appear on television shows to advertise his music , appearing on Dinah Shore , American Bandstand , Rock Concert , and The Merv Griffin Show . He also undertook a series of tours across the country , opening for both The Commodores and Chaka Khan , and performing alongside The O 'Jays , War , and <unk> .. As a result , he earned a number of awards and performed at several award ceremonies . Through this developing public presence , Sylvester , alongside other visibly queer performers like The Village People , helped to solidify the connection between disco and homosexuality within the public imagination ; this however furthered the anti @-@ disco sentiment among rock music fans which would emerge as the Disco Sucks movement . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Stars , Sell My Soul , and Too Hot To Sleep : 1979 – 81 = = = 
 Sylvester followed the success of Step II with an album entitled Stars . Consisting of four love songs , the title track – released as a single in January 1979 – had been written by Cowley , and Sylvester would proceed to tell the press that it was his first completely disco album , but that it would also probably be his last . He premiered the album 's four tracks on March 11 , 1979 , at a sold @-@ out show in the San Francisco War Memorial Opera House . The performance was attended by a number of senior figures in local government , and halfway through , Mayor Dianne Feinstein sent her aide , Harry Britt , to award Sylvester with the key to the city and proclaim March 11 to be " Sylvester Day . " The Opera House gig was recorded , and subsequently released as a live album , Living Proof . Sylvester thought very highly of the album , but it did not sell well . A single released from this album , " Can 't Stop Dancing " , was a hit in the disco clubs but not in the pop music charts . 
 Despite increasing mainstream success , Sylvester continued to reaffirm his connection to the gay community of San Francisco , performing at the main stage at the 1979 Gay Freedom Day parade . Further , during his summer 1979 tour of the UK , he performed at the London Gay Pride Festival in Hyde Park . That same year , Sylvester met the singer Jeanie Tracy through Harvey Fuqua , and they immediately became friends . A large black woman , Sylvester felt that Tracy would work well with his Two Tons O ' Fun , and invited her to join his backing singers , which she proceeded to do . Subsequently befriending the Tons , she would work for Sylvester for the rest of his life . The Tons themselves were convinced by Fuqua to produce their own self @-@ titled album , from which came two dance chart hits , " Earth Can Be Just Like Heaven " and " Just Us " ; as a result , they began to work less and less with Sylvester , only joining him on occasion for his live shows . In some interviews he would express bitterness at their departure , while in others he stressed that he had no bad feelings toward them . 
 In 1980 , Sylvester also reached tabloid headlines after he was arrested on a visit to New York City , accused of being involved in the robbery of several rare coins . After three days of incarceration , he was released on a police bail of $ 30 @,@ 000 . Sylvester was never charged , and police later admitted their mistake after it was revealed that the real culprit had posed as Sylvester by signing cheques in his name . Returning to San Francisco after this event , it was here that Sylvester produced his next album for Fantasy Records , Sell My Soul . Largely avoiding disco after the genre had become unpopular following the much publicized Disco Sucks movement , Sell My Soul instead represented a selection of soul @-@ inspired dance tracks . Recorded in two weeks , Sylvester worked largely with backing singers and musicians whom he was unfamiliar with , and regular collaborators Rhodes and Cowley were entirely absent . Reviews were generally poor , describing the album as being average in quality . The only disco song on the album , " I Need You " , was released as a single , but fared poorly . 
 Sylvester 's fifth and final album for Fantasy Records was Too Hot to Sleep , in which he once again eschewed disco for a series of groove soul tunes , ballads , and gospel @-@ style tracks . Missing the Two Tons entirely , Tracy was instead accompanied by a new backing singer , Maurice " Mo " Long , and because the three of them had all grown up in the Church of God in Christ , they decided to refer to themselves as the " <unk> Singers . " The album also featured a number of tracks in which Sylvester avoided his usual falsetto tones to sing in a baritone voice . The album sold poorly . 
 = = = Megatone Records : 1982 – 86 = = = 
 Both the Two Tons and Sylvester came to suspect that Fantasy Records had failed to pay them all of the money that they were owed from the sale of their records . Sylvester left Fantasy and in November 1982 he filed a lawsuit against them ; it ultimately proved successful in establishing that the company had been withholding money from him totaling $ 218 @,@ 112 @.@ 50 . Nevertheless , Fuqua proved unable to pay anything more than $ 20 @,@ 000 , meaning that Sylvester never saw the majority of the money that was legally owed to him . Sylvester grew to despise Fuqua , and forbade his friends from ever mentioning his name . 
 Closely associated with the now unpopular disco and having had no hit singles in the preceding few years , after leaving Fantasy Sylvester was not a particular draw for major record labels . Recognizing this state of affairs , in 1982 Sylvester commented that " there 's nothing worse than a fallen star " who still has " illusions " of their continuing fame . Rather than chasing major chart success , Sylvester wanted to focus on retaining creative control over his music . Hiring his former tour manager and longstanding friend Tim McKenna as his new manager , Sylvester decided to produce his next album with Megatone Records , a small San Francisco company that had been founded in 1981 by Patrick Cowley and Marty <unk> and which catered largely to the gay club scene . The result was All I Need ( 1982 ) , on which James Wirrick had written most of the songs , which were dance @-@ orientated and influenced by the new wave music then in vogue . Sylvester insisted that he include several ballads on the album , which featured cover art by Mark Amerika depicting Sylvester in ancient Egyptian garb . 
 One of the best known Sylvester songs of this period was " Do Ya Wanna Funk " , a Hi @-@ NRG dance track co @-@ written with Cowley which was released as a single in July 1982 , topping the U.S. dance charts and entering the pop charts in a number of countries across the world . Although he had continued working , Cowley was suffering from the recently discovered HIV / AIDS virus – at the time still referred to as " gay @-@ related immune deficiency " ( GRID ) by American doctors – and was in a deteriorating physical condition . Sylvester continued touring , and it was while in London , preparing to perform at the Heaven <unk> , that he learned of Cowley 's death on November 12 , 1982 . He went onstage , informing the crowd of Cowley 's passing and then sang " Do Ya Wanna Funk " in memory of him . 
 In 1983 , Sylvester became a partner of Megatone Records . That year he also brought out his second album with the company , Call Me , but it was not a commercial success . Four songs from the album were released as singles , although only " Trouble in Paradise " entered the top 20 of the U.S. dance charts ; Sylvester later related that the song was his " AIDS message to San Francisco . " Sylvester was emotionally moved by the HIV / AIDS epidemic , and began helping out at the Rita Rockett Lounge for patients of the disease at the San Francisco General Hospital as well as performing at various benefit concerts to raise money and awareness to combat the spread of the disease . In February 1984 he also performed a " One Night Only " retrospective of his work at the prestigious Castro Theatre . Sylvester still toured both domestically and in Europe , although he found that demand for his performances was decreasing , and that he was now playing to smaller venues and singing to a pre @-@ recorded tape rather than to a live band as he had in the late 1970s . 
 His next album , entitled M @-@ 1015 ( 1984 ) , was more frenetic and pumping than his previous releases , having embraced the recently developed genre of Hi @-@ NRG , but it also included elements of electro and rap . The major figures behind the album had been <unk> and Morey Goldstein , and Sylvester himself had not written any of the tracks . The album also contained increasingly sexually explicit lyrics , in particular in the songs " How Do You Like Your Love " and " Sex " . That year , he also entered into a relationship with an architect named Rick <unk> , and together they moved into a new apartment in the hills , where Sylvester decorated his powder room with posters and memorabilia of Divine , the drag queen , actor and singer whom he had briefly known when they were in The Cockettes . In 1985 , he fulfilled a lifelong ambition by working with the singer Aretha Franklin ; he and Jeanie had been invited to provide backing vocals on Franklin 's album Who 's Zoomin ' Who ? . 
 Sylvester 's final album , Mutual Attraction ( 1986 ) , was produced by Megatone but licensed and released by Warner Bros. On the album , Sylvester had worked with a wide number of collaborators , and included new tracks alongside covers of songs by Stevie Wonder and George Gershwin . Reviews of the album were mixed , with many claiming that it was a poor release . One of the album 's singles , " Someone Like You " , proved more successful , reaching number one on the Billboard dance charts . Warner Bros booked him to appear on the New Year 's Eve edition of The Late Show Starring Joan Rivers , during which Joan Rivers described him as a drag queen ; visibly annoyed , he corrected her by stating that he was not a drag queen , proclaiming simply " I 'm Sylvester ! " 
 = = = Final years and death : 1986 – 88 = = = 
 In 1985 , Sylvester 's boyfriend , Rick Cranmer , became aware that he had become infected with HIV ; with no known medical cure , his health deteriorated rapidly and he died in September 1987 . Sylvester was devastated , and although recognizing that he too was probably infected , he refused to have his blood tested , only noticing the virus ' first symptoms when he developed a persistent cough . Beginning work on an album that would remain unfinished , he moved into a new apartment on Collingwood Street in the Castro , and tried his best to continue performing in the Bay Area , even though he became too sick to undertake a full tour . Eventually diagnosed with AIDS , he was hospitalized for sinus surgery in late 1987 , and upon returning to his apartment he began to be cared for by his mother and Tracy , before being hospitalized again in May 1988 , this time with pneumocystis pneumonia . Returning to his flat , he gave away many of his treasured possessions and wrote his will . 
 Having lost a lot of weight and unable to walk easily , he attended the Castro 's 1988 Gay Freedom Parade in a wheelchair , being pushed along by <unk> in front of the People with AIDS banner ; along Market Street , assembled crowds shouted out his name as he passed . The subsequent 1988 Castro Street Fair was named " A Tribute to Sylvester , " and although he was too ill to attend , crowds chanted his name to such an extent that he was able to hear them from his bedroom . He continued to give interviews to the media , being open about the fact that he was dying of AIDS , and sought in particular to highlight the impact that the disease was having in the African @-@ American community . In an interview with the NME , he stated , " I don 't believe that AIDS is the wrath of God . People have a tendency to blame everything on God . " 
 For Thanksgiving 1988 , his family spent the holiday with him , although he had developed neuropathy and was increasingly bed @-@ ridden and reliant on morphine ; he died in his bed on December 16 , 1988 at the age of 41 . Sylvester had planned his own funeral , insisting that he be dressed in a red kimono and placed in an open @-@ top coffin for the mourners to see , with his friend Yvette <unk> doing his corpse 's makeup . He wanted Tracy to sing at his funeral , accompanied by choirs and many flowers . The whole affair took place in his church , the Love Center , with a sermon being provided by Reverend Walter Hawkins . The event was packed , with standing room only , and the coffin was subsequently taken and buried at his family 's plot in Inglewood Park Cemetery . An album titled Immortal was posthumously released ; it contained Sylvester 's final studio recordings , and was compiled by Marty <unk> . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Sylvester has been described as having a " flamboyant and colourful " public persona , wearing both male and female gendered clothes as part of his attire , with his biographer Joshua Gamson opining that for Sylvester , " gender was an everyday choice " . Sylvester described his public persona as " an extension of me , the real me " . Sylvester 's friend and publicist Sharon Davis described him as " a quiet , often thoughtful , caring guy , who put others before himself , and was generous to a fault , having little regard for money . His policy was you only live once , so enjoy ! " She also noted that he could be " unpredictable " , being " stubborn as a mule " and " always speak [ ing ] his mind " . Sylvester was considered to be a prima donna by members of the Hot Band and could be temperamental and difficult with those whom he worked with . He found it difficult saving the money that he earned , instead spending it as soon as he obtained it , both on himself and on his lovers , friends , and family . 
 Sylvester was openly gay , with Gamson noting that he tended to enter into relationships with men who were " white , self @-@ doubting and effeminate . " In 1978 , he entered into a relationship with a young white model named John Maley ; Sylvester later devoted the song " Can 't Forget the Love " from his Too Hot to Sleep album to his young lover . Maley ended the relationship to move to Los Angeles , later recollecting that Sylvester " was a lovely man , and I owe him a lot . " In 1981 , Sylvester entered into a relationship with a slim brunette from Deep River , Connecticut named Michael Rayner , but unlike his predecessors , he did not move into Sylvester 's house ; their partnership ended when Rayner admitted that he had not fallen completely in love with Sylvester . Sylvester 's next major relationship was with Tom Daniels , a hairdresser whom he met in 1982 , but their romance ended after six months when Daniels discovered that Sylvester had been having sex with other men while on tour . The singer 's final partner , the architect Rick Cranmer , was a six @-@ foot two blonde , and the duo moved into a house together in the hills . Cranmer died of AIDS @-@ related complications in 1987 , the year before Sylvester succumbed to the virus . 
 As an openly gay man throughout his career , Sylvester came to be seen as a spokesman for the gay community . He informed a journalist that " I realise that gay people have put me on a pedestal and I love it . After all , of all the oppressed minorities , they just have to be the most oppressed . They have all the hassles of finding something or someone to identify with – and they chose me . I like being around gay people and they 've proven to be some of my closest friends and most loyal audiences . " Elsewhere , he nevertheless remarked that he felt his career had " transcended the gay movement . I mean , my sexuality has nothing to do with my music . When I 'm fucking I 'm not thinking about singing and vice versa . " He was openly critical of what he perceived as divisive tendencies within the gay community itself , noting that " I get this conformist shit from queens all the time . They always want to read me . They always want me to do it their way . I am not going to conform to the gay lifestyle as they see it and that 's for sure " . He was particularly critical of " clones " – gay men who dressed alike with boots , boot @-@ cut jeans , checked shirts and handlebar mustaches – stating that all too often they judged those gay people who were flamboyant or extravagant . 
 Davis characterized Sylvester as an " absolute perfectionist " . He was very self @-@ conscious about his physical appearance , and when he obtained enough money from the successful Step II album , he spent part of it on cosmetic surgery to remove a bump on his nose , inject silicone into his cheeks , and have cosmetic work done on his teeth . He would also insist that all pictures of himself were meticulously airbrushed . 
 Sylvester was born and raised into the Pentecostal denomination of Christianity , and remained a Christian throughout his life . He often compared the ecstatic feelings that accompanied his onstage performances with the feelings experienced in a gospel choir in a Pentecostal church . When performances reached a certain level of heightened emotion , he would comment that " we had service . " In later life , he joined the Love Center Church in East Oakland , a ministry founded by the preacher and former gospel singer Walter Hawkins in the 1970s . He had been introduced to the church by Jean Tracie in the 1980s and would soon become a regular churchgoer , enjoying the place 's welcoming attitude towards societal outcasts . Sylvester requested that his funeral be undertaken by the ministry at the Love Center . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During the late 1970s , Sylvester gained the moniker of the " Queen of Disco " , a term that continued to be given to the singer into the 21st century . The English journalist Stephen Brogan later described him as " a star who shined brightly . He only happened once . He was a radical and a visionary in terms of queerness , music and race . " Reynaldo Anderson of Harris @-@ Stowe State University described Sylvester 's influence upon disco and subsequent electronic dance music as " incalculable " . He added that Sylvester 's songs " Dance ( Disco Heat ) " , " You Make Me Feel ( Mighty Real ) " , and " Do You Wanna Funk " represented " anthems of disco aficionados for a generation " , while also expressing the view that Sylvester himself " personified the excesses of the 1970s and the experimentation that characterized [ the decade 's ] changing social norms " within the United States . 
 Shapiro cited Sylvester alongside other artists like Wendy Carlos , Throbbing Gristle , and Terre <unk> as an individual who used electronic music as " a vehicle to express sexual transgression " , while in her study of the use of falsetto in disco , Anne @-@ Lise François believed that Sylvester 's style of singing " makes the point most obviously about falsetto as a gender @-@ bending device . " The cultural studies scholar Tim Lawrence stated that Sylvester embodied " the [ disco ] movement 's gay roots " , and in doing could be contrasted with John Travolta , who embodied " its commercialization and suburbanization " ; the two figures thus reflected a divide between the gay and straight interpretations and presentations of disco music . <unk> Philips and Marla R. Stewart compared Sylvester to both Willi Ninja and RuPaul as pop icons who exhibited " male femininity " within the " Black male diva ( or ' queen ' ) tradition " . 
 In his will , Sylvester had declared that royalties from the future sale of this music be devoted to two HIV / AIDS charities , Project Open Hand and the AIDS Emergency Fund . Although Sylvester died deeply in debt as a result of taking advances on his royalties , by the early 1990s this debt had been paid off , and a balance had begun to build up . Roger Gross , the attorney to Sylvester 's manager and the openly gay lawyer who helped him draw up his will , petitioned the probate court to designate the charities as the beneficiaries of Sylvester 's will . The proceeds of $ 140 @,@ 000 in accrued royalties were split between the two groups , and they will continue to be paid the royalties in the future . 
 In September 19 , 2005 , Sylvester was one of three artists inducted into the Dance Music Hall of Fame , alongside Chic and Gloria Gaynor . 
 = = = Biographies , documentaries , and musicals = = = 
 A biography of Sylvester was authored by Gamson and published in 2005 . Writing for the London @-@ based LGBT magazine Beige : The Provocative Cultural Quarterly , Stephen Brogan expressed his opinion that while Gamson 's biography was well researched , it had a fragmented structure and as such was " not a joy to read " . Entertainment Weekly called the book " playful and furious " and awarded it a B + rating , The Boston Globe suggested that it was " as engaging as the times it so energetically resurrects " , and The San Francisco Chronicle reported that the author " carefully paints the shifting social tapestry into his subject 's life story without ever taking Sylvester out of the foreground " . The Fabulous Sylvester won the 2006 Stonewall Book Award for nonfiction . In 2015 , Sylvester 's publicist Sharon Davis published memoirs of the time that she spent with Sylvester , noting that she planned for it to appear in 2013 to mark the 25th anniversary of Sylvester 's death . 
 In 2010 , the TV series Unsung aired an episode on Sylvester , that was later made available through YouTube . Sylvester : Mighty Real , an official feature @-@ length documentary on the life and career of Sylvester , entered production ; it featured interviews with members of Sylvester 's family and other artists and musicians who have been inspired by , but by 2012 the film 's progress had halted . 
 In August 2014 , an Off @-@ Broadway musical titled Mighty Real : A Fabulous Sylvester Musical opened at Theatre At St. Clement 's in New York City ; it was co @-@ directed by <unk> Bowman and Anthony Wayne , the latter of whom also performed as the titular character . Wayne stated that he discovered Sylvester 's story through a television documentary , and was subsequently " inspired by his drive to be who he was regardless of what he went through " , performing a concert of Sylvester 's songs with friends Anastacia McCleskey and Jacqueline B. Arnold as the Two Tons o ' Fun before deciding to begin work on the musical . A laudatory review of the musical from The New York Times noted that Wayne " certainly has the bravado , the androgynous sex appeal and the piercing voice to emulate the original convincingly . " The Huffington Post review noted that the musical largely avoided dealing with the decline in Sylvester 's musical success during the 1980s , and that although " anyone seeking an exhaustively researched play @-@ by @-@ play of the star 's life would be better off waiting for a documentary " , the musical " succeeds as a collection of infectious performances by a truly gifted cast . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 Mighty Real ( 1979 , Fantasy ) UK # 62 
 Sylvester 's Greatest Hits : Nonstop Dance Party ( 1983 , Fantasy ) 
 12 By 12 ( 1985 , Megatone ) 
 Immortal ( 1989 , Megatone ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Audio samples = = 
 = Sidewalk Talk = 
 " Sidewalk Talk " is a song by American record producer John " Jellybean " Benitez from his first extended play , Wotupski ! ? ! ( 1984 ) . It was released on October 21 , 1984 , by EMI Records as the first single from the EP . The song was written by Madonna and produced by Benitez . They had initially met in 1983 and Benitez worked as a producer on Madonna 's self @-@ titled debut album . When he started work on his debut EP , Wotupski ! ? ! , Madonna wrote " Sidewalk Talk " for him . The song features bass and electric guitars , synthesizers , piano as well drums . Lead vocals are sung by singer Catherine Buchanan , and background vocals by Madonna . 
 " Sidewalk Talk " received mixed review from critics , with David Nick Ybarra questioning crediting Buchanan as lead vocalist , instead of a better known singer like Madonna . The song was released initially in 12 @-@ inch promotional CD in remix formats to the DJs and the clubs , and reached the top of the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart . It was later released commercially in 7 @-@ inch and 12 @-@ inch formats , and charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . The song also had minor chart placements in the Netherlands , New Zealand as well as the United Kingdom . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 1983 , Madonna met John " Jellybean " Benitez , who worked as a DJ at the Funhouse club in lower Manhattan . Soon after , they started dating each other and worked on Madonna 's self @-@ titled debut album , released in 1983 . When Benitez started work on his debut EP , Wotupski ! ? ! , he asked Madonna to write a song for him . Within two days Madonna wrote " Sidewalk Talk " , whose idea she had initially thought of using on her debut album . According to Benitez , Wotupski ! ? ! was a concept album , " It 's a street slang in the Bronx . It means ' what 's up , what 's new ' ? " The artist credit of the song was simply Jellybean , with lead vocals credited to Catherine Buchanan . Madonna provided background vocals for the track with Audrey Wheeler and Cindy Mizelle . Benitez produced the track as well as arranged and mixed it . Michael Hutchinson assisted on engineering , recording and mixing the track . Producer Stephen Bray also arranged " Sidewalk Talk " with Benitez . Instrumentation featured in the track included bass guitar by Marcus Miller , synthesizer by Boyd Jarvis , Fred Zarr and Bray , electric guitar by Ira Siegel , percussion by Bashiri Johnson and Trevor Gale , and lastly drum programming by Benitez and Bray . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Sidewalk Talk " was first released as a 12 @-@ inch promotional single to US DJs and clubs on October 21 , 1984 . Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , said that the synthpop song " sounded like it was a leftover from [ Madonna 's ] debut album " because of its sonic similarity . Chuck Eddy , author of The Accidental Evolution of Rock 'n'roll : A Misguided Tour Through Popular Music , compared the track to the sound of American new wave band , Tom Tom Club . Billboard magazine 's dance music reviewer Brian Chin said that the song " touched base " with the Top @-@ 40 mainstream radio audience . For author Ira Robins , " Sidewalk Talk " was the " best track " on the EP , because of its " <unk> " . In 2011 , the EP was re @-@ released by Gold Legion Records , where four remixes of " Sidewalk Talk " was included . The CD booklet consisted of an essay by David Nick Ybarra , editor and founder of <unk> magazine . In the essay , Ybarra noted that " Sidewalk Talk " was never promoted in the press kits for the release of Wotupski ! ? ! Instead another song , " The Mexican " , was noted in the album cover 's advertising sticker . Nevertheless , Ybarra said that it was the inclusion of " Sidewalk Talk " which became the most critical aspect of the public 's interest in the release . In September 2014 , Rolling Stone ranked the song at number 71 on their list of the " 100 Best Singles of 1984 " . Maura Johnston from the magazine noted that the song was similar in composition to other production work of Benitez , like Madonna 's " Holiday " ( 1984 ) , and described it as distilling " the essence of New York — full of fast @-@ moving possibility and flash , but to be handled with caution in order to be survived . " 
 Regarding the song 's credits , Ybarra also found it mysterious that a relatively unknown singer like Buchanan received lead vocal billing , while Madonna was relegated as a backing vocalist . Wheeler , one of the backing vocalists , confirmed to Ybarra that she did not remember Buchanan being present in the recording studio . Ybarra theorized that Benitez might have intended " Sidewalk Talk " for Madonna 's first album , but since it was not included , he replaced Madonna 's vocals on the track with Buchanan since she was unknown . Thereby Benitez could use the track for his EP and it would not be mistaken as a vehicle for another artist other than Jellybean . In 1986 , Alvin and the Chipmunks covered the song for their TV series episode " Chipmunk Vice " . " Sidewalk Talk " appeared in the 1999 film Flawless and on its soundtrack album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Sidewalk Talk " debuted at number 36 on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the issue dated January 5 , 1985 . After five weeks , it reached the top of the chart , replacing Nuance 's song , " <unk> " . In an article published in Billboard , Chin noted that " Sidewalk Talk " was an unusual song to reach the top of the dance chart , since it was not released till then in commercially available 7 @-@ inch or 12 @-@ inch forms . The song was only serviced as remix forms to the clubs . Chin added that the song 's " emergence without a hard copy , so to speak , is highly uncharacteristic of a market , in which the ' commercial twelve ' is a given for a long @-@ show pop record . " The song harkened back to the time when remix forms were not available except for club promotions . " Sidewalk Talk " ranked at number 20 on the year end tabulation of the Top Dance Club Songs for 1985 . The song was released in 7 @-@ inch and 12 @-@ inch formats after eight months and entered the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 80 on the issue dated November 16 , 1985 . After twelve weeks , it reached a peak of number 18 on the chart . Its final appearance on the chart was on the week ending March 15 , 1986 . On the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , " Sidewalk Talk " reached a peak of number 51 , and was present for a total of nine weeks . 
 " Sidewalk Talk " also charted in the United Kingdom , where it was credited as " Jellybean featuring Catherine Buchanan " . It reached a peak of number 41 on the UK Singles Chart on the issue dated February 1 , 1986 , and was present for a total of four weeks . On the Netherlands Single Top 100 , it reached a peak of No. 31 , while on the Top 40 comprehensive chart , it peaked inside the top @-@ ten at number six . " Sidewalk Talk " also debuted at peaked at number 34 on the Official New Zealand Music Chart . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 John " Jellybean " Benitez – producer , arrangement , mixing , drum programming 
 Madonna – songwriter , background vocals 
 Catherine Buchanan – lead vocals 
 Stephen Bray – arrangement , synthesizer , drum programming 
 Michael Hutchinson – audio engineering , recording , mixing 
 Marcus Miller – bass guitar 
 Boyd Jarvis – synthesizer 
 Fred Zarr – synthesizer 
 Ira Siegel – electric guitar 
 Bashiri Johnson – percussion instrument 
 Trevor Gale – percussion instrument 
 Audrey Wheeler – background vocals 
 Cindy Mizelle – background vocals 
 Credits and personnel adapted from US 7 @-@ inch single liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hans Namuth = 
 Hans Namuth ( March 17 , 1915 – October 13 , 1990 ) was a German @-@ born photographer . Namuth specialized in portraiture , photographing many artists , including abstract expressionist Jackson Pollock . His photos of Pollock at work in his studio increased Pollock 's fame and recognition and led to a greater understanding of his work and techniques . Namuth used his outgoing personality and persistence to photograph many important artistic figures at work in their studios . 
 Namuth photographed many other painters such as Willem de Kooning , Robert Rauschenberg , and Mark Rothko and architects such as Frank Lloyd Wright , Philip Johnson , and Louis Kahn . Namuth focused on his rapport with his subjects , getting many reclusive figures such as Clyfford Still to agree to be photographed . Namuth 's work not only captured his subjects in their studios with their works , but also captured the relationship between photographer and subject as well as the subjects ' levels of self @-@ consciousness . Besides famous art figures , Namuth photographed the Mam people of Todos Santos , whose native lifestyles were being overrun by Western influences . Namuth died in a Long Island car crash in 1990 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hans Namuth was born March 17 , 1915 in Essen , Germany . His interests in his youth were mainly politics and the arts . Namuth cites his mother as most responsible for encouraging his interest in music and the arts . As a teenager , Namuth became familiar with German expressionism and French impressionism through the Folkwang Museum . Namuth 's father joined the Nazi Party in 1931 after becoming disillusioned due to an economic decline . This contrasted with the political views of his son , who found himself drawn to the liberal German Youth Movement . After Hans Namuth was arrested and briefly jailed for distributing anti @-@ Nazi materials in July 1933 , Namuth 's father intervened and arranged for him to be sent to Paris . During his time in Paris , Namuth took an assortment of jobs including newspaper boy , researcher , and dishwasher . 
 Namuth befriended many German expatriates in Paris , including photographer George Reisner . In 1935 , Reisner invited Namuth to assist him with his studio in Port de <unk> , Spain , and introduced the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Namuth to photography . After several months , the two returned to Paris , supporting themselves with photojournalism and occasional portraits . Namuth and Reisner were sent to cover the Workers ' Olympiad in July 1936 by French magazine Vu , which put them in Barcelona during the opening stages of the Spanish Civil War . Over the next nine months , the two photographed the war , providing photos to European publications . Namuth and Reisner returned to Paris in 1937 and continued their careers as photographers until 1939 . While in Paris , Namuth studied with Joseph <unk> , who taught him the technical aspects of photography . After increased tension and hostilities between France and Germany , Namuth and his fellow German expatriates were interned , though Namuth joined the French Foreign Legion to avoid his confinement . After being discharged in 1940 , Namuth fled to Marseilles and escaped to the United States with the help of journalist Varian Fry and his Emergency Rescue Committee . He arrived in New York City in 1941 and planned to join the Office of Strategic Services in 1943 out of a desire " to do something about everything " . However , he had fallen in love with French @-@ born Guatemalan Carmen Herrera and delayed his enlistment until he was drafted for World War II in December 1943 . After completing basic training , Namuth joined the intelligence services and worked as an interrogator and interpreter in England , France , and Czechoslovakia . Upon returning to Germany in 1945 to gather war criminals , Namuth realized , " I really had cut my navel cord completely and totally , not just with my home and family but with the country as such . I was completely out of it . " Namuth did not return to Germany until 1970 . 
 With the conclusion of World War II , Namuth left the army , having been awarded the Purple Heart and Croix de Guerre . Namuth returned to New York determined to raise enough money for his family while keeping photography as a hobby . After working for a paper research company for about a year and a half , the company went bankrupt , leaving Namuth without a job . Namuth realized he had been " doing something that really was not my dish " , and decided to return full @-@ time to photography . He set up his kitchen as a darkroom and began doing location work for architecture magazines , as he had been interested in architecture and design . Namuth was introduced to Alexey Brodovitch , a photographer , instructor , and art director of Harper 's Bazaar . Namuth began taking Brodovitch 's classes at The New School of Social Research , where he learned how to develop ideas and how to engage the concepts of his images from Brodovitch . He began working for Harper 's Bazaar , doing fashion photography , and later children 's fashion photography . 
 = = Jackson Pollock = = 
 Hans Namuth was not initially interested in the work of Jackson Pollock , but was convinced by his teacher Alexey Brodovitch that Pollock was an important painter . In July 1950 , Namuth approached Pollock and asked to photograph the artist working in his studio . Pollock agreed , encouraged by his wife , Lee Krasner , who was aware of the importance of media coverage . The resulting images helped to demystify Pollock 's famous " drip " technique of painting , revealing it to be a deliberative process rather than a random splashing of paint . They " helped transform Pollock from a talented , cranky loner into the first media @-@ driven superstar of American contemporary art , the jeans @-@ clad , chain @-@ smoking poster boy of abstract expressionism , " according to acclaimed culture critic Ferdinand <unk> . Not satisfied with black and white stills , Namuth wanted to create a color film that managed to focus on Pollock and his painting at the same time , partially because he found more interest in Pollock 's image than in his art . His solution was to have Pollock paint on a large sheet of glass as Namuth filmed from underneath the work . As Namuth could not afford professional lighting , the film was shot outside Pollock 's Long Island home . This documentary ( co @-@ produced with Paul Falkenberg ) is considered one of the most influential for artists . 
 In November 1950 , Namuth and Pollock 's relationship came to an abrupt conclusion . After coming in from the cold @-@ weather shoot of the glass painting , Pollock , who had been treated in the 1930s for alcoholism , poured himself a tumbler of bourbon whiskey after supposedly having been sober for two years . An argument between Namuth and Pollock ensued with each calling the other a " phony " , culminating in Pollock overturning a table of food and dinnerware in front of several guests . From then on , Pollock reverted to a more figure @-@ oriented style of painting , leading some to say that Namuth 's sessions robbed Pollock of his rawness and made Pollock come to feel disingenuous about doing things for the camera that he had originally done spontaneously . Art critic Jonathan Jones suggests that by filming Pollock , Namuth " broke the myth of trance " and by framing Pollock 's work in the larger surrounding landscape , destroyed Pollock 's view that his paintings were boundless . Jeffrey Potter , a close friend of Pollock 's , described Namuth as commanding , frequently telling Pollock when to start and stop painting . According to Potter , Pollock " felt what was happening was phony . " Namuth himself describes Pollock as being " very nervous and very self @-@ conscious " of the filming at the time , but less so when Pollock discussed it in a later interview . 
 During his time with Pollock , Hans Namuth had created two films and captured more than 500 photographs of the artist . These photos were first published in 1951 in Portfolio , a journal edited by Alexey Brodovitch and Franz Zachary . After the death of Pollock in 1956 , Namuth 's photos grew in popularity and were often used in articles about the painter in place of Pollock 's artwork itself . Art historian Barbara Rose states that the photographs changed art by focusing on the creation of art rather than the final product alone . Younger artists such as Bruce Nauman , Richard Serra , and Robert Morris were able not only to view Pollock 's paintings , but , with Namuth 's images , to see Pollock in the act of painting , giving rise to the popularity of Process Art . These photos have also allowed art historians to dissect the details of Pollock 's method . For example , art historian Pepe Karmel found that Pollock 's painting in Namuth 's first black @-@ and @-@ white film began with several careful drippings forming two humanoid figures and a wolf before being covered beneath several layers of paint . 
 = = Other artists = = 
 The popularity drawn from his work with Pollock helped Namuth gain access to other members of the abstract expressionist movement including Willem de Kooning and Mark Rothko . During the construction of de Kooning 's studio over the years , Namuth photographed its progress as well as de Kooning 's paintings from this period . Namuth took an especially large number of photos of de Kooning 's Reclining Man , possibly indicating the painting 's importance to Namuth or de Kooning . Namuth photographed many architects including Frank Lloyd Wright , Walter Gropius , and Louis Kahn . 
 = = Later work = = 
 Namuth and his wife had first visited Guatemala in 1946 out of interest in his wife 's native land and Namuth photographed the native Mam people of Todos Santos . Namuth returned in 1978 to survey the damage of an earthquake and was shocked to find the native customs of the Mam threatened by influences such as alcoholism . Namuth published these black @-@ and @-@ white photos in his 1989 book , Los Todos <unk> , in an effort to catalog and preserve images of the town 's population and customs . He began to work regularly for Art News in 1979 , producing 19 covers for the magazine over four years . Namuth died in 1990 in a Long Island automobile accident not far from where Pollock had similarly died in a car crash . 
 The full archive of Namuth 's work is located at the Center for Creative Photography ( CCP ) at the University of Arizona in Tucson , which also manages the copyright of his work . 
 = = Subject interaction and technique = = 
 Namuth found that the rapport he developed with his subjects was integral to making them feel comfortable being photographed while working . While Namuth was known to be a technically skilled photographer , his sociable and outgoing personality contributed largely to his notability in the New York art scene . Namuth was also persistent when persuading his subjects to agree to be photographed , including sculptor Joseph Cornell , who took two years to be convinced . He generally managed to put his subject at ease well enough so that they could work naturally in their environments without any artificial stiffness . Largely because of this , self @-@ conscious artists such as Clyfford Still and Saul Steinberg agreed to be subjects for Namuth 's photography . However , critic Sarah Boxer suggests that it is difficult to view photos of such artists without considering the possibility that they were trying to gain fame in a manner similar to Pollock . Though Namuth developed personal relationships with many of his subjects , art critic Hilton Kramer describes Namuth as " something of a hero worshiper . " 
 Namuth 's photographs included objects related to his subjects , such as paint tubes , items from around their homes , and their works of art . His photos also captured his own interactions with subjects , showing how comfortable they were at the time of shooting . Some subjects , such as Frank Stella , seemed to be intoxicated with the idea of being photographed by Namuth , while others , including Mark Rothko and Robert Rauschenberg , ignored Namuth during their photo sessions . Other photographs exude tension between photographer and subject , as if Namuth were an unwelcome guest in their workspace , as in the cases of artists Louise Nevelson and Jasper Johns . Often , Namuth 's subjects are uncomfortable in front of the camera , as were architects Eero Saarinen and Buckminster Fuller . Almost all of Namuth 's images of male artists , with the notable exception of Pollock , appear to be taking contemplative or otherwise self @-@ absorbed poses . 
 = The Master Plan ( Parks and Recreation ) = 
 " The Master Plan " is the 23rd and penultimate episode of the second season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 29th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 13 , 2010 . In the episode , Pawnee 's major budget problems result in state auditors ( Adam Scott and Rob Lowe ) arriving to make major cuts , much to Leslie 's horror and Ron 's delight . Meanwhile , Andy contemplates asking April to be his girlfriend , and Tom seeks a new girlfriend . 
 The episode was directed by Dean Holland and written by series co @-@ creator Michael Schur . " The Master Plan " featured the first series appearances by Scott and Lowe , who became permanent cast members as characters Ben Wyatt and Chris Traeger . The episode also introduced Natalie Morales as Lucy , Tom 's new girlfriend , and featured guest appearances by Ralph Richeson as " the ghoulish man " and regular series guests Ben Schwartz , April Marie Eden and Alison Becker . 
 The idea of Pawnee 's governmental problems were inspired by news reports at the time of a number of states shutting down schools , parks and other services due to the global recession . " The Master Plan " marked the end of the romantic relationship between Ann ( Rashida Jones ) and Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , which allowed for the eventual departure of Schneider from the series . A subplot featuring romantic elements between Ann and Chris was a late addition to the script to better connect Lowe to the cast . 
 This episode features six characters ( five main characters ) meeting their eventual spouses for the first time . Ann and Chris meet , Leslie and Ben meet and Tom and Lucy meet . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " The Master Plan " was seen by 4 @.@ 28 million household viewers , a five percent increase in viewership compared to the previous episode , " Telethon " . The episode received generally positive reviews , with several commentators praising the addition of Scott and Lowe to the cast , although some said Scott had more long @-@ term potential as a character than Lowe . " The Master Plan " and the rest of the second season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on November 30 , 2010 , which included an extended 30 @-@ minute " producer 's cut " of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) excitedly prepares to present the parks department budget proposal , or " master plan " . However , city manager Paul ( Phil Reeves ) , announces due to Pawnee 's huge budget deficit , all proposals will be postponed indefinitely . State auditors have been sent by the governor to solve the impasse , which makes Leslie fear severe cuts . Ron ( Nick Offerman ) is delighted because he hates any government spending , which leads him to heated arguments with Leslie . Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) is turning 21 and is having her birthday party at Tom 's ( Aziz Ansari ) favorite nightclub , the Snakehole Lounge . Andy ( Chris Pratt ) debates whether to ask April to be his girlfriend , but worries about the age difference because he is 29 . Ann ( Rashida Jones ) has broken up with Mark ( Paul Schneider ) , who was left confused because they never fought or even argued with each other . Ann explains their relationship simply did not have the right chemistry for her . 
 State auditors Chris Traeger ( Rob Lowe ) and Ben Wyatt ( Adam Scott ) soon arrive , and the extremely cheerful Chris paints an optimistic picture of how they will fix the budget , but leaves the details to the more serious Ben . When Ben explains they will need to slash the budget of every department by nearly 40 or 50 percent , Leslie angrily lashes out at Ben , who responds to her that the poorly managed government is to blame . Later , at April 's party , Tom desperately tries to pick up women , but to no avail , while Leslie and Ann get extremely drunk together . Andy and April appear to be getting along , but when he goes to the bar to get a drink for April , a drunken Ann flirts with him . An upset April flirts with Tom 's annoying friend Jean @-@ Ralphio ( Ben Schwartz ) to make Andy jealous . Andy gets upset , believing he misread April 's signals all along , and April later regrets what she did . Ben arrives at the party and tries to smooth things out with a drunken Leslie , but she again angrily lashes out at him . 
 The next morning , Ann fears she made out with someone at the party but cannot remember . She eventually learns she made out with Chris , who shows a romantic interest in her . Tom returns to the Snakehole Lounge to close his tab , where he meets the bartender , Lucy ( Natalie Morales ) , who makes fun of his efforts to pick up women . The two get along and Lucy gives Tom her phone number , to his immense pleasure . Leslie decides to apologize to Ben , and he invites her out for a beer . As they finally start to get along , Leslie realizes Ben was the mayor of a small town called Partridge , Minnesota . It was national news because he was only 18 when elected , and he promptly drove the entire government into the ground . Ben became a state auditor to prove he can be responsible and restart his political career . Later , at the parks department budget meeting , Chris and Ben reveal Pawnee 's budget crisis was far worse than previously thought and that the Pawnee government will shut down until further notice , horrifying Leslie and delighting Ron . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " The Master Plan " was written by Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator , Michael Schur . It was his fifth writing credit for the series after , " Pilot " , " Greg Pikitis " , " Christmas Scandal " , and " Galentine 's Day " . The idea of state auditors visiting Pawnee , and the subsequent government shutdown , was inspired by news reports at the time of a number of states considering shutting down schools , parks and other services due to the global recession . In particular , Schur cited stories about Kansas City closing down several of their public schools , and Idaho threatening to shut down the state parks department . Similar measures were being discussed in such states as New York , New Jersey and California . This was in keeping with efforts by the Parks and Recreation writers to be more topical with second season episodes . Upon learning of the spending freeze , Ron and Leslie engage in heated arguments over the function of government , with Leslie insisting the government is meant to provide social services and Ron advocating as little government intervention as possible . Throughout most of the second season , much of the relationship between Leslie and Ron focused on the two developing a mutual respect for each other . However , with the introduction of the Ben Wyatt character and the conflict over budget problems in Pawnee , the writers included these arguments between Leslie and Ron to illustrate their conflicting political ideologies and develop tension amid the character and the city hall setting . 
 " The Master Plan " marked the end of the romantic relationship between Mark and Ann , which had lasted throughout the entire second season . This allowed for the eventual departure of Paul Schneider , who was leaving the series at the end of the second season . The title of " The Master Plan " stemmed from the fact that real @-@ life municipal planning documents in small American towns are often called the " master plan " , like the one Leslie refers to in the episode . Schur said of this , " It seems so funny to call the municipal budgets and planning documents for a small city in Indiana the ' master plan ' . " Schur said the Parks and Recreation writing staff believed the title of the episode was appropriate because the subplots of " The Master Plan " revolved around the various plans of the characters . While Leslie is dealing with the literal master plan for the Pawnee budget proposal , April 's plan is to seek a romantic relationship with Andy , and Tom 's plan is to find a girlfriend at April 's birthday party . 
 The idea of Ann making out with Chris Traeger was not part of the original screenplay , but was added after the first cast read @-@ through of the script . The writing staff felt that while Ben was immediately connected to Leslie and the other characters through his role in eliminating wasteful spending at Pawnee , Chris still needed something to more strongly connect to the cast , and the subplot with Ann was determined to be a funny way to do it . In one scene , after Ben explains the need for severe budget cuts at Pawnee , Ron asks Leslie , " What 's a not gay way to ask him to go camping with me ? " That line was not in the first draft of the script , but was added during filming as a possible alternative line for the editors to choose from later . The staff found it so funny , however , that they chose to use it and the original line was never filmed . 
 During another scene at the Snakehole Lounge , a drunken Leslie angrily yells to Ben , " I just talked to everybody in this bar and nobody wants you here . " That line was written by Harris Wittels , who wrote past screenplays for other Parks and Recreation episodes . During the end credits , Andy sings a song he wrote for April called " November , " which includes the lyrics , " Let 's spread our wings and fly on a date . " This is also a reference to " Woman of the Year , " in which Andy explained every song he writes includes either the lyrics , " Spread your wings and fly " or " You deserve to be a champion . " Schur , who wrote the words to " November " , said it was especially challenging working one of those phrases into a love song . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " The Master Plan " marked the first appearance of Adam Scott , who also appeared in the subsequent season finale " Freddy Spaghetti " and became a regular cast member during the third season . Scott left the Starz comedy Party Down to join the Parks and Recreation cast , a decision he made in part because it was unclear whether Starz would renew the series : " It was a matter of me asking Starz if it was going to continue , and them saying they weren 't ready to make that decision . I couldn 't pass up the opportunity on Parks and Rec for a show that could possibly not exist anymore . " Schur said when the Ben Wyatt character was written , Scott was envisioned as the " dream scenario " for casting . Schur described Scott as " brilliant and funny " and praised his comedic range : " There just aren 't that many people with a comedic range that spans ' Step Brothers ' to ' Party Down . ' " . Several commentators said Ben Wyatt closely resembles the character Scott played on Party Down , Henry Pollard . While Ben was a politician who found great success at a young age then suffered a downfall , Henry was an actor who became a caterer after his acting career declined . Scott , however , said he feels they are " vastly different characters and circumstances " . The idea of a character trying to rebuild a government career following a humiliating public failure was one of the original ideas for the series of Parks and Recreation in general , but one that was ultimately not used until the Ben Wyatt character was introduced . During the scene when Ben explains his failed mayoral tenure , shots of a newspaper clip with images of the character 's prom pictures are shown . Those pictures are the actual high school prom photos of actor Adam Scott . 
 The episode also featured the first in a string of guest appearances by actor Rob Lowe , who had recently departed from the ABC drama series Brothers & Sisters . As a joke , Rob Lowe 's credit during the opening credits reads " and introducing Rob Lowe " . Unlike Scott , Lowe was originally not expected to join the regular cast , but rather make guest appearances in " Freddy Spaghetti " and six third season episodes before departing the show . However , after those episodes were filmed , Lowe later joined the show as a regular cast member . Lowe said he loved playing the part , which he described as " a big fat nerd " and " the most positive person in the world [ with ] unrelenting enthusiasm " , adding , " He is also very , very intense and specific . So whether he 's ordering how he would like his water or describing the kind of colors he wants on a graph , everything means the world to him . " Throughout the episode , whenever he meets someone new , Chris Traeger points directly at their face and slowly repeats their name . Schur said this habit was the first element the writers conceived for the character . In one line of the episode , while describing his exercise regimen and supplements , " Scientists believe that the first human being who will live 150 years has already been born . I believe I am that human being . " That line was inspired by Schur 's wife , J. J. Philbin , who had recently read an article about that scientific prediction and felt it applied to the character . Parks and Recreation was suffering in the Nielsen ratings when " The Master Plan " aired , and it was hoped Lowe 's appearance would help increase viewership . Lowe 's performance was heavily publicized in advance of the episode 's original broadcast . 
 " The Master Plan " featured several other guest appearances . Ben Schwartz returned to his recurring role as Tom 's fast @-@ talking friend , Jean @-@ Ralphio . Natalie Morales , best known for her role in the ABC Family science @-@ fiction dramedy The Middleman , made her first Parks and Recreation appearance in the episode as Lucy , a Pawnee bartender and romantic interest for Tom . The scene between Lucy and Tom at the Snakehole Lounge was the same scene Natalie Morales read during her audition for the part , although the dialogue was rewritten slightly before filming . The line with Lucy asking Tom if he flirted with so many women because he was expected to have a " 43 @-@ way " was added during the rewrite . Ralph Richeson , best known for playing the unkempt hotel employee Richardson in the HBO drama series Deadwood , briefly appeared as an unkempt man seeking a marriage license in the Pawnee town hall . Richeson is credited as " <unk> Man " in the episode 's end credits . April Marie Eden , who played beauty contest winner Trish <unk> in the episode " Beauty Pageant " , reprised that role in " The Master Plan " , in scenes where Tom flirted with her relentlessly at the Snakehole Lounge . Alison Becker , who played local reporter Shauna Malwae @-@ Tweep in several past episodes , filmed several scenes where she and Andy flirt , but he ultimately rejects her due to his feelings for April . All of these scenes were cut from the final episode due to length restrictions , which Schur said he regretted because he found Becker very funny . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 " The Master Plan " was directed by Dean Holland , his third directorial credit after " Greg Pikitis " and " Sweetums " . The script read @-@ through and filming took place in March 2010 . Rob Lowe 's first day of filming took place on his birthday , March 17 , which was the same day the scene where he kissed Rashida Jones was shot . The original cut of " The Master Plan " was a full 30 minutes and had to be cut down to 22 minutes for broadcast . The staff of Parks and Recreation had difficulty editing the episode down because the script involved so many interconnected subplots between the characters . Screenwriter Harris Wittels said , " As soon as you 'd cut one thing , you had to cut something else because it was tied to another piece . " Among the scenes cut were an extended cold open in which Ron gives April a handgun for her 21st birthday , much to the chagrin of Leslie . Also cut was a scene in which Ron chastises Leslie for yelling at Ben at the Snakehole Lounge and orders her to apologize to him so she will not be fired . Instead , the episode was changed to reflect that Leslie decided to apologize to Ben herself , with the line from Leslie " I have to go swallow my pride " added just before she spoke to Ben . 
 During one scene , Ann and Mark have a discussion at J.J. ' s Diner , a Pawnee restaurant that had previously been featured in the episodes " The Reporter " and " Summer Catalog " . In all three episodes , a different interior set is used , although the exterior building shots are the same . At the Snakehole Lounge , Tom flirts with a woman by giving her a bottle cap " to remember him by " , then later unsuccessfully tries to find her again in the nightclub . This was not part of the script , and was conceived and added to the episode about 10 minutes before the scene was shot . During one of the final scenes , when Ben informs Leslie and Ron that the Pawnee government will be shut down , Ron looks directly at the camera and makes a comical grin . Although Leslie is supposed to be horrified by the news , the scene had to be re @-@ shot many times because she kept laughing at Ron 's facial expression . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Andy says of Jean @-@ Ralphio , " That Ralph Macchio guy 's a total douche . " This is a reference to Ralph Macchio , an actor who appeared in the 1983 drama film The Outsiders , which also starred Rob Lowe . The line was improvised by actor Chris Pratt . In another scene , Ben tells Leslie the song he played after getting sworn in as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old mayor was " <unk> ! ( There It Is ) " , a 1993 hip hop song by the duo Tag Team . The episode features several quotes from author and outdoorsman Jack London . Among them , which Leslie reads from her master plan proposal , is , " You can 't wait for inspiration . You have to go after it with a club , " and " So I say the function of man is to live , not to exist . I would rather that my spark should burn out in a brilliant blaze than it should be stifled by dry @-@ rot . " The original script included about one dozen different London quotes , but most were cut from the final draft . Schur said he used London quotes because he believed the author was one both Leslie and Ron would admire . At one point in the episode , while discussing April 's birthday , Leslie says , " Damn the wheel of the world ! Why must it continually turn over ? " to which Ron replied approvingly , " Jack London . " The line was improvised by actor Nick Offerman . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Master Plan " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 28 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research . It marked a five percent increase in viewership compared to the previous episode , " Telethon " , and was the only NBC series on May 13 to show an improvement in ratings over the previous week ; the comedies The Office , Community , 30 Rock and The Marriage Ref all saw declines . HitFix writer Daniel Fienberg did not believe Rob Lowe 's guest appearance significantly helped the Parks and Recreation ratings , calling the increase " a statistically irrelevant bump " . " The Master Plan " received a 2 @.@ 7 rating / 5 share among overall viewers , and a 2 @.@ 0 rating / 6 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . Parks and Recreation ranked third in its timeslot , behind the CBS reality series Survivor : Heroes vs. Villains and the Fox crime drama Bones , but received higher ratings than the ABC science @-@ fiction drama FlashForward and the first season finale of the CW Network supernatural fantasy series The Vampire Diaries . 
 " The Master Plan " received generally positive reviews . Matt Fowler of IGN said the budget problems created strong character development potential for Leslie and comedic opportunities for Ron . Fowler also enjoyed that the normally @-@ dissolute Tom formed an authentic romantic connection , and said Chris Pratt brought " a certain naturalness " to a role that could otherwise have been overly idiotic . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club strongly praised the episode , praising Rob Lowe and the entire regular cast . He declared Parks and Recreation the best television show since Arrested Development , and said , " As much as I like the ' 50 jokes a minute ' style of comedies ... I 'm a sucker for a show where the characters are as well @-@ wrought and as purely funny as they are on this show . " HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall praised the implementation of the new characters , particularly the fact that the script did not rely too heavily on them . Sepinwall also said the episode balanced well the workplace humor with the romantic subplots between Leslie and Ben , April and Andy , and Ann and Chris . 
 New York Daily News writer David Hinckley said Lowe and Scott were strong additions to the show , and that Scott 's character in Parks was better than his character in Party Down . Hinckley said the humor " remains happily rooted in the show 's eccentric characters " , although he said some of the jokes , like Andy 's " November " song " sometimes feels like a series of short sketches instead of a show " . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell described Lowe as entertaining but " one @-@ note " , but said Adam Scott was " much more promising and nuanced " , with better potential for a romantic interest for Leslie than previous guest stars like Will Arnett and Justin Theroux . Kandell felt Schneider 's imminent departure from the series seemed unceremonious , and praised Nick Offerman 's reactions of " unbridled ecstasy " at the idea of cutbacks and the government shutdown . Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic expressed doubt about the long @-@ term effectiveness of Lowe 's character , and said the April and Andy subplot felt " dragged out for yet another week " . However , he praised the script , the addition of Scott , and the performance of the entire cast , especially Rashida Jones and Aziz Ansari . Hochberger said , " I 'm not convinced Parks and Recreation could have a bad episode at this point in the season . " TV Squad writer Kona Gallagher felt " The Master Plan " was an especially important episode due to the addition of the Lowe and Scott characters , the beginning of Mark 's exit from the series and the economic problems for Pawnee . However , Gallagher also said the episode felt mostly like a preparation for the third season . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 After " The Master Plan " aired , a producer 's cut of the episode was featured on the official NBC website . It included eight extra minutes , which consisted of deleted scenes , an extended ending and additional footage with Lowe and Scott . This version of the episode , along with the 22 @-@ minute television version and the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was later released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . It also included a commentary track for " The Master Plan " featuring Nick Offerman , Adam Scott , Dean Holland , Michael Schur , Harris Wittels and Parks and Recreation producer Morgan Sackett . 
 = Xenoblade Chronicles = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles , known in Japan as Xenoblade ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) , is an action role @-@ playing game developed by Monolith Soft and published by Nintendo for the Wii home console . Initially released in Japan in 2010 , it later released in Europe in 2011 , and was eventually released in North America in 2012 . A port to the New Nintendo 3DS was released worldwide in 2015 . Xenoblade Chronicles forms part of the Xeno metaseries , although no direct narrative connections exist to previous Xeno games , and incorporates aesthetic and narrative elements from both fantasy and science fiction . The game features navigation through an open world split into zones , side @-@ quests tied to party members ' affinity , and a real @-@ time action @-@ based battle system which incorporates the main character 's ability to see glimpses of the future . 
 Xenoblade Chronicles takes place on the frozen bodies of two warring Titans , the Bionis and the Mechonis . The people of Bionis , including the human @-@ like Homs , are in a perpetual war with the Machina machine race of Mechonis . Key to the Homs ' efforts in fighting the Machina 's Mechon army is the Monado , a sword said to have been wielded by the Bionis . In an attack on his colony , the main protagonist Shulk sees his childhood friend Fiora killed . Having discovered his ability to wield the Monado , he sets out on a quest for revenge with his best friend , Reyn , and gathers more people as he goes on this epic quest . 
 The concept for Xenoblade Chronicles originated in June 2006 when the game 's executive director and lead writer , Tetsuya Takahashi , visualized and then constructed a model of two giant gods frozen in place with people living on their bodies . Development began that year under the title Monado : The Beginning of the World , though it was eventually rebranded with its current title in honor of Takahashi 's previous work . The script was worked on by Takahashi , anime writer Yuichiro Takeda , and in @-@ house Nintendo writer <unk> Hattori . The music was handled by six different musicians , including first @-@ timer and lead composer Manami Kiyota and industry veterans Yoko Shimomura and Yasunori Mitsuda . 
 The game was announced in 2009 under its original title , and released in Japan the following year . Despite releasing in Europe , its North American released remained unconfirmed until December 2011 , during which time a fan campaign called Operation Rainfall had drawn considerable attention to the game . Upon release , the game received critical acclaim as one of the best recent role @-@ playing games , while its port was praised for successfully re @-@ creating the game in portable form . It also met with commercial success in both Japan and the West . A spiritual successor by the same development team for the Wii U , Xenoblade Chronicles X , was released in 2015 . Xenoblade Chronicles was later rereleased on the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop in August 2015 in PAL regions , and April 2016 for North America . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles plays as a role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) , where the player controls one character out of a party of three using the Wii Remote and Nunchuk or the Classic Controller . The game employs an open world design , with players able to freely navigate seamlessly interconnected environments . A day @-@ and @-@ night time cycle exists in the game , with the time of day often affecting in @-@ game events , quests , enemy strengths , and item availability : for instance , stronger enemy types appear at night . While time flows automatically and a day cycle repeats about every ten minutes in real time , players can adjust the in @-@ game clock to the desired time at any point . Additionally , while the game is about exploration , many areas , called " Landmarks " aid in traversing the land by serving as warp points , allowing the player to instantly return to that point at any time . The game also supports a " save anywhere " feature , where players can save at any point outside battle . The game also contains a New Game + mode , which pulls over much of the player 's progress from their first playthrough into future playthroughs . 
 Exploration , quest completion , and item collection are large parts of the gameplay . The player is encouraged to explore the large environments , which generally allow the player to visit whatever can be seen in the horizon . While exploring , the player may choose to take on side quests from various non @-@ player characters that inhabit the game 's world , as they commonly involve locating certain items or killing a certain number of enemy characters . When the necessary requirements are fulfilled , the quests complete automatically without the player needing to manually notify in @-@ game characters of its completion , provided that the non @-@ player characters are generic @-@ named , e.g. , Colony 9 Resident and Defence Force Soldier . Item collection plays a role in the game in the form of the game 's " Collectopedia " . Scattered across all major regions of the game are glowing blue orbs , and upon coming into contact with the orb , the player is awarded an item at random , which is added to the player 's inventory . From there , the player may add the item to the Collectopedia , and when a certain number are collected during exploration , the player is rewarded with new items . Aside from the Collectopedia , there are also ether crystals to be found from fallen enemies or ether crystal deposits , which give the player access to a multifaceted " Gem Crafting " mini @-@ game , allowing for the creation of gems that may increase battle stats when equipped . 
 Many in @-@ game systems affect the general flow of gameplay . The " Affinity " system tracks the relationships between characters and locations in the game . " Location Affinity " tracks the interpersonal relationships between all of the game 's named characters , depicting to which degree they get along with one another , and a town 's general perception of the player 's controllable party . Completing quests can alter perception of the characters , and open up additional story sequences . There is also " Party Affinity " , which is strictly the level of affection between each party member , ranging from indifference to love . These affinities can be raised by having characters participate in battle together , giving gifts , or using the " Heart @-@ to @-@ Heart " system . These " Heart @-@ to @-@ Hearts " are intimate moments between two characters that can show more of a character 's personality , history , or thoughts , and can be initiated by having a certain level of Affinity between them . The Affinity system ties into how efficient characters work together in battle and gem crafting . The game also has an extensive customization system , which includes changing the characters ' outfits and weapons . These changes are directly reflected in the game , appearing in the field and even during scripted event scenes . 
 = = = Battle system = = = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles has a real @-@ time action @-@ based battle system , where the player manually moves the current lead character in real @-@ time , and party members will " auto @-@ attack " when enemies enter their attack radius . Manually input attacks , called " Arts " , may also be performed by the player , but in a limited fashion . Battle Arts are only available after a " cool down " period that occurs after every use , while character specific " Talent Arts " only become available after enough auto @-@ attacks are executed . Both party members and enemies have a finite amount of health points , and attacks deplete this value . Combat is won when all enemies lose their HP , but the game is lost if the player 's character loses all their HP and has no means of being revived . Health may be restored by the player by using healing Arts in battle , or the player may let characters ' HP regenerate automatically outside of battle . Winning battles earns the player experience points , which allows the characters to grow stronger by leveling up and learning new Arts . Arts for each character must be set by the player on their respective set up , called a " Battle Palette " , outside battles . 
 Several other systems are present to affect the flow of battle . The " Party Gauge " slowly fills as party members successfully land hits on the enemy players , and filling the gauge allows the player to chain multiple attacks together , for extra damage . All party members have an " aggro ring " around them as well ; the more actions a character performs , the larger it grows . Larger aggro rings lead enemies to focus their efforts on that respective character , leading to a strategic aspect of luring and diverting attention of enemies . Each character has a " Tension " gauge , which represents a character 's morale : at its highest point , characters have a high probability of dealing a critical blow and less chance of missing an enemy . The game 's " Vision " system , where main character Shulk can see glimpses of enemies ' future attacks , also factors into battles . With knowledge of an enemy 's potentially dangerous attack , the player can prevent it from happening by alerting a teammate , allowing the player to activate one of their Arts , or by using an Art of their own to stop the attack . The Vision system is tied to the " Party " gauge , which is filled by boosting team morale , using Arts with special effects , and avoiding or dealing critical hits . The three @-@ tiered gauge gradually depletes outside of battle , and one tier is needed to either revive characters or receive visions . When all three tiers are full , the party can execute a chain attack . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting and characters = = = 
 The setting of Xenoblade Chronicles originated in a world that was nothing but endless ocean , until two great titans , the Bionis and the Mechonis , came into existence . The two titans fought a timeless battle , until with one final strike , only their corpses remained , forever locked in combat . The gods have since become the home of multiple forms of life . The Bionis houses organic lifeforms including human @-@ like Homs , the diminutive <unk> , and a race known as the High Entia . The Mechonis is home to a hostile machine race known as the Machina . A key weapon used by the Homs in the battle against the attacking Machina is the Monado , a mystical sword linked to the Bionis which grants visions of the future to its wielder . 
 The game 's main character is Shulk , a scientist who lives in the settlement of Colony 9 on Bionis . During an attack by Machina warriors , called Mechon , Shulk comes into possession of the Monado . During his journey , Shulk is joined by Reyn , Shulk 's childhood friend and headstrong member of the Defence Force ; Dunban , a former wielder of the Monado and the brother of Shulk 's other childhood friend Fiora ; <unk> , a medic and sniper from Colony 6 ; Melia Antiqua , crown princess of the High Entia and a half @-@ blood ; and Riki , a member of the <unk> who is chosen as the hero of his village . Other important characters include Dickson , Shulk 's mentor ; Mumkhar , a cowardly soldier who was Dunban 's rival for wielding the Monado ; Egil , leader of the Machina ; and Alvis , a mysterious man who aids Shulk on his journey . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game 's opening details events one year past , when Dickson , Dunban , and Mumkhar were fighting a Mechon army . Mumkhar deserts , and in the process of defeating the Mechon the Monado paralyses Dunban 's right arm : in the present , Shulk studies the Monado in Colony 9 , where Dunban and Fiora live . Colony 9 is soon attacked by a group of Mechon led by a special Face Mechon called Metal Face . Dunban is almost killed when he attempts to use the Monado again , prompting Shulk to use it : he wields it with ease , and receives visions of the future from it . While the Mechon are driven back , Metal Face proves immune to the Monado and kills Fiora before fleeing . Swearing revenge against Metal Face , Shulk sets out together with Reyn , meeting <unk> and reuniting with Dunban on their journey . Guided by a vision from Shulk , the group travel to the High Entia capital to gain entry to Prison Island , joined by Melia and Riki . Shulk also meets Alvis , who is revealed to share Shulk 's ability to wield the Monado . Gaining entry , they encounter Zanza , a being who created the Monado and who offers Shulk the ability to destroy the Face Mechon , revealed to be humans inside Mechon mechs . Though Shulk accepts and the Monado is granted the ability to destroy humans , Zanza is killed by Metal Face and another Mechon called Face Nemesis during an attack on the capital . During the ensuing battle , Face Nemesis is damaged to reveal a recreated and amnesiac Fiora controlling it . 
 While initially disheartened by this , Shulk is rallied by his comrades and sets out in pursuit of Metal Face and Fiora . During a peaceful encounter with Fiora , Metal Face attacks them again , revealing itself to be Mumkhar . Egil then intervenes , spiriting Fiora away . On the way to the Mechonis , the party finally kill Mumkhar , then face off against Egil and Fiora . In the resultant fight , Shulk and Fiora are separated from the group . During their time together , Shulk successfully awakens Fiora 's memories , and learns that another being was controlling her body . Reuniting with the group , they meet up with a friendly Machina named <unk> . She reveals that the Bionis and Mechonis were initially at peace , before the Bionis ' god Zanza launched an unprovoked attack . Since the battle a year before , Egil has been working to convert the life of Bionis into Mechon to render the Monado useless . Going to face Egil , Fiora is taken over by the other presence , the Machina goddess Meyneth . They reach Egil as he reactivates the Mechonis and begins an attack on the Bionis , seeking to prevent the Bionis from using its population as food and save Mechonis from another attack and the people of Bionis from extinction . Despite fighting him , Shulk manages to make him see that they both wish for a return to peace . At this point , Dickson appears and shoots Shulk , who is possessed by Zanza , Dickson 's master . Zanza uses the Monado to destroy Mechonis , stealing Meyneth 's own Monado from Fiora 's body : the party narrowly escape with Shulk 's body , with Egil sacrificing himself so they can escape . 
 In the aftermath of the Mechonis ' destruction , pure @-@ blooded High Entia begin transforming into Telethia , beings whose one purpose is to purge Bionis of life . While the party is initially helpless before the Telethia , Shulk awakens and manages to defeat a Telethia raid on Colony 6 , although Alvis is revealed to be a disciple of Zanza . Making their way to Prison Island , they defeat Zanza 's third disciple , the High Entia <unk> , then Dickson . The party then travels to face Zanza , who declares the life of Bionis as simply his food and vessels . Zanza then offers Shulk the chance to become his new disciple . Shulk rejects the offer , and during the ensuing battle produces a third Monado : prompted by Alvis , the spirit of the Monado , which Shulk uses to destroy Zanza . Alvis then shows Shulk Zanza 's origins ; both Zanza , then named Klaus , and Meyneth were originally human scientists from Earth , working to create a new universe aboard a space station . The experiment ended in disaster , obliterating the universe and causing Zanza and Meyneth to be reborn as gods . Alvis was originally the artificial intelligence operating the experiment within the station . After the new universe 's creation , Zanza and Meyneth created life in their image , and Zanza created the cycle of Bionis out of fear that he would eventually die as his creations forgot of his existence and seek life beyond Bionis . With the current universe threatened with death , Alvis asks Shulk to remake the universe . Shulk , now a god , wishes for a world without gods , where everyone can decide their own fates . In the new universe , the survivors of Bionis and Mechonis build a new settlement and live peacefully together , Fiora is restored to her Homs form , and both her and Shulk optimistically look forward to Alvis ' promise of endless worlds and races of people beyond their own . 
 = = Development = = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles was developed by Japanese development company Monolith Soft , with Tetsuya Takahashi forming the original concept and serving as the game 's executive director . Takahashi had previously worked in the 1990s on Xenogears , then on the Xenosaga trilogy after founding Monolith Soft in 1999 . Xenosaga was intended to be a six @-@ part series , but low commercial performances forced the planned Xenosaga series to be halved . After these events , the entire development team was in a state of low morale . The initial concept for Xenoblade Chronicles , of people living on the bodies of gigantic gods , came to Takahashi in June 2006 while the studio was finishing development on Disaster : Day of Crisis . Struck by his idea , he immediately committed it to paper and showed the draft to other senior staff , who were favorably impressed . One of them , an executive called Yasuyuki Honne , thought it would make a good 3D model and bought materials to create it . Construction began in July : during this period , younger staff acted as models so that Takahashi could establish which parts of the gods ' bodies could be used as habitable and navigable environments in various poses . 
 After the model 's construction , Takahashi decided to combine the model 's concept with an unrelated story idea , which became the basis for a new game after positive feedback from staff . Takahashi later said that one of the main reasons for developing the game was to bolster team morale after the commercial failure of the Xenosaga games . Development began over four years prior to its release , before the official release of the Wii hardware , with the first prototypes for the game being developed in April 2007 . It was at this point that co @-@ director Genki Yokota was brought in by Nintendo to handle any system @-@ related issues due to his previous experience with RPGs . After being contacted regarding both Xenoblade Chronicles and fellow Wii RPG The Last Story , head of Nintendo 's licensing department Shinji Hatano said that the games should be made for a wide audience and using a " romanticist approach " . Takahashi was involved in every aspect of the game 's development , from its initial concept to the debugging stage . At the beginning of development , the game was going to be a stand @-@ alone title unrelated to the Xeno series , bearing the title Monado : The Beginning of the World . Later , then @-@ Nintendo president Satoru Iwata had the title changed to its current one to honor both Takahashi 's previous titles and the effort he was investing in Xenoblade Chronicles . According to Takahashi , the " Xeno " designation was more along the lines of a symbol , calling back to the previous works of Monolith Soft . 
 A key element of the game for Takahashi was creating an ideal balance between gameplay and story , something that he felt was lacking in other JRPGs which focused too much on story . Takahashi 's previous experiences with the Xenosaga games and <unk> <unk> : Eternal Wings and the Lost Ocean , which had been called out for being old @-@ fashioned when compared to other RPGs of the day , influenced his work in this regard . The mechanic of Shulk getting glimpses of the future became the foundation of the entire battle system . Takahashi briefly experimented with a turn @-@ based battle system that incorporated the feature , but it did not work out . In a separate issue , Takahashi decided against a transition between the environment and a battle arena was chosen by Takahashi as he felt such a transition would negatively interrupt the flow of gameplay . The game features a fully open world , which was described by Takahashi as " overwhelming , like an MMORPG " , describing the world size as being roughly equivalent to the Japanese archipelago . The scale of the world was derived from Takahashi 's wish to showcase the grandeur of the experience . In addition to this , the number and length of cutscenes was cut down significantly from those present in the Xenosaga games , with Takahashi considering such a development method as having become a " dead end " . The wish for an expansive world also became tied up with the wish to reward players for exploration , which entailed the creating of a huge amount of content creation such as items and accessories . The gameplay was influenced both by previous Japanese RPGs and Western RPGs . 
 = = = Scenario = = = 
 The scenario was created by Takahashi , Yuichiro Takeda and <unk> Hattori . Takahashi was responsible for creating the main concept , but as he was going to be director and executive producer , he was unable to also take on full script @-@ writing duties , so he asked Takeda to be his partner in creating the scenario . Takeda was a writer for anime who had previously collaborated with Takahashi on adaptations of the first Xenosaga game , in addition to writing the script for the Nintendo DS remake of Xenosaga and its sequel . Takahashi deliberately chose someone outside the video game industry as he wanted a different perspective on the story 's pacing . Hattori was brought in during the early development stages due to his experience scenarios for Nintendo games , which enables her to look at Takahashi and Takeda 's scenario from an objective viewpoint . A key element in the scenario was contrasting senses of scale , which Takahashi described as " contrasting the realms of the micro and the macro " , while the main story themes were characters embarking on a great and evolving journey , and overcoming a predetermined future . Despite multiple fantasy elements , Xenoblade Chronicles is based within a science fiction premise , although such elements were kept low @-@ key during the first part of the game . 
 Despite their earlier work together , it was the first time they were so intimately involved in a project . Takeda found working on the project more difficult that he initially anticipated : his standard writing form was for the anime series format , which was limited to 20 @-@ 25 minute episodes . With Xenoblade Chronicles , the volume of story and writing work was much larger and offered more freedom for dramatic expression . Conversely , his previous experience enabled Takahashi to easily plan the structure and scheduling for the game . During the initial writing stages , Takahashi did not give precise instructions to Takeda : he instead gave a rough outline that they worked on together , then they passed the developing script between themselves , along producers Shingo Kawabata and Koh Kojima , to iron out rough elements . Takahashi compared it to playing a game of catch , something he was unused to doing for his game scenarios . The ending underwent revisions : while Takahashi and Takeda felt they had created a fairly explanatory ending , Hattori still felt unsatisfied . After a second look , Takahashi and Takeda realized that it would appear perplexing for someone outside the writing process , so they rewrote it to be more player @-@ friendly . The final script contained a large amount of dialogue : the sheer volume , which included dialogue spoken in battle , made for a difficult experience while recording . Due to all the effort , Takahashi was emphatic that as much of it as possible be used , although he sometimes felt that there was too much . In the end , some dialogue needed to be cut as testers felt that the characters talked too much . Takahashi 's overall writing style was made deliberately more mature and subdued than other games within the genre . 
 One of the elements that was of great concern to both Takahashi and Takeda was the main protagonist Shulk . Takahashi had noticed that , in the majority of RPGs , the main protagonist was all too easily disliked even if other characters became fan favorites . Consequently , one of the main priorities was to make Shulk as appealing as possible to players . During this process , it was suggested that Shulk be a silent protagonist , but there was a general wish from the staff for him to speak . In addition to this , Takahashi needed to confront the problem faced in any RPG with voiced characters , which was developing them suitably and writing appropriate dialogue between them . The companion character Riki was cited by Takeda as a favorite of his : on paper Riki sounded an unlikable character , but his voice and appearance acted as a counterbalance to his remarks . One of the scenes where Hattori had input was a scene between Shulk and Fiora which showcased their connection : the original scene had Shulk touching Fiora 's cheek , which <unk> felt would look " creepy " coming out of the blue . The scene was altered so Shulk touched her hand instead . One of the early concepts Takeda suggested was that one of the main protagonist 's party would betray them and become the final boss , but Takahashi rejected this idea as he felt it would run counter to player expectation . During the course of its development , the story underwent so many revisions that Takahashi forgot what his original concept was , although the basic framework remained intact throughout . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles was composed for by six people : Manami Kiyota , music team ACE + ( made up of Tomori Kudo , Hiroyo " <unk> " Yamanaka , and Kenji Hiramatsu ) , Yoko Shimomura , and Yasunori Mitsuda . As with other parts of development , Takahashi was deeply involved , constantly rejecting pieces due to what he felt was not fitting for the game . He admitted that this was due to early samples he had given the team for his vision for the music , which they had followed too faithfully for his liking . At Takahashi 's request , music production studio Dog Ear Records helped with the music production . 
 The music team was led by Shimomura , who was initially very confused by the odd naming of tracks , along with getting the opportunity of using sounds not normally used in her compositions , such as electric guitars . Kiyota had only previously done superficial work on video game titles , she accepted Dog Ear Records ' offer for her to compose music . ACE + was recommended to Takahashi by Dog Ear Records . Kiyota handled environmental tracks , while ACE + was in charge of battle tracks in addition to other musical pieces . The team 's main goal was to create music that went beyond the typical sound of RPGs . In hindsight , Yamanaka attributed the harmony of the six composers ' works to Takahashi 's organization and overall direction . The final score contained around ninety tracks . One of the hardest tracks for Shimomura was a nine @-@ minute track that Takahashi requested to match with a movie scene . Later , he said the track needed to change midway through , essentially necessitating the creation of two conjoined themes . The majority of the game 's music was written by Kiyota and ACE + . Shimomura created eleven tracks . The music was recorded at <unk> Stone Recording Studios . Among the musicians were violinists Yu Manabe and Masahiko Todo . The chorus work was provided by Yamanaka , Kiyota and Masao Koori . 
 The ending theme , " Beyond the Sky " , was written by Mitsuda and sung by Japanese singer Sarah <unk> , also known under the name Sarah Lin . He was brought in due to his previous experience with the soundtracks of Xenogears and the first Xenosaga game , and due to Takahashi 's long working relationship with him . When Mitsuda was contacted , the project was nearing completion , with very little development and composition work left . Despite this , before creating the main theme , Mitsuda asked if he could read the script , which was much larger than he anticipated . The track caused much stress to Mitsuda , who was tasked to create the game 's most important song , which needed to incorporate both the diversity of the entire rest of the soundtrack , and mesh with Takahashi 's grand vision for the ending of the game . Takahashi also personally wrote the original Japanese lyrics for the track . The lyrics were translated into English by Lisa <unk> . 
 An official soundtrack album for the game , Xenoblade Original Soundtrack , was released by Dog Ear Records on 23 June 2010 . It entered the Oricon charts at # 80 , and remained in the charts for five weeks . Upon release , the album received praise from critics : while multiple critics were surprised that Shimomura and Mitsuda 's contributions were less substantial than originally thought , they found the majority of the music composed by Kiyota and ACE + to be enjoyable . " Beyond the Sky " also received unanimous praise . 
 = = Release = = 
 Xenoblade Chronicles was first announced at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2009 under its original title . Its official title and release window were not announced until the beginning of 2010 , alongside the announcement of The Last Story . The game released in Japan on 10 June 2010 . Over a year after its Japanese release , it was confirmed for release in European territories under the title Xenoblade Chronicles . This version included both the English and Japanese voice tracks . According to Adam Howden , Shulk 's voice actor , he was not given much information prior to his audition , and was never given the full script during recording . According to him , the translated script needed to be altered as some lines came out as longer or shorter than the Japanese originals , and he was told to give Shulk a neutral British @-@ accented voice . Concerning the game 's localization , Takahashi stated that while some minor changes were made in the English versions of the game , like some bug fixes , minor adjustments to gameplay balance , and slight rewriting of some written content , none of the changes led to any significant differences . Initially planned for release on 2 September 2011 , it was released two weeks early on 19 August . In addition to the standard edition , a special edition with a Classic Wii Controller was also released . It was later re @-@ released in Europe on the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop on 5 August 2015 . 
 Despite being confirmed for a European release , Xenoblade Chronicles did not have a confirmation of a North American release . Additionally , the game was absent altogether from Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011 , a major medium for promoting upcoming games in North America . In an interview on the French television station <unk> , Mathieu <unk> , the marketing manager of Nintendo France , stated that Nintendo of Europe had desired to show the game at it , but Nintendo of America would not allow it , sparking speculation that it would not be released in North America . In response to this , a dedicated fan campaign was launched called Operation Rainfall . Its goal was to raise fan awareness of the situations felt by three Wii RPGs : Xenoblade Chronicles , The Last Story and Pandora 's Tower . Among the campaign tactics used by Operation Rainfall were emails , organized campaigns , online petitions , phone calls , and messages on Nintendo 's Facebook and Twitter accounts . One of the most notable efforts was a call to pre @-@ order the game via the original " Monado : Beginning of the World " placeholder on Amazon.com. Their efforts resulted in Xenoblade Chronicles becoming # 1 in the site 's pre @-@ order gaming charts , beating The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time 3D and the PlayStation 3 bundle for Call of Duty : Black Ops . The campaign also received support from Mistwalker , the developers of The Last Story , and Xenogears and Xenosaga writer Soraya Saga . Takahashi later stated that they developed the game assuming that it would be released overseas . 
 In the months following these activities , Nintendo of America officially stated that there were no current plans to release the three asked @-@ for games in North America , despite acknowledging the great demand for the titles . Rumors eventually emerged that the title would see a North American release when it was listed on the website of gaming retailer GameStop . Soon after this , Nintendo officially announced that the game would be released in the region . In a 2013 interview , Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé revealed that Nintendo were considering an American release for Xenoblade Chronicles while Operation Rainfall was active , and that while the campaign did not factor into their decision , they were aware of it and took it into account while deciding whether the release would make a profitable release . Xenoblade Chronicles eventually released in North America on 6 April 2012 . It was released in North America as an exclusive to Nintendo 's American store , and GameStop 's website and stores . The eShop version released for North America from 28 April 2016 . 
 = = = Xenoblade Chronicles 3D = = = 
 A port for the New Nintendo 3DS , called Xenoblade Chronicles 3D , was released worldwide in April 2015 . It features StreetPass functionality , as well as compatibility with the Shulk amiibo . The port was originally announced in August 2014 alongside the New Nintendo 3DS . The port was developed by Monster Games , a frequent collaborator with Nintendo on well @-@ received ports . They were requested for the job by Nintendo as the staff at Monolith Soft were already working on the next Xenoblade title . Development on the port started between Autumn and Winter 2013 , and was faced with considerable problems as the processing power of the Wii was greater than the 3DS . The New 3DS ' increased power made the port possible , and its button layout meant that the original Wii Classic Controller button layout could be used without adjustment . As part of the alterations made to the title , much of the on @-@ screen information was moved down to the bottom Touch screen so as to de @-@ clutter the top screen , while the layout was carefully arranged so as to maintain the feel of the original as much as possible . 
 To maintain frame rate and the seamless transitions between environments , unspecified " technical tricks " were used . They also worked hard to include 3D capacity despite the resultant technical difficulties . The most difficult part of the development was getting the game 's scale to work within the new hardware . This entailed the creation of a new graphics engine with a custom visibility culling and complex level of detail systems . All of the environments were rebuilt and optimized for the new system while keeping the original aesthetic intact . The reason it was created for a portable platform rather than the new Wii U home console was that the sheer amount of content would make playing at home difficult for the modern gamer , who was becoming more used to on @-@ the @-@ go , quick gaming sessions . The port was originally going to be developed for the original Nintendo 3DS , but initial testing showed that the original platform lacked the memory and power to effectively run the game . Hearing about the New 3DS , it was decided to use its increased processing power to realize the game 's ambition . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Since its release , Xenoblade Chronicles has earned unanimous critical acclaim from multiple outlets , earning perfect scores from Digital Spy , Joystiq , GamePro and RPGamer , and near @-@ perfect scores from most other video gaming websites and magazines . The game scored 92 / 100 on the aggregate site Metacritic based on 59 critic reviews . The game had the fourth highest ranking on Metacritic for all video games released in 2012 , tying with Thatgamecompany 's Journey . 
 The story was cited by many as being innovative and enjoyable despite a fairly standard premise , while its open nature was seen as a welcome change for the genre : IGN critic Keza MacDonald said that she had been shocked out of expecting RPGs to be similar to the linear and story @-@ driven Final Fantasy XIII . Its battle system and handling of quests also received praise , with the latter being seen as a great improvement for the genre due to its user @-@ friendly workings . The one point that generally drew criticism were the graphics , with multiple critics disappointed that they lacked the polish of other contemporary consoles . IGN , Eurogamer and Edge Magazine cited the game as a triumphant comeback for the RPG , and a prime example of the genre . The battle system , and to a degree its general gameplay , was favorably compared by multiple critics to that used in Final Fantasy XII . 
 The New 3DS port also received a positive reception , scoring 86 / 100 on Metacritic based on 86 reviews . The port was generally received similar praise to the original Xenoblade Chronicles : many points of praise regarding its gameplay and story were shared with its original release , while new praise was given to the fact that an RPG of its scale had been successfully ported to the platform at all . Despite this , critics cited the graphical downgrade and lackluster implementation of 3D effects as detrimental factors , generally resulting in lower scores for the port when compared to the original game . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 At the 2011 Japan Game Awards , Xenoblade Chronicles received the " Excellence " award . In IGN 's Best of 2012 awards , the game was named " Best Wii / Wii U Game " and awarded with " Best Wii / Wii U Story " . It was also nominated in the " Best Overall Role @-@ playing Game " and " Best Overall Story " categories . In RPGFan 's " Game of the Year " awards that same year , it was named " Best Traditional RPG " , and was a runner @-@ up for " Best Combat " and " Best RPG " , losing both to Mass Effect 3 . It was also awarded the site 's " Reader 's Choice Best RPG " award , with 24 % of readers ' votes going to Xenoblade Chronicles , beating Persona 4 Golden to the award . In RPGamer 's " Best of 2012 " awards , it was named as the year 's best RPG , along with earning awards for " Best Story " and " Best Music " . At the 2012 Golden Joystick Awards , the game was nominated in the " Best RPG " category , although it lost to The Elder Scrolls V : Skyrim . Slant Magazine named it as " Game of the Year " in 2012 . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 During its opening week , Xenoblade Chronicles reached the top of Japanese gaming charts , selling 80 @,@ 000 units . By the end of 2010 , the game had sold over 161 @,@ 000 copies , making it the eighth best @-@ selling Wii game of the year , and eventually reached almost 200 @,@ 000 units by the end of 2013 . In the UK charts , Xenoblade Chronicles debuted at # 7 , and reached # 2 in the dedicated Wii charts despite stock shortages . According to Gamasutra , it was the fourth best @-@ selling game in the UK during its first week . In the US gaming charts , the game was excluded from the NPD Group 's monthly assessment due to it being a retailer exclusive . Investment banking firm Piper Jaffray estimated it to be one of the best @-@ selling games in the United States during the month of April 2012 , along with Mass Effect 3 and Prototype 2 . In a later interview , it was stated that the game sold better in the West than in Japan . 
 Xenoblade Chronicles 3D fared below par , selling merely 56 @,@ 932 copies in its first week in Japan . Roughly 78 @,@ 000 Japanese copies had been sold by the end of June 2015 . In the UK charts , the game debuted at # 27 , becoming the third best @-@ selling Nintendo product of that week . According to NPD Group figures , the game sold under 75 @,@ 000 , failing to enter the top ten . However , Nintendo stated that the game was the fifth best @-@ selling platform exclusive that week . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its release , the character of Shulk has been featured as a playable character in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , an entry in Nintendo 's crossover fighting game series Super Smash Bros. , being playable in both versions . Fiora was later featured as a playable character in the crossover game Project X Zone 2 , representing the Xeno series alongside Xenosaga character KOS @-@ MOS . Using experience earned from developing Xenoblade Chronicles and listening to feedback on the game , Takahashi and the team began work on a spiritual successor for the Wii U. Titled Xenoblade Chronicles X , it was first announced in 2013 , and eventually released worldwide in 2015 . 
 = OK Computer = 
 OK Computer is the third studio album by the English alternative rock band Radiohead , released on 21 May 1997 by Parlophone Records internationally and by Capitol Records in the United States . It was the first album to be self @-@ produced by Radiohead with assistance from the producer Nigel Godrich . The album was recorded in Oxfordshire and Bath between 1996 and early 1997 , with most of the recording completed in the historic mansion St Catherine 's Court . The band made a deliberate attempt to distance themselves from the guitar @-@ oriented , lyrically introspective style of their previous album , The Bends . OK Computer 's abstract lyrics , densely layered sound and wide range of influences laid the groundwork for Radiohead 's later more experimental work . 
 OK Computer received unanimous critical acclaim and has since been cited by critics and musicians as one of the greatest albums of the 1990s . The album was nominated in the Album of the Year and Best Alternative Music Performance categories at the 1998 Grammy Awards , ultimately winning the latter . The album initiated a shift away from the popular Britpop genre of the time to the more melancholic and atmospheric style of alternative rock that would be prevalent in the next decade . Critics and fans have commented on the underlying themes found in the lyrics and album artwork , emphasising Radiohead 's views on rampant consumerism , social alienation , emotional isolation , and political malaise ; in this capacity , OK Computer is often interpreted as having prescient insight into the mood of 21st @-@ century life . 
 Upon the album 's delivery to the band 's United States record label Capitol Records , label representatives lowered their sales estimates , deeming the record uncommercial . Nevertheless , OK Computer reached number one on the UK Albums Chart and became Radiohead 's highest album entry on the United States charts at the time , debuting at # 21 on the Billboard 200 . " Paranoid Android " , " Karma Police " , " Lucky " , " No Surprises " and " Airbag " were released as promotional singles from the album . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1995 , Radiohead toured in support of their second album The Bends . Midway through the tour , Brian Eno commissioned the band to contribute a song to The Help Album , a charity compilation organised by War Child . The Help Album was to be recorded over the course of a single day , 4 September 1995 , and rush @-@ released that week . That day Radiohead recorded " Lucky " in five hours with engineer Nigel Godrich , who had assisted producer John Leckie with The Bends and had produced several Radiohead B @-@ sides . Godrich said of the Help Album session : " Those things are the most inspiring , when you do stuff really fast and there 's nothing to lose . We left feeling fairly euphoric . So after establishing a bit of a rapport work @-@ wise , I was sort of hoping I would be involved with the next album . " To promote The Help Album , " Lucky " featured as the lead track on the Help EP , which charted at number 51 after BBC Radio 1 chose not to play it . This disappointed Radiohead singer Thom Yorke , but he later said " Lucky " shaped the nascent sound and mood of their upcoming record : " ' Lucky ' was indicative of what we wanted to do . It was like the first mark on the wall . " 
 Radiohead found The Bends tour stressful and decided to take a break in January 1996 . The band sought to distance their new material from the introspective style of The Bends . Drummer Phil Selway said , " There was an awful lot of soul searching [ on The Bends ] . To do that again on another album would be excruciatingly boring . " Yorke said : " The big thing for me is that we could really fall back on just doing another miserable , morbid and negative record lyrically , but I don 't really want to , at all . And I 'm deliberately just writing down all the positive things that I hear or see . I 'm not able to put them into music yet and I don 't want to just force it . " The critical and commercial success of The Bends gave the band confidence to self @-@ produce their third album . Their label Parlophone gave them a £ 100 @,@ 000 budget for recording equipment and an open @-@ ended deadline . Guitarist Jonny Greenwood said " the only concept that we had for this album was that we wanted to record it away from the city and that we wanted to record it ourselves . " Guitarist Ed O 'Brien , said : " Everyone said , ' You 'll sell six or seven million if you bring out The Bends Pt 2 , ' and we 're like , we 'll kick against that and do the opposite . " A number of producers , including major figures such as Scott Litt , were offered for the producer role , but the band were encouraged by the sessions with Godrich . They consulted him for advice on what equipment to use , and prepared for the sessions by buying their own equipment , including a plate <unk> purchased from Jona <unk> . Although Godrich had sought to focus his work on electronic dance music , he outgrew his role as advisor and became the album 's coproducer . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In July 1996 , Radiohead started rehearsing and recording OK Computer in their studio Canned Applause , a converted shed near Didcot , Oxfordshire . Even without the deadline that contributed to the stress of The Bends , the band had difficulties , which Selway blamed on their choice to self @-@ produce the album : " [ We 're ] jumping from song to song , and when we started to run out of ideas , we 'd move on to a new song ... the stupid thing was that we were nearly finished when we 'd move on , because so much work had gone into them . " The members worked with nearly equal roles in the production and formation of the music , though Yorke was still firmly " the loudest voice " according to O 'Brien . Selway said " we give each other an awful lot of space to develop our parts , but at the same time we are all very critical about what the other person is doing . " 
 Godrich worked as a collaborator and a managerial outsider . He said that Radiohead " need to have another person outside their unit , especially when they 're all playing together , to say when the take goes well . ... I take up slack when people aren 't taking responsibility — the term producing a record means taking responsibility for the record . ... It 's my job to ensure that they get the ideas across . " From the OK Computer sessions onward , Godrich has been characterised as Radiohead 's unofficial " sixth member " . 
 Radiohead decided that Canned Applause was an unsatisfactory recording location , which Yorke attributed to its proximity to the band members ' homes , and which Jonny Greenwood attributed to its lack of dining and bathroom facilities . The group had nearly completed recording four songs : " Electioneering " , " No Surprises " , " Subterranean Homesick Alien " and " The Tourist " . At their label 's request , the band took a break from recording to embark on a 13 @-@ date American tour in 1996 , opening for Alanis Morissette , and performed early versions of several new songs . One song , " Paranoid Android " , evolved from a fourteen @-@ minute song featuring long organ solos to one closer to the six @-@ minute album version . 
 During the tour , filmmaker Baz Luhrmann commissioned Radiohead to write a song for his upcoming film Romeo + Juliet . Luhrmann gave the band footage of the final 30 minutes of the film ; Yorke said " When we saw the scene in which Claire Danes holds the Colt .45 against her head , we started working on the song immediately . " Soon afterwards , the band wrote and recorded " Exit Music ( For a Film ) " ; the track plays over the film 's end credits but was not included on the soundtrack at the band 's request . Yorke later said the song helped shape the direction of the rest of the album , and that it " was the first performance we 'd ever recorded where every note of it made my head spin — something I was proud of , something I could turn up really , really loud and not wince at any moment . " 
 Radiohead resumed their recording sessions in September 1996 at St Catherine 's Court , a historic mansion near Bath owned by actress Jane Seymour . Greenwood said the new location was <unk> @-@ in but sometimes used as " a kind of corporate convention hangout . " The change of setting marked an important transition in the recording process . Greenwood , comparing the mansion to previous studio settings , said recording at St. Catherine 's Court " was less like a laboratory experiment , which is what being in a studio is usually like , and more about a group of people making their first record together . " 
 The group made extensive use of the different rooms and acoustics throughout the house . The vocals on " Exit Music ( For a Film ) " featured an echo effect achieved by recording on a stone staircase , and " Let Down " was recorded at 3 A.M. in a ballroom . The isolation allowed the band to work at a different pace , with more flexible and spontaneous working hours . O 'Brien said that " the biggest pressure was actually completing [ the recording ] . We weren 't given any deadlines and we had complete freedom to do what we wanted . We were delaying it because we were a bit frightened of actually finishing stuff . " Yorke was satisfied with the quality of the recordings made at the location , and said : " In a big country house , you don 't have that dreadful ' 80s ' separation ' . ... There wasn 't a desire for everything to be completely steady and each instrument recorded separately . " O 'Brien was similarly pleased with the recordings , estimating that 80 percent of the album was recorded live . He said : " I hate doing overdubs , because it just doesn 't feel natural . ... Something special happens when you 're playing live ; a lot of it is just looking at one another and knowing there are four other people making it happen . " Yorke recorded many of the album 's vocals in one take . 
 Radiohead returned to Canned Applause in October for rehearsals , and completed most of OK Computer in further sessions at St. Catherine 's Court . By Christmas , they had narrowed the track listing to 14 songs . The string parts were recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London in January 1997 . The album was mastered at the same location , and mixed over the next two months at various studios around the city . Godrich preferred a quick and hands @-@ off approach to his mixing work , and said " I feel like I get too into it . I start fiddling with things and I fuck it up ... I generally take about half a day to do a mix . If it 's any longer than that , you lose it . The hardest thing is trying to stay fresh , to stay objective . " 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 = = = Style and influences = = = 
 Yorke said that the starting point for the record was the " incredibly dense and terrifying sound " of Bitches Brew , the 1970 avant @-@ garde jazz fusion album by Miles Davis . He described the sound of Bitches Brew to Q : " It was building something up and watching it fall apart , that 's the beauty of it . It was at the core of what we were trying to do with OK Computer . " Yorke has identified " I 'll Wear It Proudly " by Elvis Costello , " Fall on Me " by R.E.M. , " Dress " by PJ Harvey and " A Day in the Life " by the Beatles as being particularly influential on the album 's songwriting . Radiohead drew further inspiration from the recording style of film soundtrack composer Ennio Morricone and the krautrock band Can , musicians Yorke described as " abusing the recording process " . 
 According to Yorke , the band hoped to achieve an " atmosphere that 's perhaps a bit shocking when you first hear it , but only as shocking as the atmosphere on The Beach Boys ' Pet Sounds . " The band expanded their instrumentation to include electric piano , Mellotron , cello and other strings , glockenspiel and electronic effects . The band 's exploratory approach to instruments was summarised by Jonny Greenwood as " when we 've got what we suspect to be an amazing song , but nobody knows what they 're gonna play on it . " One reviewer characterised OK Computer as sounding like " a DIY electronica album made with guitars " . Many of Yorke 's vocals were first takes ; he felt that if he made other attempts he would " start to think about it and it would sound really lame . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The album 's lyrics , written by Yorke , are more abstract compared to his personal , emotional lyrics for The Bends . Critic Alex Ross said the lyrics " seemed a mixture of overheard conversations , techno @-@ speak , and fragments of a harsh diary " with " images of riot police at political rallies , anguished lives in tidy suburbs , yuppies freaking out , sympathetic aliens gliding overhead . " Recurring themes include transport , technology , insanity , death , modern life in the UK , globalisation and political objection to capitalism . Yorke said , " On this album , the outside world became all there was ... I 'm just taking Polaroids of things around me moving too fast . " He explained that " It was like there 's a secret camera in a room and it 's watching the character who walks in — a different character for each song . The camera 's not quite me . It 's neutral , emotionless . But not emotionless at all . In fact , the very opposite . " 
 Yorke was inspired by books he read at the time , including Noam Chomsky 's writings , Eric Hobsbawm 's The Age of Extremes , Will Hutton 's The State We 're In , Jonathan Coe 's What a <unk> Up ! and Philip K. Dick 's <unk> . Although the songs do share common themes , Radiohead do not consider OK Computer to be a concept album and have said that they had no intention to link the songs together with any underlying narrative . The album is intended to be heard as a whole ; O 'Brien said , " We spent two weeks track @-@ listing the album . The context of each song is really important ... It 's not a concept album but there is a continuity there . " 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 The album 's opening track " Airbag " was inspired by the music of DJ Shadow and is underpinned by an electronic drum beat programmed from a seconds @-@ long recording of Selway 's drumming . The band sampled the drum track with a digital sampler and edited it with a Macintosh computer , but admitted to making approximations in emulating Shadow 's style due to their programming inexperience . The bassline in " Airbag " stops and starts unexpectedly , achieving an effect similar to 1970s dub . The song 's references to automobile accidents and reincarnation were inspired by a magazine article titled " An Airbag Saved My Life " and The Tibetan Book of the Dead . Yorke wrote " Airbag " about the illusion of safety offered by modern transit , and " the idea that whenever you go out on the road you could be killed . " Music journalist Tim Footman notes the song 's technical innovations and lyrical concerns demonstrate the " key paradox " of the album : " the musicians and producer are delighting in the sonic possibilities of modern technology ; the singer , meanwhile , is railing against its social , moral , and psychological impact . ... It 's a contradiction mirrored in the culture clash of the music , with the ' real ' guitars negotiating an uneasy stand @-@ off with the hacked @-@ up , processed drums . " 
 " Paranoid Android " , split into four distinct sections , is among the band 's longest recorded studio tracks at 6 : 23 . The unconventional multi @-@ section song was inspired by the Beatles ' " Happiness Is a Warm Gun " and Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which also eschew a traditional verse @-@ chorus @-@ verse structure . The song 's musical style was also inspired by the music of the Pixies . The song was written by Yorke after an unpleasant night at a Los Angeles bar , where he saw a woman react violently after someone spilled a drink on her . Its title and lyrics are a reference to Marvin the Paranoid Android from Douglas Adams 's The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy series . 
 The use of electric keyboards in " Subterranean Homesick Alien " is an example of the band 's attempts to emulate the atmosphere of Bitches Brew . 
 " This is us desperate to be Miles Davis … It 's got a groove . And it used to be called ' Uptight ' . " – Thom Yorke 
 Its title a reference to the Bob Dylan song " Subterranean Homesick Blues " , the science fiction @-@ inspired song describes an isolated narrator who fantasises about being abducted by extraterrestrials . The narrator speculates that , upon returning to Earth , his friends would not believe his story and he would remain a misfit . The lyrics were inspired by an assignment from Yorke 's time at Abingdon School to write a piece of " Martian poetry " , a British literary movement of works that humorously <unk> mundane aspects of human life from an alien " Martian " perspective . 
 William Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet inspired the lyrics for " Exit Music ( For a Film ) " . Initially Yorke wanted to work lines from the play into the song , but the final draft of the lyrics became a broad summary of the narrative . 
 " We wrote this for Romeo + Juliet . I saw the Zeffirelli version when I was 13 and I cried my eyes out , because I couldn 't understand why , the morning after they shagged , they didn 't just run away . It 's a song for two people who should run away before all the bad stuff starts . A personal song . " – Thom Yorke 
 Yorke compared the opening of the song , which mostly features his singing paired with acoustic guitar , to Johnny Cash 's At Folsom Prison . Mellotron choir and other electronic voices are used throughout the track . The song climaxes with the entrance of drums , and this section prominently features distorted bass run through a fuzz pedal . The climactic portion of the song is an attempt to emulate the sound of trip hop group Portishead , but in a style that bass player Colin Greenwood called more " stilted and leaden and mechanical " . The song concludes by fading back to Yorke 's voice , acoustic guitar and Mellotron . 
 " Let Down " contains multilayered arpeggiated guitars and electric piano . Jonny Greenwood 's electric piano part is in a different time signature to the other instruments . O 'Brien said the song was influenced by Phil Spector , a producer and songwriter best known for his reverberating " Wall of Sound " recording techniques . The song 's lyrics are , Yorke said , " about that feeling that you get when you 're in transit but you 're not in control of it — you just go past thousands of places and thousands of people and you 're completely removed from it . " 
 " I was pissed in a club and I suddenly had the funniest thought I 'd had for ages : what if all the people who were drinking were hanging from the bottles ? If the bottles were hung from the ceiling with string , and the floor caved in , and the only thing that kept everyone up was the bottles ? It 's also about an enormous fear of being trapped . " – Thom Yorke 
 Of the line " Don 't get sentimental / It always ends up drivel " , Yorke said , " Sentimentality is being emotional for the sake of it . We 're bombarded with sentiment , people emoting . That 's the Let Down . Feeling every emotion is fake . Or rather every emotion is on the same plane whether it 's a car advert or a pop song . " Yorke felt that scepticism of emotion was characteristic of Generation X and said that it informed not just " Let Down " but the band 's approach to the whole album . 
 Critic Steve Huey said the structure of " Karma Police " is " somewhat unorthodox , since there doesn 't seem to be a true chorus section ; the main verse alternates with a short , subdued break ... and after two cycles , the song builds to a completely different ending section . " The first portion is centred around acoustic guitar and piano , with a chord progression indebted to the Beatles ' " Sexy Sadie " . Starting at 2 : 34 , the song transitions into an orchestrated section with the repeated line " For a minute there , I lost myself " . The song ends with guitarist Ed O 'Brien generating feedback using a delay effect . The title and lyrics to " Karma Police " originate from an in @-@ joke during The Bends tour . Jonny Greenwood said " whenever someone was behaving in a particularly shitty way , we 'd say ' The karma police will catch up with him sooner or later . ' " 
 " Fitter Happier " is a short musique concrète track that consists of sampled musical and background sound and spoken word lyrics recited by a synthesized voice from the Macintosh <unk> application . 
 " Fitter , happier . More productive . Comfortable . Not drinking too much . Regular exercise at the gym , three days a week . Getting on better with your associate employee contemporaries . At ease . Eating well , no more microwave dinners and saturated fats . A patient , better driver . A safer car , baby smiling in back seat . Sleeping well , no bad dreams . No paranoia . Careful to all animals , never washing spiders down the plughole . Keep in contact with old friends , enjoy a drink now and then . Will frequently check credit at moral bank , hole in wall . <unk> for favours , fond but not in love . Charity standing orders on <unk> , ring @-@ road supermarket . No killing moths or putting boiling water on the ants . Car wash , also on <unk> . No longer afraid of the dark or midday shadows , nothing so ridiculously teenage and desperate . Nothing so childish . At a better pace , slower and more calculated . No chance of escape . Now self @-@ employed . Concerned , but powerless . An empowered and informed member of society , pragmatism not idealism . Will not cry in public . Less chance of illness . Tires that grip in the wet , shot of baby strapped in backseat . A good memory . Still cries at a good film . Still kisses with saliva . No longer empty and frantic . Like a cat tied to a stick that 's driven into frozen winter shit , the ability to laugh at weakness . Calm , fitter , healthier and more productive . A pig in a cage on antibiotics . " 
 Written after a period of writer 's block , " Fitter Happier " was described by Yorke as a checklist of slogans for the 1990s , which he considered " the most upsetting thing I 've ever written " . 
 " The others were downstairs , rockin ' , and I crept upstairs and did this in ten minutes . I was feeling incredible hysteria and panic , and it was so liberating to give the lyrics to this neutral @-@ sounding computer . " – Thom Yorke 
 " Fitter Happier " was considered for the album 's opening track , but rejected because the band considered the effect off @-@ putting . Steve Lowe called the song " penetrating surgery on pseudo @-@ meaningful corporations ' lifestyles " with " a repugnance for prevailing <unk> social values . " Among the loosely connected imagery of the lyrics , Footman identified the song 's subject as " the materially comfortable , morally empty embodiment of modern , Western humanity , half @-@ <unk> , half @-@ Stepford Wife , destined for the metaphorical farrowing crate , propped up on Prozac , Viagra and anything else his insurance plan can cover . " Sam Steele called the lyrics " a stream of received imagery : scraps of media information , interspersed with lifestyle ad slogans and private prayers for a healthier existence . It is the hum of a world buzzing with words , one of the messages seeming to be that we live in such a synthetic universe we have grown unable to detect reality from artifice . " 
 " Electioneering " , featuring a cowbell and a distorted guitar solo , is the album 's most rock @-@ oriented track and one of the heaviest songs the band has recorded . It has been compared to Radiohead 's earlier style on Pablo Honey . The cynical " Electioneering " is also the album 's most directly political song . 
 " I was thinking of the Poll Tax riots when I wrote this : the moment when the horses broke through the barriers and everyone started smashing windows . It 's also from watching too many MPs on telly . You just get this feeling of , ' <unk> , I 've seen this once too many times . ' " – Thom Yorke 
 It was partly inspired by Chomsky 's Manufacturing Consent , a book analysing contemporary mass media under the propaganda model . Yorke likened its lyrics , which focus on political and artistic compromise , to " a preacher ranting in front of a bank of microphones . " Regarding its oblique political references , Yorke said , " What can you say about the IMF , or politicians ? Or people selling arms to African countries , employing slave labour or whatever . What can you say ? You just write down ' Cattle prods and the IMF ' and people who know , know . " O 'Brien said the song was about the promotional cycle of touring : " When you have to promote your album for a longer period , in the United States for example , you fly around from city to city for weeks to meet journalists and record company people . After a while you feel like a politician who has to kiss babies and shake hands all day long . " 
 " Climbing Up the Walls " – described by a critic as " monumental chaos " – is layered with a string section , ambient noise and repetitive , metallic @-@ sounding percussion . The song 's string section , composed by Jonny Greenwood and written for 16 instruments , was inspired by modern classical composer Krzysztof Penderecki 's Threnody to the Victims of Hiroshima . Greenwood said , " I got very excited at the prospect of doing string parts that didn 't sound like ' Eleanor Rigby ' , which is what all string parts have sounded like for the past 30 years . " The combination of Yorke 's distraught vocals and the atonal strings was described by one critic as " Thom 's voice dissolving into a fearful , blood @-@ clotted scream as Jonny whips the sound of a million dying elephants into a crescendo . " For the lyrics , Yorke drew from his time as an orderly in a mental hospital during the Care in the Community policy of <unk> mental health patients , and a New York Times article about serial killers . 
 " This is about the unspeakable . Literally skull @-@ crushing . I used to work in a mental hospital around the time that Care in the Community started , and we all just knew what was going to happen . And it 's one of the scariest things to happen in this country , because a lot of them weren 't just harmless … It was hailing violently when we recorded this . It seemed to add to the mood . " – Thom Yorke 
 " No Surprises " , recorded in a single take , is arranged with electric guitar ( inspired by the Beach Boys ' " Wouldn 't It Be Nice " ) , acoustic guitar , glockenspiel and vocal harmonies . The band strove to replicate the mood of Louis Armstrong 's 1968 recording of " What a Wonderful World " and the soul music of Marvin Gaye . Hoping to achieve a slower tempo than could be played well on their instruments , Godrich had the band record the song at a faster tempo , then slowed the playback for Yorke to overdub his vocals onto , creating an " ethereal " effect . Yorke identified the subject of the song as " someone who 's trying hard to keep it together but can 't . " The lyrics seem to portray a suicide or an unfulfilling life , and dissatisfaction with contemporary social and political order . Some lines refer to rural or suburban imagery . One of the key metaphors in the song is the opening line , " a heart that 's full up like a landfill " . According to Yorke , the song is a " fucked @-@ up nursery rhyme " that " stems from my unhealthy obsession of what to do with plastic boxes and plastic bottles ... All this stuff is getting buried , the debris of our lives . It doesn 't rot , it just stays there . That 's how we deal , that 's how I deal with stuff , I bury it . " Critics have said the song 's gentle mood contrasts sharply with its harsh lyrics ; Steele said , " even when the subject is suicide ... Ed O 'Brien 's guitar is as soothing as balm on a red @-@ raw psyche , the song rendered like a bittersweet child 's prayer . " 
 " Lucky " was inspired by the recent conflict in Bosnia , and Sam Taylor said it was " the one track on [ The Help Album ] to capture the sombre terror of the conflict " , and that its serious subject matter and dark tone made the band " too ' real ' to be allowed on the Britpop gravy train " . The song was originally more politically explicit , but the first draft was pared down from " pages and pages and pages of notes " . The lyrics depict a man surviving an aeroplane crash and are drawn from Yorke 's anxiety about transportation . The musical centerpiece of " Lucky " is its three @-@ piece guitar arrangement , which grew out of the high @-@ pitched intro played by O 'Brien . Critics have compared its lead guitar to Pink Floyd and , more broadly , arena rock . 
 The album ends with " The Tourist " , which Jonny Greenwood wrote as an unusually staid piece where something " doesn 't have to happen ... every 3 seconds . " He said , " ' The Tourist ' doesn 't sound like Radiohead at all . It has become a song with space . " 
 " The lyrics come from being in a beautiful square in France on a sunny day , and watching all these American tourists being wheeled around , frantically trying to see everything in ten minutes . You know : ' We 've got to be in Paris tomorrow morning ! ' And then I saw this old bloke on telly , saying that he couldn 't work out why the world had got so fast and in a hurry . I just had an image of him standing on a street corner , watching the traffic hurl by . " – Thom Yorke 
 Yorke said it was chosen as the closing track because " a lot of the album was about background noise and everything moving too fast and not being able to keep up . It was really obvious to have ' Tourist ' as the last song . That song was written to me from me , saying , ' Idiot , slow down . ' Because at that point , I needed to . So that was the only resolution there could be : to slow down . " The " unexpectedly bluesy waltz " draws to a close as the guitars drop out , leaving only drums and bass , and concludes with the sound of a small bell . 
 = = Title and artwork = = 
 " OK Computer " was the original title for the song " Palo Alto " , which had been considered for inclusion on the album . Although the song was abandoned , its first title stuck with the band ; according to Jonny Greenwood , " [ it ] started attaching itself and creating all these weird resonances with what we were trying to do . " Yorke said it " refers to embracing the future , it refers to being terrified of the future , of our future , of everyone else 's . It 's to do with standing in a room where all these appliances are going off and all these machines and computers and so on ... and the sound it makes . " Yorke described the title as " a really resigned , terrified phrase " , to him similar to the Coca @-@ Cola advertisement " I 'd Like to Teach the World to Sing " . Wired writer Leander <unk> suggests that it is an homage to Macintosh computers , as " The Mac 's built @-@ in speech recognition software responds to the command ' OK Computer , ' as an alternative to hitting an OK button onscreen . " Other titles considered were Ones and Zeroes — a reference to the binary numeral system — and Your Home May Be at Risk If You Do Not Keep Up Payments . 
 The album 's artwork is a computer @-@ generated collage of images and text created by Stanley Donwood and Yorke , credited under the pseudonym " The White Chocolate Farm " . Donwood was commissioned by Yorke to work on a visual diary alongside the recording sessions . Yorke explained , " If I 'm shown some kind of visual representation of the music , only then do I feel confident . Up until that point , I 'm a bit of a whirlwind . " The colour palette is predominantly white and blue , according to Donwood , the result of " trying to make something the color of bleached bone . " Used twice on the artwork , once in the booklet and once on the compact disc itself , is the image of two stick figures shaking hands . Yorke explained the image as emblematic of exploitation , saying , " Someone 's being sold something they don 't really want , and someone 's being friendly because they 're trying to sell something . That 's what it means to me . " Explaining the artwork 's themes , Yorke said , " It 's quite sad , and quite funny as well . All the artwork and so on ... It was all the things that I hadn 't said in the songs . " 
 Visual motifs in the artwork include motorways , aeroplanes , families with children , corporate logos and cityscapes . The words " Lost Child " feature prominently on the cover , and the booklet artwork contains phrases in the constructed language Esperanto and health @-@ related instructions in both English and Greek . The use of disconnected phrases led a critic for Uncut to say , " The non @-@ sequiturs created an effect akin to being lifestyle @-@ coached by a lunatic . " White scribbles , Donwood 's method of correcting mistakes rather than using the computer function undo , are present everywhere in the collages . The liner notes contain the full lyrics , rendered with atypical syntax , alternate spelling and small annotations . The lyrics are also arranged and spaced in shapes that resemble hidden images . In keeping with the band 's then emergent anti @-@ corporate stance , the production credits contain the ironic copyright notice " Lyrics reproduced by kind permission even though we wrote them . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 Selway admitted that when the band delivered the album , the band 's American label Capitol saw " more or less , ' commercial suicide ' . They weren 't really into it . At that point , we got the fear . How is this going to be received ? " Capitol lowered its sales forecast from two million units to a half a million . In O 'Brien 's view only Parlophone , the band 's British label , remained optimistic while global distributors dramatically reduced their sales estimates . Label representatives were reportedly disappointed with the lack of potential marketable singles , especially the absence of anything resembling their initial hit , " Creep " . 
 Parlophone 's advertising campaign was unorthodox . The label took full @-@ page advertisements in high @-@ profile British newspapers and tube stations with lyrics for " Fitter Happier " pitched in large black letters against white backgrounds . The same lyrics , and artwork adapted from the album , were repurposed for shirt designs . Yorke said , " We actively chose to pursue the ' Fitter Happier ' thing " to link what a critic called " a coherent set of concerns " between the album artwork and its promotional material . More unconventional merchandise included a floppy disk with Radiohead screensavers and an FM radio in the shape of a desktop computer . In America , Capitol sent 1 @,@ 000 cassette players to prominent members of the press and music industry , each with a copy of the album permanently glued inside . When asked about the campaign after the album 's release , Capitol president Gary Gersh said , " Our job is just to take them as a left @-@ of @-@ center band and bring the center to them . That 's our focus , and we won 't let up until they 're the biggest band in the world . " Yorke states in an early interview , " When we first gave [ the album ] to Capitol , they were taken aback . I don 't really know why it 's so important now , but I 'm excited about it . " 
 Radiohead chose " Paranoid Android " as the lead single , despite its unusually long running time and lack of a catchy chorus . Colin Greenwood admitted the song was " hardly the radio @-@ friendly , breakthrough , buzz bin unit shifter [ radio stations ] can have been expecting , " but said that Capitol was supportive of the band 's choice . The song premiered on the Radio 1 programme The Evening Session in April 1997 and released as a single in May 1997 . On the strength of frequent radio play on Radio 1 and rotation of the song 's music video on MTV , " Paranoid Android " reached number three in the UK , giving Radiohead their highest chart position . 
 Radiohead embarked on a world tour in promotion of OK Computer called the " Against Demons " tour , commencing at the album launch in Barcelona on 22 May 1997 . OK Computer was released in Japan on 21 May , in the UK on 16 June , in Canada on 17 June and in the US on 1 July . In addition to the dominant CD format , the album was released as a double @-@ LP vinyl record , cassette and MiniDisc . The album debuted at number one on the UK , where it held for two weeks . It stayed in the top 10 for weeks and became the country 's eighth @-@ best selling record of the year . Meanwhile , the tour took the band across the UK and Ireland , continental Europe , North America , Japan and Australasia , concluding on 29 August 1998 in New York . The tour was mentally taxing for the band , particularly Yorke , who later said " That tour was a year too long . I was the first person to tire of it , then six months later everyone in the band was saying it . Then six months after that , nobody was talking any more . " 
 " Karma Police " was released in August 1997 and " No Surprises " in January 1998 . Both singles charted in the UK top 10 , and " Karma Police " peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . " Lucky " was released as a single in France , but did not chart . " Let Down " , considered for release as the lead single , charted on the Modern Rock Tracks chart at number 29 . The band planned to produce a video for every song on the album to be released as a whole , but the project was abandoned due to financial and time constraints . Also considered , but ultimately scrapped , were plans for trip hop group Massive Attack to remix the entire album . Meeting People Is Easy , Grant Gee 's rockumentary following the band on its OK Computer world tour , premiered in November 1998 . 
 By February 1998 , the album had sold at least half a million copies in the UK and 2 million worldwide . To date , at least 1 @.@ 4 million copies have been sold in the US , 3 million across Europe and over 3 million worldwide . OK Computer has been certified triple platinum in the UK and double platinum in the US , in addition to certifications in other markets . 
 = = Reception = = 
 OK Computer received near @-@ unanimous critical acclaim . Critics in the British and American press generally agreed that the album was a landmark of its time and would have far @-@ reaching impact and importance , and that the band 's willingness to experiment made it a challenging listen . According to Footman , " Not since 1967 , with the release of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , had so many major critics agreed immediately , not only on an album 's merits , but on its long @-@ term significance , and its ability to encapsulate a particular point in history . " In the English press , the album garnered favourable reviews in NME , Melody Maker , The Guardian , and Q. Nick Kent wrote in Mojo that " Others may end up selling more , but in 20 years time I 'm betting OK Computer will be seen as the key record of 1997 , the one to take rock forward instead of artfully revamping images and song @-@ structures from an earlier era . " " Every word sounds achingly sincere , every note spewed from the heart , " wrote John Harris in Select , " and yet it roots itself firmly in a world of steel , glass , random @-@ access memory and prickly @-@ skinned paranoia . " 
 In an otherwise positive review , Andy Gill wrote for The Independent , " For all its ambition and determination to break new ground , OK Computer is not , finally , as impressive as The Bends , which covered much the same sort of emotional knots , but with better tunes . It is easy to be impressed by , but ultimately hard to love , an album that luxuriates so readily in its own despondency . " 
 The album was well received by critics in North America . Rolling Stone , Spin , and Pitchfork Media published positive reviews . In The New Yorker , Alex Ross praised its progressiveness , and contrasted Radiohead 's risk @-@ taking with the musically conservative " <unk> " of their contemporaries Oasis . Ross wrote that " Throughout the album , contrasts of mood and style are extreme ... This band has pulled off one of the great art @-@ pop balancing acts in the history of rock . " 
 Reviews for Entertainment Weekly , the Chicago Tribune , and Time were mixed or contained qualified praise . Robert Christgau from The Village Voice said Radiohead immersed Yorke 's vocals in " enough electronic marginal distinction to feed a coal town for a month " and to compensate for how soulless the songs are , resulting in " arid " art rock . 
 The album appeared in many 1997 critics ' lists and listener polls for best album of the year . It topped the year @-@ end polls of Mojo , Vox , Entertainment Weekly , Hot Press , <unk> OOR , <unk> , Eye Weekly and <unk> , and tied for first place with Daft Punk 's Homework in The Face . The album came second in NME , Melody Maker , Rolling Stone , Village Voice , Spin and Uncut . Q and Les Inrockuptibles both listed the album in their unranked year @-@ end polls . It was a nominee for the 1997 Mercury Prize , a prestigious award recognising the best British or Irish album of the year . 
 The near universal positive reception to the album overwhelmed the band , and some members thought the press was excessively congratulatory . Particularly irksome to the band were links to progressive rock and art rock , with frequent comparisons to Pink Floyd 's 1973 album The Dark Side of the Moon . Yorke responded : " We write pop songs ... there was no intention of it being ' art ' . It 's a reflection of all the disparate things we were listening to when we recorded it . " He was nevertheless pleasantly surprised that many listeners identified the album 's musical influences : " What really blew my head off was the fact that people got all the things , all the textures and the sounds and the atmospheres we were trying to create . " " In England , I think a lot of the reviews have been slightly over @-@ the @-@ top , " remarked Jonny Greenwood , " because the last album [ The Bends ] was somewhat under @-@ reviewed possibly and under @-@ received . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Retrospective acclaim = = = 
 OK Computer has appeared frequently in professional lists of greatest albums . A number of publications , including NME , Melody Maker , Alternative Press , Spin , Pitchfork Media , Time , Metro Weekly and Slant placed OK Computer prominently in lists of best albums of the 1990s or of all time . In 2003 , the album was ranked number 162 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . Retrospective reviews from BBC Music , The A.V. Club Slant and Paste have received the album favourably ; likewise , Rolling Stone gave the album five stars in the 2004 Rolling Stone Album Guide , with critic Rob Sheffield saying " Radiohead was claiming the high ground abandoned by Nirvana , Pearl Jam , U2 , R.E.M. , everybody ; and fans around the world loved them for trying too hard at a time when nobody else was even bothering . " According to Acclaimed Music , a site which uses statistics to numerically represent reception among critics , OK Computer is the 10th most celebrated album of all time . NME listed OK Computer at 35 on its list of the 50 darkest albums . 
 The album has been cited by some as undeserving of its acclaim , while others assert that Radiohead 's career was negatively impacted by the album 's critical success . In a poll surveying thousands conducted by BBC Radio 6 Music , OK Computer was named the sixth most over @-@ rated album " in the world " . David H. Green of The Daily Telegraph called the album " self @-@ indulgent whingeing " and maintains that the positive critical consensus toward OK Computer is an indication of " a 20th @-@ century delusion that rock is the bastion of serious commentary on popular music " to the detriment of electronic and dance music . The album was selected as an entry in " Sacred Cows " , an NME column questioning the critical status of " revered albums " , in which Henry Yates said of the album " There 's no defiance , gallows humour or chink of light beneath the curtain , just a sense of meek , resigned despondency , " and further criticised the record as " the moment when Radiohead stopped being ' good ' [ compared to The Bends ] and started being ' important ' . " In a Spin article on the " myth " that " Radiohead Can Do No Wrong " , Chris Norris argues that the acclaim for OK Computer created an inflated set of expectations for each successive Radiohead release . 
 ( * ) designates unordered lists . 
 = = = = Awards = = = = 
 The album won a Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album in the 40th Annual Grammy Awards in 1998 . The album was nominated in the 1998 Brit Awards and Mercury Prize for Best British Album and 1997 Album of the Year respectively . The album won the NME Awards and Q Awards for Album of the year and Best Album respectively . It was nominated for the Grammy Award for Album of the Year in 1998 . 
 = = = Commentary and interpretation = = = 
 OK Computer was recorded in the lead up to the 1997 general election and released a month after the victory of Tony Blair 's New Labour government . The album was perceived by critics as an expression of dissent and scepticism toward the new government and a reaction against the national mood of optimism . Dorian Lynskey wrote , " On May 1 , 1997 , Labour supporters toasted their landslide victory to the sound of ' Things Can Only Get Better . ' A few weeks later , OK Computer appeared like Banquo 's ghost to warn : No , things can only get worse . " According to Amy Britton , the album " showed not everyone was ready to join the party , instead tapping into another feeling felt throughout the UK — pre @-@ <unk> angst . ... huge corporations were impossible to fight against — this was the world OK Computer soundtracked , not the wave of British optimism . " 
 In an interview , Yorke doubted that Blair 's policies would differ from the preceding two decades of Conservative government . He said the public reaction to the death of Princess Diana was more significant , as a moment when the British public realised " the royals had had us by the balls for the last hundred years , as had the media and the state . " The band 's distaste with the commercialised promotion of OK Computer reinforced their anti @-@ capitalist political viewpoint , which would be further explored on their subsequent releases . 
 Critics have compared Radiohead 's statements of political dissatisfaction to those of earlier rock bands . David Stubbs said that , where punk rock had been a rebellion against a time of deficit and poverty , OK Computer protested the " mechanistic convenience " of contemporary surplus and excess . Alex Ross said the album " pictured the onslaught of the Information Age and a young person 's panicky embrace of it " and made the band into " the poster boys for a certain kind of knowing alienation — as Talking Heads and R.E.M. had been before . " Jon Pareles of The New York Times found precedents in the work of Pink Floyd and Madness for Radiohead 's concerns " about a culture of numbness , building docile workers and enforced by self @-@ help regimes and anti @-@ depressants . " 
 Many felt the tone of the album was millennial or futuristic , anticipating cultural and political trends . According to The A.V. Club writer Steven Hyden in the feature " Whatever Happened to Alternative Nation " , " Radiohead appeared to be ahead of the curve , forecasting the paranoia , media @-@ driven insanity , and omnipresent sense of impending doom that 's subsequently come to characterise everyday life in the 21st century . " In 1000 Recordings to Hear Before You Die , Tom Moon described OK Computer as a " prescient ... dystopian essay on the darker implications of technology ... oozing [ with ] a vague sense of dread , and a touch of Big Brother foreboding that bears strong resemblance to the constant disquiet of life on Security Level Orange , post @-@ 9 / 11 . " Chris Martin of Coldplay remarked that , " It would be interesting to see how the world would be different if Dick Cheney really listened to Radiohead 's OK Computer . I think the world would probably improve . That album is fucking brilliant . It changed my life , so why wouldn 't it change his ? " 
 The album inspired a radio play , also titled OK Computer , which was first broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in 2007 . The play was written by Joel Horwood , Chris Perkins , Al Smith and Chris Thorpe . 
 = = = Musical influence = = = 
 The release of OK Computer coincided with the decline of Britpop . Through OK Computer 's influence , the dominant style of UK guitar pop shifted toward an approximation of " Radiohead 's paranoid but confessional , slurry but catchy approach " . Many newer British acts adopted similarly complex , atmospheric arrangements . A prominent example of this trend , Post @-@ Britpop band Travis worked with Godrich to create the languid pop texture of The Man Who , which became the fourth best @-@ selling album of 1999 in the UK . Some in the British press accused Travis of appropriating Radiohead 's sound . Steven Hyden of AV Club said that by 1998 , starting with The Man Who , " what Radiohead had created in OK Computer had already grown much bigger than the band , " and that the album went on to influence " a wave of British @-@ rock balladeers that reached its zenith in the ' 00s " . 
 Critics have said OK Computer 's popularity paved the way for the next generation of British alternative rock bands , and established musicians in a variety of genres have praised the album , including R.E.M. frontman Michael Stipe , former Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr , DJ Shadow , former Guns N ' Roses guitarist Slash , Manic Street Preachers member Nicky Wire , the Divine Comedy frontman Neil Hannon , Mo ' Wax label owner James Lavelle , former Depeche Mode member Alan Wilder and contemporary composer Esa @-@ Pekka Salonen . Members of Coldplay , Bloc Party and TV on the Radio said they were <unk> influenced by OK Computer . TV on the Radio 's debut album was even titled OK Calculator as a lighthearted tribute . Radiohead described the pervasiveness of bands that " sound like us " as one reason to break with the style of OK Computer for their next album , Kid A. 
 Although OK Computer 's influence on rock musicians is widely acknowledged , several critics believe that its experimental inclination was not authentically embraced on a wide scale . Footman said the " Radiohead Lite " bands that followed were " missing [ OK Computer 's ] sonic inventiveness , not to mention the lyrical substance . " David Cavanagh said that most of OK Computer 's purported mainstream influence more likely stemmed from the ballads on The Bends . According to Cavanagh , " The populist albums of the post @-@ OK Computer era — The Verve 's Urban Hymns , Travis 's Good Feeling , Stereophonics ' Word Gets Around , Robbie Williams ' Life thru a Lens — effectively closed the door that OK Computer 's boffin @-@ esque inventiveness had opened " . John Harris believed that OK Computer was one of the " fleeting signs that British rock music might [ have been ] returning to its inventive traditions " in the wake of Britpop 's demise . While Harris concludes that British rock ultimately developed an " altogether more conservative tendency " , he said that with OK Computer and their subsequent material , Radiohead provided a " clarion call " to fill the void left by Britpop . 
 OK Computer did trigger a minor revival of progressive rock and ambitious concept albums , and a new wave of prog @-@ influenced bands credited OK Computer for enabling their scene to thrive . Brandon Curtis of The Secret Machines said " Songs like ' Paranoid Android ' made it OK to write music differently , to be more experimental . OK Computer was important because it reintroduced unconventional writing and song structures . " Steven Wilson of Porcupine Tree said , " I don 't think ambition is a dirty word any more . Radiohead were the Trojan Horse in that respect . Here 's a band that came from the indie rock tradition that snuck in under the radar when the journalists weren 't looking and started making these absurdly ambitious and pretentious — and all the better for it — records . " The band has rejected any affiliation with the genre and denies having attempted to make a coherent concept album . Jonny Greenwood dismissed such claims by saying " I think one album title and one computer voice do not make a concept album . That 's a bit of a red herring . " 
 = = Reissues = = 
 Radiohead left EMI , parent company of Parlophone , in 2007 after failed contract negotiations . EMI retained the copyright to Radiohead 's back catalogue of material recorded while signed to the label . After a period of being out of print on vinyl , EMI reissued a double @-@ LP of OK Computer on 19 August 2008 , along with later albums Kid A , Amnesiac and Hail to the Thief as part of the " From the Capitol Vaults " series . OK Computer became the year 's tenth best @-@ selling vinyl record , shifting just under 10 @,@ 000 units . The reissue was connected in the press to a general upswing in vinyl sales and cultural appreciation of records as a format . 
 OK Computer was reissued again on 24 March 2009 simultaneously with Pablo Honey and The Bends , without Radiohead 's involvement . The reissue came in two editions : a 2 @-@ CD " Collector 's Edition " and a 2 @-@ CD 1 @-@ DVD " Special Collector 's Edition " . The first disc contains the original studio album , the second disc contains B @-@ sides collected from OK Computer singles and live recording sessions , and the DVD contains a collection of music videos and a live television performance . All material on the reissue had been previously released . 
 In a March 2009 interview , O 'Brien claimed that EMI had not notified the band members of the reissue and said " I think the fans have got most of [ the material on the reissues ] , it 's all the stuff up on YouTube . This is just a company who are trying to squeeze every bit of lost money , it 's not about [ an ] artistic statement . " Press reaction to the reissue announcement reflected the concern that EMI was exploiting Radiohead 's back catalogue . Larry Fitzmaurice of Spin accused EMI of planning to " issue and re @-@ issue [ Radiohead 's ] discography until the cash stops rolling in " , and Pitchfork 's Ryan Dombal said it was " hard to look at these reissues as anything other than a cash @-@ grab for EMI / Capitol — an old media company that got dumped by their most forward @-@ thinking band . " Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone defended EMI , saying " While it 's easy to accuse Capitol of milking the cash cow once again , these sets are pretty comprehensive . " 
 The reissue was critically well received , although critics were mixed about the supplemental material . Reviews in AllMusic , Uncut , Q , Rolling Stone and PopMatters praised the supplemental material , but with reservations . A review written by Scott Plagenhoef for Pitchfork awarded the reissue a perfect score , arguing that it was worth buying for fans who did not already own the rare material . Plagenhoef said , " That the band had nothing to do with these is beside the point : This is the final word on these records , if for no other reason that the Beatles ' September 9 remaster campaign is , arguably , the end of the CD era . " The A.V. Club writer Josh Modell praised both the bonus disc and the DVD , and said of the album , " And what can be said about 1997 's OK Computer that hasn 't been said before ? It really is the perfect synthesis of Radiohead 's seemingly conflicted impulses . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Radiohead ( Colin Greenwood , Ed O 'Brien , Jonny Greenwood , Philip Selway , and Thom Yorke ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Sukumar ( director ) = 
 Sukumar ( born Sukumar Bandreddi , 11 January 1970 ) is an Indian film director , producer , and screenwriter who predominantly works in Telugu cinema . Born in <unk> near Razole , East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh , Sukumar worked as a mathematics and physics lecturer at the Aditya Junior college , Kakinada for nearly six years before pursuing a career in films . He began working as a writer and assisted Mohan and V. V. Vinayak . 
 Sukumar made his directorial debut with Arya in 2004 , whose success catapulted him to stardom . Sukumar won the Filmfare Award for Best Director – Telugu and Nandi Award for Best Screenplay Writer for his work in Arya . His other notable films include Jagadam ( 2007 ) , Arya 2 ( 2009 ) , 100 % Love ( 2011 ) , 1 : Nenokkadine ( 2014 ) , and Nannaku Prematho ( 2016 ) . Sukumar is known for his complex , multi @-@ layered screenplays which earned him the reputation of being an intelligent screenwriter . He is also known for infusing grey shades in the character sketches of the protagonists in his films . 
 Under the banner Sukumar Writings , he made his debut as a film producer with Kumari 21F ( 2015 ) , whose story and screenplay were penned by him . He received the K. V. Reddy Memorial award for his contributions to Telugu cinema in the year 2014 . In 2016 , he hinted a possible retirement from directing films . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Sukumar was born on 11 January 1970 , in <unk> , a village near Razole in the East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh . His father Tirupathi Naidu was a rice trader and his mother Veera Veni was a homemaker . Sukumar was the youngest of the six children of Naidu and Veni . At the age of 6 , following the slaughter of a rooster he loved , Sukumar began practising vegetarianism . He did his schooling from a Zilla Parishad High School , Razole and graduated with a master 's degree in mathematics . He later worked as a mathematics and physics lecturer in Aditya Junior college , Kakinada . After six years , Sukumar and his junior Prakash Toleti decided to do something creative as they opined that their life has become too mundane as a lecturer . 
 Sukumar and Toleti began their career as writers in Telugu cinema and worked as writers for a few films . After writing three scenes for <unk> C. <unk> 's <unk> <unk> ? ( 1998 ) , they were summoned by the college to help them in recruiting the students . They walked out of the film on moral grounds . Due to lack of earnings , Sukumar briefly continued to teach students , earned money , and returned to film industry . Sukumar later assisted Jayam Raja 's father Mohan for <unk> Velli <unk> Randi ( 2000 ) , and Hanuman Junction ( 2001 ) . Before making his directorial debut , Sukumar worked under V. V. Vinayak for Dil ( 2003 ) as an assistant director . 
 Sukumar had a relationship with <unk> , whom he met first at the Sudarshan Theatre , RTC X Roads , Hyderabad during the screening of his directorial debut Arya ( 2004 ) . They married in 2009 in the presence of his parents and sister . Though <unk> 's parents opposed Sukumar for being a film technician , they accepted their alliance later . The couple have a son and a daughter . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Debut and breakthrough : 2004 @-@ 2011 = = = 
 Sukumar began working on the script of his directorial debut Arya ( 2004 ) in Vishakhapatnam before joining the sets of Vinayak 's Dil . Its producer Dil Raju assured that he would produce the film if Dil becomes a commercial success . Sukumar chose to narrate the story of a boy who confess his love to a girl right in the beginning , opposed to films like Darr ( 1993 ) , Kabhie Haan Kabhie Naa ( 1994 ) , and Kaadhal <unk> ( 2003 ) where the protagonist 's love / obsession for the female lead is revealed towards the end , as he found that idea an " obsolete " one . Raju was impressed with Sukumar 's script and Allu Arjun was selected as its protagonist after considering Ravi Teja , Nithin , and Prabhas . Anuradha Mehta and Siva Balaji were chosen for the other two lead roles . R. Rathnavelu and Devi Sri Prasad were chosen as the film 's director of photography and music director respectively ; they both collaborated with Sukumar in many of his future projects . Arya was commercially successful ; it grossed ₹ 160 million on a budget of ₹ 40 million . The success of Arya catapulted Sukumar into stardom overnight . He earned the Filmfare Award for Best Director – Telugu at the 52nd Filmfare Awards South ceremony , and the Best Screenplay Writer award at the annual Nandi Awards ceremony . 
 Sukumar then began working on the script of Jagadam ( 2007 ) , a crime film starring Ram <unk> and Isha Sahni . Unlike Arya , Jagadam focused more on violence and in an interview with South Scope , Sukumar called the film an " act of bravado " , adding that he " made it with an innocent passion " , without thinking about the audience 's response . Jagadam received mixed reviews and was a commercial failure . While Sify called the film a " not so much a plot @-@ driven film " albeit praising the work of its technical crew , Rediff called it a " good effort " . He then wrote and directed Arya 2 ( 2009 ) , which was promoted as the namesake sequel of his debut Arya . It featured Allu Arjun , Kajal Aggarwal , and Navdeep in the lead roles and narrated the story of Arya , a psychotic orphan whose love for his friend Ajay and his colleague Geetha is never reciprocated . Sify called it Sukumar 's " another celluloid misadventure " after Jagadam and stated that he " fails both as a writer and director as his plotline is confusing and his hero 's characterization is negative " . However , Arya 2 became one of the few successful Telugu films of the year , and was praised for its style quotient and music . Sukumar received a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Director – Telugu at the 57th Filmfare Awards South ceremony , but lost it to S. S. Rajamouli for Magadheera . Rajamouli stated that he regards Sukumar as the best of the lot after watching Arya 2 , which was Sukumar 's " most precious and sweetest thing I have heard about myself " . 
 After a gap of two years , Sukumar 's next directorial 100 % Love ( 2011 ) was released . Sukumar envisioned the film 's concept 15 years ago , which dealt with the simple conflicts couples face and the way they solve them , and made changes based on the technological and behavioural developments of the students in the colleges . 100 % Love featured Naga Chaitanya and Tamannaah in the lead roles and was produced by Allu Aravind and Bunny Vasu . 100 % Love was commercially successful ; it received the Best Home @-@ viewing Feature Film award at the annual Nandi Awards ceremony . Sukumar earned another nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Director – Telugu at the 59th Filmfare Awards South , and a nomination for the Best Director – Telugu at the 1st South Indian International Movie Awards . 
 = = = Serious themes : 2014 @-@ Present = = = 
 After completing 100 % Love , Sukumar began working on 1 : Nenokkadine , a psychological thriller keeping Mahesh Babu in mind as the protagonist as he felt that Mahesh had a universal appeal in terms of looks . The incident of a bus driver talking about a young boy who claims that his parents were murdered in that bus was taken as the story 's base . He worked on the film 's script for two months , and considered it as his dream project . 1 : Nenokkadine was released on 10 January 2014 globally and received generally negative reviews from the critics . While Suresh Kavirayani of Deccan Chronicle opined that Sukumar " fails to deliver " and the story is " run of the mill " , Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu stated , " Habitual to watching films that begin with a great premise only to fall into the commercial trap of force @-@ fit comic situations , it comes as a relief when Sukumar laces the psychological thriller with subtle wit that never takes the focus away from the plot " . 1 : Nenokkadine collected approximately ₹ 289 million worldwide on a budget of ₹ 700 million , thus becoming a commercial failure . 
 After writing and directing a short film I Am That Change produced by Allu Arjun , Sukumar provided the story and screenplay for Kumari 21F , his maiden feature film as a co @-@ producer which was directed by his assistant Palnati Surya Pratap . He took inspiration from his college days in Razole where a young woman went to a picnic with some young men ; a major undertaking for a woman at the time . Rumours were spread and the woman was labelled as a " loose " character , which stayed in Sukumar 's mind . Produced on a budget of ₹ 60 — 150 million , Kumari 21F grossed ₹ 380 million and became the 12th highest grossing Telugu film of the year . Siddharth Rao of The Times of India stated , " In an industry where a damsel @-@ in @-@ distress @-@ wooed @-@ and @-@ saved @-@ by @-@ an @-@ angry @-@ young @-@ man is the norm , this is refreshing . Kudos to the writer Sukumar for giving yet another off @-@ beat story with characters that can 't be put into a box " . 
 Following the demise of Naidu , Sukumar decided to direct Nannaku Prematho starring N. T. Rama Rao Jr. and <unk> Preet Singh in the lead roles . Nannaku Prematho , which was Rama Rao Jr . ' s 25th film as an actor , dealt with an emotional relationship between a father and his son in a span of 30 days . Released on 13 January 2016 , Nannaku Prematho received positive reviews from the critics . Pranita Jonnalagedda of The Times of India stated that the viewers see ups every time when Sukumar " decides to listen to his inner self and gives us some interestingly conceived sequences " and downs come whenever he " gives in to the prerequisite mandates of Telugu cinema " . An above average grosser at the domestic box office , Nannaku Prematho became the third highest grossing Telugu film of all time in the overseas . 
 Sukumar 's future projects include a film with Ram Charan and Devi Sri Prasad each , which marks the latter 's on @-@ screen debut as an actor . He also announced his plans to quit directing as he felt that his assistants can do a better job of directing his stories and that he would continue to write and produce films . 
 = = Craft , style , and technical collaborations = = 
 As a writer , Sukumar is influenced by the works of <unk> <unk> , Yandamuri <unk> , and <unk> Sulochana Rani . In an interview with Deccan Chronicle , Sukumar revealed that each of the romantic scenes in his films are inspired from the writings of either <unk> or Sulochana Rani . Sukumar uses non @-@ linear screenplay for most of his films and few sequences of most of his films involve revelation of finest details and re @-@ visiting a scene again and again . His screenplays are mostly complex and multi @-@ layered which earned him the reputation of being an intelligent screenplay writer . In an interview of The Times of India in January 2014 , Sukumar said that emotions play a key role in his films , stating that a film " may have multiple subplots , but in the end , it 's the emotional curve that connects with the audience " . Because of improvising the sequences on the sets and making changes to already filmed portions , his films took long time to complete their production phases . 
 In most of his films , Sukumar 's protagonists are shown to be characterised with grey shades . Y. Sunita Chowdary of The Hindu commented that Sukumar " revels in giving a slight twist to his protagonist , in his background and character " and leaves the audience to understand him as he " unties the knots during narration and justifies his behaviour and makes us root for him " . Karthik Keramalu of CNN @-@ IBN , in his review of Kumari 21F , stated that Sukumar ’ s lead characters are " psychologically wired differently " , adding that at least one of the characters in his films " behaves in a way that will amuse the audience and the other characters present in the film " . Regarding the same , Sukumar said , " We all have a lot of emotions and we suppress most of them fearing rejection . Instead we sport a smile and move on in this world . Problems arise when we don ’ t enjoy all feelings like jealousy , selfishness and don ’ t express them . To achieve something , there must be a driving force and that could be jealousy which you term as negative " . 
 Except for the short film I Am That Change whose music was composed by Sai Karthik , Sukumar chose Devi Sri Prasad to compose the soundtrack and background score for the films he directed . Sukumar worked with cinematographer R. Rathnavelu for Arya , Jagadam , and 1 : Nenokkadine . When Raju asked Sukumar about the budget to be allotted to Arya , Sukumar said that he first wants Rathnavelu on board . In an interview to The Hindu in March 2012 , Rathnavelu said , " Sukumar 's speciality is he can give you five different ways to solve every problem you encounter . He can get to the crux of the problem and figure out the best possible method to resolve it " . Because of their friendship with Sukumar , neither Rathnavelu nor Prasad charged any remuneration for his maiden production venture Kumari 21F . For Arya 2 , he collaborated with R. D. Rajasekhar . He worked with Venkat R. Prasad and Vijay C Chakravarthy for 100 % Love and Nannaku Prematho respectively . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = Cleveland Bay = 
 The Cleveland Bay is a breed of horse that originated in England during the 17th century , named after its colouring and the Cleveland district of Yorkshire . It is a well @-@ muscled horse , with legs that are strong but short in relation to the body . The horses are always bay in colour , although a few light hairs in the mane and tail are characteristic of some breed lines . It is the oldest established horse breed in England , and the only non @-@ draught horse developed in Great Britain . The ancestors of the breed were developed during the Middle Ages for use as pack horses , when they gained their nickname of " Chapman Horses " . These pack horses were crossbred with Andalusian and Barb blood , and later with Arabians and Thoroughbreds , to create the Cleveland Bay of today . Over the years , the breed became lighter in frame as they were employed more as carriage and riding horses . The popularity of the Cleveland Bay has greatly fluctuated since it was first imported to the United States in the early 19th century . Despite serious declines in the population after the Second World War , the breed has experienced a resurgence in popularity since the 1970s , although only around 550 horses existed worldwide as of 2006 . 
 They have been patronized by members of the British Royal Family throughout their history , and they are still used to pull carriages in royal processions today . The breed has also been used to develop and improve several warmblood and draught horse breeds . Today they are used for farm work and driving , as well as under @-@ saddle work . They are particularly popular for fox hunting and show jumping , both pure blooded and when crossed with Thoroughbreds . The Cleveland Bay is a rare breed , and both the United Kingdom @-@ based Rare Breeds Survival Trust and the United States @-@ based Livestock Conservancy consider the population to be at critical limits for extinction . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Cleveland Bay generally stands between 16 and 16 @.@ 2 hands ( 64 and 66 inches , 163 and 168 cm ) , and is always bay in colour . Bright bay horses ( bays with a more reddish tint than normal ) are the most preferred by breeders , followed by ordinary bay , dark bay and then light bay . This preference for brighter shades of bay was originally stated in the official breed standard , although this stipulation has since been removed . In some bloodlines of the breed , light , grayish hairs in the mane and tail are known as a characteristic of pure blood . White markings , except for a small star on the forehead , render the horse inadmissible to the stud book . Horses are expected to have complete black points , including completely black lower legs . Legs that are red below the knees and hocks are considered faulty in colour , although they do not disqualify a horse from registry . The occasional red legs that appear in the breed are thought to come from chestnut Thoroughbred stallions that were crossed into Cleveland Bay and Yorkshire Coach Horse bloodlines at some points in the history of both breeds . The uniformity in colour is encouraged as it makes creating matching driving teams and pairs very easy . When the breed was first developed , the horses almost always had a countershaded dorsal stripe , but these disappeared with the <unk> of the 18th century . 
 The breed has a large head , slightly convex profile , and a long , well @-@ muscled neck . The withers are well @-@ muscled , which often makes them less pronounced , the chest is broad and deep , the shoulders are muscular and sloping , and the croup slightly sloping . The legs are short in relation to the body , but strong and well @-@ muscled . The legs have little or no feather , as the breed was developed partially for working in the heavy clay soils of its native country , where heavy feather led to increased disease prevalence . They are hardy and long @-@ lived horses , and docile in temperament . In the early 20th century , when a breed standard was issued by the British Cleveland Bay Society for use in judging shows , a section was added on the movement of the horses , describing the desired action , especially at the trot . This was included in part because military potential was still considered a factor in evaluating harness horses and a good trot was necessary for an artillery horse . It was also evaluated because breeds with large action at the trot often also have a potential for jumping . The combination of desired characteristics means that the breed is useful for breeding show jumpers , eventers and <unk> ( the latter especially when crossed with Thoroughbreds ) . 
 <unk> Cleveland Bays are sometimes called Cleveland Bay <unk> , although they are referred to by the US and UK registries as part breds . They are eligible for registration with the Cleveland Bay Part Bred Registry , but must not be registered with any other registry . To be eligible , horses must have at least one grandparent registered with the main Cleveland Bay Horse Society stud book . The Australasian registry refers to part breds as <unk> , although they still require at least 25 percent Cleveland Bay blood . 
 = = History = = 
 Originally developed in the Cleveland district of Yorkshire , England , the Cleveland Bay is said to be the oldest established English horse breed , and the only horse native to Britain that does not belong to the heavy horse group . The closest breed in type , although completely unrelated , is the Irish Draught . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The earliest breeding of the ancestors of the Cleveland Bay was done in large part by English churches and monasteries , to meet a need for pack horses to carry trade goods between abbeys and monasteries in northeast England . These medieval horses gained the nickname of " Chapman Horses " because of their use by travelling merchants known as " <unk> " . What is now the Cleveland Bay was developed from Barb and Andalusian horses crossed with Chapman Horse mares . The Barb blood came mainly from horses imported by wealthy young men on their Grand Tour of Europe , bought off the docks in Marseilles and transported back to England . The Andalusian blood came from horses bred at the royal stud in Cordoba and given to English royalty by the King of Spain . The stallions were often available for breeding to local horses , and the first infusion of Andalusian blood was added to the native Chapman Horses . The Spanish horses also made their way to the outlying estates of English nobility , and were then taken by Oliver Cromwell 's men after the English Civil War . Once in the hands of Cromwell 's men , many of the stallions were made available for locals to cross with the existing Chapman Horses , adding a second infusion of Andalusian bloodlines . In the late 17th century a second infusion of Barb blood was added when Cleveland breeders purchased horses directly from soldiers at Tangier or from the Moors themselves . 
 Between 1685 and 1785 this Chapman Horse / Andalusian / Barb cross developed into the original Cleveland Bay . During this century the type grew bigger due to better feeding , and by 1785 had developed through selective breeding into the " agricultural type " Cleveland Bay . This original type was heavier and more draft @-@ like than the breed of today . This was due to a need for strength more than speed on the farms and poor roads of 17th- and 18th @-@ century England . As roads improved and speed became more important in the late 18th century , Thoroughbred and Arabian blood was added . The resulting horses were used extensively as coach horses , and were lighter of frame , with a well @-@ arched neck and powerful shoulders , making for a flashy carriage horse . The Thoroughbred blood was added despite the claims of breeders that the Cleveland Bay was " free from taint of black or blood " , meaning either Thoroughbred " blood " or the Old English " Black " and its descendents . The addition of Thoroughbred breeding is thought responsible for Cleveland Bays born with red legs ( as opposed to the black normally associated with bay horses ) , generally the result of a chestnut Thoroughbred sire in the family tree . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The British Cleveland Bay Horse Society was formed in 1883 , and the first stud book was published in 1884 . The 19th century saw the export of many Cleveland Bays overseas , to Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , the United States , India , Russia and the European continent . In the early 19th century , Cleveland Bays were first imported to Maryland , Virginia and Massachusetts in the United States , and in 1884 the Upperville Colt & Horse Show was created in Virginia by Colonel Richard Henry Dulany to showcase his imported Cleveland Bay stallion and the offspring of the stallion . The Cleveland Bay Society of America was formed in 1885 , and the stud book began publication in 1889 , although horses were registered who had lived as far back as 1860 . Judging from the descriptions of the earliest registered horses , it is possible that many of the " Cleveland Bays " registered were actually Yorkshire Coach Horses ; however , all were registered as Clevelands , and that is what they are known as today . Over 2 @,@ 000 horses were registered with the association by 1907 . The horses were of interest to Buffalo Bill Cody , who drove four Cleveland Bay stallions in his Wild West Show . 
 Before the First World War , having seen the cavalry feats of mounted Boers during the Second Boer War , Britain increased its cavalry reserves . Smaller Cleveland Bays were used to carry British troopers , and larger members of the breed pulled artillery ; the British War Office offered premiums on Cleveland Bay stallions . Although the First World War was not the cavalry war the British expected , large numbers of horses were used to pull artillery and losses were high . Because the war caused a depletion in stock , in 1920 and 1921 , the British society opened a special register for previously unregistered mares of Cleveland Bay type , including some already registered with the Yorkshire Coach Horse ( a Cleveland / Thoroughbred cross ) registry , after they had passed an inspection that certified them to be of proper breed type . The subsequent foals of these mares were eligible for registration into the main British Cleveland Bay stud book , and were also eligible to compete in competitions reserved for breed members . Some of this progeny was bred and owned by King George V. 
 = = = Decline and re @-@ emergence = = = 
 However , interest in the Cleveland Bay was waning , due to increased mechanisation , and the Great Depression of the early 1930s reduced exports by almost a third . There was a brief revival of interest in the late 1930s in the United States when they became popular as foundation stock for hunters . The decline continued , quickening after the Second World War ; in 1960 the War Office stopped offering premiums on stallions , and many breeders discontinued breeding . By 1962 , only four purebred stallions were present in the UK . Queen Elizabeth II saved the breed by purchasing Mulgrave Supreme , a stallion that was about to be sold to a buyer in the United States . The stallion was bred to <unk> and part @-@ bred mares , and within 15 years there were 36 purebred stallions in the UK . Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , used the breed for many years in international driving competitions . In the late 1960s and 1970s , interest in the breed increased , and part @-@ bred Cleveland Bays were in demand for use as riding horses , especially for use as hunters and jumpers . In 1964 , a Cleveland Bay / Thoroughbred cross competed in show jumping in the Tokyo Olympics . Another half @-@ bred Cleveland Bay competed for the British Olympic team in show jumping at the 1968 Mexico City Olympics , while a third was a reserve mount for the Canadian show jumping team at the 1976 Montreal Olympics . In the late 1960s and ' 70s , horses continued to be exported to many countries . Japan , the United States and Australia have continued to import the horses from England , and in New Zealand crosses between Cleveland Bays and native mares were in demand on cattle and sheep stations . 
 Since 1977 , Elizabeth II has been a patron of the Society , and during the Society 's centenary year of 1984 she acted as its president . The British Cleveland Bay Horse Society also maintains a separate registry for part @-@ bred horses . In the late 20th century , the breed again gained the attention of the United States public , and in 1985 the US association was reactivated , renamed the Cleveland Bay Society of North America . The US American Livestock Breeds Conservancy considers their status to be critical , which means there is an estimated global population of less than 2 @,@ 000 , and fewer than 200 annual registrations in the United States . The UK Rare Breeds Survival Trust also considers their status to be critical , with less than 300 breeding females registered worldwide . The Equus Survival Trust also considers the breed population to be at critical levels , meaning there are between 100 and 300 breeding females left in the world . Currently , there are about 135 purebred horses in the US and Canada recorded with the North American registry . There are also small populations in Japan , New Zealand , and Australia . In 2006 , an estimated 550 Cleveland Bay horses existed worldwide , of which about 220 were mares ; the 2005 foal crop produced fewer than 50 horses . 
 = = Uses = = 
 The Cleveland Bay is a versatile horse and is still used today for many tasks , including driving and farmwork . In the 1920s , Cleveland Bays replaced black Hanoverians in the British royal stables , and both the Cleveland Bay and Cleveland Bay / Thoroughbred crosses are used as royal carriage horses today . The horses are used as heavy hunters , as they are powerful and able to carry a man weighing 250 pounds ( 110 kg ) for a full day of hunting over large obstacles and through heavy clay . When crossed with Thoroughbreds , the resulting progeny are lighter and faster , but still strong and heavy of bone . When show jumping was first beginning as a sport during the mid @-@ 19th century , Cleveland Bays were among the initial stars . Two mares , Star and Fanny Drape , were two of the top performers . Fanny Drape was known to have cleared a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) stone wall with a rider on her back , and a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 3 m ) bar while being jumped in @-@ hand . In 2006 , a Cleveland Bay stallion named <unk> Journeyman was used as a model for a new horse figure by Breyer Animal Creations , and the stallion participated in that year 's Breyer model horse festival . Purebred and crossbred Cleveland Bays make up the majority of the bay horses in the Royal Mews , the British royal stables , where they receive intense training to desensitize them before they are put to work drawing royal carriages . 
 The Cleveland Bay was used in the creation of the Oldenburg breed , because of its stamina , strength , and jumping ability . The breed was also used to create and improve the Holstein and Hanoverian breeds . In the late 18th century , the Cleveland Bay was used to create the short @-@ lived Yorkshire Coach Horse through crosses with Thoroughbreds . These Yorkshires were used mainly to pull mail and passenger coaches , hence their name . Called by some the " New Cleveland Bay " , foreigners often could not distinguish between the two breeds , and many horses registered as Cleveland Bays in European coach horse studbooks were actually Yorkshire Coach Horses . In the 19th century , the Cleveland Bay was crossed with French and Belgian draft horses to create the Vladimir Heavy Draft , a Russian breed developed to fill that country 's need for a heavy draft breed . 
 = Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire = 
 Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire is a pinball game developed by Jupiter and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance handheld game console . It was first revealed at E3 in 2003 , and was released in the same year – on August 1 , August 25 , and November 14 in Japan , North America , and PAL regions respectively . The North American release was done to coincide with the fifth anniversary of the North American release of Pokémon Red and Blue . It is based on Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire , and is a sequel to Pokémon Pinball for the Game Boy Color . In some ways , it plays like a traditional pinball game , where the objective is to get a high score by keeping the ball in play as long as possible and hitting bumpers . In keeping with the theme of Pokémon , it features Pokémon collection , where while the players play pinball , they must also capture the eponymous creatures . 
 Ruby & Sapphire has received generally positive reception . It was well received when it was revealed at E3 by publications such as IGN and GameSpy . Its release was similarly well received , with Metacritic and Game Rankings giving it aggregate scores of 82 and 80 @.@ 83 % respectively . It has sold 1 million copies worldwide , and has received significant praise from review outlets such as Nintendo Power , GamePro , and IGN , the latter awarding it the Game Boy Advance Game of the Month award for August 2003 . In spite of the positive reception , some reviewers found it to be an inferior pinball experience , such as TechTV , The Guardian , and Cheat Code Central , though all three felt that Pokémon fans would enjoy it . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire plays similarly to traditional pinball games , using a similar engine to its predecessor , Pokémon Pinball . It features two boards , each themed on either Pokémon Ruby or Sapphire . They have similar layouts , though they feature some differences , the Sapphire table being noted as slightly more annoying due to its setup . The player launches a ball onto the board , at which point it descends towards the bottom of said board . The objective is to ensure that the ball does not reach the pit at the bottom . Players must utilize a pair of flippers located right above the bottom to hit the ball upward , keeping it from falling for as long as possible . There are two spots located on either end of the board where the ball may fall , rendering players helpless . A Pikachu sits at either side of the board , and if players have filled its meter , it will be able to shoot the ball out of this spot . Under certain conditions , a Pichu will appear , allowing both spots to be blocked . This only occurs when the player has activated the four circles that sit in both the side slots and flipper paths , shown here . Consequently , a gravity field appears in the central hole that starts a " Start Slot " minigame that resembles a slot machine . In the blue field the player is able to utilise a <unk> ( shown here on the right side of the board ) so that it can pounce on the selected tile and obtain the result . After finishing the Rayquaza bonus stage , a new Start Slot tile appears , which is simply labeled " Arrival " , signifying the arrival of a Jirachi . Activating this tile results in a bonus mode similar to Catch ' Em Mode , where the player only has thirty seconds to catch Jirachi . This is the only way to add Jirachi to the Pokédex . 
 As players hit various objects around the field , their score goes up . At certain scores , players gain a new ball . If the ball falls to the bottom , that round is over , and the players ' scores are tallied , given bonuses for their achievements . In order to prevent players from losing a ball , the game features a Ball Saver , which allows the ball to fall without being lost . This eventually goes away , however . The game has a shop system that can provide boosts for players , such one that adds a Ball Saver . Coins are collected through various means , and are used to purchase items from this shop . If all balls are lost , the game is over . The other objective of the game is to complete the Pokédex , similar to other Pokémon titles . Occasionally , a hole will open in the field , where players can either gain bonuses , such as an added Ball Saver or a score increase , or allow them to go to a special mode . There are four primary modes - Catch ' Em Mode , Egg Mode , Evolution Mode , and Travel Mode . These modes are typically activated by going through a certain path on the board three times , and then entering an area on the board , such as the <unk> , which will activate Catch ' Em Mode . 
 In the Catch ' Em Mode , players must reveal a silhouette of a Pokémon by hitting bumpers . Once it is revealed , players must hit the Pokémon that appears three times with the ball as it sits in one spot before the time runs out . Egg Mode is a similar concept , though the baby Pokémon roam around the board as opposed to standard Pokémon , which stand still . As opposed to being timed , players must capture it before it returns from whence it came . Evolution Mode is also similar , requiring players to hit all of the evolution item markers in order to evolve their Pokémon that they have caught or hatched . These include several traditional means of evolution in the Pokémon series , such as stones and experience points . Lastly , Travel Mode allows players to leave the current location on their pinball board , allowing them to capture more kinds of Pokémon not found in the current area . Ruby & Sapphire featured additional bonus modes that often diverge from the standard gameplay . These modes sometimes feature rare Pokémon such as Groudon , Kyogre , and Rayquaza , and take place on separate fields . Outside of the gameplay , players may also view the Pokémon they have caught , listen to sound effects and music from the game , and view their high scores for each board . 
 = = Release = = 
 Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire was first revealed at E3 2003 for the Game Boy Advance . It was also shown at the 2003 Games Convention in Leipzig , Germany , as well as at the European Computer Trade Show in London , England . It was developed by Jupiter and published by Nintendo . It is based on Pokémon Ruby and Sapphire , and features Pokémon available in those games . It was first released in Japan on August 1 , 2003 , and in North America on August 25 of the same year . The North American date coincided with the five @-@ year anniversary of Pokémon Red and Blue 's North American release . It was released in PAL regions several months later on November 14 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release reception = = = 
 Before its release , Pokémon Pinball Ruby & Sapphire received generally positive impressions from critics . After a play test by Anoop Gantayat of IGN , he felt that fans of the series would enjoy it . He also praised the visuals , calling them " bright , colorful , and happy " . However , he bemoaned the lack of e @-@ Reader support , a feature common in Game Boy Advance games at the time . Craig Harris , also from IGN , found it to be a fun game , anticipating its release . IGN also included it in a list of the 10 big Game Boy Advance games of 2003 . GameSpy described it as " much more than a pinball game " , describing its gameplay mechanics as " unique " . 
 = = = Critical and consumer reception = = = 
 Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire has been met with generally positive reception . It holds an aggregate score of 82 from Metacritic and 80 @.@ 83 % from Game Rankings . Ruby & Sapphire has been met with great consumer success . It ranked number one on Amazon.com 's top 10 list for the week ending October 8 , 2003 . In the week ending September 4 in Japan , Ruby & Sapphire sold 19 @,@ 400 copies , ranking sixth , with sales at that time at 170 @,@ 247 copies total . The next week , it ranked 10th . It has sold more than one million copies worldwide . The News Tribune 's Bill <unk> called it " addictive " , while GamesRadar 's Carolyn Gudmundson called it an " awesome game " . Nintendo Power praised it as being more than " just a GBA makeover " of Pokémon Pinball , calling it an evolution and gameplay and describing the Pokémon and areas as more lively . However , GameSpot 's Jeff Gerstmann found that while the game was entertaining , it was " practically identical " to the first game , and easier too . Cheat Code Central felt that the gameplay was too repetitive , feeling that only the most " ardent of Pokémon fans " will want to complete it . Denver Post 's David Thomas called it " one of the most enjoyable pinball experiences " , citing the Pokémon brand for why the game is so popular . Electronic Gaming Monthly praised the pinball table designs for their incorporation of Pokémon themes , noting that everything , save for the flippers , has a Pokémon theme . 
 GMR Magazine praised the combination of the Pokémon franchise with pinball gameplay , saying that the combination leads to " good times " . While IGN 's Craig Harris praised Ruby & Sapphire as the greatest pinball game for the Game Boy Advance , he noted that the Sapphire @-@ themed board was slightly more annoying than the Ruby @-@ themed one . He awarded it an " Editors Choice " award . Lucas M. Thomas , a fellow member of IGN , agreed with Harris , going further in calling it one of the greatest portable pinball games ever . He added that it had more fun and playability than most Game Boy Advance titles . It was ultimately awarded Game of the Month from IGN in August 2003 , winning over Mortal Kombat : Tournament Edition . IGN praised Ruby & Sapphire as being one of the best pinball games on the Game Boy Advance , hoping that Nintendo makes a sequel to this . 
 Edge commented that while this is not a conventional pinball game , citing a lack of " well @-@ designed <unk> and a challenging layout " , the Pokémon series was never noted for its conventionality . 1UP.com praised Ruby & Sapphire , noting that while they were not as interested in the Pokémon series , Ruby & Sapphire was one of their most anticipated games of the summer . They add that Ruby & Sapphire improves on the original in " just about every way " . GameNOW compared Ruby & Sapphire to the WarioWare , Inc. series , praising it as a " perfect handheld game " and " instantly playable " . The Guardian 's Rhianna Pratchett praised Ruby & Sapphire for being good for pinball novices and Pokémon players , but criticized its lack of deeper pinball mechanics such as multi @-@ balls and skill shots . She also criticized the lack of variety in pinball boards , commenting that the two boards were very similar . 
 TechTV criticized it as being less " addictive or diverse as the great pinball videogames " , though noted it to be fun for those looking for a Pokémon title . Game Informer praised its ball physics and controls , calling them " dead on " . GameSpy 's Darryl Vassar gave similar praise , describing the game as a " blast " . He added that it had surprising depth . GamePro 's " Dan Elektro " commented that Ruby & Sapphire would not interest those who do not have interest in the series , but fans of the series would enjoy its " unusually satisfying " gameplay . Games ( TM ) praised it for combining pinball and Pokémon , adding that the pinball gameplay would be more likely to draw those who are not fans of the series into playing Pokémon more so than the adventure games . Eurogamer 's Martin Taylor commented that only the " most demanding of pinball wizards would be right to turn their nose up at Pokemon Pinball 's charming slant on the genre . " Computer and Video Games praised it for its broad appeal , commenting that it is " fast and fluid for the casual player , yet has collecting and evolving for the obsessive . " Pokémon Pinball : Ruby & Sapphire has been compared to other pinball video games , including Mario Pinball Land , which GameAxis Unwired treats as an inferior to Ruby & Sapphire . Eurogamer described Ruby & Sapphire as a spiritual predecessor to Metroid Prime Pinball . 
 = No Way Out ( 2007 ) = 
 No Way Out ( 2007 ) was the ninth annual No Way Out pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . It took place on February 18 , 2007 , at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , California and was the final branded pay @-@ per @-@ view before all pay @-@ per @-@ view events became tri @-@ branded until 2016 . 
 The main event was an interpromotional tag team match between Batista and The Undertaker ( from SmackDown ! ) and John Cena and Shawn Michaels ( from Raw ) . Cena and Michaels won the match after Cena pinned Undertaker following an FU . The main match on the undercard was an interpromotional Six @-@ man tag team match between the team of Chris Benoit and The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) and the team of MNM ( Joey Mercury and Johnny Nitro ) and Montel Vontavious Porter , which was won by the Hardys and Benoit after Benoit forced Mercury to submit to the Crippler Crossface . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured eight professional wrestling matches with outcomes predetermined by WWE script writers . The matches featured wrestlers portraying their characters in planned storylines that took place before , during and after the event . 
 The main feud heading into No Way Out was between SmackDown ! ' s World Heavyweight Champion Batista and his partner , The Undertaker , and Raw 's WWE Champion John Cena and Shawn Michaels . This feud began after Undertaker won the 2007 Royal Rumble match . The following week on an episode of SmackDown ! , the two world champions demanded an answer from Undertaker as to who he would face at WrestleMania , but Michaels interfered , as he also wanted an answer from Undertaker . As they awaited for Undertaker 's answer , Vince McMahon , the WWE Chairman , made an appearance and announced an interpromotional tag team match between the two pairs of brand representatives . On the February 5 , 2007 episode of Raw , Undertaker made his decision to face World Heavyweight Champion Batista at WrestleMania 23 , sending a message through a chokeslam . Michaels then became Cena 's challenger at WrestleMania 23 after winning a Triple Threat match against Randy Orton and Edge . On the February 15 , 2007 episode of Raw , the brand representatives were pitted in an eight @-@ man tag @-@ team match against Rated @-@ RKO ( Orton and Edge ) , Mr. Kennedy , and Montel Vontavious Porter in which the brand representatives were victorious . The Raw representatives went on to win the World Tag Team Championship , although Michaels made many attempts to superkick Cena during the road to No Way Out . On the February 16 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , Undertaker and Batista again teamed up to face Rated @-@ RKO and were victorious via pinfall . 
 The secondary feud heading into No Way Out was between Chris Benoit and The Hardys against MNM and Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) . This feud began shortly after MNM reformed , when they challenged the reunited Hardys at December to Dismember in a losing effort . They then continued to wrestle on episodes of Raw , ECW , and SmackDown ! until Armageddon , when Mercury suffered a legitimate severe facial injury . On the February 16 episode of SmackDown ! , SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long announced a ladder match between Paul London and Brian Kendrick , Dave Taylor and William Regal , MNM , and The Hardys for the WWE Tag Team Championship ( the same match all four teams had against each other at Armageddon ) , but WWE 's official website announced the match had changed to pit The Hardys and Chris Benoit against MNM and MVP , while Brian Kendrick and Paul London faced Deuce ' n Domino in a separate match . Benoit and MVP were added to the match on short notice , as they were not feuding at the time . 
 The third feud heading into No Way Out was between Kane and King Booker . This feud began during the 2007 Royal Rumble match when Kane eliminated King Booker from the match , but Booker returned unofficially to eliminate Kane . The feud continued on the February 2 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! during King Booker 's Key to the City ceremony in Houston , Texas , when Kane interrupted the ceremony and attacked King Booker . After they continued to feud during the weeks leading up to No Way Out , Theodore Long booked a match between the two at No Way Out . On the February 16 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! , King Booker mocked Kane by dishonestly reviewing Kane 's See No Evil movie , but Booker ran out when Kane came in to attack him . 
 The fourth feud heading into No Way Out was between Bobby Lashley and Mr. Kennedy . This feud began on the February 16 episode of SmackDown ! when Lashley made a guest appearance to visit Theodore Long . Mr. Kennedy voiced his opinion to Lashley , reminding Lashley that he had beaten him before and claiming that he could to it again . Long then scheduled a match between the two for the ECW World Championship at No Way Out after contacting ECW officials . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before the event aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , a dark match between Rob Van Dam and Shelton Benjamin took place . Van Dam won the match by pinning Benjamin after performing a Five @-@ star frog splash . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match that aired was the six @-@ man tag team match between the team of The Hardys ( Matt Hardy and Jeff Hardy ) and Chris Benoit and the team of MNM ( Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury ) and Montel Vontavious Porter . The match began with Porter and Benoit , and Benoit gained the early advantage over Porter . The Hardys and Benoit remained with the advantage until MNM got involved in the match . MNM illegally double teamed The Hardys while the referee was distracted . Benoit was then tagged into the match , and MNM attempted to perform a Snapshot on Benoit . Benoit , however , countered the maneuver into a Crippler crossface on Mercury , who submitted , thus making The Hardys and Benoit the winners . 
 The next match was a Cruiserweight Open for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship . The match began with Scotty 2 Hotty against Daivari ; Hotty eliminated Daivari via pinfall after performing the Worm . The Cruiserweight Champion , Gregory Helms , then entered the match and eliminated Hotty via pinfall after he performed a Double knee facebreaker on Hotty . Funaki was the next participant to enter the match ; however , he was eliminated via pinfall after Helms executed a Crossbody into a pin while holding onto Funaki 's tights . Shannon Moore was the fifth entrant into the gauntlet , but was eliminated via pinfall after Helms performed a Double knee facebreaker on him . Jimmy Wang Yang , the sixth entrant , eliminated Helms via pinfall after performing a Hurricanrana pin . Jamie Noble was the seventh entrant into the Gauntlet match , but he was eliminated via pinfall after Yang performed a moonsault into a pin . The final entrant , Chavo Guerrero , pinned Yang after a frog splash , thus winning the match and becoming the new WWE Cruiserweight Champion . 
 The third match was a Mixed tag team match between the team of Finlay and Little Bastard and the team of The Boogeyman and Little Boogeyman . The match started off with Finlay against The Boogeyman while Little Bastard hid under the ring . Finlay gained the advantage over Little Boogeyman as he threw him over the top rope onto ringside , where Little Bastard pulled Little Boogeyman under the ring . As Little Bastard finally entered into the ring , he ran out to ringside in fear of The Boogeyman , which led to The Boogeyman chasing him around the ring . This distracted the referee , allowing Finlay to hit Little Boogeyman with a shillelagh , after which Finlay covered him for the win . 
 The next match was the encounter between King Booker and Kane . The match started off with Kane gaining the advantage over Booker , which he held throughout the beginning of the match . Kane then attempted a chokeslam , but Booker <unk> the maneuver into a Scissors kick . Kane , however , managed to counter this with a clothesline . Queen Sharmell , who was at ringside in Booker 's corner , distracted Kane , allowing Booker to hit him with a heel kick . Kane retaliated by performing a chokeslam on Booker and covering him to win the match via pinfall . 
 The fifth match was a tag team match for the WWE Tag Team Championship between Deuce ' n Domino and the defending champions , Paul London and Brian Kendrick . There was back and forth action between the teams in the beginning of the match ; however , Deuce ' n Domino gained the advantage over Kendrick and London , as they focused on wearing down London , not allowing him to tag in his partner . London was eventually able to tag Kendrick into the match , after which Domino attempted an aerial attack from the top rope . He missed Kendrick with the attack , however , allowing Kendrick to roll him up for the pin . As a result , London and Kendrick won the match and retained the WWE Tag Team Championship . 
 The sixth match was an ECW World Championship match between defending champion Bobby Lashley and Mr. Kennedy . As Kennedy made his entrance towards the ring , Lashley attacked Kennedy in the aisle , delaying the start of the match . When Lashley and Kennedy finally entered the ring , Kennedy attempted many submission holds to no avail , but he continued to attack Lashley in an attempt to keep him from getting up . Kennedy then left the ring to get a steel chair , but Lashley took the chair and attacked Kennedy with it , which caused the referee to end the match as a result of a disqualification . Kennedy won the match , but due to WWE rules , Lashley retained the ECW World Championship . After the match , Lashley hit Kennedy with a steel chair repeatedly until WWE officials ran in to control Lashley . 
 After the sixth match , there was a Diva Talent Invitational hosted by The Miz , featuring divas from SmackDown ! and Raw as well as vixens from ECW . First , Extreme Expose ( Layla , Kelly Kelly & Brooke ) danced to Rich Boy 's " Boy <unk> Here " . Next , Jillian Hall sang a song , but The Miz stopped her from continuing . Candice Michelle , Ariel , and Maria came out next , but before they presented their talent , a catfight broke out among the three divas . Ashley then came out , but before she made her way down to the ring , she took her top off to reveal her breasts covered with pasties in the form of the Playboy logo . The Miz then declared Ashley the winner of the Diva Talent Invitational . 
 = = = Main event match = = = 
 The main event was an inter @-@ promotional tag @-@ team match between SmackDown ! ' s Batista and The Undertaker and Raw 's tag team champions John Cena and Shawn Michaels . The match started off with Cena and Batista , and Batista gained the advantage over Cena . Undertaker and Batista then continued to wear down Cena and Michaels before throwing them over the top rope to ringside . As Cena returned into the ring , he attempted to perform an FU on Batista , but Undertaker interfered . This allowed Batista to counter the maneuver into a Batista Bomb , but Cena managed to escape after Michaels interfered . As Batista gave Michaels a Spinebuster , Undertaker executed a chokeslam on Cena . Undertaker then prepared to perform a Tombstone piledriver on Cena ; however , Batista turned on Undertaker by performing a Spinebuster on him . Batista then exited the ring , allowing Michaels to perform Sweet Chin Music and Cena to execute an FU on Undertaker . Cena then pinned Undertaker to win the match for his team . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After No Way Out , The Undertaker continued his feud with Batista over the World Heavyweight Championship . At WrestleMania 23 , he pinned Batista to win the title . Shawn Michaels , however , was unable to win the WWE Championship , as he lost to John Cena at WrestleMania 23 . 
 After Kane defeated King Booker at No Way Out , the two continued to feud on SmackDown ! in a Money in the Bank qualifying match on February 23 , 2007 . The feud , however , ended after Booker defeated Kane to qualify for the Money in the Bank ladder match . Kane then began a feud with The Great Khali , who came out to the ring to attack Kane after the match . At WrestleMania 23 , however , Kane lost to Khali via pinfall . 
 After No Way Out , The Hardys qualified for the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania 23 but were unsuccessful in winning the match , as Mr. Kennedy won it . Chris Benoit and Montel Vontavious Porter began a feud over the WWE United States Championship , and Benoit successfully defended his championship against Porter at WrestleMania 23 . After this event , MNM 's reunion ended , as Joey Mercury was released by WWE on March 26 , 2007 . After Bobby Lashley was disqualified at No Way Out , he was chosen to represent Donald Trump at WrestleMania 23 against Vince McMahon 's representative , Umaga , in the Battle of the Billionaires : Hair vs. Hair match . Lashley won the match at WrestleMania and the right for Trump to shave McMahon 's head . 
 = = Results = = 
 = NBR 224 and 420 Classes = 
 The NBR 224 and 420 Classes consisted of six steam locomotives of the 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 wheel arrangement built by the North British Railway ( NBR ) in 1871 and 1873 . No. 224 had three claims to fame : it was the first inside @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 to run in Great Britain ; the locomotive involved in the Tay Bridge disaster ; and after rebuilding in 1885 , was the only compound @-@ expansion locomotive on the NBR and one of just three tandem compounds in Britain . 
 Intended for express passenger trains on the Edinburgh – Glasgow , Edinburgh – Carlisle , and Burntisland – Dundee routes , they handled these well . When trains from London to Edinburgh began to be forwarded via Carlisle over the NBR in mid @-@ 1876 , these heavier trains were beyond the locomotives ' capabilities , and they had to be removed from front @-@ line service on the Carlisle line . Rebuilt between 1885 and 1897 , they remained in service until 1914 – 19 . 
 = = History = = 
 Thomas Wheatley became locomotive superintendent of the North British Railway ( NBR ) at the start of February 1867 . During his tenure of seven years , he provided the NBR with 185 new locomotives ; but only eight of these were suitable for hauling express passenger trains , the first two of which were 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s built in 1869 ( the 141 Class ) , which were considered to be very good engines . 
 In 1871 , Wheatley followed these with two 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s , nos . 224 and 264 , which were built at the NBR 's Cowlairs locomotive works . These two locomotives formed the 224 Class . A leading bogie was chosen because of the preponderance of sharp curves on the NBR ; the bogie wheels were quite small , at 2 ft 9 in ( 840 mm ) diameter , and had solid centres , without spokes . The bogie centre was fixed , as opposed to the Adams type used later by the NBR , and the bogie wheelbase was 6 ft 0 in ( 1 @,@ 830 mm ) . The coupled wheels were 6 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 980 mm ) diameter , and the other principal dimensions were : cylinders 17 in ( 430 mm ) diameter by 24 in ( 610 mm ) stroke ; coupled wheelbase 7 ft 7 in ( 2 @,@ 310 mm ) . 
 No. 224 was the first inside @-@ frame inside @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 to run in Great Britain , and predated the G & SWR 6 Class by some two years , the latter being introduced in July 1873 . This layout , the 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 with inside frames and inside cylinders , became widespread across most of Great Britain , with the Great Western Railway being the only main @-@ line company which did not eventually possess the type . There had been earlier 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 designs on other railways , but these either had outside cylinders ( such as nos . 160 & 161 ( built 1860 ) of the Stockton and Darlington Railway ) or outside frames ( such as the " Whitby <unk> " ( 1864 – 65 ) of the North Eastern Railway ) . 
 The 224 Class were used on express passenger trains , no . 264 being used both on the Waverley route between Edinburgh and Carlisle and on the line between Edinburgh and Glasgow . No. 224 was used in Fife , which in the days before the construction of the Forth Bridge , was an isolated part of the NBR system . 
 The 224 Class were followed in 1873 by the four locomotives of Wheatley 's 420 Class , nos . 420 – 3 . These differed from the 224 Class in several respects : the bogie wheels were 3 ft 4 in ( 1 @,@ 020 mm ) diameter instead of 2 ft 9 in ( 840 mm ) ; the coupled wheelbase was 7 ft 9 in ( 2 @,@ 360 mm ) instead of 7 ft 7 in ( 2 @,@ 310 mm ) ; the dome was mounted on the boiler barrel instead of the firebox ; and the rear wheel splashers were shaped to the wheel instead of being square @-@ topped . They were intended for use on the Waverley route , over which an increase of traffic was anticipated : the Midland Railway ( MR ) were at the time building their Settle and Carlisle line . This route not yet being open , and the English traffic being entirely in the hands of the London and North Western Railway who worked closely in tandem with the Caledonian Railway , the NBR 's main rival , the trains over the Waverley route were comparatively light and well within the capabilities of the 420 Class . 
 The MR opened the Settle and Carlisle line on 1 May 1876 , and a through service using that route between London St Pancras and Edinburgh Waverley was introduced at the same time . North of Carlisle , the trains were operated by the NBR over their Waverley route . Each company used its own locomotives over their respective lines , and initially the locomotives used by the NBR were the 420 Class , no . 421 being equipped with the Westinghouse brake ( as were three other locomotives at a cost of £ 90 , or £ 7 @,@ 640 as of 2015 , per engine ) , the brake with which MR carriages were then fitted . But these locomotives proved insufficiently powerful , a second engine often being needed to assist in climbing the gradients , particularly those at Falahill ( between Tynehead and Heriot ) and at <unk> ( between <unk> and Riccarton Junction ) . Wheatley 's successor , Dugald Drummond , offered the opinion that NBR express locomotives of the period were " like skinny chickens , all legs and wings " . As a result , Drummond designed a new class of 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 ( the 476 Class ) which began to displace the Wheatley 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0s from the through trains in 1877 , and which were capable of maintaining the schedule of 2 hr 35 min for 98 miles ( 158 km ) ( with three intermediate stops ) . The 420 Class remained on the Waverley route , but were used on the local trains , which were lighter than the through trains from England . 
 = = = No. 224 and the Tay Bridge disaster = = = 
 Until the opening of the Forth Bridge in 1890 , passengers from Edinburgh to Dundee would cross the Firth of Forth by a ferry from Granton which connected with trains at Burntisland . Further north , the Firth of Tay had been bridged in 1878 , and trains could travel through from Burntisland to Dundee and onward to Aberdeen . 
 On 28 December 1879 , the regular engine for the 1 @.@ 30 p.m. mail train from Dundee to Burntisland ( no . 89 <unk> of the 88 Class , an 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 2T ) failed , and no . 224 ( which was based at Dundee , and spare at the time ) was called out to work the train . It did so without incident on the southbound run , but when working the 5 @.@ 20 p.m. northbound service later in the day , due to arrive at Dundee a little before 7 @.@ 30 , it was on the Tay Bridge when shortly after 7 @.@ 13 p.m. the latter collapsed . The driver , David Mitchell , and " stoker " ( fireman ) , John Marshall , of no . 224 had no warning of the impending disaster , and neither closed the regulator nor applied the brakes ; they were among the 75 persons killed . Despite the fall , the locomotive was relatively undamaged , being protected by the bridge girders which formed a cage around the train as they fell together . 
 In April 1880 , an attempt to recover the locomotive failed when the chains broke . Two days later , a second attempt also failed because the salvage equipment broke after the locomotive had been brought to the surface . One week later , it was recovered , and stood on the bank of the Tay until it was sent to Cowlairs on its own wheels for repairs , after which it was returned to traffic . It gained the nickname " The Diver " as a result of its accident and difficult recovery . 
 After this , drivers refused to take no . 224 across the second Tay Bridge ( which was built to a new design and opened in 1887 ) . However , on the 29th anniversary of the disaster , 28 December 1908 , no . 224 was used on the Sunday evening mail to Dundee via the Tay Bridge . 
 = = = Rebuilding = = = 
 Matthew Holmes , locomotive superintendent of the NBR between 1882 and 1903 , rebuilt no . 224 as a four @-@ cylinder tandem compound in 1885 . In this form , the low @-@ pressure cylinders , which were 20 in ( 510 mm ) diameter , were mounted in the position previously occupied by the original cylinders , above the bogie centre ; and the high @-@ pressure cylinders , which were of diameter 13 inches ( 330 mm ) , were placed in front of these ; the common stroke remained at 24 in ( 610 mm ) . The engine was given a modified form of Joy valve gear . The boiler pressure was 140 pounds per square inch ( 970 kPa ) , and the grate area 16 @.@ 6 sq ft ( 1 @.@ 54 m2 ) . The chief features of the design had been patented ( no . 16 @,@ 967 of 1884 ) by W.H. Nesbit ( or Nisbet ) , who was a cousin of Holmes . Although not entirely successful , it did somewhat better than the only two other British tandem compounds – Great Western Railway nos . 7 & 8 , of 1886 ; although the tandem compound system was more widely used in the USA and Russia . No. 224 was rebuilt back into simple expansion form during 1887 . 
 On the NBR , locomotives were generally rebuilt when their boilers wore out . No. 224 received two new boilers in the course of its life : one was fitted by Drummond , the other by Holmes . Holmes ultimately rebuilt all of the locomotives : other than no . 224 , nos . 420 / 1 were rebuilt in 1887 , nos . 422 / 3 in 1890 and no . 264 in 1893 . No. 224 then received its third rebuilding in 1897 . In later years , no . 224 was used on secondary and branch line trains . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Every six months , the NBR renumbered some of its older locomotives into a " duplicate list " , in order to vacate numbers for new construction . Accordingly , in 1913 , nos . 224 and 264 were placed on the duplicate list , becoming nos . 1192 / 8 respectively ; nos . 420 – 3 were similarly treated in 1914 , becoming 1241 – 4 in the same order . No. 1244 was withdrawn from service in 1914 , the others following in 1915 ( no . 1241 ) , 1917 ( no . 1198 ) , 1918 ( nos . 1242 / 3 ) and 1919 ( no . 1192 ) . These were the only classes of 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 on the NBR to be completely withdrawn before the 1923 Grouping . As such , they were not among the 183 locomotives of this wheel arrangement which were passed by the NBR to the London and North Eastern Railway when the latter company was formed at the start of 1923 by the amalgamation of the NBR with several other railways . 
 The number plate from the tender of no . 224 has been preserved at Selkirk Museum . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The locomotives may have been named after 1875 – it has been stated that Drummond , who replaced Wheatley in 1875 , named NBR engines " including those already in service " . 
 = Leah Poulton = 
 Leah Joy Poulton ( born 27 February 1984 ) is a female Australian cricketer who plays for New South Wales and Australia . She is a specialist batsman who usually opens the batting . 
 Poulton came to prominence in youth cricket by captaining New South Wales to the Under @-@ 17 national championships in 2000 . In 2002 – 03 , she made her senior debut for New South Wales in the Women 's National Cricket League ( WNCL ) . She found runs hard to come by in her first three seasons and was in and out of the team frequently , aggregating only 24 runs in her second and third seasons combined . Despite this , she regularly captained Australia 's Under @-@ 19 and Under @-@ 23 teams during this time , leading the latter on a successful tour of Sri Lanka in 2004 . In 2005 – 06 , made a substantial impact on the WNCL for the first time , scoring 325 runs , more than twice her previous best season 's total , playing in the first of five consecutive WNCL triumphs for New South Wales . 
 Poulton was rewarded with international selection in the Rose Bowl series against New Zealand at the start of the 2006 – 07 season and scored her maiden century , 101 , in the third match . However , after a poor tour of India at the end of the season , she was dropped from the Australian team in mid @-@ 2007 and continued to be overlooked after a poor WNCL season in 2007 – 08 . During the 2008 Australian winter , she travelled to play for Nottinghamshire in England , and earned herself a recall to the Australian team at the start of the 2008 – 09 southern hemisphere season . After scoring 376 runs at a batting average of 41 @.@ 77 in the 2008 – 09 WNCL , Poulton retained her position in the national team for the 2009 Women 's Cricket World Cup and the 2009 World Twenty20 . She was a regular member of the playing team in both tournaments , participating all the matches in the latter . In 2009 , Poulton made her Test debut against England and in 2009 – 10 , she hit her second ODI century , 104 not out against New Zealand . 
 = = Youth cricket = = 
 Poulton is from <unk> Vale in the New South Wales coastal city of Newcastle , and plays for the Wallsend Cricket Club in the city . She attended Lambton High School and outside of cricket , she works as a physical education teacher . 
 In March 2000 , soon after turning 16 , she played for New South Wales in the national Under @-@ 17 championships . She scored 141 runs at a batting average of 23 @.@ 50 and took two wickets at a bowling average of 15 @.@ 50 as New South Wales defeated Victoria Blue to win the competition . In January 2002 , she was selected for the state Under @-@ 19 team and scored 112 in the first match , against the Australian Capital Territory . She also made two ducks and ended the tournament with 188 runs at 31 @.@ 33 ; New South Wales won all of their six matches . 
 = = Senior domestic debut = = 
 At the start of the 2002 – 03 season , Poulton made her senior debut for New South Wales in the Women 's National Cricket League in a double @-@ header against South Australia . In her first match , she scored 12 in five @-@ wicket victory . Playing in ten matches , she made many starts , reaching double figures in all but one of her nine innings , but managed only a best score of 36 run out , against Western Australia . She ended the WNCL season with 159 runs at 19 @.@ 87 as New South Wales came second , ending a run of six consecutive titles . Victoria qualified first and thus hosted the finals , defeating New South Wales 2 – 0 in a best @-@ of @-@ three series . Poulton made only 1 and 11 in the deciding matches , which were lost by 3 wickets and 40 runs respectively . 
 During the season , Poulton also played in the Under @-@ 19 interstate tournament during the break in the WNCL , captaining her state . In five innings , she made three half @-@ centuries , with a best of 73 against Queensland in the final , which New South Wales won by five wickets . She was unbeaten in the other two fifties after opening the batting ; New South Wales completed ten @-@ wicket wins in both instances . Poulton ended the competition with 191 runs at 63 @.@ 66 . She was rewarded with selection in and captaincy of the national Under @-@ 19 team during the season and played in two matches against England Under @-@ 19s , scoring 13 and 35 as Australia won both matches . At the end of the season , she was selected to lead an Australian Under @-@ 23 team to play against the senior England team . Poulton made 15 in her only innings . 
 Poulton had an interrupted season in 2003 – 04 . After playing in the first two matches against Western Australia , scoring only 3 not out and 1 as New South Wales took both matches , she was absent until the finals series . Victoria had qualified first and hosted the three @-@ match series . Poulton was omitted for the first match , which was won by the home team , before being recalled for the second match . She made 1 and 11 as New South Wales won the last two fixtures by five and three wickets respectively to claim the title . However , Poulton contributed little to the team 's triumph , managing only 16 runs at 5 @.@ 33 . At the end of the season she was appointed captain of the Australian Youth team and played in four matches against New Zealand A , scoring 127 runs at 31 @.@ 75 with a best of 75 in the second of these fixtures . Sarah <unk> had success against Poulton , dismissing her three times in a row . Australia won all but the last match . 
 Poulton was then made captain of the Australian Under @-@ 23 team for a tour of Sri Lanka in September 2004 . The tourists played four one @-@ dayers against the host nation 's senior team and won all but the abandoned third match . In the second match , Poulton scored 14 and took her first wicket against senior opposition after bowling for the first time at the level . She made her top @-@ score of the series with 48 in the third fixture , and made 33 and took 2 / 10 in the fourth match . Poulton then made her debut in non @-@ one @-@ day cricket against the Sri Lankans , scoring 10 before being run out . After Australia took a 102 @-@ run lead , she top @-@ scored with 40 before declaring at 8 / 150 and leading the team to a 140 @-@ run win . She took a total of 0 / 24 from 10 overs . 
 After playing in the first four matches of the 2004 – 05 WNCL season , Poulton missed three matches in a row before playing her final match of the season against Queensland and being dropped for the three finals matches against Victoria . New South Wales lost the finals 2 – 1 after finishing the regular season first and earning the right to host the series . Poulton batted only three times and accumulated eight runs at 4 @.@ 00 but New South Wales nevertheless won all of these five matches . 
 Poulton returned to form in the 2005 – 06 WNCL season , playing in all of New South Wales ' 11 matches . After being run out for 39 in the first match against Western Australia , she made consecutive half @-@ centuries against Western Australia and Queensland . New South Wales won seven of their eight round @-@ robin matches to qualify to host the three @-@ match finals series against Queensland . Up to this point , Poulton had only scored 24 runs at 6 @.@ 00 in four WNCL finals matches and had been dropped ahead of the deciding series the previous season . In the first match at North Sydney Oval , Poulton top @-@ scored with an unbeaten 70 to guide New South Wales to their target of 175 for an eight @-@ wicket win . She made 28 of her state 's 154 as Queensland took the series to a deciding match with a three @-@ wicket win in the second match . Poulton was dismissed for five in the deciding match as New South Wales were bowled out for 146 , before dismissing the visitors for 144 to claim a two @-@ run win and the WNCL . She ended the season with 325 runs at 32 @.@ 50 as New South Wales won 9 of their 11 matches to claim the title . Poulton bowled for the first time in the WNCL , conceding 18 runs from two overs . 
 = = International debut = = 
 These performances were not enough to gain selection in the Test and one @-@ day series against India held in Adelaide immediately after the WNCL . However , Poulton was called up for her senior international debut against New Zealand in the Rose Bowl series staged at Allan Border Field in Brisbane at the start of the 2006 – 07 season because of an injury to fellow New South Wales batsman Alex Blackwell . The chairman of selectors Margaret Jennings said " She is a talented player with a free @-@ flowing game , and we are keen to see how she performs against New Zealand , whom we expect to provide some very tough competition . " Poulton played in all of the matches . She made 10 in her Twenty20 international debut and the match ended in a tie . 
 In her One Day International ( ODI ) debut , Poulton opened the batting with Melissa Bulow and occupied the crease for nine balls before being trapped leg before wicket by Sarah Burke for a duck . This left Australia at 1 / 0 with after 21 balls ; the hosts eventually scraped home for a one @-@ run victory . Poulton said that she was " way too nervous " during her maiden innings . She scored her first ODI runs in the following match , making 16 from 25 balls with 4 fours as the hosts won by a single wicket with a ball to spare . In the third match , Poulton scored her maiden ODI century , 101 from 136 balls , including seven fours and a six . Australia went on to seal the series with a five @-@ run win . She then made 68 from 76 balls — including ten fours — in the next match before being run out , laying the foundation for Australia 's 9 / 252 and an 85 @-@ run win . Poulton made only 12 in the final match as the hosts completed a clean sweep of the ODIs with a four @-@ wicket win . In her debut series , she aggregated 197 runs at 39 @.@ 60 with a strike rate of 70 @.@ 86 . Poulton is the 107th woman to play One Day International cricket for Australia . 
 During the 2006 – 07 season , Poulton played in all 11 of New South Wales ' WNCL matches , scoring 227 runs at 20 @.@ 63 . New South Wales struggled in the first four round @-@ robin matches , losing three . In the fifth match , against Western Australia , Poulton scored 64 to set up a six @-@ wicket victory . New South Wales won their last four matches to qualify in second place for the final , which was hosted by Victoria . Poulton scored 17 and 39 in the first two matches , both times being run out . New South Wales scraped home by one wicket in the first match , but the hosts levelled the series with an eight @-@ wicket win the next day . In the third game , she made only nine , but New South Wales eventually reached the target of 206 with three wickets in hand to take the finals 2 – 1 . Poulton took her first WNCL wicket in the season , bowling a full quota of ten overs against Western Australia , taking 1 / 23 . Her maiden wicket was Avril Fahey , trapped leg before wicket . She ended the season with one wicket at 63 @.@ 00 at an economy rate of 3 @.@ 50 . 
 After the end of the Australian season , Poulton was selected for the ODI team the ICC Women 's Quadrangular Series in Chennai , India . In addition to the hosts and Australia , New Zealand and England were also participating , and each team played each other twice in the round @-@ robin phase . Poulton scored only 8 and 0 from 21 and 8 balls respectively as Australia lost their first two matches against New Zealand and India respectively . She was then dropped for the next two games . She was recalled for the penultimate round @-@ robin match against England but did not bat in a six @-@ wicket win , and then made 27 as Australia defeated India by four wickets in the last match . The Australians needed 231 for victory — 4 @.@ 62 runs per over — and Poulton got their innings off to a slow start , taking 75 balls to accumulate her runs , scoring at less than half of the required rate . However , her teammates sped up and reached the target from the last ball of the match to qualify for the final against New Zealand . Australia won by six wickets with the dropped Poulton watching from the sidelines . She ended the series with 35 runs at 11 @.@ 66 with a strike rate of only 33 @.@ 65 , was then overlooked for the Rose Bowl series against New Zealand held in Darwin in July . 
 = = International omission and recall = = 
 Poulton struggled in the eight WNCL matches during the 2007 – 08 season , scoring 106 runs at 13 @.@ 25 with a best of 39 against Western Australia . She took her best bowling figures at senior level , claiming 3 / 10 in the second match against Western Australia . Poulton captured three lower @-@ order wickets in quick succession as Western Australia lost 4 / 10 to be all out for 141 . However , Poulton was then bowled for a golden duck from the first ball of the innings from Lauren Ebsary as New South Wales lost the match by 37 runs . Poulton ended the season with four wickets at 8 @.@ 75 at an economy rate of 3 @.@ 75 . New South Wales reached the final and were awarded the title because they placed first in the qualifying matches after rain washed out the deciding game without a ball being bowled . She also played in two Twenty20 interstate matches , top @-@ scoring with 69 in the first match against South Australia , before making 35 against Western Australia ; New South Wales won both games . After her poor WNCL season , Poulton was overlooked for Australian selection for the home series against England and then the Rose Bowl tour of New Zealand that followed . 
 During the Australian winter of 2008 , Poulton travelled to England and played for Nottinghamshire in the Women 's County Championship . After making a duck on debut for the county , she made 68 in the next match against Sussex and ended her stay with 150 runs at 25 @.@ 00 from six matches . She bowled 20 @.@ 4 overs for the county , taking a total of 0 / 95 . She was in better form for the Sapphires in the Super Fours , scoring three half @-@ centuries in four innings and ending with 215 runs at 53 @.@ 75 in four List A matches . She also top @-@ scored in both T20 matches for the Sapphires , making 32 and 47 . She also took 2 / 23 in the latter match , dismissing Jenny Gunn and Laura Marsh . 
 These performances earned Poulton a recall for the five @-@ match home ODI series against India ahead of the 2008 – 09 Australian season , which the hosts swept easily ; the margins of victory in each match were at least 54 runs or seven wickets . After making a duck in the T20 international that preceded the ODIs , Poulton played in the first four ODIs . She scored 79 runs at 26 @.@ 33 but scored at the slow strike rate of 47 @.@ 87 . This resulted in her being dropped down the order from an opening position for the fourth match ; her teammates reached the victory target before she was required and she was then omitted for the final match . Poulton took her maiden international wicket in the fourth match at Manuka Oval in Canberra , trapping Indian wicket @-@ keeper <unk> Deshpande lbw . She ended the series with a total of 1 / 63 . 
 Poulton had her most productive season in the WNCL in 2008 – 09 ahead of the 2009 World Cup , scoring 376 runs at 41 @.@ 77 . She posted two half @-@ centuries in the first four matches , resulting in eight @-@ wicket wins over Queensland and Western Australia respectively . She then made fifties in each of the last three round @-@ robin matches . This included 60 and 53 against Victoria in the last two games , which New South Wales won win by nine and three wickets respectively . New South Wales thus earned the right to host the final against the same team , and Poulton made 43 as they chased down 118 and won the title by six wickets . Poulton totalled 0 / 48 from 11 overs during the WNCL . She also played in two Twenty20 interstate matches , scoring 23 and 35 . New South Wales won the first before losing by one wicket to Victoria in the second . 
 = = World Cup = = 
 Australia toured New Zealand before the World Cup , and Poulton was dropped into the middle @-@ order . She made four in the first two matches , both of which the hosts won . She struggled in these matches , taking 15 and 18 balls to score the four runs in either ODI , was omitted for the third match . She then returned to her customary opening position and scored 81 from 97 balls , including 11 fours , in the fourth match , helping to set up an Australia victory by 44 runs . The fifth match of the series was abandoned . 
 In two warm @-@ up matches ahead of the World Cup in Australia , Poulton made 24 and 49 against England and Sri Lanka . Nevertheless , she was left out of the team for the opening match against New Zealand , which Australia lost . Poulton was recalled for the two remaining group matches against South Africa and the West Indies . The hosts won both matches to reach the next round , but Poulton struggled . Playing out of position in the middle @-@ order , she made nine from 21 balls against South Africa in her home town of Newcastle ; restored to the top of the order , she made a duck against the West Indies . Poulton was then dropped for Australia 's first match of the next phase against India , which they lost . She was recalled for the next match and scored 47 against Pakistan , putting on 100 for the first wicket with Shelley Nitschke before the latter was bowled . Poulton was then bowled herself , the third time in as many ODIs that she had been dismissed in such a manner . Australia reached 6 / 229 in their 50 overs , and Poulton then took 2 / 9 , claiming the lower @-@ order wickets of <unk> Khan and <unk> Jalil as the hosts won by 107 runs . She then hit 38 from 47 balls , including a six , in the final Super Six match against England . This helped set up Australia 's successful run @-@ chase but it was not enough to rank them among the top two nations and qualify them for the final . They faced India in the playoff for third place and Poulton was bowled by <unk> Goswami for a duck . The hosts were all out for 142 and India reached the target with three wickets in hand . Poulton ended her campaign with 94 runs at 18 @.@ 80 and took a total of 2 / 17 from five overs . 
 Poulton was selected for the 2009 World Twenty20 in England and Australia hosted New Zealand for three T20 matches in tropical Brisbane during the southern hemisphere winter before the teams departed for the tournament . Poulton scored 4 , 33 and 30 as Australia took the series 2 – 1 . Once the Australians were in England , Poulton top @-@ scored with 66 and took 1 / 7 against the hosts in her only innings in the pre @-@ tournament practice matches . Poulton made only two and eight in Australia 's first two pool matches against New Zealand and the West Indies ; Australia lost the first by nine wickets and won the second by eight wickets . In the final pool match , against South Africa , Australia needed a victory to progress . Batting first , she scored 22 before being run out as Australia made 6 / 164 from their 20 overs . In reply , South Africa were on track to reach the target , having reached 0 / 73 after seven overs . Poulton trapped <unk> Fritz for 39 with the first ball of the next over , and the South Africans lost momentum , scoring only 41 runs for the loss of seven wickets in the next ten overs . On the last ball of the 17th over , Poulton trapped opposition captain <unk> Loubser and ended with 2 / 20 from three overs as Australia prevailed by 24 runs to reach the semi @-@ finals , where they faced England . Poulton scored 39 to push Australia to 5 / 163 but the hosts reached the target with eight wickets in hand and progressed to the final , which they won . 
 = = Test debut = = 
 Australia stayed in England for a bilateral series against the hosts — the reigning world champions in both ODIs and T20s — after the end of the World Twenty20 . Poulton scored 33 and took two catches as Australia upset England in the only T20 by 34 runs . She played in all of the five ODIs , but was not successful , being dismissed for single @-@ digit scores every time and ending with 26 runs at 5 @.@ 20 . She struggled to make an effective start in the matches , with a strike rate of 35 @.@ 00 or less in each of her five innings and 29 @.@ 54 overall . England won all the matches except the last , which was ended by persistent rain . Poulton made her Test debut against England in a one @-@ off match at New Road in Worcester . Australia batted first and Poulton came in at No. 6 . She lasted only 14 balls before being bowled by paceman Katherine Brunt for 1 . This was part of a batting collapse that left the tourists at 5 / 28 , but they recovered to reach 309 . Poulton then bowled four overs in the first innings , taking 0 / 15 . She took her first catch in Tests , removing Claire Taylor from the bowling of Lauren Ebsary . Australia took a 41 @-@ run lead and Poulton then scored 23 from 41 balls before being run out as the match ended in a draw . Poulton is the 158th woman to play Test cricket for Australia . 
 Poulton had a modest WNCL in 2009 – 10 , scoring 215 runs at 21 @.@ 50 . She reached double figures in nine of 11 innings , but was unable to convert the starts into large scores . Her highest score for the season was 42 against the Australian Capital Territory . She made 31 , her second best effort of the competition , in the final , as New South Wales defeated Victoria by 59 runs to take their fifth WNCL title in a row . She had more success in the new T20 domestic competition , scoring 201 runs at 28 @.@ 71 . She top @-@ scored with 58 in a seven @-@ run defeat at the hands of Victoria and then made 38 in a nine @-@ wicket win over South Australia . However , she made only six in the final as Victoria dismissed New South Wales for 75 to win by 52 runs . 
 After the domestic competition ended , Poulton played in the Rose Bowl series against New Zealand . She was omitted from the first two ODIs at the Adelaide Oval before being recalled for the last three matches held at the Junction Oval in Melbourne ; Rachael Haynes was moved from an opening position into the middle @-@ order to make way for Poulton . After making a duck in her first innings back , Poulton struck an unbeaten 104 from 116 balls in the fourth match , hitting nine fours and three sixes , putting on an unbroken opening stand of 163 with Shelley Nitschke as the Australians won by ten wickets . She made seven in the final match as the Australians completed a 5 – 0 sweep of the home ODI leg of the series . Poulton had little success in the T20s in Australia , scoring 0 , 24 and 1 as the tourists bounced back to claim a whitewash . She then scored only one in the first T20 during the New Zealand leg of the tour and was left out for the second match , which the hosts won to sweep the T20s . Poulton played in all three ODIs in New Zealand , scoring 7 , 47 and 31 as the Australians again swept the 50 @-@ over matches . In the second match at Invercargill , she struck seven boundaries in her 54 @-@ ball innings to help Australia make a rapid start to their chase of 256 . In the final match , Australia faced a target of only 174 and Poulton hit 28 of her 31 runs from fours in a 16 @-@ ball innings , scoring almost two runs per ball . Australia won both of the last two matches by six wickets . 
 = = 2010 World Twenty20 triumph = = 
 Poulton was selected for the 2010 World Twenty20 in the West Indies and played in every match . With the selection of Elyse Villani to open with Nitschke , Poulton batted at No. 3 in all but one match . In the first warm @-@ up match , she scored one from six balls before being dismissed by Sian Ruck as Australia lost to New Zealand by 18 runs . In the last warm @-@ up match , she hammered 44 from 21 balls including two sixes and then took a catch to remove Armaan Khan as Australians made 5 / 166 and defeated Pakistan by 82 runs . 
 Australia were grouped with England , South Africa and the West Indies . In the first match against England , Poulton ran out Laura Marsh , triggering the loss of the last four wickets without the addition of a run , in six balls , leaving 15 deliveries unused . In pursuit of 105 for victory , Poulton top @-@ scored for Australia with 23 from 28 balls , helping to stabilise the innings after the Australians had fallen to 2 / 10 . However she fell at 4 / 45 , bowled by Holly Colvin , and eventually , Rene Farrell was run out going for the winning run from the third last ball available , leaving the scores tied . 
 A Super Over eventuated , and Marsh bowled for England . Farrell and Poulton batted for Australia . Poulton scored a single off the first ball she faced , before being caught by Colvin on the fourth ball . This left Australia at 1 / 4 and they ended at 2 / 6 . England also ended with 2 / 6 after a run out in an attempt to secure the winning run on the final ball . Australia was awarded the match because they had hit more sixes in the match — Jess Cameron scored the solitary six . 
 In the next match against South Africa , Poulton came in at 1 / 9 after the fall of Villani at the end of the first over . She counter @-@ attacked with Nitschke , scoring 39 runs herself from only 25 balls , including two sixes . The pair put on 58 from only 37 balls before Poulton was caught from the first ball of the eighth over . Australia collapsed and lost 6 / 16 including the last four wickets for four runs to be all out for 155 with three balls unused , before completing a 22 @-@ run win . In the final group match against the West Indies , Poulton came in at 1 / 33 and hit 15 from 13 balls , including three fours . Australia finished on 7 / 133 and won by nine runs to finish the group stage unbeaten at the top of their quartet . 
 Australia went on to face India in the semi @-@ final . Chasing a target of 120 , Poulton came in to join captain Blackwell — who had promoted herself up the order — at 2 / 75 , with 45 runs needed from 56 balls . Poulton hit 30 from 26 balls to seal an Australian victory with seven wickets and seven balls to spare . She brought up the winning runs with a lofted drive that bounced once before going for four runs . In the final against New Zealand , Australia started poorly after electing to bat . Nitschke fell in the third over to bring Poulton in at 1 / 10 , before Villani and Blackwell fell quickly to leave Australia at 3 / 20 in the sixth over . This was followed by a consolidating partnership of 30 between Poulton and Cameron , but they were unable to lift the run rate substantially ; their stand took 45 balls . Poulton was caught trying to loft a ball over cover , and two balls later , Cameron was bowled , leaving Australia at 5 / 51 in the 13th over . Only Poulton managed a solitary boundary . A later burst took Australia to 8 / 106 from their 20 overs and Poulton ended with the highest score of 20 from 28 balls . The Australians then restricted New Zealand to 6 / 103 to complete a three @-@ run win . Poulton was Australian 's highest run @-@ scorer for the tournament and the third among all players . 
 = 1993 child sexual abuse accusations against Michael Jackson = 
 In the summer of 1993 , Evan Chandler accused Michael Jackson of sexually abusing Chandler 's 13 @-@ year @-@ old son , Jordan . The relationship between Jackson and Evan had begun in May 1992 ; Chandler initially welcomed and encouraged the friendship , and bragged about his connection to a celebrity . The friendship became well known as the tabloid media reported that Jackson became a member of the Chandler family . In 1993 , Chandler confronted his ex @-@ wife June , who had custody of Jordan , with suspicions that their son had been in an inappropriate relationship with Jackson but June dismissed his worries . According to several sources , Chandler threatened to go public with the evidence he claimed he had on Jackson , who asked his lawyer Bert Fields to intervene . Chandler 's lawyer , Barry K. Rothman , called psychiatrist Mathis Abrams and reported a hypothetical situation of sexual molestation mirroring what his son had alleged . 
 Without meeting Jordan , Abrams then sent Rothman a letter on July 15 stating there was " reasonable suspicion " of sexual abuse and if it had been a real case , he would be required by law to contact the Los Angeles County Department of Children 's Services ( DCS ) . On August 4 , Chandler and Jordan met with Jackson and Anthony Pellicano , Jackson 's private investigator , and Chandler read out Abrams ' letter . He then opened negotiations to resolve the issue with a financial settlement . On August 16 , three days after Chandler and Rothman had rejected a $ 350 @,@ 000 offer from Jackson 's camp , June 's attorney notified Rothman that he would be filing papers next morning to force Chandler to return Jordan to allow him to go on the Asian leg of Jackson 's Dangerous World Tour . 
 On the day Jackson began the third leg of his tour , news of the allegations broke to the public and received worldwide media attention . Jackson ultimately cancelled the remainder of the tour due to health problems arising from the scandal . In January 1994 Jackson reached a financial settlement with the Chandlers to resolve the matter and in September a criminal investigation was closed due to lack of evidence . Five months after Jackson 's death , Evan Chandler killed himself on November 5 , 2009 , in his apartment in Jersey City , New Jersey . 
 = = Friendship , tape recording , allegations and negotiations = = 
 By the summer of 1993 , it was revealed that Jackson had children sleep over in his bed with him at his Neverland ranch , a fact which came under much media scrutiny when child sexual abuse allegations were brought against him . Jackson became firm friends with Jordan Chandler and his family after a meeting in May 1992 , as he was a fan of Jackson . Their friendship became so close that the National Enquirer ran a featured story with the title " Michael 's New Adopted Family " , which implied that Jackson had " stolen " the boy from his estranged father , Evan Chandler , a dentist , who was admittedly jealous over Jackson 's influence on his son . According to celebrity biographer , J. Randy Taraborrelli , Chandler asked , " Look , are you having sex with my son ? " and after Jackson denied doing so , Chandler 's opinion of Jackson changed . Jackson invited Jordan , his stepsister and his mother to visit Neverland on the weekends and they would also take trips to Las Vegas and Florida . These weekend trips began to interfere with Jordan 's scheduled visits with his father , with Jordan preferring to visit Neverland . In May 1993 , when Jackson and Jordan stayed with Chandler , he urged Jackson to spend more time with his son at his house and even suggested that Jackson build an addition onto the house so that Jackson could stay there . After the zoning department told Chandler it could not be done , he suggested that Jackson just build him a new home . That same month , Jordan and June flew with Jackson to Monaco for the World Music Awards . According to June 's lawyer , Michael Freeman , " Evan began to get jealous of the involvement and felt left out . " Upon their return , Chandler was pleased with a five @-@ day visit from Jackson , during which Jackson slept in a room with Jordan and his stepbrother . Chandler claimed this was when his suspicions of sexual misconduct by Jackson began , although he admitted that Jackson and Jordan always had their clothes on when he saw them in bed together and has never claimed to have witnessed any sexual misconduct between the two . 
 On July 2 , 1993 , in a private telephone conversation , Chandler was tape @-@ recorded as saying , 
 There was no reason why he ( Jackson ) had to stop calling me ... I picked the nastiest son of a bitch I could find [ Evan Chandler 's lawyer , Barry Rothman ] , all he wants to do is get this out in the public as fast as he can , as big as he can and humiliate as many people as he can . He 's nasty , he 's mean , he 's smart and he 's hungry for publicity . Everything 's going to a certain plan that isn 't just mine . Once I make that phone call , this guy is going to destroy everybody in sight in any devious , nasty , cruel way that he can do it . I 've given him full authority to do that . Jackson is an evil guy , he is worse than that and I have the evidence to prove it . If I go through with this , I win big @-@ time . There 's no way I lose . I will get everything I want and they will be destroyed forever ... Michael 's career will be over . 
 In the same conversation , when asked how this would affect his son , Chandler replied , 
 That 's irrelevant to me ... It will be a massacre if I don 't get what I want . It 's going to be bigger than all us put together ... This man [ Jackson ] is going to be humiliated beyond belief ... He will not sell one more record . 
 The recorded conversation was a critical aspect of Jackson 's defense against the upcoming allegation made against him . He and his supporters argue that he was the victim of a jealous father whose only goal was to extort money from the singer . In October 1994 , Mary A. Fischer of GQ magazine reported it was Evan Chandler who initially accused Jackson of molesting his son , before he demanded a screenwriting deal from Jackson instead of going to the police . 
 According to Taraborrelli , Chandler was forced to admit the controversial sedative sodium amytal was used when he extracted a tooth from Jordan in early August . On May 3 , 1994 , <unk> @-@ TV news reported that Chandler claimed the drug was used for tooth extraction and that the allegations came out while Jordan was under the influence of the drug . Mark Torbiner , the dental anesthesiologist who administered the drug , told GQ if sodium amytal was used , " it was for dental purposes . " Sodium amytal is a barbiturate that puts people in a hypnotic state when injected intravenously . Studies done in 1952 debunked the drug as a truth serum and demonstrated it enabled false memories to be easily implanted . 
 Dr. Phillip Resnick , a noted Cleveland psychiatrist said it was " a psychiatric medication " and " People will say things under sodium amytal that are blatantly untrue . " In mid @-@ May 1994 in Napa County , California , Gary Ramona won his lawsuit against his daughter 's therapist and the psychiatrist who had given her sodium amytal . The psychiatrist claimed the drug helped Ramona 's daughter remember specific details of sexual molestation by Ramona , but a court brief written by Martin Orne , a University of Pennsylvania psychiatrist who pioneered research of hypnosis and sodium amytal , stated that the drug is " not useful in ascertaining ' truth ' . . . The patient becomes sensitive and receptive to suggestions due to the context and to the comments of the interviewers . " This was the first successful legal challenge to the " repressed memory phenomenon " . Dr. Kenneth Gottlieb , a San Francisco psychiatrist said , " It ’ s absolutely a psychiatric drug ... I would never want to use a drug that tampers with a person ’ s unconscious unless there was no other drug available . And I would not use it without resuscitating equipment , in case of allergic reaction , and only with an M.D. anesthesiologist present . " According to Dr. John <unk> , coordinator of the anesthesia and pain control department of UCLA ’ s school of dentistry , " It ’ s unusual for it to be used [ for pulling a tooth ] " and " better , safer alternatives are available . " 
 According to Diane Dimond of Hard Copy , Torbiner 's records show that <unk> and <unk> was administered instead of sodium amytal . The U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration was investigating Torbiner 's administration of drugs in house calls , where he mostly gave patients morphine and Demerol . His credentials with the Board of Dental Examiners indicated that he was restricted by law to administering drugs solely for dental @-@ related procedures , but he had not adhered to those restrictions . For instance , he had given general anesthetic to Barry Rothman during hair @-@ transplant procedures . Torbiner had introduced Chandler and Rothman in 1991 , when Rothman needed dental work . 
 Over the next couple of months both parties engaged in unsuccessful ( out of court ) financial negotiations , with Chandler and his legal team asking for $ 20 million , or the issue would be taken to criminal court . Jackson declined the offer , saying , " No way in Hell " . A few weeks later , Jackson 's legal team gave a counter @-@ offer to the value of $ 1 million , which was declined by Chandler . Pellicano said he made the offers he said in an attempt to catch the Chandler 's negotiating and tape recorded one of the telephone calls to Rothman to demonstrate this . The father then lowered his request to $ 15 million ; Jackson rejected this and lowered his original counter @-@ offer to $ 350 @,@ 000 . With both sides unable to reach an agreement , Chandler decided he would take it to court . Chandler then took his son to see a psychiatrist called Dr. Mathis Abrams , and during the three @-@ hour session with the doctor , Jordan Chandler said he had had a sexual relationship with Jackson that went on for several months , and which included incidents of kissing , masturbation and oral sex . He then repeated these allegations to police and gave a detailed description of what he alleged was Jackson 's penis . 
 = = = Allegations made public , investigation and La Toya Jackson = = = 
 On August 18 , the Los Angeles Police Department 's Sexually Exploited Child Unit began a criminal investigation on Jackson . The same day , Jordan Chandler 's mother told police that she did not believe Jackson had molested her son . On August 21 , a search warrant was issued , allowing police to search Jackson 's Neverland Ranch . Police questioned 30 children who were friends of Jackson , with all denying that the singer was a child molester . A police officer involved in the investigation told The Los Angeles Times that no evidence ( medical , photographic or video ) could be found that would support a criminal filing . The same day the allegations were made public , Jackson began the third leg of his Dangerous World Tour in Bangkok . On August 24 , Jackson 's investigator held a press conference accusing Chandler of trying to extort $ 20 million from the singer , although the investigator failed to mention that Jackson had given several counter @-@ offers . On August 25 , Jackson 's young friends Brett Barnes and Wade Robson held a press conference in which they stated that they had slept in the same bed as Jackson , but nothing sexual in nature had occurred . Jackson 's family soon held a press conference of their own to show support , saying it was their " unequivocal belief " that Michael had been made a victim of a cruel and obvious attempt to take advantage of his fame and wealth . " The police then began an investigation into Evan Chandler 's prior actions and found that he was $ 68 @,@ 400 behind in his child support payments , even though he was well @-@ paid as a dentist . On November 8 , police searched the Jackson family home , Hayvenhurst , but found nothing of importance to add to their investigation . According to internal reports from the LA County DCFS at the time , Chandler 's story remained largely consistent but dates , places , times and some details were inconsistent . According to reports the DCFS had investigated Jackson beginning in August 1993 with the Chandler allegation and again in 2003 . Reports show the LAPD and DCFS did not find credible evidence of abuse or sexual misconduct . 
 In the winter of 1993 , despite not seeing or speaking to Jackson for a number of years , La Toya Jackson claimed that her brother was a pedophile and that she had proof , which she was prepared to disclose for a fee of $ 500 @,@ 000 . A bidding war between US and UK tabloids began , but fell through when they realized that her revelations were not what she had claimed them to be . Then in Israel , she stated , " I cannot and will not be a silent collaborator in his crimes against young children ... Forget about the superstar , forget about the icon . If he was any other 35 @-@ year @-@ old man who was sleeping with little boys , you wouldn 't like this guy " . She also claimed that checks had been made out to several boys and that Jackson 's own physical abuse as a child had turned him into an abuser . She would later claim that Jackson had tried to kidnap and kill her . The rest of the family disowned her , and in subsequent years she would insist that she was forced to make the allegations by her then husband for financial gain . Just prior to making the allegations , her husband was arrested for striking her in the face , arms and legs with a chair . By the turn of the millennium Jackson had forgiven his sister . 
 = = = Lisa Marie Presley , health concerns , rehabilitation and Elizabeth Taylor = = = 
 Jackson first met Lisa Marie Presley ( and Elvis Presley ) in 1974 , during a Jackson 5 engagement at the MGM Grand . In November 1992 , Jackson was reconnected with Presley through a mutual friend , staying in contact almost every day by telephone . As the child sexual abuse accusations became public , he became dependent on Presley for emotional support ; she was concerned about his faltering health and his addiction to drugs . She explained , " I believed he didn 't do anything wrong and that he was wrongly accused and yes I started falling for him . I wanted to save him . I felt that I could do it . " In one phone call he made to her , she described him as high , incoherent and delusional . He proposed to her over the phone towards the fall of 1993 , saying , " If I asked you to marry me , would you do it ? " . The marriage was , in her words , " a married couple 's life ... that was sexually active " . They divorced fewer than two years later , remaining friendly . 
 Jackson had begun taking painkillers , Valium , Xanax and Ativan to deal with the stress of the allegations made against him . A few months after the allegations became news , he had lost approximately 10 pounds in weight and had stopped eating . According to Jackson , he had a tendency to stop eating when " really upset or hurt " and Elizabeth Taylor had to make him eat during this ordeal ; " She took the spoon and would put it into my mouth . " He said that he eventually became unconscious and had to be fed intravenously . In a court deposition unrelated to alleged child abuse , he was visibly drowsy , lacked concentration and repeatedly slurred while speaking . He could not remember the dates of his prior album releases or names of people he had worked with and took several minutes to name some of his recent albums . His health had deteriorated to the extent that he canceled the remainder of his tour and flew with Taylor and her husband to London . When Jackson arrived at the airport , he had to be held up ; he was then rushed to the home of Elton John 's manager and afterwards to a clinic , but when he was searched for drugs on entry , 18 vials of medicine were found in a suitcase . Jackson booked the whole fourth floor of the clinic , and was put on a Valium IV to wean him from painkillers . The singer 's spokesperson told reporters that Jackson was " barely able to function adequately on an intellectual level " . While in the clinic , he took part in group and one @-@ on @-@ one therapy sessions . 
 = = = Strip search = = = 
 In December 1993 , Jackson was served with a warrant for a strip search of his body , as police wanted to verify Jordan Chandler 's description of Jackson 's private anatomy . The order stated that officers were to examine , photograph and videotape Jackson 's entire body , " including his penis , anus , hips , buttocks and any other part of his body " . The warrant stated they were looking for discoloration or any other signs of vitiligo which he had previously spoken about , or any other skin disorder , and that refusal to comply would be used in court as an indication of guilt . The strip search took place on December 20 , 1993 at Jackson 's ranch . Those present for the prosecution were Santa Barbara District Attorney Tom Sneddon , a detective , a photographer and a doctor . Those present on behalf of Jackson were his two attorneys , a physician , a detective , a bodyguard and a photographer . The attorneys and Sneddon agreed to leave the room when the examination took place , and Jackson demanded that the prosecution detective should also leave , which he subsequently did . In an emotional state , Jackson stood on a platform in the middle of the room , took off all his clothes and the search lasted for approximately 25 minutes , although he was never physically touched . 
 Reports vary on whether or not the photographs of Jackson corroborated with Chandler 's allegations . Reuters reported that an unidentified source informed them on January 27 , 1994 that " photos of Michael Jackson ’ s genitalia do not match description given by the boy " , which was reported in USA Today on January 28 . However , according to child sexual abuse consultant Bill <unk> who was one of the lead detectives from the LAPD to the allegations , Jordan Chandler 's description cooperated with the photos taken of Michael Jackson 's genitalia . Dr. Richard Strick who conducted the examination of Jackson 's genitals claimed , " I was told later that the photos and description absolutely matched " According to Sneddon in a 2005 memorandum in People v. Jackson , " The photographs reveal a mark on the right side of Defendant 's penis at about the same relative location as the dark blemish located by Jordan Chandler on his drawing of Defendant 's erect penis " and " Chandler 's graphic representation of the discolored area on Defendant 's penis is substantially corroborated by the photographs . " Sneddon ended his declaration with " I declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct except for those statements made on information and belief , as to those statements , I believe them to be true . " Sergeant Gary Spiegel , the sheriff ’ s photographer , claims he observed a dark spot on the lower side of Jackson ’ s penis . 
 It was reported that Jordan Chandler claimed that Jackson was circumcised . Jackson 's autopsy report reveals that he had not been circumcised and his foreskin appeared naturally intact and showed no signs of having been restored from a circumcision . Taraborrelli claims that Jordan correctly noted patchy colored skin on his buttocks , short pubic hair , and testicles marked pink and brown , however , initially investigators claimed Chandler said Jackson had splotches on his genitals a color " similar to the color of his face " rather than pink and brown . On February 10 , 1993 , Jackson had revealed to Oprah that he had a skin disorder that destroyed skin pigmentation and left blotches on his skin , and that make @-@ up was used to even out his skin . The live interview was watched by 90 million viewers and after it aired , expert information on vitiligo was widely shared in the media . According to private investigator Anthony Pellicano who questioned Jordan in July 1993 after hearing Evan 's taped phone call , Jordan denied that he ever saw Jackson 's body but said he did lift his shirt once to show him the blotches on his skin . At the behest of a grand jury , investigators made a probe into Jackson 's history , including familial interviews , to see if he had any surgeries or procedures done to alter his body 's appearance as the jury felt there was a lack of a clear match with Jordan Chandler 's description . 
 <unk> later was an internal report within the LAPD and Los Angeles County DCFS which showed the DCFS had cleared Jackson early on of unfounded molestation charges from the Chandlers , and later from the <unk> in 2003 . 
 = = = Jackson 's response = = = 
 On December 22 , Jackson responded to the allegations and everything that had occurred for the first time via satellite from his ranch : 
 As you may already know , after my tour ended I remained out of the country undergoing treatment for a dependency on pain medication ... There have been many disgusting statements made recently concerning allegations of improper conduct on my part . These statements about me are totally false ... I will say I am particularly upset by the handling of the mass — matter by the incredible , terrible mass media . At every opportunity , the media has dissected and manipulated these allegations to reach their own conclusions . I ask all of you to wait and hear the truth before you label or condemn me . Don 't treat me like a criminal , because I am innocent . I have been forced to submit to a dehumanizing and humiliating examination ... It was the most humiliating ordeal of my life ... But if this is what I have to endure to prove my innocence , my complete innocence , so be it . 
 A poll at the time , conducted by A Current Affair , found that nearly 75 percent of Americans believed Jackson was telling the truth in his response . While Jackson sought medical help for his faltering health , his legal team and friends , such as Presley and Taylor , took control of his defense and finances . Much of Jackson 's legal team would meet three times a week at Taylor 's home to discuss the case . Taylor then called in more legal professionals on Jackson 's behalf . Eventually Presley , Taylor , and Jackson 's team all agreed that the singer should settle out of court ; it was their opinion that the entertainer 's health had deteriorated to such a degree that he could not endure a lengthy trial . 
 = = Media reaction and civil suit settlement = = 
 Most of information available on the allegations was released ( officially or unofficially ) by the prosecution and unchallenged by Jackson . Jackson was largely portrayed as guilty by the media . The media bias was evident in the use of sensational headlines to draw in readers and viewers when the content itself did not support the headline , the purchasing of stories of his alleged criminal activity , the purchasing of confidential leaked material from the police investigation , deliberately using pictures of his appearance at its worst , using headlines that strongly implied his guilt , and a general lack of objectivity . 
 The New York Post ran the headline " Peter Pan or Pervert " , despite minimal information being disclosed by the police . Just two weeks after the allegations were reported , the headline , " Michael Jackson : A Curtain Closes " reflected the attitude of most tabloid @-@ orientated media . In a piece for Hard Copy , Diane Dimond — a journalist who would spend the next 15 years trying to prove Jackson was a pedophile — ran a story stating , " And one more shocker , Hard Copy has obtained new documents in the criminal investigation of Michael Jackson , and they are chilling ; they contain the name of child movie actor Macaulay Culkin " . The document itself stated that Culkin strongly denied being harmed by Jackson . 
 Two tabloid television shows accepted confidential leaked documents from the Los Angeles County Department of Children 's Services for $ 20 @,@ 000 . A number of Jackson 's former employees — most of whom had worked at his ranch — sold stories to the tabloids of alleged prior sexual misconduct on Jackson 's part , instead of reporting their claims to police . One couple initially asked for $ 100 @,@ 000 claiming that Jackson sexually caressed Macaulay Culkin . They were prepared to expand upon this allegation for a fee of $ 500 @,@ 000 , whereby they would allege that Jackson put his hands down Culkin 's pants . When the story broke , Culkin strongly denied the allegation , and did so again in court during the 2003 trial of Michael Jackson . A former security guard made various allegations about Jackson , saying he was fired because he " knew too much " , and alleged that he was ordered by Jackson to destroy a photo of a naked boy . Instead of reporting this to police , Hard Copy accepted the story in return for $ 150 @,@ 000 . Afterwards , Jackson 's maid , Branca Francia , alleged that she " quit in disgust " after seeing Jackson in a shower with a child , but did not inform the police . It later emerged that Francia was actually fired in 1991 , but nevertheless sold her story to Hard Copy for $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 When Jackson left the US to go into drug rehabilitation , the media showed the singer little sympathy . The Daily Mirror ( UK ) held a " Spot the Jacko " contest , offering readers a trip to Disney World if they could correctly predict where the entertainer would appear next . A Daily Express headline read , " Drug Treatment Star Faces Life on the Run " , while a News of the World headline accused Jackson of being a fugitive . These tabloids also falsely alleged that Jackson had traveled to Europe to have cosmetic surgery that would make him unrecognizable on his return . Geraldo Rivera set up a mock trial , with a jury made up of audience members , even though Jackson had not been charged with a crime . 
 A civil lawsuit was filed by Jordan Chandler and his parents on September 14 , 1993 . In late 1993 , district attorneys in Santa Barbara and Los Angeles counties both convened grand juries to assess whether criminal charges should be filed against Jackson . By January 1 , 1994 , $ 2 million had been spent by prosecution departments in California and the grand juries had questioned 200 witnesses , but Jordan 's allegations could not be corroborated . On January 4 , 1994 , Chandler 's attorney , Larry Feldman , filed a motion for the photos from Jackson 's December 1993 body search from investigators , saying Jackson 's attorneys and the L.A. district attorney had refused to give him copies . A few weeks later , Feldman petitioned the court that he should be allowed access to Jackson 's finances over concerns that the singer 's wealth would give him an unfair advantage in court . One adviser to Jackson stated , " You can take pictures of Michael 's dick and he 's not gonna like it , but once you start trying to figure out how much money he has , that 's where he stops playing around . " Initially Jackson and his lawyers filed a motion for Superior Court Judge David M. Rothman to postpone the civil case until the criminal investigation was concluded . Feldman filed a counter @-@ motion , saying the delay would hurt Jordan 's chances for recovery and make it more difficult to gather evidence . It is legal to postpone a civil lawsuit past the criminal statute of limitations as a lawsuit can still be filed past that date , such as the case of Pacers , Inc. v. Superior Court . Also , the constitutional right to a " speedy trial " only applies to criminal cases according to the Sixth Amendment , not civil cases . 
 On November 23 , Judge Rothman accepted Feldman 's motion and set March 21 , 1994 as the start date for the civil trial . Rothman ordered Jackson 's deposition scheduled before the end of January 1994 , but noted he might reconsider if Jackson was indicted on criminal charges . Jackson agreed to be deposed on January 18 . His attorneys said he was eager to testify , but also said they might oppose the deposition if criminal charges were filed or were still under consideration on his deposition date . They said if charges were filed , they would want the criminal trial to go first . However , when authorities notified Jackson 's lawyers that they expected their investigation to continue at least through February , Jackson 's team still failed to win a delay of the civil case . Jackson 's lawyers also lost a motion to prevent Feldman from turning over information ( e.g. from the civil deposition ) to prosecutors pursuing possible criminal charges . 
 The concerns about a civil trial during an ongoing criminal investigation , and about the prosecutor 's access to the plaintiff 's information in the civil trial , stemmed from Jackson 's Fifth Amendment rights . As two grand juries had deemed there was insufficient evidence for charges as of January 1 , the prosecution might have been able to form the elements of a criminal case around the defense strategy in the civil trial ; creating a situation akin to double jeopardy . For instance , prosecutor Tom Sneddon altered fundamental elements of his case in 2004 after evidence undermining the Arvizo family 's 2003 allegations appeared after Jackson 's initial arraignment . Upon discovery of two taped interviews in which the Arvizo family praised Jackson and denied any abuse , Sneddon introduced a conspiracy charge and claimed they were forced to lie against their will . And when Jackson was re @-@ arraigned in April 2004 for the conspiracy charge , the dates of the alleged molestation on the charge sheet had been shifted by almost two weeks . Jackson 's lawyer , Mark Geragos , had announced on NBC in January 2004 that his client had a " concrete , iron @-@ clad alibi " for the dates on the charge sheet . 
 On January 24 , 1994 , prosecutors announced that they would be not bringing charges against Evan Chandler for attempted extortion as Jackson 's camp has been slow to report the extortion claim to the police and had tried to negotiate a settlement with Chandler for several weeks . Evan had first made his demand for a financial settlement on August 4 , 1993 and the Jackson camp filed extortion charges against Evan and his attorney Barry K. Rothman in late August 1993 . After tape recordings supporting the extortion claim were released to the media on August 30 , a lawyer for Jackson explained they had not gone to the police earlier because , " It was our hope that this would all go away . We tried to keep it as much in @-@ house as we could . " Jackson had already experienced years of bizarre rumors and speculation . In the extortion investigation , a search warrant was never sought to search the homes and offices of Evan Chandler and Barry Rothman and no grand jury was convened when both men declined to be interviewed by police . In contrast , the police searched Jackson 's residences solely based on Jordan 's allegations reported by a psychiatrist with no particular expertise in child sexual abuse and increased their efforts to investigate Jackson after no supporting evidence was found in their raids and after questioning almost 30 children ( Jackson 's <unk> were seized ) and their families , all of whom said Jackson had done nothing wrong . Officers flew to the Philippines to interview two ex @-@ housekeepers who had sold a molestation story to the tabloids but decided it lacked credibility . Several parents also complained to one of Jackson 's attorneys of aggressive investigative techniques by the police ; allegedly frightening their children with lies , e.g. ‘ We have nude photos of you ' , to pressure them into accusing Jackson and unequivocally telling parents their children had been molested even though their children had denied being victimized . 
 On January 25 , 1994 , the Chandlers ' lawsuit was settled out of court with $ 15 @,@ 331 @,@ 250 to be held in a trust fund for Jordan , $ 1 @.@ 5 million for each of his parents and the family 's lawyer slated to receive $ 5 million for a total of approximately $ 23 million ( although another source showed Feldman was to receive $ 3 million based on a September 1993 retainer , for a total of $ 21 million ) . According to a motion passed to Judge Melville in 2004 , leading up to the 2005 trial , Evan Chandler himself is the one who initiated the settlement with Jackson 's insurer . Jackson 's insurance company " negotiated and paid the settlement , over the protests of Mr. Jackson and his personal legal counsel " and was " the source of the settlement amounts " ; as noted in a 2005 memorandum in People v. Jackson . It also noted " an insurance carrier has the right to settle claims covered by insurance where it decides settlement is expedient and the insured may not interfere with nor prevent such settlements " , as established by a number of precedents in California . Defeating the right would involve convincing a court with the power to overrule the precedent that the earlier decision was either wrongly decided or more often , ' clearly ' wrong ( depending on the criteria of the court ) or the court must be convinced to distinguish the case . That is , to make the ruling narrower than that in the precedent due to some difference in facts between the current and precedent case , while still supporting the result reached in the earlier case . In 2004 , Jackson 's attorney Thomas Mesereau in People v. Jackson said " People who intended to earn millions of dollars from his record and music promotions did not want negative publicity from these lawsuits interfering with their profits . Michael Jackson now regrets making these payments . These settlements were entered into with one primary condition – that condition was that Mr. Jackson never admitted any wrongdoing . Mr. Jackson always denied doing anything wrong ... Mr. Jackson now realizes the advice he received was wrong . " Jackson explained why had he tried to settle : " I wanted to go on with my life . Too many people had already been hurt . I want to make records . I want to sing . I want to perform again ... It 's my talent . My hard work . My life . My decision . " He also wanted to avoid a " media circus " . 
 = = Closure of the criminal investigation = = 
 Although some perceive the settlement as an admission of guilt , the settlement agreement specifically stated that Jackson admitted no wrongdoing and no liability and legally , a settlement cannot be used as evidence of guilt in future civil and criminal cases . The settlement payment was " for alleged personal injuries arising out of claims of negligence and not for claims of intentional or wrong acts of sexual molestation . " In the settlement , both parties agreed they would not speak about the case details in public but it did not prevent the Chandlers from testifying in a criminal trial or sharing information with authorities in a criminal investigation . The settlement document adamantly states there is no admission of wrongdoing on Jackson 's part and no admission of molestation or immodesty and that under no circumstances shall any payment be withheld from the complainants , even if they were to testify against Jackson . 
 The Chandlers ' lawyer Mr. Feldman explicitly stated " nobody bought anybody 's silence " . Bribery to not testify in a trial is a felony according to California Penal Code 138 . Receiving such a bribe is also a felony according to this law . District Attorney Gil Garcetti stated the settlement didn 't affect criminal prosecution of the molestation allegations , " The criminal investigation of singer Michael Jackson is ongoing and will not be affected by the announcement of the civil case settlement . " 
 Jordan Chandler was interviewed after the settlement by detectives seeking evidence of child molestation , but " no criminal charges were filed as a result of that interview . " A Santa Barbara County grand jury disbanded on May 2 , 1994 without indicting Jackson , while a Los Angeles County grand jury continued to investigate the sexual abuse allegations . After which time the Chandlers stopped co @-@ operating with the criminal investigation around July 6 , 1994 . The police never pressed criminal charges . Citing a lack of evidence without Jordan 's testimony , the state closed its investigation on September 22 , 1994 . According to the grand juries , the evidence presented by the Santa Barbara police and the LAPD was not convincing enough to indict Jackson or subpoena him , even though grand juries can indict the accused purely on hearsay evidence . According to a 1994 report by Variety , a source in contact with the grand juries stated , " none of the witnesses so far have offered anything that would directly implicate the singer . " According to a report in 1994 by Showbiz Today , one of the 1994 grand jurors claimed they " did not hear any damaging testimony " during the hearings . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 A week after the settlement of the Chandler 's lawsuit was announced on January 25 , 1994 , L.A. District Attorney Gil Garcetti announced he supported amending a law that prohibits forcing people who say they have been sexually assaulted to testify in criminal proceedings . The amendment introduced into the state assembly the week of February 7 would have immediately allowed Garcetti to compel Jordan to testify . Around that time , Santa Barbara police interviewed the 13 @-@ year @-@ old son of one of Jackson 's former maids ( who had told them her son had spent time with Jackson ) and then arranged for him to see a therapist after he repeatedly denied being abused . In a deposition , his mother stated when she asked the police about who she could speak to about her concerns about their meetings and phone conversations with her son without her present , they arranged for her and her son to see separate therapists . On April 11 , 1994 , the grand jury session in Santa Barbara was extended for an additional 90 @-@ day term to allow Sneddon to gather more evidence and prosecution sources admitted to being frustrated in their grand jury probe , failing to find direct evidence of the molestation charges . The final grand jury ultimately disbanded without ever returning an indictment against Jackson . 
 Three years later , Jordan Chandler 's alleged account of the relationship was detailed in a book by journalist Victor M. Gutierrez . The book was said to be based on a diary the boy had kept at the time and included details of alleged sexual encounters between Jackson and him . In 1995 , Jackson filed a civil suit against Gutierrez for slander ; the jury found in Jackson 's favor , awarding him $ 2 @.@ 7 million in damages . However , that suit was unrelated to the book and the judgement does not serve to refute the allegations contained within . In 1996 , Evan Chandler sued Jackson for around $ 60 million , claiming Jackson had breached an agreement never to discuss the case . In 1999 , a court ruled in Jackson 's favor and threw out the lawsuit . 
 But the 1993 case would be revisited again with the 2003 allegations . There was more than a year between Jackson 's 2003 arrest and the beginning of his trial and he was prevented by a gag order from responding to any stories in the media . As in 1993 , there were leaked documents e.g. Jordan Chandler 's 1993 police statement . The media was again eager to report on the allegations , with a tendency for sensationalism . And allegations sold to tabloid TV shows by disgruntled ex @-@ employees in the 1990s were constantly in the news again . Also similar to 1993 , details of the Arvizo family 's 2003 allegations were leaked . These stories were mostly reported as allegations rather than facts , but the volume and frequency of stories , combined with Jackson 's inability to refute them , had a devastating impact on public opinion of him . 
 In a 2005 lecture at Harvard after Jackson 's trial , Jackson 's attorney Thomas Mesereau said the following about Jordan Chandler : " The prosecutors tried to get him to show up and he wouldn 't . If he had , I had witnesses who were going to come in and say he told them it never happened and that he would never talk to his parents again for what they made him say . It turned out he 'd gone into court and got legal emancipation from his parents . " In 2006 , Jordan accused Evan of attacking him with a <unk> , choking him and spraying his face with Mace . The charges were later dropped . On November 5 , 2009 , fourteen weeks after Jackson 's death , Evan Chandler was found dead following an apparent suicide . 
 Music journalist Charles Thomson noted a continued media bias against Jackson after the Chandler suicide . Thomson said he was contacted by a British tabloid to supply information about the 1993 allegations , only to have them replace his carefully researched information with the common myths he advised them to avoid and that the same misinformation was in every article he read about the suicide . He noted when Jackson 's FBI file was released the following month , the contents were portrayed by the media as giving an impression of guilt even though the file strongly supported his innocence . He noted how Gene Simmons ' allegations in 2010 about Jackson molesting children received over a hundred times more coverage than his interview with Jackson 's long @-@ time guitarist , Jennifer Batten , who rebutted Simmons ' claims . 
 = = = Effect on Jackson 's career = = = 
 Jackson 's commercial appeal and public image declined in the wake of the case . 
 The album released prior to the allegations was Dangerous . The album stands as one of the world 's best @-@ selling records . The album 's appeal meant that singles were still being released through 1993 ( at the time of the allegations ) and Jackson was still traveling the world on his Dangerous World Tour . The last charting single from Dangerous was the ballad " Gone Too Soon " , released in December 1993 and dedicated to the memory of Jackson 's friend Ryan White , a teenager from Kokomo , Indiana who came to national attention after being expelled from his school for having HIV / AIDS . A rumored tenth single release of the title track " Dangerous " was canceled . The government of Dubai barred Jackson from performing in response to an anonymous pamphlet campaign that attacked him as immoral . After performing 24 shows of the third leg of the Dangerous Tour , Jackson canceled the remainder of the tour to seek treatment for his pain medication addictions . 
 PepsiCo stopped all promotional activities with Jackson , ending their ten @-@ year partnership . Jackson 's fans responded by boycotting the company . Jackson had contracted to create a new horror @-@ themed song and video that would be cross @-@ promoted with the film Addams Family Values . He was unable to finish shooting the video , and his song was dropped from the soundtrack . A brand of his @-@ and @-@ hers fragrances was canceled because of Jackson 's drug problems at the time . A spokesman for the marketing group behind the fragrance deal called it " somewhat of a fiasco " . 
 His next studio album was HIStory , released in the summer of 1995 . Jackson also produced a special show for cable @-@ network HBO titled For One Night Only , with the show to be recorded in front of a special invited audience at New York City 's Beacon Theater on December 8 and 9 , 1995 for transmission on HBO on December 10 . However , the shows were canceled after Jackson collapsed at the theater on December 6 during rehearsals . Jackson was admitted overnight to Beth Israel Medical Center North . The shows and the HBO special were never rescheduled . The following year , Jackson began the HIStory World Tour . Despite the show 's success , Jackson 's only concerts in the USA were two shows performed at the Aloha Stadium in Honolulu , Hawaii . Jackson never performed another world tour . 
 The allegations also had an effect on the content of Jackson 's music : HIStory , which was released shortly after the allegations , " creates an atmosphere of paranoia , " according to one writer . Its content focuses on the public struggles Jackson went through just prior to its production . In the songs " Scream " and " Tabloid Junkie " , along with the ballad " You Are Not Alone " , Jackson directs much of his anger and personal hurt at the media . In the track " D.S. " , Jackson launches a verbal attack against a character who is often cited to be Tom Sneddon , the District Attorney that requested his strip search . He describes the person as an antisocial white supremacist who wanted to " get my ass , dead or alive " . Of the song , Sneddon said , " I have not , shall we say , done him the honor of listening to it , but I ’ ve been told that it ends with the sound of a gunshot . " In the introspective ballad " Stranger in Moscow " , Jackson laments his " swift and sudden fall from grace " . He completed the video that was originally supposed to accompany Addams Family Values and released it as Ghosts ; the finished video included a framing story about an eccentric maestro who entertains children and is pursued by a bigoted local official . 
 Jackson 's last album , Invincible , was released six years later , in 2001 , his longest period between full studio records . Following a conflict between Jackson and his record label , Sony Music stopped promoting the album . Invincible would go on to be seen as a relative commercial disappointment when compared to Jackson 's prior solo material , although it sold 13 million copies worldwide . 
 As part of Jackson 's contract with Sony , a number of compilations of greatest hits packaged with previously unreleased material were released , including Number Ones in 2003 , the 4 @-@ CD / 1 @-@ DVD box set The Ultimate Collection in 2004 and double @-@ album The Essential Michael Jackson in 2005 . New agreements between Sony and Michael Jackson saw the release of the singles collection Visionary : The Video Singles in 2006 , a 25th anniversary edition of Thriller in 2008 and Jackson 's final release before his death – the King of Pop album celebrating Michael 's 50th birthday with tracks voted for by fans . 
 = = = People v. Jackson = = = 
 On December 18 , 2003 , Jackson was formally charged with seven counts of child sexual abuse and two counts of administering an intoxicating agent in order to commit a child sexual abuse felony against Gavin Arvizo . Earlier that year , a Granada Television documentary , called Living with Michael Jackson , showed the pop star holding hands and discussing sleeping arrangements with Arvizo . Jackson denied these allegations , saying that the sleepovers were in no way sexual in nature . Sneddon again led the effort to prosecute Jackson . These prosecutions led to complaints that Sneddon was motivated by a " vendetta " against Jackson . Evidence to support these claims include Sneddon joking about Jackson 's greatest hits album being released on the same day as his arrest and saying , " Like the sheriff and I really are into that kind of music . " He then proceeded to call Jackson " Wacko Jacko " and shouting " We got him , we finally got him " to the media , when he had only just began an investigation and had gathered limited information or evidence . 
 The People v. Jackson trial began in Santa Maria , California on January 31 , 2005 . During the trial , the judge allowed testimony about past allegations , including the 1993 case , to establish whether the defendant had a propensity to commit certain crimes . However , Jordan Chandler had left the country to avoid testifying . In a lecture at Harvard after the trial , Thomas Mesereau said , " The prosecutors tried to get him to show up and he wouldn 't . If he had , I had witnesses who were going to come in and say he told them it never happened and that he would never talk to his parents again for what they made him say . It turned out he 'd gone into court and got legal emancipation from his parents . " June Chandler testified that she hadn 't spoken to her son in 11 years . At one point in her testimony , she claimed that she couldn 't remember being sued by Jackson ( who had counter @-@ sued for extortion ) and at another point said that she 'd never heard of her own attorney . However , she said she never witnessed any molestation . 
 Jackson was found unanimously not guilty of all charges by the jury on June 13 , 2005 . 
 = = 2013 child molestation allegations = = 
 On May 1 , 2013 , a lawyer for choreographer Wade Robson filed a complaint against the Michael Jackson Estate for " childhood sexual abuse " . Howard Weitzman , the lawyer for Jackson 's estate , called Robson 's accusations " outrageous and pathetic . " 
 Robson appeared on The Today Show on May 16 , 2013 to discuss the allegations . Robson told interviewer Matt Lauer that Jackson was " a pedophile and a child sexual abuser " who " performed sexual acts on me and forced me to perform sexual acts on him " over a seven @-@ year period , beginning in 1990 when Robson was seven years old when he visited Jackson 's Neverland Ranch for the first time . In a 1993 deposition Robson 's mother , Joy Robson , said that Jackson had " special friends " , boys with whom he spent extra time with that he replaced each year , and that Wade was Jackson 's " special friend " in 1990 . In August 1993 , after the allegations against Jackson were made public , Wade Robson and Jackson 's other " special friend " , Brett Barnes , held a press conference in which they stated that they had slept in Jackson 's bed but nothing sexual had occurred . Robson said in the Today Show interview that his denial of wrongdoing on Jackson 's part during the 1993 investigation was a result of Jackson 's " complete manipulation and brainwashing " of him . Robson alleged that at the time Jackson " would call me every day and role play and tell me the same sort of things and also tell me then that if anyone ever thought that we did these things , any of these sexual things , that both of us would go to jail for the rest of our lives . " Robson was also a star witness for Jackson 's defense at his 2005 trial . He said that his change of story was provoked by becoming a father and experiencing nervous breakdowns in 2011 and 2012 . 
 Robson filed an amended complaint on July 1 , 2013 , which stated , " The long @-@ term psychological consequences of ( Jackson ’ s ) threats , sexual trauma and mental manipulation imprisoned ( Robson ’ s ) mind and prevented him from filing a timely claim just as effectively as if he had been physically imprisoned . " 
 On June 2 , 2014 , the trial for Robson 's lawsuit against Jackson 's estate for ' childhood sexual abuse ' began . On August 4 , 2014 , James Safechuck filed court papers against Jackson 's estate which alleged that Jackson abused him after he appeared alongside him in a Pepsi commercial . 
 The lawsuit was dismissed May 26 , 2015 by a Los Angeles judge who ruled that Robson waited too long to seek legal action . Superior Court Judge Mitchell <unk> wrote in his decision that Robson could file a lawsuit " only for a reasonable time period after any violence , intimidation or threatening conduct by the decedent ceases . " 
 = Daniel O 'Connell ( journalist ) = 
 Daniel O 'Connell ( 1849 – 23 January 1899 ) was a poet , actor , writer and journalist in San Francisco , California , and a co @-@ founder of the Bohemian Club . He was the grand @-@ nephew of Daniel O 'Connell ( 1775 – 1847 ) , the famed Irish orator and politician . 
 O 'Connell 's strict classics @-@ oriented education in Ireland stood him in good stead for his early career choices of teacher and journalist . In San Francisco , he formed friendships with artists and influential men who joined with him in presenting and promoting theatrical productions and in publishing books and newspapers . He wrote short stories for magazines and journals , and lived a life rich in food , drink , and the arts . A dedicated family man in America , O 'Connell never lost his Irish poet 's sense of overarching sadness joined with keen pleasure in the sensations of the physical world . 
 = = Early career = = 
 O 'Connell was born to distinguished lawyer Charles O 'Connell in 1849 in Ennis , County Clare , Ireland , some two years after the death of his famed grand @-@ uncle Daniel O 'Connell . Young O 'Connell attended Belvedere College , a Jesuit school in Dublin , but was called home at the deaths of his mother and sister in a coach accident . This tragic event was later judged to be the source of O 'Connell 's sense of the impermanence of the world . After the funeral , he was transferred without enthusiasm to Clongowes Wood College where he studied the classics for three years . O 'Connell signed on with the Royal Navy as a midshipman . He travelled around Cape Horn to California in 1868 . 
 After disembarking in San Francisco , O 'Connell took a position as professor of belles @-@ lettres at Santa Clara College , then accepted an offer from St. Ignatius College in San Francisco to teach Greek . 
 = = Writer = = 
 O 'Connell worked for a number of periodicals in the San Francisco Bay Area . He edited the Morning Herald , the San Francisco Times , the Bulletin , the Chronicle , the Wasp , the Bohemian and the Portico . He helped Henry George found the San Francisco Daily Evening Post in 1871 . His best work includes " The Thrust in Tierce , " a short story written for the Overland Monthly , and a yearly Christmas piece , " quaint , grotesque or poetical " usually describing the serio @-@ comic antics of would @-@ be San Francisco aristocrats with little claim to fame . 
 = = Bohemian Club = = 
 In 1872 with a group of other Chronicle newspaper staffers , O 'Connell helped form the Bohemian Club . At first , the group rented a modest room as their clubhouse , and spent many evenings enjoying food , drink , music and the literary arts . Chronicle publisher M. H. de Young later wrote that the Bohemian membership of some of his employees was " not an unmixed blessing " because the " boys would go there sometimes when they should have reported at the office . " De Young said that " very often " when O 'Connell sat down to a good dinner , " he would forget that he had a <unk> of notes for an important story . " 
 " Dan , " as he was called by his friends , was a very active Bohemian , and was described as the " Prince of the club " when he wasn 't being toasted as " the rightful King of Munster . " O 'Connell took part in many Bohemian poetry readings and stage plays , including a turn as King Macbeth of Scotland in the witches ' scene from Macbeth . O 'Connell was the first member to formally announce an upcoming " Jinks " ( literary and musical performance ) — his turn at host , or " Sire " , of an evening 's entertainment took place 30 November 1872 with the stated theme of " Tom Moore and Offenbach . " The Jinks events at the club were usually cheerful and sometimes boisterous . One of O 'Connell 's Jinks announcements joked that the " opening <unk> " of the presentation would be played by the Bohemian Club 's own musicians , " who have done so much to lower the rents in this neighborhood . " 
 In 1876 , O 'Connell wrote the preface and edited a book of stories by William Henry Rhodes ( a Bohemian who wrote under the pen @-@ name " Caxton " ) entitled Caxton 's Book . In 1878 , O 'Connell worked for The Mail , an early newspaper in San Francisco . With his adroit editing , O 'Connell helped make famous the " Town Crier " column for the San Francisco News Letter , written by Ambrose Bierce , then by Ashton Stevens . 
 In 1881 , O 'Connell published Lyrics , a book of poetry evincing a " Celtic strain . " The poetry displays O 'Connell 's sense of sunt <unk> rerum , that there will be tears with trials , and it expresses his bittersweet joy in life 's evanescent pleasures . O 'Connell wrote an Irish @-@ themed play , The Red Fox , which was staged with moderate success in San Francisco about 1882 . O 'Connell wrote " Ghoul 's Quest " for The Argonaut . In 1891 , he published The Inner Man : Good Things to Eat and Drink and Where to Get Them , a collection of anecdotes and advice for the epicurean who finds himself in the San Francisco area , and a cautionary description of common 19th century food adulterants such as chemical dyes and powdered lead . 
 O 'Connell wrote the libretto for a romantic opera entitled Bluff King Hal , working with fellow Bohemian Club member Humphrey John Stewart who composed the music . The opera was performed at San Francisco 's Grand Opera House in 1892 , with artist and Bohemian Amédée <unk> designing the costumes and painting the scenery , and architect and Bohemian Willis Polk modelling and designing the scenery . 
 O 'Connell was elected honorary life member of the Bohemian Club in the late 1890s and was made club historian . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1874 , O 'Connell married Annie Ashley , called Mabel , the daughter of California Senator Delos R. Ashley who had died the previous year . The marriage produced seven children . The O 'Connell marriage was described by a close friend as a perfect union , " with kindred tastes and boy @-@ and @-@ girl love . " With seven children who adored their father , the O 'Connell home became a " small world where love reigned . " Gipsy O 'Connell , one of the daughters , later expressed that her favourite of her father 's poems was " Sing Me A Ringing Anthem " from Lyrics . 
 = = Death and remembrance = = 
 O 'Connell died suddenly in 1899 from a cold that turned into pneumonia . The New York Times published an obituary and printed a quatrain by the Australian poet Adam Lindsay Gordon incorrectly stating that it was one of O 'Connell 's : 
 In 1900 , Ina Coolbrith , Bohemian Club librarian , edited a collection of O 'Connell 's poetry , entitled Songs from Bohemia , copyrighted to Mabel Ashley O 'Connell . Coolbrith ended the book with " The Chamber of Sleep " , the last poem by O 'Connell , written ten days before his death . William Greer Harrison wrote in a memorial foreword that O 'Connell was an avid outdoorsman of eternally sunny disposition . He mentioned his appreciation for good food and his fine chef 's skill in delicate cookery . Harrison wrote of his flair for swordsmanship and his pleasure in fishing , and noted that during any of these activities , O 'Connell could be seen pausing to write down on a scrap of paper an idea for a story . 
 Mabel Ashley O 'Connell died of grief a year after her husband . Harrison wrote that she " lingered here only long enough to say farewell to her many friends , and then joined her husband in the land that is hidden from material eyes , where love and life are one . " 
 = Hurricane Ismael = 
 Hurricane Ismael was a weak , but deadly Pacific hurricane that killed over one hundred people in northern Mexico in September of the 1995 Pacific hurricane season . It developed from a persistent area of deep convection on September 12 , and steadily strengthened as it moved to the north @-@ northwest . Ismael attained hurricane status on September 14 while located 210 miles ( 340 km ) off the coast of Mexico . It continued to the north , and after passing a short distance east of Baja California it made landfall on Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Ismael rapidly weakened over land , and dissipated on September 16 over northwestern Mexico . The remnants entered the United States and extended eastward into the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . 
 Offshore , Ismael produced waves of up to 30 feet ( 9 m ) in height . Hundreds of fishermen were unprepared for the hurricane , which was expected to move more slowly , and as a result 52 ships were wrecked , killing 57 fishermen . On land , Ismael caused 59 deaths in mainland Mexico and resulted in $ 26 million in damage ( 1995 USD , $ 40 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . The hurricane destroyed thousands of houses , leaving 30 @,@ 000 people homeless . Moisture from the storm extended into the United States , causing heavy rainfall and localized moderate damage in southeastern New Mexico . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A poorly organized area of convection persisted about 170 miles ( 270 km ) off the southern coast of Guatemala on September 9 . It moved west @-@ northwestward , and after three days without further organization a circulation developed off the southwest coast of Mexico . The system quickly organized , resulting in Dvorak classifications beginning later that day . Convective banding became better organized , and late on September 12 it developed into Tropical Depression Ten while located about 350 miles ( 560 km ) south @-@ southwest of Manzanillo , Colima . The depression moved to the northwest , and following an increase in deep convection it intensified into Tropical Storm Ismael early on September 13 . Upon attaining tropical storm status , Ismael was located in an area of warm water temperatures with well @-@ established upper @-@ level outflow . Initially the storm moved to the northwest , though in response to the interaction with an upper @-@ level low over Baja California Ismael gradually turned to the north . Such a change in motion was not operationally predicted by forecasters , though they noted uncertainty in Ismael 's track due to the low . Ismael steadily strengthened as it moved northward , though it failed to organize significantly ; early on September 14 the center remained poorly defined despite winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . However , the outflow remained well @-@ organized as it remained over warm waters . Ismael became better organized , and later on September 14 it intensified into a hurricane while located 210 miles ( 340 km ) west @-@ southwest of Puerto Vallarta . 
