 Ismael quickly developed a poorly defined eye , and six hours after becoming a hurricane it reached a peak intensity of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Steered between a mid- to upper @-@ level trough to its west and a ridge to its east , Ismael accelerated as it moved just west of due north . Late on September 14 Ismael passed 65 miles ( 100 km ) east of Cabo San Lucas . The hurricane maintained its strength as it continued northward , and made landfall on Topolobampo in the state of Sinaloa on September 15 . Ismael rapidly weakened as the circulation crossed the high terrain of the Sierra Madre Occidental , and it dissipated early on September 16 about 55 miles ( 95 km ) south of the Mexico / United States border . The remnants of Ismael continued northward , and moisture from the storm extended over the southwestern United States eastward through the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Initially , Hurricane Ismael was predicted to remain over the open waters of the Pacific Ocean . However , when a northward motion became apparent , the government of Mexico issued a tropical storm warning from Manzanillo , Colima , to Cabo Corrientes and for the Islas Marias . Shortly thereafter , the warning was extended to Los Mochis and issued for the eastern coast of Baja California Sur south of 25 ° N. Ten hours before Ismael made its final landfall , the Mexican government issued a hurricane warning from Mazatlán to Los Mochis . Prior to the arrival of the hurricane , 1 @,@ 572 people evacuated to five emergency shelters . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Ismael produced 30 foot ( 9 m ) waves over the Gulf of California and coastal waters off of Mexico . The hurricane , which was forecast to move more slowly , left hundreds of fisherman unprepared due to deficient communications between the boats and harbor authorities . As a result , 52 boats were wrecked , of which 20 sank . 57 fishermen died offshore , with dozens washing ashore as the high tides receded . About 150 fishermen survived the storm by waiting on islands , sandbars , or disabled fishing boats . Navy rescue teams and other fishermen searched for days off the Mexican coast to find victims and survivors from the storm . 
 While moving through northwestern Mexico , Hurricane Ismael dropped moderate to heavy rainfall including a state record of 7 @.@ 76 inches ( 197 mm ) in Sinaloa , resulting in the flooding of four municipalities . In one municipality , the passage of the hurricane destroyed 373 cardboard houses and damaged 4 @,@ 790 others . The passage of the hurricane left 177 houses without drinking water and left four municipalities without power . Damage was heaviest where the hurricane made landfall . In Los Mochis , the winds from Ismael knocked down houses and telephone poles , though no deaths were reported . 59 people were killed in Sinaloa . 
 Ismael produced heavy rainfall further to the north , peaking at 10 @.@ 9 inches ( 276 mm ) in Sonora . Severe flooding was reported in Huatabampo . The hurricane directly affected 24 @,@ 111 people in 8 municipalities . Throughout Sonora , the strong winds destroyed 4 @,@ 728 houses and removed the roofs of 6 @,@ 827 homes . The hurricane also destroyed 107 schools and 2 health centers in the state . The passage of Hurricane Ismael damaged high @-@ tension power lines and cable lines , causing interruptions to the communication system . The hurricane also weakened 2 @,@ 163 miles ( 3 @,@ 481 km ) of gravel roads and damaged about 100 miles ( 165 km ) of paved highways . 250 people lost their jobs in Sonora due to sunken or damaged fishing boats . In addition , about 83 sq. miles ( 215 km ² ) of crop lands were impacted . Damage in Sonora amounted to $ 8 @.@ 6 million ( 1995 USD , $ 50 million 1995 MXN , $ 77 @.@ 6 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Throughout Mexico the hurricane left 30 @,@ 000 people homeless . Including offshore casualties , Ismael caused at least 116 deaths and damage totaling to $ 26 million ( 1995 USD , $ 197 million 1995 MXN , $ 40 @.@ 4 million 2016 USD ) . 
 Moisture from the remnants of Ismael extended into southwestern Arizona and southern New Mexico . The storm dropped heavy precipitation near the New Mexico / Texas border , including a peak total of 8 @.@ 53 inches ( 217 mm ) in Hobbs , New Mexico . In addition , there were unofficial estimates of over 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . The rainfall led to flooding of roads and buildings . Multiple highways and railroads were closed due to washouts . Damaged totaled to $ 250 @,@ 000 ( 1995 USD ) in New Mexico . In Lubbock , Texas , the rainfall led to flash flooding , closing many intersections and roads . The remnants of Ismael produced over 3 inches ( 76 mm ) of rain in southwestern Oklahoma and northern Arkansas , with moisture extending eastward into the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . There , the rainfall helped to relieve drought conditions . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the passage of the hurricane , reinforcement workers quickly repaired the communication network , and other workers distributed aid to victims in Sonora . The Mexican government allocated about $ 4 @.@ 5 million ( 1995 USD , $ 34 million 1995 MXN , $ 6 @.@ 99 million 2016 USD ) in funds for the restoration of houses and the overall infrastructure . Officials distributed 4 @,@ 800 sheets , 500 cushions , and 1 @,@ 500 blankets to hurricane victims . All sunken ships and drowned bodies were ultimately recovered by divers . 
 Due to the damage and deaths , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Ismael with Israel , another Spanish name beginning with the letter " I " set to be used in the 2001 Pacific hurricane season . During the 2001 season , a reporter stationed in Israel felt offended from the name choice , and the president of the Anti @-@ Defamation League felt it was insensitive . Hundreds of people sent e @-@ mails or called the National Hurricane Center , and as a result Max Mayfield called the members of the World Meteorological Organization . The name Israel was replaced with Ivo during the season . Ivo was not retired after the 2001 , 2007 or 2013 seasons ; it will be used next in the 2019 season . 
 = Alexander Onassis = 
 Alexander Socrates Onassis ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ; April 30 , 1948 – January 23 , 1973 ) was an American businessman . He was the son of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis and his first wife Tina Livanos . He and his sister Christina Onassis were upset by his father 's marriage to Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy , and he was credited with attempting to improve the relationship between his father and Stavros Niarchos . 
 Born in New York City , Onassis was not formally educated and worked for several years for his father at his Monaco headquarters . The relationship between Onassis and his father experienced tensions as a result of his secret relationship with Fiona Thyssen , and he was later appointed the head of Olympic Aviation , a Greek regional airline owned by his father . Onassis died in hospital as a result of injuries sustained in an air crash at <unk> International Airport at the age of 24 . The Alexander S. Onassis Foundation was established in his memory . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alexander Socrates Onassis was born at the Harkness Pavilion , a private clinic in New York City 's NewYork – Presbyterian Hospital . He was the elder child of the Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis ( 1906 – 1975 ) and his first wife , <unk> Livanos ( 1929 – 1974 ) , herself a daughter of a Greek shipping magnate , Stavros G. Livanos . Onassis was named after his father 's uncle , who was hanged by a Turkish military tribunal during their sacking of Smyrna in September 1922 . Onassis 's sister , Christina , was born in 1950 . 
 Onassis had no formal schooling , but had been provided with a personal tutor and his own apartment from a young age . Onassis failed his exams at a Paris lycée aged 16 , and began working for his father at his Monaco headquarters in 1965 . Onassis earned a modest salary of $ 12 @,@ 000 working for his father despite his father 's great wealth . Onassis was not an enthusiastic employee . A fellow employee said that he seemed in no " great hurry to prove himself an Onassis " . Onassis also described himself as never having spent a day not " intimidated by the old man 's wealth " . In the mid 1960s , Onassis began a relationship with the French model Odile Rodin , a woman several years his senior . Rodin was the widow of the Dominican playboy and diplomat Porfirio <unk> , and Rodin and Onassis lived together in Monaco . 
 = = Family tensions = = 
 In October 1968 , Aristotle Onassis married Jacqueline Bouvier Kennedy , the widow of John F. Kennedy , the 35th President of the United States . Onassis and his sister Christina were greatly upset by the union . They had hoped that he might remarry their mother , which had seemed possible towards the end of their father 's relationship with the Greek opera singer Maria Callas . Onassis said : " My father loved names and Jackie loved money " . Despite never liking their stepmother , Onassis and his sister were friendly with her children , Caroline and John , and Onassis would occasionally let his stepbrother ride at the controls of his plane . Aristotle Onassis 's friend , John W. Meyer , credited Alexander with persuading his father to stop publicly accusing his business rival and former brother @-@ in @-@ law , Stavros Niarchos , of involvement in the death of Niarchos 's former wife , Alexander 's aunt Eugenia Livanos . Niarchos later married Onassis 's mother , the sister of his former wife . 
 = = Relationships = = 
 Aristotle Onassis 's second marriage exacerbated the tensions already inherent in his relationship with his son . He also disapproved of Alexander 's secret relationship with Fiona Thyssen ( née Campbell Walter ) , a British fashion model some 16 years his senior and the former wife of industrialist Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen @-@ Bornemisza . Onassis had first met Fiona Thyssen when he was 12 , and as an 18 @-@ year @-@ old had surprised his mother by inviting her to a dinner party , as she was one of his mother 's friends . 
 Following the dinner party , Onassis and Thyssen went to a disco where she punched a fellow dancer in the face ( who then fell to the floor ) after he suggested that she was only with Onassis because of his father 's wealth . Onassis wanted to have a committed relationship with Thyssen from their first meeting , which she initially resisted , but the deep relationship which eventually developed between the pair was resisted by Onassis 's mother , who constantly sought to sabotage it . Onassis 's father also sought to undermine his son 's relationship by buying him a $ 2 million villa outside Athens , a gesture that Thyssen felt was an attempt to mold her into just another " Onassis object ... to be manipulated , brutalised and treated on any level and on any terms he chooses " . Thyssen only accepted gifts from Onassis if they were paid from the small amount that he earned . 
 = = Death = = 
 Onassis had taken his first flying lesson in 1967 and had accrued 1 @,@ 500 flying hours by the time of his death . Possessing a professional pilot 's license , he was appointed the President of Olympic Aviation , a regional Greek subsidiary of his father 's Olympic Airways , in 1971 . Onassis ' poor eyesight meant that he could not hold an air transport license , but could possess an air commercial license , allowing him to fly light planes and air taxis for emergency medical cases . 
 Onassis died on January 23 , 1973 , at the age of 24 , from injuries sustained the previous day when his personal Piaggio <unk> @-@ 2 amphibious airplane , in which he was a passenger , crashed at <unk> International Airport in Athens . Onassis was instructing a potential new pilot of the plane , Donald McCusker , at the time of the crash , in his role as President of Olympic Aviation . Onassis and McCusker were accompanied by Donald McGregor , Onassis 's regular pilot , who was recovering from an eye infection . A few seconds after takeoff from runway 33 , the plane 's right wing dropped and stayed down , and the plane crashed shortly after losing balance , in a flight lasting no more than 15 seconds . McCusker and the other pilot both suffered serious injuries in the crash . The trio had planned to practice amphibious landings between the Saronic Gulf islands of Aegina and Poros after takeoff . 
 The day after the crash , Onassis 's father and stepmother arrived from New York at the hospital where Onassis was being treated . The couple were accompanied by an American neurosurgeon . Onassis 's mother arrived from Switzerland with her husband , Stavros Niarchos . Aristotle had also flown the English neurosurgeon Alan Richardson from London to Athens , but Richardson later told Onassis that Alexander had no chance of surviving his injuries . Aristotle Onassis considered having his son 's body cryogenically frozen with the Life Extension Society , but was persuaded against it , and it was embalmed by Desmond Henley . Alexander Onassis was buried next to the chapel on his father 's private Ionian island of <unk> . 
 Reports into the crash by the Greek Air Force , and an independent investigator hired by Onassis , the Englishman Alan Hunter , concluded that it had occurred as a result of the reversing of the aileron connecting cables during the installation of a new control column . This cause was disputed by McGregor who believed that the wake turbulence from an Air France Boeing 727 that had taken off before them had caused the crash . 
 Less than a month after Alexander Onassis 's death , McCusker had manslaughter proceedings initiated against him by the public prosecutor of Athens in connection with the crash . Six people were also charged over Onassis 's death in January 1974 , with their indictment indicating that faulty controls had been fitted to his plane . 
 In December 1974 , in a paid advertisement , Aristotle Onassis announced his offering of a $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 reward ( equivalent to $ 4 @.@ 798 million in 2015 ) for proof that his son 's death had been as a result of " deliberate action " as opposed to the cause of negligence , the conclusion reached by the official inquiry . All charges relating to the crash were later dropped , and McCusker was awarded $ 800 @,@ 000 in 1978 by Olympic Airways , three years after Aristotle Onassis 's death . Onassis had refused to believe that his son 's death was an accident , believing it was due to the machinations of the United States Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) and the leader of the Greek military junta , Georgios Papadopoulos . 
 Onassis 's death had a profound effect on his father , who never fully recovered from the loss of his son . Aristotle Onassis sought to sell Olympic Airways after his son 's death , and died two years later in March 1975 . Onassis was buried alongside his son on <unk> . 
 = = Alexander S. Onassis Foundation = = 
 Aristotle Onassis 's will established a charitable foundation in memory of his son , the Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation , based in the tax haven of Vaduz in Liechtenstein , and headquartered in Athens . The foundation received 45 % of his fortune , with the remainder left to Alexander 's sister , Christina . The foundation consists of two parts ; a business foundation which runs various businesses including shipping , and a public benefit foundation which is the sole recipient of the business foundation . The public benefit foundation funds the world wide promotion of Greek culture , funds the Onassis International Prizes for achievement in various fields , and the funding of scholarships for Greek university students . 
 = Sexxx Dreams = 
 " Sexxx Dreams " ( censored as " X Dreams " ) is a song by American singer Lady Gaga from her third studio album , Artpop ( 2013 ) . The song was written by Gaga , Paul " DJ White Shadow " Blair , Martin Bresso , and William Grigahcine , and produced by Blair , Gaga , Nick Monson , and Dino Zisis . Inspired by Gaga 's erotic fantasies and dreams , the song went through a number of changes to make it understandable for the singer 's team , while keeping a constant chorus . A synthpop song , Gaga promoted the title by using a number of hashtags involving the name in her social media accounts , and at one point was considered for a single release from Artpop . 
 Critics received the song favorably , complimenting the composition , the futuristic sound , the lyrical insights into Gaga 's life , and compared it to the works of singers Janet Jackson and Paula Abdul . It debuted at number 41 in the Gaon Chart of South Korea , selling 3 @,@ 414 copies during the release week of Artpop . " Sexxx Dreams " was one of several album tracks included in Gaga 's 2013 concert at the iTunes Festival in London . It was also present on the set list of Gaga 's residency show at Roseland Ballroom and ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 Development of Lady Gaga 's third studio album , Artpop , began shortly after the release of her second one , Born This Way ( 2011 ) , and by the following year , the album 's concepts were " beginning to flourish " as Gaga collaborated with producers Fernando Garibay and DJ White Shadow . However , while on tour for the Born This Way Ball , Gaga had to undergo a hip surgery in February 2013 which forced the singer into a six month hiatus , and this rehabilitation became one of the inspirations behind the album . " Sexxx Dreams " was written by Gaga , Paul " DJ White Shadow " Blair , Martin Bresso , and William Grigahcine , and produced by Blair , Gaga , Nick Monson , and Dino Zisis . Its lyrics propose a sexual encounter with a lover whose boyfriend is gone for the weekend . Gaga was inspired to write the song from her " mucky " fantasies . She said in an interview with the Daily Mirror : 
 In my mind when I picture sex dreams , it 's so bizarre ! .. It 's me standing there with some massive couture creation , staring at a blow @-@ up doll or something . That 's what my sex dreams are like . My sex dreams are weird ... Haven 't you ever been laying in bed with someone and fantasised about someone else ? ... In the song I 'm explaining my infidelity to the person I 'm with , and then I 'm having a conversation with myself to the person that I 'm fantasising about . 
 In November 2013 , during a special iHeartRadio Album Release Party broadcast on more than 150 Clear Channel stations to promote Artpop , Gaga revealed to Ryan Seacrest that " sexy sculptures " appear in her " crazy " and " really bizarre " dreams . She introduced the song as " something really erotic and exotic " , allowing fans to " experience what it 's like to be me " . Gaga and her team spent a lot of time creating the rhythm of the song . At first people involved in the production were not sure of Gaga 's idea behind the composition , and hence it went through a lot of changes , but kept the chorus as constant since Gaga was against changing it . 
 Gaga explained that the dialogue exchange in the lyrics alternate between singing to one person , and speaking to another , which reverses from verse to verse . Here the people she converses with in the song are her imaginary boyfriend and girlfriend . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard said the song is one in which Gaga " balances a disintegrating relationship and a lustful fantasy " and " juggles a pastel @-@ colored 80 's aesthetic and R @-@ rated breakdown of unspoken desire " . MTV 's Brenna Ehrlich described it as a " sweaty , sultry jam about touching oneself " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , " Sexxx Dreams " is set in common time with a moderate dance tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C minor with Gaga 's vocals spanning from G3 to F5 . The song has a basic sequence of G ♯ – Cm – G ♯ – Cm during the verses and Cm – A ♯ – G ♯ – Cm in the chorus . 
 = = Production and promotion = = 
 In August 2013 , Gaga released a preview of " Sexxx Dreams " prior to her performance of September 1 , 2013 at the iTunes Festival in London . In the video , she sings " When I lay in bed I touch myself and I think of you " . The video then shows Gaga rehearsing for the festival and displays in pink font , " We wanna give you # <unk> ' " . Gaga also promoted the song on social media by posting song lyrics ( " Last night damn , you were in my # <unk> doing really nasty things " ) , and encouraging use of a hashtag containing lyrics ( # <unk> ) . 
 On September 3 , 2013 , after debuting several tracks from Artpop at the festival , Gaga polled her fans about how to promote the album , asking : " OK <unk> ! Now that you 've seen some of ARTPOP Live , what would be YOUR pick for 2nd Single ? " Fans could choose between " Aura " , " Manicure " and " Sexxx Dreams " . At one point , the latter was in the lead by nearly 10 @,@ 000 votes . However , the song was never selected as an official single . 
 Later that month , Rihanna tweeted : " Just left the studio ... Recorded a # monster hook for one of my favorite artists ! And that 's all I can give you ... # <unk> " , then posted a separate message , " <unk> .... YOU were in my sex dreams ! ! " Her tease , followed by Gaga 's response , " @ <unk> doing really <unk> <unk> * dancing gaga * " , lead to rumors that Rihanna would be collaborating on the version that would appear on Artpop . However , Rihanna 's vocals do not appear on the album . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Sexxx Dreams " received generally positive reception and drew comparisons to the work of Paula Abdul , Janet Jackson and Prince . The Atlantic 's Spencer Kornhaber said the song " doses Prince 's ' Little Red Corvette ' with some dread and Gaga using lust as therapy " . In his review of Artpop for Billboard , Lipshutz called the song " seductive " and said it marks where the " sexuality and synth @-@ pop pleasures of [ the album ] fully bloom . " Robert Cospey of Digital Spy said the track highlights Gaga " doing her best Janet Jackson impression , and she does it very well . " 
 The Guardian 's Michael Cragg described " Sexxx Dreams " as a " Vanity 6 @-@ esque strut " , and dubbed it and " Do What U Want " , " futuristic , electro @-@ tooled R & B slow jams with delicious choruses " . Robbie Daw of Idolator called the " not so subtle " and " randy " song one of the album 's " standouts " , and recommended it for use as a single . MTV 's John Walker said of the song , " There 's something so <unk> erotic about telling someone ' you were in my sex dreams . ' It 's such a cumbersome phrase , yet Gaga somehow makes it one of the most erotic lines you 'll heard [ sic ] all year . The half @-@ giggled ' I really shouldn 't be telling you this ' line at the song 's climax — no pun intended — really seals the deal . " Walker humorously rated the song 5 out of 5 " vaguely vaginal Georgia O 'Keeffe orchids " . 
 Bradley Stern of MuuMuse said the song is " all sorts of throwback ' 80 's @-@ R & B ferociousness , blending dirty @-@ minded temptation with a seriously fierce strut a la Janet Jackson and Paula Abdul — and a bit of Divinyls ' ' I Touch Myself ' . " In his album review , he described the song as " a purely Prince / Vanity 6 @-@ inspired production , seductively sauntering into the speakers across a nasty , smutty slap of a beat " . Stern considered the track one of the album 's best moments and wrote , " there 's no part of ' Sexxx Dreams ' that isn 't purely aural sex " . Two lyrics from the song were included in USA Today 's list of the eleven most suggestive lyrics from Artpop . 
 Some reviewers commented on the part in which Gaga says she 's " had a couple of drinks " . Lipshutz wrote that Gaga sounded " loose and light @-@ hearted , letting her audience twirl around on the dance floor " . Cragg said it sounded as though her vocals had been " covertly recorded during a drunken game of truth or dare " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " Sexxx Dreams " was one of several Artpop tracks included in Gaga 's 2013 concert at the iTunes Festival in London . Ashley Percival of The Huffington Post wrote of her performance : " ' Sex Dreams ' made 2009 's ' LoveGame ' with its disco stick look like a nursery rhyme , as she delivered its racy and oh @-@ so @-@ Gaga lyrics . " Reviewing Gaga 's live performance , Gil Kaufman of MTV described the song as " theatrical , throbbing pop " , with Gaga channeling " Prince , Madonna and anyone else who writhed on , humped or <unk> into a stage in the 1980s while sharing their most intimate , detailed nighttime desires . " 
 In November 2013 , Gaga performed " Sexxx Dreams " at ArtRave , a two @-@ day promotional event for Artpop , held at the Brooklyn Navy Yard in New York . In their review of the event , Billboard contributors Andrew Hampp and Jason Lipshutz wrote that her performance of the song was " presented with colorful choreography but paled in comparison " to the studio version . 
 Gaga included the song in the set list for her March – April 2014 residency at Roseland Ballroom , showing off her " flirty side " . In his review of her opening night performance , Jon Caramanica of The New York Times described " Sexxx Dreams " as a song about fantasy and noted how Gaga " <unk> back and forth " between a male and female dancer . Gaga performed the song during her ArtRave : The Artpop Ball tour , accompanied by backup dancers dressed in fetish clothing . Kitty Empire from The Guardian refrained that " the latex <unk> section , where Gaga sings ' Sexxx Dreams ' , finds no new take on the dry @-@ humping of <unk> @-@ longues . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , California and CRC Studios , Chicago , Illinois 
 Mixed at Record Plant Studios , Hollywood , California and Heard IT ! Studios , North Hollywood , California 
 Sony / ATV Songs , LLC / House of Gaga Publishing , LLC / GloJoe Music Inc . ( BMI ) , Maxwell and Carter Publishing , LLC ( ASCAP ) , Etrange Fruit ( SACEM ) , Fuzion ( SACEM ) administered by Get Familiar Music ( ASCAP ) 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Artpop . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the release of Artpop , the song debuted at number 41 in the Gaon Chart of South Korea , selling 3 @,@ 414 copies . 
 = Garage Sale ( The Office ) = 
 " Garage Sale " is the nineteenth episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 145th episode overall . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on March 24 , 2011 . The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by series cast member , Steve Carell . The episode marks his third director 's credit for the series and the final physical appearance of Amy Ryan , having appeared as a regular since " Classy Christmas " . 
 In the episode , Michael ( Steve Carell ) decides to propose to Holly ( Amy Ryan ) , and runs into trouble thinking of how to do it well with his expensive diamond ring . He consults several coworkers on advice and for ideas on how to propose . Meanwhile , Dunder Mifflin Scranton 's warehouse and crew hosts a public garage sale . 
 " Garage Sale " was met with critical acclaim by both television reviewers as well as fans . Furthermore , HitFix reviewer Alan Sepinwall wrote that the episode could have served as Carell 's last episode . It is considered one of the best episodes of The Office . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by more than 7 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 which marked a slight rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Todd Packer " . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Michael decides to propose to Holly , and runs into trouble thinking of how to do it in the most elaborate way possible with his expensive diamond ring ( which cost what he believes is the traditional " three years ' salary " ) . He pours gasoline in the parking lot in the shape of letters , planning to light them on fire and show it to Holly . Pam stops it and gathers a meeting of Michael , herself , Jim , Ryan , and Oscar . They believe Holly truly is " the one " for him and give him anecdotes and ideas . He calls Holly 's father to ask his permission ( although he leaves a message rather than speak to him personally ) . Holly catches onto the idea when she calls her parents herself , but she notices her parents seem mentally disoriented . She talks to Michael later and says she wants to move back to Colorado to be there for her dad , and Michael supports her decision . 
 Michael takes Holly on a walk through the office , pointing out the locations of various events throughout their courtship . He opens the door to the kitchen , revealing all of the other employees holding candles . Various members of the office ask Holly if she will marry them ( all of Michael 's plan ) and she politely says no . Michael then leads Holly out to her desk , which is surrounded by dozens of candles . Michael gets down on his knee and begins to make a speech when the sprinklers go off from the candles . The water drenches everyone in the office and Michael proposes in a speech pattern similar to Yoda , reminiscent of the Season 4 finale when Holly is trying to fix her chair , as well as when Jim proposes to Pam in the rain in the Season 5 premiere . Holly accepts . Everyone then begins to congratulate Michael . However , Michael announces he is moving to Colorado with Holly . The scene ends with his employees in shock . 
 Meanwhile , Dunder Mifflin Scranton 's warehouse and crew host a public garage sale . Dwight attempts to walk away with the most expensive item by trading smaller items with his office mates beginning with a <unk> ( a reference to One red <unk> ) and continuously trading up from table to table . One item on Jim and Pam 's table that piques his interest is a packet of " miracle legumes . " Dwight initially believes Jim is trying to prank him , but is astonished when they reappear after Jim had seemingly destroyed the packet . Eventually , his curiosity gets the better of him and he trades Jim a $ 150 telescope for the legumes . At the end of the episode , Dwight plants and waters the seeds and Jim secretly replaces the pots with full @-@ grown plants . 
 Andy , Darryl , and Kevin play and bet on the Dallas board game ( which Kevin had for sale ) . As the instruction booklet is not with the game , Andy and Darryl make up the rules as they go along , much to Kevin 's objection . Eventually , Kevin notices the money they had bet on the game with is missing , and storms out . As Darryl and Andy look at each other in confusion , Kevin reveals to the cameras that he has the money , stating , " And that ... is Dallas " , mocking Andy and Darryl 's previous statement . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was written by consulting producer Jon Vitti , his second writing credit of the series since joining the staff at the beginning of the seventh season . It was directed by series star Steve Carell , the third episode he has directed for the series . The episode marked Amy Ryan 's last physical appearance on the series , although she did speak in " Goodbye , Michael " . Ryan later said in an interview with New York that " The script was so sweet anyway that it made us all have a good cry " especially adding the fact that it was her final appearance . She also expressed her confidence that the series could survive without Carell and that it was the right move for him to leave . Vitti later submitted the episode for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series , but it was not nominated . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Garage Sale " features several callbacks to previous episodes . Kevin 's skills at poker were previously shown in " Casino Night " . Michael 's St. Pauli Girl sign was previously shown in " Dinner Party " . Michael mentions when Toby left for Costa Rica from " Night Out " . 
 When Dwight trades his <unk> for various objects , this is a reference to the One Red Paperclip blog , in which a man trades his red paper clip for an eventual house . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Garage Sale " was viewed by an estimated 7 @.@ 07 million viewers and received a 3 @.@ 4 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 4 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a slight rise in the ratings from the previous episode , " Todd Packer " , which received series lows . The episode ranked second in its timeslot beating the Fox crime drama Bones , which was seen by 8 @.@ 78 million households ; and CBS coverage of NCAA basketball , which was seen by 6 @.@ 82 million household ; but it was defeated by the ABC medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , which was seen by an average 10 @.@ 1 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 This episode received critical acclaim and is considered one of the best Office episodes . HitFix reviewer Alan Sepinwall called it one of his " favorite ' Office ' episodes ever ' " and also called it one of the greatest romantic sitcom episodes of all @-@ time . He also said the episode could have served as Carell 's last episode . He also praised " Garage Sale " for its multiple <unk> , its exploration of the ensemble cast , and Jim 's prank against Dwight . Sepinwall named it one of the best TV episodes of 2011 for series that were not great the whole year . He praised it for showcasing " the ridiculous and romantic sides of ' The Office ' " . He also wrote that it gave Fischer and Krasinski their best material for the series in years . Cindy White of IGN praised it for its mix of comedy and drama . She also complimented it for the showcase of the cast . She ultimately gave the episode a 9 / 10 . James Poniewozik of TIME said it " was unspectacular as an episode overall but did build to a delightful moment as Michael finally proposed to Holly . " He later named it one of his honorable mentions for the top 10 TV episodes of 2011 . 
 The A.V. Club writer Myles McNutt called the episode a " spiritual successor to ' Casino Night ' , which remains one of my all @-@ time favorite episodes of the series " for " turning what could feel like a gimmicky sitcom scenario into something that feels distinct to both the office [ the characters ] [ ... ] and The Office " . He ultimately gave the episode an A- . Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic compared the proposal to other television proposals on Friends , Cheers and Frasier . New York writer <unk> Paskin praised the writers for being adept at writing for romance . Following the airing of the episode , Colorado governor John Hickenlooper issued a press release appointing Michael Scott to the position of Director of Paper Distribution in the Department of Natural Resources . " Garage Sale " was voted the third @-@ highest @-@ rated out of 24 from the seventh season , according to an " Survivor " episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally . It was later named the 20th @-@ best episode of the series according to an episode poll by OfficeTally . BuddyTV named the episode the 19th @-@ best TV episode of 2011 and it was the only episode of the series to make the list . 
 = Isaac Parsons ( American military officer ) = 
 Isaac Parsons ( January 7 , 1814 – April 24 , 1862 ) was an American planter , politician , and military officer in the U.S. state of Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . Parsons served as a justice of the peace of Hampshire County 's District 3 from 1852 to 1853 . He later served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County from 1854 until 1857 . Parsons was the grandson of Virginia House Delegate Isaac Parsons ( 1752 – 1796 ) , the great @-@ grandson of Colonial Virginia military officer William Foreman ( died 1777 ) , and the grandfather of First Lady of West Virginia , Edna Brady Cornwell ( 1868 – 1958 ) . 
 Parsons inherited his family 's Wappocomo plantation north of Romney . In 1855 , fugitive slave Jacob Green escaped from Parsons ' Wappocomo plantation to Pennsylvania along with several other slaves . Parsons and his nephews went north to pursue the escapees , resulting in the arrest of his nephew , James " Zip " Parsons III ( 1831 – 1893 ) . The arrest and trial of Parsons ' nephew caused a dispute between the states of Virginia and Pennsylvania over the latter 's refusal to execute the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 . Following the trial , a dispute ensued between Parsons and Charles James Faulkner over legal fees in 1857 . At the time of the dispute , Faulkner was a member of the United States House of Representatives from Virginia 's 8th congressional district . Parsons declared that Faulkner had originally offered his legal services at no cost during his nephew 's trial . 
 Following the onset of the American Civil War , Parsons served on Hampshire County 's " committee for safety " . Parsons received permission to raise an independent company of mounted infantry to provide defense along the border . He served as a military officer in the Huckleberry Rangers and Company K of the 13th Virginia Volunteer Infantry Regiment in the Confederate States Army . Parsons died of natural causes following a skirmish with Union Army cavalry at Grassy Lick Run in 1862 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Isaac Parsons was born on January 7 , 1814 , in Hampshire County , West Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . He was the third son of James Gregg Parsons ( 1773 – 1847 ) and his wife Mary Catherine Casey Parsons ( 1773 – 1846 ) . 
 The Parsons family was a prominent family whose ancestors had arrived to the Thirteen Colonies from England in 1635 , and relocated to Hampshire County around 1740 . Parsons ' paternal grandfather , of which he is a likely namesake , Isaac Parsons ( 1752 – 1796 ) served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County from 1789 until his death in 1796 ; and operated a public ferry across the South Branch Potomac River . Through his mother , Parsons was a great @-@ grandson of Colonial Virginia military officer William Foreman ( died 1777 ) . Parsons was raised through childhood to adulthood on his family 's Wappocomo plantation north of Romney . 
 = = Wappocomo = = 
 Following the death of James Gregg Parsons on January 25 , 1847 , his last will and testament dated November 7 , 1846 , and probated February 22 , 1847 , devised Lot Number 21 including Wappocomo ( referred to in the will as the " Casey tract " ) to his son Colonel Isaac Parsons ( 1814 – 1862 ) . Parsons ' brother James " Big Jim " Parsons , Jr . ( 1798 – 1858 ) , inherited the Collins tract ( Lot Number 20 ) and his other brother David C. Parsons ( 1803 – 1860 ) inherited Lot Number 13 . Parsons and his brothers also inherited the nearby " Jake Sugar Rum tract , the McGuire tract , and five town lots in Romney " . Parsons eventually acquired Wappocomo plantation outright , and in 1861 he undertook a two @-@ story stone expansion to the main house at Wappocomo . The ballroom in the upper story of this addition served as the scene of many events and parties . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Following the ratification of the 1851 Constitution of Virginia , Parsons was elected to serve as a justice of the peace for Hampshire County 's District 3 in 1852 and 1853 . Parsons served in this office alongside David Gibson , T. M. Davis , and Joseph C. Pancake . 
 Parsons served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County from 1854 until 1857 . Parsons represented Hampshire County , which was a multi @-@ member electoral district , in the following sessions of the Virginia House of Delegates : the 1854 session alongside Jesse Lupton ; the 1855 session alongside Jesse Lupton ; the 1856 session alongside Asa Hiett ; and the 1857 session alongside Asa Hiett . Prior to the American Civil War , Parsons was an ardent proponent of Virginia 's secession and the passage of an Ordinance of Secession . 
 = = Jacob Green affair = = 
 In August 1855 , Jacob Green , a slave owned by Parsons , escaped from Wappocomo farm with four other slaves from neighboring plantations . In October of that year , Green returned to Parsons ' plantation in Romney , and persuaded four or five slaves from neighboring farms owned by Parsons family relatives to escape with him to Pennsylvania . 
 A party of eight to ten men , including Parsons and two of his nephews , James " Zip " Parsons III ( 1831 – 1893 ) and a Mr. Stump , went north in pursuit of the escapees . In the course of the pursuit , they captured two of Stump 's escaped slaves , who were sent back to Hampshire County . James Parsons III was the son of Parsons ' brother James " Big Jim " Parsons , Jr . ( 1798 – 1858 ) , and his wife Elizabeth Miller Parsons . With information obtained from the two recaptured slaves , Parsons went to Johnstown , James Parsons III to Hollidaysburg , and Stump to Altoona , where they hoped to intercept Green as he headed west on the Allegheny Portage Railroad and Main Line Canal toward Pittsburgh . James Parsons III intercepted Green at Hollidaysburg , but local abolitionists thwarted his attempt to capture Green , and he was arrested and arraigned for kidnapping . 
 Upon learning of the arrest of his nephew , Parsons sought the assistance of Charles James Faulkner , a prominent Martinsburg lawyer and United States House Representative from Virginia 's 8th congressional district , and of James Murray Mason , a United States Senator from Virginia . Faulkner and Mason both offered their legal services for James Parsons III 's defense . The Virginia General Assembly pledged its support to Parsons and to Virginia 's slaveowners in defending their constitutional rights and to protect them from prosecution . Virginia Governor Henry A. Wise appointed John Randolph Tucker to attend Parsons ' trial as a " special commissioner " of Virginia . The dispute between Virginia and Pennsylvania escalated , and on January 31 , 1856 , an article published in the New York Herald read " Threatened Civil War between Virginia and Pennsylvania " . 
 Parsons , Faulkner , and Tucker traveled to Hollidaysburg for James Parsons III 's trial . Faulkner provided for Parsons ' legal defense , leading to his acquittal as having acted legally under the provisions of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 . 
 In September 1856 , Faulkner billed Parsons $ 150 for his legal services . Parsons disputed the charge . In a series of articles in the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser , he declared that Faulkner had originally offered his services at no cost ; that he had been lauded publicly for his generosity in doing so without ever denying that he had been working pro bono ; and that he was practicing " duplicity and deception " in trying to win a reputation in his district through " specious acts of munificence " . 
 James Parsons III and his brother William Miller Parsons ( born 1835 ) were later proprietors of the Virginia Argus and Hampshire Advertiser . In a series of articles published in the May 14 and May 21 , 1857 , issues of the Virginia Argus , Parsons chronicled the 1855 arrest of his nephew for attempting to capture his fugitive slave and the resulting dispute between the Parsons family and Faulkner over legal fees in 1857 . 
 = = American Civil War = = 
 Following the onset of the American Civil War , Parsons began serving on Hampshire County 's " committee for safety " . Parsons served on the " committee for safety " alongside James D. Armstrong , John M. Pancake , David Gibson , Dr. S. R. Lupton , John C. Heiskell , J. W. Marshall , W. A. Vance , R. K. Sheetz , Angus William McDonald , James Sheetz , John T. Pierce , James W. Albin , Charles Blue , Robert Hook , R. B. Sherrard , G. W. Gore , George William Washington , and John Johnson . The " committee for safety " continued to meet until May 29 , 1861 . Parsons , Pancake , and Armstrong were permitted by the Hampshire County Court to execute bonds for and on behalf of the county to raise money to fund " war purposes " . 
 On May 18 , 1861 , the Hampshire Guards and the Frontier Riflemen convened in front of the Hampshire County Courthouse in Romney before departing to fight in defense of the Confederate States of America . Parsons and a dozen of his men led the wagon train conveying these volunteers to Green Spring on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad mainline , where Parsons and the volunteers departed by train to Harpers Ferry . 
 Parsons traveled to Richmond , where he received permission to raise an independent company of mounted infantry to provide defense along the border . Parsons set about enrolling volunteers , and within a short period of time , he enlisted approximately 30 men . Following its organization , the company became known as the Huckleberry Rangers of the Confederate States Army 's 13th Virginia Volunteer Infantry Regiment . The following personnel were elected to serve in leadership positions within the company : Parsons as its captain in command ; John Blue , first lieutenant ; and his son Isaac Parsons , Jr . , second lieutenant . Parsons and his company utilized flintlock muskets , which they had retrieved from the loft of the courthouse , and additional sabres and flintlock horse pistols which had last been used during the American Revolutionary War . Parsons provided Lt. Blue with a Minié ball rifle reportedly seized from John Brown at Harpers Ferry . 
 Parsons again traveled to Richmond with a supply of cattle , and returned to his company 's camp on the North River in Hampshire County around November 15 , 1861 . Upon his return , Parsons was anxious to learn about the condition of his family and property at Wappocomo and needed an additional change of clothing and a blanket . Accompanied by Lt. Blue and Adam Parrish , Parsons traveled west along the Northwestern Turnpike to around Pleasant Dale , where they set about traversing a series of roads and paths until nighttime when they reached Sugar Hollow 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) north of Romney . Parsons stayed behind in the hollow while Lt. Blue and Parrish started out for Wappocomo to retrieve a set of Parsons ' clothes . Lt. Blue and Parrish approached Wappocomo with the knowledge that Union Army forces kept a guard at the main house there day and night . Lt. Blue circled around to the rear of the mansion at Wappocomo and knocked on the window of his uncle , Garrett W. Blue , who was residing with Parsons ' family . Blue warned his nephew about the Union Army soldiers possibly stationed on the home 's front porch , and he subsequently fetched Parsons ' daughter Kate , who provided Lt. Blue with a parcel for her father . 
 Lt. Blue and Parrish returned to Sugar Hollow where Parsons was awaiting them , and Parsons set about locating pine from which to make torches to light their way out of the hollow . Parsons carried with him a small hatchet , and he began splitting pine in the darkness to fashion a torch . Parsons accidentally struck himself in the knee with his hatchet , and Lt. Blue applied a handkerchief to the wound to stop its bleeding . The three men traveled through the dark and rain to the nearby home of Frank Carter , where they ate and dried their clothes by the fire . The following morning , the three men mounted their horses and traveled to Rev. Harris ' home , where Parsons and Lt. Blue parted with Parrish . Parsons and Lt. Blue continued east over Town Hill and reached George Thompson 's residence on the Little Cacapon River , which had risen due to the previous night 's rainfall . Parsons and Lt. Blue remained with Thompson for two days until the Little Cacapon River subsided , and traveled to Blue 's Gap , where they set up camp . There , Lt. Blue received orders from Col. Angus William McDonald to carry out an expedition to Romney for General Stonewall Jackson to ascertain the number of Union Army infantry , cavalry , and artillery present in and around the town . Lt. Blue departed for Romney with Parsons ' son Isaac Parsons , Jr . , and W. V. Parsons accompanying him . Throughout 1861 , Parsons " gratuitously " provided Confederate soldiers with food at his table and horses from his stables at his Wappocomo plantation . 
 In 1862 , Parsons had part of his family moved from their Wappocomo residence to Shull 's Gap on the Lost River in Hardy County . Romney physician Dr. Lupton and his wife were also residing with Parsons ' family at Shull 's Gap . In March , Union Army forces were no closer to Romney than Green Spring , which allowed Parsons and his wife Susan Blue Parsons to return to their home at Wappocomo with their younger children . Parsons ' eldest daughters Kate and Sallie stayed behind with his son Isaac Parsons , Jr . , who had arrived from New Market , and a Mrs. Dawson and Dr. Lupton and his wife . On March 24 , 1862 , Parsons ' eldest child and daughter Kate died . Despite recovering from illness , Lt. Blue carried the news of Kate 's death and met Parsons halfway to Romney . Parsons instructed Lt. Blue to proceed on to Romney where he delivered the news to his wife Susan . The Parsons no longer felt safe in Romney , and returned to Shull 's Gap . Parsons and Lt. Blue traveled to Harrisonburg , where they remained for a few days , and decided to return to Hampshire County . Lt. Blue traveled to his family 's residence 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Romney , and Parsons to his residence at Wappocomo plantation . Lt. Blue was subsequently captured by Union Army forces and held at the Wirgman Building , from which he later escaped . 
 Parsons , his sons , and other Confederate soldiers encountered Union Army cavalry along Grassy Lick Run south of Romney on April 24 , 1862 . Parsons carried a double @-@ barreled shotgun , and proceeded to fire his weapon at the Union forces at close range . As Parsons made his escape from the Union Army forces , he saw his son fired upon as he ran across the road , and supposed he had been killed . He traveled to the home of a Mr. Hott , and told him of the news of his son 's possible death . Parsons became pale and was helped down from his horse by Hott 's sons , so he would not fall . According to Hott , Parsons died moments later . 
 Parsons ' body was transferred to Wappocomo for burial in the Parsons family burial ground . Union Army forces assumed Parsons had died in the skirmish along Grassy Lick Run , and claimed the right to examine his body to search for wounds which would serve as sufficient cause to destroy his property . Professor Nelson , a Presbyterian minister and instructor at the Potomac Academy , was a friend of the Parsons family , and denied Union Army officials access to Parsons ' body . As a compromise , Professor Nelson allowed Union Army officers to be present in the room while Parsons ' corpse was examined . No wounds were found on Parsons ' body , and his remains were interred in the Parsons family burial ground at Indian Mound Cemetery . On April 26 , 1862 , acting Quartermaster Lt. F. H. Morse completed the death certificate for Parsons although the circumstances of Parsons ' death were not recorded . Captain William Firey of Company B , 1st Maryland Cavalry and Captain C. W. Shearer of Company B , 3rd Maryland Infantry , Potomac Home Brigade were present for the examination of Parsons ' body and attested there was " no evidence of gun @-@ shot wounds or any other violence on him " . Witnesses present at the examination were William Vance and George William Washington . 
 Parsons drafted his own will and testament , and it was proved without issue , and later cited in the Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia case French v. French ( 1877 ) . His wife Susan Blue Parsons died on October 2 , 1889 and was interred alongside Parsons at Indian Mound Cemetery . In her Parsons ' Family History and Record ( 1913 ) , Parsons ' relative and family genealogist Virginia Parsons MacCabe said of Parsons : " he was broad minded and conservative , gifted with good common sense and judgment , his honesty and integrity was unimpeachable . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Parsons married Susan Blue ( 1817 – 1889 ) on May 18 , 1836 . Susan Blue was born in Hampshire County on January 9 , 1817 , and was the daughter of Uriah Blue , Jr . , and his wife M. Elizabeth Donaldson Blue . Parsons and his wife Susan had nine children consisting of four sons and five daughters . Through his daughter Sarah Louise , Parsons was the grandfather of Edna Brady Cornwell ( 1868 – 1960 ) , who served as First Lady of West Virginia from 1917 until 1921 during her husband John J. Cornwell 's ( 1867 – 1953 ) term as Governor of West Virginia . 
 = Girl with a Pearl Earring ( film ) = 
 Girl with a Pearl Earring is a 2003 drama film directed by Peter Webber . The screenplay was adapted by screenwriter Olivia Hetreed , based on the novel of the same name by Tracy Chevalier . Scarlett Johansson stars as Griet , a young 17th @-@ century servant in the household of the Dutch painter Johannes Vermeer ( played by Colin Firth ) at the time he painted Girl with a Pearl Earring ( 1665 ) in the city of Delft in Holland . Other cast members include Tom Wilkinson , Cillian Murphy , and Judy Parfitt . 
 Hetreed read the novel before its publication , and her husband 's production company convinced Chevalier to sell the film rights . Initially , the production was to feature Kate Hudson as Griet with Mike Newell directing . Hudson withdrew shortly before filming began , however , and the film was placed in hiatus until the hire of Webber , who re @-@ initiated the casting process . In this , which was his feature film debut , Webber sought to avoid employing traditional characteristics of the period film drama . Cinematographer Eduardo Serra used distinctive lighting and colour schemes similar to Vermeer 's paintings . 
 Released on 12 December 2003 in North America and on 16 January 2004 in the United Kingdom , Girl with a Pearl Earring earned a worldwide gross of $ 31 @,@ 466 @,@ 789 . It garnered a mostly positive critical reception , with a 72 % approval rating from Rotten Tomatoes . Critics generally applauded the film 's visuals and performances while questioning elements of its story . The film was subsequently nominated for ten British Academy Film Awards , three Academy Awards , and two Golden Globe Awards . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Griet ( Scarlett Johansson ) is a shy girl living in the Dutch Republic in 1665 . Her father , a Delftware painter , has recently gone blind , rendering him unable to work and putting his family in a precarious financial situation . To help matters , Griet is sent to work as a maid in the household of famed painter Johannes Vermeer ( Colin Firth ) . Griet works hard , almost wordlessly , in the lowest position in a harsh hierarchy , doing her best despite spiteful treatment by one of Vermeer 's children . While she is on a routine shopping trip outside the house , a butcher 's son , Pieter ( Cillian Murphy ) , notices Griet and falls in love with her , even though she is slow to return his affections . 
 As Griet cleans Vermeer 's studio , which his wife Catharina ( Essie Davis ) never enters , the painter begins to converse with her and encourages her appreciation of painting , light and color . Vermeer gives her lessons in mixing paints and other tasks , taking care to keep this secret from his wife , who would react with anger and jealousy if she found out that her husband was spending time with Griet . In contrast , Vermeer 's pragmatic mother @-@ in @-@ law , Maria <unk> ( Judy Parfitt ) , sees Griet as useful to Vermeer 's career . 
 Vermeer 's rich patron , Van Ruijven ( Tom Wilkinson ) , notices Griet on a visit to the Vermeer household and asks the painter if he will give her up to work in his own house , a situation which ruined a previous girl . Vermeer refuses , but accepts a commission to paint a portrait of Griet for Van Ruijven . 
 As Vermeer secretly works on the eponymous painting , Catharina cannot help but notice something is amiss and her growing jealousy of Griet becomes apparent . As Griet deals with her growing fascination with Vermeer and his talent , she has to fend off Van Ruijven 's attempt to rape her . Soon afterwards , Catharina 's mother summons Griet , hands over her daughter 's pearl earrings , and instructs Griet to finish the painting while Catharina is away for the day . At the final painting session Vermeer pierces Griet 's earlobe so she can wear one of the pearl earrings for the portrait ; she then runs to Pieter to be consoled . They caress and make love in a barn . Afterwards , Pieter proposes marriage , but she shakes her head and leaves . She then returns the earrings to Catharina 's mother . 
 Catharina discovers that Griet used her earrings , accuses her mother of complicity , and demands Vermeer show her the painting of Griet . Heartbroken that Vermeer does not consider her worthy of being painted because she " doesn 't understand , " Catharina tries but fails to destroy the painting , then banishes Griet from the house forever . Vermeer does not object , and Griet leaves the house in shock . Later , Griet is visited by the cook from the house , who comes bearing a gift : a sealed packet containing the blue headscarf she wore in the painting , wrapped around Catharina 's pearl earrings . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The production of Girl with a Pearl Earring began in 1999 , when screenwriter Olivia Hetreed gained access to the eponymous novel shortly before its publication in August . The novel had not yet become a best @-@ seller , but several groups were beginning to show interest . Hetreed loved the character of Griet and " ... her determination to be free in a world where that was almost impossible for a girl from her background . " Anand Tucker and Hetreed 's husband Andy Paterson – both producers with the small British studio Archer Street Films – approached the novel 's author , Tracy Chevalier , for a film adaptation . Chevalier agreed , believing that a British studio would help resist Hollywood 's urge " ... to sex up the film . " She stipulated that their adaptation avoid having the main characters consummate their relationship . Paterson and Tucker promised to " ... replicate the ' emotional truth ' of the story ... , " and Chevalier did not seek to retain control during the film 's creative process , though she briefly considered adapting it herself . 
 Hetreed worked closely with Tucker and Webber to adapt the book , explaining that " ... working with them on drafts helped me to concentrate on what the film would be , rather than how beautifully I could make a line work . " Her first draft was closest to the source material and it slowly " ... developed its own character ... " through rewrites . She avoided using a voiceover , which was present in the novel , " ... partly because it would make it very literary . " Instead , she focused on conveying Griet 's thoughts visually – for example , in her adaptation Griet and Vermeer inspect the camera obscura together under his cloak amidst sexual tension ; whereas , in the novel Griet views it alone immediately after him and enjoys the lasting warmth and scent he leaves . 
 The novel maximises the few known facts of Vermeer 's life , which Hetreed described as " ... little pillars sticking up out of the dust of history . " To learn more about the artist , the screenwriter researched Dutch society in the 17th @-@ century , talked to artist friends about painting , and interviewed a Victoria & Albert Museum art historian who had restored the original artwork . Hetreed stayed in close contact with Chevalier , and the two became so close near the end of the production that they presented a Master class together on screenwriting . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Originally , the American actress Kate Hudson was cast as Griet , having successfully pursued the role from the film 's producers . In September 2001 , however , Hudson pulled out four weeks before filming began , officially due to " creative differences " . Hudson 's decision scuppered the production and led to the loss of financial support from the production company Intermedia . It also resulted in the withdrawal of Mike Newell as director and Ralph Fiennes as Vermeer ; Fiennes left the project to work on his 2002 film Maid in Manhattan . Due to this incident , The Guardian reported that it " ... now seems unlikely that the film will ever be made . " 
 Production commenced again later that year when the producers hired the relatively unknown British television director Peter Webber to helm the project , despite his not having directed a feature film before . Tucker and Paterson already knew Webber from several earlier projects ; the director discovered the project by accident after visiting their office , where he noticed a poster of Vermeer 's work and began discussing it . Webber read the script and described it as being " ... about creativity and the link between art and money and power and sex in some strange unholy mixture . " Characterising it as a " coming of age " story with a " fascinating dark undertow , " Webber deliberately did not read the book prior to filming , as he was concerned about being influenced by it , opting instead to rely on the script and the period . 
 The casting of Griet was Webber 's first major step , and led to interviews with 150 girls before Webber chose the seventeen @-@ year @-@ old actress Scarlett Johansson . He felt that she " ... just stood out . She had something distinctive about her . " Johansson seemed very modern to Webber , but he believed this was a positive attribute , realising " ... that what would work was to take this intelligent , zippy girl and repress all that . " The actress finished filming Lost in Translation immediately before arriving on set in Luxembourg , and consequently prepared little for the role . She considered the script " beautifully written " and the character " very touching " , but did not read the book because she thought it would be better to approach the story with a " clean slate . " 
 After the hiring of Johansson , other major casting decisions quickly followed , beginning with the addition of English actor Colin Firth as Vermeer . Firth and Webber , both of a similar age and background , spent significant time discussing Vermeer 's personality and lifestyle in the period leading up to the beginning of filming . While researching the role , Firth realised that Vermeer was " incredibly elusive as an artist . " As a result , unlike Webber and Johansson , Firth chose to read the book to gain a better grasp of a man of whom little information existed on his private life . Firth sought to " invent " the character and discover his motivations , and ultimately identified with the artist for having a private space in the midst of a bustling family . Firth also studied painting techniques and visited museums carrying Vermeer works . 
 After Firth , Webber 's next casting decision was Tom Wilkinson as the patron Pieter van Ruijven , who was hired in late 2002 . He was soon joined by Judy Parfitt as Vermeer 's domineering mother @-@ in @-@ law , and Essie Davis , who portrayed Vermeer 's wife Catharina . The Australian daughter of an artist , Davis did not believe her character was the film 's " bad guy , " as " ... [ Catharina ] has a certain role to play in order for you to want Griet and Vermeer to be involved . " Cillian Murphy , known for his recent role in 28 Days Later , was hired as Pieter , Griet 's butcher love interest . Murphy , taking on his first period film role , was interested in serving as a foil to Firth 's Vermeer , and representing the " ordinary " world that Griet seeks to avoid upon her meeting the artist . Other cast members included Joanna Scanlan as the maid <unk> , as well as the young actresses <unk> Mann and Anna Popplewell as Vermeer 's daughters , Cornelia and <unk> , respectively . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 During preproduction , Webber and cinematographer Eduardo Serra studied the period 's artwork and discussed the different moods they wanted to create for each scene . The director was a lover of the Stanley Kubrick period drama Barry Lyndon , but knew that Girl With a Pearl Earring would be different ; unlike the former film 's " ... elaborate and expensive set pieces ... , " Webber 's production was to be " ... about the intimate relationships within a single household . " He was not seeking to create a historically accurate biographical film of Vermeer ; Webber sought to direct a period film that avoided being " overly slavish " to characteristics of the genre , desiring instead to " ... bring the film to life ... " and have viewers " ... be able almost to smell the meat in the market . " Webber employed little dialogue and drew inspiration from the " ... quiet , tense , mysterious , transcendent world ... " of Vermeer 's paintings . The director also made a conscious effort to slow the pace of the film , hoping that by " ... slowing things down [ we could ] create these moments in between the dialogue that were full of emotion . And the more silent the film became , the closer it seemed to be to the condition of those Vermeer paintings and the closer it seemed to capture some kind of truth . " 
 The film was budgeted at £ 10 million . While it is set in Delft , the film was primarily shot in Amsterdam , Belgium , and Luxembourg . Chevalier later remarked that Webber and Serra " ... needed absolute control of the space and light they worked with – something they could never achieve by shutting down a busy Delft street for an hour or two . " Only a few exterior shots were filmed in Delft . 
 Webber hired Ben van Os as his production designer because " ... he wasn 't intimidated by the period obligations . He was much more interested in story and character . " For inspiration in constructing the film 's sets , Webber and van Os studied the works of Vermeer and other artists of the period , such as Gerard ter Borch . Set designer Todd van <unk> said the goal was to " ... reflect that quiet , sober , almost moralizing ethos that you see in Dutch paintings . " They built Vermeer 's house on one of Luxembourg 's largest film soundstages , a three @-@ story set where they designed rooms that were meant to convey a lack of privacy . According to van Os , the film was about " being observed , " so they intended Griet to always feel that she was being watched . In addition , they built two other interior sets to represent the homes of Griet and van Ruijven – Griet 's home possessed Calvinistic characteristics while van Ruijven 's contained mounted animals to reflect his " predatory nature . " The Mauritshuis museum made a high resolution photograph of the actual painting , which was then shot on a rostrum camera to be used in the film . 
 According to Webber , Serra " ... was obsessed with reproducing the amazing use of light by the artists of that period , and most particularly Vermeer 's use of it . " To reflect the " magical luminosity " of Vermeer 's artwork , Serra employed diffused lighting and different film stock when filming scenes in the artist 's studio . Webber and Serra did not want to be too reliant on Vermeer 's aesthetic , however ; they wanted audiences to come away focusing their praise on its story , not its visuals . 
 = = = Costume design and make @-@ up = = = 
 In desiring to avoid stereotypes of the costume drama , Webber costumed his actors in simple outfits he termed " period Prada , " rather than use the ruffles and baggy costumes common for the era . The intent was to " ... take the real clothes from the period and reduce them to their essence . " Costume designer Dien van Straalen explored London and Holland markets in search for period fabrics , including curtains and <unk> . For Griet , van Straalen employed " ... pale colors for Scarlett Johansson to give her the drab look of a poor servant girl . " Firth was also outfitted simply , as Vermeer was not rich . Van Straalen created more elaborate costumes for Wilkinson , as van Ruijven was to her " ... a peacock strutting around with his money . " 
 Make @-@ up and hair designer Jenny <unk> desired that Griet appear without make @-@ up , so Johansson was given very little ; rather , <unk> focused on maintaining the actress ' skin as " ... milky , thick and creamy ... , " and bleached her eyebrows . They gave Davis as Catharina a " ... very simple Dutch hairstyle ... , " which they learned from studying drawings and prints of the period . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The musical score for Girl with a Pearl Earring was written by the French composer Alexandre Desplat . Webber decided to hire Desplat after hearing a score he had composed for a Jacques <unk> film . Webber explained , " He had a sense of restraint and a sense of lyricism that I liked . I remember the first time I saw the cue where Griet opens the shutters . He was really describing what the light was doing , articulating that in a musical sphere . " Desplat was then known primarily for scoring films in his native language . 
 The score employs strings , piano , and woodwinds , with a central theme featuring a variety of instrumental forms . Desplat created a melody that recurs throughout the film , stating in a later interview that " ... it evolves and it 's much more flowing with a very gentle theme that 's haunting . " The score , his career breakthrough , gained him international attention and garnered him further film projects . The soundtrack was released in 2004 ; it earned a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score , helping increase Desplat 's name recognition in Hollywood . 
 Desplat 's work also garnered positive reviews . The New York Times described it as a " ... gorgeous score ... " which " ... brushes in a haunted gloom that gives the picture life where none seems to exist ... , " whilst Boston.com said it " ... burbles with elegant baroque minimalism . " Empire magazine called his score " ... a supremely elegant work ... " that " ... creates a captivating atmosphere of cautious emotion and wonderment , the true highlight being ' Colour in the Clouds ' , so simply majestic that it really captures the heart of the story . " 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 In the interest of shortening the adaptation , approximately one @-@ third of the story was eventually edited out ; entire subplots and characters were removed . Before becoming a screenwriter Hetreed worked as an editor , and credits this experience for knowing " ... about structure and what you need to say and what you can leave out . I am a big enthusiast for leaving things out . " She focused the story on the relationship between Griet and Vermeer , deciding what other storylines were " ... distracting and had to be jettisoned . Before editing , there was great stuff there , but Peter was fantastically ruthless . " Changes from the novel did not bother Chevalier , who felt that as a result the film gained " ... a focused , driven plot and a sumptuous visual feast . " 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 According to Webber , Girl with a Pearl Earring is " ... more than just a quaint little film about art ... " but is concerned with themes of money , sex , repression , obsession , power , and the human heart . Laura M. Sager <unk> in her book , Writing and Filming the Painting : <unk> in Literature and Film , asserts that the film deviates significantly from the source material and emphasises a " ... socio @-@ political dimension that is subtler in the novel . " Girl with a Pearl Earring , Sager <unk> says , " ... shifts its focus from a young girl 's evolving consciousness to the class and power relations in the story . " 
 In his work , Film England : Culturally English Filmmaking Since the 1990s , author Andrew Higson notes that the film overcomes the novel 's " subjective narration " device by having the camera stay fixed on Griet for much of the film . But , Higson says , " ... no effort is made to actually render her point of view as the point of view of the film or the spectator . " 
 Vermeer channels Griet 's sexual awakening into his painting , with the piercing of her ear and his directives to her posing being inherently sexual . In the opinion of psychologist Rosemary <unk> , the pearl Griet dons is a metaphor , something which normally would convey wealth and status . But , when worn by Griet the pearl is also a directive to the audience to look at the " ... psychological potential within ... " her erotic , unconsummated bond with Vermeer , unclear up to that point if it is real or not . 
 The film incorporates seven of Vermeer 's paintings into its story . Thomas Leitch , in his book Film Adaptation and Its Discontents : From Gone with the Wind to The Passion of the Christ , writes that while Chevalier 's Griet describes ten Vermeer paintings ( without naming them ) , Webber 's film avoids " ... show [ ing ] an external world that looks like a series of Vermeer paintings ... , " as this would have been a trivialisation of the artist 's achievements . Leitch adds the director " ... compromises by showing far fewer actual Vermeer paintings than Chevalier 's Griet describes but lingering longer over the visual particulars of the studio in which he creates them . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Girl With a Pearl Earring 's world premiere occurred at the Telluride Film Festival on 31 August 2003 . In North America it was distributed by Lions Gate Entertainment . The film was limited in release to seven cinemas on 12 December 2003 , landing in 32nd place for the week with $ 89 @,@ 472 . Lions Gate slowly increased its release to a peak of 402 cinemas by 6 February 2004 . Its total domestic gross was $ 11 @,@ 670 @,@ 971 . 
 The film was released in the United Kingdom on 16 January 2004 by Pathé Films . In its opening week , the film finished in tenth place with a total of £ 384 @,@ 498 from 106 cinemas . In the UK and Ireland , the film finished in fourteenth place for the year with a total box office gross of £ 3 @.@ 84 million . It garnered a total worldwide gross of $ 31 @,@ 466 @,@ 789 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In the US , the Girl With a Pearl Earring DVD was released on 4 May 2004 by Lions Gate . The Region 2 DVD 's release on 31 May 2004 included audio commentaries from Webber , Paterson , Hetreed , and Chevalier ; a featurette on " The Art of Filmmaking " ; and eight deleted scenes . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes calculated a 72 % approval rating based on reviews from 174 critics , with an average score of 6 @.@ 8 / 10 . The website reported the critical consensus as " ... visually arresting , but the story could be told with a bit more energy . " Critical reception of Girl With a Pearl Earring was mixed , with reviewers positively focusing on the film 's visuals and performances while questioning elements of its story . Historian Alex von Tunzelmann , writing for The Guardian , praised the film for its " ... sumptuous design and incredible <unk> appearance ... " but felt that " ... it 's a bit too much like watching paint dry . " In The Observer , Philip French referred to the film as " ... quiet , intelligent and well @-@ acted ... " and believed that " ... most people will be impressed by , and carry away in their mind 's eye , the film 's appearance ... [ Serra , van Os , and van Strallen ] have given the movie a self @-@ conscious beauty . " 
 The BBC 's review , written by Susan Hodgetts , described the film as " ... a superior British costume drama that expertly mixes art history with romantic fiction ... , " which would appeal to " ... anyone who likes serious , intelligent drama and gentle erotic tension . " Hodgetts said that both Firth and Johansson gave " excellent " performances who did " ... a grand job of expressing feelings and emotions without the use of much dialogue , and the picture is the better for it . " Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times called the film an " ... earnest , obvious melodrama with no soul , filled with the longing silences that come after a sigh . " Mitchell did however laud its cinematography , production design , and musical score , as did the Film Journal International 's Erica Abeel . Despite praising its visuals , Abeel criticized Girl with a Pearl Earring for being " ... a chick flick dressed up in Old Master clothes ... " and for failing " ... to render Griet 's growing artistic sensibility dramatically credible . " She cited its melodramatic villains as another failing , but concluded that it was " ... to Johansson 's credit that she alone pulls something plausible out of her character . " 
 Sandra Hall of The Sydney Morning Herald praised Webber 's ability to " ... build individual moments [ such as ] the crackle of a bedsheet which has grown an ice overcoat after being hung out to dry in the wintry air ... , " but opined that he failed to " ... invest these elegant reproductions of the art of the period with the emotional charge you 've been set up to expect . " Griet and Vermeer 's relationship , Hall wrote , lacked " ... the sense of two people breathing easily in one another 's company . " Owen Gleiberman , writing for Entertainment Weekly , remarked that Girl with a Pearl Earring " ... brings off something that few dramas about artists do . It gets you to see the world through new – which is to say , old – eyes . " Gleiberman added that while Johansson is silent for most of the film , " ... the interplay on her face of fear , ignorance , curiosity , and sex is intensely dramatic . " In Sight & Sound , David Jays wrote that " Johansson 's marvellous performance builds on the complex innocence of her screen presence ( Ghost World , Lost in Translation ) . " Jays concluded his review by praising Webber and Serra 's ability to " ... deftly deploy daylight , candle and shadow , denying our desire to see clearly just as Vermeer refuses to explicate the situations in his paintings . The film 's scenarios may be unsurprising , but Webber 's solemn evocation of art in a grey world gives his story an apt , unspoken gravity . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = ContactPoint = 
 ContactPoint was a government database that held information on all children under 18 in England . It was created in response to the abuse and death of eight @-@ year @-@ old Victoria Climbié in 2000 in England . Various agencies involved in her care had failed to prevent her death . ContactPoint aimed to improve child protection by improving the way information about children was shared between services . It was designed by Capgemini and previously had the working titles of Information Sharing Index ( or IS Index or ISI ) and the Children 's Index . 
 The database , created under the Children Act 2004 , cost £ <unk> to set up and £ 41m a year to run . It operated in 150 local authorities , and was accessible to at least 330 @,@ 000 users . The database was heavily criticised by a wide range of groups , mainly for privacy , security and child protection reasons . On 12 May 2010 the new UK Coalition Government announced plans to scrap ContactPoint and on 6 August 2010 the database was shut down . From that date the Children Act 2004 Information Database ( England ) Regulations 2007 , as amended in 2010 , no longer applies . 
 = = Development = = 
 In April 1999 , Victoria Climbié ( born 2 November 1991 in Abobo , Côte d 'Ivoire , died 25 February 2000 at St. Mary 's Hospital , London ) and her great aunt Marie @-@ Thérèse Kouao arrived in London , sent by her parents for a chance of an education . A few months later , Kouao met Carl Manning on a bus which he was driving , and she and Victoria moved into his flat . It was here that she was abused , including being beaten with hammers , bike chains , and wires ; being forced to sleep in a bin liner in the bath ; and being tied up for periods of over 24 hours . In the period leading up to her death , the police , the social services of many local authorities , the NHS , the NSPCC , and local churches all had contact with her , and noted the signs of abuse . However , in what the judge in the trial following Victoria 's death described as ' blinding incompetence ' , all failed to properly investigate the abuse and little action was taken . On 24 February 2000 , Victoria was admitted into an accident @-@ and @-@ emergency department , semi @-@ unconscious and suffering from hypothermia , multiple organ failure and malnutrition . She died the next day , aged eight . On 20 November 2000 , her guardians , Marie Thérèse Kouao and Carl Manning , were charged with child cruelty and murder ; on 12 January 2001 , both were found guilty , and sentenced to life imprisonment . 
 Victoria 's death led to a public inquiry , launched on 31 May 2001 and chaired by Herbert Laming , which investigated the role of the agencies involved in her care . The report , published on 28 January 2003 , found that the agencies involved in her care failed to protect her and that on at least 12 occasions , workers involved in her case could have prevented her death . The Laming report led to , amongst other things , the creation of the Every Child Matters programme , which consists of three green papers : Every Child Matters , published in September 2003 ; Every Child Matters : The Next Steps , published in early 2004 ; and Every Child Matters : Change for Children , published in November 2004 . The database proposals were announced in September 2003 , alongside the publication of Every Child Matters , and was being created under Section 12 of the Children Act 2004 . The idea of a child database , however , preceded the Laming report and was suggested in a report , Privacy and Data Sharing : The Way Forward for Public Services , by the Performance and Innovation Unit , published on 11 April 2002 – over a year before the Laming report – and was not related to child abuse . 
 = = Implementation and discontinuation = = 
 The pilot schemes ( designated as identification , referral and tracking ( IRT ) schemes ) began with Bolton council in 2003 and was used by eleven other local authorities . There were doubts as to the legality of Bolton council obtaining data of children from the local Primary Care Trust to put on the database , but the council was eventually advised that it was legal . The other pilot areas followed , in different ways . On 8 December 2005 , the Secretary of State for Education and Skills , Ruth Kelly , made the official announcement of the introduction of the database , confirmed by the Minister of State for Children , Young People and Families , Beverley Hughes . 
 To allow the introduction of the database , the government required all local authorities to implement the Integrated Children 's System , a framework to help improve outcomes for children . The government set a deadline of 1 January 2007 , and 92 out of the 150 local authorities failed to achieve this . The government began a consultation on the 2007 draft regulations on 21 September 2006 which ended on 14 December 2006 . In October 2006 , the government selected Capgemini to design the database . On 15 February 2007 , the database was renamed from Information Sharing Index to ContactPoint , following research with stakeholder groups , including children and families , who decided that the name ContactPoint made clear what the purpose of the database was : to improve communication between those working with children . A consultation on a guide for database users was launched on 4 May 2007 and ended on 27 July 2007 . 
 The database was expected to cost £ <unk> to set up , spread over three years beginning December 2005 ( therefore costing £ <unk> a year for the first three years ) , and £ 41m a year thereafter . The database , which would be operating in 150 local authorities and would be accessible by at least 330 @,@ 000 users , was expected to be fully operational by the end of 2008 ; however , following the 2007 UK child benefit data scandal , the deadline was pushed back for five months to allow a security review prior to implementation . Training for the workers had been planned begin in spring 2008 . 
 Following the 2010 General Election the new government scrapped the database as one of their measures ' to reverse the substantial erosion of civil liberties under the Labour Government and roll back state intrusion . ' A YouGov poll found that there was no consensus over whether this was the correct or wrong decision . 
 = = Use = = 
 The government said the database was set up to improve child protection by improving the way information about children was shared between services . Only professionals whose job involves supporting children would be able to access the database , and they would be required to undergo enhanced Criminal Records Bureau checks and training . Each local authority would decide who may access the database provided their role was listed in the ContactPoint Regulations . Users would need to provide a reason for accessing a record , and an audit trail would be kept on access to the database to help detect misuse . Professionals who have completed a Common Assessment Framework , a tool used to identify the severity of a child 's situation , would be able to record on a child 's record that they had carried this out . No information discovered in this way would be held on ContactPoint . Under the Data Protection Act , all organisations supplying data to the database would have to inform children and guardians through fair @-@ processing notices . Subjects of the database could make access requests , in writing , to view any personal data that organisations hold on them on the database and to correct any mistakes . The government estimated that the benefit of reducing unproductive work time using the database was valued at more than £ <unk> . 
 = = Content = = 
 The entries for each child were to consist of : 
 The database would not hold case or assessment material or any subjective observations . The database could include information of a ' sensitive ' nature , defined as issues relating to sexual health , mental health and substance abuse , although consent from the child or the child ’ s guardians would have been needed , and it would not have appeared as such on the database ; it would only note that the child was receiving help from ' sensitive services ' and would not say what this was . Refusal of consent could be overridden if this could be justified . Margaret Hodge , then children ’ s minister , had said that drug or alcohol use by parents , relatives and neighbours , together with other aspects of their behaviour , may be recorded . Government guidelines reveal that other information recorded may have included ' family routines ' , evidence of a ' <unk> @-@ ised / chaotic lifestyle ' , ' ways in which the family ’ s income was used ' , signs of mental illness or alcohol misuse by relatives , and ' any serious difficulties in the parents ’ relationship ' . 
 In August 2006 , the Department for Education and Skills ( DfES ) announced that the database would include telephone numbers or addresses of celebrities ' children . Records of children who may be at risk could be ' shielded ' ; this would be determined on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis . 
 The technical specification for ContactPoint did not include the capacity to store biometric data . 
 = = Coverage = = 
 The database would hold information on about 11 million children in England . Records would be kept until six years after the child turns 18 , or if they leave England and Wales with no intention of returning . The database could also apply to 18- to 25 @-@ year @-@ olds who were care leavers or had learning disabilities ( although the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child only applies to those under 18 in England and Wales ) , and their permission was needed . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 There were significant privacy concerns about the database . The Foundation for Information Policy Research produced a report in November 2006 , Children ’ s Databases – Privacy and Safety , saying the database guidelines ignored family values and privacy , and that the details on the database needs to be ' looked at carefully ' . The government responded by saying they had ' serious reservations about [ the ] report 's objectivity and evidence base ' . Terri Dowty , one of the report 's authors , replied , ' it 's an appalling <unk> to throw at some of the leading academics in this field . I 'm astonished they are challenging the evidence we used since much of the evidence in the report is from the Government itself . ' Action on Rights for Children said that the proposals invaded a child 's right to privacy given by the Convention on the Rights of the Child , while the Joint Committee on Human Rights said that the ' serious interference ' with the rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights – the right to respect for private life – seemed to be ' difficult to justify ' . Liberty , a civil liberties interest group , said governments should not interfere with family life , warning against complacency ' about the importance of privacy in a free society ' . The British Medical Association raised concerns that it may breach doctor – patient confidentiality . The phrase ' any cause for concern ' was criticised as being potential overly wide @-@ ranging and intrusive , and there were fears of function creep . A study by the Office of the Children 's Commissioner , ' I think it ’ s about trust ' : The views of young people on information sharing , found that children themselves were concerned about invasions of their privacy , and that they would be reluctant to use ' sensitive services ' if this would go on the database . 
 Commentators expressed concern about the country 's increasing surveillance . In August 2004 , the information commissioner , Richard Thomas , drawing a parallel with the way that governments in Eastern Europe and Spain gained too much power and information in the 20th century , expressed concern over this and other national databases , including the Citizen Information Project , NHS National Programme for IT , and the introduction of identity cards , warning that there was a danger of the country ' <unk> [ ing ] into a surveillance society ' . On 18 April 2006 , Des Browne , the Secretary of State for Defence , said ' the Department for Education and Skills should also consider whether there is scope to realise further efficiency and effectiveness benefits through a child population register ' , and it is thought that the database may be used in conjunction with the National Identity Register and other databases . Phil Booth , national coordinator of <unk> , a group opposing identity cards , said this was ' cradle @-@ to @-@ grave surveillance ' . Conservative Party member of parliament Oliver Heald said , ' there is already public concern at government plans for a compulsory identity card database , a nanny state children 's database and a property database for the council tax revaluation ' . Liz Davies of London Metropolitan University argued that ' ContactPoint , the new database for every child in the country , is in effect a population @-@ surveillance tool ' and that ' for five years , the system to prevent child abuse has been vanishing before our eyes ' . Fiona Nicholson of Education Otherwise , a home @-@ education support group , agreed with this assessment and said that ' frontline staff working to protect vulnerable children have also expressed disbelief that investing hundreds of millions in IT can be the best way to safeguard children ' . Laming , however , said that Davies ' assertion was a ' gross distortion of what is an intelligent application of technology aimed at ensuring every child benefits from the universal services ' . Privacy International awarded Hodge the 2004 Big Brother Award for ' Worst Public Servant ' , partly due to her backing of the database . 
 Security concerns about the database were significant , and commentators said that there was a large risk of abuse of the system . Evidence presented in 2006 to the management board of the Leeds NHS Trust showed that in one month the 14 @,@ 000 staff logged 70 @,@ 000 incidents of inappropriate access . Sex offenders targeting children might have used the database to find vulnerable victims . The celebrity exclusions were attacked , with critics saying that it underlined fears about security , and that government ministers could have decided to exclude their own children from the database . The proposals might have broken data protection and human rights laws . 
 Some had said that the database might lead to self @-@ fulfilling prophecies , where children from difficult backgrounds were treated as potential delinquents . The government was accused of using the public 's response to the death of Victoria Climbié to force through the unpopular proposal and to curb civil liberties . There were concerns that the database would undermine child protection and parents , weakening the power of parents to look after children , and would ' do more harm than good ' . The sheer size of the database could have meant that serious cases would be overlooked due to the abundance of minor incidents . There were doubts towards the government ’ s estimate of the cost of the database . The information commissioner estimates it at £ 1bn , which Hodge said was ' absurd ' , and others raised concerns over the cost , noting that government projects tend to go over @-@ budget . Some questioned children ’ s ability to give informed consent in their own right . Mary Marsh , chief executive of the NSPCC , wanted the database to cover the whole of the United Kingdom , not just England and Wales , saying ' the information held would be only partial and potentially worse than useless ' . On 27 June 2006 , a child protection conference , ' Children : Over <unk> , Under Protected ' , held at the London School of Economics , reached the conclusion that the database would do nothing to prevent child abuse , and that it would undermine parents ' ability to look after their children . 
 The government rejected most of the negative criticism . The DfES said that the database would only contain basic information and ' will certainly not be including any information on children 's diet or school attainment ' . Laming had said that information for every child needs to be kept so that they would not be at risk . The government denied any possibility of function creep . They rebutted the concerns over privacy , with a spokesman for the DfES saying ' we are conscious of the need to respect personal privacy ' . Hodge said that the database would be secure , that it would not undermine child protection and that it would help various agencies share information . Hughes said that the database would be secure and that ' we are confident we are doing all we could to ensure security ' . The government said that they were confident that the database complied with the Data Protection Act and the Human Rights Act . Paul Ennals , chief executive of the National Children 's Bureau , said , ' the index is a proportionate response to a continuing problem and any action that helps reduce the number of children who slip through the net must be welcome ' . 
 With the publication of the accreditation procedures for organisations to access ContactPoint , it became clear that the vast majority of voluntary organisations would not have been able to access ContactPoint . This meant that the majority of organisations that work with children or young people e.g. sports groups , uniformed groups and faith groups , would not be able to register their involvement , representing a real challenge for practitioners who wanted to see who as working with a particular child or young person . 
 = 1960 Texas tropical storm = 
 The 1960 Texas tropical storm brought severe but localized flooding to southeastern Texas in June 1960 . The first tropical cyclone and first tropical storm of the annual season , this system developed from an area of showers and thunderstorms in the Bay of Campeche on June 22 . Initially a tropical depression , it strengthened and was estimated to have reached tropical storm status on June 23 . Early on the following day , the storm peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Later that day , it made landfall near Corpus Christi , Texas , at the same intensity . The storm weakened slowly and moved across the Central United States , before dissipating over Illinois on June 29 . 
 In Texas , the storm dropped up to 29 @.@ 76 inches ( 756 mm ) of precipitation in Port Lavaca . Thus considerable flooding occurred in some areas of south and eastern Texas . Throughout the state , more than 150 houses sustained flood damage in several counties . In addition , numerous major highways were closed , including portions of U.S. Routes 59 , 87 , 90 , and then @-@ 185 , and Texas State Highways 35 and 71 . In Arkansas , a few buildings in Hot Springs were damaged from high winds . Flooding in that state resulted in three deaths from drowning . Light to moderate rainfall was recorded in at least 11 other states , though damage was minimal . The storm was the rainiest tropical cyclone on record in the state of Kentucky , dropping 11 @.@ 25 inches ( 286 mm ) in Dunmor . Overall , 18 fatalities were attributed to the storm and $ 3 @.@ 6 million ( 1960 USD ) in damage was reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late June 1960 , a large mass of deep convection developed in the Gulf of Mexico . A reconnaissance flight into the system on June 22 did not indicate a closed circulation . However , weather stations in Mexico reported a circulation and thus , it is estimated that the first tropical depression of the season developed at 0600 UTC on June 22 . Early on June 23 , barometric pressures in from Tampico , Tamaulipas to Brownsville , Texas had significantly decreased , which indicated that the tropical cyclone was moving generally northward . Shortly thereafter , another reconnaissance flight into the depression indicated winds of only 20 mph ( 30 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 006 mbar ( 29 @.@ 7 inHg ) . However , the plane may not have flown under the most intense convection . 
 The depression gradually strengthened , and by 1200 UTC on June 23 , it reached tropical storm status . Over Texas , airborne radars and the Dow Chemical Company radar in Freeport indicated curved convective banding associated with the storm . Though no wall cloud was reported , the Kelly Air Force Base reported a cloud center . Late on June 23 , the storm intensified slightly further , and peaked with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Early on June 24 , the tropical storm made landfall near Corpus Christi , Texas . After moving inland , the storm quickly weakened back to a tropical depression . Over the following 24 hours , the depression executed a small cyclonic loop over southern Texas . On July 26 , the depression accelerated to the north @-@ northeast , and eventually dissipated over northern Illinois on July 29 at 0000 UTC . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Texas = = = 
 Some towns in Texas considered it the worst disaster since a hurricane in 1945 . In Copano Bay , waves produced by the storm damaged three fishing piers ; a shrimp boat also capsized , killing three people . In addition , another ship was beached . However , the tides measured were only 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) above mean water levels . In Rockport , sustained winds reached 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and gusts were up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Padre Island Park also reported tropical storm force winds , with sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and gusts reaching 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . 
 Heavy rainfall was reported , peaking at 29 @.@ 76 inches ( 756 mm ) in Port Lavaca . As a result , water 6 to 12 inches ( 150 to 300 mm ) was reported in several homes and businesses in Port Lavaca . Two boys drowned in Port Lavaca after being swept by flood waters into the city harbor . Over 19 inches ( 480 mm ) fell in Bay City . It was reported by the Bay City Tribune that all of Matagorda County was " under water " . Due to large amounts of precipitation , portions of U.S. Routes 59 , 87 , 90 , and then @-@ 185 , and Texas State Highways 35 and 71 . Rainfall totals in the Houston area peaked at more than 17 inches ( 430 mm ) . At the height of the storm , about one @-@ fourth of the streets in Houston were flooded . Three subdivisions of the city were significantly affected by flooding : Alameda Plaza , Pleasantville , and Sunnyside . Many shingles were blown off the roof of a house , and then water caused the roof to collapse into the dining room and living room . However , no one was injured or killed . Several hundred people were evacuated from places with poor drainage or low @-@ lying areas . Between 150 and 200 houses were affected by flooding and damaged estimates reached $ 1 @.@ 5 million in Harris County alone . In addition , three people drowned in the flood waters in Houston . 
 Following the storm , the town of Port Lavaca requested aid from the United States Navy and Fourth United States Army . Later , cots and blankets were sent by helicopters and trucks . Three schools were opened as shelters for flood refugees in Port Lavaca . The Texas Department of State Health Services sent water and sanitation teams to the areas affected by the storm , as well as 3 @,@ 000 shots of typhoid vaccine . In addition , Calhoun County was declared a disaster area . Overall , the storm caused $ 3 @.@ 6 million and 15 fatalities in the state of Texas . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Elsewhere along the Gulf Coast of the United States , light to moderate rainfall was reported in the states of Mississippi and Louisiana . In both states , affects were minimal , and rainfall was generally less than 5 inches ( 130 mm ) . To the north of Texas in the state of Oklahoma , precipitation was also light , peaking at 4 @.@ 34 inches ( 110 mm ) in <unk> . The storm brought moderate to heavy rainfall throughout Arkansas . Much of the state reported at least 3 inches ( 76 mm ) , while precipitation in some areas was more than 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . The Ouachita River reached flood stage at Arkadelphia . Three children drowned near Redfield after the car they were occupying was swept off U.S. Route 65 and fell into a ditch . Near Hot Springs , high winds damaged a few buildings . In Tennessee , much of the state reported precipitation , though it was generally no more than 5 inches ( 130 mm ) . 
 Heavy rainfall was reported in Kentucky , peaking at 11 @.@ 25 inches ( 286 mm ) in Dunmor , making it the wettest tropical cyclone in the history of that state . Light precipitation was reported in Illinois , Indiana , and Missouri ; none of those states experienced more than 4 inches ( 100 mm ) of rain . The storm dropped rainfall was far north as Michigan and Wisconsin . In those two states , precipitation was generally light , and did not exceed 3 inches ( 76 mm ) . Rainfall totals reached 2 @.@ 83 inches ( 72 mm ) and 2 @.@ 28 inches ( 58 mm ) in Wisconsin and Michigan , respectively . 
 = Frank Sinatra Has a Cold = 
 " Frank Sinatra Has a Cold " is a profile of Frank Sinatra written by Gay Talese for the April 1966 issue of Esquire . The article is one of the most famous pieces of magazine journalism ever written and is often considered not only the greatest profile of Frank Sinatra but one of the greatest celebrity profiles ever written . The profile is one of the seminal works of New Journalism and is still widely read , discussed and studied . In the 70th anniversary issue of Esquire in October 2003 , the editors declared the piece the " Best Story Esquire Ever Published . " Vanity Fair called it " the greatest literary @-@ nonfiction story of the 20th century . " 
 = = Assignment = = 
 Talese had spent the first ten years of his career at The New York Times . He felt restricted by the limitations of newspaper writing and began searching for jobs with magazines . In 1965 , he signed a one @-@ year and six @-@ story contract with Esquire magazine . His first assignment from Esquire editor Harold Hayes was to write a profile of Frank Sinatra . It was a difficult assignment ; Sinatra had turned down interview requests from Esquire for years . 
 Sinatra was about to turn 50 and was heavily in the spotlight . Sinatra 's relationship with 20 @-@ year @-@ old Mia Farrow was constantly in the news . A CBS television documentary had upset Sinatra , who felt that his life was being pried into and was unhappy about speculation in the documentary about his connection to mafia leaders . He was also worried about his starring role in an upcoming NBC show named after his album , A Man and His Music and his various business ventures in real estate , his film company , his record label and an airline . At the time , Sinatra maintained a personal staff of 75 . 
 Sinatra refused to be interviewed for the profile . Rather than give up , Talese spent the three months , beginning in November 1965 , following Sinatra and observing everything he could and interviewing any members of his entourage who were willing to speak . Esquire paid nearly $ 5 @,@ 000 in expenses over the duration of the story . Talese vacillated on whether the story could be finished but ultimately concluded , in a letter to Harold Hayes , that " I may not get the piece we 'd hoped for — the real Frank Sinatra but perhaps , by not getting it — and by getting rejected constantly and by seeing his flunkies protecting his flanks — we will be getting close to the truth about the man . " Without Talese ever receiving Sinatra 's cooperation , the story was published in April 1966 . 
 = = Profile = = 
 The profile begins with Sinatra in a sullen mood at a private Hollywood club . Stressed about all the events in his life Sinatra and many of his staff are in a poor mood because Sinatra is afflicted by the common cold , hampering his ability to sing . 
 = = Influence on New Journalism = = 
 The article was an instant sensation . The journalist Michael Kinsley has said , " It 's hard to imagine a magazine article today having the kind of impact that [ this ] article and others had in those days in terms of everyone talking about it purely on the basis of the writing and the style . " 
 After Tom Wolfe popularized the term " New Journalism " in his 1973 anthology The New Journalism , Talese 's piece became widely studied and imitated . 
 The piece is often contrasted to modern magazine profiles in which the writers spend little time with their subjects or when writers fabricate elements of their story , such as Jayson Blair , Stephen Glass , or Janet Cooke . 
 Talese has come to reject the label of " New Journalism " for this reason . He told NPR : " The term new journalism became very fashionable on college campuses in the 1970s and some of its practitioners tended to be a little loose with the facts . And that 's where I wanted to part company . I came up with the New York Times as a copy boy and later on became a reporter and I so revered the traditions of the Times in being accurate . " 
 The story continues to receive acclaim and is cited by Talese as one of his best works . The story , which continues to be widely read , has been republished in multiple anthologies . 
 = Ewan McGregor = 
 Ewan Gordon McGregor , OBE ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born 31 March 1971 ) is a Scottish actor . His first professional role was in 1993 , when he won a leading role in the Channel 4 series Lipstick on Your Collar . He is best known for his roles as heroin addict Mark Renton in the drama Trainspotting ( 1996 ) , the young Jedi Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi in the Star Wars prequel trilogy ( 1999 – 2005 ) , poet Christian in the musical film Moulin Rouge ! ( 2001 ) , and Dr. Alfred Jones in the romantic comedy @-@ drama Salmon Fishing in the Yemen ( 2011 ) . 
 He received Golden Globe nominations for Best Actor – Musical or Comedy for both Moulin Rouge ! and Salmon Fishing in the Yemen . McGregor has also starred in theatre productions of Guys and Dolls ( 2005 – 07 ) and Othello ( 2007 – 08 ) . He was ranked No. 36 on Empire magazine 's " The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time " list in 1997 . In 2010 he won Best Actor for playing the title role in Roman Polanski 's film The Ghost Writer at the 23rd European Film Awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McGregor was born in Perth , Scotland and brought up in Crieff . His mother , Carol Diane ( née Lawson ) , is a retired teacher of Crieff High School and latterly deputy head teacher of <unk> School in Dundee . His father , James Charles Stewart " Jim " McGregor , is a retired physical education teacher and careers master of Morrison 's Academy , Crieff . He has an older brother , Colin ( b . 1969 ) , who is a former Tornado GR4 pilot in the Royal Air Force . He is the nephew of actor Denis Lawson ( who also appeared in the Star Wars franchise , as Rebel Alliance pilot Wedge Antilles ) and actress Sheila Gish , and the step @-@ cousin of actress Lou Gish on his mother 's side of the family . McGregor attended the independent Morrison 's Academy in Crieff . After leaving school , at the age of 16 , he worked as a stagehand at Perth Repertory Theatre and studied a foundation course in drama at Kirkcaldy College of Technology , before moving to London to study drama at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama when he was 18 years old . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 In 1993 , six months prior to his graduation from Guildhall , McGregor won a leading role in Dennis Potter 's six @-@ part Channel 4 series Lipstick on Your Collar . The same year , he starred in the BBC adaptation of Scarlet and Black with a young Rachel Weisz , and made his film debut in Bill Forsyth 's Being Human . In 1994 , McGregor performed in the thriller Shallow Grave , for which he won an Empire Award , and which marked his first collaboration with director Danny Boyle . His international breakthrough followed in 1996 with the role of heroin addict Mark Renton in Boyle 's Trainspotting , an adaptation of Irvine Welsh 's novel of the same name . 
 McGregor played the male romantic lead role in the 1998 British film Little Voice . In 1999 , McGregor starred in the blockbuster Star Wars : Episode I – The Phantom Menace as the young Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi , a role originally made famous by Sir Alec Guinness in the original Star Wars trilogy . His uncle , Denis Lawson , had played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy . In 2001 , he starred in Moulin Rouge ! as the young poet Christian , who falls in love with the terminally @-@ ill courtesan <unk> , played by Nicole Kidman . McGregor reprised his role of Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi for the subsequent prequel Star Wars : Episode II – Attack of the Clones in 2002 . In 2003 , he starred alongside Renée Zellweger in Down With Love . He also portrayed the younger Edward Bloom in the critically acclaimed film Big Fish alongside Albert Finney , Jessica Lange , Alison Lohman and Billy Crudup . During that year , he also received critical acclaim for his portrayal of an amoral drifter mixed up with murder in the drama Young Adam , which co @-@ starred Tilda Swinton . 
 In 2005 , McGregor appeared for the final time as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi in Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith . He took very special care — especially in Revenge of the Sith — to ensure that his portrayal of Obi @-@ Wan 's mannerisms , speech timings and accents closely resembled Alec Guinness ' version . That same year , McGregor voiced two successful animated features ; he played the robot Rodney <unk> in Robots , which also featured the voices of Halle Berry and Robin Williams , and he voiced the lead character in Gary Chapman 's Valiant , alongside Jim Broadbent , John Cleese and Ricky Gervais . Also in 2005 , McGregor played two roles — one a clone of the other — opposite Scarlett Johansson in Michael Bay 's science fiction action thriller film The Island . He also headlined Marc Forster 's 2005 film Stay , a psychological thriller co @-@ starring Naomi Watts and Ryan Gosling . 
 In 2006 , he narrated the <unk> production Astronaut , created for the National Space Centre . That same year , he also narrated the STV show <unk> , a six @-@ part series following the lives of trainee pilots and navigators at RAF Lossiemouth as they undergo a gruelling six @-@ month course learning to fly the Tornado GR4 , the RAF 's primary attack aircraft . In 2007 , McGregor starred opposite Colin Farrell in the Woody Allen film Cassandra 's Dream . In 2009 , he co @-@ starred with Jim Carrey in I Love You Phillip Morris and appeared in Amelia alongside Hilary Swank . Also in 2009 , he portrayed Camerlengo Patrick McKenna in Angels & Demons , the film adaptation of Dan Brown 's novel of the same name . McGregor is scheduled to co @-@ star with Daniel Craig in Dan Harris ' upcoming film adaptation of Glen Duncan 's novel I , Lucifer . At the 2011 Seattle International Film Festival , he was awarded with the SIFF Golden Space Needle Award for Outstanding Achievement in Acting . 
 In 2012 , he was named as a member of the Jury for the Main Competition at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival . At the San Sebastián International Film Festival , he was awarded the Donostia Lifetime Achievement Award and became the youngest recipient of the award . 
 In 2015 , he starred in the film <unk> , alongside Johnny Depp , Olivia Munn , and Paul Bettany . 
 On 21 April 2015 , it was announced that McGregor would play Lumiere in the live @-@ action version of Disney 's Beauty and the Beast , directed by Bill Condon . He joins a cast that includes Emma Watson ( Belle ) , Dan Stevens ( Beast / Prince ) , Luke Evans ( Gaston ) , Josh Gad ( <unk> ) , Ian McKellen ( Cogsworth ) , Emma Thompson ( Mrs. Potts ) , Kevin Kline ( Maurice ) and Audra McDonald ( <unk> ) . Filming began in May 2015 at Shepperton Studios in London . The film is scheduled to be released in March 2017 . 
 In 2017 , he will reprise his role as Mark Renton in T2 : Trainspotting 2 . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 From November 1998 to March 1999 , McGregor starred as Malcolm <unk> in a production of David Halliwell 's Little Malcolm and His Struggles Against the Eunuchs , directed by his uncle , Denis Lawson . The play was first staged at the Hampstead Theatre before transferring to the Comedy Theatre in London 's West End . In November 2001 , McGregor made a cameo appearance in The Play What I Wrote . 
 From June 2005 to April 2007 , McGregor starred alongside Jane Krakowski , Douglas Hodge and Jenna Russell in the original Donmar Warehouse production of Guys and Dolls at the Piccadilly Theatre in London . He played the leading role of Sky Masterson , made famous by Marlon Brando in the film of the same name . McGregor received the <unk> award for Best Actor for his performance in 2005 , and he was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor in a Musical in 2007 . 
 From December 2007 to February 2008 , McGregor starred as Iago in Othello at the Donmar Warehouse alongside Chiwetel Ejiofor as Othello and Kelly Reilly as Desdemona . He reprised the role on BBC Radio 3 in May 2008 . 
 = = <unk> journeys = = 
 A motorcyclist since his youth , McGregor undertook a marathon international motorbike trip with his best friend Charley Boorman and cameraman Claudio von <unk> in 2004 . From mid @-@ April to the end of July , they travelled from London to New York via central Europe , Ukraine , Kazakhstan , Mongolia , Siberia , Canada and the United States on BMW <unk> Adventure motorbikes , for a cumulative distance of 22 @,@ 345 miles ( 35 @,@ 960 km ) . The trip included visits to several UNICEF programs along the route , and formed the basis of a television series and a best @-@ selling book , both called Long Way Round . 
 The Long Way Round team reunited in 2007 for another motorcycle trip from John o ' Groats in Scotland to Cape Town in South Africa . The journey , entitled Long Way Down , lasted from 12 May until 5 August 2007 . McGregor 's brother Colin joined the motorcycle team during the early stages of the Long Way Down journey , and his father Jim also rode on sections of both Long Way Round and Long Way Down . 
 McGregor appeared in a two @-@ part BBC documentary in April 2012 entitled Ewan McGregor : Cold Chain Mission in which he travels by motorbike , boat , plane and foot to deliver vaccines to children in remote parts of India , Nepal and the Republic of Congo . The trip was part of his work as a UNICEF Ambassador . 
 In a June 2015 interview , McGregor indicated that a long discussed South American trip with Boorman was still in the planning stages , but he expected that an excursion through Baja California Peninsula would take place first . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McGregor has been married since 1995 to Eve <unk> , a French production designer , whom he met on the set of Kavanagh QC . They have four daughters : Clara Mathilde McGregor ( b . 1996 ) , Esther Rose McGregor ( b . 2001 ) , <unk> McGregor ( b . 2001 ) , and Anouk McGregor ( b . 2011 ) . In 2006 , McGregor and his wife adopted <unk> from Mongolia , where he spent time during the Long Way Round journey in 2004 . McGregor has a heart and dagger tattoo of the names of his wife and daughters on his right arm . The family currently resides in Los Angeles , California after moving from London . 
 McGregor is involved in charity work , including with UNICEF and GO Campaign . During the Long Way Round journey in 2004 , McGregor and his travelling companions saw some of UNICEF 's work in Ukraine , Kazakhstan and Mongolia , and during the Long Way Down trip in 2007 , he and Charley Boorman did work for UNICEF in Africa . McGregor hosted the annual Hollywood gala for GO Campaign in 2009 and 2010 . He has also worked with the Children 's Hospice Association Scotland , as featured in Long Way Down . In 2012 , McGregor travelled with UNICEF immunisation workers to remote parts of India , Nepal and the Republic of Congo for a BBC2 documentary entitled Ewan McGregor : Cold Chain Mission . 
 In June 2015 , McGregor read Hans Christian Andersen 's " The Little Match Girl " for the children 's fairytales app <unk> in aid of UNICEF , together with Roger Moore , Stephen Fry , Joan Collins , Joanna Lumley , Michael Caine , David Walliams , Charlotte Rampling and Paul McKenna . 
 In 2007 , on an episode of Parkinson , McGregor stated that he had given up alcohol after a period where he was arguably a functioning alcoholic , and that he had not had a drink in seven years . In 2008 , he had a cancerous mole removed from underneath his right eye . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Theatre = = 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 McGregor was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to drama and charity . 
 = = Discography = = 
 " Choose Life " with PF Project , Trainspotting # 2 : Music from the Motion Picture , Vol . # 2 , 1997 . 
 " TV Eye " with Wylde <unk> , Velvet Goldmine : Music from the Original Motion Picture , 1999 . 
 " Come What May " with Nicole Kidman , Moulin Rouge ! Music from Baz Luhrmann 's Film , 2001 . 
 " Elephant Love Medley " with Nicole Kidman , Moulin Rouge ! Music from Baz Luhrmann 's Film , 2001 . 
 " El Tango de Roxanne " with Jose Feliciano , Moulin Rouge ! Music from Baz Luhrmann 's Film , 2001 . 
 " Your Song " with Alessandro Safina , Moulin Rouge ! Music from Baz Luhrmann 's Film , 2001 . 
 " Here 's To Love " with Renée Zellweger , Down With Love : Music from and Included in the Motion Picture , 2003 . 
 " The Sweetest Gift " , Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars , 2006 . 
 = Gilbert Foliot = 
 Gilbert Foliot ( c . 1110 – 18 February 1187 ) was a medieval English monk and prelate , successively Abbot of Gloucester , Bishop of Hereford and Bishop of London . Born to an ecclesiastical family , he became a monk at Cluny Abbey in France at about the age of twenty . After holding two posts as prior in the Cluniac order he was appointed Abbot of Gloucester Abbey in 1139 , a promotion influenced by his kinsman Miles of Gloucester . During his tenure as abbot he acquired additional land for the abbey , and may have helped to fabricate some charters — legal deeds attesting property ownership — to gain advantage in a dispute with the Archbishops of York . Although Foliot recognised Stephen as the King of England , he may have also sympathised with the Empress Matilda 's claim to the throne . He joined Matilda 's supporters after her forces captured Stephen , and continued to write letters in support of Matilda even after Stephen 's release . 
 Foliot accompanied Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , to a papal council at Reims in 1148 . During his time there he was appointed to the Diocese of Hereford by Pope Eugene III . Despite a promise made in Reims not to recognise Stephen , Foliot on his return to England nevertheless swore fealty to the king , causing a temporary rift in his relationship with Henry of Anjou , Matilda 's son , who eventually became King Henry II of England in 1154 . When Theobald died in 1160 , it was widely assumed that he would be replaced by Foliot , but King Henry nominated his Chancellor , Thomas Becket , instead . Foliot later claimed to have opposed this appointment , and supported Henry during the king 's dispute with the new archbishop . Foliot was translated , or moved , to the Diocese of London in 1163 , perhaps as consolation for not receiving Canterbury . 
 During the great dispute between Becket and the king , Foliot was reviled by Becket and his supporters . He acted as an envoy for the king on a number of diplomatic missions related to this dispute and wrote a number of letters against Becket which were circulated widely in Europe . Becket excommunicated Foliot on two occasions , the second of which precipitated the archbishop 's martyrdom . For a short period following Becket 's death the papacy kept Foliot excommunicate , but he was quickly absolved and allowed to resume his episcopal functions . In addition to his role in the Becket controversy , Foliot often served as a royal judge , and was an active administrator and bishop in his different dioceses . He was a prolific letter writer , and some of his correspondence was collected after his death . He also wrote sermons and biblical commentaries , two of which are extant . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Foliot was probably the son of Robert Foliot — steward to David , Earl of Huntingdon , heir to the Scottish throne — and Robert 's wife Agnes , sister of Robert de Chesney , Bishop of Lincoln . Whatever his parentage , Gilbert was certainly Robert de Chesney 's nephew ; another of his uncles , Reginald , was a monk of Gloucester Abbey and Abbot of Evesham Abbey . Other ecclesiastics in his family included Robert Foliot , a later Bishop of Hereford perhaps from an Oxford branch of the family , and two earlier Bishops of London , Richard de Beaumis the elder and Richard de Beaumis the younger , Gilbert also referred to Richard of Ilchester , later Bishop of Winchester , as a kinsman , but the exact relationship is unknown . William de Chesney , a partisan of Stephen 's and a leading Oxfordshire layman , was another of Foliot 's uncles , and Miles of Gloucester , Earl of Hereford , was a cousin . In about 1145 Foliot intervened to secure the release of a knight to whom he was related , Roger Foliot , but their precise relationship is unknown . 
 Born about 1110 , Foliot became a monk of Cluny , probably in about 1130 . He became Prior of Cluny Abbey , then Prior of Abbeville , a Cluniac house . There are some indications that he studied law at Bologna , and he may have studied under Robert Pullen , the English theologian , either at Oxford or Exeter . He also acquired a knowledge of rhetoric as well as the liberal arts . The names of two of his early teachers are known , but nothing else of them . Foliot also learned biblical exegesis , probably from Pullen . 
 Foliot attended the Second Lateran Council , called by Pope Innocent II . It opened on 4 April 1139 , and among other matters heard an appeal from the Empress Matilda concerning her claim to the throne of England . Matilda was the daughter and only surviving legitimate child of King Henry I , but following her father 's death in late 1135 her cousin Stephen , the son of Henry 's sister , had seized the crown . By 1139 Matilda had gathered supporters and was contesting Stephen 's right to the throne . 
 In about 1143 Foliot wrote an account of the proceedings of the council in a letter to one of Matilda 's supporters . No action was taken on her claim , and no conclusion was reached as to its validity . The papacy continued to accept Stephen as king , and the pope ordered the English Church to make no changes to the status quo . According to Foliot 's letter the council 's deliberations centred on the legitimacy of the marriage between Matilda 's parents . Matilda 's mother , Edith @-@ Matilda , had been educated at a convent , and there was some uncertainty over whether she had taken vows before her marriage to Henry I. At the time of the council , the question caused some concern , although in time most were persuaded that the marriage was valid because Anselm of Canterbury had performed the ceremony . Foliot seems to have had some doubts in 1139 , but before writing his letter of 1143 he had come to believe that Matilda was indeed the legitimate heiress , and he supported the Angevin cause , as Matilda 's claim was known . 
 = = Abbot = = 
 In 1139 Foliot was elected Abbot of Gloucester , blessed by the diocesan bishop on 11 June 1139 . The appointment had been pushed through by Foliot 's relative , Miles of Gloucester , who was by then the Earl of Hereford . Foliot was well connected at court in other respects , for his probable father had been steward to David I , before David became King of Scotland . David was the uncle of both the Empress and Stephen 's wife . Following his elevation to abbot Foliot recognised Stephen as king , although he seems until then to have supported Matilda . 
 King Stephen was captured by Matilda 's forces on 2 February 1141 , and Matilda called a council at Westminster to gather support for her assuming the throne . Foliot attended the council and was one of her main supporters in the following months as the Angevin cause tried to place her on the throne . 
 It was during his time as abbot that Foliot wrote his reply to Brien FitzCount , one of Matilda 's earliest supporters , discussing the Second Council of the Lateran 's deliberations on Matilda 's cause . FitzCount , in a letter now lost , had presented his reasons for supporting Matilda , and Foliot 's reply set forth a defence of Matilda 's claim to the throne . Foliot also wrote that Stephen had " dishonoured the episcopate " with his behaviour in 1139 , when the king arrested Roger of Salisbury , the Bishop of Salisbury , and Roger 's nephew , Alexander , who was Bishop of Lincoln , as well as attempting to arrest another of Roger 's nephews , Nigel , Bishop of Ely . After the arrest Stephen forced the bishops to surrender their castles and secular government offices . Most historians see Foliot 's letter as firmly supporting Matilda 's cause , although one of King Stephen 's recent biographers , Donald Matthew , claims that Foliot 's support was lukewarm at best , motivated by the location of his abbey in one of Matilda 's strongholds . Matthew points out that Gloucester Abbey owed no military service in a feudal levy , which allowed Foliot to avoid choosing sides irrevocably . Matthew also points out that after 1141 Foliot is a signatory to just one of Matilda 's charters . Foliot did though address Robert of Gloucester 's defence of Matilda 's rights , buttressing it with arguments of his own . Robert had argued that the Bible supported female succession , and quoted from Numbers , chapter 36 , which allowed women to inherit , but prohibited them marrying outside their tribe . In his reply Foliot claimed that Robert had actually used Numbers , chapter 27 , which had no restrictions on the marriage of heiresses . 
 During his time as abbot Foliot became friendly with Aelred of Rievaulx , a writer and later saint , who dedicated a book of sermons to him . Another friend and ally from his abbacy was Theobald of Bec , the Archbishop of Canterbury , who during Stephen 's reign was attempting to unite the English Church under his leadership . Foliot helped Theobald by forming a communication link to Matilda 's side . 
 Foliot took an interest in the Dorset monastery of Cerne Abbey , which in 1145 received the Prior of Gloucester Abbey , Bernard , as abbot . Bernard was an active reformer , and Foliot supported Bernard 's efforts , but the monks objected to the new abbot , and drove him out of the monastery . Both abbot and monks appealed to the papacy , which supported the abbot . Although Matilda wrote to Foliot , and interceded on behalf of the monks , Foliot pointed out that he was unable to disobey a papal command . 
 While abbot , Foliot supervised the acquisition of a dependent priory in the city of Hereford for the monastery . Most of the abbey buildings predate Foliot 's time as abbot , and there is no sure evidence of any buildings he added to the monastery . During his abbacy , a dispute that had dragged on between Gloucester and the Archdiocese of York over some manors was finally settled in Gloucester 's favour . This was done with a group of forged charters that Foliot may have helped to create . Forging charters was a common practice in English monasteries of the time . Foliot also had disputes with the Welsh bishop Uhtred , Bishop of Llandaff , over <unk> Priory and a church in Llancarfan , concerning tithes and new chapels that had been built without Gloucester Abbey 's permission . 
 = = Bishop of Hereford = = 
 In early 1148 , Foliot accompanied Theobald of Bec to the Council of Reims , even though the archbishop had been forbidden to attend by King Stephen ; Foliot was presumably with Theobald when the archbishop used a small fishing boat in his escape from England to the continent . Robert de Bethune , the Bishop of Hereford , died at the Council of Reims , and Foliot was nominated by Pope Eugene III to fill the Diocese of Hereford , which was held by the Angevin cause . Theobald was behind the appointment , having urged it on the pope . It appears likely that before his consecration Foliot gave assurances that he would not swear fealty to Stephen . He was consecrated Bishop of Hereford on 5 September 1148 at Saint @-@ Omer by Archbishop Theobald . The other English bishops present at Reims — Hilary of Chichester and Josceline de Bohon — refused to help with the consecration , claiming it was contrary to custom for an English bishop to be consecrated outside England . Another of the bishops ' concerns was that the pope had infringed Stephen 's right to a say in the election . After his consecration Foliot swore fealty to Henry of Anjou , the son of the Empress and the new head of the Angevin party . 
 Foliot switched his allegiance on his return to England and swore fealty to Stephen , angering the Angevins . Theobald managed to secure peace between the parties , saying that Foliot could not refuse to swear homage " to the prince approved by the papacy " . Foliot also attempted to hold Hereford in plurality , or at the same time , with the abbey of Gloucester , but the monks of Gloucester objected . Rather than accept a situation like that of Henry of Blois , who held the Diocese of Winchester as well as being Abbot of Glastonbury , the monks of Gloucester held an election three weeks after Foliot 's selection as bishop , and chose their prior as the new abbot . 
 Foliot supported his uncle Robert de Chesney 's nomination to become Bishop of Lincoln , lobbying the pope on Robert 's behalf , and maintaining a long correspondence with Robert after his elevation . The letters to this uncle are full of warm sentiments , more than would be expected of a dutiful correspondence . Other episcopal correspondents and friends included Roger de Pont L 'Évêque , the Archbishop of York , Josceline de Bohon , the Bishop of Salisbury , and William de Turbeville , the Bishop of Norwich , who became a regular correspondent after Foliot was translated to London . 
 During the later part of Stephen 's reign Foliot was active in judicial affairs , including a case in 1150 involving sanctuary and his kinsman Roger , the Earl of Hereford , which ended up in the court of Archbishop Theobald . Foliot 's participation in legal affairs led him in 1153 to employ a clerk specialising in Roman law . 
 After Henry of Anjou 's accession to the throne of England as Henry II in 1154 , Foliot persuaded the Earl of Hereford to submit to the new king 's demand that he return the custody of certain royal castles to the king . In the summer of 1160 , Foliot wrote to Pope Alexander III , whom the king had just recognised as pope instead of Alexander 's rival , Victor IV , intimating that the canonisation of King Edward the Confessor , which had been delayed by Alexander 's predecessor Innocent II , might be warranted as a reward for Henry 's recognition of Alexander . 
 The art historian Hans J. <unk> claims that Foliot began the construction of the Bishop 's Chapel at Hereford Cathedral . <unk> contends that the architectural style of the chapel ( which was destroyed in 1737 ) resembled that of the German imperial chapels , and was deliberately chosen by Foliot to demonstrate his loyalty to King Henry . However most sources credit Robert of Hereford , bishop from 1079 to 1095 , as the builder of the chapel . 
 When Theobald died in 1160 , most observers believed that Foliot was the leading candidate to become archbishop of Canterbury . Traditionally , the see of Canterbury had been held by a monk , at least since the replacement of Stigand by Lanfranc in 1070 . Although Foliot was a Cluniac monk , they were a subset of the Benedictine Order and thus the cathedral chapter at Canterbury , which was Benedictine but not Cluniac , would have had no objections to him on that score . Foliot denied that he ever lobbied for the office , but John of Salisbury and Thomas Becket apparently believed that Foliot desired it . 
 = = Bishop of London = = 
 Foliot was Becket 's rival for the Archbishopric of Canterbury . He objected to the king 's choice on the grounds that Becket was too worldly , the only bishop or magnate known to have opposed the king 's choice . When the newly elected archbishop was presented to the court before his consecration , Foliot remarked that the king had performed a miracle by turning a layman and a knight into an archbishop . Soon after Becket 's consecration the king wrote to the pope asking for permission to make Foliot the royal confessor . This may have been a conciliatory move to appease Foliot after the loss of Canterbury , or it may have been that the king and the new archbishop were already having differences of opinion and the king wished Foliot to be a counter @-@ weight to Becket 's influence . 
 After Becket 's election as archbishop , Foliot was nominated to the Diocese of London , to which he was translated on 6 March 1163 . His nomination had been put forward by the king , who wrote to the pope stating that Foliot would be more accessible as an adviser and confessor if he was in London , rather than in Hereford on the Welsh Marches . Becket wrote to Foliot urging him to accept the translation . His transfer was confirmed by Pope Alexander III on 19 March 1163 and Foliot was enthroned at London on 28 April 1163 . Papal confirmation was required because the movement of bishops from one see to another was still frowned on at this time . The medieval chronicler Ralph de Diceto , who was a canon at London , states that the cathedral chapter at St Paul 's Cathedral , London , the cathedral of the London diocese , approved of Foliot 's selection . Becket was unable to attend Foliot 's enthronement , and Foliot did not make a profession of obedience to the archbishop , arguing that he had already sworn an oath to Canterbury when he became Bishop of Hereford , and thus no further oath was required . The issue was sent to the papacy , but the pope refused to be pinned down to an answer . Foliot then attempted to make London independent of Canterbury by reviving Pope Gregory I 's old plan for an archbishopric at London . Foliot proposed either to have London raised to an archdiocese along with Canterbury , or to have London replace Canterbury as the archiepiscopal seat for the southern province . Foliot did though support Becket in the latter 's attempt to prevent the Archbishop of York having his archiepiscopal cross borne in procession before him when visiting the province of Canterbury . 
 By 1166 , Foliot had been presented with a petition for annulment of the marriage of Aubrey de Vere , the Earl of Oxford , and Agnes of Essex . On the couple 's third appearance before the bishop in his episcopal court on 9 May 1166 , Countess Agnes appealed to the pope to affirm the validity of her marriage . Foliot enclosed her appeal in his own surviving letter setting out the salient features of the case . While the case was under papal consideration , Foliot reprimanded the earl for his treatment of his wife , reminding him that until the pope had ruled otherwise , Agnes was to be considered his wife in bed and board . When Pope Alexander III wrote to the bishop concerning the countess 's maltreatment , and requiring Foliot to threaten the earl with excommunication , he also chastised the bishop for his handling of the case . 
 = = Henry 's conflict with Becket = = 
 The king and Becket began quarrelling in July 1163 , at first over financial matters and then over the marriage of Henry 's younger brother to an heiress , which Becket forbade . The true spark to the quarrel was the matter of clergy who committed crimes , who the king wished to have prosecuted in secular courts ; the archbishop refused , arguing that all clergy must be tried in church courts , even if the crime was non @-@ ecclesiastical . At the Council of Westminster called by Henry in October 1163 to deal with the issue , Foliot at first sided with the other bishops , who supported Becket 's position and opposed the king . However , after the council was dismissed , Foliot became the leader of those bishops who changed sides in support of the king . In December , Becket capitulated to the king . 
 In January 1164 the king summoned a council at Clarendon . The bishops were asked to approve the Constitutions of Clarendon , which proposed restrictions on the powers of the Church and limits to papal authority in England ; Becket 's refusal led to the great dispute between king and archbishop , into which Foliot and his fellow bishops were inevitably drawn . When Becket appeared before the court with his archiepiscopal cross borne before him , a studied insult to the king , Foliot told the archbishop that " If the king were to brandish his sword , as you now brandish yours , what hope can there be of peace between you ? " The king refused to see Becket , and negotiations between the two camps soon revealed that Becket had ordered the bishops to refuse to pass judgement on him and threatened them with suspension from ecclesiastical office if they did . Becket also threatened to appeal the case to the papacy . Both of these actions by the archbishop breached the Constitutions of Clarendon . During the subsequent back and forth between the bishops and the king , as well as the bishops and the archbishop , Foliot was asked by one of his fellow bishops to try and persuade Becket to modify his behaviour . Foliot replied that Becket " was always a fool and always will be " . 
 After the bishops refused to pass judgment , the barons attempted to do so , but Becket refused to hear the court and left the council without the king 's permission . Soon afterward , Foliot , along with Hilary of Chichester , went to Becket and suggested a compromise , which Becket refused . Becket went into exile after this last attempt at a settlement , and arrived in Flanders on 2 November 1164 . Foliot was sent , along with Roger , the Archbishop of York , Hilary of Chichester , Bartholomew Iscanus , the Bishop of Exeter , Roger of Worcester , the Bishop of Worcester , William d 'Aubigny , the Earl of Arundel , and a group of royal clerks , to Thierry the Count of Flanders , Louis VII the King of France , and Pope Alexander III . Their mission was to prevent the archbishop from being given refuge , but despite their efforts Louis of France agreed to grant Becket refuge . Foliot 's delegation met with more success at the papal court ; although they did not succeed in securing a decision in the king 's favour , neither did the pope side with the archbishop . 
 = = Becket 's exile = = 
 During Becket 's exile Foliot collected and sent to Rome Peter 's Pence , the annual payment from England to the papacy . Foliot observed during the conflict that it was not a theological or moral dispute , merely one over church government . During Becket 's exile , the king confiscated the archbishop 's estates , and also confiscated the benefices of the clerks who had followed Becket into exile . Foliot was made custodian of those benefices in the diocese of Canterbury . Becket blamed both Foliot and Roger of York for the confiscations , but evidence appears to show that the confiscations were Henry 's decision , and that Foliot , at least , was a conscientious custodian who made sure that little profit went to the king , and most of the revenues from the benefices went to religious purposes . 
 In early summer 1165 , Pope Alexander III wrote twice to Foliot , ordering him to intercede with the king and protest the royal injunction against appeals to the papacy . Foliot replied that the king respected the pope , heard his protests carefully , and that the archbishop had not been expelled , but had left of his own accord . Foliot wrote that the king had said Becket was free to return at any time , but would still have to answer to the charges he had faced at Northampton . Foliot then advised the pope not to impose any sentences of excommunication and to be patient and continue to negotiate . In 1166 , Foliot accused Becket of simony , or the purchase of church offices , basing this on the alleged purchase Becket had made of the chancellorship , although there is no evidence that Becket bought the office . By 1166 , the king had made Foliot the head of the English Church , in fact if not in law . The king and Foliot got along well , and it was probably Foliot 's influence that kept the king from more violent measures against Becket . 
 On 10 June 1166 , Becket excommunicated a number of his opponents , some specifically by name , as well as any who opposed his cause . Henry 's response was to order the English bishops to appeal to the pope , which they did at a council that Foliot organised and led in London on 24 June . The appeal was written by Foliot , and a separate letter from the bishops , also written by Foliot , was sent to the archbishop . The bishops rested their case on the fact that those excommunicated had not been warned or allowed to defend themselves . They pointed out to the pope that the king had not escalated the conflict and had behaved reasonably to the last papal overtures in the summer of 1165 . Becket replied to these moves with a letter written to Foliot that was full of resentment and reproaches . Foliot 's reply , in a letter that is usually titled <unk> nobis , set forth his view of Becket 's abilities as archbishop as well as giving reasons why Becket was wrong . He then suggested that the archbishop compromise and exercise some humility in order to reach his goals . By the end of 1166 , Foliot managed to resign his custody of the confiscated Canterbury benefices , something he had been attempting to do for some time , thus removing one source of conflict between him and Becket . 
 In November 1167 Foliot was summoned to Normandy , then ruled by Henry II , to meet with papal legates and the king . Roger of York , Hilary of Chichester , and Roger of Worcester were also summoned to attend . After some discussion and argument , Henry appears to have agreed that the legates could judge both the king 's case against Becket as well as the bishops ' case . Henry also offered a compromise on the subject of the Constitutions of Clarendon , that the legates accepted . However , when the legates met with Becket on 18 November , it quickly became apparent that Becket would not accept negotiations with the king nor accept the legates as judges of either case against him . As the legates had no mandate to compel Becket to accept them as judges , the negotiations came to an end with the king and bishops still appealing to the papacy . 
 On 13 April 1169 , Becket excommunicated Foliot , along with Hugh , Earl of Norfolk , Josceline de Bohun , and seven royal officials . Becket did this even though none of them had been warned , and despite the fact that the pope had asked that Becket not make any such sentences until after a pending embassy to King Henry had ended . Becket also warned a number of others that unless they made amends to him , they too would be excommunicated on 29 May , Ascension Day . In his excommunication , Becket called Foliot " that wolf in sheep 's clothing " . Although Foliot tried to enlist the help of his fellow bishops in an appeal , they were less than helpful . Foliot then prepared to appeal his sentence to the pope in person , and travelled to Normandy in late June or early July , where he met the king , but proceeded no further towards Rome , as the papacy was attempting once more to secure a negotiated settlement . In late August and early September serious but ultimately fruitless negotiations took place between the king and the archbishop . 
 Foliot then proceeded to Rome , but at Milan he received word that his envoy at the papal court had secured the right for him to be absolved by Rotrou , Archbishop of Rouen . Foliot then returned to Rouen , where he was absolved on 5 April and reinstated in his see on 1 May . The only requirement of this absolution was that Foliot accept a penance to be imposed by the pope . Much of Foliot 's objections to Becket 's excommunication stemmed from the lack of warning that Foliot and the others had received , contrary to the customary and normal procedures . Becket and his supporters pointed out that there were some situations in which it was possible to excommunicate without warning , but Foliot claimed that the present situation was not one of them . According to Foliot , Becket 's habit was " to condemn first , judge second " . Foliot 's example of appealing excommunications to the papacy was an important step in the setting up of an appeal process for excommunication during the 12th century . 
 = = Death of Becket and aftermath = = 
 On 14 June 1170 , Henry 's son , Henry the Young King , was crowned King of England by the Archbishop of York , which infringed on the right of Becket as Archbishop of Canterbury to crown English monarchs . Although there is no definitive evidence that Foliot assisted in the coronation , it appears likely that he did so . The coronation drove the pope to allow Becket to lay an interdict , or decree prohibiting church rites , on England as punishment , and the threat of an interdict forced Henry to negotiate with Becket in July 1170 . Becket and the king came to terms on 22 July 1170 , allowing the archbishop to return to England , which he did in early December . However , shortly before he landed in England , he excommunicated Roger of York , Josceline of Salisbury , and Foliot . One possible reason for the excommunications was that the three ecclesiastics had electors from the various vacant bishoprics with them , and were escorting those electors to the king on the continent in order to reward a number of royal clerks with the long vacant bishoprics . Included among those royal clerks were some of Becket 's most bitter foes during his exile . Although Becket offered to absolve Josceline and Foliot , he argued that only the pope could absolve Roger , as he was an archbishop . Roger persuaded the other two to appeal to the king , then in Normandy . When they did so , the royal anger at the timing of the excommunications was such that it led to Henry uttering the question often attributed to him " Will no one rid me of the turbulent priest " . This inspired four knights to set off from the king 's court in Normandy to Canterbury , where on 29 December 1170 , they murdered Becket . 
 After Becket 's death his sentences of excommunication were confirmed , as well as the suspensions from ecclesiastical office . The pope in his confirmation referred to Roger of York , Foliot , and Josceline of Salisbury , as the " Gilbertine trinity " . The excommunication was absolved for Foliot on 1 August 1171 , but he remained suspended from office . He secured his restoration to office on 1 May 1172 , after clearing himself of any involvement in Becket 's murder . The king performed a public act of penance on 12 July 1174 at Canterbury , when he publicly confessed his sins , and then allowed each bishop present , including Foliot , to give him five blows from a rod , then each of the 80 monks of Canterbury Cathedral gave the king three blows . The king then offered gifts to Becket 's shrine and spent a vigil at Becket 's tomb . 
 Foliot and Becket seem to have been on amicable terms until 1163 , but their relationship seems to have soured after that date . Becket accused Foliot in 1167 with : " your aim has all along been to effect the downfall of the Church and ourself " . After the pope absolved Foliot 's excommunication in early 1170 , Becket exclaimed to a cardinal that " Satan is <unk> for the destruction of the Church " . A modern biographer of Becket , the historian Frank Barlow , feels that one reason for Becket 's change in behaviour after his election as archbishop was due to his need to " out @-@ bishop " the other bishops , and prevent Foliot from making any more jibes about his inadequacies as an ecclesiastic . 
 Foliot was mainly a force for moderation in the quarrel between the king and the archbishop , urging restraint on Becket and curbing the king 's attempts to impose the Constitutions more rigorously . Foliot 's rhetoric against the archbishop was pointed and effective . Foliot also developed the novel legal filing of ad <unk> , which was an appeal to the papacy against any future action by the archbishop . Although Foliot 's tactic of ad <unk> was ridiculed by his opponents , the papacy did not challenge the technique . 
 During his time as bishop Foliot served for many years as a papal judge @-@ delegate , especially in his later years . He was active in both of his dioceses in supporting his cathedral chapters and other religious houses of the dioceses . He kept in constant contact with his archdeacons and deans about the administration of the dioceses . He also gathered about himself a group of clerks who compiled a collection of <unk> known as the Belvoir collection . This collection mainly relates to Foliot 's activities at London , and probably dates to before 1175 . 
 = = Writings = = 
 Foliot was well known as a letter writer , and his letters were later collected as a book . The main manuscript for this collection , now held at the Bodleian Library , is supposed to have originated in Foliot 's own writing office . About 250 to 300 examples of Foliot 's letters have survived , which together with his surviving charters gives a total of almost 500 items . The collection was printed in a modern edition edited by Adrian Morey and Christopher N. L. Brooke and published by the Cambridge University Press in 1967 , under the title of The Letters and Charters of Gilbert Foliot . Some of the letters have appeared in volumes five through eight of Materials for the History of Thomas Becket , from the Rolls Series , published from 1875 – 1885 . Older editions appeared in the <unk> ecclesiae Anglicanae series from the 1840s , and in Migne 's <unk> from 1854 . The letters cover most of the period of Foliot 's public life , and are one of the main sources for the history of that period . The historian David Knowles said of the collection that " owing to its wealth of personal and local detail [ it ] is of the greatest value for the church historian " . According to Knowles , Foliot 's letters paint a picture of an active bishop and ecclesiastical leader who supported the Gregorian church reforms but did not meddle in politics beyond those of the church . His letters are typical of the educated letter writer of his time , refined and polished to an art form . 
 Foliot also wrote a number of sermons and commentaries on the Bible . Of the commentaries , only those on the Song of Songs and the Lord 's Prayer still survive . The commentary on the Song of Songs was first printed in 1638 , by Patrick Young , and again in the Patrologia Latina volume 202 . The commentary on the Lord 's Prayer was first published by David Bell in 1989 . The commentary on the Song of Songs has been printed three times , the last in the middle of the 20th century . About 60 of his acta , or decisions , as Bishop of Hereford still survive , and from his time at London a further 150 or so are extant . A contemporary , Peter , the prior of Holy Trinity Priory in Aldgate , London , heard Foliot preach a sermon at a synod , and praised the sermon as " adorned with flowers of words and sentences and supported by a copious array of authorities . It ran backwards and forwards on its path from its starting @-@ point back to the same starting point . " The sermon so inspired Peter that he wrote a work entitled <unk> , which dealt with the <unk> method of exegesis , which was developing around this time . All of Foliot 's surviving theological works are based on exegesis , and may include nine sermons on the subject of Saints Peter and Paul , which were dedicated to Aelred of <unk> . These sermons are dedicated to a " Gilbert , Bishop of London " , which could mean either Foliot or an earlier bishop , Gilbert Universalis . However , the historian Richard Sharpe feels that the fact that the sermons are paired with a group of Aelred 's sermons dedicated to Foliot makes their authorship by Foliot slightly more likely . These sermons survive in manuscript , now in the British Library as Royal 2 <unk> , but have not yet been printed . A further group of sermons which were dedicated to Haimo , the abbot of Bordesley , did not survive , but is known from the surviving dedication letter . 
 The antiquarian John Bale in the 1550s listed six works of Foliot known to him , five of which were letters . The sixth work known to Bale was the commentary on the Song of Songs , which survived in a single manuscript , now in the Bodleian Library . Young also recorded a <unk> Ecclesiae as being by Foliot . The scholar John Pits gave much the same list in 1619 , adding one work , a Vitas <unk> sanctorum Angliae , <unk> <unk> , but this work never appears in a medieval book catalogue and has not survived under this name so it is unclear if Foliot wrote such a work . The antiquary Thomas Tanner , writing in the early 18th century , listed Foliot as the author of the seven works given by Bale and Pits , adding an eighth , the Tractatus Gilberti , episcopi London : Super <unk> " <unk> <unk> <unk> " , citing John Leland , the 16th @-@ century antiquary , as his source . This apparently is the collection of nine sermons on Saints Peter and Paul that has yet to be published and is still in manuscript at the Bodleian Library . Leland also listed another work by Foliot , the <unk> <unk> , episcopi <unk> , which he stated was held at Forde Abbey . This work , since lost , might have been the sermons mentioned above , or could have been a known collection of homilies , also lost . It is also possible that another Gilbert was the author . Lastly , Walter Map recorded that Foliot had begun work on a " the Old and the New Law " shortly before his death . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Foliot died on 18 February 1187 . The medieval chronicler Walter Map praised him as " a man most accomplished in the three languages , Latin , French and English , and eloquent and clear in each of them " . The modern historian Frank Barlow says of him that " It was probably because he was so self @-@ righteous that it could be suggested that his behaviour was sometimes devious . " He went blind some time during the 1180s , but continued to work on his biblical writings . 
 Foliot sent his nephew Richard Foliot and another clerk of his household to Bologna to study law in the 1160s , exemplifying the growing emphasis laid on Roman law among his countrymen . Another nephew was Ralph Foliot , Archdeacon of Hereford and a royal justice during the reign of Richard I. During his time at both dioceses , he did much to promote his relatives , and all of the archdeacons he appointed while at London were either nephews or other relatives . A member of his household at Hereford was the scholar Roger of Hereford , who dedicated his computus , or treatise on calculating dates , to Foliot . Another work , the <unk> in <unk> , was dedicated to him by a writer named Odo while Foliot was still a prior in France . 
 = Pseudocolus fusiformis = 
 Pseudocolus fusiformis is a stinkhorn mushroom in the Phallaceae , a family well known for a remarkable range of fruit body types . It is the most widely distributed member of the genus Pseudocolus and has been found in the United States , Australia , Japan , Java , and the Philippines . It is commonly known as the stinky squid , because of its fetid odor , and its three or four upright " arms " which are connected at the top . The malodorous smell comes from the dark greenish slimy gleba covering the inside faces of the arms , and attracts insects that help to disperse the spores . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first appearance of this species in the literature was in 1890 , under the name Colus fusiformis , when Eduard Fischer wrote a description based on a painting he found in the Paris Museum of Natural History . In his 1944 monograph on the Gasteromycetes of Australia and New Zealand , Gordon Herriot Cunningham considered this naming to be a nomen nudum — not published with an adequate description . However , it was valid under the rules of the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature . In 1899 Penzig described the species Colus javanicus based on a single specimen found on Java , and a year later Fischer amended the name of his original Colus fusiformis to Colus javanicus , as he was not satisfied with the quality of his original description . Despite his doubts on the validity of his description , his original naming is both legitimate and has priority over C. javanicus . 
 In 1907 , Curtis Gates Lloyd described the new genus Pseudocolus , and reduced several species to synonyms of Pseudocolus fusiformis . The first North American description of this species ( as Colus schellenbergiae ) was in 1916 by David Ross <unk> ; Johnson later ( 1929 ) transferred this to <unk> schellenbergiae . Although Cunningham ( 1931 ) revised the genus Anthurus to include members of Pseudocolus , Dring in 1973 considered the genera to be distinct . Up until the appearance of an extensive study published in 1980 , 13 different binomials had been used in the literature to name the species . Index Fungorum lists the following synonyms of P. fusiformis : 
 Colus fusiformis E.Fisch. ( 1891 ) 
 Colus elegans <unk> . ( 1842 ) 
 Anthurus rothae ( <unk> ex E.Fisch. ) E.Fisch. ( 1893 ) 
 Colus rothae <unk> ex E.Fisch. ( 1893 ) 
 Pseudocolus rothae ( E.Fisch. ) Yasuda ( 1916 ) 
 Colus javanicus Penz . ( 1899 ) 
 Pseudocolus javanicus ( Penz . ) Lloyd ( 1907 ) 
 Anthurus javanicus ( Penz . ) <unk> ( 1931 ) 
 Pseudocolus rothae Lloyd ( 1907 ) 
 Colus rothae ( Lloyd ) <unk> . & <unk> ( 1910 ) 
 Colus schellenbergiae <unk> . ( 1916 ) 
 Pseudocolus schellenbergiae ( <unk> . ) <unk> ( 1929 ) 
 = = Description = = 
 Immature fruiting bodies resemble egg- or pear @-@ shaped puffballs , grayish @-@ brown to pale gray in color , with dimensions of 0 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) diameter ; the top surface is broken into small regions by cracks or crevices ( areolate ) . As the fungus matures , the fruiting body cracks open and forms a stalk with tapering arms , a volva , and a spore mass known as a gleba . 
 The mature fruiting body is typically 3 to 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) in height , with arms that are 2 – 5 times the length of the stipe . The stipe itself does not extend past the volva , and is hollow , thin @-@ walled , chambered , wrinkled , and flares towards the upper end . The color of the stipe is white or grayish @-@ white ; it is 1 to 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 4 in ) in height , and 0 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) thick at the widest diameter . The three or four arms extending from the stipe average 3 @.@ 6 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) in length ( ranging from 1 to 13 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 5 @.@ 1 in ) , and wrinkled on the side bearing the gleba . The arms , which are joined at the top , are shaped like a lance ( lanceolate ) , pointed towards the apex ; they are orange @-@ colored . The internal structure of the arms is made of chambers ; one large chamber towards the outside , and typically three smaller chambers on the inside of the arm . The gleba is commonly found on the upper two @-@ thirds of the inside surface of the arms , and is dark green and slimy . The fetid odor of the gleba , described by one author as comparable to " fresh pig manure " , attracts insects that help to disperse the spores . 
 The spores are elliptical or ovoid , smooth , translucent ( hyaline ) , with dimensions of 4 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 by 2 – 2 @.@ 5 µm . The basidia , the spore @-@ bearing cells , are attached to 6 – 8 sessile spores . 
 = = = Edibility = = = 
 Although not considered poisonous , P. fusiformis is not recommended for consumption . Some related species such as Phallus impudicus or Mutinus caninus are considered to be edible ( or even delicacies ) in the immature egg stage ; however , the foul smell of stinkhorns at maturity would likely deter most individuals from eating them . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The stinkhorn species Clathrus columnatus somewhat resembles P. fusiformis in that it has 3 or 4 arms that extend upwards and join at the top . However , unlike C. columnatus , the arms of P. fusiformis share a common stem , and the immature egg @-@ form is gray or grayish brown , rather than white . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This species grows scattered or in groups on disturbed soil in coniferous or mixed forests . It is also found growing on wood chips used as mulch in gardens or for landscaping ; Blanton has also reported it growing in a garden " solitary and very large " . 
 Pseudocolus fusiformis has been collected from a variety of locations worldwide , including Australia , Japan , Java , the Philippines , Reunion Island , the United States , and Turkey . In the continental United States , it was first collected in Pittsburgh in 1915 ; since then it has been found in Alabama , Connecticut , Georgia , ( South Carolina ) Louisiana , Florida , Massachusetts , New Jersey , New York , North Carolina , Rhode Island , and Tennessee ; it has also been found in Hawaii . It is thought to have been introduced to North America from southeast Asia . 
 = December 14 , 1998 Albanian – Yugoslav border ambush = 
 On December 14 , 1998 the Yugoslav Army ( VJ ) ambushed a group of 140 Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) militants attempting to smuggle weapons and supplies from their base in Albania into the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . A five @-@ hour battle ensued , ending with the deaths of 36 militants and the capture of a further nine . Dozens more fled back to Albania , abandoning large quantities of weapons and supplies , which were subsequently seized by the Yugoslav authorities . The ambush was the most serious war @-@ related incident in Kosovo since a <unk> truce took effect two months before . It came on the heels of increasing tensions in the province , where inter @-@ ethnic violence had been escalating steadily since early 1996 . 
 Within hours , suspected KLA gunmen attacked a Serb @-@ owned café in Peć , killing six unarmed Serb youths . Western diplomats suspected the attack was carried out in retaliation for the ambush , though the KLA denied responsibility . Several days after , Yugoslav authorities handed over the bodies of all but three of the fallen militants to the KLA following mediation by the International Committee of the Red Cross . The militants were given heroes ' funerals in a rebel @-@ held area , in a ceremony attended by thousands of ethnic Albanians , including other KLA fighters . In January 1999 , the KLA abducted eight VJ personnel , who were later exchanged for the nine militants captured in the ambush . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1989 , Belgrade abolished self @-@ rule in Serbia 's two autonomous provinces , Vojvodina and Kosovo . Kosovo , a province inhabited predominantly by ethnic Albanians , was of great historical and cultural significance to Serbs . Prior to the mid @-@ 19th century they had formed a majority in the province , but by 1990 represented only about 10 percent of the population . Alarmed by their dwindling numbers , the province 's Serbs began to fear that they were being " squeezed out " by the Albanians , with whom ethnic tensions had been brewing since the early 1980s . As soon as Kosovo 's autonomy was abolished , a minority government run by Serbs and Montenegrins was appointed by Serbian President Slobodan Milošević to oversee the province , enforced by thousands of heavily armed paramilitaries from Serbia @-@ proper . Albanian culture was systematically repressed and hundreds of thousands of Albanians working in state @-@ owned companies lost their jobs . 
 In 1996 , a ragtag group of Albanian nationalists calling themselves the Kosovo Liberation Army ( KLA ) began attacking the Yugoslav Army ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Vojska Jugoslavije ; VJ ) and the Serbian Ministry of Internal Affairs ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Ministarstvo unutrašnjih poslova ; MUP ) in Kosovo . Their goal was to separate the province from the rest of Yugoslavia , which following the secession of Slovenia , Croatia , Macedonia and Bosnia @-@ Herzegovina in 1991 – 92 , was just a rump federation consisting of Serbia and Montenegro . At first the KLA carried out hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks ( 31 in 1996 , 55 in 1997 , and 66 in January and February 1998 alone ) . The group quickly gained popularity among young Kosovo Albanians . Many of whom favoured an aggressive approach and rejected the idea of non @-@ violent resistance advocated by the politician Ibrahim Rugova . The organization received a significant boost in 1997 when an armed uprising in neighbouring Albania led to thousands of weapons from the Albanian Army 's depots being looted . Many of these weapons ended up in the hands of the KLA which already had substantial resources due its involvement in the trafficking of drugs , weapons and people , or through donations from the Albanian diaspora . The group 's popularity skyrocketed after the VJ and MUP attacked the compound of KLA leader Adem Jashari , in March 1998 , killing him , his closest associates and most of his family . The attack motivated thousands of young Kosovo Albanians to join the ranks of the KLA , fueling the Kosovar uprising that eventually erupted in the spring of 1998 . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 The Kosovo conflict escalated over the summer of 1998 . The KLA increasingly took to smuggling weapons and supplies from Albania across the border into Kosovo . In September , Yugoslav officials stated that 90 militants had been killed while attempting to illegally cross the border since January of that year . The Yugoslav Defense Ministry reported that 947 rifles , 161 light machine guns , 33 mortars , 55 mines , 3 @,@ 295 hand grenades , and almost 350 @,@ 000 rounds of ammunition had been confiscated by the VJ and Yugoslav border guards in the same period . 
 In October 1998 , Milošević and the U.S. envoy Richard Holbrooke reached an agreement to temporarily end the fighting , whereby Yugoslavia would halve the amount of troops and police personnel it had stationed in Kosovo . The agreement came after Holbrooke convinced the KLA to consider negotiations with Belgrade while making it clear to Milošević that failing to find a peaceful solution to the conflict would lead to a NATO bombing campaign against Serbia . The agreement stipulated that Yugoslavia had to let Kosovo Verification Mission ( KVM ) observers enter Kosovo to ensure that the Yugoslavs was abiding by their commitment to withdraw thousands of soldier and police officers from the province . Small @-@ scale clashes continued , and by December , over 1 @,@ 000 people had been killed and more than 300 @,@ 000 displaced in the fighting . 
 = = = Clashes = = = 
 At around 02 : 00 on the morning of Monday , December 14 , 1998 , 140 KLA militants tried to illegally cross the Albanian – Yugoslav border between the outposts of <unk> and <unk> , about 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) west of Pristina . They were coming from a base inside Albania , where they had been training . The subsequent ambush occurred near the village of <unk> , just west of Prizren . The militants had been trying to illegally smuggle weapons , ammunition and supplies to be used by KLA fighters in Kosovo . A member of the KVM told reporters that the militants encountered a Yugoslav sentry post and were attacked by the guards . One of the militants was killed instantly , and the column started retreating back into Albania . As the militants turned back , they were ambushed and another 25 were killed . The bodies of five other militants were soon discovered not far from the site of the ambush , raising the KLA casualty figure to 31 . Fighting between the militants and the border guards continued for about five hours . Gunfire and explosions could reportedly be heard in three nearby villages . By 07 : 00 , a total of 36 militants had been killed , twelve were wounded and a further nine were captured . The militants who were not killed or captured either managed to flee back to Albania or were hiding along the border , according to a KVM monitor . The Yugoslavs reported they had suffered no casualties , and stated that large quantities of " modern weapons " , ammunition and supplies had been seized . 
 The VJ allowed a team of KVM observers to view the bodies and photograph and record the names of the prisoners . Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe ( OSCE ) observers were also escorted to the site , and reported seeing 31 bodies in camouflage uniforms with KLA insignia . They identified one woman among the dead , and the KVM stated that another woman was among those that had been captured . A KVM monitor told reporters : " Our initial feelings are that this was a normal military operation ... [ and ] not a set @-@ up . " The reported figure of 36 dead made the ambush the single deadliest war @-@ related incident in Kosovo since the truce took effect two months earlier . Eight KLA fighters had been killed near the site of the ambush just eleven days prior . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 According to Albanian journalists , villages near the site of the ambush remained sealed off by Yugoslav forces for the remainder of the day . Within hours of the ambush , the KLA vowed revenge . That evening , suspected KLA gunmen entered a Serb @-@ owned café in Peć and opened fire on the patrons , killing six Serb youths . Western diplomats suspected that the attack was carried out by the KLA in retribution for the ambush . The KLA denied responsibility ; the journalist Tim Judah suggests that the attack may have been carried out by a rogue unit . The shooting appalled foreign emissaries , and at a meeting with Milošević the following day , Holbrooke condemned it as an act of terrorism and described the situation in Kosovo as " very grave " . Milošević issued a separate statement accusing the international community of failing to prevent attacks on Serb civilians , stating : " The terrorist gangs have not ceased attacking the army , the police , and inhabitants of Kosovo . " 
 The VJ continued pursuing remnants of the rebel group for most of December 15 , and foreign reporters noted shelling near the site of the ambush through much of the day . After mediation by the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) , Yugoslav authorities handed the bodies of 33 militants over to the KLA for burial . The militants were given heroes ' funerals in the rebel @-@ held village of <unk> , on a field dubbed the " Tomb of Heroes " , about 61 kilometres ( 38 mi ) northwest of Pristina . The funerals were attended by several thousand Albanians , including about 500 militants . 
 The KLA militants captured in the ambush were initially taken to a jail in Prizren , and later transported to a military prison in Niš . On January 8 , 1999 , the KLA ambushed a convoy carrying rations to VJ personnel stationed in Kosovska Mitrovica , taking eight Yugoslav soldiers hostage . U.S. officials negotiated the soldiers ' release five days later . In return , on January 23 , Yugoslav authorities freed the nine militants that had been captured in the ambush . Almost simultaneously , the KLA released five elderly Serb civilians that it had taken hostage two days earlier . Yugoslav officials insisted that the two events were not linked . Earlier , the KLA 's taking of civilian hostages had drawn condemnation from Western diplomats , including the head of the KVM , William Walker , who told reporters : " ... I think it was a very unwise and uncivilized thing for them to do to kidnap civilians . " Upon being released , the militants alleged that they were mistreated and beaten while in custody , and vowed to avenge the deaths of their fellow fighters . 
 = Pond Eddy Bridge = 
 The Pond Eddy Bridge is a petit truss bridge spanning the Delaware River between the hamlet of Pond Eddy in Lumberland , New York and the settlement informally called Pond Eddy in Shohola Township , Pennsylvania . It is accessible from NY 97 in Lumberland on the New York side and two dead @-@ end local roads , Flagstone Road ( State Route 1011 ) and Rosa Road on the Pennsylvania side . The bridge was built in 1903 by the Oswego Bridge Company to replace an old suspension bridge that had washed away in a flood earlier in the year . It connected the bluestone quarries in Pennsylvania to New York . 
 The bridge remained intact for many years and , in 1963 , it was rededicated as the All Veterans Memorial Bridge by two local veterans groups . In 1998 , it was nominated for the U.S. National Register of Historic Places for its engineering significance ; it is also listed in the New York State Register of Historic Places . 
 Over the years , the bridge 's condition has deteriorated , weakening its retaining strength . The National Bridge Inventory Survey categorizes its condition as " Structurally Deficient " and " Basically intolerable requiring high priority of replacement " . In 2005 , the town of Narrowsburg passed a resolution calling on the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation ( PennDOT ) to replace the bridge . There has also been a local movement to save the bridge . The bluestone quarries are no longer active , but the bridge still serves as the only access to 26 homes on the Pennsylvania side and the only access those residents have to emergency services . Because of the state of the bridge , planning for its replacement began in 1999 ; full construction to replace the bridge is scheduled to begin in 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = The 1870 suspension bridge = = = 
 Settlement around Pond Eddy was triggered by the Delaware and Hudson Canal , which was constructed in the 1820s . The Erie Railroad , on the Pennsylvania side , also contributed to the community 's growth . After Pond Eddy continued to grow in both states , local officials decided a bridge should be erected to connect the two communities . The new bridge would make it easier to ship bluestone , slate and lumber via the railroad . In 1870 , a new bridge was funded with taxpayer 's money and the Town of Lumberland in New York helped build the new Pond Eddy Bridge . The new bridge was a wire @-@ rope suspension bridge , similar to those used by John Augustus Roebling . James D. Decker , then the Sullivan County sheriff and former Lumberland town supervisor was hired to supervise the construction of the bridge . He lived so close to the bridge site that it was soon nicknamed " Decker 's Bridge " . When finished , the new bridge was 521 feet ( 159 m ) long and 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide , enough to hold the anticipated traffic . It stood 31 feet ( 9 @.@ 4 m ) above the water , higher than most bridges on the Delaware . 
 Historians believe that from the beginning of the bridge 's life , it was toll @-@ free for Lumberland residents . Eventually the town leased the bridge out to private individuals , who collected tolls indiscriminately . During times when bridge could not be leased , the town retained control . The tollhouse was later removed and sold . It is now a home . Originally , the settlement of Pond Eddy on the Pennsylvania side was named Flagstone , but changed to its current name upon construction . Both Pond Eddys expanded rapidly . A new railroad station was created in Pond Eddy on the Pennsylvania side . The riverfront location on the New York side had two stores , a Methodist church , a telegraph office , eighteen homes and a new hotel with a restaurant . The hotel had new owners around the time of the bridge and eventually became a large stop for travelers . The Pond Eddy Bridge served the town of Lumberland well in the late 19th century , but the area 's prosperity did not last . The canal went out of business in 1898 , after years of competition from railroads . The Erie station on the Pennsylvania had no roads to go anywhere , and the community began to decline . Decker died at 77 years old in 1900 , having lived long enough to experience the rise and fall of Pond Eddy . 
 = = = The 1903 petit truss bridge = = = 
 In 1903 , the " floods of the century " struck the Delaware River Valley . Two storms of massive strength , including one from the Great Lakes converged in New Jersey , Pennsylvania and New York on October 9 , causing massive flooding . The Riverside Hotel received little damage , but homes and businesses were damaged heavily as well as the railroad . The 1870 bridge was destroyed in the storm . Lumberland hired the Oswego Bridge Company to build a replacement for $ 28 @,@ 900 ( $ 761 @,@ 000 in contemporary dollars ) . The company built the current two @-@ span , one @-@ lane steel structure . 
 The lumber industries and stone mines on both sides of the river were eventually exhausted and closed . Tourists coming up the river from Port Jervis became the mainstay of the local economy . During the next two decades , seasonal homes and hotels were built in Pond Eddy . 
 During the 1920s , the Joint Bridge Commission in Pennsylvania and New York started buying up the tolled bridges along the Delaware . The town of Lumberland offered the Pond Eddy bridge to the Commission , but was refused . The bridge , according to the Commission , was already toll @-@ free and adequately maintained . However , the town was eager to get rid of the responsibility to maintain the two @-@ decade old structure , and continued to try . Finally in 1926 , the Lumberland town supervisor , a friend of Pennsylvania Governor Gifford Pinchot , offered the commission the bridge for $ 1 ; around the same time , the commission paid $ 55 @,@ 000 ( $ 735 @,@ 000 in 2016 dollars ) for the Narrowsburg – Darbytown Bridge . The Joint Commission became the owner of both bridges . Since then the bridge 's history has been virtually uneventful , surviving the flooding during the remains of Hurricane Diane in 1955 with little damage . 
 = = Replacement plans = = 
 In 2005 , the community of Narrowsburg , New York , several miles upstream , requested that Pennsylvania Department of Transportation replace the 102 @-@ year @-@ old structure . It had already had its weight limits reduced . The same year , an engineering firm in Millburn , New Jersey reported replacing the bridge would cost about $ 6 @.@ 16 million , while keeping it would cost even more and raise its life expectancy by no more than 15 years . The Upper Delaware Council said that the 8 ton ( 7 @.@ 2 tonne ) limit on the bridge was inadequate for service trucks and emergency vehicles . The Shohola Township supervisors support maintaining the existing bridge , but the Lumberland Town Board was not convinced that it would be sufficient . 
 More proposals were made in 2007 . Replacing the bridge would cost $ 7 – 8 million and take two years to complete . Rehabilitation would require bringing the bridge up to code so it could carry loads of up to 40 tons ( 36 tonnes ) . A preservation group formed to oppose a replacement . Its founder compared the bridge to the <unk> Ferry Bridge on the Pennsylvania – New Jersey border , which carries similar traffic loads . One possibility is to replace the bridge , and move the antique structure elsewhere in Sullivan County , since it is a popular tourist attraction . In June 2008 , a compromise was made defining the possibility of a $ 12 million bridge to replace the 104 @-@ year @-@ old deteriorating structure . PennDOT has suggested that they will let anyone preserve the bridge by taking it somewhere else . However , there has been no response , and plans for the new bridge were initially scheduled to begin by 2010 . 
 PennDOT has recently begun the Route 1011 @-@ Pond Eddy Bridge Replacement Project . Route 1011 is the internal designation for Flagstone Road , one of the two side roads in Pennsylvania along with the bridge . The state has proposed a four @-@ span bridge with three connecting bridge piers , with four side options : replacing the bridge upstream , buying out the 26 residences on the Pennsylvania side , rehabilitating the structure to handle weights of 16 @-@ 18 tons or maintain the bridge in its current form . Depending on which project is chosen , the estimated start would be in 2013 , when the structure reaches its 110th year in use . The entire project would cost $ 8 @.@ 5 @-@ 11 million . Opponents of demolishing the bridge hope that that they can find a place to move the bridge , which would cost $ 500 @,@ 000 , and have the new owners maintain it . 
 On December 17 , 2010 , PennDOT 's District 4 <unk> the bridge 's weight limit to four tons due to deterioration on the bridge . PennDOT will also front $ 350 @,@ 000 – $ 500 @,@ 000 to replace 70 planks on the bridge , which will then restore the weight back to seven tons . Signage has already adjusted for the demotion by both PennDOT and Sullivan County . Replacement began on April 18 , 2011 of 64 stringer beams and on May 25 , the project was completed , less than a month ahead of schedule . The seven @-@ ton weight limit was also restored as a result of the completed construction . The cost of the project totaled out to $ 493 @,@ 000 ( 2011 USD ) . 
 Officials from the state of New York stopped the replacement project in 2012 due to concerns of the local preservationist group , Save the Pond Eddy Bridge , which complained that the $ 12 million ( 2012 USD ) project would only serve twelve families in Shohola Township and was a waste of taxpayer funding . The new bridge , which would have a weight limit of 40 tons and 32 feet ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) wide , caused New York State Department of Transportation to work with PennDOT to redesign the bridge . In May 2013 , a deal was reached between all agencies , developing a new bridge that would be 22 feet ( 6 @.@ 7 m ) wide , with a single lane and sidewalk . The new bridge also got approval from the Federal Highway Administration despite the critics who thought it would be cheaper to build a road in Shohola Township side , which would be about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) of new road . The new bridge would look similar to the original structure and would cost about $ 9 million ( 2013 USD ) to construct . The 15 @-@ month project however would require the Delaware River to have the waters below rerouted for the construction . 
 On July 14 , 2014 , PennDOT announced that they were opening bids on selling the Pond Eddy Bridge for people who wish to reassemble to use it as a bridge within the next ten years . The agency also sent out invitations for all municipalities in Lackawanna , Luzerne , Pike , Susquehanna , Wayne and Wyoming counties . 
 = Jack Coggins = 
 Jack Banham Coggins ( July 10 , 1911 – January 30 , 2006 ) was an artist , author , and illustrator . He is known in the United States for his oil paintings , which focused predominantly on marine subjects . He is also known for his books on space travel , which were both authored and illustrated by Coggins . Besides his own works , Coggins also provided illustrations for advertisements and magazine covers and articles . 
 During World War II , he served as an artist and correspondent for YANK magazine , capturing and conveying wartime scenes from the front lines . Over the course of his career , Coggins produced more than 1 @,@ 000 paintings and taught art classes for 45 years . He retired in May 2001 and died at his home in Pennsylvania in January 2006 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Coggins was born in London , England on July 10 , 1911 , the only child of Ethel May ( née Dobby ) and Sydney George Coggins . Sydney Coggins was Regimental Corporal Major of the First Regiment of Life Guards , the part of the Household Cavalry responsible for guarding the British Monarch ; Jack Coggins was born in his father 's barracks . During World War I , Sydney Coggins served with , and was commissioned by the regiment . After the war , he was appointed regimental Riding Master , but he was retired when the 1st and 2nd Life Guards were amalgamated into a single regiment under the Geddes Axe . A fellow officer , married to an American steel heiress , offered Sydney work as a secretary to his wife , and the Coggins family emigrated to Long Island , New York in 1923 . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 While his father served with the Life Guards Regiment in France during World War I , Coggins and his mother lived with family in Folkestone , Kent . He attended the Imperial Service College , a public school preferred by army families . After moving to New York , Coggins enrolled at Roslyn High School in Roslyn Heights where he found difficulty in adjusting to the difference between military school in England and New York city public school . After graduation from Roslyn in 1928 at age 17 , he enrolled in the New York City Grand Central School of Art and studied under Edmund <unk> , George Pearse Ennis , and Wayman Adams . In the early years , he painted advertising signs to support himself . With a grounding in fine art techniques , Coggins graduated to the Art Students League of New York , where he studied from 1933 to 1934 under noted artist Frank DuMond . 
 = = = Marriage and later life = = = 
 While a member of the faculty of Hunter College in New York , Coggins met Alma Wood , a fashion and photographic model . They married in 1948 and moved to Pike Township , Berks County , Pennsylvania , where Coggins had bought an old farm . Alma named their home " <unk> , " which , according to Jack , meant absolutely nothing . 
 Coggins taught his wife to paint , and she had success as an artist in her own right under the name Alma Woods . The couple would hold annual joint exhibitions for many years . Alma Coggins assisted her husband in the planning , research and typing of many of his books , and he acknowledged her efforts with book dedications to her . 
 Coggins taught art classes at the Wyomissing Institute of the Arts from 1957 until 2001 , despite being handicapped by the loss of his left eye due to infection after an operation . 
 Coggins was a signature member and Master <unk> of the Pastel Society of America , a Fellow of the American Society of Marine Artists , a member of the American Ordnance Association , the U.S. Naval Institute , and an adviser to the boards of the Philadelphia Maritime Museum and the Reading Public Museum . He died at his home in Berks County , Pennsylvania at the age of 94 and willed his body to medical science . Alma Wood @-@ Coggins died March 4 , 2007 . Jack and Alma Coggins had no children and were survived by several nieces and nephews . 
 = = Illustrator , author and artist = = 
 = = = Military illustrations of World War II = = = 
 Coggins 's interest in sailing and maritime subjects began in London when he would sail model yachts on Round Pond in Kensington Gardens . This interest developed into a lifelong passion during his teens when he sailed small craft on Hempstead Harbor , near his new home on Long Island . During the early years of World War II , Coggins took a sampling of his war illustrations to Worthen Paxton , the art director of LIFE Magazine , who commissioned Coggins to produce a drawing of an imaginary coastal invasion of England . Coggins was paid $ 250 for that work , a large sum at the time , which paid his rent for five months . Appearing on July 15 , 1940 , this was the first of many war time illustrations for LIFE . Some of Coggins 's works are in the Anne S. K. Brown Military Collection . 
 During the early 1940s , Coggins obtained more work producing war pictures for other magazines , including a series of double @-@ page spreads for the controversial newspaper PM , and illustrations for The Saturday Evening Post . Throughout the war years , most of the output of many large corporations was reserved for materiel production ; however , management were keen to promote their connection to the war effort and keep their name before the buying public until they could resume peacetime sales . Coggins received advertising commissions from such corporations including Elco , Koppers , US Steel , and Westinghouse . He also received commissions from the U.S. War Department for aircraft recognition charts , and he was intrigued to later find these charts used during his army basic training . 
 Because of the quality of his maritime illustrations , Coggins was invited by publisher Doubleday to provide artwork for a children 's book about the U.S. Navy ; the author being Fletcher Pratt , the well known military historian . Coggins was invited to participate in Pratt 's Naval Game , based on a wargame developed by Fred T. Jane involving dozens of tiny wooden ships , built on a scale of one inch to fifty feet . These were spread over the floor of Pratt 's apartment and their maneuvers were calculated via a complex mathematical formula . The result of Pratt and Coggins 's first collaboration , published in 1941 , was Fighting Ships of the U.S. Navy , a volume that described in text and illustrated in full color every class of ship in the Navy . 
 Coggins was called up for Army service , and enlisted on April 8 , 1943 . He was pulled from basic training at Fort Eustis , Virginia before he could complete it to work as an illustrator for YANK magazine . He was originally introduced to the Commanding Officer and Editor of YANK , Colonel Franklin Forsberg , by Fletcher Pratt . On May 20 , 1943 , Coggins commenced work at the head office of YANK in New York , where he worked until his departure for Britain . Jack Coggins became a naturalized citizen of the United States on August 19 , 1943 . 
 Coggins served as an artist for British YANK in London until August 2 , 1945 and was discharged from the U.S. Army on November 3 , 1945 . While in Britain , Coggins spent time on a Royal Navy convoy in the North Sea , witnessed the bombing of Saint @-@ Lô , and flew over Berlin in a Lancaster bomber . He also spent time on a U.S. PT boat patrolling the beaches and made a trip into Brittany with an armored column . Events from all of these sorties were illustrated in YANK magazine in double page spreads . During his time in Britain , Coggins wrote articles on war rockets and the German Navy which were also published in YANK . 
 = = = Science and science @-@ fiction illustrations = = = 
 During the late 1940s and early 1950s Coggins 's marine art was featured on covers of Yachting Magazine and other publications , as well as on advertising material , and his science @-@ fiction art illustrated covers for pulp science fiction magazines . These included Galaxy Science Fiction , The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction and Thrilling Wonder Stories . 
 Due to reduced interest in his pre @-@ war work , Coggins applied for a position teaching watercolor at Hunter College . He taught watercolor painting there from 1948 to 1952 . In New York , as a result of his friendship with Fletcher Pratt , Coggins was introduced to the members of the Hydra Club , where he met Judith Merril and L. Ron Hubbard . Coggins was also invited to join Pratt 's Trap Door Spiders club , where he became closely associated with L. Sprague de Camp and Isaac Asimov . The contact with such visionary thinkers complimented his exposure to the German V @-@ 2 rockets in Europe and served to strengthen his growing interest in space travel , rockets , and science fiction . In 1951 and 1952 , Coggins collaborated again with Fletcher Pratt on two classic books : Rockets , Jets , Guided Missiles & Space Ships , and By Space Ship to the Moon . The books were released amidst the great wave of interest in space travel sweeping the United States and the rest of the world in the 1950s , and they were published in several countries and translated into other languages . These books made the prospect of space exploration seem a practical possibility . National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) scientists used the books to demonstrate their ideas to Congressmen when seeking funding for the space program , and there are many NASA scientists today who retain fond memories of the influence the books had on their careers . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Between 1941 and 1983 , Coggins wrote or illustrated 44 books on a wide range of marine , military , historical and educational themes . Among his more famous works is the 1962 authoring and illustration of Arms and Equipment of the Civil War . Dale E. <unk> , registrar at the Civil War Library and Museum in Philadelphia , described the work as " not about generals or battles but about the things one should know before delving into those areas ... a welcome addition to any Civil War library . " It was republished several times , most recently in 2004 . In 1966 , Coggins wrote and illustrated The Horseman 's Bible , which sold over 500 @,@ 000 copies with a revised edition published in 1984 . In this book Coggins acknowledges his father " whose twenty five years in the cavalry and lifetime interest in horses made his advice invaluable . " Coggins 's last book was Marine Painter 's Guide , which was first published in 1983 . After the book was published , he decided to stop writing to concentrate more on painting . A new edition of Marine Painter 's Guide was published in 2005 by Dover Publications , the publisher of new editions for several of his books . 
 = = = Other paintings and illustrations = = = 
 Coggins relies on a realistic style that is executed in oils , for which he had a preference . However , he also painted works in water colors and other media . The majority of his paintings have a maritime theme , about which he wrote " It seems strange that with so much of the globe covered by water , so few artists know how to paint it . " His stated preference in art styles was " a direct splashy type of realistic painting " and he admired the New Hope school of Redfield and Garber , with " no liking for ' modern art ' " . A catalog listing over 1000 works has been posthumously compiled by his relatives . A retrospective exhibition and sale of artworks found in Coggins 's home after his death was held at the Wyomissing Institute of the Arts in late 2006 . This consisted of about 300 previously unseen oils , watercolors , and other printed materials . An annual " Jack Coggins award " to be given to a deserving local artist was financed from part of the proceeds from the sale of these works . 
 As of 2001 his paintings are owned by the Philadelphia Maritime Museum , the National Air and Space Museum of the Smithsonian Institution , the U.S. Navy , and the United States Coast Guard , among many other institutions , corporations , and private collectors . His original manuscripts and illustrations are part of The University of Southern Mississippi 's Permanent Collection of outstanding authors and artists . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Coggins 's work has been accepted for show by the American Watercolor Society , the Salmagundi Club , the American Artist Professional League , and the Pastel Society of America . Coggins received a number of awards and accolades during his career , including the American Revolution Round Table Award in 1969 , the Daniel Boone National Foundation 's Americanism Award in 1985 , the Mystic Maritime Gallery 's Purchase Award in 1989 , the International Maritime Exhibition 's Rudolph Shaeffer Award from 1987 to 1990 , and Berks Art Council 's Pagoda Award in 1995 . In 2000 , he was inducted to the International Association of Astronomical Artists Hall of Fame as a Living Legend and celebrated master of the genre of Space Art . 
 = Cyclone Urmil ( 2006 ) = 
 Tropical Cyclone Urmil ( RSMC Nadi designation : 06F , JTWC designation : 07P ) was a short lived storm of January 2006 that explosively intensified to reach its peak intensity as a high @-@ end Category 2 cyclone on the Australian Scale , just 12 hours after being named . Forming out of a tropical disturbance early on January 14 , Urmil quickly intensified before weakening just as quickly . The intensification was a result of the main convective banding feature wrapping around the center of circulation . However , the combination of high wind shear and the rapid movement of the cyclone caused convection to become separated from the center . By January 15 , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone shortly before dissipating . Urmil had only minor effects on land ; scattered vegetation damage was reported in Tonga . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Cyclone Urmil originated from a weak tropical disturbance over the open waters of the south Pacific Ocean on January 13 . Around 1800 UTC , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji classified the system as Tropical Disturbance 06F , while it was located about 370 km ( 230 mi ) west of Pago Pago , American Samoa . Forming in the wake of Tropical Cyclone Tam , the disturbance rapidly organized within an environment of favorable diffulence aloft , warm waters ( 29 ° C ; 84 @.@ 2 ° F ) , and moderate wind shear . Six hours later , RSMC Nadi upgraded 06F to a tropical cyclone and gave it the name Urmil while it was situated near Niuatoputapu , Tonga . Shortly after , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert as the storm quickly traveled towards the south @-@ southeast . Around 0600 UTC on January 14 , the JTWC classified Urmil as Tropical Cyclone 07P . 
 During the following six hours , Urmil underwent explosive deepening as the main feeder band wrapped around the center of circulation . After the brief period of intensification , the storm reached its peak intensity with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) according to both the RSMC Nadi and the JTWC , making it a high @-@ end Category 2 cyclone on the Australian Scale . The highly favorable environment , in combination with the fast forward motion of the storm , allowed Urmil to rapidly reach its peak intensity , despite wind shear reaching 35 km / h ( 25 mph ) . However , as quickly as the storm strengthened , it began to weaken as convection weakened . With both wind shear and forward motion increasing , the cyclone quickly became disorganized . Around 0000 UTC on January 15 , the center of circulation was devoid of shower and thunderstorm activity . About six hours later , Urmil transitioned into an extratropical cyclone and was subsequently absorbed into the mid @-@ latitude westerlies . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon being designated Tropical Disturbance 06F , tropical cyclone alerts and strong wind warnings were issued for Niue , Tonga , the Cook Islands , and French Polynesia . A flood advisory and small craft advisory were issued for Samoa . Later that day , the strong wind warnings for the Cook Islands and French Polynesia were canceled , as Urmil no longer posed a threat to the islands . By January 15 , all of the warnings associated with Urmil were lifted . 
 Early on January 14 , 06F passed close to <unk> and Niuatoputapu , produced heavy rains and near gale @-@ force winds over the islands . The highest winds in Tonga were recorded on Niuatoputapu ; sustained winds reached 35 km / h ( 25 mph ) with gusts to 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . The winds caused minor damages , mainly limited to vegetation . Some fruit trees were damaged , mainly banana trees . The rains from Urmil exaggerated flooding produced by Cyclone Tam just a few days earlier . 
 = Ruby ( Supernatural ) = 
 Ruby is a fictional character on The CW Television Network 's Supernatural portrayed mainly by actresses Katie Cassidy and Genevieve Cortese . Created by the writers to expand on the characterization of demons within the series , she first appears in the third season , wherein she assists series protagonists Sam and Dean Winchester in fighting her fellow demons . By the fourth season , she has won Sam 's trust and begins training him to kill demons with his psychic powers , though Dean remains fearful of ulterior motives . The character departs the series at the end of the fourth season . Though the fans at first reacted negatively towards Cortese replacing Cassidy after the third season , Cortese and creator Eric Kripke felt that they became more accepting as the fourth season progressed . While fan response to the character was mixed overall , critical reception was generally negative . A common criticism was underwhelming performances by Cassidy and Cortese . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Debuting in the third season premiere " The Magnificent Seven " , Ruby ( Katie Cassidy ) trails Sam Winchester — a hunter of supernatural creatures — and eventually rescues him from a group of demons , whom she kills with her unique demon @-@ killing knife . She reveals her identity to Sam in " The Kids Are Alright " , but claims to be different from other demons and wants to help Sam fight them . In return for his cooperation , she promises to save his brother Dean from the Faustian deal he had made to resurrect Sam in the second season finale " All Hell Breaks Loose : Part 2 " . However , she refuses to tell Sam her motives . Though he distrusts her and Dean wants to kill her before she can harm them , Sam decides to let her continue to help him with both saving Dean and fighting the hundreds of other demons who — like Ruby — escaped Hell in the second season finale . 
 Ruby 's credibility builds throughout Season 3 . In " Sin City " , she restores power to the Colt for the Winchesters to use in their war against demons . The episode " Malleus Maleficarum " provides her backstory , revealing that she had been a witch during the Plague who sold her soul to a demon . She confides in Dean that , unlike other demons , she still remembers what it is like to be human , citing this trait as the reason she is helping the brothers against other demons . She returns in " Jus in Bello " to save the brothers from an attacking horde of demons . Upon learning that they have lost the Colt , she decides to perform a spell that will destroy all the demons in the area , including herself . However , because the spell requires a human virgin 's heart , Dean does not allow her to perform it . Although the plan he comes up with instead saves himself and his brother , the people they leave behind get killed by demons pursuing Sam and Dean , which Ruby uses to rebuke the brothers for not listening to her . 
 Contrary to her promise to Sam , Ruby tells Dean that she cannot actually save him from Hell and that she had lied to Sam to get him to listen to her . However , in the season finale " No Rest for the Wicked " , she tells Sam that she had lied to Dean and that she truly can help Sam save him . Her plan is to train Sam to harness his latent demonic abilities so that he can use them to kill Lilith , the demon who holds the contract for Dean 's soul . Believing that Ruby is trying to manipulate Sam into giving in to his dark side , Dean tricks her into a devil 's trap — a mystical symbol capable of rendering demons powerless — and leaves with Sam to face Lilith . Ruby frees herself and tracks the brothers down during their campaign , but gets expelled from her host body by Lilith and thus is not present at the confrontation between Lilith and the brothers , with her whereabouts at the time unclear . The fourth season episode " I Know What You Did Last Summer " states that she had been sent back to Hell . Eventually , Ruby returns and offers Sam her help in taking revenge on Lilith for Dean 's death in " No Rest for the Wicked " as well as in stopping Lilith 's apocalyptic plans . To appease Sam , who dislikes her using a living host against the host 's will , Ruby takes possession of a body recently declared to be dead ( Genevieve Cortese ) . They have sex together at least once , and she brings him out of his downward spiral towards self @-@ destruction . Consequently , Sam now trusts Ruby implicitly . 
 Ruby begins training Sam in using his demonic abilities to exorcise ( and later , kill ) demons , and continues to do so in secret following Dean 's resurrection by the angel Castiel in the fourth season premiere . The episode " On the Head of a Pin " reveals that she is feeding Sam her demonic blood to boost his powers , and by " The Rapture " , he has become addicted to drinking her blood . In the following episode " When the Levee Breaks " , Sam and Dean have a heated confrontation over Sam 's trust in her and the negative influence she has on him , leading to a vicious fight which ends in Sam strangling Dean and Dean severing ties with Sam . In the season finale " Lucifer Rising " , Ruby insists that she and Sam must murder a demonically @-@ possessed woman despite the woman being alive and pleading for them to let her go , as Ruby argues that Sam needs to also drink the woman 's blood in order to be able to kill Lilith ; Sam eventually agrees . In the episode 's climax , Ruby keeps Dean from interfering while Sam succeeds in killing Lilith . Afterward , Ruby reveals that she is a double @-@ agent working for Lilith who has just tricked Sam into setting the demons ' revered god Lucifer free with Lilith 's death . With Sam 's help , she is killed by Dean with her own knife . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Prior to Ruby 's introduction in the third season , series creator Eric Kripke summarized the character as " ruthless and a little crazy and rough around the edges " , calling her " [ a ] little unhinged " because she lacks the " moral conscience " that Sam and Dean have . Katie Cassidy , the actress who portrayed Ruby in the third season , described her as a " kick @-@ ass , bad @-@ ass " ally of Sam and Dean 's who " also likes to stir up a little trouble . " According to Cassidy , Ruby is " mysterious " , " manipulative " , and in control of her situation , being " always 10 steps ahead of everybody else " . On this , Cassidy proclaimed that Ruby " knows what she wants , and she 's out to get it " . Actress Genevieve Cortese , who played the character in the fourth season , deemed Cassidy 's incarnation " very tough " and " hard to get close to " . 
 In taking over the role , Cortese felt " conflicted over where Ruby is now versus where she 's come from " and explained that her own portrayal of the character was a " total 180 from [ how she was ] last season " , being calmer and " more fear @-@ driven " ; after a discussion with Kripke on the character 's mindset , Cortese saw Ruby as being in a " lonely , desperate " situation . She tried to make Ruby seem " as innocent as possible " to make viewers question her true allegiance , and to " bring more of a humanity " to Ruby than Cassidy had . For example , taking from the third season finale in which Dean is sent to Hell , Cortese portrayed the character as having some guilt over his death , even though Ruby was not responsible for it . The actress also acknowledged that Ruby was likely manipulating Sam when she claimed to remember how it felt to be human , but suggested that there was also an element of truth to her character 's words . 
 Cortese believed that Ruby fell in love with Sam over the course of the season , though she questioned whether this was " true love " or her being " in love with what he can do " . As Cortese noted , " He has something she can nurture . It 's almost like a mother bear and her cub [ in terms of ] how protective she is ... Sam 's all [ Ruby has ] , so it 's almost like giving birth , in a weird , messed @-@ up way . " She stated that the sex scene between her character and Sam was " about two people who are so broken and sad " and compared it to similar sex scenes from the film Monster 's Ball . Although Ruby eventually reveals herself as a traitor , Kripke wrote her final scene with the intention of depicting Ruby as " the opposite of evil " and to show that Ruby does care about Sam , despite her manipulation of him to free Lucifer ; Kripke explained that , in Ruby 's mind , she had to lead Sam down that path because " it was for his own good " . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ruby was described as a " demon hunter " in press releases prior to her debut so that her true demonic nature would surprise the audience . The writers created Ruby to change the perception of demons into more of a grey area , rather than the " black and white " , " They 're evil , we 're good " approach previously used in the series . However , the writers also planned for Ruby to impact the brothers negatively by facilitating the story arc of Sam falling into evil — which had been set up in the second season , but without follow @-@ through — and causing a fracture in their relationship . Knowing this , the writers were amused by fans questioning why they were " trying to make [ Ruby ] likable " . Despite Ruby 's overall betrayal of the brothers , writer Sera Gamble commented , " [ Ruby ] brought the idea that you can 't just dismiss demons as things that need to be killed right away . They could be useful , and while fundamentally untrustworthy , there might be cause to trust them in a given situation . " 
 Fearing that introducing the character as an " [ accessory ] to the boys " would hinder their chances of successfully integrating her into the series , the writers intended that Ruby should be " a character in [ her ] own right " and deemed her an antagonist " with [ her ] own interests and [ her ] own motives " rather than a love interest to Sam or Dean , which they felt had been their mistake in their introduction of the widely disliked Jo Harvelle in the second season . While they were not planning on a romance between Ruby and either of the Winchesters in the third season , however , they were open to the possibility in the future , with Kripke saying , " If the chemistry is there , and we see the sparks , and we want it to happen , and the fans want it to happen , it 'll happen . " Due to " protective and occasionally nervous " fans , Kripke meant to introduce Ruby in " small doses " . Wanting fans to know the show would always be about Sam and Dean , and nothing else , he stated , " [ Ruby and Bela are ] there for important plot elements , but it 's not the Ruby and Bela show , nor is it about the four of them cruising around in the Impala together . It 's about the guys . " 
 Cassidy originally auditioned for the role of Bela Talbot , but ultimately received the part of Ruby . As opposed to using traditional demonic abilities such as telekinesis , Ruby instead relies on conventional martial arts and her demon @-@ killing knife . Cassidy trained in kickboxing alongside Bela 's actress Lauren Cohan to be able to perform Ruby 's martial arts skills , prompting her to attempt as many of the fight scenes as she could rather than rely on her stunt double . Before filming for the third season began , she and Cohan decided to watch previous seasons together to catch up on the show . Cassidy also prepared by looking to Sharon Stone 's performance in the film Basic Instinct for inspiration due to Ruby 's manipulative ways . As Cassidy explained , " [ Stone 's character ] always has the power , and there 's this mystery about her . " Costume designer Diane Widas had Ruby dressed in dark colors so that she would blend into shadows , also giving her pleather jackets and narrow jeans to allow Cassidy to be more active . Because of Cassidy 's height difference with the lead actors — she is 5 ' 7 " while Sam 's actor , Jared Padalecki , is 6 ' 4 " — she had to wear tall , spiky high heels that at times made her lose balance . 
 Kripke cited budgetary reasons for Cassidy 's departure after the third season . According to Cassidy , however , Warner Bros. ' s uncertainty about what direction to take Ruby in prompted her to leave when the opportunity to star in the series Harper 's Island arose . To " make the best out of a bad situation " , Kripke and the writers planned for Ruby to take on a new host every few episodes for the fourth season . They believed this would " keep [ viewers ] guessing " , and provide a " cool character that most shows don 't have the ability to do " . Auditions for an unnamed " love interest " were held to recast Ruby with a new actress , and Cortese was hired for the part . She was then informed that she would actually be playing Ruby . Before the first episode she was in aired , however , she was said to be playing " a small @-@ town waitress " named Kristy who had become " romantically involved " with Sam after Dean 's death . Cortese played the first of what was expected to be many incarnations of Ruby , but an impressed Kripke ultimately chose to keep her in the role because she " brought a lot of the different colors and vulnerabilities to Ruby that [ he ] was really looking for " . Although Cortese viewed DVDs of Cassidy 's portrayal , she tried to make the character her own at the producers ' request rather than emulate Cassidy . She was not as concerned with how Ruby was received by the audience — stating " if people don 't like her , they don 't like her " — as much as she was with using her performance to " answer questions " about Ruby and her relationship with the Winchester brothers , such as why Sam and Dean were continuing to work with Ruby in the fourth season . 
 = = Reception = = 
 BuddyTV staff columnist Don Williams felt the addition of Ruby was a " cheap ploy " to attract teen male viewers , that the character distracted viewers from the " brotherly bond that made the show so special in the first place " , and that Cassidy " was cast more for her looks than her acting prowess " . However , he later admitted Ruby " remains one of the more interesting and ambiguous evildoers on the series " . Although IGN 's Diana Steenbergen had looked forward to Ruby 's introduction , she ultimately found the third @-@ season incarnation a " wasted " character who did little to improve the series . Her main concerns consisted of Ruby 's " unlikable and manipulative " qualities and her tendency to make the Winchesters " look stupid " . Cassidy " never quite [ pulled off ] " the " tough chick " persona of Buffy the Vampire Slayer 's Faith or Battlestar Galactica 's Six . TV Guide 's Tina Charles , however , liked Ruby 's action @-@ packed introduction in " The Magnificent Seven " . She was " intrigued " by the character in " The Kids Are Alright " , and felt Cassidy was " doing a good job " . Ruby made a " plausible addition " to " Malleus Maleficarum " , with Charles finding it " cool " to learn Ruby 's backstory due to its implications for Dean 's storyline . Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune thought Cassidy " wasn 't awful " in " The Magnificent Seven " . Though " not great enough for Ackles to really play off of " in " Malleus Maleficarum " , the actress was " good enough to make her weaker acting chops kind of work for her " . While under the impression that Ruby had been killed off in " No Rest for the Wicked " , Peterson wrote that the character " got gone just as [ she was ] getting interesting " and deemed her a " decent traveling [ companion ] " . 
 In her debut , Cortese impressed Peterson " even less than the old Ruby " . While Peterson was accepting of the sexual relationship between Ruby and Sam , she felt the " seduction came out of nowhere " in " I Know What You Did Last Summer " . Contributing to this problem was Cortese 's inability to " pull it off " , making the " whole thing [ feel ] gratuitous and clumsy " . Conversely , Peterson enjoyed the performances of actresses Anna Williams and Michelle Hewitt @-@ Williams as Ruby 's temporary hosts in the episode ; the former was " great " , while she found the latter " sassy " and " [ missed ] her already " . She " loved " Ruby 's death in the finale , describing it as " a beautiful thing " . Similar to Peterson , BuddyTV 's Williams considered Cortese 's acting " a bit distracting " , but noted she improved over time . Steenbergen considered Cortese an " acceptable Ruby " , but wrote that the actress ' portrayal was often " too girlish to connect with the previous incarnations of the character " . In contrast to Williams , Steenbergen felt that Cortese " seemed out of her depth in the acting department " towards the end of the season . Ruby 's seeming betrayal of Anna Milton in " Heaven and Hell " would " have added some welcome layers to her character " in Steenbergen 's opinion , but the character 's true intentions made the character development " less exciting " . However , Steenbergen deemed Ruby 's overall deceit of Sam a " great revelation " . 
 Like BuddyTV 's Don Williams , fans were very wary at first of bringing in female characters to the male @-@ dominated show . To make matters worse , Kripke wrote a lackluster scene intended solely for the audition process . Fans quickly came across it on casting sites , and developed the feeling that the character " really [ looks like she sucks ] " . However , Kripke believed that fans would change their minds about Ruby after learning that she was a demon . By the middle of the third season , Kripke felt enough fans were " responding positively to vindicate the character " , and that most were " finally embracing her " by the third season finale , with Cassidy 's version of Ruby even being dubbed a " fan favorite " later on . When the character returns in the fourth season , she is much different than her third season counterpart . Cortese felt that while the drastic change made fans angry , the flashbacks provided in " I Know What You Did Last Summer " shed some light on Ruby 's new mindset and made fans more accepting of the character . However , the overall criticisms towards Cortese 's performance made her reluctant to return for an episode in the sixth season , although she eventually accepted when she learned she would be portraying herself . 
 Despite the generally negative reception to Cortese in the role , fans voted her version of Ruby the 32nd sexiest female character in fantasy and science fiction film and television in a 2012 poll by SFX for the Top 200 Sexiest Characters In Sci @-@ Fi , making her the highest @-@ placing female Supernatural character in the list , beating out Jo Harvelle at number 53 and Ellen Harvelle at number 77 . 
 = LatinoJustice PRLDEF = 
 LatinoJustice PRLDEF , long known by its former name the Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund , is a New York @-@ based national civil rights organization with the goal of changing discriminatory practices via advocacy and litigation . Privately funded , nonprofit and nonpartisan , it is part of the umbrella Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights . 
 The Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund was founded in 1972 by three lawyers , one of whom , Cesar A. Perales , became the president of the group for much of its history . PRLDEF played a key role in the installation of bilingual education in New York City schools , and soon became the most important legal advocacy group for Puerto Ricans in the U.S. mainland . The group became known for the part it played in redistricting battles , for its opposition to civil service exams it thought discriminatory , and for its attempts to combat anti @-@ Latino sentiment especially as arising from the debate over immigration to the U.S. It changed its name to the current one in 2008 in order to reflect demographic shifts in the Latino population in New York and elsewhere . 
 = = Origins and the 1970s = = 
 The Puerto Rican Legal Defense and Education Fund was founded in 1972 as a non @-@ profit organization by three lawyers , Jorge Batista , Victor Marrero , and Cesar A. Perales , with Perales the fund 's first president . It was created as a privately funded , nonprofit and nonpartisan organization with the goal of changing discriminatory practices via advocacy and litigation . It was inspired in form and purpose by the high @-@ profile NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund , which Thurgood Marshall had established in 1957 . PRLDEF ( pronounced " pearl @-@ deaf " ) had $ 300 @,@ 000 of initial funding from foundations , government sources , and private corporations . U.S. House of Representatives member Herman <unk> was on its first Board of Directors , and at the fund 's initial press conference he said , " There is plenty of room for change in our society , and much can be done through the medium of class actions . " The organization soon grew to have a Litigation Division , a Pro Bono Cooperating Counsel Division , and an Education Division . A typical staffer was a young , idealistic attorney from a premier law school . 
 The fund 's first lawsuit was filed on behalf of the Hispanic educational improvement organization <unk> in an action against the New York City Board of Education . It led to the August 1974 <unk> Consent Decree , which established the right of city public school students with limited English proficiency to receive bilingual education . The decree was a key factor in bilingual education spreading throughout the city school system . It also brought about the publication of some federal and state forms in Spanish as well as English . By the late 1970s , PRLDEF had become the nation 's most important legal advocacy group for Puerto Ricans in the mainland . 
 = = 1980s and 1990s = = 
 In 1981 , PRLDEF achieved its most visible early triumph when a federal court intervened to block a city Democratic Party primary election on the grounds that New York City Council boundaries diminished the power of minority voters . The council district lines were redrawn in consequence of the ruling . ( A similar action was taken in 1991 to forestall a planned redrawing , and subsequent negotiations with the U.S. Justice Department resulted in changes to the redistricting . ) Also in 1981 , the fund began activity in opposition to reinstatement of the death penalty in New York State , with its board saying that " capital punishment is associated with evident racism in our society . " The fund was also active in highlighting cases of police brutality . 
 During the 1980s , PRLDEF changed its focus somewhat , moving beyond traditional civil rights cases to address more economically focused issues such as wage disparities . A major target became civil service exams , which the fund believed were unfair to Latinos and other minority groups . In 1984 , the fund sued the New York City Police Department , saying that its promotion exams discriminated against Latinos and African @-@ Americans . The case was settled when the department agreed to promote an additional 100 black officers and 60 Latino officers to sergeant rank . The fund also filed separate suits against the New York City Fire Department and the New York City Department of Sanitation . 
 The fund actively opposed the 1987 Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination , " because of the threat he poses to the civil rights of the Latino community , " and worked on joining anti @-@ Bork coalitions . The same year , the fund teamed with community organizers ACORN on behalf of affordable housing for low @-@ income Puerto Rican families in East New York . It also met with editors of the New York Daily News to complain about " negative images of Puerto Ricans presented by the News ' staff , " especially those coming from popular columnist Jimmy Breslin . 
 Future federal judge and U.S. Supreme Court nominee Sonia Sotomayor was an active member of the board of directors of PRLDEF from 1980 to 1992 . Board members were often chosen for their wealth or their political connections and have included U.S. Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach , Senator Jacob Javits , Ambassador William <unk> Heuvel , Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau , New York State Attorney General Robert Abrams , and federal judge Jose Cabranes . Co @-@ founder Victor Marrero became a federal judge and returned to serve on the board as well . The extent to which the board 's Litigation Committee had control over which lawsuits went forward varied over time and was a subject of intermittent discussion . 
 The group endured financial strain several times , and in 1984 , private contributions suffered due to a dispute between management and staff over control of the fund . Under president and general counsel Juan Figueroa , who joined the group in 1993 , PRLDEF forged a strategic plan that led to an alliance with the Institute for Puerto Rican Policy in 1998 . The Institute functioned as the Fund ’ s policy research arm . As a result , PRLDEF had an expanded role in the public policy community , a higher national profile , and an integrated program that effectively united grassroots advocacy , public policy and precedent @-@ setting litigation . PRLDEF cases included language rights , education , voting rights and environmental justice . 
 = = 2000s and a new name = = 
 By 2003 , the group was in severe financial crisis . Perales , who had since gone on to become a high @-@ ranking official at the city , state , and federal levels , was brought back to serve as president . In 2005 , the former Institute for Puerto Rican Policy split back off , renaming itself the National Institute for Latino Policy . PRLDEF itself was a member organization of the umbrella Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights . 
 In the 2000s , PRLDEF collaborated with the New York Legal Assistance Group , suing the United States Government for delays in the processing of immigration applications . PRLDEF was also known to collaborate with the Hispanic National Bar Association . After the town of Hazleton , Pennsylvania passed an ordinance to punish landlords who rented to illegal immigrants and businesses who hired illegal immigrants , the American Civil Liberties Union and the PRLDEF sued Hazleton , saying the law was unconstitutional . Perales said , " What [ the ordinance ] is about is an anti @-@ Latino sentiment that has been growing in this country . " On July 26 , 2007 , a federal court agreed and struck down the Hazleton ordinance ; Hazleton 's mayor promised to appeal the decision . The Hazleton challenge became PRLDEF 's most visible work of that period . In July 2010 , the group co @-@ authored an amicus curiae brief filed by several Latino organizations that sought to block the highly controversial Arizona SB 1070 anti @-@ illegal immigration law . The following month , PRLDEF said that was ready to sue the state of Virginia if its governor allowed the Virginia State Police to ask about the immigration status of individuals they stop or arrest , stating that such a policy would result in racial profiling . 
 In addition to its other efforts , the Education Division of PRLDEF encourages Latinos to become lawyers by offering LSAT prep courses , internships , and mentoring relationships . Those endeavors have assisted as many as 300 Latino and African @-@ Americans students a year and helped create a generation of minority lawyers . 
 In October 2008 , the group changed its name to LatinoJustice PRLDEF . Perales said that " there is a coming together of identification in a common struggle , " especially in regards to immigration issues . But the change was also motivated by broad demographic shifts ; when the organization had first been formed , Puerto Ricans comprised about 63 percent of the overall New York Latino population . This figure had now fallen to about 34 percent , and the group 's clients were coming from Bolivia , Colombia , the Dominican Republic , Ecuador , Mexico , Peru , and the like . The move opened up additional fundraising opportunities , but also caused some Puerto Ricans to criticize the group for forsaking its heritage . 
 The organization received new national attention in mid @-@ 2009 with the Sonia Sotomayor Supreme Court nomination , with Republicans saying Sotomayor had been involved in a radical organization while Democrats defended it as a mainstream civil rights operation . Perales said , " You have a reputable group that has stood up for the civil rights of Latinos for 37 years . To suddenly be accused of being something bad , and that anyone associated with it should not be allowed to serve on the Supreme Court , to me is shocking . " Mayor of New York Michael Bloomberg came to PRLDEF 's defense , saying " While we have not always agreed on every issue , the group has made countless important contributions to New York City . " 
 In December 2008 , LatinoJustice PRLDEF filed an unusual international petition with the Inter @-@ American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States , charging that the United States was failing to protect Latinos living within its borders and was thus falling short of several human rights manifestos . In March 2010 , the group urged Governor of Puerto Rico Luis Fortuño to delay by at least six months the effective date of a new birth certificate law , which as of July 2010 would invalidate all previously issued birth certificates . PRLDEF was concerned that the new law , whose objective was to stop identity theft and fraud , would harm Stateside Puerto Ricans applying for a driver 's license or a job . ( The governor delayed the law by three months . ) 
 In 2011 , Perales stepped down as president of the organization and was replaced by civil rights lawyer Juan Cartagena . Perales was subsequently named Secretary of State of New York . 
 = New York State Route 308 = 
 New York State Route 308 ( NY 308 ) is a short state highway , 6 @.@ 19 miles ( 9 @.@ 96 km ) in length , located entirely in northern Dutchess County , in the U.S. state of New York . It is a major collector road through mostly rural areas that serves primarily as a shortcut for traffic from the two main north – south routes in the area , U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) and NY 9G , to get to NY 199 and the Taconic State Parkway . The western end of NY 308 is located within the Rhinebeck Village Historic District , a 2 @.@ 6 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 7 km2 ) historic district comprising 272 historical structures . The highway passes near the Dutchess County Fairgrounds , several historical landmarks , and the Landsman Kill . 
 Indicated by artifacts found near Lake Sepasco , a small lake along NY 308 , the highway began its history in about 1685 , when a group of Native Americans called the Sepasco built the Sepasco Trail ; this trail ran from the Hudson River , eastward through modern @-@ day Rhinebeck ( then Sepasco or <unk> ) , and ended at Lake Sepasco , following roughly Route 308 and its side roads . The trail remained until 1802 , when part of the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike — also known as the Salisbury Turnpike — was chartered over the trail and extended from Salisbury , Connecticut to the Susquehanna River at or near the Town of Jericho ( now Bainbridge ) . 
 Route 308 was designated as part of the 1930 renumbering of New York state highways , incorporating a portion of the former Ulster and Delaware Turnpike . The route originally extended from Milan westward to Rhinecliff to serve a ferry landing on the Hudson River . It was truncated to US 9 in the 1960s but its former routing to Rhinecliff is still state @-@ maintained as an unsigned reference route . The highway was also intended to be part of the then @-@ new Kingston – Rhinecliff Bridge until plans were changed to involve other routes and the building site for the bridge was moved about 3 miles ( 5 km ) northward . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Part of NY 308 is located along the Rhinebeck Village Historic District , a 1 @,@ 670 @-@ acre ( 6 @.@ 8 km2 ) historic district that contains 272 buildings in a variety of architectural styles dating from over 200 years of the settlement 's history . It was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1979 as a well @-@ preserved and cohesively built area of historic buildings . A notable attraction is the Beekman Arms Inn , which is located at the corner of NY 308 and US 9 . Founded in 1776 , it claims to be the oldest continuously @-@ operated inn located in the United States . 
 Route 308 begins at US 9 in the Dutchess County village of Rhinebeck , at about 200 feet ( 61 m ) in elevation . To the south is the American Legion Park , a small lake , and the Rhinebeck Cemetery . In the center of the village is the Rhinebeck , New York U.S. Post Office , which is situated very close to the US 9 / NY 308 intersection . The Post Office was established in 1940 , and was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1989 . At this point , the Dutchess County Fairgrounds are located just to the north of Route 308 . The highway proceeds eastward on East Market Street , soon exiting Rhinebeck while it runs parallel to the Landsman Kill River , a minor tributary of the Hudson River , which is sometimes known as Landsman Kill or <unk> . The Landsman Kill has numerous spawning runs of smelt , alewife , and blueback herring . 
 An intersection with County Route 101 ( CR 101 , known as Violet Hill Road ) soon follows , as NY 308 turns slightly to the north . It intersects with NY 9G via an interchange before crossing the stream and gradually turning to the east into a relatively rural area . Between US 9 and NY 9G , NY 308 carries an average of about 6 @,@ 400 vehicles per day . East of NY 9G , the traffic volume drops to about 3 @,@ 700 vehicles per day . Several small lakes surround NY 308 as it intersects CR 52 in the hamlet of Eighmyville and subsequently turns to the northeast , traveling within a large open field . NY 308 then travels west of Sepasco Lake before turning on an eastward route once again . The highway runs initially in a fairly flat area , although passes between two large hills of at least 400 feet ( 120 m ) . It passes just to the south of the Red Hook Golf Club before coming to an end at NY 199 in Rock City , a hamlet within the town of Milan that is situated just east of where the Milan , Red Hook , and Rhinebeck town lines converge . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Native Americans and old roads = = = 
 Indicated by artifacts recovered close to the road in Milan and in other areas along the Hudson River , the earliest inhabitants of the northern Dutchess County region were the Mohicans , a Native American nation , about 3 @,@ 000 years ago . The range of the Mohicans extended from northern Dutchess County to the southern tip of Lake Champlain , and from the Catskill Mountains to the Berkshires in Massachusetts . The total population of the Mohicans was estimated at 8 @,@ 000 during the time of first contact with the Europeans , although only 800 remained after the American Revolution . Artifacts were also recovered along the shore of Lake Sepasco — a small lake NY 308 passes near its ending terminus . Those artifacts recovered included ancient arrowheads , and are now on display at the Museum of Rhinebeck History . 
 A group of these Native Americans were , in deeds and correspondence , known as the Sepasco Indians , a name specific to Native Americans in the Sepasco area ( modern @-@ day Rhinebeck ) . The word Sepasco probably originated from the tribe 's word for little river or stream , <unk> , which is believed to have referred to the Landsman Kill , a stream parallel to NY 308 . After the American Civil War , only a few of the Sepasco were left ; the last Sepasco died in a hut near Welch 's Cave and Lake Sepasco and was reported in the local newspaper in 1867 . By 1685 , a trail known as the Sepasco Trail was formed by them and was routed from the Hudson River , eastward through the present @-@ day Village of Rhinebeck , ending at Lake Sepasco . The trail from the Village of Rhinebeck to Lake Sepasco follows roughly modern @-@ day Route 308 , in some areas slightly to the south , where the highway 's side roads are curved in a pattern similar to that of the Sepasco Trail . It is possible that the trail as a whole existed as a spur of an ancient path that stretched from Rhinebeck to Cornwall , Connecticut . 
 The trail remained intact until 1802 , when part of the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike was chartered over it " for improving and making a road from the west line of the Town of Salisbury in the State of Connecticut to the Susquehannah [ sic ] River at or near the Town of Jericho [ present @-@ day Bainbridge ] " . The portion of the Ulster and Delaware Turnpike east of the Hudson River was also commonly known as the Ulster and Salisbury Turnpike . The turnpike crossed the river by way of the Kingston – Rhinecliff Ferry and used modern Rhinecliff Road and West Market Street to the village center of Rhinecliff , then followed roughly modern NY 308 to the hamlet of Eighmyville . It continued east from there using part of CR 52 to eventually connect with NY 199 . 
 A bronze plaque attached to a large boulder was erected in November 1922 by Chancellor Livingston Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution on the property of the Beekman Arms , that marked the crossing of the Kings Highway ( present @-@ day US 9 ) and the Ulster and Salisbury Turnpike . Still existent , it reads " This stone marks the crossing of the Kings Highway and the Sepasco Indian Trail , later named the Ulster and Salisbury Turnpike , over which traveled the Connecticut Pioneers to their new homes in western New York . " 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 The NY 308 designation was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of New York state highways . At the time , it extended from the Rhinecliff ferry landing to Rock City in the town of Milan . West of US 9 , NY 308 continued to follow the old turnpike alignment to Hutton Street , where it connected to the Kingston – Rhinecliff Ferry . In 1947 , the ferry was the only crossing of the Hudson River between Catskill ( the Rip Van Winkle Bridge ) and Poughkeepsie ( the Mid @-@ Hudson Bridge ) — a distance of 36 miles ( 58 km ) — and the only one serving the Kingston area . 
 Initial plans for the Kingston – Rhinecliff Bridge , a structure that replaced the ferry between the two locations , called for the bridge to span the Hudson River between downtown Kingston ( at Kingston Point ) and the village of Rhinebeck along a corridor similar to that of NY 308 . Due to political and economic factors , the bridge site was moved 3 miles ( 5 km ) upstream ( northward ) . The bridge , then partially complete , opened to traffic on February 2 , 1957 , at which time the ferry service between Kingston and Rhinecliff was terminated . However , NY 308 continued to extend west to Rhinecliff up to the 1960s , when it was truncated to US 9 in the village of Rhinebeck . The section of former NY 308 west of US 9 is now designated as NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Dutchess County . 
 = Central Flying School RAAF = 
 Central Flying School ( CFS ) is a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) training unit , located at RAAF Base East Sale , Victoria . It operates the Pilatus PC @-@ 9 turboprop trainer . The school is responsible for training flight instructors , setting flying standards , and auditing flying practices . It is also home to the " Roulettes " aerobatic team . CFS was the first military aviation unit to be formed in Australia , in 1913 , when its role was to provide basic flying training . Its current form dates from World War II , when it was re @-@ established to train flying instructors for the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . 
 CFS was inaugurated at Point Cook , Victoria , in March 1913 , and trained over 150 pilots of the Australian Flying Corps during World War I. It was disbanded in December 1919 , and the newly formed RAAF 's No. 1 Flying Training School took on its function in 1921 . Re @-@ formed under EATS at Point Cook in April 1940 , CFS relocated to New South Wales the following month , based first at Camden , then at Tamworth from April 1942 , and finally at Parkes from January 1944 . It returned to Point Cook in September 1944 . By the end of World War II , the school had produced more than 3 @,@ 600 instructors . It transferred to East Sale in November 1947 . 
 Since 1962 , CFS has been responsible for three aerobatic display teams . The first , " The Red Sales " , flew De Havilland Vampire jet aircraft . A second team , " The Telstars " , was formed in 1963 , also flying Vampires . The Telstars disbanded in 1968 , just after taking delivery of new Macchi <unk> jets , when the RAAF curtailed display flying . The Roulettes formed in 1970 , flying the Macchi , and continued to operate the type until 1990 , when the team finished converting to the PC @-@ 9 . As well as the Roulettes , CFS is responsible for the display work of the Air Force Balloons . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and World War I = = = 
 In December 1911 , the Australian Department of Defence advertised in the United Kingdom for " two competent mechanists and aviators " to establish a flying corps and school . The following year , Henry Petre , an Englishman , and Eric Harrison , an Australian , were selected and commissioned as lieutenants in the Australian Military Forces . Petre arrived in Australia in January 1913 ; his first job was to choose a site for the proposed Central Flying School ( CFS ) , which he was to command . Rejecting the government 's preferred location near the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in Canberra , he selected 297 hectares at Point Cook , Victoria , to become , as George Odgers described it , the " birthplace of Australian military aviation " . Petre and Harrison established CFS over the following year with four mechanics , three other staff , and five aircraft including two Deperdussin monoplanes , two Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 biplanes , and a Bristol Boxkite for initial training . Harrison made the unit 's first flight in the Boxkite on 1 March 1914 , while Petre , flying a Deperdussin later that day , registered its first accident when he crashed after snaring his tailplane in telephone wires . Its coterie of personnel by now referred to as the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) , CFS commenced its first flying course on 17 August 1914 , two weeks after the outbreak of World War I. The four students included Captain Thomas White and Lieutenants Richard Williams , George Merz , and David <unk> . Williams , who became the first to graduate , recalled the school as a " ragtime show " consisting of a paddock , tents , and one large structure : a shed for the Boxkite . 
 A further eleven courses were run during the war years , graduating 152 pilots to a basic flying standard . Many of these students would go on to play a prominent role in the future Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) , including Bill Anderson , Harry Cobby , Adrian Cole , Frank McNamara , Lawrence Wackett , and Henry Wrigley . The AFC 's first unit to see active service , the Mesopotamian Half Flight , was raised under Petre 's command and departed for the Middle East in April 1915 ; Petre 's fellow pilots included CFS graduates White and Merz . Harrison took over the school 's leadership in Petre 's absence . The facilities were improved , and by the end of 1915 , according to Wackett , they boasted " a good engineering workshop " , " cottages for the married staff " and " a very comfortable officers mess " . A year later , three AFC squadrons had been formed at Point Cook for service in the Middle East and France : Nos. 1 , 3 and 4 Squadrons . In September 1918 the school , now made up of No. 1 Home Training Squadron , No. 1 Home Training Depot , and an aircraft repair section , became part of the Australian Imperial Force . Harrison was posted overseas in October and Major William Sheldon , former commanding officer of Nos. 2 and 4 Squadrons , was placed in charge of CFS . Little training took place in the year following the November 1918 Armistice ; staff mainly did " odd jobs " such as making survey flights and promoting government bonds . CFS 's units were disbanded in December 1919 and the school taken over by the short @-@ lived Australian Air Corps , formed on 1 January 1920 . In 1921 , CFS 's function was assumed by No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) , a unit of the newly formed RAAF . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 RAAF flying training was heavily reorganised soon after the outbreak of World War II in response to Australia 's participation in the Empire Air Training Scheme ( EATS ) . Elementary Flying Training Schools were formed , to provide basic flight instruction to cadets , while more advanced pilot instruction was to take place at Service Flying Training Schools . The most pressing need , however , was for flying instructors ; the RAAF had only sixteen , and at least 1 @,@ 000 were needed to meet Australia 's obligations under EATS . To train these instructors , the Instructors ' Training Squadron at No. 1 FTS was detached to form the nucleus of a new Central Flying School on 29 April 1940 . Described as the " nerve @-@ centre of the Empire Air Training Scheme in Australia " , it was commanded by Squadron Leader E.C. Bates , RAF , former chief flying instructor at No. 1 FTS . CFS relocated from Point Cook to RAAF Station Camden , New South Wales , on 14 May . 
 Formerly the privately owned Macquarie Grove Aerodrome , Camden was a new air base , and the school 's facilities cost £ 53 @,@ 000 to construct . On establishment , its personnel numbered 470 officers and airmen , and its complement of aircraft included twenty @-@ three Tiger Moths , nine CAC Wirraways , and fourteen Avro Ansons . Among the staff were former civil pilots and instructors , as well as career Air Force officers . Graduates from Camden included Bill Newton , later awarded the Victoria Cross for bombing raids in New Guinea , and Jerry Pentland , a World War I fighter ace with twenty @-@ three victories , who went on to become perhaps the oldest RAAF pilot on active duty . The outbreak of the Pacific War led to an influx of United States Army Air Forces units to Australian bases , including Camden . To make way , CFS moved to Tamworth , New South Wales , during March and April 1942 . Tamworth was not considered a suitable airfield for the school 's Wirraways , Ansons and Airspeed Oxfords , and a further relocation was deemed necessary , this time to RAAF Station Parkes , New South Wales , on 18 January 1944 . Later that year , CFS moved once more , returning on 19 September to Point Cook . There it gained an aviation medicine section , which in 1956 was detached to form the RAAF School of Aviation Medicine ( later the RAAF Institute of Aviation Medicine ) . CFS remained at Point Cook for the rest of the war , by which time it had graduated some 3 @,@ 600 instructors . 
 = = = Post @-@ war era = = = 
 The immediate aftermath of the Pacific War saw large @-@ sale demobilisation of RAAF personnel , along with the disposal of equipment and disbandment of units . CFS was allocated resources to ensure the maintenance of Air Force flying standards , but took on no new students . The school relocated from Point Cook to RAAF Station East Sale ( now RAAF Base East Sale ) , Victoria , during November and December 1947 ; its aircraft included seven Tiger Moths , nine Wirraways , three Oxfords , two C @-@ 47 Dakotas , one P @-@ 51 Mustang , and one Avro Lincoln . It then returned to the job of training instructors , graduating its first post @-@ war course in June 1948 . Newspapers reporting on its move to East Sale called CFS the RAAF 's " university of the air " . Official RAAF historian Alan Stephens described the school as " the Air Force 's most important peacetime unit " , going on to state that " CFS 's pre @-@ eminence derived from its role as the Air Force 's arbiter of pure flying standards , a responsibility it met by training instructors , examining and rating squadron instructors , conducting quality control tests at flying training schools , and auditing flying practices generally across the RAAF . Any fall in standards at CFS could in time be expected adversely to affect standards across the entire Air Force . " Conversely , Stephens continued , the professionalism inculcated at the school flowed through to all flying units . By 1951 , the average student taking the six @-@ month instructors ' course was reported as being a flight lieutenant aged twenty @-@ seven , with 1 @,@ 000 hours flying experience . Wing Commander Charles Read , who later became Chief of the Air Staff , served as commanding officer of CFS from August 1952 to May 1954 . In May 1953 , the school commenced jet instructor training with dual @-@ control De Havilland Vampires . The CAC Winjeel entered service in 1955 , to replace the Tiger Moth as the Air Force 's basic trainer , and began operating at CFS the following year . In March 1957 , the school took on the responsibility of training the RAAF 's air traffic controllers ; this continued until May 1981 , when the RAAF School of Air Traffic Control was formed as an autonomous unit at East Sale . 
 CFS formed its first aerobatic team , called " The Red Sales " , in 1962 . The team consisted of four instructors flying Vampire trainers . On 15 August , they were practising a low @-@ level routine when they flew into a hill at 500 miles per hour ( 800 km / h ) , killing all four pilots and two passengers . Determined to overcome the shock of the accident , the commanding officer of CFS , Wing Commander H.C. Plenty , quickly formed a new aerobatic team called the " The Telstars " , led by himself . Also flying Vampires , the team made its first public display in February 1963 , six months after the Red Sales disaster . In 1965 , Plenty 's successor as commanding officer , Wing Commander <unk> Meldrum , joined an RAAF team charged with selecting a jet trainer to replace both the Winjeel and the Vampire . Led by Air Commodore Brian Eaton , the team chose the Italian Macchi MB @-@ <unk> as it met all requirements , could be licence @-@ built by the Commonwealth Aircraft Corporation in Australia , and was relatively inexpensive . The Telstars began flying the Macchi in February 1968 , but the RAAF cut back on display flying shortly afterwards , and the team disbanded in April . A new aerobatic team flying Macchis , the " Roulettes " , was formed at CFS in August 1970 , in preparation for the RAAF 's fiftieth anniversary celebrations commencing in March 1971 . 
 The introduction of the Macchi permitted a brief flirtation with " all @-@ through jet training " starting in 1969 , as it was expected to reduce the time necessary to turn out high @-@ quality pilots , and CFS had begun preparing to train instructors for this purpose in 1967 . All @-@ through jet training was dropped in 1971 , subsequently being labelled " an expensive way of finding out that some pupils lacked the aptitude to become military pilots " . Winjeels continued to operate at CFS until replaced by the CT @-@ 4 <unk> in August 1975 . For the next fifteen years , the main types used for instructor training were the CT @-@ 4 and the Macchi . CFS also flew Dakotas for twin @-@ engined instructor courses until March 1980 ; they were further used to train pilots of the Papua New Guinea Defence Force . The school was presented with the Queen 's Colour by Governor @-@ General Sir Zelman Cowen in September 1978 . In December 1987 , CFS took delivery of its first Pilatus PC @-@ 9 turboprop trainer , to replace the Macchi for advanced flying instructor training . The Roulettes converted to the PC @-@ 9 in 1989 – 90 . The CT @-@ 4 was phased out at the school in favour of the PC @-@ 9 in December 1991 . 
 As of 2012 , CFS continued to operate the PC @-@ 9 for pilot instructor training at East Sale , under the control of the Air Force Training Group 's Air Training Wing , and to administer flying standards across the RAAF . Practising and performing with the Roulettes , which celebrated its fortieth anniversary in 2010 , remains a secondary task for team members after their instructional duties . As well as the Roulettes ' displays , the school is responsible for the training and public relations work of the Air Force Balloons , which are co @-@ located with No. 28 Squadron at HMAS Harman in Canberra . In their role supporting RAAF recruitment and public awareness , the two hot @-@ air balloons are often employed in rural areas as an economical alternative to displays by the Roulettes or other aircraft . 
 = First Battle of Algeciras = 
 The First Battle of Algeciras was a naval battle fought on 6 July 1801 ( 17 messidor an IX of the French Republican Calendar ) between a squadron of British Royal Navy ships of the line and a smaller French Navy squadron at anchor in the fortified Spanish port of Algeciras in the Strait of Gibraltar . The British outnumbered their opponents , but the French position was protected by Spanish gun batteries and the complicated shoals that obscured the entrance to Algeciras Bay . The French squadron , under Contre @-@ Admiral Charles Linois , had stopped at Algeciras en route to the major Spanish naval base at Cadiz , where they were to form a combined French and Spanish fleet for operations against Britain and its allies in the French Revolutionary Wars . The British , under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir James Saumarez , sought to eliminate the French squadron before it could reach Cadiz and form a force powerful enough to overwhelm Saumarez and launch attacks against British forces in the Mediterranean Sea . 
 Sailing directly from his blockade station off Cadiz , Saumarez 's squadron consisted of six ships of the line , twice the number under Linois 's command . Discovering the French at anchor in Algeciras on the morning of 6 July , Saumarez launched an immediate attack on the anchorage through the complicated shoals of Algeciras Bay . Although the initial attack caused severe damage to the French ships , light winds and shallow water led to the British ship HMS Hannibal grounding under heavy fire while the French vessels were driven on shore to prevent their capture . With his intentions frustrated , Saumarez ordered his squadron to withdraw , five of his ships limping out of the bay while the batted Hannibal remained trapped . Isolated and unable to manoeuvre , Captain Solomon Ferris on Hannibal endured the enemy fire for another half an hour before surrendering his ship . 
 Both sides had suffered severe damage and casualties , but both were also aware that the battle would inevitably be rejoined and so the aftermath of the British defeat was one of frenzied activity at Gibraltar , Algeciras and Cadiz . While the British and French squadrons conducted hasty repairs , the French and Spanish fleet at Cadiz was prepared for a rescue mission , a heavy squadron arriving at Algeciras on 12 July . As the squadron departed with Linois 's squadron , it was attacked again by Saumarez 's squadron at the Second Battle of Algeciras and caught at night by faster and more manoeuvrable ships , which resulted in the British inflicting heavy losses on the Spanish rearguard but failing to destroy the French squadron for a second time . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 1 August 1798 , the French Mediterranean Fleet was almost completely destroyed at the Battle of the Nile in Aboukir Bay off Egypt . As a result , the British Royal Navy became dominant in the Mediterranean Sea and imposed blockades on French and Spanish ports in the region , including the important naval bases of Toulon and Cadiz . By 1801 , the British were planning a large scale operation to invade and recapture Egypt from the French , and First Consul Napoleon Bonaparte made plans to restore the Mediterranean Fleet and reinforce the garrison before the invasion took place . To this end , a squadron was despatched to Egypt from the French Atlantic ports and an agreement was reached with the Spanish Navy to supply the French Navy with six ships of the line from their reserve at Cadiz . The squadron never reached Egypt , diverting to Toulon under British pressure and separating , the most seaworthy vessels making a vain attempt to Egypt later in the year while the remainder were left at Toulon . 
 In June 1801 , a squadron of three ships of the line that had been detached from the Egyptian squadron departed Toulon for Cadiz under the command of Contre @-@ Admiral Charles Linois . The squadron 's orders instructed Linois to join with the French and Spanish fleet at Cadiz and take possession of the promised vessels . From there the combined fleet , bolstered by 1 @,@ 500 French soldiers under General Pierre Devaux on Linois 's ships , could launch major operations against British forces or those of their allies : attacks on Egypt and Lisbon were both suggested , although no firm plan had been drawn up for either . Able to leave Toulon without resistance in the absence of the British blockade squadron , Linois passed along the Spanish Mediterranean Coast without interception , passing the fortified British port of Gibraltar on 3 July . There Linois was informed by Captain Lord Cochrane , captured in his brig HMS Speedy on 4 July , that a powerful squadron of seven British ships of the line were stationed off Cadiz under Rear @-@ Admiral Sir James Saumarez . On hearing this news , Linois postponed the plan to reach the Spanish naval base and instead anchored at Algeciras , a well @-@ fortified coastal town in Algeciras Bay , within sight of Gibraltar . 
 At Gibraltar , the only ship in harbour was the small sloop @-@ of @-@ war HMS Calpe under Captain George Dundas , who on sighting the French squadron immediately sent word to Saumarez off Cadiz . The message arrived on 5 July , delivered by Lieutenant Richard <unk> in a small boat . The admiral , a veteran of the Battle of the Nile , immediately gathered his ships and sailed eastwards to investigate . He had only six ships of the line as one , HMS Superb under Captain Richard Goodwin Keats , was on detached duty at the mouth of the Guadalquivir River with the brig HMS Pasley . Saumarez sent messages in the frigate HMS Thames recalling Keats , who followed Saumarez towards Algeciras , and was in sight of the admiral 's ship on the horizon at dawn on 6 July . However , after hearing an inaccurate report from an American merchant ship that Linois had already sailed from Algeciras , Keats reasoned that the French would have turned eastwards for Toulon and thus he would be too late to catch them . He therefore resolved to return to his station observing the Spanish at Cadiz , retaining Pasley and Thames . 
 As Saumarez sailed eastwards towards Algeciras against the wind , the already strong defences at Algeciras were augmented to meet him : Linois drew his ships up in a line of battle across the harbour , with the flagship Formidable at the northern edge , followed by Desaix and with Indomptable to the south , the ships each 500 yards ( 460 m ) apart . The frigate Muiron was stationed in shallower water to the south of Indomptable . The French position was strengthened by the presence of 11 large Spanish gunboats at the northern extremity of the harbour , which was also overlooked by fortifications at the <unk> de San Iago and the Torre de Almirante . The southern approach to the harbour was covered by three gunboats and batteries at Fort Santa Garcia and Torre de la Vila Vega on the shore and the fortified island of Isla Verda , which mounted seven heavy cannon , lay between Indomptable and Muiron . Further support was offered by more distant forts that could land shells in the anchorage and most importantly by the geography of the bay , which was scattered with complicated shoals and rocks that made navigation difficult for unfamiliar sailors . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Saumarez 's attack = = = 
 Delayed during 5 July by contrary winds , Saumarez 's squadron did not reach Algeciras until 07 : 00 on 6 July , the British admiral deciding to immediately descend on the French squadron and issuing orders for his ships to launch their small boats " in readiness to act when required . " Thousands of spectators lined both the Spanish and <unk> shoreline in anticipation of the battle to come . Orders had been given for HMS Venerable under Captain Samuel Hood to lead the attack as the officer with most experience in these waters , and his vessel was the first to enter the bay around Cabrita Point . Once in the bay however , the wind dropped and Hood was left becalmed . As a result , the first shots of the engagement were fired from a battery on Cabrita Point at HMS Pompee under Captain Charles Stirling , which entered the bay at 07 : 50 , followed closely by HMS Audacious under Captain Shuldham Peard . On sighting the British squadron , Linois gave orders for the French ships to warp into the shallower waters along the shoreline , and many sailors and soldiers aboard were despatched to assist the Spanish gun batteries around the bay . The French ships joined the fire as Pompee and Audacious came within range , first Murion and then the ships of the line attacking the approaching British vessels . 
 Saumarez and remainder of the British squadron were 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) behind the leading ships but Stirling pressed ahead with the attack , passing close to the Isla Verda at 08 : 30 and engaging each of the French ships in turn until anchoring next to Formidable at 08 : 45 and opening fire from close range . Venerable and Audacious suffered from light winds further out in the bay and it was not until 08 : 50 that they were able to enter the action , Venerable firing on Desaix and Formidable and Audacious on Indomptable although , contrary to Saumarez 's orders , both were anchored at long range . The French and Spanish responded with a heavy cannonade against the anchored ships , the engagement lasting half an hour until Formidable temporarily ceased firing and began to slowly warp further inshore . Suddenly , Pompee was caught by a fresh current , which swung the ship so that its bow was facing Formidable 's broadside , although at some distance , allowing the French to rake the British ship which could only respond with a handful of the forward cannon . Assistance was provided by Dundas in Calpe , who took his small vessel inshore to engage the Spanish batteries firing on the British squadron , and also attacked Murion at close range , the undermanned frigate still powerful enough however to drive off its smaller opponent . 
 At 09 : 15 the straggling rear of the British squadron began to arrive , led by the flagship HMS Caesar , which anchored ahead of Audacious and inshore of Venerable before opening fire on Desaix . At 09 : 20 , HMS Hannibal under Captain Solomon Ferris joined the action , anchoring ahead of Caesar . This left only HMS Spencer under Captain Henry Darby unengaged : Spencer had been left becalmed to the south of Isla Verda and came under heavy fire from the batteries and towers , some of which were firing shells hot shot designed to start fires in the ship 's timbers . Captain Jahleel Brenton on Caesar suggested to Saumarez that if he negotiated with the Spanish they might permit him to seize the French ships in exchange for a cessation of the action , but Saumarez dismissed the idea as premature . At 10 : 12 , with Formidable pulling into shallower waters away from the attacking British ships , Saumarez sent orders to Captain Ferris on Hannibal instructing him to manoeuvre his ship closer inshore to attack Formidable more effectively : specifically he was told to " go and rake the French admiral " . Ferris began by sailing slowly northwards , using the light winds to pull ahead of the combat before tacking back towards Formidable . The manoeuvre was initially successful , but at 11 : 00 , as he passed the Torre de Almirante , Hannibal grounded . From this position , Ferris was able to direct part of his broadside onto Formidable and the rest against the Spanish shore defences , but his ship was left very vulnerable to fire from the shore . 
 Hannibal was now isolated at the northern end of the British line , under heavy fire from Formidable as well as the Spanish shore batteries and gunboats and unable to manoeuvre or effectively respond . Ferris attempted to notify Saumarez of his ship 's precarious position , but his signal halyards had been torn away by shot and it was sometime before assistance could be organised . The rest of the squadron was ordered to provide ship 's boats to attempt to tow Hannibal off the shoal but the attempt failed , Caesar 's pinnace sinking in the process after being struck by a cannonball . Ultimately , Hannibal was left stranded as the last of the <unk> disappeared , preventing any of the other British ships from coming to Ferris ' assistance . There was however a light land breeze from the northwest that initially favoured the outnumbered and battered French squadron , Linois immediately ordering his ships to sever their anchor cables and use the breeze to manoeuvre slowly into stronger defensive positions closer inshore . His flagship Formidable successfully completed the manoeuvre , but neither Indomptable nor Desaix could be brought back under control in time , and both grounded , Desaix directly in front of Algeciras and Indomptable northeast of Isla Verda with her bow facing out to sea . 
 Saumarez responded by cutting his the cables on Caesar and wearing past the becalmed Audacious and Venerable , taking up station off Indomptable 's vulnerable bows and repeatedly raking the stranded ship . Audacious followed the flagship at 12 : 00 , taking up a new station between Caesar and Indomptable and also opening fire on the beleaguered Indomptable . Both Caesar and Audacious were now directly exposed however to the heavy fire from Isla Verda , the batteries there and all around the bay now manned by French sailors who had evacuated the grounded ships of the line . Audacious had been becalmed with Desaix off the bow and out of the ship 's field of fire and it took considerable time and effort with the ship 's boats to affect the turn needed to engage the French ship . Spencer and Venerable , ordered to join the attack , were unable to take up their intended positions due to the absence of wind , Venerable losing its mizen @-@ topmast to French shot as Hood attempted to wear his ship around . Venerable 's masts and rigging had been so badly torn by this stage of the battle that Hood was no longer able to effectively manoeuvre in the fitful breeze , although he did eventually pull his ship within range . 
 = = = Saumarez 's withdrawal = = = 
 To the north of this engagement , the trapped Pompée and Hannibal were under heavy fire from the anchored Formidable and an array of Spanish batteries and gunboats , both ships taking severe damage without being able to effectively reply as their main broadsides now faced away from the enemy . On Hannibal the situation seemed hopeless : as casualties mounted , the main and mizen masts were shot away and the ship remained firmly and irretrievably grounded . Pompée was in a slightly better position : Sterling 's rigging was in tatters , but his masts held and his ship was at least afloat , although totally becalmed . At one stage , Pompée 's colours were shot away , leading to French claims that the ship had surrendered , although they were quickly replaced . At 11 : 30 , no longer able to contribute to the battle with rigging torn and more than 70 casualties , Saumarez ordered the remainder of the squadron to send their remaining boats to tow Pompée out of danger , the boats coming under heavy fire as they did so , with a number sunk . 
 The diversion of the boats to Pompée prevented Saumarez from launching a planned amphibious assault against Isla Verda with the squadron 's Marines , and in the fitful breeze , both Caesar and Audacious were beginning to drift dangerously close to the shoals around the island : if they grounded , then they would share Hannibal 's fate directly in front of the island 's batteries . Observing the failure of his planned attack on the French squadron , Saumarez raised the signal at 13 : 35 for his ships to withdraw to Gibraltar . Pompée was already well on the way thanks to the towing boats , and Caesar and Audacious were able to cut their remaining anchors and limp out of the bay with the assistance of a sudden land breeze that carried them rapidly out of reach of the French and Spanish guns . They were joined by Venerable and Spencer as they left , the battered squadron retiring to Gibraltar leaving the almost dismasted hulk of Hannibal grounded in Algeciras harbour . 
 On Hannibal , more than sixty men had been killed and Captain Ferris ordered the survivors below decks to escape the worst of the fire as the combined guns of the French and Spanish forces turned on the last remaining target , starting several fires . By 14 : 00 , seeing that continued resistance was futile , he had ordered the colours struck , and the Hannibal 's ensign came down . French and Spanish soldiers then stormed the ship , and Hannibal 's surgeon later reported that a number of wounded men were trampled to death as the boarding parties sought to extinguish the fires . It has not been established whether what followed was a misunderstanding aboard Hannibal or a deliberate ploy by the French , but Hannibal 's ensign was then rehoisted upside down , a recognised international signal of distress . Captain Dundas , who had watched the entire battle from Gibraltar , believed on seeing the flag that it meant that Ferris was still holding out on Hannibal and requesting either support to salvage his battered ship or for it to be evacuated before surrendering . Boats were sent from Gibraltar with carpenters from the dockyards there to effect repairs on Hannibal and Dundas took HMS Calpe back into the bay to provide assistance , coming under heavy fire before withdrawing when his error was realised , although not before several of the boats had been seized by the French as their crews boarded Hannibal . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Both sides had suffered heavy casualties and damage , the British losing 121 killed , 240 wounded and 11 missing , the missing thought to have drowned when their boats were sunk . As well as the loss of Hannibal , both Pompée and Caesar were heavily damaged , although both Venerable and Spencer had only suffered relatively lightly during the battle . Casualties were heavy throughout the squadron , Hannibal suffering more than 140 men killed and wounded and the rest made prisoner , Pompée more than 80 casualties and none of the other ships less than 30 . The French had suffered higher casualties , with 161 killed , including Captains Moncousu and Lalonde and 324 wounded , including Devaux . All three French ships of the line were damaged : Saumarez believed that the French ships " were unserviceable " following the battle , although he was soon proven incorrect . Indomptable and Desaix were particularly damaged , although the frigate Murion , which had remained in the shallow water of Algeciras harbour , was undamaged . The Spanish reportedly had 11 men killed and an unspecified number wounded , the casualties occurring in the battered forts and on the gunboats , five of which had been destroyed in the battle . The British crews had found during the engagement that their gunnery was affected by the lack of wind , much of their shot flying over the French ships and into the town of Algeciras , which was considerably damaged . The Spanish authorities later accused Saumarez of deliberately targeting the town in his frustration at being unable to capture the French squadron . 
 On 7 July , Saumarez sent Captain Brenton into Algeciras with a flag of truce and negotiations were held with a view to returning Captain Ferris and his officers to British control under terms of parole . After a brief correspondence between Linois and Saumarez this was agreed , and Ferris , his officers , his wounded men and the officers taken from HMS Speedy were sent to Gibraltar . By August 1801 , Ferris and his officers were back in Britain , where a court @-@ martial , standard practice in the case of a ship lost to the enemy , was held . Rear @-@ Admiral John Holloway presided and the court found that Ferris ' conduct during the battle was exemplary and he was acquitted of any blame for the loss of his ship . On returning his sword , Holloway remarked that " I feel assured , if ever you have occasion to <unk> it again , it will be used with the same gallantry which you so nobly displayed in defending his majesty 's ship Hannibal . " 
 The immediate reaction in both Algeciras and Gibraltar was devoted to repairing and refitting the damaged warships : it was assumed by all involved that continuation of the action had merely been postponed rather than concluded . At Gibraltar , Saumarez decided to temporarily abandon Pompée and Caesar and reassign their crews to ensuring that the rest of the squadron was ready for battle . This decision was disputed by Captain Brenton of Caesar , and by working continuously for three days <unk> 's crew successfully readied their ship in time for Saumarez to sail again . The haste was necessary because Linois , while strenuously repairing his own squadron and readying the captured Hannibal for sea with jury masts , had sent word to Cadiz urging Vice @-@ Admiral Jose de Mazzaredo to send reinforcements before Saumarez was ready to attack again . Urged by French Contre @-@ Admiral Pierre Dumanoir le Pelley , who was in Cadiz to take occupation of the promised six ships of the line , Mazzaredo ordered Vice @-@ Admiral Juan Joaquin de Moreno to sail with a formidable force which arrived off Algeciras Bay on 9 July . The Franco @-@ Spanish squadron was shadowed by Superb , which then joined Saumarez at Gibraltar . At Algeciras the Spanish squadron intended to collect Linois and convoy his battered squadron to Cadiz with five ships of the line , including two massive 112 @-@ gun first rate ships , as escorts . Hannibal proved too damaged for the journey and was anchored in Algeciras harbour , but the remainder of the French and Spanish squadrons sailed for Cadiz on 12 July and were caught that night by Saumarez 's repaired squadron in the Second Battle of Algeciras . The Spanish rearguard was overwhelmed , the 112 @-@ gun ships both sunk with more than 1 @,@ 700 lives and another ship was captured , but Linois 's force succeeded in reaching Cadiz the following morning . Hannibal was later removed from Algeciras by the French and commissioned as Annibal . 
 In France , the victory was the cause of celebration , Le Moniteur Universel declaring that " the combat covers the French arms with glory and shows what they are capable of " . Linois was proclaimed a national hero and presented with a Sabre d 'honneur by Napoleon . The French victory over a significantly stronger British force was an unusual event in the war during which the Royal Navy had dominated at sea . Saumarez publicly represented the battle as a victory , declaring that he had " compleatly [ sic ] succeeded in disabling the Enemy 's ships " , although in private he acknowledged the defeat . Historian Richard Gardiner commented that " The well trained and led French had fought hard and skillfully and a combination of weather , luck and shore support had given them the victory against a superior force of which they had captured one . It is , however , also significant that this rare British setback occurred close inshore with all the difficulties and <unk> that implied . " 
 = FutureSex / LoveSounds = 
 FutureSex / LoveSounds is the second studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake . It was released on September 8 , 2006 by Jive Records and its affiliated label of the Zomba Group of Companies . During a two @-@ year hiatus , Timberlake resolved his feelings on being unable to record any new material , and as he returned to record some new music , he began collaborating with his longtime record producer Timbaland , alongside the latter 's colleague Danja . The album 's contents were produced at Timbaland 's Thomas Crown Studios . The album shares some lyrical themes with Timberlake 's debut album Justified ( 2002 ) , although FutureSex / LoveSounds has more diversity in music genres . It infuses R & B and pop with techno , funk , and elements of rock . The reprises and interludes interspersed on the album 's tracks were created by the production team with the goal of channeling Timberlake 's influences ; including David Bowie and Prince . 
 FutureSex / LoveSounds was met with acclaim from music critics , who noted its wide range of influences and collection of eclectic sounds . The album produced six singles that attained chart success ; including U.S. Billboard Hot 100 number @-@ one singles : " SexyBack " , " My Love " , and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . With " Summer Love " , the album achieved four U.S. Mainstream Top 40 number @-@ one songs . Rolling Stone magazine ranked the album at number 46 on its list of the best albums of the 2000s , and aside from earning numerous best @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade lists , the album received several Grammy Award nominations ; including Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album . It has been certified multi @-@ platinum in many countries worldwide , and has sold over ten million copies , with four million in the United States . The album has been added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's musical library and archive . 
 = = Background = = 
 In November 2002 , Justin Timberlake released his debut album Justified , and produced the US top @-@ five singles : " Rock Your Body " and " Cry Me a River " . " Cry Me a River " in particular was credited for having helped the album sell and peak on the music charts . Justified ended selling four million copies in the United States alone . Although the album established Timberlake 's career outside his then @-@ band * NSYNC , Timberlake ( who was 22 years old at the time ) , was " at a crossroads " and felt he was at the stage of being " burnt out " , and thought he had lost his voice " in regards to knowing what ( and how ) he wanted to sing " . Timberlake stated that Justified had been years in the making , and a record that would re @-@ create its success would be a challenge he was not ready to take . 
 In the following years , Timberlake went partially idle in the music industry . His being " burnt out " partly caused him to try acting in films . In October 2003 , he hosted and was the guest musician on the late @-@ night variety show Saturday Night Live , where he showcased his acting potentials . He also paired with American actor Jimmy Fallon on The Barry Gibb Talk Show . After the show , Timberlake was reportedly " inundated " with acting offers , which he readily accepted partly because he needed inspiration and did not want to pass up the opportunities . Before returning to music , Timberlake shot four films ; including Edison Force ( 2005 ) and Alpha Dog ( 2006 ) . Timberlake opted not to pursue the reunion with * NSYNC , which he considered after Justified . According to him , he was concerned with how they would reinvent their music . In late 2004 , Timberlake then contacted record producers Rich Harrison and Rodney Jerkins , who had produced songs for * NSYNC . Both producers were " impressed " by the live band @-@ driven late @-@ night shows Timberlake had participated in and wanted to incorporate this in his music . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In 2005 , Timberlake felt inspired to record songs again . Motivated by the " sad state " of pop radio , he decided he needed to experiment with music . Reportedly , it was not until Timberlake turned to producer Timbaland " that he figured out the direction he wanted the record to take " . In November 2005 , Timberlake visited Timbaland 's brand @-@ new Thomas Crown Studios in Virginia Beach , Virginia , United States . Timbaland had previously collaborated with Timberlake , producing four tracks for Justified including " Cry Me a River " . 
 Once in the studio , however , the team had no clear direction for the album as there were no concepts being discussed . Aside from having " Cry Me a River " to draw from , they had no " game plan " and no working title for the new album . Timberlake thought that if he could make a record that would live up to Justified , he " would have " . So he asked Timbaland if he could reproduce the likes of " Cry Me a River " by four or six times . 
 While in the studio , Timbaland played on the stereo plenty of songs by American singer and musician Prince for them to listen to . Early in their sessions , they reportedly were " fooling around " and " freestyling " . One night , Danja was playing a guitar riff and caught the attention of Timberlake , who then started humming to the melody and later sung the lyrics . Timbaland , who was at their side , added drums onto the progressing sound . After an hour , with no lyrics written on paper , Timberlake recorded in the vocal booth a song that would become " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . Timberlake , having been teased by Timbaland , said to the latter : " Let 's do something we would never do . Let 's go far left and just see what happens . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Official production for FutureSex / LoveSounds started in December 2005 . When production began , Jive Records Chairman and CEO , Barry Weiss , asked when the album would be completed , to which Timberlake replied that it could possibly take a year . The title was not finalized until Jive Records gave Timberlake a deadline on finishing what would become FutureSex / LoveSounds . The collective thought the album is comparable with Michael Jackson 's landmark record , Thriller , dubbing their own as FS / LS Thriller 2006 . Timberlake is a fan of Jackson and even name @-@ drops the latter in the song " Chop Me Up " . 
 According to Timberlake , FutureSex / LoveSounds is like a " fashion editorial , <unk> and Gucci suits , which goes with the sonics " . The album 's artworks were shot by American fashion photographer Terry Richardson . The cover features Timberlake stomping a disco ball using his black pointy shoe . 
 For his new project , Timberlake collaborated with only few producers . With no concrete plans , however , Timberlake 's goal for the album was " ' to capture moments ' with a vivid , raw , off @-@ the @-@ cuff sound " . Timberlake , who included record production in his repertoire , managed the recording sessions with no formula . His sessions with Timbaland and Danja were described as free @-@ flowing , and he referred to themselves in the process as " looking like [ mad men ] , a mad scientist " . 
 On his collaboration with Timbaland , Timberlake asserted that they " have a very interesting connection " in music . In ten days , they composed at least eight to ten songs with the lyrics , melodies , and vocals all in place . In three weeks , after that transitional moment with " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " , the collective was able to produce songs like " My Love " , " SexyBack " , and " Sexy Ladies " . Unlike Justified which was recorded in six weeks , Timberlake said that FutureSex / LoveSounds took one year to complete . 
 Sessions for the album also saw Timberlake collaborating with Rick Rubin and will.i.am , the latter himself a member of the hip hop group The Black Eyed Peas , whose 2003 single " Where Is the Love ? " Timberlake lent vocals to . For the production , they are credited as Jawbreakers , a production team of their own established during their collaboration for The Black Eyed Peas ' album . Four songs were produced with will.i.am , although only " Damn Girl " made it to the standard edition of the album . 
 Actor Chris Rock recommended producer Rubin to Timberlake , who considered the idea and discussed it with Rubin when he saw him at a music festival in Coachella , California . Timberlake went to singer @-@ songwriter Neil Diamond 's studio , where Rubin played him some demos , one of which was a ballad that would become " ( Another Song ) All Over Again " . Timberlake suggested that the collaboration was meant to " do the anti @-@ whatever @-@ you @-@ want @-@ to @-@ call @-@ it that [ Timbaland and ] I came up with " . 
 = = Music = = 
 During the production of FutureSex / LoveSounds , Timberlake was interested in rock music . This inspiration was used in his approach in recording the songs , rather than in composing them . Timberlake reveals , " I wanted to sing the song like a rock and roll singer , not an R & B singer . " On the influences he drew from , he said that if Justified was " characterized " by Michael Jackson and Stevie Wonder , FutureSex / LoveSounds is more like David Bowie and Prince . Other influences include late INXS @-@ frontman Michael Hutchence , Arcade Fire , David Byrne , The Killers , The Strokes , and Radiohead . 
 Although Timberlake expressed interest in recording songs with rock influences , Timbaland was initially reluctant to pursue the idea because he was not accustomed to producing such music . Nonetheless , he suggested that they could produce a handful , since they were afraid of alienating Timberlake 's urban fan base . Because of this concern , they produced several reprises , encores and preludes with a rock influence , instead of full @-@ length songs . As to the sound of FutureSex / LoveSounds , " My Love " , the second song composed , steered the album 's direction . Danja revealed that it " changed the whole album " , and the energy derived from the song was sustained throughout the process . On his inspiration for the infusion of R & B with trance in the album , Danja remembers : 
 I heard dance and techno and was always interested in it but didn 't really know where to go . But I went to a club one night and saw that people were losing their mind to these dance tracks . It wasn 't really that I wanted to mimic that sound . I just wanted to have that energy and have people going crazy . So I knew the fusion was putting R & B with trance . 
 Unlike his previous record that was intended to focus on R & B and pop genres , FutureSex / LoveSounds is less concentrated on one particular sound , thus representing a wider range . Timberlake explains , " It 's more broad as far as the styles I wanted to mix in to my own type of thing . " A musically " complex " album , FutureSex / LoveSounds is a fusion of rap , rock , funk , soul , gospel , new wave , opera , and world music . Entertainment Weekly noted that the album 's sound is a " sonic departure " from both * NSYNC and Justified . Although " What Goes Around " sounds similar to Justified , Timberlake admitted that it is the only song in the new album to have such similarity . Critics noted that the influences and styles are varied across the album 's track list . The title track " FutureSex / LoveSound " incorporates early 1980s new wave and industrial rock . The song " Sexy Ladies " takes on Minneapolis funk . Another funk song on the album is the lead single " SexyBack " , the style of which is described by Timberlake as " club funk " . Meanwhile , the track " Damn Girl " , which was produced by the Jawbreakers , incorporates ' 60s soul music . Gospel music is infused in " Losing My Way " , which is the only song in the album that features choir arrangement . 
 = = Lyrics = = 
 Most of the songs ' lyrics were not written down on paper , as Timberlake believed it would only slow him down . For most of the album 's production , Timberlake composed the lyrics in his head and would record the song shortly after . Some songs were conceptualized within a relatively shorter time , while others took longer because Timberlake had wanted to incorporate variation . For instance , the lyrics to " Losing My Way " were in a narrative style which took Timberlake longer to write . The only song that Timberlake wrote down on paper was the Rick Rubin @-@ produced " ( Another Song ) All Over Again " . Rubin felt it was unusual for Timberlake because he requested the latter to write the lyrics first instead of recording it directly in the vocal booth . 
 Sharing common themes with Justified , FutureSex / LoveSounds contains songs that are thematically based on and , according to Timberlake , were motivated by sex and love . MTV editor Jennifer Vineyard summarizes that the album illustrates " the very nature of how sex and love are interchangeable and immutable and contradictory and complementary all at once " . The first half of the album , FutureSex , generally focuses on themes about sex that are evident on songs like the title track " FutureSex / LoveSound " , " LoveStoned " , " Damn Girl " and " Sexy Ladies " . The second half , LoveSounds , is the album 's " sweet side " , encompassing songs such as " My Love " , the slow jam " Until the End of Time " and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . Meanwhile , " LoveStoned " transitions to the two @-@ minute prelude " I Think She Knows " . 
 Although themes of sex and love are dominant in the album , the song " Losing My Way " diverges to a more serious topic , which was inspired by a documentary of crystal meth addiction that Timberlake watched . Meanwhile , " ( Another Song ) All Over Again " is a homage to soul musician Donny Hathaway , according to Timberlake . The lyrics to " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " are thought to have similar meaning to " Cry Me a River " . In an interview , he revealed that the song was based on one of his friends ' experience . " My Love " was also noted as " arguably " similar with " Cry Me a River " . Timberlake however confirmed in many interviews that the record is not autobiographical , although he himself had an experience from which to draw . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Six major singles were issued from the album , led by " SexyBack " which was released on July 7 , 2006 , two months prior to the publication of the album . Regarding the song , Timberlake surmised he did not sound like he did before . " SexyBack " , which lacks his distinctive falsetto , is seen as a complete departure from Timberlake 's recognized sound , and his management thought it might risk being unrecognizable as a " Justin Timberlake song " . But that risk nonetheless appealed to Timberlake , who reportedly insisted to have " SexyBack " released as the album 's lead single . Jive Records executive Barry Weiss , who initially doubted the suggestion , later told in an interview in February 2007 that albeit an " unusual record " , it was a " risk that clearly paid off " . 
 " SexyBack " was followed with the release of " My Love " in the third quarter of 2006 , and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " in early January 2007 . The single releases for the standard edition of the album spanned a year , during which time the fourth single , " LoveStoned / I Think She Knows " , was released . When the deluxe edition was issued , the duet version of " Until the End of Time " was also released in the same month . The single version includes as its B @-@ side the " Set the Mood ( Prelude ) " , which is juxtaposed with " Summer Love " in the album 's track listing . The European release of " Until the End of Time " omits " Set the Mood ( Prelude ) " , and instead included " Summer Love " as double A @-@ side . 
 Commercially , the album 's first three singles have been the most successful in the domestic music market . They each peaked at number one on the US Billboard Hot 100 , giving Timberlake credit as the only artist to achieve such feat since R & B singer Usher accomplished four chart @-@ topping singles between February and December 2004 . " SexyBack " and " My Love " have since been certified multi @-@ platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , an achievement that was seen as " rare " amidst free file @-@ sharing in the Internet , which had made reaching the million mark in sales a struggle in the music industry . 
 = = Tour = = 
 In support of the album , Timberlake embarked on the FutureSex / LoveShow , his first concert tour on a global scale . Promoted primarily by AEG Live , the concert tour reached North America , Europe , Asia and Oceania , with 119 venues in total . It began on January 8 , 2007 , in San Diego , California , and culminated in Abu Dhabi , United Arab Emirates , on December 6 , 2007 . FutureSex / LoveShow , which drew 1 @.@ 6 million people worldwide , grossed a total of US $ 126 @.@ 8 million , the third top @-@ grossing concert tour in 2007 . 
 In May 2007 , it was announced that Timberlake signed a deal with HBO network to broadcast the live concert . Timberlake had previously appeared on HBO , which aired the * NSYNC Live From Madison Square Garden concert in 2000 . FutureSex / LoveShow was taped on the second night at the Madison Square Garden on August 16 , 2007 . The footage was broadcast by HBO on September 3 , 2007 , and later on September 6 due to demand . On November 20 , 2007 , a two @-@ disc edition of FutureSex / LoveShow : Live from Madison Square Garden was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats that were sold exclusively by the retailer Best Buy . The release included extra footage including a song @-@ by @-@ song commentary by Timberlake and pre- and post @-@ show clips . 
 In 2008 , the broadcast earned Timberlake an Emmy Award in the category Outstanding Picture Editing For A Special ( Single Or Multi @-@ Camera ) . For Timberlake 's performance of " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " at the Madison Square Garden , Josh Tyrangiel of Time magazine ranked it second on its list of top ten live performances in 2007 . Tyrangiel writes , " It 's a little on the long side , but Timberlake earns this symphonic take on What Goes Around from his HBO special . " On October 31 , 2007 , Billboard magazine announced the finalists for the 2007 Billboard Touring Awards , which was based on actual box office performance from January 1 , 2007 , to September 30 , 2007 . Timberlake was nominated in the categories Top Tour , Top Draw and Breakthrough Artist ; he won the latter that was announced during the awards show on November 15 , 2007 . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 FutureSex / LoveSounds was released worldwide on September 13 , 2006 . More than a year after its initial release , a deluxe edition of the album was issued on November 27 , 2007 . This edition contains three additional tracks on the album , each featuring guest artist . One of the tracks is a re @-@ recording of " Until the End of Time " , now a duet between Timberlake and American R & B singer Beyoncé . Also included with the Deluxe Edition is a bonus DVD , which contains footage from Timberlake 's live performances and behind the scenes on the music videos of four singles , including " SexyBack " and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " . The main album included with the Deluxe Edition is the edited version ; and an explicit version was not issued . 
 According to Billboard magazine , Jive 's mother company Sony BMG offered 71 distinct products to tie in with FutureSex / LoveSounds . This was an attempt at finding solutions to declining sales in physical albums , and Timberlake 's album was among those offered in various configurations and versions . Aside from the album itself , the project included digital versions , ringtones , wallpapers and individual tracks . 
 Before , an artist 's release was made available in less than ten formats . In recent years , however , versioning strategies have been increasingly applied to the recording industry . On the 2010 book The Music Industry : Music in the Cloud which examines such context , author Patrik <unk> noted FutureSex / LoveSounds as one " high @-@ profile " example . From the project , a total of 115 versions or products have been sold . According to the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , the project has sold as of 2008 more than 19 million units worldwide , 20 percent of which were sales on CD format . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 Fueled by its lead single " SexyBack " , FutureSex / LoveSounds sold more than 684 @,@ 000 units in its first week , peaking at number one on the Billboard 200 , the official US albums chart . It became Timberlake 's first number @-@ one album as a solo artist . The album has sold over four million units in the United States , and has been certified four @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . FutureSex / LoveSounds became the eighteenth best @-@ selling album of 2006 in the United States . As of March 2013 , the album has sold 4 @.@ 4 million copies in the US . 
 Internationally , the album was also well received , selling almost equal units and topping many charts worldwide . Sony BMG distinguished FutureSex / LoveSounds as the biggest @-@ selling album among the record company 's releases in 2006 . Weiss noted that in the past three to five years before the album 's release , American artists found it increasingly hard to achieve commercial success in international music markets . He found that Timberlake was among those few " that successfully sells in every country around the world " . According to MTV , the album has since sold more than 10 million units worldwide . 
 In the United Kingdom , the album debuted at number one . FutureSex / LoveSounds became the biggest pre @-@ order album in iTunes history , breaking the all @-@ time record for one week digital sales previously held by the English alternative rock band Coldplay . Elsewhere in Europe , the album debuted at number one in Ireland , and opened at number two in Sweden and Switzerland . In Australia , the album peaked at number one and has since been certified five @-@ times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association , denoting shipments of over 350 @,@ 000 units . FutureSex / LoveSounds was the thirty @-@ fourth best @-@ selling album of 2006 in Australia , and third in the following year . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 FutureSex / LoveSounds was met with critical acclaim from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 , the album received an average score of 70 , based on 25 reviews . Torque commended Timberlake for " manag [ ing ] to surprise with an eclectic collection of sounds , and in a good way " . Katy Kroll of Billboard noted the album 's sound as a " bit different , but the music 's sex appeal remains a force to be reckoned with " . Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times suggested that the album is not " an easy listen at first " , but " repeated listening helps the tunes unravel " . AllMusic senior editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine commended Timberlake 's " clear musical vision " and stated , " <unk> he may be , [ he ] is nevertheless kind of fascinating on FutureSex / LoveSounds " . Q called it a " set of forward @-@ thinking pop reminiscent of " Prince 's 1987 album Sign " O " the Times . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times stated , " How well do Mr. Timberlake and Timbaland work together ? So well that they can make even the world 's most irritating percussion instrument , the human beatbox , sound pretty good . " She also took notice of the album 's preludes and interludes , writing , " Timbaland has long been known for hiding little surprises near the end of songs , and here he takes his obsession with transformation to new heights . " 
 In a mixed review , Uncut magazine found the album " laudable , but overreaching . " Vibe felt that Timberlake and Timbaland 's songwriting is " frustratingly awkward " . Alexis Petridis , writing for The Guardian , said that the album " almost works : close , but no enema . " Ben Williams of New York magazine commented that Timberlake is " better at being sappy than sexy " and concluded , " If he hasn 't yet invented a persona intriguing enough to live up to his music , give him credit for being one of the few white men still brave enough to make black music . " Robert Christgau of Rolling Stone found Timberlake 's " best new " songs " thrilling " , although " some of the up @-@ tempo stuff flirts with mechanical muscle @-@ flexing " and " Losing My Way " is a " well @-@ meaning " but " clueless embarrassment . " In his consumer guide for MSN Music , he cited " My Love " and " SexyBack " as highlights and gave the album a three @-@ star honorable mention , indicating " an enjoyable effort consumers attuned to its overriding aesthetic or individual vision may well treasure . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 In 2007 , the album received four nominations at the Grammy Awards , including Album of the Year and Pop Vocal Album . Timberlake lost the two ; however , he won the Best Dance Recording for " SexyBack " and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " My Love " , featuring rapper T.I. The following year at the Grammys , " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " was nominated for Record of the Year ; Timberlake won Best Male Pop Vocal Performance for the same song and another Best Dance Recording for " LoveStoned / I Think She Knows ( Interlude ) " . In 2007 , Timberlake was nominated for seven categories at the MTV Video Music Awards , winning four , including Artist of the Year . He also earned the Quadruple Threat award , an accolade that recognizes those artists who have excelled in multiple media including music , fashion and acting . For the album and its singles , Timberlake won World 's Best Selling American Artist and World 's Best Selling Pop Male Artist at the 2007 World Music Awards . 
 Aside from procuring awards and nominations , the album earned numerous best @-@ of lists in 2006 and the following years . Music magazine Rolling Stone listed FutureSex / LoveSounds as their 26th among 2006 's top 50 albums of the year . On the British newspaper The Observer , the album made it at number 47 on the publication 's list best 50 albums of 2006 . On the general publication Time , the album is ranked eighth among its list of ten best albums in 2006 . The publication notes that Timberlake " levitates into a falsetto that honors Prince and Michael Jackson without stealing from them " . 
 FutureSex / LoveSounds earned numerous best @-@ of @-@ the @-@ decade lists . Rolling Stone ranked it 46th on their top 100 albums of the 2000s - calling it " an avant @-@ garde sprawl of abstract electronica and hallucinatory space funk . " Entertainment Weekly ranked the album at number nine on their list of 10 best albums of the decade . It says that FutureSex / LoveSounds is an album that " redefined pop 's cutting edge " . Earlier in 2008 , the album made it at number 31 on the magazine 's 100 new classics in music . The album received additional acclaim from Pitchfork Media and Slant Magazine , ranking the album at number 79 and 49 on their respective " Best of the 2000s " lists . In 2013 , Vibe named it the greatest album of the 2000s and ranked it at 5 on their list of " The Greatest 50 Albums Since ' 93 " . In 2015 , Spin made a list of the 300 best albums of the past 30 years ( 1985 @-@ 2014 ) , raking the album at number 101 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The success of FutureSex / LoveSounds had an impact on both Timberlake 's and Timbaland 's careers . For Timberlake , it further established his career as a solo artist . He comments , " ' SexyBack ' was the point when people stopped asking me when * NSYNC [ sic ] were going to reunite and started asking what I was going to do next . " Timberlake has also beefed up his fan base , gaining " hipster " fans in the wake of the album 's success . 
 Combining the international success of Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveSounds and Nelly Furtado 's Loose , demands for Timbaland 's work reportedly surged . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Chris Willman remarked that FutureSex / LoveSounds is " like Timberlake 's ' cred ' record " , although Chris Collis said Timbaland nearly stole the spotlight , sharing with Timberlake the " star " status . 
 Aside from earning critical acclaim for the album , according to Sia Michel of The New York Times , Timberlake was responsible for popularizing in 2006 the catchphrase " I 'm bringing sexy back " , which is culled from the lead single " SexyBack " . It spawned a " phenomenon " in which video @-@ makers spoofed the song . At least four parodies gained attention such as " <unk> " and " <unk> " . 
 In 2007 , Timberlake is ranked among Time magazine 's 100 men and women " whose power , talent or moral example is transforming the world " . For the publication , Timbaland writes , " It 's as if Justin had been born 26 years ago to deliver music to the world . There are those who follow and those who lead . Justin is a leader , setting the bar for what 's expected of others . " The album has been added to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame 's musical library and archive . 
 In 2013 , Maura Johnston from Vibe called it an " ambitious classic " , writing FutureSex / LoveSounds " musically propelled the pop & B genre with audio novellas , interlude twists , Timbaland 's weirdo sound effects and that irresistible falsetto " and " embraced the hard / soft duality implied by the title to thrilling effect — and because of their mastery of that balancing act , FutureSex / LoveSounds would go on to influence , if not define , much of the pop music that came after it . " also adding it " pushed boundaries more forcefully than works by fellow crooners R. Kelly and Usher . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Notes 
 " Damn Girl " contains a sample of " A New Day ( Is Here at Last ) " , written and performed by J. C. Davis . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Something Nice Back Home = 
 " Something Nice Back Home " is the tenth episode of the American Broadcasting Company 's fourth season of the serial drama television series Lost and 82nd episode overall . It was aired on May 1 , 2008 , on ABC in the United States and on CTV in Canada . The episode was written in February and March by co @-@ executive producers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz and directed in March and April by supervising producer Stephen Williams . Critical reviews were mixed and the broadcast of " Something Nice Back Home " brought in 13 million American viewers , one of the smallest audiences for an original episode of Lost in the show 's history . 
 The narrative begins on December 28 , 2004 , 98 days after the crash of Oceanic Airlines Flight 815 . The leader of the survivors , Jack Shephard ( played by Matthew Fox ) develops appendicitis and Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) operates on him . Meanwhile , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) , Miles Straume ( Ken Leung ) , Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) , and her baby Aaron continue their trek to the beach from the Barracks . In a flashforward , Jack experiences visions of his deceased father Christian Shephard ( John Terry ) , while his relationship with Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) is strained soon after he proposes marriage . Kitsis said that the episode " was interesting because [ it shows ] a time , maybe brief , where Jack was happy . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 After feeling ill for a day , Jack faints . Juliet diagnoses him with appendicitis and deems an appendectomy necessary . She sends Sun Kwon ( Yunjin Kim ) to get medical supplies from the Staff Dharma Initiative medical station . Sun is accompanied by Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) , Daniel Faraday ( Jeremy Davies ) and Charlotte Lewis ( Rebecca Mader ) ; the latter pair are increasingly distrusted by the survivors . Jin realizes that Charlotte is fluent in Korean and confronts her after their successful trip , threatening to hurt Daniel if she continues to lie about her agenda and does not get Sun off the island . Jack convinces Juliet to allow him to remain awake during the surgery , with Kate holding a mirror , so that he can see and direct the surgery . As Juliet operates , Jack 's consciousness proves to be a detriment and her nurse — dentist Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) — knocks him out with chloroform . The appendectomy is a success ; afterwards , Juliet tells Kate that Jack really does love Kate and not Juliet . 
 Sawyer gives Miles a " restraining order " to keep him away from Claire as they travel to the survivors ' beach camp with Claire 's infant son , Aaron . On their way , Miles discovers the partially buried bodies of Danielle Rousseau ( Mira Furlan ) and Karl ( Blake Bashoff ) . They encounter Frank Lapidus ( Jeff Fahey ) , who saves their lives by instructing them to hide from a nearby Martin Keamy ( Kevin Durand ) and the other mercenaries , who are on their way back to the helicopter to return to the freighter Kahana . At night , Miles watches Claire as she leaves with her deceased father , Christian . Sawyer awakes the next morning to find Aaron alone in a nearby tree and calls out for Claire with no response . 
 In flashforwards , Jack has returned to work as a doctor in Los Angeles . He is engaged to Kate and lives with her while helping to raise Aaron ( William Blanchette ) . Jack visits Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) , who is in a mental institution . Hurley has not been taking his medication and suffering from hallucinations of his deceased friend , Charlie Pace ( Dominic Monaghan ) . He believes that the Oceanic Six have died and gone to heaven . Hurley gives Jack a message from Charlie : " You 're not supposed to raise him . " Charlie has also told Hurley that Jack will be receiving a visitor . On two separate occasions , Jack sees his father ; Jack asks his colleague Erika Stevenson ( April Parker Jones ) to prescribe him the anti @-@ anxiety drug clonazepam . After overhearing a phone call , Jack becomes suspicious of Kate . The next night , a heated argument ensues , in which she reveals that she is doing an errand for Sawyer , who Jack says is on the island by choice . Aaron walks into the room as Jack blurts out that Kate and Aaron are not related . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by March 10 , 2008 and was done alongside " The Shape of Things to Come " and " Cabin Fever " . Shooting began by March 24 , alongside filming of the previous episode and continued through April 4 . The flashforwards were written partially to explain what led Jack to become the drug addict that he is in third season finale 's flashforwards , who believes that his father is alive . Matthew Fox stated that the fourth season is " starting to close the loop on the end of [ the third ] season . Jack in the future is a man marked by weakness , but the Jack [ on the island in December 2004 ] is strong . [ ' Something Nice Back Home ' explains ] how he made that transition . " When asked why Hurley does not take drugs to see Charlie , but Jack starts his drug addiction to try not to see Christian , Edward Kitsis said that " Jack has … always been a man of science , and there has to be something logical . The scene where Jack is staring at the bench where Hurley sits when Charlie visits him , I think in that moment he 's thinking , my life right now is pretty good , I don 't want to end up here . " In regard to the contrast in Kate 's character on the island and after the island , Kitsis said that " you could say [ that ] motherhood suits her . In the flashforwards … there 's a sense of purpose to her , there 's some clarity to her . There 's so much devotion to that child , and she appears to be such a great mother … taking care of Aaron may have helped her put away some other issues . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Something Nice Back Home " was viewed live or recorded and watched within four hours of broadcast by 10 @.@ 726 million American viewers , scoring a 4 @.@ 7 / 13 in the key adults 18 – 49 demographic , ranking Lost as the twenty @-@ first most watched series of the week and setting a ratings low for the series . A total of 12 @.@ 946 million Americans watched the episode live or recorded it and watched it within seven days ; this number was factored into the season 's average . The episode was viewed by 1 @.@ 322 million Canadians , making Lost the nineteenth most watched show of the week . 647 @,@ 000 in the United Kingdom tuned in to the local broadcast . In Australia , " Something Nice Back Home " was watched by 505 000 people , having been moved to a later timeslot of 10 @.@ 30 pm , outside the prime time viewing block . 
 Verne Gay of Newsday described it as " another fine , fine Lost " . The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune 's Karla Peterson gave the episode an " A " , calling it " one of those dense , chewy episodes in which a lot of stuff happened to a lot of people , and the foundation was laid for one hell of a season finale . " She praised Fox , Evangeline Lilly , Jorge Garcia , Elizabeth Mitchell and Jeremy Davies 's work in " Something Nice Back Home " , while Tom <unk> of The Daytona Beach News @-@ Journal deemed Jeremy Davies 's performance deserving of an Emmy Award . The Palm Beach Post 's Kevin Thompson " thought [ that ] Matthew [ Fox ] did a nice job conveying a wide range of emotions — scared , haunted , frustration , horny , jealousy , just to name a few . " Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly said that " Something Nice Back Home " " was partly a transitional passage in the Lost saga , a busywork episode designed to put all the characters in position for the year 's big finale " and " [ Jack 's ] appendicitis [ was ] the kind of hardcore castaway survival plotline we haven 't really seen since season 1 . Combined with a strong character @-@ driven flash story , it was very old school Lost . " Jensen also " liked how the episode neatly neutralized one of [ his ] least favorite season 4 moments , the Jack @-@ Juliet smooch " . TV Guide 's Michael Ausiello wrote that " Fox quietly solidified his status as one of the tube 's most reliable and unshowy stalwarts " and deemed him deserving of a Primetime Emmy Award nomination . Oscar Dahl of BuddyTV gave the episode a positive review , saying that he was " shocked and baffled " and writing that " Lost … can give me an exciting , well @-@ done episode while making me fear where the series is going … [ because ] ghosts aren 't my thing . " The Huffington Post 's Jay Glatfelter decided that " what made this episode great was the fact that it just contained so much story [ with ] Jack 's flashforward [ making ] this one of his most interesting ' centric ' episodes . … Not only was Jack 's story interesting for a change , but the inclusion of [ many ] other characters … and giving them great story and character development [ was also intriguing ] . " Daniel of TMZ graded " Something Nice Back Home " as a " B " . In his recap , he wrote that " if that 's the last we ever see of Claire again , that would be <unk> awesome . " 
 Robert Bianco of USA Today praised Fox 's performance , saying that it was almost worthy of an Emmy Award nomination . The Star @-@ Ledger 's Alan Sepinwall of gave the episode a mixed review , saying that " I find [ Jack ] and his love life simultaneously boring and obnoxious … [ and ] insufferable " ; however , he enjoyed the subplots and commended the acting by Matthew Fox and Jorge Garcia . James Poniewozik of Time did not enjoy the flashforwards , commenting that they were " the first of the flashforwards that resembled one of the bad old flashbacks , in that it just reconfirmed character traits we already knew and showed Jack and Kate falling into patterns we knew from the past … I didn 't get much from it " . IGN 's Chris Carabott gave the episode a 7 @.@ 5 / 10 , making it his least favorite episode of the season . Carabott wrote that " this season [ Lost 's main character Jack ] seems to have been relegated to playing second fiddle … oddly enough , even in his own episode , Jack really isn 't given much to do " and stated that " the possible rekindling of Jack and Kate 's romantic relationship on the island is juxtaposed quite well with their relationship during the flashforward . " Dan Compora of SyFy Portal wrote that " the pace … was a bit too slow " and " I usually like the Jack @-@ centered episodes , but a bout of appendicitis simply does not make for high drama or stimulating action " ; however , he noted that " all in all , this was a good episode , but it was nothing special . " Compora praised Fox 's increasingly good acting , but said that " this season has seen much stronger lead performances from Michael Emerson [ in ' The Shape of Things to Come ' as Ben Linus ] and Henry Ian Cusick [ as Desmond Hume in ' The Constant ' ] . " Erin Martell of AOL 's TV Squad called " Something Nice Back Home " " a break after last week 's <unk> and information @-@ packed episode " , argued that Rousseau was not given a proper death and enjoyed Rose and Bernard 's roles . UGO 's Sara shared Martell 's sentiments in regard to Rose and Bernard 's appearances and speculated that " Something Nice Back Home " would not be enjoyed by fans who like Rousseau or do not like Jack . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of Digital Spy gave the episode three out of five stars , saying that " the Jack @-@ Kate romantic intrigue is rather dull , while the appendix plot feels like an unnecessary narrative obstacle for viewers to surmount . " 
 = Italian ironclad Italia = 
 Italia was an Italian ironclad battleship build for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) , the lead ship of the Italia class . She and her single sister ship , Lepanto , had lengthy construction times . Italia was laid down in January 1876 , launched in September 1880 , and completed in October 1885 . She was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) guns mounted in a central barbette and was capable of a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) . Unusually , for ships of that era , Italia had an armored deck rather than the typical belt armor . 
 Italia spent the first two decades of her career in the Active and Reserve Squadrons , where she took part in annual training maneuvers with the rest of the fleet . She was withdrawn from service in 1905 for a significant modernization . Upon returning to service in 1909 , Italia was employed as a training ship . During the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , the ship provided fire support to Italian troops defending Tripoli in Libya . She was used as a floating battery at Brindisi after Italy entered World War I in 1915 . The ship was rebuilt as a grain carrier in December 1917 – June 1918 . Italia served in this capacity for only a short time , being stricken in November 1921 and then scrapped . 
 = = Design = = 
 Italia was 124 @.@ 7 meters ( 409 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 54 m ( 74 @.@ 0 ft ) and an average draft of 8 @.@ 75 m ( 28 @.@ 7 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 678 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 462 long tons ; 15 @,@ 077 short tons ) normally and up to 15 @,@ 407 t ( 15 @,@ 164 long tons ; 16 @,@ 983 short tons ) at full load . Her propulsion system consisted of four compound steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by eight coal @-@ fired , oval boilers and sixteen fire @-@ tube boilers . Her engines produced a top speed of 17 @.@ 8 knots ( 33 @.@ 0 km / h ; 20 @.@ 5 mph ) at 11 @,@ 986 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 938 kW ) . She could steam for 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of 669 – 701 officers and men . 
 Italia was armed with a main battery of four 17 in ( 432 mm ) guns , mounted in two pairs en echelon in a central barbette . Three guns were 26 @-@ caliber guns , while the fourth was a slightly longer 27 @-@ caliber version . She carried a secondary battery of seven 5 @.@ 9 in ( 150 mm ) 26 @-@ caliber guns and four 4 @.@ 7 in ( 119 mm ) 23 @-@ caliber guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she carried four 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . Unlike other ships built at the time , Italia dispensed with vertical belt armor . Her designer , Benedetto Brin , believed that contemporary steel alloys could not effectively defeat armor @-@ piercing shells of the day , and so he discarded it completely . Italia was instead protected by an armored deck that was 4 in ( 102 mm ) thick . Her conning tower was armored with 4 in of steel plate . The barbette had 19 in ( 483 mm ) of steel armor . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Italia was under construction for nearly 10 years . She was laid down at Regio Cantiere di Castellammare di Stabia shipyard on 3 January 1876 , originally under the name Stella D 'Italia . She then spent over four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years on the building ways and was launched on 29 September 1880 . She was not completed for another five years , her construction finally being finished on 16 October 1885 . She nonetheless was completed 22 months before her sister Lepanto , which took almost 11 years to build . After Italia was completed , several smaller caliber guns were added , including two 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns , twelve 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ caliber guns , twelve 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) revolver cannon , and two machine guns . 
 Italia took part in the annual 1888 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclads Caio Duilio , Lepanto , Enrico Dandolo , and San Martino , a protected cruiser , four torpedo cruisers , and numerous smaller vessels . The maneuvers consisted of close @-@ order drills and a simulated attack on and defense of La Spezia . Later that year , the ship was present during a naval review held for the German Kaiser Wilhelm II during a visit to Italy . Italia served as the flagship of the 2nd Division of the Active Squadron during the 1893 fleet maneuvers , along with the ironclad Andrea Doria , the torpedo cruiser Iride , and four torpedo boats . During the maneuvers , which lasted from 6 August to 5 September , the ships of the Active Squadron simulated a French attack on the Italian fleet . 
 In 1895 , Italia and Lepanto were assigned to the Reserve Squadron , along with the ironclads Ruggiero di Lauria and Re Umberto . Italia was not assigned to either the Active or Reserve Squadrons in 1898 , though she took part in the annual fleet maneuvers that year . In the early 1890s , the Italian Navy considered rebuilding Italia along the same lines as Enrico Dandolo , which had received new , quick @-@ firing 10 @-@ inch ( 250 mm ) guns in place of her slow 17 @-@ inch guns . Italia and her sister were to have their guns replaced with new 13 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 340 mm ) guns , but by 1902 this plan had been abandoned as too costly . 
 In 1905 , Italia went into drydock for a major reconstruction that lasted into 1908 . Her six funnels were reduced to four , and a second mast was erected . One of her 5 @.@ 9 in guns , six of the 57 mm guns , and eight of the 37 mm revolver cannon were removed . After returning to service in 1909 , she served as a torpedo training ship ; she served in this capacity through 1910 . At the start of the Italo @-@ Turkish War of 1911 – 12 , Italia was assigned to the 5th Division of the Italian fleet , along with her sister Lepanto and Enrico Dandolo . In December 1911 , Italia and Lepanto were sent to Tripoli , replacing the three Re Umberto @-@ class ironclads , to support the Italian garrison that had captured the city . The two ships were sent in large part because the Italian Navy had a large stockpile of 17 in shells . 
 She was employed as a training ship for petty officers in 1912 , and by 1914 she was stationed in Taranto as a guard ship . Italia was laid up on 1 June 1914 and stricken from the naval register three days later . Despite having all of her secondary guns removed , the ship was towed to Brindisi on 20 April 1915 , shortly before Italy entered World War I , to defend the harbor . She was formally returned to the naval register on 23 May , the day Italy declared war on Austria Hungary , and was recommissioned on 1 June as a " first class auxiliary " . She remained at Brindisi until 16 December 1917 , when she was taken to La Spezia for conversion into a grain carrier , retaining only two of her 4 @.@ 7 in guns . She was transferred initially to the Ministry of Transport on 1 June but was quickly reassigned to the State Railways on 27 July 1919 . She remained there briefly , returning to the Navy on 13 January 1921 . Italia was finally stricken on 16 November 1921 and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = D @-@ Day naval deceptions = 
 Operations Taxable , Glimmer and Big Drum were tactical military deceptions conducted on 6 June 1944 in support of the Allied landings in Normandy . The operations formed the naval component of Operation Bodyguard , a wider series of tactical and strategic deceptions surrounding the invasion . Small boats , along with aircraft from RAF Bomber Command , simulated invasion fleets approaching Cap d 'Antifer , Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais and Normandy . Glimmer and Taxable played on the German belief , amplified by Allied deception efforts over the preceding months , that the main invasion force would land in the Calais region . Big Drum was positioned on the western flank of the real invasion force to try to confuse German forces about the scale of the landings . These operations complemented Operation Titanic , which was intended to confuse the Germans about the D @-@ Day airborne forces . 
 It is unclear whether the operations were successful , due to the complexity of their execution , poor weather , and lack of response from German forces . It is possible that they contributed to the overall confusion of D @-@ Day as part of the wider Bodyguard plan . 
 = = Background = = 
 Glimmer , Taxable and Big Drum were World War II deception operations . They were conducted as part of Operation Bodyguard , a broad strategic military deception intended to support the Allied invasion of German @-@ occupied France in June 1944 . Bodyguard was designed to confuse the Axis high command as to Allied intentions during the lead @-@ up to the invasion . The London Controlling Section ( LCS ) had spent some time convincing German commanders that the fictional First United States Army Group ( FUSAG ) represented the bulk of the Allied invasion force . FUSAG 's existence was fabricated through Operation Fortitude South . 
 The Allied story for FUSAG was that the army group , based in south @-@ east England , would invade the Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais region several weeks after a smaller diversionary landing in Normandy . In reality , the main invasion force would land in Normandy on D @-@ Day . As D @-@ Day approached , the LCS moved on to planning tactical deceptions to help cover the progress of the real invasion forces . As well as naval operations , the LCS also planned operations involving paratroopers and ground deceptions . The latter would come into effect once landings were made but the former ( involving naval , air and special forces units ) were used to cover the approach of the true invasion fleet . 
 In preparation for the coming landings , Allied scientists had worked on techniques for obscuring the size and disposition of an invasion force . The German defences relied on the Seetakt radar system . Scientists from the Telecommunications Research Establishment discovered that the resolution of the Seetakt was about 520 yards ( 480 m ) . To deceive the radar system they proposed dropping clouds of aluminium foil ( chaff , then code @-@ named Window ) at two mile intervals . The clouds would appear as a continuous blip , similar to one created by an approaching fleet , on German screens . The Allies also repurposed radio equipment , code named Moonshine , to jam the Seetakt signal . Allied command decided that , rather than mask the approaching fleet , these measures would serve to alert German defences . So it was decided to combine these techniques with small groups of boats to simulate an entire invasion fleet aimed at the Calais region . 
 Allied planners proposed that small boats , towing large radar reflecting balloons ( code named Filbert ) and carrying both Moonshine jamming and standard wireless equipment ( for transmitting fake traffic ) , would advance toward the French coast under a cloud of Window . The chaff and other countermeasures would hide the small size of the naval force while wireless traffic would play on the FUSAG story to mislead the Germans into expecting a major landing . A third deceptive force , Operation Big Drum , would use radar countermeasures on the western flank of the true invasion fleet . This operation was intended to lend confusion as to the extent of the landings in Normandy . 
 = = Glimmer and Taxable = = 
 Glimmer and Taxable were very similar operations . They were executed in the early hours of 6 June 1944 whilst the invasion fleet was approaching Normandy . Taxable simulated an invasion force approaching Cap d 'Antifer and Glimmer threatened Pas @-@ de @-@ Calais . By dropping chaff in progressive patterns , Royal Air Force ( RAF ) bombers were able to create the illusion of a large fleet on coastal radar screens . Beneath the chaff , small boats towed radar reflector balloons and simulated the radio traffic expected of a large fleet . Once German forces were drawn to the coast , it was planned that the RAF would attempt to contain them in this region , and away from Normandy , by bombing bridges and roads . 
 The operations required precise flying in elongated circuits with replacement aircraft having to merge in seamlessly to avoid tell @-@ tale gaps . The bombers were staged at 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) intervals parallel to the French coast . Once in position they would spend two and a half minutes flying toward the coast , dropping chaff at fifteen @-@ second intervals . Then the aircraft would turn and head away from the coast for two minutes and ten seconds . By repeating this circuit , the wide cloud of chaff edged toward the coast just like a real sea @-@ borne fleet . The aircraft had to be modified by cutting a hole in the nose to allow the large quantities of chaff to be dropped . 
 The larger of the two operations , Taxable , was carried out by 18 small boats , a mix of Harbour Defence Motor Launches ( <unk> ) and RAF <unk> , designated Special Task Force A. Chaff was dropped by Lancaster bombers from the No. 617 " Dam Busters " Squadron . Each aircraft carried an expanded crew of up to 14 . The squadron began training for the operation on 7 May , but were not aware of their final target . 
 Task Force A left port in the evening of 5 June , but struggled in bad seas which affected their equipment and ability to converge at their meeting point . By 00 : 37 on 6 June the lead boats were on schedule and had reached the muster point . Between 02 : 00 and 04 : 00 the ships operated radar and radio equipment as they headed toward a point 7 miles ( 11 km ) offshore . From there the task force simulated a landing attempt ; by running fast to within 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of the beach before returning to the 7 @-@ mile marker under cover of smoke . During this time only a small German response was observed including searchlights and intermittent gunfire . Shortly after 05 : 00 the operation ended and the task force laid mines before heading toward Newhaven , reaching port by midday . 
 The air operations for Glimmer were conducted by No. 218 " Gold Coast " Squadron under Wing Commander R. M. Fenwick @-@ Wilson . The squadron , which flew Short Stirling bombers , was much smaller than No. 617 and so no relief aircraft were available . Instead each aircraft carried two pilots who rotated flying duties . The naval contingent , Special Task Force B under the command of Lieutenant Commander W. M. Rankin , consisted of 12 <unk> equipped with jamming gear , radios and radar @-@ reflecting balloons . The task force began jamming operations at approximately 01 : 00 followed by radio chatter around an hour later . 
 Glimmer elicited more response from German forces than Taxable including reconnaissance planes sent to investigate the " fleet " . After completing their assignment ( which , unlike Taxable , did not include laying mines ) the ships returned to port , reaching their berths by 13 : 00 on D @-@ Day . 
 = = Big Drum = = 
 Big Drum was similar to the other D @-@ Day naval deceptions , but without an airborne component . Task Force C consisted of four <unk> , whose job was to operate as a distraction on the western flank of the invasion . The plan originally called for the task force , which was attached to Force U ( the westernmost convoy of the invasion fleet ) , to operate radar jamming equipment as it approached the French coast , holding 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) off shore until first light . After the Germans failed to respond , the ships moved to within 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) of the coast . No response , either in the air or on the shore , was observed , and the convoy returned safely to Newhaven . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Taxable , Glimmer and Big Drum were complicated in execution , requiring coordination of air and naval forces . Launched in poor weather conditions , Taxable did not appear to have the desired effect and failed to elicit any significant response from the Germans . The reaction to Glimmer was more encouraging . The attacks on the bomber squadrons indicated , at least to the satisfaction of RAF Bomber Command , that the Germans believed a genuine threat existed . There is no evidence that Big Drum elicited any specific response from the shore . According to historian Mary Barbier , the adverse conditions and complexity of the operations contributed to the limited enemy response . 
 From intelligence intercepts it appears that German forces in the Pas de Calais region reported an invasion fleet . In addition , there are reports of the decoys being fired on by shore batteries in that area . In an 11 June report on the operations , Lieutenant Commander Ian Cox ( who was in charge of deception units ) indicated that German forces had been convinced by the fake radio traffic . Intercepted dispatches from Hiroshi Ōshima , the Japanese ambassador to Germany , made reference to the naval deceptions . An 8 June dispatch referred to the Calais region and stated " an enemy squadron that had been operating there has now withdrawn " . 
 Although disappointed not to have seen any action during the night of D @-@ Day , and still unsure of their actual impact , the bomber crews felt proud of the operations . Squadron Leader Les Munro of No. 617 Squadron wrote , " I have always considered the operation in one sense to be the most important the squadron carried out in my time – not because [ of ] bad weather , nor because of any threat of enemy action and not measured by any visible results , but because of the very exacting requirements to which we had to fly and navigate " . 
 = Metropolitan Railway = 
