 The Metropolitan Railway ( also known as the Met ) was a passenger and goods railway that served London from 1863 to 1933 , its main line heading north @-@ west from the capital 's financial heart in the City to what were to become the Middlesex suburbs . Its first line connected the main @-@ line railway termini at Paddington , Euston , and King 's Cross to the City . The first section was built beneath the New Road using the " cut @-@ and @-@ cover " method between Paddington and King 's Cross and in tunnel and cuttings beside Farringdon Road from King 's Cross to near Smithfield , near the City . It opened to the public on 10 January 1863 with gas @-@ lit wooden carriages hauled by steam locomotives , the world 's first underground railway . 
 The line was soon extended from both ends , and northwards via a branch from Baker Street . It reached Hammersmith in 1864 , Richmond in 1877 and completed the Inner Circle in 1884 , but the most important route was the line north into the Middlesex countryside , where it stimulated the development of new suburbs . Harrow was reached in 1880 , and the line eventually extended to Verney Junction in Buckinghamshire , more than 50 miles ( 80 kilometres ) from Baker Street and the centre of London . 
 Electric traction was introduced in 1905 and by 1907 electric multiple units operated most of the services , though electrification of outlying sections did not occur until decades later . Unlike other railway companies in the London area , the Met developed land for housing , and after World War I promoted housing estates near the railway using the " Metro @-@ land " brand . On 1 July 1933 , the Met was amalgamated with the Underground Electric Railways Company of London and the capital 's tramway and bus operators to form the London Passenger Transport Board . 
 Former Met tracks and stations are used by the London Underground 's Metropolitan , Circle , District , Hammersmith & City , Piccadilly , and Jubilee lines , and by Chiltern Railways . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Paddington to the City , 1853 – 63 = = = 
 = = = = Establishment = = = = 
 In the first half of the 19th century the population and physical extent of London grew greatly . The increasing resident population and the development of a commuting population arriving by train each day led to a high level of traffic congestion with huge numbers of carts , cabs , and omnibuses filling the roads and up to 200 @,@ 000 people entering the City of London , the commercial heart , each day on foot . By 1850 there were seven railway termini around the urban centre of London : London Bridge and Waterloo to the south , Shoreditch and Fenchurch Street to the east , Euston and King 's Cross to the north , and Paddington to the west . Only Fenchurch Street station was within the City . 
 The congested streets and the distance to the City from the stations to the north and west prompted many attempts to get parliamentary approval to build new railway lines into the City . None were successful , and the 1846 Royal Commission investigation into Metropolitan Railway Termini banned construction of new lines or stations in the built @-@ up central area . The concept of an underground railway linking the City with the mainline termini was first proposed in the 1830s . Charles Pearson , Solicitor to the City , was a leading promoter of several schemes and in 1846 proposed a central railway station to be used by multiple railway companies . The scheme was rejected by the 1846 commission , but Pearson returned to the idea in 1852 when he helped set up the City Terminus Company to build a railway from Farringdon to King 's Cross . Although the plan was supported by the City , the railway companies were not interested and the company struggled to proceed . 
 The Bayswater , Paddington , and Holborn Bridge Railway Company was established to connect the Great Western Railway 's ( GWR 's ) Paddington station to Pearson 's route at King 's Cross . A bill was published in November 1852 and in January 1853 the directors held their first meeting and appointed John Fowler as its engineer . After successful lobbying , the company secured parliamentary approval under the name of the " North Metropolitan Railway " in the summer of 1853 . The bill submitted by the City Terminus Company was rejected by Parliament , which meant that the North Metropolitan Railway would not be able to reach the City : to overcome this obstacle , the company took over the City Terminus Company and submitted a new bill in November 1853 . This dropped the City terminus and extended the route south from Farringdon to the General Post Office in St. Martin 's Le Grand . The route at the western end was also altered so that it connected more directly to the GWR station . Permission was also sought to connect to the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) at Euston and to the Great Northern Railway ( GNR ) at King 's Cross , the latter by hoists and lifts . The company 's name was also to be changed again , to Metropolitan Railway . Royal assent was granted to the North Metropolitan Railway Act on 7 August 1854 . 
 Construction of the railway was estimated to cost £ 1 million . Initially , with the Crimean War under way , the Met found it hard to raise the capital . While it attempted to raise the funds it presented new bills to Parliament seeking an extension of time to carry out the works . In July 1855 , an Act to make a direct connection to the GNR at King 's Cross received royal assent . The plan was modified in 1856 by the Metropolitan ( Great Northern Branch and Amendment ) Act and in 1860 by the Great Northern & Metropolitan Junction Railway Act . 
 Although the GWR agreed to contribute £ 175 @,@ 000 and a similar sum was promised by the GNR , sufficient funds to make a start on construction had not been raised by the end of 1857 . Costs were reduced by cutting back part of the route at the western end so that it did not connect directly to the GWR station , and by dropping the line south of Farringdon . In 1858 , Pearson arranged a deal between the Met and the City of London Corporation whereby the Met bought land it needed around the new Farringdon Road from the City for £ 179 @,@ 000 and the City purchased £ 200 @,@ 000 worth of shares . The route changes were approved by Parliament in August 1859 , meaning that the Met finally had the funding to match its obligations and construction could begin . 
 = = = = Construction = = = = 
 Despite concerns about undermining and vibrations causing subsidence of nearby buildings and compensating the thousands of people whose homes were destroyed during the digging of the tunnel construction began in March 1860 . The line was mostly built using the " cut @-@ and @-@ cover " method from Paddington to King 's Cross ; east of there it continued in a 728 yards ( 666 m ) tunnel under Mount Pleasant , Clerkenwell then followed the culverted River Fleet beside Farringdon Road in an open cutting to near the new meat market at Smithfield . 
 The trench was 33 feet 6 inches ( 10 @.@ 2 m ) wide , with brick retaining walls supporting an elliptical brick arch or iron girders spanning 28 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 7 m ) . The tunnels were wider at stations to accommodate the platforms . Most of the excavation work was carried out manually by navvies , although a primitive earth @-@ moving conveyor was used to remove excavated spoil from the trench . 
 Within the tunnel , two lines were laid with a 6 @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) gap between . To accommodate both the standard gauge trains of the GNR and the broad gauge trains of the GWR , the track was three @-@ rail mixed gauge , the rail nearest the platforms being shared by both gauges . Signalling was on the absolute block method , using electric Spagnoletti block instruments and fixed signals . 
 Construction was not without incident . In May 1860 , a GNR train overshot the platform at King 's Cross and fell into the workings . Later in 1860 , a boiler explosion on an engine pulling contractor 's wagons killed the driver and his assistant . In May 1861 , the excavation collapsed at Euston causing considerable damage to the neighbouring buildings . The final accident occurred in June 1862 when the Fleet sewer burst following a heavy rainstorm and flooded the excavations . The Met and the Metropolitan Board of Works managed to stem and divert the water and the construction was delayed by only a few months . 
 Trial runs were carried out from November 1861 while construction was still under way . The first trip over the whole line was in May 1862 with William Gladstone among the guests . By the end of 1862 work was complete at a cost of £ 1 @.@ 3 million . 
 = = = = Opening = = = = 
 Board of Trade inspections took place in late December 1862 and early January 1863 to approve the railway for opening . After minor signalling changes were made , approval was granted and a few days of operating trials were carried out before the grand opening on 9 January 1863 , which included a ceremonial run from Paddington and a large banquet for 600 shareholders and guests at Farringdon . Charles Pearson did not live to see the completion of the project ; he died in September 1862 . 
 The 3 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 6 km ) railway opened to the public on Saturday 10 January 1863 . There were stations at Paddington ( Bishop 's Road ) ( now Paddington ) , Edgware Road , Baker Street , Portland Road ( now Great Portland Street ) , Gower Street ( now Euston Square ) , King 's Cross ( now King 's Cross St Pancras ) , and Farringdon Street ( now Farringdon ) . 
 The railway was hailed a success , carrying 38 @,@ 000 passengers on the opening day , using GNR trains to supplement the service . In the first 12 months 9 @.@ 5 million passengers were carried and in the second 12 months this increased to 12 million . 
 The original timetable allowed 18 minutes for the journey . Off @-@ peak service frequency was every 15 minutes , increased to ten minutes during the morning peak and reduced 20 minutes in the early mornings and after 8 pm . From May 1864 , workmen 's returns were offered on the 5 : 30 am and 5 : 40 am services from Paddington at the cost of a single ticket ( 3d ) . 
 Initially the railway was worked by GWR broad @-@ gauge Metropolitan Class steam locomotives and rolling stock . Soon after the opening disagreement arose between the Met and the GWR over the need to increase the frequency , and the GWR withdrew its stock in August 1863 . The Met continued operating a reduced service using GNR standard @-@ gauge rolling stock before purchasing its own standard @-@ gauge locomotives from Beyer , Peacock and rolling stock . 
 The Metropolitan initially ordered 18 tank locomotives , of which a key feature was condensing equipment which prevented most of the steam from escaping while trains were in tunnels ; they have been described as " beautiful little engines , painted green and distinguished particularly by their enormous external cylinders . " The design proved so successful that eventually 120 were built to provide traction on the Metropolitan , the District Railway ( in 1871 ) and all other ' cut and cover ' underground lines . This 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank engine can therefore be considered as the pioneer motive power on London 's first underground railway ; ultimately , 148 were built between 1864 and 1886 for various railways , and most kept running until electrification in 1905 . 
 In the belief that it would be operated by smokeless locomotives , the line had been built with little ventilation and a long tunnel between Edgware Road and King 's Cross . Initially the smoke @-@ filled stations and carriages did not deter passengers and the ventilation was later improved by making an opening in the tunnel between Gower Street and King 's Cross and removing glazing in the station roofs . With the problem continuing after the 1880s , conflict arose between the Met , who wished to make more openings in the tunnels , and the local authorities , who argued that these would frighten horses and reduce property values . This led to an 1897 Board of Trade report , which reported that a pharmacist was treating people in distress after having travelled on the railway with his ' Metropolitan Mixture ' . The report recommended more openings be authorised but the line was electrified before these were built . 
 = = = Extensions and the Inner Circle , 1863 – 84 = = = 
 = = = = Farringdon to Moorgate and the City Widened Lines = = = = 
 With connections to the GWR and GNR under construction and connections to the Midland Railway and London , Chatham and Dover Railway ( LC & DR ) planned , the Met obtained permission in 1861 and 1864 for two additional tracks from King 's Cross to Farringdon Street and a four @-@ track eastward extension to Moorgate . The Met used two tracks : the other two tracks , the City Widened Lines , used mainly by other railway companies . 
 A pair of single @-@ track tunnels at King 's Cross connecting the GNR to the Met opened on 1 October 1863 when the GNR began running services , the GWR returning the same day with through suburban trains from such places as Windsor . By early autumn 1864 the Met had sufficient carriages and locomotives to run its own trains and increase the frequency to six trains an hour . 
 On 1 January 1866 , LC & DR and GNR joint services from Blackfriars Bridge began operating via the Snow Hill tunnel under Smithfield market to Farringdon and northwards to the GNR . The extension to Aldersgate Street and Moorgate Street ( now Barbican and Moorgate ) had opened on 23 December 1865 and all four tracks were open on 1 March 1866 . 
 The new tracks from King 's Cross to Farringdon were first used by a GNR freight train on 27 January 1868 . The Midland Railway junction opened on 13 July 1868 when services ran into Moorgate Street before its St Pancras terminus had opened . The line left the main line at St Paul 's Road Junction , entering a double @-@ track tunnel and joining the Widened Lines at Midland Junction . 
 = = = = Hammersmith & City Railway = = = = 
 In November 1860 , a bill was presented to Parliament , supported by the Met and the GWR , for a railway from the GWR 's main line a mile west of Paddington to the developing suburbs of Shepherd 's Bush and Hammersmith , with a connection to the West London Railway at Latimer Road . Authorised on 22 July 1861 as the Hammersmith and City Railway ( H & CR ) , the 2 miles 35 chains ( 3 @.@ 9 km ) line , constructed on a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) high viaduct largely across open fields , opened on 13 June 1864 with a broad @-@ gauge GWR service from Farringdon Street , with stations at Notting Hill ( now Ladbroke Grove ) , Shepherd 's Bush ( replaced by the current Shepherd 's Bush Market in 1914 ) and Hammersmith . The link to the West London Railway opened on 1 July that year , served by a carriage that was attached or detached at Notting Hill for Kensington ( Addison Road ) . Following an agreement between the Met and the GWR , from 1865 the Met ran a standard @-@ gauge service to Hammersmith and the GWR a broad @-@ gauge service to Kensington . In 1867 , the H & CR became jointly owned by the two companies . The GWR began running standard @-@ gauge trains and the broad gauge rail was removed from the H & CR and the Met in 1869 . In 1871 , two additional tracks parallel to the GWR between Westbourne Park and Paddington were brought into use for the H & CR and in 1878 the flat crossing at Westbourne Park was replaced by a <unk> . In August 1872 , the GWR Addison Road service was extended over the District Railway via Earl 's Court to Mansion House . This became known as the Middle Circle and ran until January 1905 , although from 1 July 1900 trains terminated at Earl 's Court . Additional stations were opened at Westbourne Park ( 1866 ) , Latimer Road ( 1868 ) , Royal Oak ( 1871 ) , Wood Lane ( 1908 ) and Goldhawk Road ( 1914 ) . 
 Between 1 October 1877 and 31 December 1906 some services on the H & CR were extended to Richmond over the London and South Western Railway ( L & SWR ) via its station at Hammersmith ( Grove Road ) . 
 = = = = Inner Circle = = = = 
 The early success of the Met prompted a flurry of applications to Parliament in 1863 for new railways in London , many of them competing for similar routes . To consider the best proposals , the House of Lords established a select committee , which issued a report in July 1863 with a recommendation for an " inner circuit of railway that should abut , if not actually join , nearly all of the principal railway termini in the Metropolis " . A number of railway schemes were presented for the 1864 parliamentary session that met the recommendation in varying ways and a joint committee composed of members of both Houses of Parliament was set up to review the options . 
 Proposals from the Met to extend south from Paddington to South Kensington and east from Moorgate to Tower Hill were accepted and received royal assent on 29 July 1864 . To complete the circuit , the committee encouraged the amalgamation of two schemes via different routes between Kensington and the City , and a combined proposal under the name Metropolitan District Railway ( commonly known as the District railway ) was agreed on the same day . Initially , the District and the Met were closely associated and it was intended that they would soon merge . The Met 's chairman and three other directors were on the board of the District , John Fowler was the engineer of both companies and the construction works for all of the extensions were let as a single contract . The District was established as a separate company to enable funds to be raised independently of the Met . 
 Starting as a branch from Praed Street junction , a short distance east of the Met 's Paddington station , the western extension passed through fashionable districts in Bayswater , Notting Hill , and Kensington . Land values here were higher and , unlike the original line , the route did not follow an easy alignment under existing roads . Compensation payments for property were much higher . In Leinster Gardens , Bayswater , a façade of two five @-@ storey houses was built at Nos. 23 and 24 to conceal the gap in a terrace created by the railway passing through . To ensure adequate ventilation , most of the line was in cutting except for a 421 @-@ yard ( 385 m ) tunnel under Campden Hill . Construction of the District proceeded in parallel with the work on the Met and it too passed through expensive areas . Construction costs and compensation payments were so high that the cost of the first section of the District from South Kensington to Westminster was £ 3 million , almost three times as much as the Met 's original , longer line . 
 The first section of the Met extension opened to Brompton ( Gloucester Road ) ( now Gloucester Road ) on 1 October 1868 , with stations at Paddington ( Praed Street ) ( now Paddington ) , Bayswater , Notting Hill Gate , and Kensington ( High Street ) ( now High Street Kensington ) . Three months later , on 24 December 1868 , the Met extended eastwards to a shared station at South Kensington and the District opened its line from there to Westminster , with other stations at Sloane Square , Victoria , St James 's Park , and Westminster Bridge ( now Westminster ) . 
 The District also had parliamentary permission to extend westward from Brompton and , on 12 April 1869 , it opened a single @-@ track line to West Brompton on the WLR . There were no intermediate stations and at first this service operated as a shuttle . By summer 1869 separate tracks had been laid between South Kensington and Brompton and from Kensington ( High Street ) to a junction with the line to West Brompton . During the night of 5 July 1870 the District secretly built the disputed Cromwell curve connecting Brompton and Kensington ( High Street ) . 
 East of Westminster , the next section of the District 's line ran in the new Victoria Embankment built by the Metropolitan Board of Works along the north bank of the River Thames . The line opened from Westminster to Blackfriars on 30 May 1870 with stations at Charing Cross ( now Embankment ) , The Temple ( now Temple ) and Blackfriars . 
 On its opening the Met operated the trains on the District , receiving 55 per cent of the gross receipts for a fixed level of service . Extra trains required by the District were charged for and the District 's share of the income dropped to about 40 per cent . The District 's level of debt meant that the merger was no longer attractive to the Met and did not proceed , so the Met 's directors resigned from the District 's board . To improve its finances , the District gave the Met notice to terminate the operating agreement . Struggling under the burden of its very high construction costs , the District was unable to continue with the remainder of the original scheme to reach Tower Hill and made a final extension of its line just one station east from Blackfriars to a previously unplanned City terminus at Mansion House . 
 On Saturday 1 July 1871 an opening banquet was attended by Prime Minister William Gladstone , who was also a shareholder . The following Monday , Mansion House opened and the District began running its own trains . From this date , the two companies operated a joint Inner Circle service between Mansion House and Moorgate Street via South Kensington and Edgware Road every ten minutes , supplemented by a District service every ten minutes between Mansion House and West Brompton and H & CR and GWR suburban services between Edgware Road and Moorgate Street . The permissions for the railway east of Mansion House were allowed to lapse . At the other end of the line , the District part of South Kensington station opened on 10 July 1871 and Earl 's Court station opened on the West Brompton extension on 30 October 1871 . 
 In 1868 and 1869 , judgements went against the Met in a number of hearings , finding financial irregularities such as the company paying a dividend it could not afford and expenses being paid out of the capital account . In 1870 , its directors were found guilty of a breach of trust and ordered to compensate the company . Although they all appealed and were allowed in 1874 to settle for a much lower amount , to restore shareholders ' confidence the directors had all been replaced by October 1872 and Edward Watkin appointed chairman . Watkin was an experienced railwayman and already on the board of several railway companies , including the South Eastern Railway ( SER ) , and had an aspiration to construct a line from the north through London to that railway . 
 Due to the cost of land purchases , the Met 's eastward extension from Moorgate Street was slow to progress and it had to obtain an extension of the Act 's time limit in 1869 . The extension was begun in 1873 , but after construction exposed burials in the vault of a Roman Catholic chapel , the contractor reported that it was difficult to keep the men at work . The first section opened to the Great Eastern Railway 's ( GER 's ) recently opened terminus at Liverpool Street on 1 February 1875 . For a short time , while the Met 's station was being built , services ran into the GER station via a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ chain ( 70 m ) curve , the Met opening its station later that year on 12 July and this curve not being used again by regular traffic . During the extension of the railway to Aldgate several hundred cartloads of bullocks ' horn were discovered in a layer 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) below the surface . A terminus opened at Aldgate on 18 November 1876 , initially for a shuttle service to Bishopsgate before all Met and District trains worked through from 4 December . 
 Conflict between the Met and the District and the expense of construction delayed further progress on the completion of the inner circle . In 1874 , frustrated City financiers formed the Metropolitan Inner Circle Completion Railway Company with the aim of finishing the route . This company was supported by the District and obtained parliamentary authority on 7 August 1874 . The company struggled to raise the funding and an extension of time was granted in 1876 . A meeting between the Met and the District was held in 1877 with the Met now wishing to access the SER via the East London Railway ( ELR ) . Both companies promoted and obtained an Act of Parliament in 1879 for the extension and link to the ELR , the Act also ensuring future co @-@ operation by allowing both companies access to the whole circle . A large contribution was made by authorities for substantial road and sewer improvements . In 1882 , the Met extended its line from Aldgate to a temporary station at Tower of London . Two contracts to build joint lines were placed , from Mansion House to the Tower in 1882 and from the circle north of Aldgate to Whitechapel with a curve onto the ELR in 1883 . From 1 October 1884 , the District and the Met began working trains from St Mary 's via this curve onto the ELR to the SER 's New Cross station . After an official opening ceremony on 17 September and trial running a circular service started on Monday 6 October 1884 . On the same day the Met extended some H & CR services over the ELR to New Cross , calling at new joint stations at Aldgate East and St Mary 's . Joint stations opened on the circle line at Cannon Street , Eastcheap ( Monument from 1 November 1884 ) and Mark Lane . The Met 's Tower of London station closed on 12 October 1884 after the District refused to sell tickets to the station . Initially , the service was eight trains an hour , completing the 13 miles ( 21 kilometres ) circle in 81 – 84 minutes , but this proved impossible to maintain and was reduced to six trains an hour with a 70 @-@ minute timing in 1885 . Guards were permitted no relief breaks during their shift until September 1885 , when they were permitted three 20 @-@ minute breaks . 
 = = = Extension Line , 1868 – 99 = = = 
 = = = = Baker Street to Harrow = = = = 
 In April 1868 , the Metropolitan & St John 's Wood Railway ( M & SJWR ) opened a single @-@ track railway in tunnel to Swiss Cottage from new platforms at Baker Street ( called Baker Street East ) . There were intermediate stations at St John 's Wood Road and Marlborough Road , both with crossing loops , and the line was worked by the Met with a train every 20 minutes . A junction was built with the Inner Circle at Baker Street , but there were no through trains after 1869 . 
 The original intention of the Metropolitan & St. John 's Wood Railway was to run to underground north @-@ east to Hampstead Village , and indeed this appeared on some maps . Although in the event this was not completed in full and the line was built in a north @-@ western direction instead , a short heading of tunnel was built north of Swiss Cottage station in the direction of Hampstead . This is still visible today when traveling on a southbound Metropolitan line service . 
 In the early 1870s , passenger numbers were low and the M & SJWR was looking to extend the line to generate new traffic . Recently placed in charge of the Met , Watkin saw this as the priority as the cost of construction would be lower than in built @-@ up areas and fares higher ; traffic would also be fed into the Circle . In 1873 , the M & SJWR was given authority to reach the Middlesex countryside at Neasden , but as the nearest inhabited place to Neasden was Harrow it was decided to build the line 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) further to Harrow and permission was granted in 1874 . To serve the Royal Agricultural Society 's 1879 show at Kilburn , a single line to West Hampstead opened on 30 June 1879 with a temporary platform at Finchley Road . Double track and a full service to Willesden Green started on 24 November 1879 with a station at Kilburn & Brondesbury ( now Kilburn ) . The line was extended 5 miles 37 @.@ 5 chains ( 8 @.@ 80 km ) to Harrow , the service from Baker Street beginning on 2 August 1880 . The intermediate station at Kingsbury Neasden ( now Neasden ) was opened the same day . Two years later , the single @-@ track tunnel between Baker Street and Swiss Cottage was duplicated and the M & SJWR was absorbed by the Met . 
 In 1882 , the Met moved its carriage works from Edgware Road to Neasden . A locomotive works was opened in 1883 and a gas works in 1884 . To accommodate employees moving from London over 100 cottages and ten shops were built for rent . In 1883 , a school room and church took over two of the shops ; two years later land was given to the Wesleyan Church for a church building and a school for 200 children . 
 = = = = Harrow to Verney Junction and Brill = = = = 
 In 1868 , the Duke of Buckingham opened the Aylesbury and Buckingham Railway ( A & BR ) , a 12 @.@ 75 @-@ mile ( 20 @.@ 5 km ) single track from Aylesbury to a new station at Verney Junction on the Buckinghamshire Railway 's Bletchley to Oxford line . At the beginning lukewarm support had been given by the LNWR , which worked the Bletchley to Oxford line , but by the time the line had been built the relationship between the two companies had collapsed . The Wycombe Railway built a single @-@ track railway from Princes Risborough to Aylesbury and when the GWR took over this company it ran shuttles from Princes Risborough through Aylesbury to Quainton Road and from Quainton Road to Verney Junction . 
 The A & BR had authority for a southern extension to Rickmansworth , connecting with the LNWR 's Watford and Rickmansworth Railway . Following discussions between the Duke and Watkin it was agreed that this line would be extended south to meet the Met at Harrow and permission for this extension was granted in 1874 and Watkin joined the board of the A & BR in 1875 . Money was not found for this scheme and the Met had to return to Parliament in 1880 and 1881 to obtain permission for a railway from Harrow to Aylesbury . Pinner was reached in 1885 and an hourly service from Rickmansworth and Northwood to Baker Street started on 1 September 1887 . By then raising money was becoming very difficult although there was local support for a station at Chesham . Authorised in 1885 , double track from Rickmansworth was laid for 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , then single to Chesham . Services to Chesham calling at Chorley Wood and Chalfont Road ( now Chalfont & Latimer ) started on 8 July 1889 . 
 The Met took over the A & BR on 1 July 1891 and a temporary platform at Aylesbury opened on 1 September 1892 with trains calling at Amersham , Great Missenden , Wendover and Stoke Mandeville . In 1894 , the Met and GWR joint station at Aylesbury opened . Beyond Aylesbury to Verney Junction , the bridges were not strong enough for the Met 's locomotives . The GWR refused to help , so locomotives were borrowed from the LNWR until two D Class locomotives were bought . The line was upgraded , doubled and the stations rebuilt to main @-@ line standards , allowing a through Baker Street to Verney Junction service from 1 January 1897 , calling at a new station at Waddesdon Manor , a rebuilt Quainton Road , <unk> Road and Winslow Road . 
 From Quainton Road , the Duke of Buckingham had built a 6 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) branch railway , the Brill Tramway . In 1899 , there were four mixed passenger and goods trains each way between Brill and Quainton Road . There were suggestions of the Met buying the line and it took over operations in November 1899 , renting the line for £ 600 a year . The track was relaid and stations rebuilt in 1903 . Passenger services were provided by A Class and D Class locomotives and Oldbury rigid eight @-@ wheeled carriages . 
 In 1893 , a new station at Wembley Park was opened , initially used by the Old <unk> Football Club , but primarily to serve a planned sports , leisure and exhibition centre . A 1 @,@ 159 @-@ foot ( 353 m ) tower ( higher than the recently built Eiffel Tower ) was planned , but the attraction was not a success and only the 200 @-@ foot ( 61 m ) tall first stage was built . The tower became known as " Watkin 's Folly " and was dismantled in 1907 after it was found to be tilting . 
 Around 1900 , there were six stopping trains an hour between Willesden Green and Baker Street . One of these came from Rickmansworth and another from Harrow , the rest started at Willesden Green . There was also a train every two hours from Verney Junction , which stopped at all stations to Harrow , then Willesden Green and Baker Street . The timetable was arranged so that the fast train would leave Willesden Green just before a stopping service and arrived at Baker Street just behind the previous service . 
 = = = = Great Central Railway = = = = 
 Watkin was also director of the Manchester , Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway ( MS & LR ) and had plans for a 99 @-@ mile ( 159 km ) London extension to join the Met just north of Aylesbury . There were suggestions that Baker Street could be used as the London terminus , but by 1891 – 2 the MS & LR had concluded it needed its own station and goods facilities in the Marylebone area . An Act for this railway was passed in 1893 , but Watkin became ill and resigned his directorships in 1894 . For a while after his departure the relationship between the companies turned sour . 
 In 1895 , the MS & LR put forward a bill to Parliament to build two tracks from Wembley Park to Canfield Place , near Finchley Road station , to allow its express trains to pass the Met 's stopping service . The Met protested before it was agreed that it would build the lines for the MS & LR 's exclusive use . When rebuilding bridges over the lines from Wembley Park to Harrow for the MS & LR , seeing a future need the Met quadrupled the line at the same time and the MS & LR requested exclusive use of two tracks . The MS & LR had the necessary authority to connect to the Circle at Marylebone , but the Met suggested onerous terms . At the time the MS & LR was running short of money and abandoned the link . 
 Because of the state of the relationship between the two companies the MS & LR was unhappy being wholly reliant on the Met for access to London and , unlike its railway to the north , south of Aylesbury there were several speed restrictions and long climbs , up to 1 in 90 in places . In 1898 , the MS & LR and the GWR jointly presented a bill to Parliament for a railway ( the Great Western and Great Central Joint Railway ) with short connecting branches from Grendon Underwood , north of Quainton Road , to <unk> and from Northolt to Neasden . The Met protested , claiming that the bill was ' incompatible with the spirit and terms ' of the agreements between it and the MS & LR . The MS & LR was given authority to proceed , but the Met was given the right to compensation . A temporary agreement was made to allow four MS & LR coal trains a day over the Met lines from 26 July 1898 . The MS & LR wished these trains to also use the GWR route from Aylesbury via Princes Risborough into London , whereas the Met considered this was not covered by the agreement . A train scheduled to use the GWR route was not allowed access to the Met lines at Quainton Road in the early hours of 30 July 1898 and returned north . A subsequent court hearing found in the Met 's favour , as it was a temporary arrangement . 
 The MS & LR changed its name to the Great Central Railway ( GCR ) in 1897 and the Great Central Main Line from London Marylebone to Manchester Central opened for passenger traffic on 15 March 1899 . Negotiations about the line between the GCR and the Met took several years and in 1906 it was agreed that two tracks from Canfield Place to Harrow would be leased to the GCR for £ 20 @,@ 000 a year and the Metropolitan and Great Central Joint Railway was created , leasing the line from Harrow to Verney Junction and the Brill branch for £ 44 @,@ 000 a year , the GCR guaranteeing to place at least £ 45 @,@ 000 of traffic on the line . Aylesbury station , which had been jointly run by the GWR and the Met , was placed with a joint committee of the Great Western & Great Central and Metropolitan & Great Central Joint Committees , and generally known as Aylesbury Joint Station . The Met & GC Joint Committee took over the operation of the stations and line , but had no rolling stock . The Met provided the management and the GCR the accounts for the first five years before the companies switched functions , then alternating every five years until 1926 . The Met maintained the line south of milepost 28 @.@ 5 ( south of Great Missenden ) , the GCR to the north . 
 = = = Electrification , 1900 – 14 = = = 
 = = = = Development = = = = 
 At the start of the 20th century , the District and the Met saw increased competition in central London from the new electric deep @-@ level tube lines . With the opening in 1900 of the Central London Railway from Shepherd 's Bush to the City with a flat fare of 2d , the District and the Met together lost four million passengers between the second half of 1899 and the second half of 1900 . The polluted atmosphere in the tunnels was becoming increasingly unpopular with passengers and conversion to electric traction was seen as the way forward . Electrification had been considered by the Met as early as the 1880s , but such a method of <unk> was still in its infancy , and agreement would be needed with the District because of the shared ownership of the Inner Circle . A jointly owned train of six coaches ran an experimental passenger service on the Earl 's Court to High Street Kensington section for six months in 1900 . This was considered a success , tenders were requested and in 1901 a Met and District joint committee recommended the Ganz three @-@ phase AC system with overhead wires . This was accepted by both parties until the Underground Electric Railways Company of London ( UERL ) took control of the District . The UERL was led by the American Charles Yerkes , whose experience in the United States led him to favour DC with a third rail similar to that on the City & South London Railway and Central London Railway . After arbitration by the Board of Trade a DC system with four rails was taken up and the railways began electrifying using multiple @-@ unit stock and electric locomotives hauling carriages . In 1904 , the Met opened a 10 @.@ 5 MW coal @-@ fired power station at Neasden , which supplied 11 kV 33 @.@ 3 Hz current to five substations that converted this to 600 V DC using rotary converters . 
 Meanwhile , the District had been building a line from Ealing to South Harrow and had authority for an extension to Uxbridge . In 1899 , the District had problems raising the finance and the Met offered a rescue package whereby it would build a branch from Harrow to Rayners Lane and take over the line to Uxbridge , with the District retaining running rights for up to three trains an hour . The necessary Act was passed in 1899 and construction on the 7 @.@ 5 miles ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) long branch started in September 1902 , requiring 28 bridges and a 1 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) long viaduct with 71 arches at Harrow . As this line was under construction it was included in the list of lines to be electrified , together with the railway from Baker Street to Harrow , the inner circle and the joint GWR and Met H & C. The Met opened the line to Uxbridge on 30 June 1904 with one intermediate station at Ruislip , initially worked by steam . Wooden platforms the length of three cars opened at Ickenham on 25 September 1905 , followed by similar simple structures at Eastcote and Rayners Lane on 26 May 1906 . 
 = = = = Running electric trains = = = = 
 Electric multiple units began running on 1 January 1905 and by 20 March all local services between Baker Street and Harrow were electric . The use of six @-@ car trains was considered wasteful on the lightly used line to Uxbridge and in running an off @-@ peak three @-@ car shuttle to Harrow the Met aroused the displeasure of the Board of Trade for using a motor car to propel two trailers . A short steam train was used for off @-@ peak services from the end of March while some trailers were modified to add a driving cab , entering service from 1 June . 
 On 1 July 1905 , the Met and the District both introduced electric units on the inner circle until later that day a Met multiple unit overturned the positive current rail on the District and the Met service was withdrawn . An incompatibility was found between the way the shoe @-@ gear was mounted on Met trains and the District track and Met trains were withdrawn from the District and modified . Full electric service started on 24 September , reducing the travel time around the circle from 70 to 50 minutes . 
 The GWR built a 6 MW power station at Park Royal and electrified the line between Paddington and Hammersmith and the branch from Latimer Road to Kensington ( Addison Road ) . An electric service with jointly owned rolling stock started on the H & CR on 5 November 1906 . In the same year , the Met suspended running on the East London Railway , terminating instead at the District station at Whitechapel until that line was electrified in 1913 . The H & CR service stopped running to Richmond over the L & SWR on 31 December 1906 , although GWR steam rail motors ran from Ladbroke Grove to Richmond until 31 December 1910 . 
 The line beyond Harrow was not electrified so trains were hauled by an electric locomotive from Baker Street , changed for a steam locomotive en route . From 1 January 1907 , the exchange took place at Wembley Park . From 19 July 1908 , locomotives were changed at Harrow . GWR rush hour services to the city continued to operate , electric traction taking over from steam at Paddington from January 1907 , although freight services to Smithfield continued to be steam hauled throughout . 
 In 1908 , Robert Selbie was appointed General Manager , a position he held until 1930 . In 1909 , limited through services to the City restarted . Baker Street station was rebuilt with four tracks and two island platforms in 1912 . To cope with the rise in traffic the line south of Harrow was quadrupled , in 1913 from Finchley Road to Kilburn , in 1915 to Wembley Park . However , the line from Finchley Road to Baker Street remained double track , causing a bottleneck . 
 = = = = London Underground = = = = 
 To promote travel by the underground railways in London a joint marketing arrangement was agreed . In 1908 , the Met joined this scheme , which included maps , joint publicity and through ticketing . UNDERGROUND signs were used outside stations in Central London . Eventually the UERL controlled all the underground railways except the Met and the Waterloo & City and introduced station name boards with a red disc and a blue bar . The Met responded with station boards with a red diamond and a blue bar . Further coordination in the form of a General Managers ' Conference faltered after Selbie withdrew in 1911 when the Central London Railway , without any reference to the conference , set its season ticket prices significantly lower than those on the Met 's competitive routes . Suggestions of merger with the Underground Group were rejected by Selbie , a press release of November 1912 noting the Met 's interests in areas outside London , its relationships with main @-@ line railways and its freight business . 
 = = = = East London Railway = = = = 
 After the Met and the District had withdrawn from the ELR in 1906 , services were provided by the South Eastern Railway , the London , Brighton , and South Coast Railway ( LB & SCR ) and the Great Eastern Railway . Both the Met and the District wanted to see the line electrified , but could not justify the whole cost themselves . Discussions continued , and in 1911 it was agreed that the ELR would be electrified with the UERL providing power and the Met the train service . Parliamentary powers were obtained in 1912 and through services restarted on 31 March 1913 , the Met running two trains an hour from both the SER 's and the LB & SCR 's New Cross stations to South Kensington and eight shuttles an hour alternately from the New Cross stations to Shoreditch . 
 = = = = Great Northern & City Railway = = = = 
 The Great Northern & City Railway ( GN & CR ) was planned to allow trains to run from the GNR line at Finsbury Park directly into the City at Moorgate . The tunnels were large enough to take a main @-@ line train with an internal diameter of 16 feet ( 4 @.@ 9 m ) , in contrast to those of the Central London Railway with a diameter less than 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . The GNR eventually opposed the scheme , and the line opened in 1904 with the northern terminus in tunnels underneath GNR Finsbury Park station . 
 Concerned that the GNR would divert its Moorgate services over the City Widened Lines to run via the GN & CR , the Met sought to take over the GN & CR . A bill was presented in 1912 – 13 to allow this with extensions to join the GN & CR to the inner circle between Moorgate and Liverpool Street and to the Waterloo & City line . The takeover was authorised , but the new railway works were removed from the bill after opposition from City property owners . The following year , a bill was jointly presented by the Met and GNR with amended plans that would have also allowed a connection between the GN & CR and GNR at Finsbury Park . Opposed , this time by the North London Railway , this bill was withdrawn . 
 = = = War and " Metro @-@ land " , 1914 – 32 = = = 
 = = = = World War I = = = = 
 On 28 July 1914 World War I broke out and on 5 August 1914 the Met was made subject to government control in the form of the Railway Executive Committee . It lost significant numbers of staff who volunteered for military service and from 1915 women were employed as booking clerks and ticket collectors . The City Widened Lines assumed major strategic importance as a link between the channel ports and the main lines to the north , used by troop movements and freight . During the four years of war the line saw 26 @,@ 047 military trains which carried 250 @,@ 000 long tons ( 254 @,@ 000 t ) of materials , although the sharp curves prevented ambulance trains returning with wounded using this route . Government control was relinquished on 15 August 1921 . 
 = = = = Metro @-@ land development = = = = 
 Unlike other railway companies , which were required to dispose of surplus land , the Met was in a privileged position with clauses in its acts allowing it to retain such land that it believed was necessary for future railway use . Initially , the surplus land was managed by the Land Committee , made up of Met directors . In the 1880s , at the same time as the railway was extending beyond Swiss Cottage and building the workers ' estate at Neasden , roads and sewers were built at Willesden Park Estate and the land was sold to builders . Similar developments followed at Cecil Park , near Pinner and , after the failure of the tower at Wembley , plots were sold at Wembley Park . 
 In 1912 , Selbie , then General Manager , thought that some professionalism was needed and suggested a company be formed to take over from the Surplus Lands Committee to develop estates near the railway . However , World War I delayed these plans and it was 1919 , with expectation of a housing boom , before the Metropolitan Railway Country Estates Limited ( <unk> ) was formed . Concerned that Parliament might reconsider the unique position the Met held , the railway company sought legal advice , which was that although the Met had authority to hold land , it had none to develop it . An independent company was created , although all but one of its directors were also directors of the Met . The <unk> developed estates at Kingsbury Garden Village near Neasden , Wembley Park , Cecil Park and Grange Estate at Pinner , and the Cedars Estate at Rickmansworth , and created places such as Harrow Garden Village . 
 The term Metro @-@ land was coined by the Met 's marketing department in 1915 when the Guide to the Extension Line became the Metro @-@ land guide , priced at 1d . This promoted the land served by the Met for the walker , visitor and later the house @-@ hunter . Published annually until 1932 , the last full year of independence , the guide extolled the benefits of " The good air of the Chilterns " , using language such as " Each lover of Metroland may well have his own favourite wood beech and coppice — all tremulous green loveliness in Spring and russet and gold in October " . The dream promoted was of a modern home in beautiful countryside with a fast railway service to central London . 
 From about 1914 the company promoted itself as " The Met " , but after 1920 the commercial manager , John Wardle , ensured that timetables and other publicity material used " Metro " instead . Land development also occurred in central London when in 1929 Chiltern court , a large , luxurious block of apartments , opened at Baker Street , designed by the Met 's architect Charles Walter Clark , who was also responsible for the design of a number of station reconstructions in outer " Metro @-@ land " at this time . 
 = = = = Infrastructure improvements = = = = 
 To improve outer passenger services , powerful 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) H Class steam locomotives were introduced in 1920 , followed in 1922 – 23 by new electric locomotives with a top speed of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . The generating capacity of the power station at Neasden was increased to approximately 35 MW and on 5 January 1925 electric services reached Rickmansworth , allowing the locomotive change over point to be moved . 
 In 1924 and 1925 , the British Empire Exhibition was held on the Wembley Park Estate and the adjacent Wembley Park station was rebuilt with a new island platform with a covered bridge linking to the exhibition . The Met exhibited an electric multiple unit car in 1924 , which returned the following year with electric locomotive No. 15 , subsequently to be named " Wembley 1924 " . A national sports arena , Wembley Stadium was built on the site of Watkin 's Tower . With a capacity of 125 @,@ 000 spectators it was first used for the FA Cup Final on 28 April 1923 where the match was preceded by chaotic scenes as crowds in excess of capacity surged into the stadium . In the 1926 Metro @-@ land edition , the Met boasted that that had carried 152 @,@ 000 passengers to Wembley Park on that day . 
 In 1925 , a branch opened from Rickmansworth to Watford . Although there had been a railway station in Watford since 1837 , in 1895 the Watford Tradesmen 's Association had approached the Met with a proposal for a line to Watford via Stanmore . They approached again in 1904 , this time jointly with the local District Council , to discuss a new plan for a shorter branch from Rickmansworth . A possible route was surveyed in 1906 and a bill deposited in 1912 seeking authority for a joint Met & GCR line from Rickmansworth to Watford town centre that would cross Cassiobury Park on an embankment . There was local opposition to the embankment and the line was cut back to a station with goods facilities just short of the park . The amended Act was passed on 7 August 1912 and the Watford Joint Committee formed before the start of World War I in 1914 delayed construction . After the war , the 1921 Trade Facilities Act offered government financial guarantees for capital projects that promoted employment , and taking advantage of this construction started in 1922 . During construction the Railways Act 1921 meant that in 1923 the London and North Eastern Railway ( LNER ) replaced the GCR . Where the branch met the extension line two junctions were built , allowing trains access to Rickmansworth and London . Services started on 3 November 1925 with one intermediate station at Croxley Green ( now Croxley ) , with services provided by Met electric multiple units to Liverpool Street via Moor Park and Baker Street and by LNER steam trains to Marylebone . The Met also ran a shuttle service between Watford and Rickmansworth . During 1924 – 5 the flat junction north of Harrow was replaced with a 1 @,@ 200 feet ( 370 m ) long <unk> to separate Uxbridge and main @-@ line trains . Another attempt was made in 1927 to extend the Watford branch across Cassiobury Park to the town centre , the Met purchasing a property on Watford High Street with the intention of converting it to a station . However , the proposals for tunnelling under the park proved controversial and the scheme was dropped . 
 There remained a bottleneck at Finchley Road where the fast and slow tracks converged into one pair for the original M & SJWR tunnels to Baker Street . In 1925 , a plan was developed for two new tube tunnels , large enough for the Met rolling stock that would join the extension line at a junction north of Kilburn & Brondesbury station and run beneath Kilburn High Street , Maida Vale and Edgware Road to Baker Street . The plan included three new stations , at Quex Road , Kilburn Park Road and Clifton Road , but did not progress after Ministry of Transport revised its Requirements for Passenger Lines requiring a means of exit in an emergency at the ends of trains running in deep @-@ level tubes - compartment stock used north of Harrow did not comply with this requirement . However , Edgware Road station had been rebuilt with four platforms and had train destination indicators including stations such as Verney Junction and Uxbridge . 
 In the 1920s , off @-@ peak there was a train every 4 – 5 minutes from Wembley Park to Baker Street . There were generally two services per hour from both Watford and Uxbridge that ran non @-@ stop from Wembley Park and stopping services started from Rayners Lane , Wembley Park , and Neasden , although most did not stop at Marlborough Road and St John 's Wood Road . Off @-@ peak , stations north of Moor Park were generally served by Marylebone trains . During the peak trains approached Baker Street every 2 @.@ 5 – 3 minutes , half running through to Moorgate , Liverpool Street or Aldgate . On the inner circle a train from Hammersmith ran through Baker Street every 6 minutes , and Kensington ( Addison Road ) services terminated at Edgware Road . Maintaining a frequency of ten trains an hour on the circle was proving difficult and the solution chosen was for the District to extend its Putney to Kensington High Street service around the circle to Edgware Road , using the new platforms , and the Met to provide all the inner circle trains at a frequency of eight trains an hour . 
 Construction started in 1929 on a branch from Wembley Park to Stanmore to serve a new housing development at Canons Park , with stations at Kingsbury and Canons Park ( Edgware ) ( renamed Canons Park in 1933 ) . The government again guaranteed finance , this time under the Development Loans Guarantees & Grants Act , the project also quadrupling the tracks from Wembley Park to Harrow . The line was electrified with automatic colour light signals controlled from a signal box at Wembley Park and opened on 9 December 1932 . 
 = = = London Passenger Transport Board , 1933 = = = 
 Unlike the UERL , the Met profited directly from development of Metro @-@ land housing estates near its lines ; the Met had always paid a dividend to its shareholders . The early accounts are untrustworthy , but by the late 19th century it was paying a dividend of about 5 per cent . This dropped from 1900 onwards as electric trams and the Central London Railway attracted passengers away ; a low of 1 ⁄ 2 per cent was reached in 1907 – 8 . Dividends rose to 2 per cent in 1911 – 13 as passengers returned after electrification ; the outbreak of war in 1914 reduced the dividend to 1 per cent . By 1921 recovery was sufficient for a dividend of 2 1 ⁄ 4 per cent to be paid and then , during the post @-@ war housing boom , for the rate to steadily rise to 5 per cent in 1924 – 5 . The 1926 General Strike reduced this to 3 per cent ; by 1929 it was back to 4 per cent . 
 In 1913 , the Met had refused a merger proposal made by the UERL and it remained stubbornly independent under the leadership of Robert Selbie . The Railways Act 1921 , which became law on 19 August 1921 , did not list any of London 's underground railways among the companies that were to be grouped , although at the draft stage the Met had been included . When proposals for integration of public transport in London were published in 1930 , the Met argued that it should have the same status as the four main @-@ line railways , and it was incompatible with the UERL because of its freight operations , although the government saw the Met in a similar way to the District as they jointly operated the inner circle . After the London Passenger Transport Bill , aimed primarily at co @-@ ordinating the small independent bus services , was published on 13 March 1931 , the Met spent £ 11 @,@ 000 opposing it . The bill survived a change in government in 1931 and the Met gave no response to a proposal made by the new administration that it could remain independent if it were to lose its running powers over the circle . The directors turned to negotiating compensation for its shareholders ; by then passenger numbers had fallen due to competition from buses and the depression . In 1932 , the last full year of operation , a 1 5 ⁄ 8 per cent dividend was declared . On 1 July 1933 , the London Passenger Transport Board ( LPTB ) , was created as a public corporation and the Met was amalgamated with the other underground railways , tramway companies and bus operators . Met shareholders received £ 19 @.@ 7 million in LPTB stock . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The Met became the Metropolitan line of London Transport , the Brill branch closing in 1935 , followed by the line from Quainton Road to Verney Junction in 1936 . The LNER took over steam workings and freight . In 1936 , Metropolitan line services were extended from Whitechapel to Barking along the District line . The New Works Programme meant that in 1939 the Bakerloo line was extended from Baker Street in new twin tunnels and stations to Finchley Road before taking over the intermediate stations to Wembley Park and the Stanmore branch . The branch transferred to the Jubilee line when that line opened in 1979 . The Great Northern and City Railway remained isolated and was managed as a section of the Northern line until being taken over by British Railways in 1976 . 
 Steam locomotives were used north of Rickmansworth until the early 1960s when they were replaced following the electrification to Amersham and the introduction of electric multiple units , London Transport withdrawing its service north of Amersham . In 1988 , the route from Hammersmith to Aldgate and Barking was branded as the Hammersmith & City line , and the route from the New Cross stations to Shoreditch became the East London line , leaving the Metropolitan line as the route from Aldgate to Baker Street and northwards to stations via Harrow . 
 After amalgamation in 1933 the " Metro @-@ land " brand was rapidly dropped . In the mid @-@ 20th century , the spirit of Metro @-@ land was remembered in John Betjeman 's poems such as " The Metropolitan Railway " published in the A Few Late <unk> collection in 1954 and he later reached a wider audience with his television documentary Metro @-@ land , first broadcast on 26 February 1973 . The suburbia of Metro @-@ land is one locale of Julian Barnes ' Bildungsroman novel Metroland , first published in 1980 . A film based on the novel , also called Metroland , was released in 1997 . 
 = = Accident = = 
 On 18 June 1925 , electric locomotive No. 4 collided with a passenger train at Baker Street station when a signal was changed from green to red just as the locomotive was passing it . Six people were injured . 
 = = Goods = = 
 Until 1880 the Met ran no goods trains , but goods trains ran over its tracks from 20 February 1866 when the GNR began a service to the LC & DR via Farringdon Street , followed by a service from the Midland Railway from July 1868 . The GNR , the GWR and the Midland all opened goods depots in the Farringdon area , accessed from the City Widened Lines . However , goods traffic was to play an important part of Met traffic on the extension line out of Baker Street . In 1880 , the Met secured the coal traffic of the Harrow District Gas Co . , worked from an exchange siding with the Midland at Finchley Road to a coal yard at Harrow . Goods and coal depots were provided at most of the stations on the extension line as they were built . Goods for London were initially handled at Willesden , with delivery by road or by transfer to the Midland . The arrival of the GCR gave connections to the north at Quainton Road and south via Neasden , Acton and Kew . 
 In 1909 , the Met opened Vine Street goods depot near Farringdon with two sidings each seven wagons long and a regular service from West Hampstead . Trains were electrically hauled with a maximum length of 14 wagons and restricted to 250 long tons ( 254 t ) inwards and 225 long tons ( 229 t ) on the return . In 1910 , the depot handled 11 @,@ 400 long tons ( 11 @,@ 600 t ) , which rose to 25 @,@ 100 long tons ( 25 @,@ 500 t ) in 1915 . In 1913 , the depot was reported above capacity , but after World War I motor road transport became an important competitor and by the late 1920s traffic had reduced to manageable levels . 
 Coal for the steam locomotives , the power station at Neasden and local gasworks were brought in via Quainton Road . Milk was conveyed from Vale of Aylesbury to the London suburbs and foodstuffs from Vine Street to Uxbridge for Alfred Button & Son , wholesale grocers . Fish to Billingsgate Market via the Met and the District joint station at Monument caused some complaints , leaving the station approaches in an " indescribably filthy condition " . The District suggested a separate entrance for the fish , but nothing was done . The traffic reduced significantly when the GCR introduced road transport to Marylebone , but the problem remained until 1936 , being one reason the LPTB gave for abolishing the carrying of parcels on Inner Circle trains . 
 Initially private contractors were used for road delivery , but from 1919 the Met employed its own <unk> . In 1932 , before it became part of London Underground , the company owned 544 goods vehicles and carried 162 @,@ 764 long tons ( 165 @,@ 376 t ) of coal , 2 @,@ 478 @,@ 212 long tons ( 2 @,@ 517 @,@ 980 t ) of materials and 1 @,@ 015 @,@ 501 long tons ( 1 @,@ 031 @,@ 797 t ) tons of goods . 
 = = Rolling stock = = 
 = = = Steam locomotives = = = 
 Concern about smoke and steam in the tunnels led to new designs of steam locomotive . Before the line opened , in 1861 trials were made with the experimental " hot brick " locomotive nicknamed Fowler 's Ghost . This was unsuccessful and the first public trains were hauled by broad @-@ gauge GWR Metropolitan Class condensing 2 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank locomotives designed by Daniel Gooch . They were followed by standard @-@ gauge GNR locomotives until the Met received its own 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 tank locomotives , built by Beyer Peacock of Manchester . Their design is frequently attributed to the Met 's Engineer John Fowler , but the locomotive was a development of one Beyer had built for the Spanish Tudela to Bilbao Railway , Fowler specifying only the driving wheel diameter , axle weight and the ability to navigate sharp curves . Eighteen were ordered in 1864 , initially carrying names , and by 1870 40 had been built . To reduce smoke underground , at first coke was burnt , changed in 1869 to smokeless Welsh coal . 
 From 1879 , more locomotives were needed , and the design was updated and 24 were delivered between 1879 and 1885 . Originally they were painted bright olive green lined in black and yellow , chimneys copper capped with the locomotive number in brass figures at the front and domes of polished brass . In 1885 , the colour changed to a dark red known as <unk> , and this was to remain the standard colour , taken up as the colour for the Metropolitan line by London Transport in 1933 . When in 1925 the Met classified its locomotives by letters of the alphabet , these were assigned A Class and B Class . When the M & SJWR was being built , it was considered that they would struggle on the gradients and five Worcester Engine 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 tank locomotives were delivered in 1868 . However , it was soon found that A and B Classes could manage trains without difficulty and the 0 @-@ 6 @-@ <unk> were sold to the Taff Vale Railway in 1873 and 1875 . 
 From 1891 , more locomotives were needed for work on the extension line from Baker Street into the country . Four C Class ( 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 ) locomotives , a development of South Eastern Railway 's ' Q ' Class , were received in 1891 . In 1894 , two D Class locomotives were bought to run between Aylesbury and Verney Junction . These were not fitted with the condensing equipment needed to work south of Finchley Road . Four more were delivered in 1895 with condensing equipment , although these were prohibited working south of Finchley Road . In 1896 , two E Class ( 0 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 ) locomotives were built at Neasden works , followed by one in 1898 to replace the original Class A No. 1 , damaged in an accident . Four more were built by Hawthorn Leslie & Co in 1900 and 1901 . To cope with the growing freight traffic on the extension line , the Met received four F Class ( 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 ) locomotives in 1901 , similar to the E Class except for the wheel arrangement and without steam heat . In 1897 and 1899 , the Met received two 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 saddle tank locomotives to a standard Peckett design . Unclassified by the Met , these were generally used for shunting at Neasden and Harrow . 
 Many locomotives were made redundant by the electrification of the inner London lines in 1905 – 06 . By 1907 , 40 of the class A and B locomotives had been sold or scrapped and by 1914 only 13 locomotives of these classes had been retained for shunting , departmental work and working trains over the Brill Tramway . The need for more powerful locomotives for both passenger and freight services meant that , in 1915 , four G Class ( 0 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 ) locomotives arrived from Yorkshire Engine Co . Eight 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) capable H Class ( 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 4 ) locomotives were built in 1920 and 1921 and used mainly on express passenger services . To run longer , faster and less frequent freight services in 1925 six K Class ( 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4 ) locomotives arrived , rebuilt from 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotives manufactured at Woolwich Arsenal after World War I. These were not permitted south of Finchley Road . 
 Two locomotives survive : A Class No. 23 ( LT L45 ) at the London Transport Museum , and E Class No. 1 ( LT L44 ) at the Buckinghamshire Railway Centre . No.1 ran in steam as part of the Met 's 150th anniversary celebrations during 2013 . 
 = = = Carriages = = = 
 The Met opened with no stock of its own , with the GWR and then the GNR providing services . The GWR used eight @-@ wheeled compartment carriages constructed from teak . By 1864 , the Met had taken delivery of its own stock , made by the Ashbury Railway Carriage & Iron Co . , based on the GWR design but standard gauge . Lighting was provided by gas — two jets in first class compartments and one in second and third class compartments , and from 1877 a pressurised oil gas system was used . Initially the carriages were braked with wooden blocks operated by hand from the guards ' compartments at the front and back of the train , giving off a distinctive smell . This was replaced in 1869 by a chain that operated brakes on all carriages . The operation of the chain brake could be abrupt , leading to some passenger injuries , and it was replaced by a non @-@ automatic vacuum brake by 1876 . In the 1890s , a mechanical ' next station ' indicator was tested in some carriages on the circle , triggered by a wooden flap between the tracks . It was considered unreliable and not approved for full installation . 
 In 1870 , some close @-@ coupled rigid @-@ wheelbase four @-@ wheeled carriages were built by Oldbury . After some derailments in 1887 , a new design of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 38 m ) long rigid @-@ wheelbase four @-@ wheelers known as Jubilee Stock was built by the Cravens Railway Carriage and Wagon Co. for the extension line . With the pressurised gas lighting system and non @-@ automatic vacuum brakes from new , steam heating was added later . More trains followed in 1892 , although all had been withdrawn by 1912 . By May 1893 , following an order by the Board of Trade , automatic vacuum brakes had been fitted to all carriages and locomotives . A Jubilee Stock first class carriage was restored to carry passengers during the Met 's 150th anniversary celebrations . 
 Bogie stock was built by Ashbury in 1898 and by Cravens and at Neasden Works in 1900 . This gave a better ride quality , steam heating , automatic vacuum brakes , electric lighting and upholstered seating in all classes . The Bluebell Railway has four 1898 – 1900 Ashbury and Cravens carriages and a fifth , built at Neasden , is at the London Transport Museum . 
 Competition with the GCR on outer suburban services on the extension line saw the introduction of more comfortable Dreadnought Stock carriages from 1910 . Ninety @-@ two of these wooden compartment carriages were built , fitted with pressurised gas lighting and steam heating . Electric lighting had replaced the gas by 1917 and electric heaters were added in 1922 to provide warmth when hauled by an electric locomotive . Later formed into rakes of five , six or seven coaches , conductor rail pick @-@ ups on the leading and trailing guard coaches were joined by a bus line and connected to the electric locomotive to help prevent <unk> . Two rakes were formed with a Pullman coach that provided a buffet service for a supplementary fare . The Vintage Carriages Trust has three preserved Dreadnought carriages . 
 From 1906 , some of the Ashbury bogie stock was converted into electric multiple units . Some Dreadnought carriages were used with electric motor cars , although two @-@ thirds remained in use as locomotive hauled stock on the extension line . 
 = = = Electric locomotives = = = 
 After electrification , the outer suburban routes were worked with carriage stock hauled from Baker Street by an electric locomotive that was exchanged for a steam locomotive en route . The Met ordered 20 electric locomotives from Metropolitan Amalgamated with two types of electrical equipment . The first ten , with Westinghouse equipment , entered service in 1906 . These ' camel @-@ back ' bogie locomotives had a central cab , weighed 50 tons , and had four 215 hp ( 160 kW ) traction motors The second type were built to a box car design with British Thomson @-@ Houston equipment , replaced with the Westinghouse type in 1919 . 
 In the early 1920s , the Met placed an order with Metropolitan @-@ Vickers of Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness for rebuilding the 20 electric locomotives . When work started on the first locomotive , it was found to be impractical and uneconomical and the order was changed to building new locomotives using some equipment recovered from the originals . The new locomotives were built in 1922 – 23 and named after famous London residents . They had four 300 hp ( 220 kW ) motors , totalling 1 @,@ 200 hp ( 890 kW ) ( one @-@ hour rating ) , giving a top speed of 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) . 
 No. 5 " John Hampden " is preserved as a static display at the London Transport Museum and No. 12 " Sarah Siddons " has been used for heritage events , and ran during the Met 's 150th anniversary celebrations . 
 = = = Electric multiple units = = = 
 The first order for electric multiple units was placed with Metropolitan Amalgamated in 1902 for 50 trailers and 20 motor cars with Westinghouse equipment , which ran as 6 @-@ car trains . First and third class accommodation was provided in open saloons , second class being withdrawn from the Met . Access was at the ends via open lattice gates and the units were modified so that they could run off @-@ peak as 3 @-@ car units . For the joint Hammersmith & City line service , the Met and the GWR purchased 20 × 6 @-@ cars trains with Thomson @-@ Houston equipment . In 1904 , a further order was placed by the Met for 36 motor cars and 62 trailers with an option for another 20 motor cars and 40 trailers . Problems with the Westinghouse equipment led to Thomson @-@ Houston equipment being specified when the option was taken up and more powerful motors being fitted . Before 1918 , the motor cars with the more powerful motors were used on the circle with three trailers . The open lattice gates were seen as a problem when working above ground and all of the cars had gates replaced with vestibules by 1907 . Having access only through the two end doors became a problem on the busy circle and centre sliding doors were fitted from 1911 . 
 From 1906 , some of the Ashbury bogie stock was converted into multiple units by fitting cabs , control equipment and motors . In 1910 , two motor cars were modified with driving cabs at both ends . They started work on the Uxbridge @-@ South Harrow shuttle service , being transferred to the Addison Road shuttle in 1918 . From 1925 to 1934 these vehicles were used between Watford and Rickmansworth . 
 In 1913 , an order was placed for 23 motor cars and 20 trailers , saloon cars with sliding doors at the end and the middle . These started work on the circle , including the new service to New Cross via the ELR . In 1921 , 20 motor cars , 33 trailers and six first @-@ class driving trailers were received with three pairs of double sliding doors on each side . These were introduced on the circle . 
 Between 1927 and 1933 multiple unit compartment stock was built by the Metropolitan Carriage and Wagon and Birmingham Railway Carriage and Wagon Co. for services from Baker Street and the City to Watford and Rickmansworth . The first order was only for motor cars ; half had Westinghouse brakes , Metro @-@ Vickers control systems and four MV153 motors ; they replaced the motor cars working with bogie stock trailers . The rest of the motor cars had the same motor equipment but used vacuum brakes , and worked with converted 1920 / 23 Dreadnought carriages to form ' MV ' units . In 1929 , ' MW ' stock was ordered , 30 motor coaches and 25 trailers similar to the ' MV ' units , but with Westinghouse brakes . A further batch of ' MW ' stock was ordered in 1931 , this time from the Birmingham Railway Carriage & Wagon Co . This was to make seven 8 @-@ coach trains , and included additional trailers to increase the length of the previous ' MW ' batch trains to eight coaches . These had GEC <unk> motors , and although designed to work in multiple with the MV153 , this did not work well in practice . After the Met became part of London Underground , the MV stock was fitted with Westinghouse brakes and the cars with GEC motors were re @-@ geared to allow them to work in multiple with the MV153 @-@ motored cars . In 1938 , nine 8 @-@ coach and ten 6 @-@ coach MW units were re @-@ designated T Stock . A trailer coach built in 1904 / 5 is stored at London Transport Museum 's Acton Depot , although it has been badly damaged by fire , and the Spa Valley Railway is home to two T stock coaches . 
 = = = Other publications = = = 
 = For Your Eyes Only ( film ) = 
 For Your Eyes Only ( 1981 ) is the twelfth spy film in the James Bond series , and the fifth to star Roger Moore as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . It marked the directorial debut of John Glen , who had worked as editor and second unit director in three other Bond films . 
 The screenplay by Richard Maibaum and Michael G. Wilson takes its characters and combines elements from the plots from two short stories from Ian Fleming 's For Your Eyes Only collection : the title story and " Risico " . In the plot , Bond attempts to locate a missile command system while becoming tangled in a web of deception spun by rival Greek businessmen along with Melina Havelock , a woman seeking to avenge the murder of her parents . Some writing elements were inspired by the novels Live and Let Die , Goldfinger and On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . 
 After the science fiction @-@ focused Moonraker , the producers wanted a conscious return to the style of the early Bond films and the works of 007 creator Fleming . For Your Eyes Only followed a grittier , more realistic approach and a narrative theme of revenge and its consequences . Filming locations included Greece , Italy and England , while underwater footage was shot in The Bahamas . 
 For Your Eyes Only was released on 24 June 1981 to a mixed critical reception ; the film was a financial success , generating $ 195 @.@ 3 million worldwide . This was the final Bond film to be distributed solely by United Artists ; the studio merged with Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer soon after this film 's release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The British spy boat St Georges , which holds the Automatic Targeting Attack Communicator ( ATAC ) , the system used by the Ministry of Defence to communicate with and co @-@ ordinate the Royal Navy 's fleet of Polaris submarines , is sunk after accidentally trawling an old naval mine in the Ionian Sea . MI6 agent James Bond , code name " 007 " , is ordered by the Minister of Defence , Sir Frederick Gray and MI6 Chief of Staff , Bill Tanner , to retrieve the ATAC before the Soviets , as the transmitter could order attacks by the submarines ' Polaris ballistic missiles . 
 The head of the KGB , General Gogol has also learnt of the fate of the St Georges and already notified his contact in Greece . A marine archaeologist , Sir Timothy Havelock , who had been asked by the British to secretly locate the St Georges , is murdered with his wife by a Cuban hitman , Hector Gonzales . Bond goes to Spain to find out who hired Gonzales . 
 While spying on Gonzales ' villa , Bond is captured by his men , but manages to escape as Gonzales is killed by an arrow . Outside , he finds the assassin was Melina Havelock , the daughter of Sir Timothy , and the two escape . With the help of Q , Bond identifies the man he saw paying off Gonzales as Emile Leopold Locque , and then goes to Locque 's possible base in Italy . There Bond meets his contact , Luigi Ferrara , and a well @-@ connected Greek businessman and intelligence informant , Aris Kristatos , who tells Bond that Locque is employed by Milos Columbo , known as " the Dove " in the Greek underworld , Kristatos ' former resistance partner during the Second World War . After Bond goes with Kristatos ' protégée , figure skater Bibi Dahl , to a biathlon course , a group of three men , which includes East German biathlete Eric Kriegler , chases Bond , trying to kill him . Bond escapes , and then goes with Ferrara to bid Bibi farewell in an ice rink , where he fends off another attempt on his life by men in ice hockey gear . Ferrara is killed in his car , with a dove pin in his hand . Bond then travels to Corfu in pursuit of Columbo . 
 There , at the casino , Bond meets with Kristatos and asks how to meet Columbo , not knowing that Columbo 's men are secretly recording their conversation . After Columbo and his mistress , Countess Lisl von Schlaf , argue , Bond offers to escort her home with Kristatos ' car and driver . The two then spend the night together . In the morning Lisl and Bond are ambushed by Locque and Lisl is killed . Bond is captured by Columbo 's men before Locque can kill him ; Columbo then tells Bond that Locque was actually hired by Kristatos , who is working for the KGB to retrieve the ATAC . Bond accompanies Columbo and his crew on a raid on one of Kristatos ' opium @-@ processing warehouses in Albania , where Bond uncovers naval mines similar to the one that sank the St Georges , suggesting it was not an accident . After the base is destroyed , Bond chases Locque and kills him . 
 Afterwards , Bond meets with Melina , and they recover the ATAC from the wreckage of the St Georges , but Kristatos is waiting for them when they surface and he takes the ATAC . After the two escape an assassination attempt , they discover Kristatos ' rendezvous point when Melina 's parrot repeats the phrase " ATAC to St Cyril 's " . With the help of Columbo and his men , Bond and Melina break into St Cyril 's , an abandoned mountaintop monastery . As Columbo confronts Kristatos , Bond kills the biathlete Kriegler . 
 Bond retrieves the ATAC system and stops Melina from killing Kristatos after he surrenders . Kristatos tries to kill Bond with a hidden flick knife , but is killed by a knife thrown by Columbo ; Gogol arrives by helicopter to collect the ATAC , but Bond destroys it first . Bond and Melina later spend a romantic evening aboard her father 's yacht . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond : MI6 agent 007 , who is sent to retrieve a stolen " ATAC " system that could be misused for controlling British military submarines . 
 Carole Bouquet as Melina Havelock : The daughter of marine archaeologists who are murdered while tracking down the ATAC 's whereabouts . Bouquet had auditioned for the role of Holly Goodhead in Moonraker , but was unsuccessful . 
 Julian Glover as Aristotle Kristatos : Initially shown as an ally , later as the main villain . A smuggler planning to expand his fortune by selling the ATAC to the KGB . Glover had been shortlisted as a possible Bond for Live and Let Die , eventually losing out to Moore . 
 Chaim Topol ( credited as " Topol " ) as Milos Columbo : Kristatos ' former smuggling partner who assists Bond in his mission . Named after Gioacchino Colombo , the Ferrari engine designer , specifically Ferrari 125 , which Fleming admired . Topol suggested the pistachios as a trademark of the character , which are used in a scene to orient Columbo 's men on where to shoot . 
 Lynn @-@ Holly Johnson as Bibi Dahl : An ice @-@ skating prodigy who is training with the financial support of Kristatos . Johnson was an ice skater before turning to acting , and achieved second place at the novice level of the 1974 United States Figure Skating Championships . 
 Michael <unk> as Emile Leopold Locque : A Belgian hired killer and associate of Kristatos . 
 Cassandra Harris as Countess Lisl von Schlaf : Columbo 's mistress . At the time of filming Harris was married to future Bond actor Pierce Brosnan , and the couple lunched with the film 's producer Albert R. Broccoli during filming . 
 John Wyman as Erich Kriegler : An East German Olympic class athlete and Kristatos ' henchman / KGB contact . The academic Jeremy Black said that he resembles Hans of You Only Live Twice and Stamper of Tomorrow Never Dies . 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q , the head of MI6 's technical department . 
 Jill Bennett as Jacoba Brink : Bibi 's skating coach . 
 Jack Hedley as Sir Timothy Havelock : A marine archaeologist hired by the British Secret Service to secretly locate the wreck of St. Georges . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny , M 's secretary . 
 Geoffrey Keen as Sir Frederick Gray : The British Minister of Defence , a minister in the British government . The role , along with Bill Tanner as Chief of Staff , was used to brief Bond in place of M , following the death of Bernard Lee . 
 James Villiers as MI6 Chief of Staff Bill Tanner . The role of Tanner first appeared on film in The Man with the Golden Gun , although in an un @-@ credited capacity . Villiers presumed he would play the role of M in subsequent films and was disappointed not to be asked ; the producers thought him too young for the role and wanted an actor in his 70s . 
 John Moreno as Luigi Ferrara : 007 's MI6 contact in northern Italy . 
 Walter Gotell as General Gogol : Head of the KGB . 
 Toby Robins as Iona Havelock : Melina 's mother and wife of Sir Timothy . 
 Jack <unk> as <unk> : One of Kristatos 's henchmen and chauffeur . 
 Stefan <unk> as Hector Gonzales : A Cuban hitman hired by Kristatos to kill the Havelocks . 
 Charles Dance as Claus , an associate of Locque . The role was early in Dance 's career ; in 1989 he would play Ian Fleming in Anglia Television 's Goldeneye : The Secret Life of Ian Fleming , a dramatised portrayal of the life of Ian Fleming . 
 Janet Brown as the British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , who appears in the closing scene alongside John Wells as Denis . 
 John Hollis as the " bald villain in wheelchair " , voiced by Robert <unk> . The character appears in the pre @-@ credits sequence and is both unnamed and uncredited . The character contains a number of characteristics of Ernst Stavro Blofeld , but could not be identified as such because of the legal reasons surrounding the Thunderball controversy with Kevin McClory claiming sole rights to the Blofeld character , a claim disputed by Eon . 
 Bob Simmons , who previously portrayed Bond in the gun barrel sequences in the first three films and SPECTRE agent Colonel Jacques Bouvar in Thunderball , cameos as another villain as Gonzales ' henchman who falls victim to Bond 's exploding Lotus . 
 = = Production = = 
 For Your Eyes Only marked a change in the make up of the production crew : John Glen was promoted from his duties as a film editor to director , a position he would occupy for four subsequent films . The transition in directors resulted in a harder @-@ edged directorial style , with less emphasis on gadgetry and large action sequences in huge arenas ( as was favoured by Lewis Gilbert ) . Emphasis was placed on tension , plot and character in addition to a return to Bond 's more serious roots , whilst For Your Eyes Only " showed a clear attempt to activate some lapsed and inactive parts of the Bond mythology . " 
 The film was also a deliberate effort to bring the series more back to reality , following the success of Moonraker in 1979 . As co @-@ writer Michael G. Wilson pointed out , " If we went through the path of Moonraker things would just get more outlandish , so we needed to get back to basics " . To that end , the story that emerged was simpler , not one in which the world was at risk , but returning the series to that of a Cold War thriller ; Bond would also rely more on his wits than gadgets to survive . Glen decided to symbolically represent it with a scene where Bond 's Lotus blows itself up and forces 007 to rely on Melina 's more humble Citroën 2CV . Since Ken Adam was busy with Pennies from Heaven , Peter Lamont , who had worked in the art department since Goldfinger , was promoted to production designer . Following a suggestion of Glen , Lamont created realistic scenery , instead of the elaborate set pieces for which the series had been known . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Richard Maibaum was once again the scriptwriter for the story , assisted by Michael G. Wilson . According to Wilson , the ideas from stories could have come from anyone as the outlines were worked out in committee that could include Broccoli , Maibaum , Wilson and stunt coordinators . Much of the inspiration for the stories for the film came from two Ian Fleming short stories from the collection For Your Eyes Only : Risico and For Your Eyes Only . Another set @-@ piece from the novel of Live and Let Die – the <unk> – which was unused in the film of the same name , was also inserted into the plot . Other ideas from Fleming were also used in For Your Eyes Only , such as the <unk> which comes from the novel Goldfinger , where it was originally called the " <unk> " . These elements from Fleming 's stories were mixed with a Cold War story centred on the macguffin of the ATAC . An initial treatment for “ For Your Eyes Only ” was submitted by Ronald Hardy , an English novelist and screenwriter in 1979 . Hardy ’ s treatment included the involvement of a character named Julia Havelock whose parents were assassinated by a man named Gonzales . 
 For Your Eyes Only is noted for its pre @-@ title sequence , described variously as either " out @-@ of place and disappointing " or " roaringly enjoyable " . The scene was shot to introduce a potential new Bond to audiences , thus linking the new actor to elements from previous Bond films ( see casting , below ) . 
 The sequence begins with Bond laying flowers at the grave of his wife Tracy Bond , before a Universal Exports helicopter picks him up for an emergency . Control of the helicopter is taken over by remote control by a bald man in a grey Nehru jacket with a white cat . This character is unnamed in either the film or the credits , although he looks and sounds like Ernst Stavro Blofeld as played by Donald Pleasence or Telly Savalas . Director John Glen referred to the identity of the villain obliquely : " We just let people use their imaginations and draw their own conclusions ... It 's a legal thing " . The character is deliberately not named due to copyright restrictions with Kevin McClory , who owned the film rights to Thunderball , which supposedly includes the character Ernst Stavro Blofeld , the organisation SPECTRE , and other material associated with the development of Thunderball . Eon disputed McClory 's ownership of the Blofeld character , but decided not to use him again : the scene was " a deliberate statement by Broccoli of his lack of need to use the character . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Roger Moore had originally signed a three @-@ film contract with Eon Productions , which covered his first three appearances up to The Spy Who Loved Me . Subsequent to this , the actor negotiated contracts on a film @-@ by @-@ film basis . Uncertainty surrounding his involvement in For Your Eyes Only led to other actors being considered to take over , including Lewis Collins , known in the UK for his portrayal of Bodie in The Professionals ; Michael Billington , who previously appeared in The Spy Who Loved Me as Agent XXX 's ill @-@ fated lover , ( Billington 's screen test for For Your Eyes Only was one of the five occasions he auditioned for the role of Bond ) and Michael Jayston , who had appeared as the eponymous spy in the British TV series of Quiller ( Jayston eventually played Bond in a BBC Radio production of You Only Live Twice in 1985 ) . Eventually , however , this came to nothing , as Moore signed on to play Bond once again . 
 Bernard Lee died in January 1981 , after filming had started on For Your Eyes Only , but before he could film his scenes as M , the head of MI6 , as he had done in the previous eleven films of the series . Out of respect , no new actor was hired to assume the role and , instead , the script was re @-@ written so that the character is said to be on leave , letting Chief of Staff Bill Tanner take over the role as acting head of MI6 and briefing Bond alongside the Minister of Defence . 
 Chaim Topol was cast following a suggestion by Broccoli 's wife Dana , while Julian Glover joined the cast as the producers felt he was stylish – Glover was even considered to play Bond at some point , but Michael G. Wilson stated that " when we first thought of him he was too young , and by the time of For Your Eyes Only he was too old " . Carole Bouquet was a suggestion of United Artists publicist Jerry <unk> , and after Glen and Broccoli saw her in That Obscure Object of Desire , they went to Rome to invite Bouquet for the role of Melina . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production of For Your Eyes Only began on 2 September 1980 in the North Sea , with three days shooting exterior scenes with the St Georges . The interiors were shot later in Pinewood Studios , as well as the ship 's explosion , which was done with a miniature in Pinewood 's tank on the 007 Stage . On 15 September principal photography started on Corfu at the Villa Sylva at <unk> , above Corfu Town , which acted as the location of the Spanish villa . Many of the local houses were painted white for scenographic reasons . Glen opted to use the local slopes and olive trees for the chase scene between Melina 's Citroën 2CV and Gonzales ' men driving Peugeot 504s . The scene was shot across twelve days , with stunt driver Rémy Julienne – who would remain in the series up until GoldenEye – driving the Citroën . Four <unk> were used , with modifications for the stunts – all had more powerful flat @-@ four engines , and one received a special revolving plate on its roof so it could get turned upside down . 
 In October filming moved to other Greek locations , including <unk> and the <unk> . In November , the main unit moved to England , which included interior work in Pinewood , while the second unit shot underwater scenes in The Bahamas . On 1 January 1981 , production moved to Cortina D 'Ampezzo in Italy , where filming wrapped in February . Since it was not snowing in Cortina D 'Ampezzo by the time of filming , the producers had to pay for trucks to bring snow from nearby mountains , which was then dumped in the city 's streets . 
 Many of the underwater scenes , especially involving close @-@ ups of Bond and Melina , were actually faked on a dry soundstage . A combination of lighting effects , slow @-@ motion photography , wind , and bubbles added in post @-@ production , gave the illusion of the actors being underwater . Actress Carole Bouquet reportedly had a pre @-@ existing health condition that prevented her from performing actual underwater stunt work . Actual aquatic scenes were done by a team lead by Al Giddings , who had previously worked on The Deep , and filmed in either Pinewood 's tank on the 007 Stage or an underwater set built in the Bahamas . Production designer Peter Lamont and his team developed two working props for the submarine Neptune , as well as a mock @-@ up with a fake bottom . 
 Roger Moore was reluctant to film the scene of Bond kicking a car , with Locque inside , over the edge of a cliff , saying that it " was Bond @-@ like , but not Roger Moore Bond @-@ like . " Michael G. Wilson later said that Moore had to be persuaded to be more ruthless than he felt comfortable . Wilson also added that he and Richard Maibaum , along with John Glen , toyed with other ideas surrounding that scene , but ultimately everyone , even Moore , agreed to do the scene as originally written . 
 For the Meteora shoots , a Greek bishop was paid to allow filming in the monasteries , but the uninformed Eastern Orthodox monks were mostly critical of production rolling in their installations . After a trial in the Greek Supreme Court , it was decided that the monks ' only property were the interiors – the exteriors and surrounding landscapes were from the local government . In protest , the monks remained shut inside the monasteries during the shooting , and tried to sabotage production as much as possible , hanging their washing out of their windows and covering the principal monastery with plastic bunting and flags to spoil the shots , and placing oil drums to prevent the film crew from landing helicopters . The production team solved the problem with back lighting , matte paintings , and building both a similar scenographic monastery on a nearby unoccupied rock , and a monastery set in Pinewood . 
 Roger Moore said he had a great fear of heights , and to do the climbing in Greece , he resorted to moderate drinking to calm his nerves . Later in that same sequence , Rick Sylvester , a stuntman who had previously performed the pre @-@ credits ski jump in The Spy Who Loved Me , undertook the stunt of Bond falling off the side of the cliff . The stunt was dangerous , since the sudden rope jerk at the bottom could be fatal . Special effects supervisor Derek Meddings developed a system that would dampen the stop , but Sylvester recalled that his nerves nearly got the better of him : " From where we were [ shooting ] , you could see the local cemetery ; and the box [ to stop my fall ] looked like a casket . You didn 't need to be an English major to connect the dots . " The stunt went off without a problem . 
 Bond veteran cameraman and professional skier Willy Bogner , Jr. was promoted to director of a second unit involving ski footage . Bogner designed the ski chase on the bobsleigh track of Cortina d 'Ampezzo hoping to surpass his work in both On Her Majesty 's Secret Service and The Spy Who Loved Me . To allow better filming , Bogner developed both a system where he was attached to a bobsleigh , allowing to film the vehicle or behind it , and a set of skis that allowed him to ski forwards and backwards to get the best shots . In February 1981 , on the final day of filming the bobsleigh chase , one of the stuntmen driving a sleigh , 23 @-@ year @-@ old Paolo <unk> , was killed when he became trapped under the bob . 
 The pre @-@ credits sequence used a church in Stoke Poges as a cemetery , while the helicopter scenes were filmed at the abandoned Beckton Gas Works in London . The gas works were also the location for some of Stanley Kubrick 's 1987 film , Full Metal Jacket . Director John Glen got the idea for the remote @-@ controlled helicopter after seeing a child playing with an RC car . Since flying a helicopter through a warehouse was thought to be too dangerous , the scene was shot using forced perspective . A smaller mock @-@ up was built by Derek Meddings ' team closer to the camera that the stunt pilot Marc Wolff flew behind and this made it seem as if the helicopter was entering the warehouse . The footage inside the building was shot on location , though with a life @-@ sized helicopter model which stood over a rail . Stuntman Martin Grace stood as Bond when the agent is dangling outside the flying helicopter , while Roger Moore himself was used in the scenes inside the model . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score of For Your Eyes Only was written by Bill Conti , who retained a number of John Barry @-@ influenced brass elements in the score , but also added elements of dance and funk music . Whilst one reviewer observed that " Bill Conti 's score is a constant source of annoyance " , another claimed that " In the end , For Your Eyes Only stands as one of the best James Bond film scores of the 1980s . " 
 The title song , written by Conti and Michael Leeson , was sung by Sheena Easton , who holds the distinction of being the first title song artist to appear on screen in a Bond film , as designer Maurice Binder liked Easton 's appearance and decided to add her to the opening credits . The producers of the film wanted Blondie to perform the title song : the band wrote a song titled " For Your Eyes Only " , but decided to decline the offer when they discovered the producers wanted a recording of Conti 's song instead . Blondie 's song can be found on their 1982 album , The Hunter . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 For Your Eyes Only was premiered at the Odeon Leicester Square in London on 24 June 1981 , setting an all @-@ time opening @-@ day record for any film at any cinema in the UK with a gross of £ 14 @,@ 998 ( £ 51 @,@ 844 in 2016 pounds ) — ( $ 29 @,@ 696 ) . The film went on general release in the UK the same day . For Your Eyes Only had its North American premiere in the US and Canada on Friday , 26 June , at approximately 1 @,@ 100 cinemas . 
 The film grossed $ 54 @.@ 8 million in the United States , ( equivalent to $ 101 @.@ 5 million at 2011 ticket prices or $ 143 million in 2016 dollars , adjusted for general inflation ) and $ 195 @.@ 3 million worldwide , becoming the second highest grossing Bond film after its predecessor , Moonraker . This was the last James Bond film to be solely released by United Artists . Following the MGM and United Artists merger , the films were released by " MGM / UA Distribution Co " . 
 The promotional cinema poster for the film featured a woman holding a crossbow ; she was photographed from behind , and her outfit left the bottom half of her buttocks exposed . The effect was achieved by having the model wear a pair of bikini bottoms backwards , so that the part seen on her backside is actually the front of the suit . The poster caused some furore — largely in the US — with The Boston Globe and the Los Angeles Times considering the poster so unsuitable they edited out everything above the knee , whilst the Pittsburgh Press editors painted a pair of shorts over the legs . There was significant speculation as to the identity of the model before photographer Morgan Kane identified her as Joyce Bartle . 
 A number of items of merchandising were issued to coincide with the film , including a 007 digital watch and a copy of Melina 's Citroën 2CV by Corgi Toys . Citroën itself produced a special " 007 " edition of the 2CV , which even had decorative bullet holes on the door . Marvel Comics also did a comic book adaptation ( see section below ) . 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Derek Malcolm in The Guardian disliked the film , saying it was " too long ... and pretty boring between the stunts " , although he admitted that the stunts were of a high quality . According to Malcolm , Bond " inhabits a fantasy @-@ land of more or less bloodless violence , <unk> sex and naivety masked as superior sophistication " , with Moore playing him as if in a " nicely lubricated daze " . Although Malcolm tipped the film for international box office success , he observed that he " can 't quite see why the series has lasted so long and so strong in people 's affections . " Writing in The Observer , Philip French commented that " not for the first time the pre @-@ credits sequence is the best thing about the film . " French was dismissive of Moore 's Bond , saying that Bond was " impersonated by Moore " and referred to Moore 's advancing years . 
 Ian Christie , writing in the Daily Express , said that it was not " much of a plot , but it has a touch of credibility which is a welcome change from some of its predecessors . " Overall , Christie thought , For Your Eyes Only was " one of the better Bonds , with a nice balance between humour and excitement and the usual bevy of beautiful girls . " Christie 's colleague in the Sunday Express , Richard Barkley praised the film , saying that For Your Eyes Only " is one of the most exciting yet " . Barkley describes Moore 's Bond as having an " accustomed debonair calm and quiet authority " . All told , Barkley thought " this Bond movie is smashing entertainment . " 
 David Robinson , writing in The Times bemoaned the fact that the " dramatic bits between the set pieces don 't count for much . " Like other critics at the time his praise was more directed towards the stunt crews ; they were " better than ever in this one . " The film critic for the magazine Time Out was brief and pithy : " no plot and poor dialogue , and Moore really is old enough to be the uncle of those girls . " 
 For the US press , Gary Arnold in The Washington Post thought the film was " undeniably easy on the eyes " , and further added " maybe too easy to prevent the mind from wandering and the lids from drooping . " Arnold was also critical of the large set pieces , calling them " more ponderous than sensational " and that there was " no equivalent of the classic action highlights that can be recalled readily from " From Russia , With Love " or " You Only Live Twice " or " The Spy Who Loved Me " or " Moonraker . " This is a Bond waiting for something inspired to push it over the top . " The New York Times critic Vincent Canby said that " For Your Eyes Only is not the best of the series by a long shot " although he does say that the film is " slick entertainment " with a tone that is " consistently comic even when the material is not . " 
 Jack Kroll in Newsweek dismissed the film , saying it was " an anthology of action episodes held together by the thinnest of plot lines " , although he does concede that these set pieces are " terrific in their exhilaratingly absurd energy . " For Time magazine , Richard Corliss concentrated on the stunts , saying the team " have devised some splendid optional features for For Your Eyes Only " whilst also commenting on Roger Moore , saying that his " mannequin good looks and waxed @-@ fruit insouciance " show him to be " the best @-@ oiled cog in this perpetual motion machine . " Jay Scott of The Globe and Mail included it on his list of the year 's worst films , calling it " repellant " and " ambitiously bad " . 
 French filmmaker Robert Bresson admired the film . " It filled me with wonder because of its cinematographic writing ... if I could have seen it twice in a row and again the next day , I would have done . " Elsewhere Bresson said he also loved the film 's ski chase . 
 = = = Reflective reviews = = = 
 Opinion on For Your Eyes Only has not changed with the passing of time and the reviews are still mixed : as of October 2015 , the film holds a 74 % ' fresh ' rating from Rotten Tomatoes , being ranked twelfth among the 22 Bond films . Ian Nathan of Empire gives the film only two of a possible five stars , observing that the film " still ranks as one of the most forgettable Bonds on record . " In 2006 , IGN chose For Your Eyes Only as the sixth best Bond film , claiming it is " a good old @-@ fashioned espionage tale " , a placement shared by Norman Wilner of MSN , who considered it " the one Moore film that seems to reach back to Connery 's heyday " , and Entertainment Weekly chose it as the tenth best in 2008 , saying it was a " return to low @-@ tech , low @-@ key Bond [ with ] ... some of the best stunts since the early days " . In October 2008 Time Out re @-@ issued a review of For Your Eyes Only and observed that the film is " admirable in intent " but that it " feels a little spare " , largely because the plot has been " divested of the bells and whistles that hallmark the franchise " . 
 James Berardinelli wrote that the film was " a solid adventure , although it could have been better " , while Danny Peary thought " There are exciting moments , but most of it is standard Bond fare , " going on to describe For Your Eyes Only as " an attempt to mix spectacle with [ the ] tough , believable storylines of early Bond films ... [ it ] is enjoyable while you 're watching it . Afterward , it 's one of the most forgettable of the Bond series . " Raymond Benson , the author of nine Bond novels , thought For Your Eyes Only was Roger Moore 's best Bond film . 
 Although Chris Nashawaty of Entertainment Weekly ranks Carole Bouquet playing Melina as the " worst babe " of the seven Roger Moore James Bond films , his colleague , Joshua Rich disagreed , putting her tenth in the overall 10 Best Bond Girls listing from the 21 films released up to that point . Entertainment Weekly also ranked Lynn @-@ Holly Johnson as Bibi Dahl as ninth on their list of the 10 worst Bond girls from the 21 films that had been released . After 20 films had been released , IGN ranked Bouquet as fifth in their ' top 10 Bond Babes ' list , and The Times thought she was sixth on their list of the Top 10 most fashionable Bond girls after 21 films had been released . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The song " For Your Eyes Only " was nominated for a Best Original Song at the 39th Golden Globe Awards and Best Original Song at the 1981 Academy Awards , losing out at both ceremonies to " Arthur 's Theme " from the film Arthur . However , the 1981 Academy Awards ceremony did see the presenting of the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award to producer Albert R. Broccoli . The Writers Guild of America nominated the script by Michael G. Wilson and Richard Maibaum for Best Adapted Screenplay – Comedy or Musical Picture . 
 = = Comic book adaptation = = 
 As part of the merchandising of For Your Eyes Only , Marvel Comics published a two @-@ issue comic book adaptation of the film . The first issue was released in October 1981 and was soon followed by the second issue in November of the same year . Both issues of the adaptation were written by Larry Hama , pencilled by Howard Chaykin , inked by Vincent Colletta and edited by Dennis O 'Neil . 
 It was the second film in the series to have a comic book tie @-@ in , following a Dr. No comic in 1962 . Marvel Comics would go on to publish an Octopussy comic book adaptation in 1983 . 
 = Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System = 
 The Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System ( TAPS ) includes the trans @-@ Alaska crude @-@ oil pipeline , 12 pump stations , several hundred miles of feeder pipelines , and the Valdez Marine Terminal . TAPS is one of the world 's largest pipeline systems . It is commonly called the Alaska pipeline , trans @-@ Alaska pipeline , or Alyeska pipeline , ( or the pipeline as referred to in Alaska ) , but those terms technically apply only to the 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 287 km ) of the pipeline with the diameter of 48 inches ( 122 cm ) that conveys oil from Prudhoe Bay , to Valdez , Alaska . The crude oil pipeline is privately owned by the Alyeska Pipeline Service Company . 
 The pipeline was built between 1974 and 1977 after the 1973 oil crisis caused a sharp rise in oil prices in the United States . This rise made exploration of the Prudhoe Bay oil field economically feasible . Environmental , legal , and political debates followed the discovery of oil at Prudhoe Bay in 1968 , and the pipeline was built only after the oil crisis provoked the passage of legislation designed to remove legal challenges to the project . 
 The task of building the pipeline had to address a wide range of difficulties , stemming mainly from the extreme cold and the difficult , isolated terrain . The construction of the pipeline was one of the first large @-@ scale projects to deal with problems caused by permafrost , and special construction techniques had to be developed to cope with the frozen ground . The project attracted tens of thousands of workers to Alaska , causing a boomtown atmosphere in Valdez , Fairbanks , and Anchorage . 
 The first barrel of oil traveled through the pipeline in 1977 , and full @-@ scale production began by the end of the year . Several notable incidents of oil leakage have occurred since , including those caused by sabotage , maintenance failures , and bullet holes . As of 2010 , the pipeline has shipped almost 16 billion barrels ( 2 @.@ 5 × 109 m3 ) of oil . 
 = = Origins = = 
 <unk> people on the North Slope of Alaska had mined oil @-@ saturated peat for possibly thousands of years , using it as fuel for heat and light . Whalers who stayed at Point Barrow saw the substance the <unk> called pitch and recognized it as petroleum . Charles Brower , a whaler who settled at Barrow and operated trading posts along the arctic coast , directed geologist Alfred Hulse Brooks to oil seepages at Cape Simpson and Fish Creek in the far north of Alaska , east of the village of Barrow . Brooks ' report confirmed the observations of Thomas Simpson , an officer of the Hudson 's Bay Company who first observed the seepages in 1836 . Similar seepages were found at the Canning River in 1919 by Ernest de Koven Leffingwell . Following the First World War , as the United States Navy converted its ships from coal to fuel oil , the importance of securing a stable supply of oil became important to the U.S. government . Accordingly , President Warren G. Harding established by executive order a series of Naval Petroleum Reserves ( NPR @-@ 1 through -4 ) across the United States . These reserves were areas thought to be rich in oil and set aside for future drilling by the U.S. Navy . Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 4 was sited in Alaska 's far north , just south of Barrow , and encompassed 23 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 93 @,@ 078 km2 ) . Other Naval Petroleum Reserves were embroiled in controversy over government corruption in the Teapot Dome Scandal . 
 The first explorations of NPR @-@ 4 were undertaken by the U.S. Geological Survey from 1923 to 1925 and focused on mapping , identifying and characterizing coal resources in the western portion of the reserve and petroleum exploration in the eastern and northern portions of the reserve . These surveys were primarily pedestrian in nature ; no drilling or remote sensing techniques were available at the time . These surveys named many of the geographic features of the areas explored , including the Philip Smith Mountains and quadrangle . These efforts are summarized in . 
 The petroleum reserve lay dormant until the Second World War provided an impetus to explore new oil prospects . The first renewed efforts to identify strategic oil assets were a two pronged survey using bush aircraft , local Inupiat guides , and personnel from multiple agencies to locate reported seeps . <unk> and <unk> reported on these initial forays in 1943 Starting in 1944 , the U.S. Navy funded oil exploration near <unk> Mountain , on the Colville River in the foothills of the Brooks Range . Surveyors from the U.S. Geological Survey spread across the petroleum reserve and worked to determine its extent until 1953 , when the Navy suspended funding for the project . The USGS found several oil fields , most notably the Alpine and <unk> Oil Field , but none were cost @-@ effective to develop . 
 Four years after the Navy suspended its survey , Richfield Oil Corporation ( later Atlantic Richfield and ARCO ) drilled an enormously successful oil well near the Swanson River in southern Alaska , near Kenai . The resulting Swanson River Oil Field was Alaska 's first major commercially producing oil field , and it spurred the exploration and development of many others . By 1965 , five oil and 11 natural gas fields had been developed . This success and the previous Navy exploration of its petroleum reserve led petroleum engineers to the conclusion that the area of Alaska north of the Brooks Range surely held large amounts of oil and gas . The problems came from the area 's remoteness and harsh climate . It was estimated that between 200 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 barrels ( 32 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) and 500 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 barrels ( 79 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil would have to be recovered to make a North Slope oil field commercially viable . 
 In 1967 , Atlantic Richfield ( ARCO ) began detailed survey work in the Prudhoe Bay area . By January 1968 , reports began circulating that natural gas had been discovered by a discovery well . On March 12 , 1968 , an Atlantic Richfield drilling crew hit paydirt . A discovery well began flowing at the rate of 1 @,@ 152 barrels ( 183 @.@ 2 m3 ) of oil per day . On June 25 , ARCO announced that a second discovery well likewise was producing oil at a similar rate . Together , the two wells confirmed the existence of the Prudhoe Bay Oil Field . The new field contained more than 25 billion barrels ( 4 @.@ 0 × 10 ^ 9 m3 ) of oil , making it the largest in North America and the 18th largest in the world . 
 The problem soon became how to develop the oil field and ship product to U.S. markets . Pipeline systems represent a high initial cost but lower operating costs , but no pipeline of the length needed had yet been constructed . Several other solutions were offered . Boeing proposed a series of gigantic 12 @-@ engine tanker aircraft to transport oil from the field , the Boeing RC @-@ 1 . General Dynamics proposed a line of tanker submarines for travel beneath the Arctic ice cap , and another group proposed extending the Alaska Railroad to Prudhoe Bay . Ice breaking oil tankers were proposed to transport the oil directly from Prudhoe Bay . 
 In 1969 , Humble Oil and Refining Company sent a specially fitted oil tanker , the SS Manhattan , to test the feasibility of transporting oil via ice @-@ breaking tankers to market . The Manhattan was fitted with an ice @-@ breaking bow , powerful engines , and hardened propellers before successfully traveling the Northwest Passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the Beaufort Sea . During the voyage , the ship suffered damage to several of its cargo holds , which flooded with seawater . Wind @-@ blown ice forced the Manhattan to change its intended route from the M <unk> Strait to the smaller Prince of Wales Strait . It was escorted back through the Northwest Passage by a Canadian Coast Guard icebreaker , the CCGS John A. Macdonald . Although the Manhattan successfully transited the Northwest Passage again in the summer of 1970 , the concept was considered too risky . A pipeline was thus the only viable system for transporting the oil to the nearest port free of pack @-@ ice , almost 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) away at Valdez . 
 = = Forming Alyeska = = 
 In February 1969 , before the SS Manhattan had even sailed from its East Coast starting point , the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System ( TAPS ) , an unincorporated joint group created by ARCO , British Petroleum , and Humble Oil in October 1968 , asked for permission from the United States Department of the Interior to begin geological and engineering studies of a proposed oil pipeline route from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez , across Alaska . Even before the first feasibility studies began , the oil companies had chosen the approximate route of the pipeline . Permission was given , and teams of engineers began drilling core samples and surveying in Alaska . 
 Because TAPS hoped to begin laying pipe by September 1969 , substantial orders were placed for steel pipeline 48 inches ( 122 cm ) in diameter . No American company manufactured pipe of that specification , so three Japanese companies — Sumitomo Metal Industries Ltd . , Nippon Steel Corporation , and Nippon <unk> Kabushiki Kaisha — received a $ 100 million contract for more than 800 miles ( 1280 km ) of pipeline . At the same time , TAPS placed a $ 30 million order for the first of the enormous pumps that would be needed to push the oil through the pipeline . 
 In June 1969 , as the SS Manhattan traveled through the Northwest Passage , TAPS formally applied to the Interior Department for a permit to build an oil pipeline across 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) of public land — from Prudhoe Bay to Valdez . The application was for a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 @.@ 5 m ) wide right of way to build a subterranean 48 @-@ inch ( 122 @-@ centimeter ) pipeline including 11 pumping stations . Another right of way was requested to build a construction and maintenance highway paralleling the pipeline . A document of just 20 pages contained all of the information TAPS had collected about the route up to that stage in its surveying . 
 The Interior Department responded by sending personnel to analyze the proposed route and plan . Max Brewer , an arctic expert in charge of the Naval Arctic Research Laboratory at Barrow , concluded that the plan to bury most of the pipeline was completely unfeasible because of the abundance of permafrost along the route . In a report , Brewer said the hot oil conveyed by the pipeline would melt the underlying permafrost , causing the pipeline to fail as its support turned to mud . This report was passed along to the appropriate committees of the U.S. House and Senate , which had to approve the right @-@ of @-@ way proposal because it asked for more land than authorized in the Mineral Leasing Act of 1920 and because it would break a development freeze imposed in 1966 by former Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall . 
 Udall imposed the freeze on any projects involving land claimed by Alaska Natives in hopes that an overarching Native claims settlement would result . In the fall of 1969 , the Department of the Interior and TAPS set about bypassing the land freeze by obtaining waivers from the various native villages that had claims to a portion of the proposed right of way . By the end of September , all the relevant villages had waived their right @-@ of @-@ way claims , and Secretary of the Interior Wally Hickel asked Congress to lift the land freeze for the entire TAPS project . After several months of questioning by the House and Senate committees with oversight of the project , Hickel was given the authority to lift the land freeze and give the go @-@ ahead to TAPS . 
 TAPS began issuing letters of intent to contractors for construction of the " haul road " , a highway running the length of the pipeline route to be used for construction . Heavy equipment was prepared , and crews prepared to go to work after Hickel gave permission and the snow melted . Before Hickel could act , however , several Alaska Native and conservation groups asked a judge in Washington , D.C. to issue an injunction against the project continuing . Several of the native villages that had waived claims on the right of way reneged because TAPS had not chosen any Native contractors for the project , and the contractors chosen were not likely to hire Native workers . 
 On April 1 , 1970 , Judge George Luzerne Hart , Jr . , of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia , ordered the Interior Department to not issue a construction permit for a section of the project that crossed one of the claims . Less than two weeks later , Hart heard arguments from conservation groups that the TAPS project violated the Mineral Leasing Act and the National Environmental Policy Act , which had gone into effect at the start of the year . Hart issued an injunction against the project , preventing the Interior Department from issuing a construction permit and halting the project in its tracks . 
 After the Department of the Interior was stopped from issuing a construction permit , the unincorporated TAPS consortium was reorganized into the new incorporated Alyeska Pipeline Service Company . Former Humble Oil manager Edward L. Patton was put in charge of the new company and began to lobby strongly in favor of an Alaska Native claims settlement to resolve the disputes over the pipeline right of way . 
 = = Opposition = = 
 Opposition to construction of the pipeline primarily came from two sources : Alaska Native groups and conservationists . Alaska Natives were upset that the pipeline would cross the land traditionally claimed by a variety of native groups , but no economic benefits would accrue to them directly . Conservationists were angry at what they saw as an incursion into America 's last wilderness . Both opposition movements launched legal campaigns to halt the pipeline and were successful in preventing construction from 1970 to 1973 . 
 = = = Conservation objections = = = 
 Although conservation groups and environmental organizations had voiced opposition to the pipeline project before 1970 , the introduction of the National Environmental Policy Act allowed them legal grounds to halt the project . Arctic engineers had raised concerns about the way plans for a subterranean pipeline showed ignorance of Arctic engineering and permafrost in particular . A clause in NEPA requiring a study of alternatives and another clause requiring an environmental impact statement turned those concerns into tools used by the Wilderness Society , Friends of the Earth , and the Environmental Defense Fund in their spring 1970 lawsuit to stop the project . 
 Due to the injunction against the project , Alyeska was forced to do further research throughout the summer of 1970 . The collected material was turned over to the Interior Department in October 1970 , and a draft environmental impact statement was published in January 1971 . The statement met with massive criticism from almost the moment it was released . The statement amounted to 294 pages but generated more than 12 @,@ 000 pages of testimony and evidence in Congressional debates by the end of March . Criticisms of the project included its effect on the Alaska tundra , possible pollution , harm to animals , geographic features , and the lack of much engineering information from Alyeska . One element of opposition the report quelled was the discussion of alternatives . All the proposed alternatives — extension of the Alaska Railroad , an alternative route through Canada , establishing a port at Prudhoe Bay , and more — were deemed to pose more environmental risks than construction of a pipeline directly across Alaska . 
 Opposition also was directed at the building of the construction and maintenance highway parallel to the pipeline . Although a clause in Alyeska 's pipeline proposal called for removal of the pipeline at a certain point , no such provision was made for removal of the road . Sydney Howe , president of the Conservation Foundation , warned : " The oil might last for fifty years . A road would remain forever . " This argument relied upon the slow growth of plants and animals in far northern Alaska due to the harsh conditions and short growing season . In testimony , an environmentalist argued that arctic trees , though only a few feet tall , had been seedlings " when George Washington was inaugurated " . 
 The portion of the environmental debate with the biggest symbolic impact took place when discussing the pipeline 's impact on caribou herds . Environmentalists proposed that the pipeline would have an effect on caribou similar to the effect of the U.S. transcontinental railroad on the American Bison population of North America . Pipeline critics said the pipeline would block traditional migration routes , making caribou populations smaller and making them easier to hunt . This idea was exploited in anti @-@ pipeline advertising , most notably when a picture of a forklift carrying several legally shot caribou was emblazoned with the slogan , " There is more than one way to get caribou across the Alaska Pipeline " . The use of caribou as an example of the pipeline 's environmental effects reached a peak in the spring of 1971 , when the draft environmental statement was being debated . 
 = = = Native objections = = = 
 In 1902 , the United States Department of Agriculture set aside 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 acres ( 64 @,@ 750 km2 ) of Southeast Alaska as the Tongass National Forest . Tlingit natives who lived in the area protested that the land was theirs and had been unfairly taken . In 1935 , Congress passed a law allowing the Tlingits to sue for recompense , and the resulting case dragged on until 1968 , when a $ 7 @.@ 5 million settlement was reached . Following the Native lawsuit to halt work on the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline , this precedent was frequently mentioned in debate , causing pressure to resolve the situation more quickly than the 33 years it had taken for the Tlingits to be satisfied . Between 1968 and 1971 , a succession of bills were introduced into the U.S. Congress to compensate statewide Native claims . The earliest bill offered $ 7 million , but this was flatly rejected . 
 The Alaska Federation of Natives , which had been created in 1966 , hired former United States Supreme Court justice Arthur Goldberg , who suggested that a settlement should include 40 million acres ( 160 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land and a payment of $ 500 million . The issue remained at a standstill until Alyeska began lobbying in favor of a Native claims act in Congress in order to lift the legal injunction against pipeline construction . In October 1971 , President Richard Nixon signed the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act ( <unk> ) . Under the act , Native groups would renounce their land claims in exchange for $ 962 @.@ 5 million and 148 @.@ 5 million acres ( 601 @,@ 000 km2 ) in federal land . The money and land were split up among village and regional corporations , which then distributed shares of stock to Natives in the region or village . The shares paid dividends based on both the settlement and corporation profits . To pipeline developers , the most important aspect of <unk> was the clause dictating that no Native allotments could be selected in the path of the pipeline . 
 = = Legal issues and politics = = 
 Alyeska and the oil companies fought objections to the pipeline 's construction in both the courts and in Congress , where debates about the pipeline 's environmental impact statement continued through 1971 . Objections about the caribou herds were countered by observations of Davidson Ditch , a water pipeline with the same diameter of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline , which caribou were able to jump over . To those who argued that the pipeline would irrevocably alter Alaska wilderness , proponents pointed to the overgrown remnants of the Fairbanks Gold Rush , most of which had been erased 70 years later . Some pipeline opponents were satisfied by Alyeska 's preliminary design , which incorporated underground and raised crossings for caribou and other big game , gravel and styrofoam insulation to prevent permafrost melting , automatic leak detection and shutoff , and other techniques . Other opponents , including fishermen who feared tanker leaks south of Valdez , maintained their disagreement with the plan . 
 All the arguments both for and against the pipeline were incorporated into the 3 @,@ 500 @-@ page , 9 @-@ volume final environmental impact statement , which was released on March 20 , 1972 . Although Alaska Sen. Ted Stevens felt the statement " was not written by a proponent , " it maintained the general approval for pipeline construction that was demonstrated in the draft statement . U.S. Secretary of the Interior Rogers Morton allowed 45 – days of comment after the release , and conservationists created a 1 @,@ 300 @-@ page document opposing the impact statement . This document failed to sway Judge Hart , who lifted the injunction on the project on August 15 , 1972 . 
 The environmental groups that had filed the injunction appealed the decision , and on October 6 , 1972 , the U.S. District Court of Appeals in Washington , D.C. partially reversed Hart 's decision . The appeals court said that although the impact statement followed the guidelines set by the National Environmental Policy Act , it did not follow the Minerals Leasing Act , which allowed for a smaller pipeline right of way than was required for the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . The oil companies and Alyeska appealed this decision to the U.S. Supreme Court , but in April 1973 , the court declined to hear the case . 
 = = = Congressional issues = = = 
 With the appeals court having decided that the Minerals Leasing Act did not cover the pipeline 's requirements , Alyeska and the oil companies began lobbying Congress to either amend the act or create a new law that would permit a larger right @-@ of @-@ way . The Senate Interior Committee began the first hearings on a series of bills to that effect on March 9 , 1973 . Environmental opposition switched from contesting the pipeline on NEPA grounds to fighting an amendment to the leasing act or a new bill . By the spring and summer of 1973 , these opposition groups attempted to persuade Congress to endorse a Trans @-@ Canada oil pipeline or a railroad . They believed the " leave it in the ground " argument was doomed to fail , and the best way to oppose the pipeline would be to propose an ineffective alternative which could be easily defeated . The problem with this approach was that any such alternative would cover more ground and be more damaging environmentally than the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . 
 Hearings in both the U.S. Senate and the House continued through the summer of 1973 on both new bills and amendments to the Mineral Leasing Act . On July 13 , an amendment calling for more study of the project — the Mondale @-@ Bayh Amendment — was defeated . This was followed by another victory for pipeline proponents when an amendment by Alaska Sen. Mike Gravel was passed by the Senate . The amendment declared that the pipeline project fulfilled all aspects of NEPA and modified the Mineral Leasing Act to allow the larger right @-@ of @-@ way for the Alaska pipeline . Upon reconsideration , the vote was tied at 49 – 49 and required the vote of vice president Spiro Agnew , who supported the amendment . A similar amendment was passed in the House on August 2 . 
 = = = Oil crisis and authorization act = = = 
 On October 17 , 1973 , the Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries announced an oil embargo against the United States in retaliation for its support of Israel during the Yom Kippur War . Because the United States imported approximately 35 percent of its oil from foreign sources , the embargo had a major effect . The price of gasoline shot upward , gasoline shortages were common , and rationing was considered . Most Americans began demanding a solution to the problem , and President Richard Nixon began lobbying for the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline as at least a part of the answer . 
 Nixon supported the pipeline project even before the oil crisis . On September 10 , 1973 , he released a message stating that the pipeline was his priority for the remainder of the Congressional session that year . On November 8 , after the embargo had been in place for three weeks , he reaffirmed that statement . Members of Congress , under pressure from their constituents , created the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline Authorization Act , which removed all legal barriers from construction of the pipeline , provided financial incentives , and granted a right @-@ of @-@ way for its construction . The act was drafted , rushed through committee , and approved by the House on November 12 , 1973 , by a vote of 361 – 14 – 60 . The next day , the Senate passed it , 80 – 5 – 15 . Nixon signed it into law on November 16 , and a federal right @-@ of @-@ way for the pipeline and transportation highway was granted on January 3 , 1974 . The deal was signed by the oil companies on January 23 , allowing work to start . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Although the legal right @-@ of @-@ way was cleared by January 1974 , cold weather , the need to hire workers , and construction of the Dalton Highway meant work on the pipeline itself did not begin until March . Between 1974 and July 22 , 1977 , when the first barrel of oil reached Valdez , tens of thousands of people worked on the pipeline . Thousands of workers came to Alaska , attracted by the prospect of high @-@ paying jobs at a time when most of the rest of the United States was undergoing a recession . 
 Construction workers endured long hours , cold temperatures , and brutal conditions . Difficult terrain , particularly in Atigun Pass , Keystone Canyon , and near the Sagavanirktok River forced workers to come up with solutions for unforeseen problems . Faulty welds and accusations of poor quality control caused a Congressional investigation that ultimately revealed little . More than $ 8 billion was spent to build the 800 miles ( 1 @,@ 300 km ) of pipeline , the Valdez Marine Terminal , and 12 pump stations . The construction effort also had a human toll . Thirty @-@ two Alyeska and contract employees died from causes directly related to construction . That figure does not include common carrier casualties . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System and its completion in 1977 had an immense effect on Alaska , the United States , and the rest of the world . Its impact has included economic , physical , and social repercussions running the gamut from life in small towns to the global oil market . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Construction of the pipeline caused a massive economic boom in towns up and down the pipeline route . Prior to construction , most residents in towns like Fairbanks — still recovering from the devastating 1967 Fairbanks Flood — strongly supported the pipeline . By 1976 , after the town 's residents had endured a spike in crime , overstressed public infrastructure , and an influx of people unfamiliar with Alaska customs , 56 percent said the pipeline had changed Fairbanks for the worse . The boom was even greater in Valdez , where the population jumped from 1 @,@ 350 in 1974 to 6 @,@ 512 by the summer of 1975 and 8 @,@ 253 in 1976 . 
 This increase in population caused many adverse effects . Home prices skyrocketed — a home that sold for $ 40 @,@ 000 in 1974 was purchased for $ 80 @,@ 000 in 1975 . In Valdez , lots of land that sold for $ 400 in the late 1960s went for $ 4 @,@ 000 in 1973 , $ 8 @,@ 000 in 1974 , and $ 10 @,@ 000 in 1975 . Home and apartment rentals were correspondingly squeezed upward by the rising prices and the demand from pipeline workers . Two @-@ room log cabins with no plumbing rented for $ 500 per month . One two @-@ bedroom home in Fairbanks housed 45 pipeline workers who shared beds on a rotating schedule for $ 40 per week . In Valdez , an apartment that rented for $ 286 per month in December 1974 cost $ 520 per month in March 1975 and $ 1 @,@ 600 per month — plus two mandatory roommates — in April 1975 . Hotel rooms were sold out as far away as <unk> , 115 miles ( 185 km ) north of Valdez . 
 The skyrocketing prices were driven by the high salaries paid to pipeline workers , who were eager to spend their money . The high salaries caused a corresponding demand for higher wages among non @-@ pipeline workers in Alaska . Non @-@ pipeline businesses often could not keep up with the demand for higher wages , and job turnover was high . Yellow cab in Fairbanks had a turnover rate of 800 percent ; a nearby restaurant had a turnover rate of more than 1 @,@ 000 percent . Many positions were filled by high school students promoted above their experience level . To meet the demand , a Fairbanks high school ran in two shifts : one in the morning and the other in the afternoon in order to teach students who also worked eight hours per day . More wages and more people meant higher demand for goods and services . Waiting in line became a fact of life in Fairbanks , and the Fairbanks McDonalds became No. 2 in the world for sales — behind only the recently opened Stockholm store . Alyeska and its contractors bought in bulk from local stores , causing shortages of everything from cars to tractor parts , water softener salt , batteries and ladders . 
 The large sums of money being made and spent caused an upsurge in crime and illicit activity in towns along the pipeline route . This was exacerbated by the fact that police officers and state troopers resigned in large groups to become pipeline security guards at wages far in excess of those available in public @-@ sector jobs . Fairbanks ' Second Avenue became a notorious hangout for prostitutes , and dozens of bars operated throughout town . In 1975 , the Fairbanks Police Department estimated between 40 and 175 prostitutes were working in the city of 15 @,@ 000 people . Prostitutes brought pimps , who then engaged in turf fights . In 1976 , police responded to a shootout between warring pimps who wielded automatic firearms . By and large , however , the biggest police issue was the number of drunken brawls and fighting . On the pipeline itself , thievery was a major problem . Poor accounting and record keeping allowed large numbers of tools and large amounts of equipment to be stolen . The Los Angeles Times reported in 1975 that as many as 200 of Alyeska 's 1 @,@ 200 yellow @-@ painted trucks were missing from Alaska and " scattered from Miami to Mexico City " . Alyeska denied the problem and said only 20 – 30 trucks were missing . The theft problem was typified by <unk> ' practice of mailing empty boxes to pipeline camps . The boxes then would be filled with items and shipped out . After Alyeska ruled that all packages had to be sealed in the presence of a security guard , the number of packages being sent from camps dropped by 75 percent . 
 = = = Economy of Alaska = = = 
 Since the completion of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System in 1977 , the government of the state of Alaska has been reliant on taxes paid by oil producers and shippers . Prior to 1976 , Alaska 's personal income tax rate was 14 @.@ 5 percent — the highest in the United States . The gross state product was $ 8 billion , and Alaskans earned $ 5 billion in personal income . Thirty years after the pipeline began operating , the state had no personal income tax , the gross state product was $ 39 billion , and Alaskans earned $ 25 billion in personal income . Alaska moved from the most heavily taxed state to the most tax @-@ free state . 
 The difference was the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System and the taxes and revenue it brought to Alaska . Alyeska and the oil companies injected billions of dollars into the Alaska economy during the construction effort and the years afterward . In addition , the taxes paid by those companies altered the tax structure of the state . By 1982 , five years after the pipeline started transporting oil , 86 @.@ 5 percent of Alaska revenue came directly from the petroleum industry . 
 The series of taxes levied on oil production in Alaska has changed several times since 1977 , but the overall form remains mostly the same . Alaska receives royalties from oil production on state land . The state also has a property tax on oil production structures and transportation ( pipeline ) property — the only state property tax in Alaska . There is a special corporate income tax on petroleum companies , and the state taxes the amount of petroleum produced . This production tax is levied on the cost of oil at Pump Station 1 . To calculate this tax , the state takes the market value of the oil , subtracts transportation costs ( tanker and pipeline tariffs ) , subtracts production costs , then multiplies the resulting amount per barrel of oil produced each month . The state then takes a percentage of the dollar figure produced . 
 Under the latest taxation system , introduced by former governor Sarah Palin in 2007 and passed by the Alaska Legislature that year , the maximum tax rate on profits is 50 percent . The rate fluctuates based on the cost of oil , with lower prices incurring lower tax rates . The state also claims 12 @.@ 5 percent of all oil produced in the state . This " royalty oil " is not taxed but is sold back to the oil companies , generating additional revenue . At a local level , the pipeline owners pay property taxes on the portions of the pipeline and the pipeline facilities that lay within districts that impose a property tax . This property tax is based on the pipeline 's value ( as assessed by the state ) and the local property tax rate . In the Fairbanks North Star Borough , for example , pipeline owners paid $ 9 @.@ 2 million in property taxes — approximately 10 percent of all property taxes paid in the borough . 
 The enormous amount of public revenue created by the pipeline provoked debates about what to do with the windfall . The record $ 900 million created by the Prudhoe Bay oil lease sale took place at a time when the entire state budget was less than $ 118 million , yet the entire amount created by the sale was used up by 1975 . Taxes on the pipeline and oil carried by it promised to bring even more money into state coffers . To ensure that oil revenue wasn 't spent as it came in , the Alaska Legislature and governor Jay Hammond proposed the creation of an Alaska Permanent Fund — a long @-@ term savings account for the state . This measure required a constitutional amendment , which was duly passed in November 1976 . The amendment requires at least 25 percent of mineral extraction revenue to be deposited in the Permanent Fund . On February 28 , 1977 , the first deposit — $ 734 @,@ 000 — was put into the Permanent Fund . That deposit and subsequent ones were invested entirely in bonds , but debates quickly arose about the style of investments and what they should be used for . 
 In 1980 , the Alaska Legislature created the Alaska Permanent Fund Corporation to manage the investments of the Permanent Fund , and it passed the Permanent Fund Dividend program , which provided for annual payments to Alaskans from the interest earned by the fund . After two years of legal arguments about who should be eligible for payments , the first checks were distributed to Alaskans . After peaking at more than $ 40 billion in 2007 , the fund 's value declined to approximately $ 26 billion as of summer 2009 . In addition to the Permanent Fund , the state also maintains the Constitutional Budget Reserve , a separate savings account established in 1990 after a legal dispute over pipeline tariffs generated a one @-@ time payment of more than $ 1 @.@ 5 billion from the oil companies . The Constitutional Budget reserve is run similar to the Permanent Fund , but money from it can be withdrawn to pay for the state 's annual budget , unlike the Permanent Fund . 
 = = = Oil prices = = = 
 Although the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System began pumping oil in 1977 , it did not have a major immediate impact on global oil prices . This is partly because it took several years to reach full production and partly because U.S. production outside Alaska declined until the mid @-@ 1980s . The Iranian Revolution and OPEC price increases triggered the 1979 energy crisis despite TAPS production increases . Oil prices remained high until the late 1980s , when a stable international situation , the removal of price controls , and the peak of production at Prudhoe Bay contributed to the 1980s oil glut . In 1988 , TAPS was delivering 25 percent of all U.S. oil production . As North Slope oil production declined , so did TAPS ' share of U.S. production . Today , TAPS provides less than 17 percent of U.S. oil production . 
 = = = Social impact = = = 
 The pipeline attracts tens of thousands of visitors annually on pipeline tourism trips . Notable visitors have included Henry Kissinger , Jamie Farr , John Denver , President Gerald Ford , King Olav V of Norway , and Gladys Knight . Knight starred in one of two movies about the pipeline construction , Pipe Dreams . The other film was Joyride , and both were critically panned . Other films , such as On Deadly Ground and 30 Days of Night , refer to the pipeline or use it as a plot device . 
 The pipeline has also inspired various forms of artwork . The most notable form of art unique to the pipeline are pipeline maps — portions of scrap pipe cut into the shape of Alaska with a piece of metal delineating the path of the pipeline through the map . Pipeline maps were frequently created by welders working on the pipeline , and the maps were frequently sold to tourists or given away as gifts . Other pipeline @-@ inspired pieces of art include objects containing crude oil that has been transported through the pipeline . 
 = = Technical details = = 
 Oil going into the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline comes from one of several oil fields on Alaska 's North Slope . The Prudhoe Bay Oil Field , the one most commonly associated with the pipeline , contributes oil , as do the <unk> , Alpine , Endicott , and Liberty oil fields , among others . Oil emerges from the ground at approximately 120 ° F ( 49 ° C ) and cools to 111 ° F ( 44 ° C ) by the time it reaches Pump Station 1 through feeder pipelines that stretch across the North Slope . North Slope crude oil has a specific gravity of 29 @.@ 9 API at 60 ° F ( 16 ° C ) . In 2008 , the pipeline carried approximately 700 thousand barrels per day ( 110 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) , less than its theoretical maximum capacity of 2 @.@ 14 million barrels per day ( 340 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) or its actual maximum of 2 @.@ 03 million barrels per day ( 323 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) in 1988 . From Pump Station 1 it takes an average of 11 @.@ 9 days for oil to travel the entire length of the pipeline to Valdez , a speed of 3 @.@ 7 miles per hour ( 6 @.@ 0 km / h ) . 
 The minimum flow through the pipeline is not as clearly defined as its maximum . Operating at lower flows will extend the life of the pipeline as well as increasing profit for its owners . The 2012 flow of 600 @,@ 000 bbd is significantly less than what the pipeline was designed for . Low <unk> require that the oil move slower through the line , meaning that its temperature drops more than in high @-@ flow situations . A freeze in the line would block a pig in the line , which would force a shutdown and repairs . A 2011 engineering report by Alyeska stated that , to avoid freezing , heaters would need to be installed at several pump stations . This report noted that these improvements could bring flow as low as 350 @,@ 000 bbd , but it did not attempt to determine the absolute minimum . Other studies have suggested that the minimum is 70 @,@ 000 100 @,@ 000 bbd with the current pipeline . Alyeska could also replace the 48 " pipeline from Prudhoe Bay to Fairbanks with a 20 " pipeline and use rail the rest of the way , which would allow as little as 45 @,@ 000 bbd . 
 Pumping stations maintain the momentum of the oil as it goes through the pipeline . Pump Station 1 is the northernmost of 11 pump stations spread across the length of the pipeline . The original design called for 12 pump stations with 4 pumps each , but Pump Station 11 was never built . Nevertheless , the pump stations retained their intended naming system . Eight stations were operating at startup , and this number increased to 11 by 1980 as throughput rose . As of December 2006 , only five stations were operating , with Pump Station 5 held in reserve . Pump Stations 2 and 7 have a capacity of moving 60 @,@ 000 gallons / minute ( 227 @,@ 125 l / min ) , while all other stations have a capacity of 20 @,@ 000 gal / min ( 75 @,@ 708 l / min ) . The pumps are natural @-@ gas or liquid @-@ fueled turbines . 
 Because of meanders and thermal and seismic accommodations , the amount of 48 @-@ inch ( 1 @,@ 200 mm ) diameter welded steel pipeline between the pipe stations and the end of the line is 800 @.@ 3 miles ( 1 @,@ 288 @.@ 0 km ) , while the linear distance between the Prudhoe Bay and Valdez station endpoints is 639 @.@ 34 miles ( 1 @,@ 028 @.@ 92 km ) . The pipeline crosses 34 major streams or rivers and nearly 500 minor ones . Its highest point is at Atigun Pass , where the pipeline is 4 @,@ 739 feet ( 1 @,@ 444 m ) above sea level . The maximum grade of the pipeline is 145 % , at Thompson Pass in the Chugach Mountains . The pipeline was created in 40 and 60 @-@ foot ( 12 @.@ 2 and 18 @.@ 3 @-@ meter ) sections . Forty @-@ two thousand of these sections were welded together to make a double joint , which was laid in place on the line . Sixty @-@ six thousand " field girth welds " were needed to join the double joints into a continuous pipeline . The pipe is of two different thicknesses : 466 miles ( 750 km ) of it is 0 @.@ 462 inches ( 1 @.@ 17 cm ) thick , while the remaining 334 miles ( 538 km ) is 0 @.@ 562 inches ( 1 @.@ 43 cm ) thick . More than 78 @,@ 000 vertical support members hold up the aboveground sections of pipeline , and the pipeline contains 178 valves . 
 At the end of the pipeline is the Valdez Marine Terminal , which can store 9 @.@ 18 million barrels ( 1 @,@ 460 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil . Eighteen storage tanks provide this capacity . They are 63 @.@ 3 feet ( 19 @.@ 3 m ) tall and 250 feet ( 76 m ) in diameter . They average 85 % full at any given time — 7 @.@ 8 million barrels ( 1 @,@ 240 @,@ 000 m3 ) . Three power plants at the terminal generate 12 @.@ 5 megawatts each . Four tanker berths are available for mooring ships in addition to two loading berths , where oil pumping takes place . More than 19 @,@ 000 tankers have been filled by the marine terminal since 1977 . 
 = = Maintenance = = 
 The pipeline is surveyed several times per day , mostly by air . Foot and road patrols also take place to check for problems such as leaks or pipe settling or shifting . The pipeline can be surveyed in as little as two hours , but most surveys take longer to ensure thoroughness . These external inspections are only part of standard maintenance , however . The majority of pipeline maintenance is done by pipeline pigs — mechanical devices sent through the pipeline to perform a variety of functions . 
 The most common pig is the scraper pig , which removes wax that precipitates out of the oil and collects on the walls of the pipeline . The colder the oil , the more wax buildup . This buildup can cause a variety of problems , so regular " <unk> " are needed to keep the pipe clear . A second type of pig travels through the pipe and looks for corrosion . Corrosion @-@ detecting pigs use either magnetic or ultrasonic sensors . Magnetic sensors detect corrosion by analyzing variations in the magnetic field of the pipeline 's metal . Ultrasonic testing pigs detect corrosion by examining vibrations in the walls of the pipeline . Other types of pigs look for irregularities in the shape of the pipeline , such as if it is bending or buckling . " Smart " pigs , which contain a variety of sensors , can perform multiple tasks . Typically , these pigs are inserted at Prudhoe Bay and travel the length of the pipeline . In July 2009 , a pig launcher was installed at Pump Station 8 , near the midpoint of the pipeline . 
 A third type of common maintenance is the installation and replacement of sacrificial anodes along the subterranean portions of pipeline . These anodes reduce the corrosion caused by electrochemical action that affect these interred sections of pipeline . Excavation and replacement of the anodes is required as they corrode . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 The pipeline has at times been damaged due to sabotage , human error , maintenance failures , and natural disasters . By law , Alyeska is required to report significant oil spills to regulatory authorities . The Exxon Valdez oil spill is the best @-@ known accident involving Alaska oil , but it did not involve the pipeline itself . Following the spill , Alyeska created a rapid response force that is paid for by the oil companies , including ExxonMobil , which was found liable for the spill . 
 An explosion on July 8 , 1977 , Pump Station No. 8 , killed one worker , injured five others , and destroyed the pump station . A US House of Representatives Committee later announced the cause was workers not following the proper procedures , causing crude oil to flow into a pump under repair at the time . Since the startup of the Alaska pipeline on June 20 , 1977 , to August 15 , 1977 , seven incidents and accidents have caused the pipeline to be shut down periodically . The NTSB investigated the system , and made recommendations . 
 The largest oil spill involving the main pipeline took place on February 15 , 1978 , when an unknown individual blew a 1 @-@ inch ( 2 @.@ 54 @-@ centimeter ) hole in it at Steele Creek , just east of Fairbanks . Approximately 16 @,@ 000 barrels ( 2 @,@ 500 m3 ) of oil leaked out of the hole before the pipeline was shut down . After more than 21 hours , it was restarted . 
 The steel pipe is resistant to gunshots and has resisted them on several occasions , but on October 4 , 2001 , a drunken gunman named Daniel Carson Lewis shot a hole into a weld near <unk> , causing the second @-@ largest mainline oil spill in pipeline history . Approximately 6 @,@ 144 barrels ( 976 @.@ 8 m3 ) leaked from the pipeline ; 4 @,@ 238 barrels ( 673 @.@ 8 m3 ) were recovered and <unk> into the pipeline . Nearly 2 acres ( 8 @,@ 100 m2 ) of tundra were soiled and were removed in the cleanup . The pipeline was repaired and was restarted more than 60 hours later . Lewis was found guilty in December 2002 of criminal mischief , assault , drunken driving , oil pollution , and misconduct . 
 The pipeline was built to withstand earthquakes , forest fires , and other natural disasters . The 2002 Denali earthquake damaged some of the pipeline sliders designed to absorb similar quakes , and it caused the pipeline to shut down for more than 66 hours as a precaution . In 2004 , wildfires overran portions of the pipeline , but it was not damaged and did not shut down . 
 In May 2010 , as much as several thousands of barrels were spilled from a pump station near Fort Greely during a scheduled shutdown . A relief valve control circuit failed during a test of the fire control system , and oil poured into a tank and overflowed onto a secondary containment area . 
 A leak was discovered on Jan 8 , 2011 , in the basement of the booster pump at Pump Station 1 . For more than 80 hours , pipeline flow was reduced to 5 percent of normal . An oil collection system was put in place , and full flow resumed until the pipeline was again shut down while a bypass was installed to avoid the leaking section . 
 = = Future of the pipeline = = 
 Decline in oil production has posed a serious problem for the pipeline . 
 By 2015 , it is anticipated that daily oil throughput will approach 500 @,@ 000 barrels per day ( 79 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) , unless additional sources of oil are developed . As volumes decrease , Alyeska will begin closing pump stations . The company intends to close all but four stations , because the lower throughput will require less pumping to maintain its momentum . While some reports supporting drilling in the ANWR coastal plain maintain that the pipeline may reach its minimum operating level of 200 @,@ 000 barrels per day ( 32 @,@ 000 m3 / d ) by 2020 the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System Renewal Environmental Impact Statement estimated levels above this through at least 2032 due to ongoing exploration outside ANWR . Improvements that allow low flow @-@ rates could extend its lifespan as far as 2075 . 
 By law , Alaska is required to remove all traces of the pipeline after oil extraction is complete . No date has been set for this removal , but plans for it are being updated continuously . 
 = = Additional sources = = 
 Allen , Lawrence J. The Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . Vol 1 : The Beginning . Vol 2 : South to Valdez . Seattle ; Scribe Publishing Co . 1975 and 1976 . 
 Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . Alyeska : A 30 @-@ Year Journey . Alyeska Pipeline Service Co . , 2007 . 
 Baring @-@ Gould , Michael and Bennett , Marsha . Social Impact of the Trans @-@ Alaska Oil Pipeline Construction in Valdez , Alaska 1974 @-@ 1975 . Anchorage ; University of Alaska Anchorage , 1976 . 
 Brown , Tom . Oil on Ice : Alaskan Wilderness at the Crossroads . Edited by Richard Pollack . San Francisco ; Sierra Club <unk> , 1980 . 
 Dixon , Mim . What Happened to Fairbanks ? The Effects of the Trans @-@ Alaska Oil Pipeline on the Community of Fairbanks , Alaska . Social Impact Assessment Series . Boulder , Colorado ; Westview Press , 1978 . 
 Dobler , Bruce . The Last Rush North . Boston ; Little , Brown and Co . , 1976 . 
 Fineberg , Richard A. A Pipeline in Peril : A Status Report on the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline . Ester , Alaska ; Alaska Forum for Environmental Responsibility , 1996 . 
 Hanrahan , John and <unk> , Peter . Lost Frontier : The Marketing of Alaska . New York ; W.W. Norton , 1977 . 
 Kruse , John A. Fairbanks Community Survey . Fairbanks ; Institute of Social and Economic Research , 1976 . 
 LaRocca , Joe . Alaska Agonistes : The Age of Petroleum : How Big Oil Bought Alaska . Rare Books , Inc . 2003 . 
 <unk> , Terry F. The Management , Planning and Construction of the Trans @-@ Alaska Pipeline System . Washington , D.C. ; Report to the Alaska Pipeline Commission . 
 Manning , Harvey . Cry Crisis ! Rehearsal in Alaska ( A Case Study of What Government By Oil Did to Alaska and Does to the Earth ) . San Francisco ; Friends of the Earth , 1974 . 
 <unk> , Joe . Going to Extremes . New York ; Alfred A. Knopf , 1980 . 
 McPhee , John . Coming Into the Country . New York : Farrar , Straus and Giroux , 1976 . 
 Miller , John R. Little Did We Know : Financing the Trans Alaska Pipeline . Cleveland : <unk> LLC , 2012 . 
 Romer , John and Elizabeth . The Seven Wonders of the World : A History of the Modern Imagination . New York ; Henry Holt and Co . , 1995 . 
 Simmons , Diane . Let the Bastards Freeze in the Dark . New York ; Wyndham Books , 1980 . 
 <unk> , John . Extreme Conditions : Big Oil and the Transformation of Alaska . New York ; Simon & Schuster , 1993 . 
 Wolf , Donald E. Big Dams and Other Dreams : The Six Companies Story . Norman , Oklahoma . University of Oklahoma Press , 1996 . 
 Yergin , Daniel . The Prize : The Epic Quest for Oil , Money and Power . New York ; Simon & Schuster , 1991 . 
 = = = Video = = = 
 Armstrong , John . Pipeline Alaska . Pelican Films , 1977 . 
 Davis , Mark . The American Experience : The Alaska Pipeline . PBS , Season 18 , Episode 11 . April 24 , 2006 . 
 World 's Toughest Fixes : Alaska Oil Pipeline . National Geographic Channel . Season 2 , Episode 10 . August 20 , 2009 . 
 = HMS Blanche ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Blanche ( <unk> ) was a B @-@ class destroyer built for the Royal Navy around 1930 . During the Spanish Civil War of 1936 – 1939 , the ship spent considerable time in Spanish waters , enforcing the non @-@ intervention measures agreed by Britain and France . She was attacked , but not damaged , by Nationalist bombers in early 1938 and was subsequently transferred to the Home Fleet . Blanche was sunk by a mine in November 1939 , becoming the first British destroyer lost to enemy action in World War II . 
 = = Description = = 
 Blanche displaced 1 @,@ 360 long tons ( 1 @,@ 380 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 790 long tons ( 1 @,@ 820 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 323 feet ( 98 @.@ 5 m ) , a beam of 32 feet 3 inches ( 9 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 12 feet 3 inches ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which developed a total of 34 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 25 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ; 40 mph ) . Steam for the turbines was provided by three Admiralty 3 @-@ drum boilers . Blanche carried a maximum of 390 long tons ( 400 t ) of fuel oil that gave her a range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 15 knots ( 28 km / h ; 17 mph ) . The ship 's complement was 134 officers and men , although it increased to 142 during wartime . 
 The ship mounted four 45 @-@ calibre QF 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch Mk IX guns in single mounts . For anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) defence , Blanche had two 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) QF 2 @-@ pounder Mk II AA guns mounted on a platform between her funnels . She was fitted with two above @-@ water quadruple torpedo tube mounts for 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedoes . One depth charge rail and two throwers were fitted ; 20 depth charges were originally carried , but this increased to 35 shortly after the war began . 
 = = Career = = 
 The ship was ordered on 4 March 1929 from Hawthorn Leslie of Hebburn , under the 1928 Naval Programme . She was laid down on 29 July 1929 , and launched on 29 May 1930 , as the tenth RN ship to carry this name . Blanche was completed on 14 February 1931 at a cost of £ 225 @,@ 195 , excluding items supplied by the Admiralty such as guns , ammunition and communications equipment . After her commissioning , she was assigned to the 4th Destroyer Flotilla with the Mediterranean Fleet until 1936 . The ship was refitted that year and reassigned , with her flotilla , to Home Fleet , after its completion . Blanche spent six months deployed off the southern Spanish coast during the Spanish Civil War , based in Gibraltar . She was attacked by five Nationalist bombers on 6 March 1938 , but they all missed . The ship received a brief overhaul at Portsmouth between 1 April and 11 June 1938 and was then assigned to the anti @-@ submarine flotilla based at the Isle of Portland . During the Munich Crisis , Blanche was one of the destroyers that escorted the ocean liner RMS Aquitania and the battleship HMS Revenge in the English Channel on 30 September . She was given a more thorough refit in Sheerness Dockyard between 1 April and 15 July 1939 and became the emergency destroyer at the Nore upon its completion . 
 Blanche was assigned to the 19th Destroyer Flotilla when World War II began and spent the next two months escorting convoys and patrolling in the Channel and North Sea . The ship and her sister Basilisk were escorting the minelayer Adventure on the morning of 13 November in the Thames Estuary when they entered a minefield laid the night before by several German destroyers . Adventure and Blanche both struck mines ; the latter lost all power and capsized at <unk> . One man was killed and twelve more were wounded . She was the first British destroyer sunk by the Germans during the war . 
 = Central African Republic women 's national football team = 
 The Central African Republic women 's national football team represents the Central African Republic ( CAR ) in women 's international football competitions . The team has not played any international matches to date , but the country 's youth national team has played in several matches and events , including an Under @-@ 19 World Cup qualifying competition in which the team lost in the semi @-@ finals . As is the case across Africa , the women 's game faces numerous challenges . Football was only formally organised in 2000 , and there are only 400 players competing at the national level . 
 = = Women 's World Cup record = = 
 1991 to 2003 - Did not enter 
 2007 - Withdrew 
 2011 to 2015 - Did not enter 
 = = African Women 's Championship = = 
 1991 to 2004 - Did not enter 
 2006 - Withdrew 
 2008 to 2014 - Did not enter 
 = = Team = = 
 In 1985 , only a few countries had women 's national football teams , and the Central African Republic was no exception . In 2006 , the team trained five times a week . 
 As of March 2012 , the team was not ranked by FIFA due to it not having played any international matches . 
 The country has a national under @-@ 20 side . This team has participated in the qualifying competition for the FIFA U @-@ 20 Women 's World Cup , which prior to 2006 was an under @-@ 19 tournament in which the CAR team also took part . In 2002 , the qualifiers began with an African Women 's Under @-@ 19 Championship . The CAR faced Equatorial Guinea in a home @-@ and @-@ away series in the first round , winning both matches by scores of 1 – 0 and 2 – 0 . The country was set to play Zimbabwe in the quarterfinals , but Zimbabwe withdrew from the competition . In the semi @-@ finals , the CAR met South Africa in a home match , but lost 0 – 2 . The team was scheduled to play a return match in South Africa , but the host country refused to grant the Central African players visas , which led to South Africa 's disqualification from the tournament . South Africa appealed the decision and visas were subsequently issued to Central African players , but the team then withdrew from the competition . In 2010 , the Central African Republic women 's national under @-@ 20 football team participated in the African Women 's U @-@ 20 World Cup qualifiers . They had a walkover win against São Tomé and Príncipe in the first round but did participate in the second or third rounds . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The development of women 's football in Africa faces several challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women , inequalities and human rights abuses targeting women . Many quality players leave the country seeking greater opportunity in Europe or the United States . In addition , most of the funding for women 's football in Africa comes from FIFA , not the local national football associations . 
 The Fédération <unk> de Football , the CAR 's national football association , was founded in 1961 and became a FIFA affiliate in 1964 . In the CAR , there is no national association staffer dedicated to women 's football and no women on the board or in the executive committee . With assistance from FIFA , the federation developed a women 's programme starting in 2000 . A national competition and school competition were later introduced . Football is one of the most popular women 's sports in the CAR . There were about 200 registered youth players in the country and 200 registered senior players as of 2006 . There are 80 club @-@ level teams with women on them , 20 of which are exclusively for women . 
 = 1962 Pacific hurricane season = 
 The 1962 Pacific hurricane season was a moderately active Pacific hurricane season that included two hurricane landfalls . The 1962 Pacific hurricane season officially started on May 15 , 1962 in the eastern Pacific and June 1 , 1962 in the Central Pacific Hurricane Center 's area of responsibility and lasted until November 30 , 1962 in both regions . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northeastern Pacific Ocean . 
 The first of two hurricane landfalls , Hurricane Valerie , struck northwestern Mexico in June . The other , Hurricane Doreen , hit further to the north of Valerie in October . The most impacting storm of the season was Tropical Storm Claudia , after its remnants dropped heavy rainfall in portions of Arizona . The rainfall left damaging flooding across rivers and towns . No people were killed , but damage totaled to $ 11 million ( 1962 USD ) . Moreover , Tropical Storm Bernie also made landfall along the Baja California peninsula , later providing rain to Arizona . An unusually high number of storms threatened the Palmyra Atoll , where only 1 % of known Pacific tropical cyclones have threatened . In all , a total of 16 storms were observed , which was above average though only two ( Valerie and Doreen ) reached hurricane intensity . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 With 16 named storms , the season was above the 1949 @-@ 2006 average of 13 named storms and was the most active season ever recorded that that time ; however , this record was broken in the 1968 Pacific hurricane season , which saw 18 storms . Despite the activity , only two hurricane were observed and no major hurricanes ( Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale ) were noted . These totals are well below their long @-@ term averages of seven and three respectively . This season was part of a decade @-@ long absence of major hurricanes ; during the 1960s , only one major hurricane was observed and none were noted from 1960 @-@ 66 . However , it is possible that some storms were missed due to the lack of satellite coverage in the region ; at that time , satellite data was still scarce , and 1962 is still four years shy of the start of the geostationary satellite era , which began in 1966 . Moreover , the Pacific Decadal Oscillation ( PDO ) was in the midst of a cold phase during this time period , which has a tendency to suppress Pacific hurricane activity . During the season , tropical cyclone advisories were issued by the Naval Fleet Warning Central ( <unk> ) in Alameda , which held responsibility for the basin until 1970 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane Valerie = = = 
 The first tropical cyclone of the season – Hurricane Valerie – was first observed on June 24 , about 245 mi ( 400 km ) west of Acapulco , Guerrero . It moved northwestward along the coast , producing high seas and strong winds in southwestern Mexico . Valerie was estimated to have attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . It turned to the northeast and struck near Mazatlán on June 25 , dissipating early the next day . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Willa = = = 
 On July 8 , Tropical Storm Willa developed south of the Baja California peninsula . It maintained a west @-@ northwestward track throughout its duration , remaining a minimal tropical storm . On July 10 , the storm dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ava = = = 
 In the middle of August , a tropical storm formed off the southwest coast of Mexico . Given the name Ava , it tracked to the northwest before turning more to the north . It dissipated on August 20 . 
 = = = Unnamed August tropical storm = = = 
 As the previous storm was dissipating , another tropical storm developed to its west . Lasting only two days , it dissipated on August 22 about halfway between Hawaii and the west coast of Mexico . 
 = = = Hurricane " C " = = = 
 On August 24 , satellite imagery indicated a hurricane with a defined eye was located over the central Pacific Ocean . It slowly weakened as it moved over lukewarm waters , and deteriorated more rapidly after wind shear increased . By August 28 , the system consisted of a circulation with only weak associated convection . It weakened to a tropical depression on August 30 , although it remained a tropical cyclone until September 2 . At that time it was last observed about 200 mi ( 320 km ) south of Hilo , Hawaii . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Bernice = = = 
 A tropical storm named Bernice developed on September 2 west of Jalisco . After moving northwestward for two days , the storm turned to the north , striking Baja California on September 6 before dissipating . The remnants of the storm later brought moderate rain to Arizona . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Claudia = = = 
 Later in the month , another storm similar to Bernice existed . Tropical Storm Claudia formed on September 20 to the southwest of Acapulco . It maintained a general northwest movement for its duration . On September 23 , Claudia crossed over the western portion of the Baja California peninsula , moved over water , and again struck the peninsula before dissipating . 
 The remnant moisture caused severe flash floods in the vicinity of Tucson , with 5 to 7 inches ( 130 to 180 mm ) of precipitation falling over the headwaters of the washes of Santa Rosa , Jackrabbit , and Brawley during a 14- to 15 @-@ hour period . Over 7 inches ( 180 mm ) of rainfall also fell near the Arizona @-@ Sonora Desert Museum . The ensuing flood of the Santa Cruz River and its tributaries produced a path of destruction about 100 miles ( 160 km ) long and up to 8 miles ( 13 km ) wide . Santa Rosa Wash conveyed 53 @,@ 100 cubic feet per second ( 1 @,@ 500 m3 / s ) at its peak ; Los Robles Wash carried up to 32 @,@ 600 cu ft / s ( 920 m3 / s ) , while the Santa Cruz River proper peaked at 9 @,@ 200 cu ft / s ( 260 m3 / s ) . The washes and rivers reached depths of up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) , and overflowed its banks in places by 1 to 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 30 to 1 @.@ 83 m ) . Flooding from the storm inundated the towns of Marana and Sells , both in Pima County . Helicopters rescued 27 families from Fort Huachuca . There was one indirect death related to the flooding , due to an ambulance not being able to reach an elderly woman . The flooding also killed many cattle , and damage in Pima and Pinal counties exceeded $ 11 million ( 1962 USD ) , much of it from crop damage . The flooding prompted a disaster declaration by former governor Paul Fannin , which provided funds for the affected people . 
 = = = Unnamed September tropical storm = = = 
 On September 26 , a tropical storm developed off the southwest coast of Mexico . The storm moved to the west @-@ northwest for several days , dissipating on September 30 . 
 = = = September and October Central Pacific tropical cyclones = = = 
 In September and October , satellite imagery indicated that there were five tropical storms in the central Pacific Ocean . The first , designated Tropical Storm " R " , passed about 200 mi ( 320 km ) north of Palmyra Island on September 28 . It represented about 1 % of storms in the basin to directly affect the island , after it produced westerly winds there . Tropical Storm " T " existed on September 29 without affecting land . Similarly , Tropical Storm " X " existed on October 2 over open Pacific waters . The next day , Tropical Storm " Z " passed near Johnston Island during the Operation Dominic I and II nuclear tests , although no impact was reported . Lastly , satellite imagery indicated Tropical Storm " A " on October 27 to the northeast of Palmyra Island . 
 = = = Hurricane Doreen = = = 
 The last storm of the season was Hurricane Doreen , which formed on October 1 off the southwest Mexican coast . It moved northwestward before curving to the north , although later it turned again to the northwest . Doreen was estimated to have attained peak winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . On October 4 , Doreen made its closest approach to the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula as it began a motion to the northeast . Later that day , the hurricane moved over southern Sonora before dissipating on October 5 . Hurricane Doreen was responsible for light rainfall in the U.S. states of Arizona , New Mexico , and West Texas . 
 = = = Tropical depressions = = = 
 There were two non @-@ developing tropical depressions during the season . 
 Surface observations and satellite imagery indicated the formation of a tropical depression about 275 mi ( 443 km ) north of Palmyra Island on July 29 . It moved west @-@ northwestward without developing further , and eventually dissipated on August 2 over the central Pacific . 
 On August 31 , the Joint Hurricane Warning Center named a tropical depression in the Central Pacific basin as Tropical Depression 63 , following the West Pacific 's numbering . The advisories were discontinued 275 nautical miles ( 509 km ) from the South Point of Big Island , where it was no longer considered a threat to shipping lanes or any land masses . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 The following names were used for named storms that formed in the eastern Pacific in 1962 . No names were retired from this list . This is a part of list 1 and list 2 , which was used from 1960 @-@ 1965 . Names that were not assigned are marked in gray . 
 = LGBT themes in Hindu mythology = 
 LGBT themes in Hindu mythology involve Hindu deities or heroes whose attributes or behavior can be interpreted as lesbian , gay , bisexual or transgender ( LGBT ) , or as having elements of gender variance and non @-@ heterosexual sexuality . Traditional Hindu literary sources do not speak of homosexuality directly , but changes of sex , homoerotic encounters , and intersex or third gender characters are often found both in traditional religious narratives such as the Vedas , Mahabharata , Ramayana and Puranas as well as in regional folklore . 
 Hindu mythology has many examples of deities changing gender , manifesting as different genders at different times , or combining to form androgynous or hermaphroditic beings . Gods change sex or manifest as an Avatar of the opposite sex in order to facilitate sexual congress . Non @-@ divine beings also undergo sex @-@ changes through the actions of the gods , as the result of curses or blessings , or as the natural outcome of reincarnation . 
 Hindu mythology contains numerous incidents where sexual interactions serve a non @-@ sexual , sacred purpose ; in some cases , these are same @-@ sex interactions . Sometimes the gods condemn these interactions but at other times they occur with their blessing . 
 In addition to stories of gender and sexual variance that are generally accepted by mainstream Hinduism , modern scholars and queer activists have highlighted LGBT themes in lesser known texts , or inferred them from stories that traditionally are considered to have no homoerotic subtext . Such analyses have caused disagreements about the true meaning of the ancient stories . 
 = = Gender variance of deities = = 
 Many deities in Hinduism and Indian mythology are represented as both male and female at different times and in different incarnations or may manifest with characteristics of both genders at once , such as Ardhanarishvara , created by the merging of the god Shiva and his consort Parvati . The name Ardhanarishvara means " The Lord whose half is a woman " . This form of Shiva represents the " totality that lies beyond duality " , and is associated with communication between mortals and gods and between men and women . Alain <unk> says that " The hermaphrodite , the homosexual and the transvestite have a symbolic value and are considered privileged beings , images of the <unk> . " . A similar merger occurs between the beauty and prosperity goddess Lakshmi and her husband Vishnu , forming the <unk> or androgynous Lakshmi @-@ Narayana . 
 In the Bhagavata Purana , Vishnu takes the form of the enchantress , Mohini , in order to trick the demons into giving up Amrita , the elixir of life . Shiva later becomes attracted to Mohini and spills his semen on the rocks which turn into gold . In the Brahmanda Purana , Shiva 's wife Parvati " hangs her head in shame " when she sees her husband 's pursuit of Mohini . In some stories Shiva asks Vishnu to take on the Mohini form again so he can see the actual transformation for himself . Stories in which Shiva knows of Mohini 's true nature have been interpreted to " suggest the fluidity of gender in sexual attraction " . 
 <unk> writes that those focusing only on homoeroticism miss the narrative 's deeper metaphysical significance : Mohini 's femininity represents the material aspect of reality , and Mohini 's seduction is another attempt to induce Shiva into taking an interest in worldly matters . He cites another story to show that only Vishnu has the power to " enchant " Shiva : a demon tries to kill Shiva by taking the form of a woman ( placing sharp teeth in " his " vagina ) . Shiva recognizes the impostor and kills the demon by the placing a " thunderbolt " on his " manhood " during their act of " lovemaking " . 
 In the later , Puranic story of the origin of God Ayyappa , Vishnu as Mohini becomes pregnant from Shiva , and gives birth to Ayyappa , who he @-@ she abandons in shame . Pattanaik writes that rather than Mohini becoming pregnant , Ayyappa sprang from Shiva 's semen , which he ejaculated upon embracing Mohini . In another version , the Pandyan king Rajasekhara of <unk> adopts the baby . In this version , Ayyappa is referred to as <unk> jata , " not born from a vagina " , and later Hariharaputra , " the son of Vishnu and Shiva " , and grows up to be a great hero . 
 According to Tamil versions of the Mahabharata , the god Krishna – an incarnation of Vishnu – also took the form of Mohini and married Aravan . This was in order to give Aravan the chance to experience love before his death , as he had volunteered to be sacrificed . Krishna remained in mourning in the Mohini form for some time after Aravan 's death . This marriage and death of Aravan are commemorated annually in a rite known as <unk> , during which Hijra ( Indian " third gender " ) take on the role of Krishna @-@ Mohini and " marry " Aravan in a mass @-@ wedding , followed by an 18 @-@ day festival . The festival ends with a ritual burial of Aravan , while the <unk> mourn in Tamil style : by beating their chests in ritual dances , breaking their bangles and changing into white mourning clothes . 
 = = Gender variance in heroes = = 
 Changes of sex and cross @-@ dressing also occur in myths about non @-@ divine figures . One such figure is Shikhandi , a character in the Mahabharata . He was originally born as a girl named ' Shikhandini ' to Drupada , the king of Panchala . In a previous lifetime , <unk> was a woman named Amba , who was rendered unmarriageable by the hero Bhishma . Humiliated , Amba undertook great austerities , and the gods granted her wish to be the cause of Bhishma 's death . Amba was then reborn as Shikhandini . A divine voice told Drupada to raise Shikhandini as a son ; so Drupada raised her like a man , trained her in warfare and arranged for her to marry a female . On the wedding night , Shikhandini 's wife discovered that her " husband " was female , and insulted her . Shikhandini fled , but met a yaksha who exchanged his sex with her . Shikhandini returned as a man with the name ' Shikhandi ' and led a happy married life with his wife and children . During the Kurukshetra war , Bhishma recognised him as Amba reborn and refused to fight ' a woman ' . Accordingly , Arjuna hid behind Shikhandi in order to defeat the almost invincible Bhishma . In the Javanese telling , Srikandi ( as she is known ) never becomes a man , but is a woman equal to men , and is the wife of Arjuna . After his death , Shikhandi 's masculinity was transferred back to the yaksha . 
 Arjuna himself is an example of gender variance . When Arjuna refused her amorous advances , the nymph Urvashi cursed Arjuna ; he would become a " <unk> , " a member of the third gender . Krishna assured Arjuna that this curse would serve as the perfect disguise for Arjuna during his last year of exile . Arjuna took the name <unk> and dressed in women 's clothes , causing the curse to take effect . Thus Arjuna gained entry into the city ruled by king Virata , where he taught the arts of music , singing and dancing to the princess <unk> and her female attendees . Doniger describes Arjuna 's cross @-@ dressing disguise as a source of comedy in the story , with references to his " hairy arms " . In the Padma Purana , Arjuna is also physically transformed into a woman when he requests permission to take part in Krishna 's mystical dance , which only women may attend . 
 The story of Ila , a king cursed by Shiva and Parvati to be a man one month and a woman the next , appears in several traditional Hindu texts . After changing sex , Ila loses the memory of being the other gender . During one such period , Ila marries Budha ( the god of the planet Mercury ) . Although Budha knows of Ila 's alternating gender , he doesn 't enlighten the ' male ' Ila , who remains unaware of his life as a woman . The two live together as man and wife only when Ila is female . In the Ramayana version , Ila bears Budha a son , although in the Mahabharata Ila is called both mother and father of the child . After this birth the curse is lifted and Ila is totally changed into a man who goes on to father several children with his wife . 
 = = Patrons of LGBT and third sex people = = 
 Numerous deities have been considered patrons of third @-@ sex or <unk> @-@ inclined people . This patronage can originate in mythological stories about the deity , or from religious practices and rituals . For example , Conner and Sparks argue that the goddess of fire , love and sexuality , Arani , has been linked to lesbian eroticism via rituals in her honor : for example two pieces of wood perceived as feminine , called the <unk> and <unk> , are rubbed together , simulating a spiritual lesbian interaction . 
 Bahuchara Mata is a patron goddess of the <unk> . In popular iconography she is often shown riding a rooster and carrying a sword , trident and a book . Various stories link Bahuchara to castration or other changes in physical sexual characteristics , sometimes as the result of her aiming curses against men . Bahuchara is believed to have originated as a mortal woman who became martyred . In one story , Bahuchara is attacked by a bandit who attempts to rape her , but she takes his sword , cuts off her breasts and dies . In another story , Bahuchara curses her husband when she catches him sneaking to the woods to engage in homoerotic behavior , causing his genitals to fall off and forcing him to dress as a woman . 
 Stories also link Bahuchara to gender variance after she becomes divine . One myth concerns a king who prayed to Bahuchara for a son . Bahuchara complied , but the prince grew up to be impotent . One night Bahuchara appeared to the prince in a dream and ordered him to cut off his genitals , wear women 's clothes and become her servant . Bahuchara is believed to continue to identify impotent men and command them to do the same . If they refuse , she punishes them : for their next seven incarnations they will be impotent . This myth is the origin of the cult of Bahuchara Mata , whose devotees are required to self @-@ castrate and remain celibate . 
 Samba , the son of Krishna , is also a patron of eunuchs , transgender people and homoeroticism . Samba dresses in women 's clothes to mock and trick people , and so that he can more easily enter the company of women and seduce them . In the <unk> Purana , Samba , dressed as woman , is cursed after being questioned about " her " supposed pregnancy . As a result of the curse , Samba , although remaining male , gives birth to an iron pestle and mortar . 
 = = Same @-@ sex sexual interactions = = 
 Homosexual or bisexual activity also occurs between gods , although such interactions are most usually considered purely ritualistic , or have purposes other than sexual pleasure . Agni , the god of fire , wealth and creative energy , has same @-@ sex sexual encounters that involve accepting semen from other gods . Although married to the goddess Svaha , Agni is also shown as being part of a same @-@ sex couple with Soma , the god of the moon . Agni takes a receptive role in this relationship , accepting semen from Soma with his mouth , paralleling Agni 's role in accepting sacrifices from Earth to Heaven . Orthodox Hinduism emphasises that these are " <unk> " , ritual sexual encounters , and Agni and his mouth represent the feminine role . 
 Agni also accepts semen in myths of the conception and birth of Karttikeya , a god of male beauty and battle . Numerous versions of Karttikeya 's birth story exist , many having a conception from only male input , although heterosexual sex or desire also plays a part . However , Parvati is credited as Karttikeya 's mother due to her having sexual intercourse with Shiva , causing him to ejaculate . Ganga is Karttikeya 's mother in other versions , accepting semen from Agni and carrying the unborn child . The male progenitor is sometimes Shiva , Agni , or a combination of the two . In the Shiva Purana and the Ramayana , the gods fear the outcome of Shiva and Parvati 's " unending embrace , " and interrupt their coitus . Shiva then appears before the gods and declares " now let him step forward who will accept the semen I discharge " . At the prompting of the gods , Agni captures Shiva 's semen in his hands and swallows it . In these stories , Parvati and Shiva condemn Agni 's actions , calling them " wicked " or " improper . " In the eleventh century text Kathasaritsagara , however , Shiva forces the reluctant Agni to receive his semen . The semen causes a burning sensation in those that ingest it , prompting Agni to divest it into wives of a group of sages , under Shiva 's advice . The sages ' wives in turn drop the semen into the Ganges river ( the Ganga ) , where it flows to the shore from which Kārttikeya springs . In the Mahabharata , Kārttikeya is also the son of Agni , who ejaculates into the hands of one of the Krittikas ( the Pleiades ) , who in turn throws the semen into a lake , from whence Kārttikeya is born . In some myths , Agni ejaculates onto a mountain that was itself made from Shiva 's divine semen , making Kārttikeya the child of the two gods , according to an interpretation by Markandeya in the Vana Parva . 
 Mitra and Varuna , are gods of great intimacy and often mentioned together in Vedic literature . These <unk> preside over the universal waters wherein Mitra controls the ocean depths and lower portals while Varuna rules over the ocean ’ s upper regions , rivers and shorelines . 
 In Vedic literature , Mitra and Varuna are portrayed as icons of affection and intimate friendship between males ( the Sanskrit word mitra means “ friend ” or “ companion ” ) . They are depicted riding a shark or crocodile together while bearing tridents , ropes , conch shells and water pots . Sometimes they are portrayed seated side @-@ by @-@ side on a golden chariot drawn by seven swans . Ancient Brahmana texts furthermore associate Mitra and Varuna with the two lunar phases and same @-@ sex relations : “ Mitra and Varuna , on the other hand , are the two half @-@ moons : the waxing one is Varuna and the waning one is Mitra . During the new @-@ moon night these two meet and when they are thus together they are pleased with a cake offering . Verily , all are pleased and all is obtained by any person knowing this . On that same night , Mitra implants his seed in Varuna and when the moon later wanes , that waning is produced from his seed . ” ( Shatapatha Brahmana 2 @.@ 4 @.@ 4 @.@ 19 ) Varuna is similarly said to implant his seed in Mitra on the full @-@ moon night for the purpose of securing its future waxing . In Hinduism , the <unk> and full @-@ moon nights are discouraged times for procreation and consequently often associated with <unk> or unusual types of intercourse . 
 The Bhagavata Purana ( 6 @.@ 18 @.@ 3 @-@ 6 ) lists Varuna and Mitra as having children through <unk> or non @-@ vaginal sex . For example , Varuna fathered the sage Valmiki when his semen fell upon a termite mound , and Agastya and Vasistha were born from water pots after Mitra and Varuna discharged their semen in the presence of <unk> . This account is similar to Gay couples having children through surrogate mothers in modern days . 
 Some versions of the Bengali text <unk> Ramayana contain a story of two queens that conceived a child together . When the famous king of the Sun Dynasty , Maharaja Dilipa , died , the demigods become concerned that he did not have an heir . Shiva appeared before the king 's two widowed queens and commanded , " You two make love together and by my blessings you will bear a beautiful son . " The two queens execute Shiva 's order and one of them conceived a child . The child was born boneless , but by the blessings of the sage Ashtavakra , the child was restored to full health . Ashtavakra named the child " Bhagiratha " – he who was born from two vulvas ( <unk> ) . Bhagiratha later became one of the most famous kings of India and is credited with bringing the Ganges River down to earth through his austerities . 
 The elephant @-@ headed , wisdom god Ganesha 's conception has numerous versions . Some sources consider him to be the progeny of Shiva and Parvati , although conception occurs outside the womb . However , most versions consider him to have been produced purely through the actions of Parvati , who in the Shiva Purana fashioned him from clay to protect her from Shiva 's advances while she was bathing . However , when Ganesha blocks Shiva , he is beheaded and later restored to life by Shiva . In a 13th @-@ century Kashmiri text , <unk> 's <unk> , Ganesha 's birth is the result of Parvati 's menstrual blood being washed into the Ganges , where they are swallowed by Parvati 's elephant @-@ headed handmaiden Malini , who in turn gives birth , giving Ganesha an all @-@ female origin . Courtright considers the birth to be " less auspicious " due to the lack of male input and use of bodily fluids such as sweat or menstrual blood , but Ruth Vanita points out that Hindus consider Ganesha 's birth auspicious , and that the use of non @-@ procreative bodily fluids is considered sacred and purifying in many Hindu rituals . 
 = = Sangam literature = = 
 Sangam literature use the word ‘ <unk> ’ to refer to people born with Intersex condition , it also refers to <unk> <unk> and various types of <unk> . Likewise , the famous sangam period characters of King <unk> and <unk> are another example for same sex love . They are said to have not seen each other at all and yet shared love and regard for each other , so much , that they die at the same time at different places . “ For instance , the friendship between King Pari and poet <unk> is shown as something more than just friendship . There are lyrical undertones suggestive of the intimate relationship they had . But since there are no explicit representation , one can only postulate a possibility . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 Hindu traditional literary sources say little about homosexuality directly . <unk> in traditional texts is often masked by adherence to strict gender and caste rules . Critical study is further hampered by the lack of Sanskrit words for modern conceptions ( such as homosexuality ) , although words for specific same @-@ sex sexual acts exist . Timothy Murphy writes that LGBT themes are often ignored by " heterosexist scholars " , and even early investigations into sexual minorities in Hindu culture failed to analyse stories or artwork depicting same @-@ sex sexual acts between mythological beings . Murphy describes the study of LGBT topics in Hindu culture as " still in their infancy " . 
 Goldman writes of transsexualism in Hindu literature : " Few cultures have accorded this phenomenon so prominent a place in the realms of mythology and religion as has that of traditional India . " Goldman considers the numerous myths concerning gender change to be a manifestation of patriarchal cultures desire to control the sexuality of women , but writes that many myths " project a positive valuation of women and femininity " . Changes in gender may be caused by a god or through the use of magic , in order to deceive others or to facilitate a romantic encounter . A change in gender may also occur spontaneously due to changes in a person 's spiritual or moral character , either in a single life , or through reincarnation . 
 According to the Encyclopedia of Love in World Religions , queer theorists and activists have reinterpreted ancient texts " searching for alternative voices " that demonstrate the diversity of gender models and sexualities in Hinduism . These scholars include Gita Thadani , who attempted to uncover lesbian subtext in ancient Vedic and Sanskrit texts in <unk> : lesbian desire in ancient and modern India , and Ruth Vanita , who attempts " to locate spaces of same @-@ sex intimacy in vernacular texts " in Same @-@ sex love in India : readings from literature and history . 
 Some LGBT interpretations of popular stories and characters have been controversial . <unk> : Lord of obstacles , Lord of beginnings , applied psychoanalytic approaches to Hindu stories . The book stated that Ganesha 's trunk represented a flaccid penis and his love of sweets indicated a desire to perform homosexual oral sex . The deductions of this book , and similar application of psychoanalysis to the study of Hinduism , has been questioned by Western and Indian academics including Antonio De Nicholas , Krishnan Ramaswamy , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , who have stated that the book is based on mistranslations and psychoanalytic misinterpretations . The book became infamous in India , triggering protests and resulting in a public apology from the publishers and withdrawal of the book in India . 
 The scholarship of Wendy Doniger , which focuses on interpretation of Hindu texts through psychoanalysis , is similarly controversial and has been criticised . Doniger has been described as " being rude , crude and very lewd in the hallowed portals of Sanskrit Academics . " Doniger 's works that feature LGBT interpretations of Hindu myths include the books Siva : The Erotic Ascetic , Tales of Sex and Violence , and Splitting the difference : gender and myth in ancient Greece and India . Michael Witzel , a Professor of Sanskrit , said that Wendy Doniger 's knowledge of Vedic Sanskrit is severely flawed . Nicholas <unk> , a European Indologist , has also criticised Doniger 's works and wrote that Doniger seems to be obsessed with only one meaning of myths : the most sexual imaginable . 
 = = = General = = = 
 Conner , Randy P. ; Sparks , David Hatfield ; Sparks , Mariya ( 1998 ) . Cassell 's Encyclopedia of Queer Myth , Symbol and Spirit . UK : Cassell . ISBN 0 @-@ 304 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Courtright , Paul B. ( 1989 ) . Ganesa : Lord of Obstacles , Lord of Beginnings . Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Das Wilhelm , Amara . Tritiya @-@ Prakriti : People of the Third Sex . 2006 : Xlibris Corporation . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4134 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Doniger , Wendy ( 1999 ) . Splitting the difference : gender and myth in ancient Greece and India ( Volumes 1996 – 1997 of Jordan lectures in comparative religion ) . University of Chicago Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 226 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Doniger O 'Flaherty , Wendy ( 1987 ) . Tales of sex and violence : folklore , sacrifice , and danger in the <unk> <unk> . Motilal <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 81 @-@ 208 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Goldman , Robert P. ( July – Sept 1993 ) . " <unk> , gender , and anxiety in traditional India " . The Journal of the American Oriental Society ( The American Oriental Society ) . 
 Greenberg , <unk> Kornberg ( 2007 ) . Encyclopedia of Love in World Religions . ABC @-@ CLIO . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 85109 @-@ 980 @-@ 1 . 
 Murphy , Timothy F. ( 2000 ) . Reader 's guide to lesbian and gay studies . Taylor & Francis . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 142 @-@ 8 . 
 Pattanaik , Devdutt ( 2001 ) . The man who was a woman and other queer tales of Hindu lore . Routledge . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 181 @-@ 3 . 
 <unk> , Christopher ( 2003 ) . Gay Witchcraft : <unk> the Tribe . Weiser . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 281 @-@ 7 . 
 Thadani , Giti ( 1996 ) . <unk> : lesbian desire in ancient and modern India . Cassell . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 304 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 Vanita , Ruth ; <unk> , Saleem ( 2001 ) . Same @-@ sex love in India : readings from literature and history . Palgrave Macmillan . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Wilhelm , Amara Das ( 2004 ) . Hindu Deities and the Third Sex . 
 = Sunshine Days = 
 " Sunshine Days " is the eighteenth and penultimate episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and the series ' 200th episode overall . It originally aired on the Fox network on May 12 , 2002 . The entry was written and directed by executive producer Vince Gilligan . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology , or overarching fictional history , of The X @-@ Files . " Sunshine Days " earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 2 , was viewed by 6 @.@ 5 million households , and 10 @.@ 4 million viewers in its initial broadcast . It received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Doggett , Reyes , Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) and Scully stumble on to a bizarre murder case where the main suspect is a man with an unusual obsession for The Brady Bunch . Despite their initial differences — both in investigative style and love of The Brady Bunch — the four of them soon learn that the man 's telekinetic ability is the ultimate , undeniable proof of an X @-@ File . 
 The episode marked Gilligan 's second directorial effort , after season seven 's " Je Souhaite " . The Brady Bunch house set featured in the episode was completely rebuilt . According to Anderson , people came " from all over Los Angeles " to get their pictures taken on the set . In addition , it contained several elaborate effects . " Sunshine Days " was the final " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " entry in the series ; the series finale , " The Truth " would deal with the series ' overarching alien colonization mythology . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Van Nuys , California , two men in their early twenties named Blake and Mike ( Tyson <unk> and David Faustino ) sneak into a house that Blake claims was where the comedy television series The Brady Bunch was filmed . Inside , they find a perfect recreation of the house from the series ; Mike , unsettled , gets worried and leaves , but Blake plods on . Blake is subsequently sent hurtling through the air and smashes into Mike 's car , killing Blake . 
 John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) are called in to investigate . They interview Mike , who claims that Blake died after visiting " The Brady Bunch House " . The three speak to the owner , Oliver Martin ( Michael Emerson ) , but upon entering discover that the house looks nothing like the one featured in the teaser . Doggett , feeling something is not right , checks Martin 's trashcan and finds asphalt shingles ; earlier , on top of Mike 's car , Doggett had found a piece of a shingle . He deduces that Blake was thrown through Martin 's roof . Later that night , Mike looks into Martin 's house and sees the whole Brady family eating dinner . He storms into the house , only to find that the family has disappeared . Suddenly , he is confronted by Martin , who tells him to leave . Mike refuses , and is thrown through the roof , only to be embedded in the yard . 
 Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) looks through various X @-@ Files and discovers one about a young boy named Anthony Fogelman who possessed psychokinesis . She learns that Fogelman later changed his name to Oliver Martin . She meets with Dr. John Rietz ( John Aylward ) , a parapsychologist who worked with the young Fogelman . Rietz claims that , despite being extremely lonely , Martin was not dangerous and that his power faded as he grew up . Reyes makes the connection that Fogelman changed his name to Oliver based on Cousin Oliver from The Brady Bunch . Scully notes that , in the show , Oliver was portrayed as a " jinx " , and the three agents deduce that Fogelman must see himself as one , too . 
 Doggett and Reitz decide to talk to Fogelman . Initially , he is apprehensive and nearly sends Doggett hurtling through the roof . It is revealed that Fogelman 's powers are temperamental and sometimes he cannot control them , such as the case with Mike and Blake . Reyes and Scully show up and convince him that his powers could positively impact the world . The agents take him to Washington , D.C. and demonstrate his powers to Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) by making him float in midair . Suddenly , however , Fogelman collapses . Scully later reports that his body is destroying itself because of his extreme power . Doggett realizes that Fogelman must stop using his powers ; he notes that his power had faded earlier when Dr. Rietz was studying him as a boy . Doggett tells Rietz that his power faded because , with Rietz around , Fogelman did not feel lonely . Rietz visits Fogelman in the hospital , and the two rekindle their friendship , saving Fogelman 's life . Scully laments the fact that there may not be any vindication for the X @-@ Files , but that cases like Fogelman 's might show that there is proof of " more important things . " 
 = = Production = = 
 " Sunshine Days " was written and directed by executive producer Vince Gilligan . The episode marked Gilligan 's second directorial effort , after season seven 's " Je Souhaite " . Gilligan called the episode his " goodbye to the audience , and goodbye to the characters " because he realized that " would be the last time I 'd ever be writing from them . " Furthermore , " Sunshine Days " was the final " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " entry in the series ; the show 's finale , " The Truth " would deal with the series ' overarching alien colonization mythology . 
 The elaborate The Brady Bunch house set featured in the episode was built completely by the production crew , according to series co @-@ star Gillian Anderson . She recounts the fact that , due to the original set having been long ago disassembled , people came " from all over Los Angeles " to get their pictures taken on the set . Anderson , who was a fan of popular sitcoms made by Sherwood Schwartz , like Gilligan 's Island and The Brady Bunch , called the experience " wild " . The scene wherein Fogelman 's house turns into an outside field was created via the technique of Chroma <unk> . A shot of both The Brady Bunch house and an outside field were filmed . Then , the actors were filmed against a blue screen . A matte of the scenes were then cut and the scenes were composited against each other . Due to the fact that the shot was an extended scene , Paul Rabwin later noted that the effects were " a little tricky " to get right ; Rabwin noted that the shots ' mattes had to cover the " little strands of hair " on Anderson 's head , because missing the strands is what " gives [ the effect ] away " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Sunshine Days " originally aired on the Fox network on May 12 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on March 16 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 6 @.@ 5 million households and by 10 @.@ 4 million viewers . " Sunshine Days " earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 2 , meaning that roughly 6 @.@ 2 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , were tuned in to the episode . It was the forty @-@ sixth most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending May 12 . Fox promoted the episode with the promise that it was the " most bizarre " episode of The X @-@ Files to ever have been shown . 
 Critical reception to " Sunshine Days " was mixed . Aaron Kinney from Salon magazine was critical of the producers ' idea to air the entry as the penultimate episode leading up to the heavily @-@ promoted series finale . Kinney pointed out that the episode had little to do with the show 's overarching storyline , but it was nevertheless touted as part of The X @-@ Files " Endgame " promotion strategy . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it a " C " grade . She sarcastically wrote , " nine years of mytharc to start to wrap up . And so the penultimate episode of The X @-@ Files , naturally , is devoted to The Brady Bunch . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five . The two noted that the episode " is not one of Gilligan 's very best stories " , citing issues with its tone and its characterization of Oliver Martin . The two , however , did praise Gilligan 's humanized style , writing , " he gives Scully the proof of the paranormal she 's been needing " but shows that the most important " things to care about in life " are " humans " . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a moderately positive review and awarded it a 7 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was a pleasant yet bittersweet episode , one that leaves the characters in relative peace . It is the first time that we get a glimpse of what the writers are thinking as the series comes to a close . Now all that 's left is the mythology , which I can only hope will end on a similarly pleasant note . " M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , said that " the central story falls a bit flat " , but the episode worked well as a " paean to medium of television itself " and he felt it was an appropriate vehicle for the series ' penultimate installment . 
 = Southern Cross Expedition = 
 The Southern Cross Expedition , officially known as the British Antarctic Expedition 1898 – 1900 , was the first British venture of the Heroic Age of Antarctic Exploration , and the forerunner of the more celebrated journeys of Robert Falcon Scott and Ernest Shackleton . The brainchild of the Norwegian @-@ born , half @-@ British explorer and schoolmaster Carsten Borchgrevink , it was the first expedition to over @-@ winter on the Antarctic mainland , the first to visit the Great Ice Barrier since James Clark Ross 's expedition of 1839 to 1843 , and the first to effect a landing on the Barrier 's surface . It also pioneered the use of dogs and sledges in Antarctic travel . 
 The expedition was privately financed by the British magazine publisher Sir George Newnes . Borchgrevink 's party sailed in the ship Southern Cross , and spent the southern winter of 1899 at Cape Adare , the northwest extremity of the Ross Sea coastline . Here they carried out an extensive programme of scientific observations , although opportunities for inland exploration were severely restricted by the mountainous and glaciated terrain surrounding the base . In January 1900 the party left Cape Adare in Southern Cross to explore the Ross Sea , following the route taken by Ross sixty years earlier . They reached the Great Ice Barrier , where a team of three made the first sledge journey on the Barrier surface , during which a new Farthest South record latitude was established at 78 ° 50 ′ S. 
 On its return to England the expedition was coolly received by London 's geographical establishment which was resentful of the pre @-@ emption of a role they envisaged for their own National Antarctic ( Discovery ) Expedition . There were also questions about Borchgrevink 's leadership qualities , and criticism of the limited amounts of scientific information which the expedition provided . Despite the groundbreaking achievements in Antarctic survival and travel , Borchgrevink was never accorded the heroic status of Scott or Shackleton , and his expedition was soon forgotten in the dramas which surrounded these and other Heroic Age explorers . However , Roald Amundsen , conqueror of the South Pole in 1911 , acknowledged that Borchgrevink 's expedition had removed the greatest obstacles to Antarctic travel , and had opened the way for all the expeditions that followed . 
 = = Background = = 
 Born in Oslo in 1864 to a Norwegian father and an English mother , Carsten Borchgrevink emigrated to Australia in 1888 , where he worked on survey teams in the interior before accepting a provincial <unk> appointment in New South Wales . In 1894 he joined a commercial expedition , led by Henryk Bull in the whaler Antarctic , which penetrated Antarctic waters and reached Cape Adare , the western portal to the Ross Sea . A party including Bull and Borchgrevink briefly landed there and claimed to be the first men to set foot on the Antarctic continent — although the American sealer John Davis believed he had landed on the Antarctic Peninsula in 1821 . They also visited Possession Island in the Ross Sea , leaving a message in a tin box as proof of their journey . Borchgrevink was convinced that the Cape Adare location , with its huge penguin rookery providing a ready supply of fresh food and blubber , could serve as a base at which a future expedition could overwinter and subsequently explore the Antarctic interior . 
 Determined that he would lead such an expedition himself , after his return from Cape Adare Borchgrevink spent much of the next three years attempting to gain financial backing in Australia and England . Despite some encouragement from the Royal Geographical Society ( RGS ) , whose International Congress he addressed in 1895 , he was initially unsuccessful . The RGS was harbouring plans of its own for a large @-@ scale National Antarctic Expedition ( which eventually transpired as the Discovery Expedition 1901 – 04 ) and was in search of funds ; Borchgrevink was regarded by RGS president Sir Clements Markham as a foreign interloper and a rival for funding . However , Borchgrevink eventually managed to persuade publisher Sir George Newnes ( whose business rival Alfred Harmsworth was backing the RGS venture ) to meet the full cost of his expedition , some £ 40 @,@ 000 ( approximately £ 4 @,@ 018 @,@ 400 in 2016 ) . This gift infuriated Markham and the RGS , since Newnes 's donation , had it come their way , would have been enough " to get the National Expedition on its legs " . 
 Newnes stipulated that Borchgrevink 's expedition must sail under the British flag , and be styled the British Antarctic Expedition . Borchgrevink readily agreed to this , even though only two of the entire expedition party were British . This increased the hostility and contempt of Markham , who chastised RGS librarian Hugh Robert Mill for attending the Southern Cross Expedition launch . There , Mill had toasted the success of the expedition in stirring terms , calling it " a reproach to human enterprise " that there were parts of the earth that man had never attempted to reach . He hoped that this reproach would be lifted through " the munificence of Sir George Newnes and the courage of Mr Borchgrevink " . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 = = = Expedition objectives = = = 
 Borchgrevink 's expedition objectives comprised commercial , scientific and geographical goals . He considered forming a company to exploit the extensive guano deposits that he had observed during his 1894 – 95 voyage , but this came to nothing . In numerous addresses to scientific societies , he stressed the extent of work that could be carried out by a resident expedition , including the possibility of establishing the location of the South Magnetic Pole . The team of scientists that Borchgrevink appointed , though inexperienced , covered a wide range of disciplines — magnetism , meteorology , biology , zoology , taxidermy and cartography . Borchgrevink also hoped that the expedition 's scientific achievements could be matched by spectacular geographical discoveries and journeys , even perhaps an attempt on the geographical South Pole itself . With no knowledge of the continent 's geography , he was unaware that the site of the base at Cape Adare would rule out any serious exploration of the Antarctic interior . 
 = = = Ship = = = 
 For his expedition 's ship , Borchgrevink purchased a steam whaler , Pollux , that had been built in the yard of Colin Archer , the renowned Norwegian shipbuilder . Archer had designed and built Nansen 's ship Fram , which in 1896 had returned unscathed from its long drift in the northern polar ocean during Nansen 's " Farthest North " expedition , 1893 – 96 . Pollux , which Borchgrevink immediately renamed Southern Cross , was barque @-@ rigged , 520 tons gross , and 146 feet ( 45 m ) overall length . Engines were designed to Borchgrevink 's specification , and fitted before the ship left Norway . Although Markham cast doubts on her seaworthiness ( perhaps to thwart Borchgrevink 's departure ) , the ship fulfilled all that was required of her in Antarctic waters . Like several of the historic polar ships her post @-@ expedition life was short ; she was sold to the Newfoundland Sealing Company , and in April 1914 was lost with all hands in a storm off the Newfoundland coast . 
 = = = Personnel = = = 
 The shore party of ten who were to winter at Cape Adare consisted of Borchgrevink , five scientists , a medical officer , a cook who also served as a general assistant , and two dog drivers . Of this party , five were Norwegians , two were English , one was Australian and two , the dog experts , were Samis from Northern Norway , sometimes described in expedition accounts as Lapps or " Finns " . Among the scientists was the Tasmanian Louis Bernacchi , who had studied magnetism and meteorology at the Melbourne Observatory . He had been appointed to the Belgian Antarctic Expedition , 1897 – 99 , but had been unable to take up his post ; that expedition 's ship , Belgica , had failed to call at Melbourne on its way south , leaving Bernacchi stranded . Bernacchi then travelled to London and secured a place on Borchgrevink 's scientific staff . His chronicle of the Southern Cross Expedition , which was published in 1901 , was critical of aspects of Borchgrevink 's leadership , but defended the expedition 's scientific achievements . In 1901 Bernacchi went back to Antarctica as a physicist on Scott 's Discovery Expedition . Another of Borchgrevink 's men who was to serve Scott 's expedition ( in command of Discovery 's relief ship Morning ) was Englishman William Colbeck , an experienced seaman who held a lieutenant 's commission in the Royal Naval Reserve . In preparation for the Southern Cross Expedition Colbeck had taken a course in magnetism at Kew Observatory . 
 Borchgrevink 's assistant zoologist was Hugh Blackwell Evans , a vicar 's son from Bristol , who had spent three years on a cattle ranch in Canada and had also been on a sealing voyage to the Kerguelen Islands . The chief zoologist was Nicolai Hanson , a graduate from the University of Christiania . Also in the shore party was <unk> <unk> , the expedition 's medical officer , whose previous appointment had been to a lunatic asylum in Bergen . The others were Anton <unk> , scientific assistant and general handyman ; <unk> <unk> , cook and general assistant ; and the two Sami dog @-@ handlers , Per Savio and Ole Must . Savio and Must , at 21 and 20 years of age respectively , were the youngest of the party . Borchgrevink later described Savio as " well @-@ known for his faithful character , hardihood and intelligence " . 
 The ship 's company , under Captain Bernard Jensen , consisted of 19 Norwegian seamen and one Swedish steward . Jensen was an experienced ice navigator in Arctic and Antarctic waters , and had been with Borchgrevink on Bull 's Antarctic voyage in 1894 – 95 . 
 = = Voyage = = 
 = = = Cape Adare = = = 
 Southern Cross left London on 23 August 1898 , after inspection by HRH the Duke of York ( the future King George V ) , who presented a Union Flag . Along with the expedition 's personnel , equipment and provisions the ship was carrying Siberian sledge dogs , the first to be taken on an Antarctic expedition . After final provisioning in Hobart , Tasmania , Southern Cross sailed for the Antarctic on 19 December . She crossed the Antarctic Circle on 23 January 1899 , and was then caught in the pack ice for three weeks . Cape Adare was sighted on 16 February , and the following day the ship was anchored close to the shore . 
 Cape Adare had been discovered by Antarctic explorer James Clark Ross during his 1839 – 43 expedition . It lies at the end of a long promontory ; below the Cape is a large triangular shingle foreshore , where Bull and Borchgrevink had made their brief landing in 1895 . This foreshore is the site of one of the largest Adelie penguin rookeries on the entire continent and , as Borchgrevink had remarked in 1895 , " On this particular spot , there is ample room for houses , tents and provisions " . The abundance of penguins would provide both a winter larder and a fuel source . 
 Unloading began on 17 February . First ashore were the 75 dogs , with their two Sami handlers , who remained with them and thus became the first men to spend a night on the Antarctic continent . During the next twelve days the rest of the equipment and supplies were landed , and two prefabricated huts were erected , one as living quarters and the other for storage . These were the first buildings erected on the continent . A third structure was contrived from spare materials , to serve as a magnetic observation hut . As accommodation for ten men the " living hut " was small and cramped , and seemingly precarious — Bernacchi later described it as " fifteen feet square , lashed down by cables to the rocky shore " . The dogs were housed in kennels fashioned from packing cases . By 2 March the base , christened " Camp Ridley " after Borchgrevink 's English mother 's maiden name , was fully established , and the Duke of York 's flag raised . That day , Southern Cross departed for Australia , to spend the winter there . 
 Inside the living hut were two small ante @-@ rooms , one used as a photographic darkroom , the other for taxidermy . Within the main accommodation area daylight was admitted via a double @-@ glazed and shuttered window and through a small square pane high on the northern wall . <unk> were fitted around the outer walls , and a table and stove dominated the centre of the hut . During the few brief weeks before winter set in , members of the party made trial sledging journeys on the sea ice in nearby Robertson Bay , during which they surveyed the coastline and collected specimens of birds and fish . They also slaughtered seals and penguins for food and fuel . Outside activities were largely curtailed in Mid @-@ May , with the onset of severe winter weather . 
 = = = Antarctic winter = = = 
 As the winter season took hold , the party was almost completely restricted to the cramped living quarters . This proved to be a difficult time ; Bernacchi wrote of rising boredom and irritation : " Officers and men , ten of us in all , found tempers wearing thin " . During this period of tension and confinement , Borchgrevink 's qualities as a commander were found wanting ; he was , wrote Bernacchi , " in many respects ... not a good leader " . Polar historian Ranulph Fiennes writes that in conditions of " democratic anarchy " , dirt , disorder and inactivity were the order of the day . 
 Borchgrevink was not a trained scientist , and his incompetence with equipment and inability to make simple observations were reportedly of great concern to some of the party . However , a programme of scientific observations was maintained , exercise was taken outside the hut when the weather permitted , and as a further diversion Savio improvised a sauna in the snowdrifts alongside the hut . A concert was arranged , including lantern slides , songs and readings . During this time there were two near @-@ fatal incidents ; in the first , a candle left burning beside a bunk set fire to the hut and caused extensive damage . In the second , three of the party were nearly asphyxiated by coal fumes as they slept . 
 The party was well @-@ supplied with a variety of basic foodstuffs — butter , tea and coffee , herrings , sardines , cheeses , soup , tinned tripe , plum pudding , dry potatoes and vegetables . However , there were soon complaints about the lack of luxuries , Colbeck noting that " all the tinned fruits supplied for the land party were either eaten on the passage or left on board for the [ ship 's ] crew " . There was also a shortage of tobacco , in spite of an intended provision of half a ton ( 500 kg ) ; only a quantity of chewing tobacco was landed . 
 The zoologist , Nicolai Hanson , had fallen ill during the winter . On 14 October 1899 he died , apparently of an intestinal disorder , and became the first person to be buried on the Antarctic continent . The grave was dynamited from the frozen ground at the summit of the Cape . Bernacchi wrote : " There amidst profound silence and peace , there is nothing to disturb that eternal sleep except the flight of seabirds " . Hanson left a wife , and a baby daughter born after he left for the Antarctic . 
 As winter gave way to spring , the party prepared for more ambitious inland journeys using the dogs and sledges . However , their base camp was cut off from the continent 's interior by high mountain ranges , and journeys along the coastline were frustrated by unsafe sea ice . These factors severely restricted the extent of their exploration , which was largely confined to the vicinity of Robertson Bay . Here , a small island was discovered , which was named Duke of York Island , after the expedition 's patron . A few years later this find was dismissed by members of Scott 's Discovery Expedition , who claimed that the island " did not exist " , but its position has since been confirmed at 71 ° 38 ′ S , 170 ° 04 ′ E. 
 = = = Ross Sea exploration = = = 
 On 28 January 1900 Southern Cross returned to Cape Adare from Australia . Borchgrevink began dismantling the camp and taking its remaining supplies on board , but soon abandoned this ; on 2 February he took the ship south into the Ross Sea . Evidence of a hasty and disorderly departure from Cape Adare was noted two years later , when the site was visited by members of the Discovery Expedition , after which Edward Wilson wrote ; " ... heaps of refuse all around , and a mountain of provision boxes , dead birds , seals , dogs , sledging gear ... and heaven knows what else " . 
 Southern Cross 's first port of call on the Ross Sea voyage was Possession Island , where the tin box left by Borchgrevink and Bull in 1895 was recovered . They then proceeded southwards , following the Victoria Land coast and discovering further islands , one of which Borchgrevink named after Sir Clements Markham , whose hostility towards the expedition was evidently unchanged by this honour . Southern Cross then sailed on to Ross Island , observed the volcano Mount Erebus , and attempted a landing at Cape Crozier , at the foot of Mount Terror . Here , Borchgrevink and Captain Jensen were almost drowned by a large wave caused by a calving or breakaway of ice from the adjacent Great Ice Barrier . Following the path of James Clark Ross sixty years previously , they proceeded eastwards along the Barrier edge , to find the inlet where , in 1843 , Ross had reached his farthest south . Observations indicated that the Barrier edge had moved some 30 statute miles ( 50 km ) south since Ross 's time , which meant that the ship were already south of Ross 's record . Borchgrevink was determined to make a landing on the Barrier itself , and in the vicinity of Ross 's inlet he found a spot where the ice sloped sufficiently to suggest that a landing was possible . On 16 February he , Colbeck and Savio landed with dogs and a sledge , ascended to the Barrier surface , and then journeyed a few miles south to a point which they calculated as 78 ° 50 ′ S , a new Farthest South record . They were the first persons to travel on the Barrier surface , earning Amundsen 's approbation : " We must acknowledge that , by ascending the Barrier , Borchgrevink opened the way to the south , and threw aside the greatest obstacle to the expeditions that followed " . Close to the same spot ten years later , Amundsen would establish his base camp " Framheim " , prior to his successful South Pole journey . 
 On its passage northward , Southern Cross halted at Franklin Island , off the Victoria Land coast , and made a series of magnetic calculations . These indicated that the location of the South Magnetic Pole was , as expected , within Victoria Land , but further north and further west than had previously been assumed . The party then sailed for home , crossing the Antarctic Circle on 28 February . On 1 April , news of their safe return was sent by telegram from Bluff , New Zealand . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Southern Cross returned to England in June 1900 , to a cool welcome . In geographical circles there was still resentment at Borchgrevink 's coup in obtaining the backing of Newnes , but public attention was , in any event , distracted by the preparations for the upcoming Discovery Expedition , due to sail the following year . Borchgrevink meanwhile pronounced his voyage a great success , stating : " The Antarctic regions might be another <unk> " — in terms of the prospects for fishing , sealing , and mineral extraction . He had proved that it was possible for a resident expedition to survive an Antarctic winter , and had made a series of geographical discoveries . These included new islands in Robertson 's Bay and the Ross Sea , and the first landings on Franklin Island , Coulman Island , Ross Island and the Great Ice Barrier . The survey of the Victoria Land coast had revealed the " important geographical discovery ... of the Southern Cross Fjord , as well as the excellent camping place at the foot of Mount Melbourne " . The most significant exploration achievement , Borchgrevink thought , was the scaling of the Great Ice Barrier and the journey to " the furthest south ever reached by man " . 
 Borchgrevink 's account of the expedition , First on the Antarctic Continent , was published the following year ; the English edition , much of which may have been embroidered by Newnes 's staff , was criticised for its " journalistic " style and for its bragging tone . The author , whom commentators recognised was " not known for either his modesty or his tact " , embarked on a lecture tour of England and Scotland , but the reception was generally poor . 
 Hugh Robert Mill stated that while the scientific results of the expedition were not so great as expected , many of Hanson 's notes having mysteriously disappeared , the expedition was " interesting as a dashing piece of scientific work " . The meteorological and magnetic conditions of Victoria Land had been recorded for a full year ; the location of the South Magnetic Pole had been calculated ( though not visited ) ; samples of the continent 's natural fauna and flora , and of its geology , had been collected . Borchgrevink also claimed the discovery of new insect and shallow @-@ water fauna species , proving " bi @-@ polarity " ( existence of species in proximity to the North and South poles ) . 
 The geographical establishments in Britain and abroad were slow to give formal recognition to the expedition . The Royal Geographical Society gave Borchgrevink a fellowship , and other medals and honours eventually followed from Norway , Denmark and the United States , but the expedition 's achievements were not widely recognised . Markham persisted in his attacks on Borchgrevink , describing him as cunning and unprincipled ; Amundsen 's warm tribute was a lone approving voice . Scott 's biographer David Crane surmises that if Borchgrevink had been a British naval officer , his expedition would have been treated differently in Britain , but " a Norwegian seaman / schoolmaster was never going to be taken seriously " . A belated recognition came in 1930 , long after Markham 's death , when the Royal Geographical Society presented Borchgrevink with its Patron 's Medal . It admitted that " justice had not been done at the time to the pioneer work of the Southern Cross expedition " , and that the magnitude of the difficulties it had overcome had previously been underestimated . After the expedition , Borchgrevink lived quietly , largely out of the public eye . He died in Oslo on 21 April 1934 . 
 = = = Book sources = = = 
 Amundsen , Roald ( 1976 ) . The South Pole : Vol . I. London : C. Hurst & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 903983 @-@ 47 @-@ 8 . 
 Borchgrevink , Carsten ( 1901 ) . First on the Antarctic Continent . George Newnes Ltd . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 41 @-@ 0 . Retrieved 11 August 2008 . 
 Crane , David ( 2005 ) . Scott of the Antarctic . London : HarperCollins . ISBN 0 @-@ 00 @-@ 715068 @-@ 7 . 
 Fiennes , Ranulph ( 2003 ) . Captain Scott . London : Hodder & Stoughton . ISBN 0 @-@ 340 @-@ 82697 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , David . " The Southern Cross Expedition " . <unk> Retrieved 10 August 2008 . 
 Huxley , Elspeth ( 1977 ) . Scott of the Antarctic . London : Weidenfeld and Nicolson . ISBN 0 @-@ 297 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Jones , Max ( 2003 ) . The Last Great Quest . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 280483 @-@ 9 . 
 Paine , Lincoln P. ( 2000 ) . Ships of Discovery and Exploration . Boston : Mariner Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 395 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Preston , Diana ( 1997 ) . A First Rate Tragedy . London : Constable & Co . ISBN 0 @-@ 09 @-@ 479530 @-@ 4 . 
 Riffenburgh , Beau ( 2004 ) . Nimrod . London : Bloomsbury Publications . ISBN 0 @-@ 7475 @-@ 7253 @-@ 4 . 
 Stonehouse , B. ( ed ) ( 2002 ) . Encyclopaedia of Antarctica and the Southern Oceans . New York : John Wiley . ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Wilson , Edward A. ( 1973 ) . Diary of the Discovery Expedition . London : Blandford Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7137 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 = The Third of May 1808 = 
 The Third of May 1808 ( also known as El tres de mayo de 1808 en Madrid or Los <unk> de la <unk> del Príncipe Pío , or Los <unk> del tres de mayo ) is a painting completed in 1814 by the Spanish painter Francisco Goya , now in the Museo del Prado , Madrid . In the work , Goya sought to commemorate Spanish resistance to Napoleon 's armies during the occupation of 1808 in the Peninsular War . Along with its companion piece of the same size , The Second of May 1808 ( or The Charge of the <unk> ) , it was commissioned by the provisional government of Spain at Goya 's suggestion . 
 The painting 's content , presentation , and emotional force secure its status as a groundbreaking , archetypal image of the horrors of war . Although it draws on many sources from both high and popular art , The Third of May 1808 marks a clear break from convention . Diverging from the traditions of Christian art and traditional depictions of war , it has no distinct precedent , and is acknowledged as one of the first paintings of the modern era . According to the art historian Kenneth Clark , The Third of May 1808 is " the first great picture which can be called revolutionary in every sense of the word , in style , in subject , and in intention " . 
 The Third of May 1808 has inspired a number of other major paintings , including a series by Édouard Manet , and Pablo Picasso 's Massacre in Korea and Guernica . 
 = = Background = = 
 Napoleon I of France declared himself First Consul of the French Republic on February 18 , 1799 , and crowned himself Emperor in 1804 . Because Spain controlled access to the Mediterranean , the country was politically and strategically important to French interests . The reigning Spanish sovereign , Charles IV , was internationally regarded as ineffectual . Even in his own court he was seen as a " half @-@ wit king who renounces cares of state for the satisfaction of hunting " , and a cuckold unable to control his energetic wife , Maria Luisa of Parma . Napoleon took advantage of the weak king by suggesting the two nations conquer and divide Portugal , with France and Spain each taking a third of the spoils , and the final third going to the Spanish Prime Minister Manuel de Godoy , along with the title Prince of the Algarve . Godoy was seduced , and accepted the French offer . He failed , however , to grasp Napoleon 's true intentions , and was unaware that his new ally and co @-@ sovereign , the former king 's son Ferdinand VII of Spain , was using the invasion merely as a ploy to seize the Spanish parliament and throne . Ferdinand intended not only that Godoy be killed during the impending power struggle , but also that the lives of his own parents be sacrificed . 
 Under the guise of reinforcing the Spanish armies , 23 @,@ 000 French troops entered Spain unopposed in November 1807 . Even when Napoleon 's intentions became clear the following February , the occupying forces found little resistance apart from isolated actions in disconnected areas , including Saragossa . Napoleon 's principal commander , Marshal Joachim Murat , believed that Spain would benefit from rulers more progressive and competent than the Bourbons , and Napoleon 's brother Joseph Bonaparte was to be made king . After Napoleon convinced Ferdinand to return Spanish rule to Charles IV , the latter was left with no choice but to abdicate , on March 19 , 1808 , in favor of Joseph Bonaparte . 
 Although the Spanish people had accepted foreign monarchs in the past , they deeply resented the new French ruler . On May 2 , 1808 , provoked by news of the planned removal to France of the last members of the Spanish royal family , the people of Madrid rebelled in the Dos de Mayo Uprising . A proclamation issued that day to his troops by Marshal Murat read : " The population of Madrid , led astray , has given itself to revolt and murder . French blood has flowed . It demands vengeance . All those arrested in the uprising , arms in hand , will be shot . " Goya commemorated the uprising in his The Second of May , which depicts a cavalry charge against the rebels in the Puerta del Sol square in the center of Madrid , the site of several hours of fierce combat . Much the better known of the pair , The Third of May illustrates the French reprisals : before dawn the next day hundreds of Spaniards were rounded up and shot , at a number of locations around Madrid . Civilian Spanish opposition persisted as a feature of the ensuing five @-@ year Peninsular War , the first to be called guerrilla war . Irregular Spanish forces considerably aided the Spanish , Portuguese , and British armies jointly led by Sir Arthur Wellesley , who first landed in Portugal in August 1808 . By the time of the painting 's conception , the public imagination had made the rioters symbols of heroism and patriotism . 
 Like other Spanish liberals , Goya was personally placed in a difficult position by the French invasion . He had supported the initial aims of the French Revolution , and hoped for a similar development in Spain . Several of his friends , like the poets Juan Meléndez Valdés and Leandro Fernández de <unk> , were overt <unk> , the term for the supporters — collaborators in the view of many — of Joseph Bonaparte . Goya 's 1798 portrait of the French ambassador @-@ turned @-@ commandant Ferdinand <unk> betrays a personal admiration . Although he maintained his position as court painter , for which an oath of loyalty to Joseph was necessary , Goya had by nature an instinctive dislike of authority . He witnessed the subjugation of his countrymen by the French troops . During these years he painted little , although the experiences of the occupation provided inspiration for drawings that would form the basis for his prints The Disasters of War ( Los desastres de la guerra ) . 
 In February 1814 , after the final expulsion of the French , Goya approached the provisional government with a request to " perpetuate by means of his brush the most notable and heroic actions of our glorious insurrection against the Tyrant of Europe " . His proposal accepted , Goya began work on The Third of May . It is not known whether he had personally witnessed either the rebellion or the reprisals , despite many later attempts to place him at the events of either day . 
 = = The painting = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 The Third of May 1808 is set in the early hours of the morning following the uprising and centers on two masses of men : one a rigidly poised firing squad , the other a disorganized group of captives held at gun point . Executioners and victims face each other abruptly across a narrow space ; according to Kenneth Clark , " by a stroke of genius [ Goya ] has contrasted the fierce repetition of the soldiers ' attitudes and the steely line of their rifles , with the crumbling irregularity of their target . " A square lantern situated on the ground between the two groups throws a dramatic light on the scene . The brightest illumination falls on the huddled victims to the left , whose numbers include a monk or friar in prayer . To the immediate right and at the center of the canvas , other condemned figures stand next in line to be shot . The central figure is the brilliantly lit man kneeling amid the bloodied corpses of those already executed , his arms flung wide in either appeal or defiance . His yellow and white clothing repeats the colors of the lantern . His plain white shirt and sun @-@ burnt face show he is a simple laborer . 
 On the right side stands the firing squad , engulfed in shadow and painted as a monolithic unit . Seen nearly from behind , their bayonets and their shako headgear form a relentless and immutable column . Most of the faces of the figures cannot be seen , but the face of the man to the right of the main victim , peeping fearfully towards the soldiers , acts as a <unk> at the back of the central group . Without distracting from the intensity of the foreground drama , a townscape with a steeple looms in the nocturnal distance , probably including the barracks used by the French . In the background between the hillside and the <unk> is a crowd with torches : perhaps onlookers , perhaps more soldiers or victims . 
 The Second and Third of May 1808 are thought to have been intended as parts of a larger series . Written commentary and circumstantial evidence suggest that Goya painted four large canvases memorializing the rebellion of May 1808 . In his memoirs of the Royal Academy in 1867 , José <unk> wrote of four paintings by Goya of the second of May , and Cristóbal <unk> — an artist and a collector of Goya — mentioned two other paintings on the theme : a revolt at the royal palace and a defense of artillery barracks . Contemporary prints stand as precedents for such a series . The disappearance of two paintings may indicate official displeasure with the depiction of popular insurrection . 
 = = = The Disasters of War = = = 
 Goya 's series of aquatint etchings The Disasters of War ( Los desastres de la guerra ) was not completed until 1820 , although most of the prints were made in the period 1810 – 1814 . The album of proofs given by Goya to a friend , however , now in the British Museum , provides many indications of the order in which both the preliminary drawings and the prints themselves were composed . The groups identified as the earliest clearly seem to predate the commission for the two paintings , and include two prints with obviously related compositions ( illustrated ) , as well as I saw this , which is presumably a scene witnessed during Goya 's trip to Saragossa . No se <unk> <unk> ( One cannot look at this ) is clearly related compositionally and thematically ; the female central figure has her arms outstretched , but pointing down , while another figure has his hands clasped in prayer , and several others shield or hide their faces . This time the soldiers are not visible even from behind ; only the bayonets of their guns are seen . 
 Y no hay <unk> ( And it cannot be helped ) is another of the early prints , from a slightly later group apparently produced at the height of the war when materials were unobtainable , so that Goya had to destroy the plate of an earlier landscape print to make this and another piece in the Disasters series . It shows a shako @-@ wearing firing squad in the background , this time seen receding in a frontal rather than a rear view . 
 = = = Iconography and invention = = = 
 At first the painting met with mixed reactions from art critics and historians . Artists had previously tended to depict war in the high style of history painting , and Goya 's unheroic description was unusual for the time . According to some early critical opinion the painting was flawed technically : the perspective is flat , or the victims and executioners are standing too close together to be realistic . Although these observations may be strictly correct , the writer Richard Schickel argues that Goya was not striving for academic propriety but rather to strengthen the overall impact of the piece . 
 The Third of May references a number of earlier works of art , but its power comes from its bluntness rather than its adherence to traditional compositional formulas . Pictorial artifice gives way to the epic portrayal of unvarnished brutality . Even the contemporary Romantic painters — who were also intrigued with subjects of injustice , war , and death — composed their paintings with greater attention to the conventions of beauty , as is evident in Théodore Géricault 's Raft of the Medusa ( 1818 – 1819 ) and Eugène Delacroix 's 1830 painting Liberty Leading the People . 
 The painting is structurally and thematically tied to traditions of martyrdom in Christian art , as exemplified in the dramatic use of chiaroscuro , and the appeal to life juxtaposed with the inevitability of imminent execution . However , Goya 's painting departs from this tradition . Works that depicted violence , such as those by Jusepe de Ribera , feature an artful technique and harmonious composition which anticipate the " crown of martyrdom " for the victim . 
 In The Third of May the man with raised arms at the focal point of the composition has often been compared to a crucified Christ , and a similar pose is sometimes seen in depictions of Christ 's nocturnal Agony in the Garden of Gethsemane . Goya 's figure displays stigmata @-@ like marks on his right hand , while the lantern at the center of the canvas references a traditional attribute of the Roman soldiers who arrested Christ in the garden . Not only is he posed as if in crucifixion , he wears yellow and white : the heraldic colors of the papacy . In The Third of May , however , there is no attempt to find transcendence , and no sense that the sacrifice of life will lead to salvation . 
 The lantern as a source of illumination in art was widely used by Baroque artists , and perfected by Caravaggio . Traditionally a dramatic light source and the resultant chiaroscuro were used as metaphors for the presence of God . Illumination by torch or candlelight took on religious connotations ; but in The Third of May the lantern manifests no such miracle . Rather , it affords light only so that the firing squad may complete its grim work , and provides a stark illumination so that the viewer may bear witness to wanton violence . The traditional role of light in art as a conduit for the spiritual has been subverted . 
 The victim , as presented by Goya , is as anonymous as his killers . His entreaty is addressed not to God in the manner of traditional painting , but to an <unk> and impersonal firing squad . He is not granted the heroism of individuality , but is merely part of a continuum of victims . Beneath him lies a bloody and disfigured corpse ; behind and around him are others who will soon share the same fate . Here , for the first time , according to biographer Fred Licht , nobility in individual martyrdom is replaced by futility and irrelevance , the victimization of mass murder , and anonymity as a hallmark of the modern condition . 
 The way the painting shows the progress of time is also without precedent in Western art . The death of a blameless victim had typically been presented as a conclusive episode , imbued with the virtue of heroism . The Third of May offers no such cathartic message . Instead , there is a continuous procession of the condemned in a mechanical formalization of murder . The inevitable outcome is seen in the corpse of a man , splayed on the ground in the lower left portion of the work . There is no room left for the sublime ; his head and body have been disfigured to a degree that renders resurrection impossible . The victim is portrayed bereft of all aesthetic or spiritual grace . For the rest of the picture the viewer 's eye level is mostly along the central horizontal axis ; only here is the perspectival point of view changed , so that the viewer looks down on the mutilated body . 
 Finally , there is no attempt by the artist to soften the subject 's brutality through technical skill . Method and subject are indivisible . Goya 's procedure is determined less by the mandates of traditional virtuosity than by his intrinsically morbid theme . The brushwork could not be described as pleasing , and the colors are restricted to earth tones and black , punctuated by bright flashes of white and the red blood of the victims . The quality of the pigment itself foreshadows Goya 's later works : a granular solution producing a matte , sandy finish . Few would admire the work for painterly flourishes , such is its horrific force and its lack of theatricality . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 Despite the work 's commemorative value , no details about its first exhibition are known , and it is not mentioned in any surviving contemporaneous accounts . This lack of commentary may be due to Fernando VII 's preference for neoclassical art , and to the fact that popular revolts of any kind were not regarded as suitable subject matter by the restored Bourbons . A monument to the fallen in the uprising , also commissioned in 1814 by the provisional government , " was stopped by Ferdinand VII , in whose eyes the senators and heroes of the war of independence found small favour , on account of their reforming tendencies " . 
 According to some accounts the painting lay in storage for thirty to forty years before being shown to the public . Its mention in an 1834 Prado inventory shows that the painting remained in the possession of the government or monarchy ; much of the royal collection had been transferred to the museum upon its opening in 1819 . Théophile Gautier mentioned seeing " a massacre " by Goya during a visit to the museum in 1845 , and a visitor in 1858 noted it as well , though both accounts refer to the work as depicting the events of the second of May , perhaps because Dos de Mayo continues to be the Spanish name for the whole episode . 
 In 1867 , Goya 's biographer Charles Emile <unk> considered the painting important enough to warrant its own special exhibition , but it was not until 1872 that The Third of May was listed in the Prado 's published catalog , under the title Scene of the Third of May 1808 . Both the Third and Second of May suffered damage in a road accident while being transported by truck to Valencia for safety during the Spanish Civil War , apparently the only time they have left Madrid . Significant paint losses to the left side of the Second of May have been deliberately left unrepaired . Restoration work to both paintings was done in 2008 in time for an exhibition marking the bicentennial of the uprising . 
 In 2009 , the Prado selected The Third of May 1808 as one of the museum 's fourteen most important paintings , to be displayed in Google Earth at a resolution of 14 @,@ 000 megapixels . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The first paraphrasing of The Third of May was Édouard Manet 's Execution of Emperor Maximilian , painted in several versions between 1867 and 1869 . In recording a current event to which neither he nor the emerging art of photography was witness , Manet seems inspired by Goya 's precedent . He may have seen the work at the Prado in 1865 before beginning his own paintings , which were too sensitive to be exhibited in France in Manet 's lifetime . He undoubtedly did see a print of it which was published in 1867 by an acquaintance . Art critic Arthur Danto compares Goya 's work and Manet 's : 
 The Third of May also depicts an execution , an early event in the so @-@ called Peninsular War between France and Spain . Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Spain in 1808 , capturing its royal family and replacing them with his brother , Joseph . The French were as unpopular in Spain as they later were in Mexico , and they encountered a fierce insurrection , which ultimately triumphed . The Third of May execution was an indiscriminate killing of civilians by French soldiers in reprisal for a guerrilla attack the previous day . Goya 's painting of the massacre , which shows terrified civilians facing a firing squad , was intended to arouse anger and hatred on the part of Spanish viewers . Goya 's is a highly romantic picture of a deeply emotional episode . 
 The Third of May is cited as an influence on Pablo Picasso 's 1937 Guernica , which shows the aftermath of the Nazi German bombing of Guernica during the Spanish Civil War . An exhibition in 2006 at the Prado and the Reina Sofía showed The Third of May , Guernica , and the Execution of the Emperor Maximilian in the same room . Also in the room was Picasso 's Massacre in Korea , painted in 1951 during the Korean War — an even more direct reference to the composition of The Third of May . The perpetrators in this painting were intended to be the United States Army or their United Nations allies . 
 Aldous Huxley wrote in 1957 that Goya lacked Rubens ' ability to fill the canvas with an ordered composition ; but he considered The Third of May a success because Goya " is speaking in his native language , and he is therefore able to express what he wants to say with maximum force and clarity " . 
 Kenneth Clark remarked on the painting 's radical departure from history painting , and its singular intensity : 
 With Goya we do not think of the studio or even of the artist at work . We think only of the event . Does this imply that The Third of May is a kind of superior journalism , the record of an incident in which depth of focus is sacrificed to an immediate effect ? I am ashamed to say that I once thought so ; but the longer I look at this extraordinary picture and at Goya 's other works , the more clearly I recognise that I was mistaken . 
 = Locus iste ( Bruckner ) = 
 Locus iste ( English : This place ) , WAB 23 , is a sacred motet composed by Anton Bruckner in 1869 . The text is the Latin gradual Locus iste for the annual celebration of a church 's dedication . The incipit , Locus iste a Deo factus est , translates to " This place was made by God " . Bruckner set it for four unaccompanied voices , intended for the dedication of the Votivkapelle ( votive chapel ) at the New Cathedral in Linz , Austria , where Bruckner had been a cathedral organist . It was the first motet that Bruckner composed in Vienna . It was published in 1886 , together with two other gradual motets . 
 As a composition with no obvious technical difficulty , it has been performed by church choirs and by professionals , often to celebrate church dedications . 
 = = History = = 
 Bruckner composed Locus iste on 11 August 1869 . It was intended for the dedication ceremony of the Votivkapelle ( votive chapel ) at the New Cathedral in Linz , Austria . The New Cathedral was under construction since 1862 , and the Votivkapelle was completed in 1869 as its first section . At that time Bruckner lived in Vienna , teaching at the Vienna Conservatory as a professor of harmony and counterpoint , and at the Vienna University as a part @-@ time lecturer from 1876 . He had a strong connection to the Old Cathedral of Linz , where he had been the organist from 1855 to 1868 . He had already been commissioned by Bishop Franz @-@ Josef <unk> to compose a Festive Cantata for the laying of the foundation stone of the new cathedral , and composed <unk> den Herrn ( Praise the Lord ) on a text by Maximilian <unk> , which was performed on 1 May 1862 on the building site . 
 The Latin text of Locus iste is the gradual Locus iste , part of the proper of the mass for <unk> , the anniversary of a church 's dedication . While some sources claim that the motet was first performed on the dedication day , 29 September 1869 , together with the first performance of Bruckner 's Mass in E minor , it was actually performed four weeks later , on 29 October , at the same location . Bruckner dedicated the work to Oddo <unk> , one of his students at the Vienna Conservatory . It was Bruckner 's first motet composed in Vienna . 
 The motet was edited together with three other motets based on <unk> ( Christus factus est , WAB 11 , Os <unk> , WAB 30 , and Virga Jesse , WAB 52 ) by Theodor <unk> , Vienna in 1886 . Locus iste is often performed on the anniversary of a church 's dedication . It is put in Band XXI / 25 of the <unk> . 
 = = Music = = 
 The motet is scored for a unaccompanied mixed choir . It is in the key of C major and in common time , has 48 bars and takes about three minutes to perform . The text concentrates on the concept of the sacred place , based on the Biblical story of Jacob 's Ladder , Jacob 's saying " Surely the Lord is in this place ; and I knew it not " ( Genesis 28 : 16 ) , and the story of the burning bush where Moses is told " put off thy shoes from off thy feet , for the place whereon thou <unk> is holy ground " ( Exodus 3 : 5 ) . 
 Bruckner structured the three lines of the text in an ABA da capo form , closed by a coda , with A containing the first line , framing the second and third . Peter Strasser suggests that the work reflects elements of architecture , such as in the symmetry of the da capo form and the use of motifs like building blocks . 
 The motet is marked Allegro moderato and begins calmly in homophony . Max Auer notes that the beautiful work has touches with Mozart 's Ave verum . A. Crawford Howie notes further that the work " begins with Mozartian phrases , but soon introduces characteristic Brucknerian progressions " . The repeat of the first line , beginning one step higher , is marked mf , confirming " a Deo factus est " higher and stronger , then repeating it softly . The bass begins each " a Deo factus est " . Musicologist Anthony Carver notes here as in many of Bruckner 's motets the " isolation of the bass part at structurally important points " . The bass also begins the second line with a new rising motif , marked f ; the upper voices follow in homophony . The line is repeated as a sequence a step higher , marked ff . After a pause of half a bar , the tenor alone begins in sudden pp the middle section on a repeated note , imitated by soprano and alto . Throughout the section , only the upper voices , without a bass foundation , sing in chromaticism , beginning in undefined tonality . In a gradual crescendo , the intensity is heightened , but only to mf . Iso <unk> notes in an article dedicated to the work in the Neue Zürcher Zeitung : das <unk> Geheimnis ( the irreproachable mystery ) appears as <unk> ( incomprehensible ) and <unk> ( disturbing ) , described by Ryan Turner as " transparently chromatic " . 
 After another rest of half a bar , the first line is repeated . Instead of the last " factus est " , the word " Deo " is extended to the only melisma of the otherwise austere , strictly syllabic composition . The author of the program notes for an Oratorio Society of New York CD that includes the motet writes that the melisma " spins an ethereal spell " . It leads to a long general pause , achieved " by carefully measuring out five beats " , before " a Deo , Deo factus est " is repeated a final time , concluding " peacefully and serenely " . The author of the Oratorio Society notes concludes by stating that " Locus iste is a hauntingly beautiful work reminiscent of the quiet chapel it honored " . Writing for Gramophone , Malcolm Riley called it " sublime ( and deceptively difficult ) " . 
 = = Selected discography = = 
 The first recording of Bruckner 's Locus iste occurred in the beginning of the 20th century : 
 Karl <unk> , Chor der <unk> <unk> – 78 rpm gramophone disc G.C. / HMV <unk> , c . 1907 ( no sample of it currently available ) 
 A selection of the over 200 recordings of Bruckner 's Locus iste : 
 Matthew Best , Corydon Singers , Bruckner : Motets – CD : Hyperion <unk> , 1982 
 Philippe Herreweghe , la Chapelle Royale / Collegium Vocale , Ensemble Musique Oblique , Bruckner : Messe en mi <unk> ; Motets – CD : Harmonia Mundi France HMC <unk> , 1989 
 Frieder <unk> , Kammerchor Stuttgart , Bruckner : Mass in E minor ; Ave Maria ; Christus factus est ; Locus iste ; Virga Jesse – CD : Sony CL SK <unk> , 1991 
 John Eliot Gardiner , Monteverdi Choir , Bruckner : Mass No. 1 ; Motets – CD : DG 459 674 – 2 , 1998 
 Dan @-@ Olof <unk> , Malmö <unk> , Bruckner : <unk> Werke – CD : Malmö <unk> <unk> 051 , 2004 
 Petr Fiala , <unk> <unk> Chor Brno , Anton Bruckner : Motets – CD : MDG 322 1422 @-@ 2 , 2006 
 Ulf Samuelsson , <unk> <unk> , Under <unk> <unk> – CD : Olaus Petri <unk> <unk> , 2006 
 Michael <unk> , <unk> Carmeli , <unk> <unk> Linz – CD / DVD issued by the choir , 2006 , and on YouTube . 
 Stephen Layton , Polyphony Choir , Bruckner : Mass in E minor & Motets – CD : Hyperion CDA <unk> , 2007 @,@ 
 Erwin Ortner , Arnold Schoenberg Chor , Anton Bruckner : <unk> ergo – CD : Issue of the choir , 2008 
 Otto <unk> , <unk> St. Pölten , Bruckner : Messe E @-@ Moll , CD : ORF CD <unk> , 2013 
 = Isidore van Kinsbergen = 
 <unk> " Isidore " van Kinsbergen ( 3 September 1821 – 10 September 1905 ) was a Dutch @-@ Flemish engraver who took the first archaeological and cultural photographs of Java during the Dutch East Indies period in the nineteenth century . The photographs he produced during his visit to the colony in 1851 ranged in subject from antiquities and landscapes to portraits , court @-@ photography , model studies and nudes . His monograph was published in black and white with a coloured quire of nearly 400 photographs . His photograph of Borobudur was the first picture of the monument that showed the results of the first restoration c . 1873 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Isidore van Kinsbergen was born in Bruges in 1821 ( at that time , Bruges was part of the United Kingdom of the Netherlands ) . Having studied painting and singing in Paris , he joined a French opera group that travelled to Batavia ( the present day Jakarta ) in 1851 . After several performances the group left the Dutch East Indies , but Van Kinsbergen decided to stay there . He became interested in the new medium of photography , particularly in using the albumen print technique . He opened the first albumen print processing shop in Batavia . 
 = = Commissions = = 
 In 1862 , the General Secretary of East Indies Alexis Loudon invited van Kinsbergen to join the government mission to Siam ( present day Thailand ) in February 1862 to cover the 1860 Treaty of Friendship , Trade and Navigation between the Netherlands and Siam . It was van Kinsbergen 's first government assignment and he used the occasion to capture a number of curiosities in the country . 
 During that period , the Batavia Society of Arts and Sciences , whose main interests were in archaeological research and conservation , became interested in the newly invented albumen print medium . The society felt that the world should know more about Javanese culture as expressed in the old inscriptions , statues , customs and temples . The Society arranged an archaeological tour around Java , headed by <unk> Brumund , a priest of the Batavian <unk> Community and a specialist in Javanese . The Society also commissioned van Kinsbergen to accompany Brumund during his tour in order to illustrate Brumund 's publication of Javanese culture and antiquities . The government granted permission for this tour , with the restriction that all wet @-@ prints ( cliches ) would be government property and that extra printing would only be allowed with permission from the government . 
 As part of his contract with the Batavian Society , van Kinsbergen had to take photographs of Borobudur , which had just been cleaned and restored . However , when he went to photograph the <unk> Hindu temple complex in East Java in 1867 , he ran out of chemicals . In his enthusiasm for photographing the many reliefs of the temple complex , he used up so many glass slides that he could not go to Borobudur as he had intended to . The Society was nervous about van Kinsbergen 's delay , so they did not grant his request to supply new slides . 
 However , van Kinsbergen 's photographs satisfied the Society and he became renowned as " the Society 's Photographer " . His work on repairing the system for managing water flow during his trip in the Dieng Plateau in order to photograph the Javanese Hindu temple there was avidly praised by the Society . The board then decided that van Kinsbergen was no longer obliged to follow Brumund 's directions , but should pursue his own vision . Brumund published his work in 1868 , but without the full illustrations of van Kinsbergen . Later in 1872 , van Kinsbergen published photographs of monuments in Java , but he was criticized for missing some important ruins , for instance , those in the east of Kediri . 
 Although Brumund 's publication included drawings of Borobudur , the Batavia Society still felt that it was incomplete . In April 1873 , van Kinsbergen set off to the monument . Cleaning , digging and other technical difficulties delayed his start in taking pictures until August that year . The wet monsoon season further hampered his work , resulting in a series of only 43 photographs taken between August to December . The Society was disappointed with the number of photographs , although satisfied with the printing and artistic quality . 
 = = Photographic styles = = 
 Isidore van Kinsbergen was known as a perfectionist . During his work in Borobudur , he selected the statues and panels which had been preserved best to take pictures of . He preferred a non @-@ frontal angle , which shows a better depth of the relief and the skills of the relief maker . To stress its timeless beauty , van Kinsbergen blocked out the original background in the negative film instead of putting up a black curtain during photographing . 
 There are some criticisms of van Kinsbergen 's photographs . He missed some details and sometimes his series was unbalanced . Trained as an artist , his works lacked archaeological descriptions , the main purpose of his contract . The printing quality , however , is beyond question and he had success showing the beauty of classical Javanese arts . His photographs were shown to the public both in the 1873 International Exhibition in Vienna and the 1878 World Exhibition in Paris . His works can be seen in several places , including the National Museum in Amsterdam . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Juxtapozed with U = 
 " Juxtapozed with U " is the thirteenth single by Super Furry Animals . It was the first single to be taken from the Rings Around the World album and reached number 14 on the UK Singles Chart on its release in July 2001 . The song was initially conceived as a duet but , after both Brian Harvey and Bobby Brown turned the band down , lead singer Gruff Rhys sang the entire track , using a vocoder on the verses to imitate another person . Musically " Juxtapozed with U " has echoes of Philadelphia soul and the " plastic soul " of David Bowie 's album Young Americans and was inspired by the Paul McCartney and Stevie Wonder track " Ebony and Ivory " . Rhys has claimed that he sees " Juxtapozed with U " as " fairly subversive " because its polished pop style was in stark contrast to the " macho " guitar music the band felt was prevalent in 2001 . 
 Critical reaction to the track was generally positive with some reviewers describing it as the band 's best single to date . A promotional music video was produced to accompany " Juxtapozed with U " ' s release as a single . Directed by Dawn of the New Assembly / H5 the video features a computer generated women and man seen as thermal images . The couple drive around New York and attend a party on the top floor of a skyscraper which is enveloped in flames towards the end of the track . An alternative video , directed by Fukme 99 , was included on the DVD version of Rings Around the World . This video features three people walking through the streets of Hammersmith , dressed in cardboard costumes as a camcorder , clapperboard and microphone . The characters meet up with a fourth person wearing a large cardboard head and arms and then dance with several other people dressed in cardboard outside a group of warehouse . The DVD version of Rings Around the World also includes two remixes of " ( Drawing ) Rings Around the World " by Lesser and the Super Furry Animals themselves . 
 = = Themes and recording = = 
 " Juxtapozed with U " was inspired by the Paul McCartney and Stevie Wonder track " Ebony and Ivory " as well as the work of Marvin Gaye and Caetano Veloso . The track was originally conceived as a duet , with the band approaching both Brian Harvey from East 17 , and Bobby Brown to sing alongside Gruff Rhys . Both turned the band down so Rhys sang the verses through a vocoder to imitate another person , something which he has described as a " very schizophrenic thing to do " . Rhys has claimed his lyrics address social injustice and are about " house prices going up , and people being left behind by the super rich " . The song has echoes of the Philadelphia soul music of the 1970s as well as David Bowie 's " plastic " approximation of the sound on his 1975 album Young Americans . The group tried to make the song as " plastic " as possible : " if we 'd tried to make it sound authentic , it would have been awful . " According to Rhys the band were keen to challenge people 's opinions of them with the track which is a " shocking song , because you can 't shock with loud guitars any more " and , as a polished uplifting pop song , is " fairly subversive " when contrasted with the macho guitar music which the band felt was prevalent in 2001 . The track was recorded in 2000 at Monnow Valley Studio , Rockfield , Monmouthshire and was produced by the Super Furry Animals and Chris Shaw . 
 = = Musical structure = = 
 " Juxtapozed with U " is 3 minutes 8 seconds long and is in the key of A major . The track begins with a drum fill , featuring flanging , before a harp , strings , acoustic guitar and bass join at 2 seconds . An electric guitar joins at 13 seconds playing a melody line . The song breaks down at 25 seconds for the first verse with just bass , drums , acoustic guitar and occasional synthesizer accompanying Gruff Rhys 's vocals which are fed through a vocoder . The first chorus begins at 47 seconds with the strings and harp re @-@ entering while Rhys sings the words " You 've got to tolerate all those people that you hate , I 'm not in love with you but I won 't hold that against you " twice without the use of a vocoder . The song breaks down again for the second verse after which the second chorus enters at 1 minute 33 seconds . The outro begins at 1 minute 58 seconds with Rhys singing " Let 's get juxtaposed , juxtaposed , just suppose I 'm juxtaposed with you " supported by harmony backing vocals . The rest of the band continue singing these words while Rhys begins singing the chorus lyrics , starting at 2 minutes 43 seconds . The track ends with Rhys singing the words " Let 's get juxtaposed " backed only by harmony vocals . 
 = = = Alternative versions = = = 
 Two remixes of " Juxtapozed with U " are included on the DVD version of Rings Around The World . The first , by the Super Furry Animals themselves , is 3 minutes 23 seconds in length and largely follows the arrangement of the original with lengthy instrumental passages between each verse and chorus . Electronic drums and keyboards play alongside Gruff Rhys 's vocals with barely any recognisable instrumentation from the version of the track which appears on Rings Around the World . The second remix by Lesser is 3 minutes 22 seconds long and begins with a short sample of Rhys singing the words " All the people that you hate " before breaking down to finger clicking and clapping . Rhys 's vocals enter again , singing the title phrase , before samples of the original 's string section and drums enter at 1 minute 11 seconds . The rest of the track continues with Rhys 's vocals backed by disjointed drum and string samples , breaking down towards the end to just the lead vocals and a harp . The remix ends with Rhys singing the line " Til someone stole my name " a cappella . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " Juxtapozed with U " received a generally positive response from critics . Drowned in Sound described the track as the Super Furry Animals ' best single to date and stated that " its one of those songs which you will undoubtedly find yourself singing along to it as if you 've heard it a million times before , its that catchy " while Allmusic saw the track as an example of the band 's " exceptional songwriting " . The NME gave the song their " Single of the week " award on its release , calling it " a total surprise and an absolute delight " , going on to claim that " Juxtapozed with U " is " genius " and shows the band " going pop with grace , style and total conviction . " Both Pitchfork Media and the Dallas Observer likened the song to Philadelphia soul music and The Guardian described it as a " string @-@ laden soul ballad with the sort of treated robot vocal Daft Punk are fond of " . Uncut described the track as a " delirious soul pastiche " and suggested Rhys 's lyrics make a " wry plea for understanding between races and classes " while PopMatters claimed the song is about gentrification . Entertainment Weekly was critical of " Juxtapozed with U " , describing it as an " awful lite @-@ rock homage " which resembles the theme tune to The Love Boat . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Music videos = = 
 = = = Fukme 99 video = = = 
 A Fukme 99 directed video was included on the DVD version of Rings Around the World on its release in July 2001 . The video begins with the phrase " Get real ! " in pink letters and features three people , dressed in cardboard costumes as a camcorder , clapperboard and microphone respectively , wandering around the streets of Hammersmith . The camcorder is refused entry into a shop and is taunted by schoolchildren while the clapperboard is told to leave the scene of a film by one of the crew . The microphone is shown attempting to hand out flyers alongside a man dressed in a banana costume who is much more successful at getting people to take the leaflets from him . The camcorder , microphone and clapperboard then meet up in a car park before going to the house of a man with a large cardboard head and arms . The four walk towards some warehouses where they dance with several other people dressed in cardboard , including a mobile phone and camera , as well as the man dressed as a banana who appeared earlier in the video . Rhys has described this sequence as a " big dance routine with ... cardboard outsiders " . 
 Keyboard player Cian Ciaran has stated that the band deliberately tried to avoid making videos that looked like just " another pop promo ... like MTV " for the DVD version of Rings Around the World and asked the directors to make the visuals as " extreme as possible " . Ciaran claims the directors had to " work even harder at creating something interesting " due to the limited budget available . 
 = = = Dawn of the New Assembly / H5 video = = = 
 A promotional video , directed by Dawn of the New Assembly / H5 , was produced to accompany the release of " Juxtapozed with U " as a single . According to Gruff Rhys the band made separate videos for Rings Around the World 's three singles as they saw the videos included on the DVD release of the album as " pure art " whereas they needed promotional music videos that were more like adverts for the songs . The video is computer generated and begins with stylised shots of traffic moving across the Brooklyn Bridge , New York . The camera zooms in to show a man and women , who appear as thermal images , driving one of the cars . The man checks his watch and puts a CD in the car 's stereo before the video switches to an outside shot of the vehicle driving through a tunnel and a busy street . Another street is shown with many neon signs , including one which says " Broadway " and another with features the legend " Juxtapozed with U , Super Furry Animals " . The couple continue driving until they reach the Guggenheim Art Museum where they park beside a valet who opens the car 's passenger door . The next shot shows the museum 's interior exhibit which consists of a black and neon blue grids with various mathematical symbols and currency signs on the walls . The couple talk to one of the crowd in the club before leaving the building and walking past the valet to a lift which takes them to a party on the roof of a skyscraper . Shots of a swimming pool on the skyscraper 's roof and the couple kissing are intercut with images of fire engines driving through the streets past the Chrysler Building . These fire engines arrive below the skyscraper where the party is taking place and several people , including the couple , look down on them from above . Firemen are shown fighting a blaze on several floors of the skyscraper and a helicopter is seen flying to rescue the partygoers . In the last few seconds of the video the skyscraper explodes and the helicopter crashes into the roof of the building . The Dawn of the New Assembly / H5 video appears on the DVD release of the band 's greatest hits album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 and the Enhanced CD version of the " Juxtapozed with U " single . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals . 
 Digipak Enhanced CD ( <unk> ) 
 " Juxtapozed with U " – 3 : 10 
 " Tradewinds " – 5 : 37 
 " Happiness is a Worn Pun " – 3 : 21 
 " Juxtapozed with U ( Video ) " – 3 : 10 
 12 " ( <unk> ) , MC ( <unk> ) 
 " Juxtapozed with U " – 3 : 10 
 " Tradewinds " – 5 : 37 
 " Happiness is a Worn Pun " – 3 : 21 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Gruff Rhys – vocals 
 Huw Bunford – guitar 
 Guto Pryce – bass guitar 
 Cian Ciaran – keyboards 
 Dafydd Ieuan – drums 
 Beti Rhys – harp 
 John Telfer – flute 
 Harriet Harris – violin 
 S. Herbert – violin 
 Jackie Norrie – violin 
 Sonia <unk> – violin , string arrangements 
 Nick Barr – viola 
 Clare Smith – viola 
 Nick Cooper – cello 
 Sophie Harris – cello 
 Kris Jenkins – percussion 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Double Nickels on the Dime = 
 Double Nickels on the Dime is the third studio album by American punk trio Minutemen , released on the Californian independent record label SST Records in 1984 . A double album containing 45 songs , Double Nickels on the Dime combines elements of punk rock , funk , country , spoken word and jazz , and references a variety of themes , from the Vietnam War and racism in America , to working class experience and linguistics . 
 After recording new material , the band each selected songs for different sides of the double album , with the fourth side named " Chaff " . Several songs on Double Nickels on the Dime were outsourced to or inspired by contemporaries , such as Black Flag 's Henry Rollins and Jack Brewer of <unk> Trust . 
 Double Nickels on the Dime is seen not only as Minutemen 's crowning achievement , but , according to critic Mark Deming , " one of the very best American rock albums of the 1980s " . The album now appears on many professional lists of the all @-@ time best rock albums , including Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . Slant Magazine listed the album at # 77 on its list of " Best Albums of the 1980s " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Minutemen were formed by guitarist D. Boon and bassist Mike Watt , both from San Pedro , California , in 1980 . After their previous band , The Reactionaries , disbanded in 1979 , the pair continued to write new material and formed the band with drummer Frank <unk> a year later . Minutemen signed to the Californian independent record label SST Records following their second gig . George Hurley , the former drummer of The Reactionaries , replaced <unk> as drummer soon afterwards . The Minutemen were noted in the California punk scene for a philosophy of " jamming <unk> " ; a sense of <unk> reflected in their touring and presentation . They soon released numerous recordings through SST and their own label , New Alliance Records , while touring with hardcore punk bands like Black Flag and Hüsker Dü . 
 In January 1983 , Minutemen were asked by ex @-@ Blue Cheer keyboardist and local producer Ethan James to contribute a song to Radio Tokyo Tapes , a compilation named after the Californian studio where James worked . The band agreed and contributed three songs to the compilation , with James recording them all for free . These three songs , and another five recorded in May 1983 for a total of $ 50 , were included in their 1983 EP Buzz or Howl Under the Influence of Heat . The band had recorded solely with SST engineer Spot prior to the recordings . However , they were so impressed by the sessions that they enlisted James to record their next full @-@ length album ; Watt later commented : " Ethan , although not knowing us much , tapped right in . " After their European tour in mid @-@ 1983 with Black Flag , Minutemen entered Radio Tokyo Studios in November to record their next studio album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Minutemen originally recorded an " album 's worth of material " with James in November 1983 in Radio Tokyo Studios . However , after hearing labelmates Hüsker Dü 's double album Zen Arcade ( 1984 ) , which had been recorded a month earlier , Minutemen decided to write more material . Watt later commented : " It wasn 't really a competition even . When I wrote ' Take that <unk> ! " in [ the album 's liner notes ] it was acknowledging that they gave us the idea to make a double album . " Unlike Hüsker Dü 's Zen Arcade , Minutemen did not have a unifying concept , but soon decided that the record 's concept would be their cars . 
 The band wrote almost two dozen more songs for a second recording session with James in April 1984 . Double Nickels on the Dime was then mixed on a single eight @-@ track in one night by James and cost $ 1 @,@ 100 to record . Several songs on the album were recorded elsewhere ; a studio @-@ recorded cover of Creedence Clearwater Revival 's " Don 't Look Now " was replaced with a live version of the song , and according to Watt , " Love Dance " was written at Ian MacKaye 's Dischord House . 
 For sequencing , the band decided that each band member would be allocated a side of the record , an arrangement inspired by Pink Floyd 's 1969 double album Ummagumma . The band drew straws to select songs ; Hurley won the draw and decided to pick his solo track " You Need the Glory " , followed by Boon and Watt . The fourth side of the record was named " Side Chaff " , an admission that the songs present were the leftover songs . 
 = = Music = = 
 The album is referred by Watt to be their art record in the documentary " We Jam <unk> The Story of The Minutemen " . The songwriting styles of Boon and Watt on Double Nickels on the Dime contrasted . Boon tended to write the band 's anthems , and often explored wider political issues . " This Ain 't No Picnic " , was an example of his approach . Exploring racism and the strife of the working class with both gravity and humor , he composed the song after his supervisor would not let him listen to jazz and soul music on the radio at his day job , claiming it was " nigger shit . " 
 Watt favored complex and abstract lyrical themes , exemplified by songs such as " The Glory Of Man " and " My Heart and the Real World " . Influenced by James Joyce 's novel Ulysses ( the subject of " June 16th " ) and the stream of consciousness literary technique in general , Watt 's lyrics were often complex and philosophical . On " Take 5 , D. " , Boon felt that the lyrics were " too spacey " . Watt agreed to rewrite the song , adding : " There ain 't nothing going to be more real . " He found a new set of lyrics : a note from a friend 's landlady about a shower . 
 Double Nickels on the Dime contained several inside jokes that were missed by the band 's audience . Watt later remarked : " No one knew what the fuck we were talking about . We 'd explain it to people and they 'd say , ' I don 't get it , what 's so funny about that ? ' And we couldn 't tell them because it was our whole angle on the rock & roll , our worldview on the music scene . " 
 = = Imagery = = 
 The album was named Double Nickels on the Dime as a reaction to the Sammy Hagar song " I Can 't Drive 55 , " a protest against the federally imposed speed limit of 55 miles per hour on all U.S. highways . Minutemen decided that driving fast " wasn 't terribly defiant " ; Watt later commented that " the big rebellion thing was writing your own fuckin ' songs and trying to come up with your own story , your own picture , your own book , whatever . So he can 't drive 55 , because that was the national speed limit ? Okay , we 'll drive 55 , but we 'll make crazy music . " 
 The band illustrated the theme on the cover of Double Nickels on the Dime , which depicts Watt driving his Volkswagen Beetle at exactly 55 miles per hour ( " double nickels " in trucker slang ) traveling southbound through downtown Los Angeles on Route 110 , also known as the Harbor Freeway , toward the band 's hometown of San Pedro , California . " The title means fifty @-@ five miles per hour on the button , like we were Johnny Conservative . " Dirk Vandenberg , the band 's " buddy / contributor , " took photos from the backseat as Watt drove under the sign to San Pedro ; it took three circuits of the highway and two days of photography before Minutemen were happy with the cover . Vandenberg later commented on the cover art : " There were three elements that Mike [ Watt ] wanted in the photo : a natural kind of glint in his eyes reflected in the rearview mirror , the speedometer pinned exactly at <unk> , and , of course , the San Pedro sign guiding us home " . However , when the cover was presented to SST , " someone botched the cropping for the print and cut off the end of the word Pedro . " 
 = = Release = = 
 SST Records released Double Nickels on the Dime on double vinyl in July 1984 . SST delayed the release of Zen Arcade by Hüsker Dü so that both albums could be released simultaneously . After the release of Double Nickels on the Dime , Minutemen toured almost constantly to promote the record . One 1984 tour saw the band playing 57 dates in 63 days . The album sold fifteen thousand copies during 1984 , a respectable amount for a band on an independent record label . As of 2008 , Double Nickels on the Dime remains Minutemen 's best @-@ selling record . 
 No singles were released to promote Double Nickels on the Dime , but two videos , " This Ain 't No Picnic " and " Ain 't Talkin ' ' Bout Love " ( a cover of a song by Van Halen , which the aforementioned Hagar would eventually join ) , were released as " flyers " . Made for $ 440 by a University of California , Los Angeles graduate , Anthony Johnson , " This Ain 't No Picnic " was Minutemen 's first video and was later nominated for an MTV award . The video for " This Ain 't No Picnic " features the band playing amidst rubble as a fighter plane " piloted " by Ronald Reagan , edited from public domain footage , fires at them . The video of " Ain 't Talkin ' ' Bout Love " , released by SST as a promotional video , was a 40 @-@ second recording of a live performance . 
 In August 1987 , Watt and producer Vitus <unk> remastered Double Nickels on the Dime for a CD release . To ensure that the CD would be compatible with all players , they omitted all car jams except Boon 's , and three songs : " Mr. Robot 's Holy Orders " , " Ain 't Talkin ' ' bout Love " and " Little Man With A Gun In His Hand . " Watt commented later that the remix was a " nightmare " and " totally worse than the Ethan James mix . " Watt reverted to the original mix for a 1989 CD release of Double Nickels on the Dime , but did not include the previously omitted songs . In a January 2006 interview , Watt announced his intention to discuss a remastered full Double Nickels on the Dime CD release with SST owner Greg Ginn . 
 = = Critical recognition = = 
 Upon its release , Double Nickels on the Dime received critical acclaim from a range of American critics ; however as a regional independent record label , many of SST 's releases did not attract attention from British music magazines . Village Voice critic Robert Christgau gave Double Nickels on the Dime an A- rating , describing Boon as a " somewhat limited singer " but " a hell of a reader , with a guitar that rhymes " , and remarking " this is poetry @-@ with @-@ jazz as it always should have been . " Christgau later said that he underrated the album on its original release . Double Nickels on the Dime placed at number 14 in the publication 's end of year Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . Reviewing the album in February 1985 for Rolling Stone , David Fricke awarded the album three and a half stars , and also praised Boon 's technique , stating : " The telegraphic stutter and almost scientific angularity of singer @-@ guitarist D. Boon 's chordings and breakneck solos heighten the jazzier tangents he dares to take , " but that " Double Nickels on the Dime 's best moments go far too quickly . " 
 Later reviews have also been positive : Allmusic 's Mark Deming described Double Nickels on the Dime as a " quantum leap into greatness " for Minutemen , describing the album as " full of striking moments that cohere into a truly remarkable whole " and awarding a full five stars . Journalist Michael Azerrad , profiling Minutemen in his book Our Band Could Be Your Life ( titled after a lyric from " History Lesson – Part II " ) , named Double Nickels on the Dime as " one of the greatest achievements of the indie era " and described it as a " Whitman 's sampler of left @-@ wing politics , moving autobiographical vignettes , and twisted <unk> twang " . Several publications have raised their rating of the album in the years since its release ; Rolling Stone re @-@ reviewed Double Nickels on the Dime for the 2004 Album Guide and gave it its classic rating , a full five stars . 
 Although not commercially successful upon its release , Double Nickels on the Dime marked the point where many punk bands began to ignore the stylistic limitations of the hardcore scene . According to American Hardcore : A Tribal History author Steven Blush , Double Nickels on the Dime was , along with Zen Arcade , " either the pinnacle or downfall of the pure hardcore scene . " Watt later commented that Double Nickels on the Dime was the " best album I ever played on . " 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Double Nickels on the Dime is adapted from AcclaimedMusic.net. 
 * designates unordered lists . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Original vinyl release = = = 
 = = = Differences = = = 
 To ensure that the CD version would be compatible with all players , the following tracks were omitted from all CD releases : " Mr. Robot 's Holy Orders " , " Ain 't Talkin ' ' bout Love " and " Little Man With A Gun In His Hand " . " Don 't Look Now " and " Dr. Wu " were removed from 1987 release , but included in 1989 release . Three of the " car jams " were removed from 1989 release , but included in 1987 release . 
 = = Credits = = 
 All information taken from the 1989 CD release of Double Nickels on the Dime : 
 D. Boon – vocals , guitar 
 Mike Watt – bass ( vocals on " Take 5 , D. " , " Dr. Wu " , and " The Politics of Time " ) 
 George Hurley – drums , vocals 
 Joe <unk> – guitar on " Take 5 , D. " 
 John <unk> – guitar on " Take 5 , D. " 
 Dirk Vandenberg – guitar on " Take 5 , D. " 
 Ethan James – producer and engineer 
 = Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Mahdi = 
 Sayyid Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Mahdi , KBE ( Arabic : عبد الرحمن <unk> ) ( 1885 – 1959 ) was one of the leading religious and political figures during the colonial era in the Anglo @-@ Egyptian Sudan ( 1898 – 1955 ) , and continued to exert great authority as leader of the Neo @-@ Mahdists after Sudan became independent . The British tried to exploit his influence over the Sudanese people while at the same time profoundly distrusting his motives . Throughout most of the colonial era of the Anglo @-@ Egyptian Sudan the British saw Sayyid Abd al @-@ Rahman al @-@ Mahdi as important as a moderate leader of the Mahdists . However , the British would not support him in his ambition to become King of Sudan when the country gained independence . 
 Abd al @-@ Rahman was the posthumous son of Muhammad Ahmad bin Abd Allah , who had proclaimed himself the Mahdi or messianic redeemer of the Islamic faith in 1881 , and died in 1885 a few months after his forces had captured Khartoum . A joint British and Egyptian force recaptured Sudan in 1898 . At first , the British severely restricted Abd al @-@ Rahman 's movement and activity . However , he soon emerged as the Sayyid ( leader ) of the Ansar religious sect , supporters of the Mahdist movement . 
 Abd al @-@ Rahman helped the British to retain Sudanese support during the First World War , when they were opposed to the Turkish Empire , despite his being a Muslim leader . He lent his support again during a crisis in 1924 when there were anti @-@ British riots in Egypt and the British Governor @-@ General of the Sudan was assassinated . Meanwhile he grew wealthy from cotton production , for which his supporters provided labor , and influential among the intelligentsia . The British administration distrusted him . When Governor General Sir Geoffrey Archer paid a formal and friendly visit to Abd al @-@ Rahman in March 1926 , Archer was dismissed and Abd al @-@ Rahman was placed under travel restriction . 
 In the 1930s Abd al @-@ Rahman spoke out against a treaty between Egypt and Britain that recognized Egyptian claims of sovereignty in Sudan , although no Sudanese had been consulted , travelling to London to make his case . His Ansar followers became an influential faction in the General Congress established in 1938 , and in the successor Advisory Council set up in 1944 . Abd al @-@ Rahman was patron of the nationalist Ummah ( Nation ) political Party in the period before and just after Sudan became independent in 1956 . In 1958 the Umma party won the most seats in the first parliamentary elections after independence . In November 1958 the army staged a coup , which Abd al @-@ Rahman supported . He died shortly afterwards . 
