 Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star is the eighth studio album by the American experimental rock band Sonic Youth , released on May 3 , 1994 by DGC Records . It was produced by Butch Vig and recorded at Sear Sound studio in New York City , the same studio where the band 's 1987 album Sister was recorded . Unlike its predecessor Dirty , Experimental Jet Set features a more low @-@ key approach and references the band 's earlier work on the independent record label SST Records . The album contains quieter and more relaxed songs that deal with personal and political topics . 
 Upon release , Experimental Jet Set reached No. 34 on the US Billboard Top 200 chart and No. 39 on the UK Albums Chart . It was the band 's highest peak on the US charts until their 2009 album The Eternal reached No. 18 . The song " Bull in the Heather " was released as a single and as a music video featuring Kathleen Hanna of Bikini Kill . The album received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who highlighted the band 's ability to create both noise and melody . However , some felt that the album 's anti @-@ commercial style was difficult to appreciate . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star is the follow @-@ up to Sonic Youth 's 1992 album Dirty , which was released by DGC in the wake of Nirvana 's breakthrough into the mainstream . Dirty became one of the band 's most commercially successful albums , selling around 500 @,@ 000 copies worldwide as of May 1994 . The album also reached No. 83 on the US Billboard Top 200 chart and No. 6 on the UK Albums Chart . After Dirty , Sonic Youth decided to step away from major @-@ label alternative rock acts , which singer and guitarist Thurston Moore thought the media associated the band with . Touring with indie rock bands like Pavement , Sebadoh , and Royal Trux inspired Sonic Youth to write a quieter and more subtle album . 
 Like its predecessor , Experimental Jet Set was produced by the band and alternative rock veteran Butch Vig . According to the band , " The idea this time was to cut as much of it live as we could , and not labor over polishing and overdubbing in the usual big @-@ rock manner . " Similarly , guitarist Lee Ranaldo explained that the band wanted to achieve a more lo @-@ fi approach : " None of [ Experimental Jet set 's ] music was labored , some of it was done in people 's bedrooms , even . [ ... We wanted ] to write the songs and record them simply and basically . " Additionally , the band ordered Vig to refrain from his desire to apply a buzz remover to several tracks . The album was engineered by John Siket and recorded at Sear Sound studio in New York City , the same studio where the band 's 1987 album Sister was recorded . The band claimed that the album was recorded over the master tapes of Sister to save costs , and it is possible to hear some parts of Sister during quiet sections of the final recording . The album was recorded on a two @-@ inch 16 @-@ track analog tape recorder through antiquated equipment . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Unlike Dirty , which features a loud and " dense blast of noise " , Experimental Jet Set was considered warmer and more relaxed . Singer and bassist Kim Gordon described the sound of the album as " art @-@ core " and Bradley <unk> of Billboard noted that the album references the band 's earlier work on the independent record label SST Records , stating that it features " a sparse , bracingly dichotomous work of ' quiet noise ' that , with its wayward tonalities and laconic grooves , speaks to the future while thinking of the past . " In fact , the song " Screaming Skull " is about the band 's nostalgia for their days on SST Records , which is mentioned frequently throughout the song . It also references fellow bands Hüsker Dü and The Lemonheads . The song was inspired by a conversation Moore had with film director Dave Markey about the SST Superstore , a shop located on Sunset Strip which supplies SST records and skateboard @-@ related products . 
 Most of the lyrics on Experimental Jet Set deal with political and personal topics . Gordon explained that the song " Bull in the Heather " is about " using passiveness as a form of rebellion — like , I 'm not going to participate in your male @-@ dominated culture , so I 'm just going to be passive . " Similarly , the song " Androgynous Mind " addresses traditional gender roles , while " Self @-@ Obsessed and <unk> " is an observation on an anonymous riot grrrl . Moore explained that the latter is not about Courtney Love of Hole or Kathleen Hanna of Bikini Kill ; it is about " being attracted to somebody who 's obviously out of control with self @-@ obsession in the high @-@ profile alternative @-@ rock world . " The track " Quest for the Cup " deals with a person who desires more than it is needed . The opening track , " Winner 's Blues " , alludes to the pressure of fame and has been described as an acoustic and sad lullaby . The song was originally intended to be an outtake designated for the compilation DGC Rarities Vol . 1 , but the band ultimately decided to include it in the album at the last minute during the mixing sessions . Another outtake , " Compilation Blues " , was instead included on the compilation . 
 Experimental Jet Set was also the first Sonic Youth album to feature a hidden track on the CD release ; just over a minute after the closing track " Sweet Shine " finishes , there is 1 : 30 of " bonus noise " featuring a looped speech of a Japanese gas attendant . Unlike on previous Sonic Youth albums , Ranaldo did not write or sing any songs because he did not like how his compositions were treated and assembled for Dirty and its predecessor Goo . David Browne , author of Goodbye 20th Century : A Biography of Sonic Youth , remarked that " a sense of ambivalence and impermanence hung over [ Experimental Jet Set ] , even down to the cover " , which " for the first time since Sonic Youth in 1982 , featured their faces instead of a piece of art . " 
 = = Promotion and release = = 
 To promote the album , the song " Bull in the Heather " was released as a single in April 1994 . The single features an outtake , " Razor Blade " , which was recorded at the same sessions as " Winner 's Blues " and " Compilation Blues " , and an alternate version of " Doctor 's Orders " as B @-@ sides . The song reached No. 13 on the US Modern Rock Tracks and No. 24 on the UK Singles Chart . The track " Self @-@ Obsessed and <unk> " was intended to be the second single from the album . A promo CD was issued , but plans for a regular release were eventually canceled . The remaining copies were sold off through the Sonic Death fan club magazine . The CD includes the same B @-@ sides as " Bull in the Heather " . A music video featuring Kathleen Hanna was made for " Bull in the Heather " under the direction of Tamra Davis . 
 Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star was released on May 3 , 1994 by DGC , which also released the band 's previous two albums . The album peaked at No. 34 on the US Billboard Top 200 chart and No. 39 on the UK Albums Chart . It was the band 's highest position on the US charts until their 2009 album The Eternal reached No. 18 . The album also charted in several other countries , including Australia , New Zealand , The Netherlands and Sweden . The band did not support the album with a tour due to Gordon 's advanced pregnancy at the time . As of 2005 , the album had sold 246 @,@ 000 copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Barbara O 'Dair of Rolling Stone felt that the album was " quietly confident ; more ambitious and weirder than Dirty " . However , she remarked that the band " saved their integrity at the expense of quality ; with a little more grease , their grit might get across better . " Lorraine Ali , writing for the Los Angeles Times , praised Gordon 's dynamic singing and the guitar playing for giving the album a sleepy and dreamy mood , concluding that Sonic Youth " transcends the confining roles of pretentious art @-@ rock band or palatable alternative group , and instead offers a penetrating album that 's all its own . " Billboard also praised the album , saying that it offered both noise and melody that " <unk> exceedingly well " . 
 In a mixed review , AllMusic reviewer Jason Birchmeier criticized Experimental Jet Set for its stripped @-@ down sound , saying that the album only contains " odd lyrics and unique guitar nuance . " Similarly , Evelyn McDonnell of Entertainment Weekly noted that the songs " never quite emerge from the sketch stage " and that newcomers may find it difficult to appreciate . In contrast , Alternative Press highlighted the album 's anti @-@ commercial aesthetic , claiming that " It doesn 't get much cooler than this " . The Advocate criticized the album and the band for not taking risks , concluding : " Sonic Youth is stuck repeating the same experience . And this time around , the songs don 't stick . " Mike Rubin , writing for Spin , described Experimental Jet Set as a " low @-@ key , mellow affair " , but highlighted the guitar playing and the audio feedback on some songs . 
 In a very positive review , prominent music critic Robert Christgau asserted the band 's ability to create unexpected noises , which he described as " marks of flesh @-@ and @-@ blood creatures thinking and feeling things neither you nor they have ever thought or felt before . If they can 't quite put those things into words , that 's what unexpected noises are for . " Unlike previous Sonic Youth albums , Experimental Jet Set was not ranked in the Top 40 of The Village Voice 's Pazz & Jop critics ' poll for 1994 , but Christgau placed it at No. 3 in his own " Dean 's List " . In a retrospective review for About.com , 90s rock expert Melissa Bobbitt wrote : " Though it might not be as universally celebrated as 1988 's Daydream Nation or Dirty , this record represented the triumphant rise of the Alternative Nation and its progressive nature . " In 2014 , Guitar World placed Experimental Jet Set , Trash and No Star at No. 44 in their " Superunknown : 50 Iconic Albums That Defined 1994 " list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Sonic Youth unless otherwise noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Album 
 Singles 
 = Michael Cammalleri = 
 Michael Anthony " Mike " Cammalleri ( born June 8 , 1982 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player , who is an alternate captain of the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was a second round selection , 49th overall , of the Los Angeles Kings at the 2001 NHL Entry Draft . He made his NHL debut with the Kings in 2002 and scored the first regular season goal ever scored in a game played in Europe in 2007 . After playing with Calgary for one season in 2008 – 09 , he moved on to the Montreal Canadiens , with whom he scored the 20,000th goal in franchise history in 2009 and tied a franchise record for goals in one playoff series in 2010 . He returned to the Flames in 2012 following an unusual transaction in which he was traded in the middle of a game . 
 Representing Canada internationally on four occasions , Cammalleri won bronze and silver medals at the 2001 and 2002 World Junior Championships respectively . He was named the tournament 's best forward in 2002 . He won a gold medal at the 2007 Men 's World Ice Hockey Championships . An all @-@ star in college and the American Hockey League , Cammalleri played in the Cold War , an outdoor game that set a then world attendance record in 2001 . He has also been recognized for his involvement in charitable efforts supporting children and the military . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Cammalleri was born in Richmond Hill , Ontario , and was raised there in a secular household ( he described his upbringing as " non @-@ denominational " ) . His father , Leo , is of Sicilian descent , and his mother , Ruth , is Jewish . He has one sister , Melanie . His maternal grandparents , from Poland and Czechoslovakia , were Holocaust survivors . He said : " It 's a family of deep @-@ rooted closeness and unity coming from very desperate times . It is who I am as a person . " 
 His best sport as a youth was soccer , while he also played baseball and golf . His passion was hockey , and he played most of his minor hockey with the Toronto Red Wings organization of the Greater Toronto Hockey League . He was selected by the St. Michael 's Majors in the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) Priority Draft , but chose not to play in the OHL so as to preserve his American college eligibility . Instead , he joined the Junior A Bramalea Blues of the Ontario Provincial Junior Hockey League ( OPJHL ) where he was named the league 's rookie of the year as a 15 @-@ year @-@ old in 1997 – 98 . He was named an all @-@ star the following season and was selected as the Ontario Hockey Association 's top draft prospect after scoring 103 points in 41 games . 
 At 15 , Cammalleri committed to attend the University of Michigan on a full hockey scholarship . He took an accelerated course schedule and graduated from The Country Day School in King City , Ontario at age 17 . He then moved on to Michigan , where he studied sports management and communications . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = University of Michigan = = = 
 Cammalleri joined the Michigan Wolverines men 's ice hockey program in 1999 , scoring 13 goals in 39 games as a freshman . He led the team with 29 goals as a sophomore in 2000 – 01 , and was named a first @-@ team Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) all @-@ star . Michigan reached the 2001 Frozen Four , where it lost the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) semi @-@ final game to Boston College . He was also voted to the NCAA west second All @-@ American team . 
 The Los Angeles Kings selected Cammalleri in the second round of the 2001 NHL Entry Draft , 49th overall . He chose to remain in college , rejoining a much @-@ younger Wolverines team as an alternate captain and expected to be the team 's offensive leader . Early in the season , on October 1 , 2001 , he played in the " Cold War " against Michigan State , an outdoor game that set a then @-@ world record attendance for a hockey game at 74 @,@ 554 fans . Though he nearly missed the game due to a hip @-@ flexor injury , Cammalleri figured in all three of Michigan 's goals as the game ended in a 3 – 3 draw . 
 With 23 goals and 44 points in 29 games , Cammalleri led the Wolverines to the CCHA conference championship in 2001 – 02 . He was named a CCHA second team all @-@ star and an NCAA first team All @-@ American . At the West Regional tournament , Cammalleri was named both an all @-@ star at forward and the most valuable player as he led Michigan back to the Frozen Four . The Wolverines again lost the national semifinal , this time to the University of Minnesota . 
 = = = Los Angeles Kings = = = 
 Cammalleri chose to forgo his senior year of eligibility , signing a contract with the Kings ahead of the 2002 – 03 NHL season . He attended Kings ' training camp , but failed to make the roster and was assigned to the Manchester Monarchs of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . He scored 14 points in nine games and earned his first recall to Los Angeles on November 7 , 2002 . He made his NHL debut the following night against the Ottawa Senators and earned his first point , an assist , in a 3 – 2 victory . His first goal came a week later , on November 16 , against Tommy Salo of the Edmonton Oilers . He was demoted and recalled by the Kings twice more during the season , and appeared in a total of 28 NHL games , scoring 8 points in addition to 20 points in 13 games in the AHL before his season was ended on January 28 , 2003 , when he suffered a concussion in a game against the San Jose Sharks . 
 He again bounced between the Kings and the Monarchs throughout the 2003 – 04 season , while a labour dispute in the NHL resulted in his spending the entire 2004 – 05 season in Manchester . Cammalleri opened the season with 20 goals in his first 22 games en route to a league leading and franchise record setting total of 46 . His total of 109 points , also a Monarchs record , was second in the AHL behind Jason Spezza 's 117 . He was voted a starter in the 2005 AHL All @-@ Star Game , was named to the second All @-@ Star team and received the Willie Marshall Award for leading the league in goals . 
 Returning to Los Angeles in 2005 – 06 , Cammalleri established himself as an NHL regular , appearing in 80 games with the Kings and leading the team with 26 goals . He improved to 34 goals and 80 points in 2006 – 07 and was voted the recipient of the Bill Libby Memorial Award as the Kings ' most valuable player by the local media . He and the Kings were unable to agree on a new contract following the season . Cammalleri was asking for $ 6 @-@ million per season , while the team offered $ 2 @.@ 6 million . The two sides went to arbitration , where Cammalleri was awarded a two @-@ year contract that paid him $ 3 @.@ 1 million then $ 3 @.@ 6 million . 
 The Kings opened the season in London , England for the first regular season games played in Europe in league history . Cammalleri scored two goals , including the first ever in Europe , in a 4 – 1 victory over the Anaheim Ducks on September 29 , 2007 . He opened the season with ten goals in ten games before a protracted offensive slump and rib injury that forced him out of lineup for a month resulted in only nine more goals scored over the remainder of the season . 
 = = = Calgary and Montreal = = = 
 Cammalleri was involved in trade rumours following his arbitration hearing , which was considered contentious . At the 2008 NHL Entry Draft held on June 20 , he was dealt to the Calgary Flames as part of a three @-@ way trade . The Kings received Anaheim 's first round pick , 12th overall , and a second round pick from Calgary , while the Ducks received Calgary 's first round pick , 17th overall , and Los Angeles ' 28th overall selection . Paired with Jarome Iginla , Cammalleri had a career year with the Flames in 2008 – 09 , leading the team with 39 goals and finishing second to Iginla with 82 points . He scored the 100th goal of his career as part of his first hat trick early in a 4 – 3 victory over the Vancouver Canucks on November 27 , 2008 . 
 Faced with salary cap constraints , the Flames were unable to re @-@ sign Cammalleri following the season . He left Calgary to sign a five @-@ year , $ 30 million contract with the Montreal Canadiens . Midway through the 2009 – 10 season , he scored the 20,000th goal in Montreal franchise history on December 28 , 2009 , against the Ottawa Senators . A knee injury resulted in Cammalleri missing six weeks of play , but he finished the season with 50 points in 65 games . 
 Following a series victory over the Washington Capitals in the first round of the 2010 Stanley Cup Playoffs , Cammalleri led the Canadiens into the conference finals for the first time since 1993 by tying a franchise record for goals in one series in a victory over the Pittsburgh Penguins . His total of seven tied the mark held jointly by Maurice Richard , Jean Beliveau , Bernie Geoffrion , Guy Lafleur and Marcel Bonin . Montreal lost their third @-@ round series to the Philadelphia Flyers , but Cammalleri 's 13 goals led all playoff scorers despite the fact Montreal failed to reach the final . 
 Cammalleri began the 2010 – 11 season on the suspended list after earning a one @-@ game ban for a slashing incident against Nino Niederreiter during a pre @-@ season game against the New York Islanders . He then missed a month of play when he suffered a separated shoulder after being crosschecked into the boards by Buffalo 's Mike Weber . He returned to action in time to appear in his second outdoor game , the 2011 Heritage Classic against Calgary . 
 Opening the 2011 – 12 season , Cammalleri scored the first NHL regular season goal at the MTS Centre as Montreal spoiled the debut of the new Winnipeg Jets franchise with a 5 – 1 victory . He had to leave the game , however , after suffering a cut on his leg from the skate blade of teammate Yannick Weber . He struggled throughout the first part of the season , and with the team also losing , was booed by the fans in Montreal during a 3 – 0 defeat against the St. Louis Blues . Following the game , he expressed his frustration , quoted as saying : " I can 't accept that we will display a losing attitude as we 're doing this year . We prepare for our games like losers . We play like losers . So it 's no wonder why we lose . " The commentary sparked controversy , while the Montreal Gazette suggested later that the comments , originally spoken in English , were misrepresented after they were translated to French by Réseau des sports then translated back to English . 
 Two nights later , on January 12 , 2012 , Cammalleri was pulled from the Montreal lineup during their game against the Boston Bruins after the team completed a trade that saw him return to Calgary , along with the rights to goaltender Karri Ramo and a fifth round draft pick in exchange for René Bourque , prospect Patrick Holland and a second round draft pick . The circumstances of the deal , described as " bizarre " by the media , stunned Cammalleri 's former teammates , none of whom could recall a player being dealt mid @-@ game before . In his re @-@ debut with the Flames , Cammalleri scored a goal , but Calgary lost 4 – 1 to Los Angeles . On February 13 , 2013 he scored his 200th goal , again while completing a hat trick , against the Dallas Stars . 
 Cammalleri reached 500 points for his career on April 4 , 2014 , with a goal in a 2 – 1 victory over the Florida Panthers . 
 = = = New Jersey Devils = = = 
 Cammalleri signed a five @-@ year , $ 25 million contract as a free agent with the New Jersey Devils on July 1 , 2014 . In his first season for the Devils , he was the teams leading scorer with 27 goals . For season 2015 @-@ 16 Cammalleri became the first player in the history of the Devils to wear sweater # 13 , becoming the first player to wear it since Robin Burns wore it with the Kansas City Scouts . 
 = = International play = = 
 Cammalleri made his international debut in 2000 , joining the Canadian junior team at the 2001 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . He had four goals and six points in seven games for Canada , who won the bronze medal . He returned the following year , leading Canada to a silver medal . Cammalleri led the 2002 tournament in scoring with 7 goals and 11 points , and was named the tournament 's top forward . He made his debut with the senior team at the 2006 World Championships where he scored one goal and five points in eight games for the fourth place Canadians . He returned for the 2007 tournament in Moscow , where his seven points helped Canada win the gold medal with a perfect 9 – 0 record . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Though he stands five feet , nine inches tall , Cammalleri 's teammates have argued his small stature is not a drawback . While at Michigan , teammate Craig Murray said that " a lot of people look at his size and they hold it against him , but there 's no one stronger out there . " On the ice , Cammalleri says he tries to play bigger than his opponents . His coach at Michigan , Red Berenson , agreed . He stated that Cammalleri played like he was " 6 @-@ foot @-@ 4 " with the puck and could beat any opponent one @-@ on @-@ one . The Hockey News rates his offensive skills and intelligence on the ice as his greatest strength , but notes that he can be inconsistent away from the puck . He is a natural goal scorer , and is capable of playing at either centre or on the wing . Injuries have been a concern for Cammalleri ; his time in Montreal were marked by both shoulder and knee problems . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Cammalleri and his wife , Jennifer <unk> , have a daughter , Chloe , born in 2011 . Their second daughter , Mya , was born in December 2014 . The couple have been involved in numerous charitable endeavours since Cammalleri joined the NHL . He has focused on children 's charities , supporting the Starlight Children 's Foundation , World Vision and the <unk> Foundation in Toronto among others . During his time in Montreal , Cammalleri also supported the military via his " Cammy 's Heroes " program . He bought tickets for Quebec 's soldiers and their families to attend Canadiens games , meeting with them prior to each game . In recognition of his service , the Canadiens named Cammalleri the 2010 – 11 recipient of the Jean Béliveau Trophy , a team award given annually to the player who " best exemplifies leadership qualities in the community " . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Chandralekha ( 1948 film ) = 
 Chandralekha ( also spelt <unk> ) is a 1948 Indian Tamil @-@ language historical fiction film directed and produced by S. S. Vasan . Starring T. R. Rajakumari , M. K. Radha and Ranjan in the lead roles , the film follows two brothers named Veerasimhan and Sasankan , who fight with each other over ruling their father 's kingdom and for marrying the village dancer Chandralekha . 
 The development of Chandralekha began in the early 1940s when , after two successive box office hits , Vasan announced that his next film would be titled Chandralekha . However , when he launched an advertising campaign for the film , he had only the name of the heroine from a storyline by Gemini Studios ' story department he had rejected . Veppathur Kittoo , one of his storyboard artists , eventually developed a story based on a chapter of George W. M. Reynolds ' novel Robert Macaire : or , The French bandit in England ( 1848 ) , which impressed Vasan . The original director T. G. Raghavachari directed more than half of the film , then left the project because of disagreements with Vasan , who took over the film in his directorial debut . 
 Originally made in Tamil and later in Hindi , Chandralekha was in production for five years from 1943 to 1948 . It went through a number of changes to the script , cast and production , and ultimately became the most expensive film made in India at the time ; the budget for a single sequence equalled that typical for an entire film of the period . Vasan mortgaged all of his property and even sold his jewellery to complete the film . Cinematography was by Kamal Ghosh and K. Ramnoth . The music was largely inspired by both Indian and Western classical music ; it was composed by S. Rajeswara Rao and by M. D. Parthasarathy , with lyrics by Papanasam Sivan and Kothamangalam Subbu . 
 Chandralekha premiered in Chennai on 8 April 1948 and had a wide theatrical release the following day . The film received generally positive reviews , but was unable to recover its production costs . As a result , Vasan released the film in Hindi with some changes on 24 December in the same year , and Chandralekha soon became a major box office success . South Indian cinema gained prominence throughout the country with the film 's release . The film inspired South Indian film producers to market their Hindi films in North India . It was dubbed in English , Japanese , Danish and other foreign languages and was screened at Indian and international film festivals . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Veerasimhan ( M. K. Radha ) and Sasankan ( Ranjan ) are the sons of a king . While passing through a village on his horse , Veerasimhan meets a village dancer named Chandralekha ( T. R. Rajakumari ) and they fall in love . At the palace , the king decides to abdicate in favour of Veerasimhan . This enrages the younger brother Sasankan ; he forms a gang of thieves who embark on a crime spree . Chandralekha 's father is injured in the ensuing chaos and dies soon after . Chandralekha , now orphaned , joins a band of travelling musicians , whose caravan is raided by Sasankan 's men . 
 Sasankan orders Chandralekha to dance for him , which she does after being flogged , but she soon manages to escape . Later , Sasankan ambushes Veerasimhan and takes him prisoner . Chandralekha watches Sasankan 's men trapping Veerasimhan in a cave and sealing its entrance with a boulder . She rescues him with the help of elephants from a passing circus troupe . Veerasimhan and Chandralekha join the circus to hide themselves from Sasankan 's men . After returning to the palace , Sasankan imprisons his parents and declares himself king . He immediately sends a spy to find Chandralekha . 
 The spy sees Chandralekha performing at the circus ; he tries to capture her but Veerasimhan saves her and they both escape and join a gypsy group . When Veerasimhan leaves to seek help , Sasankan 's men capture Chandralekha and take her to the palace . Sasankan tries to woo Chandralekha but she pretends to faint every time he approaches her . One of Chandralekha 's friends from the circus comes to Sasankan disguised as a gypsy healer , claiming that she can cure Chandralekha of her " illness " . Behind locked doors , the two girls secretly talk . Sasankan is pleased to find Chandralekha miraculously cured and apparently ready to accept him as a bridegroom . In return , he agrees to Chandralekha 's request for a drum dance to celebrate the royal wedding . 
 Huge drums are arranged in rows in front of the palace . Chandralekha joins the dancers , who dance on the drums . Sasankan is impressed with Chandralekha 's performance but , unknown to him , Veerasimhan 's soldiers are hiding inside the drums . As the dance ends , they rush out of the drums and attack Sasankan 's men . Veerasimhan confronts Sasankan , and they have a long sword fight , which ends with Sasankan 's defeat and imprisonment . Veerasimhan releases his parents and becomes the new king , while Chandralekha becomes his queen . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Producer S. S. Vasan contemplated a story for his third film to follow Bala Nagamma ( 1942 ) and Mangamma <unk> ( 1943 ) , which netted profits of ₹ 4 million . He wanted a film on a grand scale with no budgetary constraints . He asked Gemini Studios ' story department ( consisting of K. J. Mahadevan , Kothamangalam Subbu , <unk> , Naina and Veppathur Kittoo ) to write a screenplay . They saw Mangamma <unk> and Bala Nagamma as " heroine @-@ oriented stories " , and suggested a similar story to Vasan . They told the story of Chandralekha , a tough woman who " outwits a vicious bandit , delivers the final insult by slashing off his nose and , as a finishing touch , fills the bloodied gaping hole with hot , red chilli powder " . Vasan disliked their story 's gruesomeness and vulgarity , and rejected it but kept the character 's name , Chandralekha . 
 Without waiting for the full story , Vasan announced that his next project would be titled Chandralekha , and he publicised it heavily in most major publications . Despite much work by Gemini 's writers , the story was still not ready three months later . Vasan grew impatient and told the writers he would be shelving Chandralekha in favour of developing <unk> ( 1953 ) . After he allowed them a final week , Kittoo discovered George W. M. Reynolds ' novel Robert Macaire : or , The French bandit in England ( 1848 ) . In the first chapter he read : 
 A dark night in rural England and a mail coach convoy drawn by horses trots its way down a deserted leafy highway when suddenly , Robert Macaire , the fierce bandit and his henchmen emerge from the surrounding darkness and rob the convoy . Hiding under a seat is a young woman fleeing from a harsh , unhappy home . She is a dancer and when she refuses to dance the bandit whips her into submission . 
 Vasan was impressed when Kittoo narrated a story based on this episode . He decided to continue with the film , naming the heroine Chandralekha . Although the story was still incomplete , the rest of Gemini 's story department later improvised Kittoo 's ideas to give the story its final form . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The script had two major roles ; both princes of a kingdom — the elder of whom was the hero and his brother the villain . M. K. Radha was offered the part of Sasankan , the younger prince . As he was then known for playing heroic roles , he was unwilling to play a negative role , and instead agreed to play the older prince Veerasimhan . Radha 's wife had persuaded Vasan to cast Radha for the part . K. J. Mahadevan , who joined Gemini as a production controller , was chosen to play Sasankan , while T. G. Raghavachari agreed to direct the film . Some footage featuring Mahadevan was shot , but his performance was deemed " too soft " and he was dismissed from the part . He continued to serve as a scriptwriter and an assistant director . When Raghavachari suggested Ranjan for Sasankan , Vasan was reluctant , feeling he was too effeminate to play a " steel @-@ hard villain " , but eventually agreed . By then , Ranjan was already committed to B. N. Rao 's <unk> ( 1945 ) , but Kittoo persuaded him to take a screen test for Chandralekha and Rao gave Ranjan a few days off . The test was successful and Ranjan was officially cast . 
 T. R. Rajakumari was chosen to play Chandralekha , replacing Vasan 's first choice K. L. V. Vasantha . Film historian Randor Guy believes Vasan chose Rajakumari over Vasantha because she was then leaving Gemini Studios permanently for Modern Theatres in Salem . In April 1947 , N. S. Krishnan was released from prison ; Vasan recruited him and T. A. <unk> to play the circus artists who help Veerasimhan rescue Chandralekha from Sasankan . The script was rewritten ; new scenes were added to showcase the comedy duo . Actors Madurai <unk> Naidu and S. N. Lakshmi made their acting debut in this film ; the former appears in an uncredited role as a horseman , and the latter appears as a dancer in the climactic drum @-@ dance scene . 
 When a minor role of the hero 's bodyguard was yet to be cast , the then struggling stage actor Villupuram <unk> Pillai Ganeshamurthy — who later became known as Sivaji Ganesan — was interested ; he grew his hair long for the role . Ganeshamurthy had contacted Kittoo several times asking for a role in the film . Eventually , Kittoo took Ganeshamurthy to Vasan , who had seen him perform on @-@ stage . To Ganeshamurthy 's dismay , Vasan rejected him , calling him " totally unsuited for films " and told him to choose another profession . This incident caused a permanent schism between Vasan and Ganeshamurthy . The role of the bodyguard was eventually given to N. Seetharaman , who later became known as Javar Seetharaman . 
 Kothamangalam Subbu 's wife M. S. Sundari Bai plays a circus performer who helps Chandralekha escape from Sasankan . T. A. Jayalakshmi , in one of her earliest film roles , appears briefly in one scene that lasted for a few minutes , as a dancer . L. Narayana Rao plays the circus manager . T. E. Krishnamachari plays the king and V. N. Janaki plays a gypsy dancer who gives Chandralekha and Veerasimhan shelter in the forest . Veppathur Kittoo plays Sasankan 's spy ; he also worked as an assistant director in the film . <unk> Krishnamurthy appears in the song " Naattiya Kuthirai " . Other supporting actors include <unk> Bhagavathar , <unk> Iyengar , T. V. Kalyani , Surabhi Kamala , Subbiah Pillai , Cocanada <unk> , N. <unk> , Ramakrishna Rao , Sundara Rao , V. S. Susheela , Varalakshmi and Velayutham , in addition to " 100 Gemini Boys & 500 Gemini Girls " . Studio staff members , their families and passers @-@ by were recruited as extras to play spectators in the circus scenes . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Chandralekha began shooting in 1943 . More than half of the film was directed by Raghavachari , but due to differences of opinion that arose between him and Vasan over the shooting of some scenes at the Governor 's Estate ( now Raj Bhavan , Guindy ) , Raghavachari left the project and Vasan took over directing , making his directorial debut . 
 Originally , the film did not include any circus scenes . Vasan decided to include them when the film was halfway through production , and the screenplay was altered . Kittoo travelled throughout South India and Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) to see over 50 circuses before choosing the Kamala Circus Company and <unk> Lion Circus ; Vasan employed Kamala for a month . The circus scenes were shot by K. Ramnoth . In retrospect , Kittoo said about Ramnoth 's work , " In those days , we had no zoom lenses and yet Ramnoth did it . One night , while Chandralekha is performing on the flying trapeze , she notices the villain 's henchman in the front row . She is on her perch high up and he is seated in a ringside chair . Shock hits her and to convey the shock the camera zooms fast from her to the man . Today , with a fast zoom shot it can be done very easily , but there was no such lens forty years ago . Ramnoth did it using the crane . He planned it well and rehearsed the shot for long . He took the shot 20 times and selected the best ' take ' . " For the scene in which Veerasimhan is freed from a cave by elephants , " hundreds " of circus elephants were used . 
 After Raghavachari 's departure , one sequence he directed — the drum @-@ dance scene — remained in the film . The scene involved 400 dancers and six months of daily rehearsals . It was designed by the chief art director A. K. Sekhar , choreographed by <unk> and was shot with four cameras by Kamal Ghosh . The drum dance alone cost ₹ 500 @,@ 000 ( about US $ 105 @,@ 000 in 1948 ) , and included various dance forms such as Kathakali , Bharatanatyam and the Sri Lankan Kandyan dance . 
 During post @-@ production , Vasan asked Ramnoth his opinion of the scene in which hundreds of Veerasimhan 's warriors storm the palace to rescue Chandralekha from Sasankan . Although everyone else praised the scene 's photography , shots and action , Ramnoth remained quiet , finally saying that the suspense could be ruined if the scene was shown uncut , which sparked a discussion . Vasan advised the editor Chandru to edit according to Ramnoth , and he was impressed with the result . C. E. Biggs worked as the audio engineer . 
 Chandralekha was in production for five years ( from 1943 to 1948 ) ; it went through numerous changes to its story , cast , and filming . This caused substantial time and cost overruns ; the film ultimately cost ₹ 3 million ( about US $ 600 @,@ 000 in 1948 ) , and became the most expensive Indian film at that time . Vasan had mortgaged all of his property , received financial assistance from K. Srinivasan — then the editor of The Hindu — and sold his jewellery to complete the film . Adjusted for inflation , the film would have cost US $ 28 million in 2010 . According to film historian S. Muthiah , Chandralekha , considering the free @-@ floating exchange rate at that time , became the first film with a budget of more than a million dollars to be made outside of the United States . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Although a period film , Chandralekha is not based on historical fact ; instead its plot is based on the first chapter of the novel Robert Macaire : or , The French bandit in England . Sasankan is based on the fictional bandit Robert Macaire , and , according to film historian B. D. Garga , Chandralekha is " probably " based on a female dancer in the novel who Macaire <unk> when she refuses to dance . The film enacts the incident from the novel . Garga noted that the film also shows influences from other Western literary and cinematic sources , including the novel Blood and Sand ( 1908 ) , and the films The Mark of Zorro ( 1920 ) , Robin Hood ( 1922 ) , The Thief of Baghdad ( 1924 ) and Ben @-@ Hur ( 1925 ) . In December 1964 , Jerzy Toeplitz called Chandralekha an " extension and development " of the mythology genre . Toeplitz said , " The characters are mortals but behave like heavenly beings , and their movements and gestures , like those of the gods and heroes of the Mahabharata are impregnated with the miraculous . " He called the story a " mere pretext to hold together the different episodes , each of which builds up like a circus turn : the tension mounts to a culminating point , whereupon the next episode immediately takes over . " According to the book Third World Film Making and the West ( 1987 ) by Roy Armes , Uday Shankar 's Kalpana ( 1948 ) , which was also shot at Gemini Studios , inspired Vasan to make Chandralekha . In the 2003 book Encyclopaedia of Hindi Cinema , Chandralekha is defined as a " Ruritanian period extravaganza " . 
 The climactic sword fight between Veerasimhan and Sasankan has often been compared to that in the 1894 novel The Prisoner of Zenda . In 1976 , American film historian William K. Everson compared the comedians in Chandralekha to the comedy duo Laurel and Hardy . Although Randor Guy considers the film 's drum dance scene to be the first of its kind in Indian cinema , the 1947 film Naam Iruvar includes a scene in which the lead actress ' younger sister dances on drums to the Tamil poet Subramania Bharati 's song " <unk> Murase " ; French film historian Yves Thoraval said this " prefigured the dance that Chandralekha made famous the very next year . " According to American film critic Jonathan Rosenbaum , Chandralekha " belongs to the same childhood continuum " as Fritz Lang 's 1959 films The Tiger of <unk> and The Indian Tomb which were set in India . In his 2009 book 50 Indian Film Classics , film critic M. K. Raghavendra states that Chandralekha is constructed in a manner that " enables its narrative to incorporate elements drawn from virtually any kind of genre . " According to Guy , the settings of the song " Naattiya Kuthirai " picturised on Sundari Bai 's character , including the dance and the costume worn by Sundari Bai , are inspired by those seen in the 1943 musical film Coney Island . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was composed by S. Rajeswara Rao , with lyrics by Papanasam Sivan and Kothamangalam Subbu . R. Vaidyanathan and B. Das Gupta collaborated with M. D. Parthasarathy on the background music . Rajeswara Rao recalled in a 1993 interview with The Hindu that it took him over a year to compose the music for the film , with much of the time being taken for the drum dance sequence . He stated , " As the dancers performed , we used to rehearse and compose the music . It was done with incredibly few instruments . We used a piano , ten double bass violins and drums from Africa , Egypt , and Persia which we have acquired from an African War troupe . " His salary was ₹ 1500 . The music was influenced by Carnatic music , Hindustani music , Latin American and Portuguese folk music , and Johann Strauss I 's waltzes . M. K. Raghavendra said the film has " snatches from [ Richard ] Wagner and [ Nikolai ] Rimsky Korsakov ( <unk> ) being used at dramatic moments . " 
 The song " Naattiya Kuthirai " was not originally part of the script ; it was added during the final stages of the film 's production . Sundari Bai spent over a month rehearsing the song . The songs " <unk> <unk> <unk> " and " <unk> <unk> " were sung by T. R. Rajakumari , while " <unk> <unk> " and " Naattiya Kuthirai " were sung by M. D. Parthasarathy . J. Cooling <unk> played the accordion and piano in the gypsy song of the film . The circus chorus was adapted from " The Donkey Serenade " from Robert Z. Leonard 's The Firefly ( 1937 ) . For the Hindi soundtrack , Vasan offered most of the songs to Uma Devi , who later became popularly known as Tun Tun . She was initially hesitant , feeling that " these were beyond her capabilities " , but she was supported by Rajeswara Rao who " worked hard on her " . The music of Chandralekha helped it to become one of the most successful Indian musical films of the 1940s ; it " created an atmosphere for a number of music directors influenced by Western music " in Tamil cinema . The film was also a major breakthrough in Uma Devi 's career , though by signing it she violated her contract with producer Abdur Rashid Kardar , who terminated her contract in retaliation . This , in addition to the " dwindling fortunes " of the film industry following India 's independence from the British Raj , eventually ended Uma Devi 's career in playback singing . 
 In his 1997 book Starlight , Starbright : The Early Tamil Cinema , Randor Guy said Parthasarathy and Rajeswara Rao " created a fine blend of lilting music of many schools " . Writing for Screen in April 1998 , film historian M. <unk> called the songs as " distinct and standing on its own , with barely any background score attempting to interlink anything , just periods of silence " . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The first advertisement for Chandralekha appeared on the back cover of the songbook for the film Dasi <unk> ( 1944 ) . It featured Vasantha as the heroine , before she was replaced by Rajakumari . With Chandralekha , Gemini became the first Tamil studio to attempt to distribute a film throughout India . According to film scholar P. K. Nair , Chandralekha was the first Indian film to have a full @-@ page newspaper advertisement . According to a 2010 article in Mumbai Mirror by <unk> Kulkarni , ₹ 574 @,@ 500 was spent on newspaper publicity and ₹ 642 @,@ 300 on posters , banners and billboards . G. Dhananjayan 's book The Best of Tamil Cinema ( 2011 ) contradicts this , saying that Vasan spent close to ₹ 500 @,@ 000 on publicity alone . Chandralekha 's publicity campaign was the most expensive for an Indian film at that time ; the entire publicity budget of a typical Indian film a decade earlier was around ₹ 25 @,@ 000 . In the 1950s , the entire publicity for a " top Indian film " cost no more than ₹ 100 @,@ 000 , which is substantially less than the amount spent on Chandralekha . According to Guy , the publicity campaign " made the nation sit up and take notice " . 
 A. K. Shekhar designed the publicity material , which included posters , booklets and full @-@ page newspaper advertisements . Gemini Studios , inspired by American cinema , also produced a publicity brochure for distribution to exhibitors and the press . It contained a synopsis of the film and a step pictorial account of the key points of the narrative . It provided text for use by local theatres . The booklet also had layouts for women 's pages and a pictorial account of suggested marketing activities , such as " How to drape an Indian sari : Theatre demonstrations have a big draw " , and information about the film 's costumes — which were hand @-@ woven garments of silk and gold ; one gold @-@ embroidered riding jacket is considered " the most expensive piece of outfitting ever used in a motion picture " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Chandralekha was released on 9 April 1948 . It was released simultaneously in 40 theatres throughout South India and in another 10 within a week . In the 1940s , a typical Tamil film would be released in about 10 towns , but Chandralekha was released simultaneously in 120 towns . 
 Chandralekha was released in Japan as <unk> @-@ no <unk> ( " Fight Under the Red Heat " ) in April 1954 , where it was distributed by Nippon Cinema Corporation ( NCC ) . It was the first Tamil film to be dubbed in Japanese , and the second Indian film to be released in Japan — the first was the 1952 Hindi film Aan , which was released in Tokyo in January 1954 . NCC later collapsed ; no information about how Chandralekha came to be released in Japan survives . During the 1950s , when India was short of foreign currency , barter was a common means of exchange with overseas business partners . Japanese scholar Tamaki Matsuoka believes this to have been the case with Chandralekha . The pamphlet prepared by NCC for the film calls Vasan the " Cecil B. DeMille of the Indian film industry " . A Danish version of the film titled Indiens <unk> ( " India 's ruler " ) , was released on 26 April 1954 . An abridged English @-@ language version of Chandralekha , titled Chandra , was screened in the United States and Europe during the 1950s . 
 The film was a bellwether for its filming , production costs and publicity before , during and after its release . Other producers delayed releasing their films until after Chandralekha 's release to avoid competition . The film 's entertainment value made it popular with audiences ; however , it was unable to recover its production costs , and Vasan remade it in Hindi to do so . The Hindi version was released on 24 December 1948 , with over 600 prints and became a large commercial success , setting box @-@ office records . Vasan called the film " a pageant for our peasants " meant for " the war @-@ weary public that had been forced to watch insipid war propaganda pictures for years " . It was selected by the government of India for exhibition at the Fourth International Film Festival in Prague in 1949 . The film 's success made Madras a major production centre for Hindi films . Five years after the film 's success , Gemini paid its employees a bonus , becoming one of the first studios in the world to do so . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Although exact figures for the film 's box office earnings are not available , film trade websites provide estimates of its takings . According to Sharmishtha <unk> 's 2010 book Bengali Cinema : An Other Nation , Chandralekha grossed ₹ 10 million ( about US $ 2 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 in 1948 ) in India alone . Box Office India gives the Hindi version 's nett gross as ₹ 7 million and states that it was the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing Bollywood film of 1948 after Shaheed . It gives its adjusted nett gross as ₹ 37 @,@ 98 @,@ 00 @,@ 000 . Film historian B. D. Garga said in his 2005 book Art Of Cinema , " The two versions — Tamil and Hindi — grossed millions " . According to the 1998 book Indian cinema : A Visual Voyage by India 's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting , the film grossed ₹ 20 million ( US $ 300 @,@ 000 ) at the box office . A 2011 article by Namrata Joshi in Outlook India says , " Chandralekha grossed Rs 1 @.@ 55 crore with an audience of 3 crore , 60 % from rural India . " 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 Chandralekha received generally positive reviews from Indian critics . On 9 April 1948 , The Hindu said , " India has not witnessed a film of this magnitude in terms of making and settings so far . " On 10 April , The Indian Express said , " Chandralekha is an entertaining film for everyone with elements like animals , rope dance , circus and comedy . " The same day , the Tamil newspaper Dinamani said , " Chandralekha is not only a first rate Tamil film but also an international film . " Kumudam gave a rather mixed review : " Though the story is ordinary , the shocking events inserted into the narrative are something new to the Tamil cinema . There are some shortcomings : The songs are not so good ; the film is too long ; the time period of the story should have been defined ; in a scene , there is a wall clock in the King 's office , whereas he is writing with a feather @-@ pen . " In its January 1949 issue , the magazine Gundoosi praised the Hindi version for being an improvement over the Tamil version , stating that it had better dialogues and appreciated its pacing . 
 V. A. K. Ranga Rao described the film as " the most complete entertainer ever made " . In their 1988 book One Hundred Indian Feature Films : An Annotated Filmography , Anil Srivastava and <unk> Banerjee praised nearly every aspect of the film , including its grandeur , the battle scenes and the drum dance , which they called the " raison d 'etre " of the film . In 2003 , journalist S. Muthiah called it " an epic extravaganza worthy of Cecil B. de . Mille " that was " larger @-@ than @-@ life " . In their 2008 book Global Bollywood : Travels of Hindi Song and Dance , Sangita Gopal and Sujata <unk> said , " Chandralekha is a film that translates the aesthetic of Hollywood Orientalism for an indigenous mass audience " , calling its drum @-@ dance sequence " perhaps one of the most spectacular sequences in Indian cinema " . In his 2009 book 50 Indian Film Classics , M. K. Raghavendra said , " Indian films are rarely constructed in a way that makes <unk> viewing essential to their enjoyment and Chandralekha is arranged as a series of distractions . " He concluded by saying , " Chandralekha apparently shows us that enjoyment and visual pleasure in the Indian context are not synonymous with edge @-@ of @-@ the @-@ seat excitement but must permit absent @-@ mindedness as a viewing condition . " 
 In May 2010 , Raja Sen of Rediff praised the film 's setpieces , the drum dance sequence and the " longest swordfight ever captured on film " , calling Chandralekha " just the kind of film , in fact , that would be best appreciated now after digital restoration . " In an October 2010 review of Chandralekha , Randor Guy praised Rajakumari 's performance , calling it " her career @-@ best " and saying that she " carried the movie on her shoulders " . Guy praised Radha as his " usual impressive self " , saying the film would be " remembered for : the excellent onscreen narration , the magnificent sets and the immortal drum dance sequence " . In 2013 , director Dhanapal Padmanabhan told K. Jeshi of The Hindu , " Chandralekha had grandeur that was at par with Hollywood standards . " 
 = = = = Overseas = = = = 
 Chandralekha was well received by critics overseas . Reviewing the English version , The New York Times described Rajakumari as a " buxom beauty " . When Chandralekha was screened in New York City in 1976 , William K. Everson said , " It 's a colorful , naive and zestful film in which the overall ingenuousness quite disarms criticism of plot absurdity or such production shortcomings as the too @-@ obvious studio " exteriors " . [ ... ] Last but far from least , Busby Berkeley would surely have been delighted to see his influence extending to the climactic drum dance . " 
 Jonathan Rosenbaum said in August 1981 , " The prospect of a three @-@ hour Indian film in <unk> [ sic ] with no subtitles is a little off @-@ putting , I would say — wouldn 't you ? " However , he had " surprisingly little trouble following the plot and action " of the film , and added , " this made @-@ in @-@ Madras costume drama makes for a pretty action @-@ packed 186 minutes . " In June 2009 , K. S. Sivakumaran of Daily News Sri Lanka called it " the first colossal <unk> [ sic ] film I saw " . In October 2013 , Malaysian author D. Devika Bai , writing for New Straits Times , praised Chandralekha for its technical aspects ; she said , " at almost 68 , I have not tired of watching the movie . " 
 = = Hindi version = = 
 The Hindi version of Chandralekha was Vasan 's first Bollywood project . For this version , Vasan re @-@ shot some scenes and included a slightly different cast . Among the notable differences between the Hindi and Tamil versions of the film , Pandit Indra and Agha Jani Kashmiri wrote the dialogue only for the Hindi version . Indra was a lyricist for the Hindi version with Bharat Vyas , while Kothamangalam Subbu and Papanasam Sivan were lyricists for the Tamil version . Rajeswara Rao , who composed the soundtrack for both versions , was assisted by Bal Krishna Kalla on the Hindi version . Parthasarathy and Vaidyanathan composed background music for the Hindi version without Das Gupta . While the Tamil version was 18 @,@ 634 feet ( 5 @,@ 680 m ) long , the Hindi version was edited down to 14 @,@ 495 feet ( 4 @,@ 418 m ) . 
 Rajakumari , Radha and Ranjan reprised their roles in the Hindi version , but their characters — except for Rajakumari 's character Chandralekha — were renamed . Radha 's character Veerasimhan was known as Veer Singh in the Hindi version , and Ranjan 's character Sasankan was renamed Shashank . Of the other cast members , N. S. Krishnan , T. A. <unk> , T. E. Krishnamachari , <unk> Krishnamoorthy and N. Seetharaman appeared only in the Tamil version , whereas Yashodhara Katju and H. K. Chopra appeared only in the Hindi version . Nearly the entire cast were credited in the Tamil version , but only six people — Rajakumari , Radha , Ranjan , Sundari Bai , Katju and L. Narayana Rao — were credited in the Hindi version . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 With the success of Chandralekha , Vasan became known as one of the best directors in Indian cinema . Kristin Thompson and David Bordwell , authors of the book , Film History — An Introduction , called the film " the biggest box @-@ office hit of the decade " . Randor Guy later called Vasan the " Cecil B. DeMille of Tamil cinema " , and called Chandralekha his " magnum opus " . According to S. Muthiah , Vasan " pioneered making South Indian films in English " . He inspired producer A. V. Meiyappan , who later became a " master at publicity " . The film demonstrated that if a film was entertaining , it would be commercially successful . The success of the Hindi version gave opportunities to South Indian film producers to market their Hindi films in North India . The publicity campaign for Chandralekha created such an impact that film producers in Bombay ( now Mumbai ) passed a resolution that there should be a limit imposed on advertisements for any film in periodicals . Vasan 's Apoorva <unk> ( 1949 ) is often considered an unofficial sequel to Chandralekha ; it was also a major commercial success . 
 Chandralekha enhanced Rajakumari 's and Ranjan 's careers ; both became popular throughout India after the film 's release . Its climactic sword @-@ fight scene was well received , and is thought to be the longest sword fight in Indian cinema . The drum @-@ dance sequence is often considered the film 's highlight ; later producers tried unsuccessfully to emulate it . Producer @-@ director T. <unk> said he drew inspiration from the drum @-@ dance for a song sequence budgeted at ₹ 10 million ( equivalent to ₹ 30 million or US $ 450 @,@ 000 in 2016 ) in his 1999 film Monisha En <unk> . Film historian Firoze Rangoonwalla ranked the Hindi version eighth in his list of " the top twenty films of Indian cinema " . Chandralekha was also a major influence on Kamalakara Kameswara Rao 's 1953 Telugu film <unk> , featuring N. T. Rama Rao . On 26 August 2004 , a postage stamp featuring Vasan and the drum dance was released to commemorate the 35th anniversary of his death , and his centenary . 
 In July 2007 , S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu asked eight Tamil film directors to list their all @-@ time favourite Tamil films ; two of them — J. Mahendran and K. Balachander — named Chandralekha . Mahendran said , " If anybody tries to remake this black and white film , they will make a mockery of it . " Balachander said , " Just like Sivaji today , people talked about Chandralekha in the past . Produced at a cost of Rs 30 lakhs ( a huge sum at that time ) , it has grand sets . I have seen it 12 times . " In December 2008 , S. Muthiah said , " Given how spectacular it was — and the appreciation lavished on it from 1948 till well into the 1950s , which is when I caught up with it — I 'm sure that if re @-@ released , it would do better at the box office then most Tamil films today . " In a 2011 interview with Indo @-@ Asian News Service ( IANS ) , South Indian Bollywood actor Vyjayanthimala said although people consider that she " paved the way " for other South Indian female actors in Hindi cinema , " the person who really opened the doors was S.S. Vasan " . She said , " When [ Chandralekha was ] released , it took the North by storm because by then they haven 't seen that kind of lavish sets , costumes and splendour . So Vasan was the person who opened the door for Hindi films in the South . " 
 Chandralekha was K. Ramnoth 's last film for Gemini Studios . Although he is often credited with shooting the drum @-@ dance sequence , Ramnoth left the studio in August 1947 , before the sequence had been conceived . Director Singeetham Srinivasa Rao told film critic Baradwaj Rangan he disliked Chandralekha when he first saw it , realising that it was a classic only after 25 years , " a fact that the audiences realised in just two minutes . " G. Dhananjayan told The Times of India , " When you talk of black and white films , you cannot resist mentioning the 1948 epic Chandralekha . " In April 2012 , Rediff included the film in its list " The A to Z of Tamil Cinema " and said it " boasted an ensemble cast , great production values and a story that ensured it became a blockbuster all over India , the first of its kind . " 
 Chandralekha has been screened at many film festivals ; it was screened in December 2012 at the 10th Chennai International Film Festival , which was a tribute to 100 years of Indian cinema . To mark the same anniversary , it was also screened in April 2013 at the Centenary Film Festival , which was organised by India 's Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and National Film Archive . In 2014 , Chandralekha was one of eight Indian films that were screened at the 28th edition of the Italian film festival Il Cinema <unk> , as a part of " The Golden 50s : India 's Endangered Classics " — the first Indian cinema retrospective at the festival . M. Suganth of The Times of India , in his review of Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) , noted that the film 's director S. S. Rajamouli had " take [ n ] his cues from varied sources " for its visuals , such as the grandeur of Chandralekha . In an interview with Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu in November 2015 , actor Kamal Haasan noted , " Visual appeal has always gone hand @-@ in @-@ hand with content , since the days of Chandralekha and [ Mayabazar ] , not just after Baahubali . " 
 = Diwali ( The Office ) = 
 " Diwali " is the sixth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 34th overall . It was written by Mindy Kaling , who also acts in the show as Kelly Kapoor , and directed by Miguel Arteta . The episode first aired on November 2 , 2006 , on NBC , twelve days after the actual Diwali holiday . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In the episode , Kelly invites the office to a Diwali celebration , where Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) struggles to make a good impression on Kelly 's parents and Michael ( Steve Carell ) considers taking his relationship with Carol ( Nancy Carell ) to the next step . Meanwhile , at the Stamford branch , Jim ( John Krasinski ) and Andy ( Ed Helms ) get drunk while working late , leading Karen ( Rashida Jones ) to give Jim a ride home . 
 Kaling and executive producer Greg Daniels came up with the episode idea after Kaling held a Diwali party in 2005 for series staff . She undertook research about Indian culture and the resulting episode was substituted in place of one that would have been Halloween @-@ themed . The episode was directed by Miguel Arteta . According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 8 @.@ 8 million viewers tuned in ; it earned a 4 @.@ 2 / 10 rating among adults aged 18 to 49 , placing first in this demographic group . Critical reception to the episode was largely positive , with many praising Kaling 's writing , Carell 's performance , and other comedic elements . As a result of the episode , The Office became the first American comedy series to depict the holiday , and several commentators have credited it with helping introduce Indian customs to American audiences . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Kelly Kapoor ( Mindy Kaling ) invites the entire office staff to a celebration of Diwali , the Hindu Festival of Lights , which Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) mistakenly believes to be an Indian version of Halloween . Ryan Howard ( B.J. Novak ) fails to make a favorable impression on Kelly 's parents , who in turn try to set up Kelly with a young doctor . Initially reluctant to attend the festival , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) gives in and ends up enjoying herself . Inspired by a conversation with Kelly 's parents about Hindu marriage customs , Michael publicly proposes to Carol ( Nancy Carell ) . Uncomfortable , Carol declines his offer and leaves the room . She later explains that this is only their ninth date , and drives home , leaving Michael to find a ride . 
 Meanwhile , in Stamford , Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) decides to bike to work . Working late , Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) , Karen Filippelli ( Rashida Jones ) , and Jim turn a late night of paperwork into an excuse to drink , although Karen , unbeknownst to Jim and Andy , pours her shots into her wastebasket . Pam sends a text message to Jim , who does not answer because he is passed out on his desk . At the end of the evening , Michael mistakenly thinks that he and Pam have a connection , and is rejected when he tries to kiss her . She gives him a ride home on the condition that he sit in the back seat . Jim tries to bicycle home but is too drunk and an amused Karen gives Jim a ride . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and filming = = = 
 " Diwali " was written by Mindy Kaling and directed by Miguel Arteta . While the episode is partly set at West Scranton High School , filming actually took place at Grant High School in Los Angeles , the same building where Freaks and Geeks was shot . That series ' co @-@ creator , Paul Feig , has directed several episodes of The Office , including " Email Surveillance " . 
 Kaling used her own Indian cultural background as inspiration when writing the episode , which portrays the Indian festival of Diwali . She and her friend , My Name Is Earl writer Vali Chandrasekaran , had held a Diwali party in 2005 for the cast of their two shows . According to Kaling , NBC was " so excited . They were like , ' What the hell is this holiday ? I 've never heard of it ' . " The following year , while discussing the possible creation of a Halloween episode , she and executive producer Greg Daniels agreed to instead create one that was Diwali @-@ themed , as the two holidays fall near each other . 
 When it came time to write the episode however , Kaling had to perform a Google search , as she had forgotten many details . She explained , " I was a little embarrassed with how little I knew about it . I 'm Hindu , but I 'm not really a practicing Hindu , so I had to do a lot of research . " Kaling was pleased to learn more about her culture , at first being concerned that Daniels " and people I work with were a little antsy about assigning the Hindu writer the Indian episode . I didn 't want to feel like they pigeonholed me , but I felt like I 'd done enough episodes that it was okay . " She found that making the episode " was kind of the perfect meeting of being the child of immigrants and writing for a comedy show . " The series writers have since joked that they should do a Diwali @-@ themed episode every year in the same vein as the Christmas specials . 
 When creating the story , Kaling knew that " a lot of stuff has to happen " in the midst of the festival , including Michael and Carol 's relationship becoming " very roller @-@ <unk> . " As with other series storylines , this development was decided upon before Kaling began writing the episode . She stated , " But it was always sort of built in that the peak of ' Diwali ' would be this incredibly romantic overture [ and its uncomfortable aftermath ] . " Kaling was pleased that much of " Diwali " took place at Stamford , especially as she was able to explore the contrasts between the two offices . She also liked that the episode contained " romance , people getting dressed up in costumes , lots of food , <unk> and making out ... and little girls making fun of B.J. Novak . " 
 In her weekly blog for TV Guide , actress Kate Flannery wrote that " Mindy shares that B.J. Novak talent of being able to write an incredibly funny episode ( " Hot Girl , " " The Injury " ) and be in it . Diwali is the Indian festival of lights . So this week Dunder @-@ Mifflin gets a spicy taste of Indian culture in a hurry . Michael decides the office needs an outing to the local high school for the annual Indian Diwali party . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kaling cast her own mother and father , a doctor and an architect respectively , as the parents of her character . Kaling was proud of their acting , though she admitted that their presence on set was at first " mortifying . " She commented , " Of course I sort of lapsed back into that pre @-@ teen attitude of every single thing my parents do embarrasses me . But they were great about it . They were such pros – they had all these scenes with Steve Carell and they were completely unafraid . They got along effortlessly . " Kaling injected elements of Romeo and Juliet and Pride and Prejudice into her character 's relationship with Ryan , with her parents attempting to persuade her to date an Indian doctor . She remarked , " Kelly 's family has , like , nine daughters , and if only they could marry them off it would be wonderful . But Kelly is the oldest and most idiotic of them all . " 
 Though he wanted to avoid becoming an actor , Chandrasekaran was cast by Kaling as the " suitable boy " Kelly 's parents want her to marry . Chandrasekaran later stated , " I asked Mindy to write as few lines as possible . Acting is not a skill that I have particularly a lot of . " Other guest stars included Creed Bratton as Creed Bratton , Charles Esten as Josh Porter , Ed Helms as Andy Bernard , and Rashida Jones as Karen Filippelli . Nancy Carell , Steve Carell 's wife , reprised her role as Carol Stills , the girlfriend of his character . 
 = = = Deleted scenes = = = 
 The third season DVD contained a number of deleted scenes , including Angela complaining about attending the Diwali party , Michael hoping that the office does not embarrass themselves , Kelly explaining that Diwali is an " Indian Halloween " to Michael , an initially angry Jan being supportive about the office attending the festival , Michael explaining to the office that Ben Kingsley liberated India and then became an actor , Carol meeting Ryan and Dwight , and Angela leaving the party with Dwight . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Diwali " first aired on November 2 , 2006 in the United States on NBC during November sweeps week . According to Nielsen Media Research , an estimated 8 @.@ 8 million viewers watched the episode , and it earned a 4 @.@ 2 / 10 ratings share among adults aged 18 to 49 . In other words , it was seen by 4 @.@ 2 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This was the series ' highest rating since the season premiere . The episode also ranked first in its timeslot among both adults and men aged 18 to 34 . 
 " Diwali " received generally positive reviews from television critics . Entertainment Weekly columnist Abby West thought the episode " hit all the show 's major buttons , " focusing on Michael while also furthering the Jim / Karen and Pam / Roy storylines as well as showcasing the other characters . West added that " Kaling gets what makes the show work , and she pulled it together while displaying great timing . " AOL TV 's Michael Sciannamea considered the episode " a classic , " though he thought that " the Stamford scenes don 't seem to add much to the story other than the burgeoning flirtation between Jim and Karen . " Sciannamea concluded that it was " a terrific episode . The scenes inside the hall were hysterical , especially the dancing . " 
 Brian Zoromski of IGN rated " Diwali " 9 @.@ 3 out of 10 , an indication of an " amazing " episode . He wrote that " Michael completely stole the episode with a truly dizzying number of uncomfortable situations . Daily Show vet Steve Carell has become the king of the uncomfortable moment , throwing himself completely into situations viewers know won 't end well . " Like West , Zoromski also appreciated the other characters ' moments , such as Angela 's " xenophobic " comments during the festivities . Television Without Pity gave the episode an A grade . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 As a result of this episode , The Office became the first American comedy series to depict the Diwali holiday . Lauren <unk> of The Huffington Post has credited the episode with helping to introduce Diwali to the American public , writing that it " represents perhaps the brightest spotlight ever shone on Diwali in the United States . " In their 2012 book Diversity in U.S. Mass Media , Catherine A. Luther , Carolyn Ringer Lepre , and <unk> Clark noted that " Diwali " " introduces the audience to Indian dancing and singing , a tradition rarely seen on television . " 
 = Pi de les Tres Branques = 
 Pi de les Tres Branques ( Catalan pronunciation : [ pi <unk> <unk> <unk> ' <unk> ] , " the three @-@ branched pine " ) is a pine tree snag located in the countryside near the town of Berga in north @-@ central Catalonia , Spain . It has long been regarded by some Catalan nationalists as representing the unity of the three " Catalan Countries " and is the site of regular political @-@ cultural gatherings . 
 The tree has been dead since 1915 and is in poor structural condition , due in part to politically motivated vandalism , but there is a very similar living tree a short distance away known as Pi Jove de les Tres Branques ( " the young three @-@ branched pine " ) , which is regarded as its successor . Both are protected as " monumental trees " by the Catalan government . 
 = = Situation = = 
 The tree is a Scots pine ( Pinus sylvestris ) , 25 metres ( 82 ft ) tall , and as its name suggests , consists of three main branches or trunks rising from a common base . It is located in the centre of the <unk> plain , which measures about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) by 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) and occupies the flat floor of a valley , surrounded by forested mountains of the Pre @-@ Pyrenees , at an altitude of 1 @,@ 294 metres ( 4 @,@ 245 ft ) . To the south , separating the valley from Berga town , is the Serra de Queralt ridge , home to the Queralt Sanctuary religious complex , and to the north are the Rasos de <unk> mountains and ski resort . Berga is 9 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) away by road . 
 The tree previously dominated the valley 's farmed and grazed land , due to its height and full foliage , and was visible from a long distance , as is shown in old photographs . However , much of the surrounding land has now been taken over by forest , and Pi de les Tres Branques now has many other trees in its vicinity , which , together with its current skeletal form , make it much less visible than before . 
 The valley is traversed by a minor road which terminates at the small settlement of Castellar del Riu at its western end . The road passes close by Pi de les Tres Branques , which is indicated by a signpost . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 Although legend places the tree much earlier , it has been estimated that Pi de les Tres Branques took root between 1630 and 1632 , when the local farmhouse was built . 
 = = = Cultural recognition = = = 
 The tree had been traditionally celebrated as a symbol of the Holy Trinity , and it is still a venue for religious ceremonies . The first reference in extant records was in 1685 , when a cartographer wrote that it was known as the Tree of the Trinity . It is also recorded that in 1746 , the bishop of <unk> granted indulgences to those who prayed at the site . 
 In 1876 , the landowner of the site , in a letter to a local magazine denying that he was planning to sell the tree for timber , pointed out that it also represented the revolutionary ideals of liberty , equality and fraternity . 
 The Catalan language cultural revival of the 19th century saw a great increase in Catalan literature and culture . In 1875 , playwright Francesc <unk> Briz published a play Lo Pi de las Tres <unk> , which is set in Berga and at the tree , and contains a passage suggesting that the tree was already a Catalan national symbol . However , it was the 1888 poem " Lo Pi de les Tres Branques " by the poet Fr Jacint Verdaguer , published in his anthology <unk> , which brought the tree to widespread attention , converting what was mainly a local religious symbol into a significant secular national symbol . In his poem , Jacint Verdaguer created the so @-@ called ' legend ' of the king @-@ child King James I of Aragon who after being released from captivity in Narbonne ( France ) travelled with his retinue through Catalonia back to his seat at Monzón in Aragon , supposedly spending one of the nights sleeping under Pi de les Tres Branques , and it was there that he had an inspirational dream that he was destined to rule three kingdoms , represented by the three trunks of the tree , conquering the Balearic Islands and the Kingdom of Valencia from the Moors , which in fact he later achieved . 
 The previous year , Verdaguer had stayed a few days in the nearby Queralt Sanctuary and visited the tree . " Lo Pi de les Tres Branques " recounts the story of James and the tree 's symbolism of the Trinity and the unity of the Catalan Countries , and expressed the wish that it be adopted as Catalonia 's national tree . The poem has remained the tree 's principal literary connection , regularly recited at gatherings there . It starts and ends with the often @-@ quoted lines " <unk> que <unk> <unk> Pi / l <unk> <unk> de la <unk> . " ( " We pray that this Pine will be / the sacred tree of the fatherland . " ) . 
 It is accepted that in fact Verdaguer invented the story of James 's sojourn for his poem , since there is no record of it before then , and that the poem 's popularity created the legend . 
 In 1901 , when Verdaguer was presiding at the Floral Games , a traditional Catalan poetry contest , he coined the sobriquet " Guernica of Catalonia " for the tree , referring to the Tree of Guernica , an oak tree which symbolises Basque freedom . He also suggested the tree 's trunks symbolised the three major awards of the contest : country , faith , and love . 
 In May 1901 the landowner transferred ownership of the tree to the Catalanist Union ( Unió <unk> ) , a grouping of various nationalist organisations , at their meeting in Terrassa , though the transaction was never legally registered . This new popularity coincided with the slow decay of the tree , which eventually died in 1915 . 
 In 1987 the Catalan regional government listed the tree as a protected " monumental tree " , one of the first three such trees ( along with Pi Jove and Roure de Can <unk> in Sant <unk> d <unk> ) . A silhouette of Pi de les Tres Branques ( while it was alive ) is now used by the government as a generic logo for monumental trees . 
 = = = Damage and death = = = 
 Before its death , Pi de les Tres Branques had been attacked several times , for economic and / or political reasons . 
 In 1901 , Jacint Verdaguer reported that a woodcutter had recently tried to cut down one of the trunks , causing it to lean out ; damage from which the tree was unlikely to recover . It was also reported that around 1895 , cuts had been made to tap the tree for resin , and a fire lit at its base to speed the process . This and other damage prompted the Catalanist Union to erect a high stone wall around the tree in 1907 to protect against further attacks , though it was suggested that the building work also contributed to the subsequent death of the tree . By 1915 the aforementioned wall had been demolished . 
 In 1910 , it was reported that the tree had lost its leaves , though others suggest a date of 1913 , and it was completely dead by 1915 . Scots pines have a natural lifespan of up to over 700 years , depending on the region . 
 Many years later , the trunk that was damaged as reported by Verdaguer , was struck by lightning and the top half broke off . The remnant of that trunk is still supported by a small stone wall . 
 = = = Later damage = = = 
 Following its death , another three @-@ trunked tree was chosen , but it has also been attacked many times by people opposed to its political symbolism . 
 In 1939 , after the end of the Civil War , supporters of the victorious Franco side started an attempt to topple the tree , but were repelled by local people . It has also been subject to regular minor damage such as anti @-@ Catalan graffiti . 
 However , the most serious deliberate damage happened during the night of 12 / 13 May 2014 , when the tallest trunk was sawn off at its base with a chainsaw , by unknown perpetrators . Following the vandalism , the severed trunk was stored , and it was eventually decided to re @-@ attach it with artificial supports , several steel straps connecting the trunk to the base ; this work was carried out in early July 2015 at a cost of € 35 @,@ 000 , shared by the Catalan government and the Barcelona provincial administration . 
 In January 2016 , the tree was again attacked ( along with Pi Jove ) with a 10 cm chainsaw cut into one of the other trunks . This damage was quickly patched up with steel straps as before . 
 = = Pi Jove = = 
 Following the death of Pi de les Tres Branques , another three @-@ branched pine 300 metres ( 980 ft ) away had been adopted as its successor . Pi Jove de les Tres Branques , or Pi de les Tres Branques II , is also hundreds of years old , but smaller at 19 metres ( 62 ft ) tall . Its similarities to the main tree had been noticed as far back as 1810 , when the Baron of <unk> mentioned it in his diary . 
 At the 1921 rally at the site , following a campaign by poet @-@ politician Ventura <unk> , Pi Jove was inaugurated as the successor to the then @-@ dead main tree . Speaking at the event , <unk> invited the landowner , who was present , to donate the tree to the Commonwealth of Catalonia ( a semi @-@ recognised autonomous government ) , but he declined , saying that practical effort is more important than symbols . 
 It has since become the main attraction for younger and more radical elements of the nationalist movement . The older and younger trees are often simply called " el Pi Vell " ( the old pine ) and " el Pi Jove " ( the young pine ) respectively , to distinguish the two . 
 Along with Pi Vell , Pi Jove was registered as a protected " monumental tree " in 1987 . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 Unlike Pi Vell , Pi Jove had escaped the attentions of vandals until more recently , due to its lower political profile and greater distance ( 200 m ) from the road . In 2010 , it was discovered with a circumferential cut through the bark , in addition to apparent shotgun damage . Vandals attacked it in June 2015 , attempting to saw through one of its trunks , though it was not thought that the damage was serious enough to kill the affected trunk . As a precaution , in December 2015 <unk> installed a frame to hold the three trunks together and ensure their stability . In January 2016 , deeper chainsaw cuts were discovered on the already @-@ damaged trunk which are believed harsh enough to kill the trunk altogether ; these vandals also attacked Pi Vell . 
 = = The annual gathering = = 
 Pi de les Tres Branques , as a symbol of the united Catalan Countries , or simply of Catalan self @-@ determination , has been the site of large political rallies since the turn of the 20th century , at first sporadically , but annually since 1980 . 
 The first record of a political assembly there was in October 1900 , when a large group of Carlist troops , led by Josep Grandia , based themselves there in preparation for their part in the failed Carlist uprising . 
 The first major rally was in 1904 when the Catalanist Union organised an assembly there to celebrate its acquisition of the site , on Sunday 25 September . The ceremony , and associated events in Berga the day before , attracted several hundred activists , with messages from foreign sympathisers being read out . Another rally was held in 1915 . 
 The next major rally was held in 1921 , on 25 July , the St. James holiday ; a key point of that event included the inauguration of Pi Jove as the intended replacement for the original tree . 
 Subsequent political developments made it difficult to hold large organised rallies at the site . Catalan political gatherings were banned during the 1923 – 1930 dictatorship of Miguel Primo de Rivera , travel was difficult during the 1936 – 1939 Spanish Civil War , and political gatherings were again banned during ( and for some time after ) the Franco dictatorship of 1939 – 1975 . 
 It was not until 1980 , following the restoration of democracy in Spain , that the first annual gathering of the modern era took place , starting a tradition of a large gathering at the site on the third Sunday of July each year . 
 Attendance at the gathering has varied ; the 1980 inaugural gathering attracted 3 @,@ 000 visitors , reached a peak of 14 @,@ 000 in 1986 , but has since declined , with attendances of 2 @,@ 000 in 2001 , 1 @,@ 000 in 2012 and 1 @,@ 500 in 2014 . 
 It attracts Catalan nationalists of many different viewpoints , including those attending a mass , political activists from the entire nationalist spectrum left and right giving speeches , organisations hosting stands and selling political books and souvenirs , and performers of traditional Catalan cultural activities such as <unk> bands and dancers , <unk> ( human towers ) , and <unk> ( giant puppets ) . The gathering also marks the culmination of the four @-@ day El <unk> ( " The Shoot " ) musical / political festival which has been held in Berga almost every year since 2001 , organised by the <unk> / Arran left @-@ wing youth organisation . 
 Because of the shortage of parking at the site , shuttle buses are provided by Berga town council , who also organise catering for the crowds in the town after the event . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Events at the gathering have several times resulted in controversies , and clashes between rival political factions . Following the 1981 event , the Catalan parliament president Heribert Barrera , two parliamentary deputies , and several others , faced criminal charges of " insulting the feelings and unity of the Spanish nation and distributing illegal publications " . The charges were dropped after three years . The 1986 gathering was marred by the burning of Spanish flags and harassment of moderate groups . As a result , the mainstream political parties Democratic Convergence and Republican Left stayed away from the 1987 event . In 1988 , different factions of the far @-@ left Movement for Defence of the Land ( MDT ) fought each other . In 1991 , MDT militants attacked youth members of Democratic Convergence and Republican Left , and in 1996 , hooded left @-@ wing militants came from their assembly at Pi Jove to attack members of <unk> Català at Pi Vell . Since the events of 1996 , the authorities have increased security at the gathering , and the event has returned to a peaceful cultural atmosphere . 
 = = Management and development plans = = 
 Although both Pi Vell and Pi Jove are officially protected , they are easily accessible in an isolated wooded area , and therefore vulnerable to vandalism as well as natural hazards such as lightning and wildfire . Several proposals have been made over the years to improve the site . 
 Around 1990 , a private business identified the <unk> valley , with Pi de les Tres Branques as a central attraction , as one of the possible locations for a large @-@ scale Catalan @-@ identity theme park called " <unk> " . A different site was eventually selected , but the project was abandoned . 
 In 2003 , the Catalan parliament passed a resolution urging development of a government plan to improve the site . A government report in 2001 , re @-@ published in 2004 , included a proposal to cut down the fragile Pi Vell , leaving the stump in place along with a commemorative monument , and purchase and develop the site as a public amenity . 
 The attack on Pi Jove in 2010 prompted activists to complain about perceived ongoing lack of action by the authorities , and prompted the local municipality of Castellar del Riu to start work with interested parties to develop a plan to secure the site . In 2012 the mayor announced plans to take over the maintenance of the land around the two trees and develop facilities for visitors , including a car park and information panels . 
 In March 2015 , following the serious attack on Pi Vell ten months before , the government set up a working group consisting of representatives of the Barcelona provincial administration , the local municipality , and the Institute of Catalan Studies , to manage the maintenance and protection of the two trees . The first result was the repair of the damaged tree in July , and in February 2016 they decided to place video security cameras at the site , watching both trees . 
 = = Other associated three @-@ branched pines = = 
 Another similarly named tree is Pi de les Tres Branques de <unk> , located near the village of <unk> in the municipality of Riner in central Catalonia . This tree is also protected by the Catalan government , since 1988 , but was killed in a forest fire in 1998 . 
 In recent times , local bodies such as the municipality of Castellar del Riu or Berga or the local branch of the Catalan National Assembly , have adopted the practice of presenting a young three @-@ branched pine tree or sapling claimed to be a descendant of Pi de les Tres Branques to other bodies , as symbols of solidarity . Early examples include presentations to the Castle of <unk> in 1986 , and the Castle of St. Ferran in Berga in 1992 ( along with a sapling of the Tree of Guernica ) . The practice gained momentum following the February 2014 presentation of a young tree to the town of <unk> , to commemorate Jacint Verdaguer who was born there ; that tree has since been vandalised . Subsequent 2014 recipients have included Andorra la Vella , Sant <unk> de <unk> , and <unk> . The Forest Museum in Sant Celoni also claims to have five descendants of Pi de les Tres Branques in its grounds . 
 = Polyethnicity = 
 Polyethnicity refers to the proximity of people from different ethnic backgrounds within a country or other specific geographic region . It also relates to the ability and willingness of individuals to identify themselves with multiple ethnicities . It occurs when multiple ethnicities inhabit a given area , specifically through means of immigration , intermarriage , trade , conquest , and post @-@ war land @-@ divisions . Professor William H. McNeill states in his series of lectures on polyethnicity that it is the societal norm for cultures to be made up of many ethnic groups . This has had many political and social implications on countries and regions . 
 Many , if not all , countries have some level of polyethnicity , with countries like the United States and Canada having large levels and countries like Japan and Poland having very small levels ( and more specifically , a sense of homogeneity ) . The amount of polyethnicity prevalent in current society has spurred some arguments against it , which include a belief that it leads to the weakening of each society 's strengths , and also a belief that political @-@ ethnic issues in countries with polyethnic populations are better handled with different laws for certain ethnicities . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 In 1985 Professor William H. McNeill , a Canadian historian known for his expertise on the subject of polyethnicity , gave a series of three lectures on polyethnicity in ancient and modern cultures at the University of Toronto . The main thesis throughout the lectures was that it has been the cultural norm for societies to be composed of different ethnic groups . McNeill states that the ideal of homogeneous societies may have grown between 1750 and 1920 in Western Europe due to a growth in the belief in a single nationalistic base for the political organization of society . McNeill believes that World War I was the point in time when the desire for homogeneous nations began to weaken . 
 = = Impact on politics = = 
 Polyethnicity divides nations , complicating the politics as local and national governments attempt to satisfy all ethnic groups . Many politicians in countries attempt to find the balance between ethnic identities within their country and the identity of the nation as a whole . Nationalism also plays a large part in these political debates , as cultural pluralism and <unk> are the democratic alternatives to nationalism for the polyethnic state . The idea of nationalism being social instead of ethnic entails a variety of culture , a shared sense of identity , and a community not based on descent . Culturally plural states vary constitutionally between a decentralized and unitary state ( such as Great Britain ) and a federal state ( such as Belgium , Switzerland , or Canada ) . Ethnic parties in these polyethnic regions are not anti @-@ state but instead seek maximum power within this state . Many polyethnic countries face this dilemma with their policy decisions . The following nations and regions are just a few specific examples of this dilemma and its effects : 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The United States is a nation founded by different ethnicities frequently described as coming together in a " melting pot , " a term used to emphasize the degree to which constituent groups influence and are influenced by each other , or a " salad bowl , " a term more recently coined in contrast to the " melting pot " metaphor and emphasizing those groups ' retention of fundamentally distinct identities despite their proximity to each other and their influence on the overall culture that all of those groups inhabit . A controversial political issue in recent years has been the question of bilingualism . Many immigrants have come from Hispanic America , who are native Spanish speakers , in the past centuries and have become a significant minority and even a majority in many areas of the Southwest . In New Mexico the Spanish speaking population exceeds 40 % . Disputes have emerged over language policy , since a sizable part of the population , and in many areas the majority of the population , speak Spanish as a native language . The biggest debates are over bilingual education for language minority students , the availability of non @-@ English ballots and election materials , and whether or not English is the official language . It has evolved into an ethnic conflict between the <unk> who support bilingualism and linguistic access and the <unk> who strongly oppose this and lead the official English movement . The United States does not have an official language , but English is the default national language , spoken by the overwhelming majority of the country 's population . 
 = = = Canada = = = 
 Canada has had many political debates between the French speakers and English speakers , particularly in the province of Quebec . Canada holds both French and English as official languages . The politics in Quebec are largely defined by nationalism as French Québécois wish to gain independence from Canada as a whole , based on ethnic and linguistic boundaries . The main separatist party , Parti Québécois , attempted to gain sovereignty twice ( once in 1980 and again in 1995 ) and failed by a narrow margin of 1 @.@ 2 % in 1995 . Since then , in order to remain united , Canada granted Quebec <unk> particulier , recognizing Quebec as a nation within the united nation of Canada . Canada is often described as a cultural mosaic . 
 = = = Belgium = = = 
 The divide between the Dutch @-@ speaking north ( Flanders ) and the French @-@ speaking South ( Wallonia ) has caused the parliamentary democracy to become ethnically polarized . Though an equal number of seats in the Chamber of Representatives are prescribed to the Flemish and Walloons , Belgian political parties have all divided into two ideologically identical but linguistically and ethnically different parties . The political crisis has grown so bad in recent years that the partition of Belgium has been feared . 
 = = = Ethiopia = = = 
 Ethiopia is a polyethnic nation consisting of 80 different ethnic groups and 84 indigenous languages . Due to the diverse population and rural areas throughout the nation , it was nearly impossible to create a strong centralized state ; though it was eventually accomplished through political evolution . Prior to 1974 , nationalism was only discussed within radical student groups , but by the late 20th century the issue had come to the forefront of political debate . Ethiopia was forced to modernize their political system to properly handle the nationalism debates . The Derg military regime took control with a Marxist @-@ Leninist ideology , urging self @-@ determination and rejecting compromise over any nationality issues . In the 1980s , Ethiopia suffered a series of famines and after the USSR broke apart , they lost their aid from the Soviet Union and the Derg regime collapsed . Eventually Ethiopia <unk> and adopted a modern political system that models a federal parliamentary republic . It was still impossible to create a central government holding all power , so the government was torn . The central federal government now presides over ethnically @-@ based regional states and each ethnic state is granted the right to establish their own government and democracy . 
 = = = 19th century Spain = = = 
 In Spain from 1808 @-@ 1814 the Spanish War of Independence took place amidst a multi @-@ cultural Spain . Spain , at the time , was under the control of King Joseph , who was Napoleon I of France 's brother . Because the nation was under the control of French rule , the Spanish formed coalitions of ethnic groups to reclaim their own political representation , instead of the current French political system in power . 
 = = = Southeast Asia = = = 
 In Southeast Asia the continental area ( Myanmar , Thailand , Laos , Cambodia , and Vietnam ) generally practices Theravada Buddhism . Most of insular Southeast Asia ( namely Malaysia , Brunei and Indonesia ) practices mostly Sunni Islam . The rest of the insular region ( Philippines and East Timor ) practices mostly Roman Catholic Christianity and Singapore practises mostly Mahayana Buddhism . Significant long @-@ distance labor migration that occurred during the late 19th into the early 20th century provided many different types of ethnic diversity . Relations between the indigenous population of the region arose from regional variations of cultural and linguistic group . During this time immigrant minorities , especially the Chinese , developed as well . Although there were extreme political differences for each minority and religion , they were still legitimate members of political communities and there has been a significant amount of unity throughout history . This differs from both nearby East and South Asia . 
 = = Impact on society = = 
 Polyethnicity , over time , can change the way societies practice cultural norms . 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 An increase in intermarriage in the United States has led to the blurring of ethnic lines . Anti @-@ miscegenation laws ( laws banning interracial marriages ) were abolished in the United States in 1967 and now it is estimated that one @-@ fifth of the population in the United States by 2050 will be part of the polyethnic population . In 2000 , self @-@ identified Multiracial Americans numbered 6 @.@ 8 million or 2 @.@ 4 % of the population . 
 While the number of interethnic marriages is on the rise , there are certain ethnic groups that have been found more likely to become polyethnic and recognize themselves with more than one ethnic background . Bhavani <unk> states in his article on polyethnicity that : 
 Asians and Latinos have much higher rates of interethnic marriages than do blacks , and they are more likely to report polyethnicity than blacks who more often claim a single ethnicity and racial identity . This is the case , the authors [ Lee , J & Bean , <unk> ] argue , because blacks have a " legacy of slavery , " a history of discrimination , and have been victimized by the " one drop rule " ( where having any black blood automatically labeled one as black ) in the US . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Presently , most armed forces are composed of people from different ethnic backgrounds . They are considered to be polyethnic due to the differences in race , ethnicity , language or background . While there are many examples of polyethnic forces , the most prominent are among the largest armed forces in the world , including those of the United States , the former USSR , and China . <unk> armed forces are not a new phenomenon ; multi @-@ ethnic forces have been in existence since the ancient Roman Empire , Middle Eastern Empires and even the Mongol Khans . The U.S. Military was one of the first modern militaries to begin ethnic integration , by order of President Truman in 1945 . 
 = = Criticisms = = 
 There are also arguments against polyethnicity , as well as the assimilation of ethnicities in polyethnic regions . Wilmot Robertson in The <unk> and Dennis L. Thomson in The Political Demands of Isolated Indian Bands in British Columbia , argue for some level of separatism . 
 In The <unk> , Robertson declares polyethnicity as an ideal that only lessens each culture . He believes that , within a polyethnic culture , the nation or region as a whole is less capable of cultural culmination than each of the individual ethnicities that make it up . Essentially , polyethnicity promotes the dilution of ethnicity and thus hinders each ethnicity in all aspects of culture . 
 In The Political Demands of Isolated Indian Bands in British Columbia , Thomson points out the benefits in some level ( albeit small ) of separatist policies . He argues the benefits of allowing ethnic groups , like the Amish and the Hutterites in the United States and Canada or the Sami in Norway , to live on the edges of governance . These are ethnic groups that would prefer to retain their ethnic identity and thus prefer separatist policies for themselves , as they do not require them to conform to policies for all ethnicities of the nation . 
 = Whitehall = 
 Whitehall is a road in the City of Westminster , Central London , which forms the first part of the <unk> road from Trafalgar Square to Chelsea . It is the main thoroughfare running south from Trafalgar Square towards Parliament Square . The street is recognised as the centre of Her Majesty 's Government and is lined with numerous departments and ministries including the Ministry of Defence , Horse Guards and the Cabinet Office . Consequently , the name " Whitehall " is used as a metonym for British central governmental administration , and the geographic name for the surrounding area . 
 The name was taken from the Palace of Whitehall that was the residence of Kings Henry VIII through to William III , before its destruction by fire in 1698 ; only the Banqueting House survived . Whitehall was originally a wide road that led to the front of the palace ; the route to the south was widened in the 18th century following the destruction of the palace . 
 As well as government buildings , the street is known for its memorial statues and monuments , including Britain 's primary war memorial , the Cenotaph . The Whitehall Theatre , now the Trafalgar Studios , has been a popular place for farce comedies since the mid @-@ 20th century . 
 = = Geography and name = = 
 The name Whitehall was used for several buildings in the Tudor period . It either referred to a building made of light stone , or as a general term for any festival building . This included the Royal Palace of Whitehall , which in turn gave its name to the street . 
 The street is about 0 @.@ 4 miles ( 0 @.@ 64 km ) long and runs through the City of Westminster . It is part of the <unk> , a main road in Central London that leads towards Chelsea via the Houses of Parliament and Vauxhall Bridge . It runs south from Trafalgar Square , past numerous government buildings , including the old War Office building , Horse Guards , the Ministry of Defence , the Cabinet Office and the Department of Health . It ends at the Cenotaph , the road ahead being Parliament Street . Great Scotland Yard and Horse Guards Avenue branch off to the east , while Downing Street branches off to the west at the southern section of the street . 
 The nearest tube stations are Charing Cross at the north end , and Westminster at the south . Numerous London bus routes run along Whitehall , including 12 , 24 , 53 , 88 , 159 and 453 . 
 = = History = = 
 There has been a route connecting Charing Cross to Westminster since the Middle Ages ; the 12th @-@ century historian William <unk> described it as " a continued suburb , mingled with large and beautiful gardens , and orchards belonging to the citizens " . The name Whitehall was originally only used for the section of road between Charing Cross and Holbein Gate ; beyond this it was known as The Street as far as King Street Gate , then King Street thereafter . It had become a residential street by the 16th century , and had become a popular place to live by the 17th , with residents including Lord Howard of Effingham and Edmund Spenser . 
 The Palace of Whitehall , to the east of the road , was originally named York Palace , but was renamed during the reign of Henry VIII . The palace was redesigned in 1531 – 32 and became the King 's main residence later in the decade . He married Ann Boleyn here in 1533 , followed by Jane Seymour in 1536 , and died at the palace in 1547 . Charles I owned an extensive art collection at the palace and several of William Shakespeare 's plays had their first performances here . It ceased to be a royal residence after 1689 , when William III moved to Kensington Palace . The palace was damaged by fire in 1691 , following which the front entrance was redesigned by Sir Christopher Wren . In 1698 , most of the palace burned to the ground owing to an accident started by a careless washerwoman . 
 Wallingford House was constructed in 1572 by William Knollys , 1st Earl of Banbury along the western edge of Whitehall . It was subsequently used by Charles I. During the reign of William III , it was bought for the Admiralty . The Old Admiralty Buildings now sit on the house 's site . 
 Banqueting House was built as an extension to the Palace of Whitehall in 1622 by Inigo Jones . It is the only surviving portion of the palace after it was burned down , and was the first Renaissance building in London . It later became a museum to the Royal United Services Institute and has been opened to the public since 1963 . 
 Oliver Cromwell moved to the street in 1647 , taking up residence in Wallingford House . Two years later , Charles I was carried through Whitehall on the way to his trial at Westminster Hall . Whitehall itself was a wide street and had sufficient space for a scaffold to be erected for the King 's execution at Banqueting House . He made a brief speech there before being beheaded . Cromwell died at the Palace of Whitehall in 1658 . 
 During the Great Plague of London in 1665 , people boarded coaches at Whitehall , then at the edge of urban London , in an attempt to escape . The King and court temporarily moved to Oxford to avoid the plague , while Samuel Pepys remarked in his diary on 29 June , " By water to Whitehall , where the Court is full of waggons and people ready to go out of town . This end of town every day grows very bad with plague " . 
 By the 18th century , traffic was struggling along the narrow streets south of Holbein Gate , which led to King Street Gate being demolished in 1723 . Holbein Gate , in turn , was demolished in 1759 . Meanwhile , Parliament Street was a side road alongside the palace which led to the Palace of Westminster . After the Palace of Whitehall was destroyed , Parliament Street was widened to match Whitehall 's width . The present appearance of the street dates from 1899 after a group of houses between Downing Street and Great George Street were destroyed . 
 = = Government buildings = = 
 By the time the palace was destroyed , separation of crown and state had become important , with Parliament being necessary to control military requirements and pass laws . The government wanted to be some distance from the monarch , and the buildings around Whitehall , physically separated from St James 's Palace by St James 's Park , seemed to be a good place for ministers to work . 
 The Horse Guards building was designed by William Kent , and built during the 1750s on a former tiltyard site , replacing an earlier guard @-@ house erected during the Civil War . The building includes an archway for coach traffic and two pedestrian arches that provide access between Whitehall and Horse Guards Parade . The central archway is marked with " <unk> " and " <unk> " , and denotes the boundary between St Martin 's in the Fields and St Margaret 's church parish boundaries . 
 During the 19th century , as private leases ran out on residential buildings , ownership reverted to the Crown , which began to use them as public offices . The name " Whitehall " is now used as a metonym to refer to that part of the civil service which is involved in the government of the United Kingdom . The street 's central portion is dominated by military buildings , including the Ministry of Defence , with the former headquarters of the British Army and Royal Navy , the Royal United Services Institute , the Horse Guards building and the Admiralty , on the opposite side . Government buildings on Whitehall , from north to south , include the The Admiralty Buildings ( Foreign and Commonwealth Office , others ) , the Department for International Development at No. 22 , the Department of Energy and Climate Change at No. 55 , the Old War Office , the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel at No. 36 , the Horse Guards , the Ministry of Defence main building , Dover House ( containing the Scotland Office ) , <unk> House ( containing the Wales Office ) , the Cabinet Office at No. 70 , the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Government Offices Great George Street ( HM Treasury , HM Revenue and Customs and parts of the Cabinet Office ) . 
 Scotland Yard , the headquarters of London 's Metropolitan Police Service , was originally located in Great Scotland Yard off the north @-@ eastern end of Whitehall . The buildings had been lodgings for the Kings of Scotland , on part of the old Palace of Whitehall 's grounds ; by the 19th century , Little and Middle Scotland Yard had been merged into Whitehall Place , leaving only Great Scotland Yard . No. 4 Whitehall Place had become vacant by the 1820s , which allowed Sir Robert Peel to use it as the main headquarters when forming the police in 1829 . It was formally named the Metropolitan Police Office , but became quickly known as Great Scotland Yard , and eventually Scotland Yard . The buildings were damaged in a series of bombings by Irish Nationalists in 1883 , and an explosion from a Fenian terrorist attack on 30 May 1884 blew a hole in Scotland Yard 's outer wall and destroyed the neighbouring Rising Sun pub . The headquarters was moved away from Whitehall in 1890 . 
 Downing Street leads off the south @-@ west end of Whitehall , just above Parliament Street . It was named after Sir George Downing , who built a row of houses along the street around 1680 leading west from Whitehall . Following a number of terrorist attacks , the road was closed to the public in 1990 , when security gates were erected at both ends . On 7 February 1991 , the Provisional IRA fired mortars from a van parked in Whitehall towards No. 10 , one of which exploded in the gardens . 
 Additional security measures have been put in place along Whitehall to protect government buildings , following a £ 25 million streetscape project undertaken by Westminster City Council . The project has provided wider pavements and better lighting , along with installing hundreds of concrete and steel security barriers . 
 Richmond House , at No. 79 , has held the Department of Health since 1987 . The building is scheduled to be a temporary debating chamber from 2020 , while the Houses of Parliament undergo a £ 7 billion refurbishment and modernisation programme . 
 = = Memorials = = 
 A number of statues and memorials have been built on and around Whitehall , commemorating military victories and leaders . The Cenotaph was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens and erected at the southern end in 1919 , commemorating victory in World War I and later used as a memorial for both World Wars . It is the main war memorial in Britain and an annual service is held here on Remembrance Sunday , led by the reigning monarch and leading politicians . In 2005 a national Monument to the Women of World War II was erected a short distance north of the Cenotaph in the middle of the Whitehall carriageway . 
 The Royal Tank Regiment Memorial is at the north east end of Whitehall , where Whitehall Court meets Whitehall Place . Erected in 2000 , it commemorates the use of tanks in both World Wards and depicts five World War II tank crew members . The Gurkha Memorial is to the south of this , on Horse Guards Avenue to the east of Whitehall . 
 Whitehall is also home to six other monuments . From north to south , these are of Prince George , Duke of Cambridge ( Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the British Army ) , Liberal Party , Liberal Unionist Party and Unionists leader Spencer Cavendish , 8th Duke of Devonshire , Douglas Haig , 1st Earl Haig ( known as the Earl Haig Memorial ) , Field Marshal Montgomery ( commander of the 8th Army , the 21st Army Group and Chief of the Imperial General Staff ) , William Slim , 1st Viscount Slim , Commander of the 14th Army and Governor @-@ General of Australia , and Alan Brooke , 1st Viscount Alanbrooke , Chief of the Imperial General Staff . 
 = = Culture = = 
 The Whitehall Theatre opened in 1930 at the north west end of the street , on a site that had previously been Ye Old Ship Tavern in the 17th century . The revue Whitehall Follies opened in 1942 , which drew controversy over its explicit content featuring the stripper and actress Phyllis <unk> . The theatre became known for its farces , reviving a tradition on Whitehall that had begun with court jesters at the palace during the 16th century . These included several plays featuring actor @-@ manager Brian Rix throughout the 1950s and 60s , and 1981 's satirical Anyone for Denis , written by John Wells and Private Eye editor Richard Ingrams . The venue was Grade II listed in 1996 , and renamed the Trafalgar Studios in 2004 . 
 Because of its importance as a centre of British government , several political comedies are based in and around Whitehall . These include the BBC 's Yes Minister and The Thick of It . 
 Whitehall is one of three purple squares on the British Monopoly board , along with Pall Mall and Northumberland Avenue . All three streets converge at Trafalgar Square . 
 = 2000 UEFA Cup Final = 
 The 2000 UEFA Cup Final was a football match that took place on 17 May 2000 at Parken Stadium in Copenhagen , Denmark to decide the winner of the 1999 – 2000 UEFA Cup . The game event pitted Galatasaray of Turkey and Arsenal of England , and was the final match of the 1999 – 2000 season , the 29th final of Europe 's second largest club football competition , the UEFA Cup . It was Galatasaray 's first appearance , in a final of a European tournament and Arsenal 's first UEFA Cup final . 
 Both clubs competed in the 1999 – 2000 UEFA Champions League ; with each team finishing in third place of the first group stage , Galatasaray behind Chelsea and Hertha Berlin and Arsenal behind Barcelona and Fiorentina , thus exiting the competition , and qualifying for the third round of the UEFA Cup . Whilst there , a total sixteen matches were played , as the two sides advanced through the rounds , including the quarter @-@ and semi @-@ finals to progress to the final . Galatasaray overcame Bologna , Borussia Dortmund , Mallorca and Leeds United on their way , while Arsenal defeated Nantes , Deportivo La Coruña , Werder Bremen and Lens . 
 The match was attended by 38 @,@ 919 spectators , as Galatasaray won 4 – 1 on penalties following extra time , making it the first time for a Turkish side to win the contest and a European honour . They also obtained the Treble , having previously achieved the Turkish league championship , and the Turkish domestic cup titles , as well as qualifying for the 2000 UEFA Super Cup and the 2001 FIFA Club World Championship . The final was somewhat marred by the riots between supporters of the two sides . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Galatasaray = = = 
 Galatasaray were required to qualify for the group stage , as Turkey 's country coefficient only held qualifying places . The Turks entered the third qualifying round of the 1999 – 2000 UEFA Champions League , the final qualifying game of the competition , where they competed against Rapid Wien in two matches . Galatasaray won the first leg with 3 – 0 at the Ernst @-@ Happel @-@ Stadion , and earned their spot in the first group stage following a 1 – 0 win at their home arena , Ali Sami Yen Stadium in the decisive leg . Galatasaray were scheduled to take part in Group G , containing Chelsea , Hertha Berlin and Milan . Six matches were played , as they recorded a total two wins , one draw and three defeats , thus descending into the third round of the UEFA Cup . 
 Galatasaray faced Bologna in the competition 's third round . The first game was played at Stadio Renato Dall 'Ara , which ended in a 1 – 1 draw ; the Italian side took the lead after a Giuseppe <unk> goal during the second half , before Hakan Şükür levelled the score , with eight minutes remaining . At home , the Turkish side scored twice during the first half , and conceded once , as they won the match 2 – 1 , and the overall leg 3 – 2 . Galatasaray were pitted against Borussia Dortmund in the fourth round . Gala won 2 – 0 away at Westfalenstadion , while a scoreless draw in the homecoming match was enough for Galatasaray to see them through . 
 In the quarter @-@ finals , Galatasaray 's opponents were Mallorca . They won the first match with 4 – 1 , which was played at Son <unk> . They booked their place in the next round by clinching a 2 – 1 home victory in the return leg , winning 6 – 2 on aggregate . Galatasaray were up against Leeds United in the semi @-@ finals . The Istanbul side began their first game on home soil with a 2 – 0 win , following goals by Şükür and Capone . At Elland Road , their second match ended in a 2 – 2 stalemate , with Gheorghe Hagi and Şükür netting , thus winning the tie 4 – 2 and proceeding to the final . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal qualified automatically into the Champions League group stage because of England 's country coefficient . They were drawn in Group B , along with AIK , Barcelona and Fiorentina . Each club played six matches , with Arsenal registering two victories , two draws and two defeats . This meant they finished in third place , one point behind second place holders Fiorentina , and hence entered the third round stage of the UEFA Cup . 
 Arsenal competed against Nantes in the third round of the contest . At their home venue , Arsenal Stadium , they defeated the French club 3 – 0 , before recording a 3 – 3 draw at the Stade de la Beaujoire , ensuring the Gunners a 6 – 3 aggregate victory . They battled Deportivo La Coruña in the fourth round . Arsenal played at their home ground in the first match , and comprehensively beat the Spanish outfit by five goals to one , before suffering a 1 – 2 loss at Estadio Municipal de Riazor , which was still enough to take the English side to the next round on aggregate . 
 Werder Bremen were next up in the quarter @-@ finals . Goals apiece by Thierry Henry and Fredrik Ljungberg helped them to a 2 – 0 victory at home . Arsenal sealed their place in the semi @-@ finals in the second leg played at the <unk> , a match which they won 4 – 2 after Ray Parlour 's hat @-@ trick and a lone Henry goal to register a 6 – 2 aggregate win . In the semi @-@ finals , Arsenal collided with Lens . The first leg took place at home , and the Gunners won by one goal to nil , through an early goal scored by Dennis Bergkamp . They advanced at Stade Félix @-@ Bollaert with a 2 – 1 victory , overall winning 3 – 1 to reach the final . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Galatasaray and Arsenal met each other for the first time in a European football competition , though the Turkish outfit had faced English clubs formerly on eight occasions . Their first was against Manchester United , in the 1993 – 94 Champions League second round , which they won 3 – 3 on away goals in a two @-@ legged match . Both teams were reunited in the following season of the group stage , which concluded in a goalless tie and a Galatasaray blow . Other meetings include against West Bromwich Albion in the commencing round of the 1978 – 79 UEFA Cup , and Chelsea in this year 's Champions League campaign . Arsenal by contrast ran into Turkish opposition twice , both of them against Fenerbahçe in the 1979 – 80 European Cup Winners ' Cup first round ; the home game was won by the English side 2 – 0 , while the away leg ended in a 0 – 0 draw . 
 Arsenal had a better European record , compared to Galatasaray going into the match ; they defeated Anderlecht with a 4 – 3 aggregate winning result , in the final of the 1969 – 70 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup . The London – based club reached the Cup Winners ' Cup finales three times , in 1980 , where they suffered a 4 – 5 defeat in a penalty shoot @-@ out to Valencia , following a 0 – 0 stalemate ; Arsenal also reached the 1994 final , winning 1 – 0 over Parma , and the following edition , losing 1 – 2 at the hands of Real Zaragoza . Their 1994 success led to them qualifying for that year 's European Super Cup , where they were beaten 2 – 0 by Milan on aggregate in two games . This was Arsenal 's first UEFA Cup ( sixth in total ) European final . The club were considered favorites to win the match . 
 Galatasaray entered the final in search for the Treble . Their fourteenth and fourth successive Turkish league title was confirmed on the final matchday . The Turkish club added the domestic cup to their trophy cabinet , after Antalyaspor was defeated with a 5 – 3 victory in the 2000 Turkish Cup Final . The side participated in their first UEFA Cup and European competition final , while also becoming the first ever team from Turkey to make the final in a UEFA club football competition . 
 = = = Ticketing = = = 
 Before the final , both finalists were awarded 12 @,@ 000 tickets . The Danish Football Association announced that 9 @,@ 000 tickets would be offered , for sale to the public , while the remaining 3 @,@ 000 were sold to other European countries . UEFA allocated another 3 @,@ 000 tickets to their officials and VIP members . Problems ensued after it was revealed that Galatasaray had been charging the tickets more than the original price , in order to prevent some football hooligans from entering the ground . The Turkish club 's secretary general however , denied this and insisted that the tickets were being sold at their original price and to support the stadium and the club 's other sporting activities . 
 = = = Venue = = = 
 Parken Stadium was selected as the official ground of the final , after a decision made by the UEFA Executive Committee . It is located in the Indre Østerbro territory in Copenhagen ; the site was once known as Idrætsparken , with the opening premiere held in 1911 . It was the home of the Denmark national football team and <unk> Boldklub 's ( KB ) matches , until 1990 , when the venue underwent reconstruction by the Danish lending company Baltica Finans A / S , with the former scrapped in favour of the new name , Parken Stadium . The concept was supported by the Danish Football Association with a contract that all of Denmark 's national games would take place at the stadium for fifteen years . The price of the renovation was <unk> million ( £ 740 million ) . It made its debut two years later , in 1992 , and has since then been the home base for F.C. Copenhagen 's fixtures . 
 This was the second occasion that a major European final had been staged at Parken . The venue also hosted the 1994 Cup Winners ' Cup Final between Arsenal and Parma . 
 = = = Match ball = = = 
 Adidas <unk> Silverstream was the official match ball used in the final . It was assembled and marketed by German sport firm Adidas , and was the ninth ball in the European Championship series , as well as part of the Adidas Finale . The ball 's design was created by British independent brand specialist company Design Bridge , and influenced by the waters , in the Netherlands and Belgium . The ball contains synthetic foam layers , making it more comfortable to grip and smoother to control . The <unk> Silverstream was later unveiled as the official match ball of the UEFA Euro 2000 . 
 = = = Match officials = = = 
 Before the final , a match official team from the Royal Spanish Football Federation was appointed , with Antonio López Nieto as the main referee of the final , his second UEFA Cup final since 1998 between Internazionale and Lazio . Nieto obtained his international referee badge in 1993 , and had previously taken charge of 30 European tournament games – 15 UEFA Champions League and 15 UEFA Cup matches . The Spaniard made his European debut , in the second leg of the first round clash , involving Manchester United – Honvéd in the 1993 – 94 Champions League season . He was also present in the match referees squad during the UEFA Euro 1996 qualifiers and the main event , as well as at the 1998 FIFA World Cup qualifiers . 
 Nieto was joined by assistant referees Fernando <unk> Gracia and Victoriano <unk> Carrasco and fourth official Arturo <unk> Ibáñez . 
 = = = Opening ceremony = = = 
 An opening ceremony was held , prior to the match . At the start of the event , cheerleading girls dressed in pom @-@ pom clothing stepped onto the football pitch to entertain the crowd ; the routine also featured a small number of Danish – Turkish girls from a local school , performing a folk dance display containing Turkish elements . The act was succeeded by an appearance from Danish pop singer and actor Stig Rossen , who sang an alternative version of the notable song " Wonderful Copenhagen " . Prince Joachim of Denmark , the youngest of Queen Margrethe II and Prince Henrik 's two children , welcomed the opening ceremony by making a short speech to all the seated spectators in the stadium . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 The final was made available on television , across 185 countries , with an estimated 500 million viewers . Danish television channel <unk> announced that they would use seventeen cameras , for the match coverage . In the United Kingdom , BBC One , the main channel of the public television corporation , the British Broadcasting Corporation acquired the rights for the final ; the network broadcast the event , with live commentary provided by veteran professional sports pundit and television presenter Barry Davies , who was assisted by former English footballer Trevor Brooking . In the United Kingdom , the final came second in the overnight ratings list , with 9 @.@ 1 million viewers , behind an episode of Coronation Street . The game was shown on Fox Sports World in the United States . In Turkey , the match was broadcast on the public television channel TRT 1 . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 = = = = First half = = = = 
 Arsenal started the match through kick @-@ off Henry . There minutes into the match , captain Tony Adams attempted to clear the ball via a header , only for it to land at Arif Erdem , who attempted a volley shot outside the Arsenal area , deflecting off the goal post . As a result , Galatasaray were awarded a corner . Erdem took it , but failed to trouble the defense , as the ball was easily cleared away . Arsenal responded via Bergkamp , who received the ball from Marc Overmars ; Bergkamp attempted to outrun Galatasaray defenders Capone and Gheorghe Popescu and into their area , only to be unable to keep the ball in match play . Arsenal even fashioned more chances , as Overmars won a one @-@ on @-@ one encounter against Capone , trying to reach Bergkamp , but the ball was easily read by Popescu for a corner . The corner was came to nothing , as Patrick Vieira tried to hit the ball , before it landed for an opportunity for Henry , whose shot went over the goal post . A third of the match played , Arsenal were awarded a free @-@ kick opportunity , after <unk> Buruk received a yellow card for committing a sliding tackle on Vieira . 
 Martin Keown took care of the free @-@ kick which Popescu unsuccessfully attempted to clear , only to give Overmars a shot on goal , a volley which went over . One minute later , Galatasaray 's first opportunity came when Erdem received a straight ball from a Hagi taken free – kick , and took a shot on goal , which goalkeeper David Seaman managed to keep out with his left hand for a corner . The corner was taken , but no Galatasaray player was available to direct the ball towards the goal . Arsenal would create more opportunities into the match , when Sylvinho snatched the ball from Hagi and ran down to Galatasaray 's left , before putting in a cross to the running Henry , who was halted by a clearance from <unk> Korkmaz . As Galatasaray grew more into the game minute , Erdem exchanged passes with Şükür , whose bicycle kick went completely off target . Arsenal began creating more chances – in the 35th minute , Overmars made a low powerful shot on goal , forcing Cláudio Taffarel to make a diving save . Overmars then made another run into the area but his attempt went across the goal . Galatasaray nearly took the lead with only two minutes of the first half remaining , when Şükür found Erdem , who beat the offside trap . However , his shot went just wide . 
 = = = = Second half = = = = 
 Before the second half , no substitutions were made by either teams as Galatasaray kicked @-@ off the match . During the third minute , Vieira picked Parlour , but his shot hit the outside of the goal . Galatasaray almost scored the opening goal , when <unk> Buruk played in Hakan Şükür , whose shot hit the right post . Arsenal attempted to strike , with Sylvinho passing Hagi , and finding Henry , who in turn put in a cross for Keown , only for his shot to go over . Later throughout the match , Parlour sent a long ball into the Galatasaray midfield , but no Arsenal player was there to pick up the ball . A free @-@ kick was given to Bergkamp after a foul on Overmars , which was cleared with a Popescu header . Galatasaray attempted an attack on the counter – Capone gave the ball to Hagi , who lost his balance while preparing to take a shot . After receiving a pass , Hagi put in a wide cross for Şükür , but he was denied a shot on target after a clearance . Arsenal had another chance , when Henry snatched the ball from Korkmaz , and entered the penalty area , only to see his shot to go off target . 
 A throw @-@ in by Hagi led to Şükür attempting to reach Erdem , who was in the penalty area , but was tackled and match play continued , which saw Arsenal attack on the counter under Parlour , whose volley shot went wide . Overmars then had an opportunity , after being given the ball by Henry , but the shot was off target . In the 70th minute , Korkmaz exchanged passes with Erdem , but his effort was successfully blocked by Tony Adams . Three minutes later , Parlour attempted a bending cross for Henry , but Taffarel read it easily . A well @-@ played pass by Nwankwo Kanu ensured the ball reached Henry on the left area , who proceeded to give it to Overmars in the penalty area – however , Overmars 's shot fell flat , but still enough for Taffarel to make a save . With four minutes of normal time remaining , the Turks came close to a winning goal , when Şükür collected the ball from the centre and entered Arsenal 's area , but lost his footing before he could make an effort on goal , allowing Seaman to pick up the ball for a goal kick . Two minutes of extra time were added on , just when a free @-@ kick was awarded to Galatasaray . Şükür took the shot , but the ball headed wide around the wall . It proved to be the final event in normal time , as the match entered extra time . 
 = = = = Extra time = = = = 
 With the match entering extra time and the golden goal rule applying , both sides had chances to score the decisive goal . In the second minute , Henry beat two defenders to enter the opponent 's area , but his shot went just across the goal . Shortly after , Hagi received a straight red card , after game footage showed the player holding and punching Adams in the back ; the Arsenal captain was awarded a yellow card . As a result , Arsenal began to put the Turkish side under pressure by creating more chances through Henry , who almost won the game when he directed a header on goal from a long cross by Parlour , which Taffarel managed to keep out . Overmars 's effort was then blocked by a Galatasaray defender . 
 Near the start of the second half in extra time , Galatasaray 's first opportunity came , when Şükür attempted a shot from a Popescu cross , but the ball hit the side netting . After seven minutes , Kanu beat a defender , dribbled into the Galatasaray area and shot the ball twice , only to be denied twice by Taffarel . In the dying minutes both teams continued to create decisive chances – Galatasaray 's Popescu was given a free – kick , after Şükür was brought down by Keown . However , the ball flew straight into Seaman 's arms . Arsenal 's Sylvinho put in a cross into the Galatasaray area to Henry , but ball was cleared away . The final whistle was blown and the match moved into a penalty shoot @-@ out . 
 = = = = Penalty shoot @-@ out = = = = 
 Galatasaray 's <unk> <unk> stepped up to take the first spot kick and scored . He placed the ball inside the near right @-@ hand corner , just past Seaman , who dived to his left . Davor Šuker was the first man up to take Arsenal 's penalty kick . His effort proved to be unsuccessful , as the ball hit the left @-@ hand post and bounced off the goal . Şükür became the next player to take Galatasaray 's spot kick . He scored as he lobbed the ball in the right @-@ hand corner . With Galatasaray leading 2 – 0 , Arsenal 's next penalty taker was Parlour . He placed the ball on the spot and successfully scored by burying the ball to Taffarel 's right to make it 2 – 1 . <unk> <unk> calmly placed the goal , near the centre of the goal to make it 3 – 1 to Galatasaray . Arsenal 's only hope now was Vieira , but the midfielder missed and hit the crossbar instead . Popescu then stepped up , and netted with a powerful shot , sending Seaman to the wrong side of the goal , as Galatasaray won the penalty shoot @-@ out 4 – 1 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = Road to Rupert = 
 " Road to Rupert " is the ninth episode of the fifth season of Family Guy . It originally aired on Fox in the United States on January 28 , 2007 . The episode follows Brian after he inadvertently sells Stewie 's teddy bear , Rupert , during a yard sale . In an attempt to retrieve him , Stewie and Brian travel across the United States , eventually discovering he is with a child living in Aspen , Colorado . Meanwhile , Peter has his driving license revoked for careless driving and is forced to be driven around by Meg , which annoys him . 
 The episode was written by Patrick Meighan and directed by Dan Povenmire . It received divided reviews , with the negative reviews going to the " personal driver " plot and the positive going to the " Rupert " plot . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 8 @.@ 8 million homes in its original airing . The episode feature guest performances by Max Burkholder , Phil LaMarr , Rob Lowe , Ted McGinley , Stephen Stanton , Connor Trinneer , Audrey Wasilewski , George Wendt and Dave Wittenberg . SpongeBob SquarePants voice actors Tom Kenny and Bill Fagerbakke lent their voices to the episode as SpongeBob and Patrick respectively from archive music of the " Campfire Song " from the episode The Camping Episode , but remain uncredited . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Griffins have a yard sale to sell off household items that they no longer need , but Brian accidentally sells Stewie 's teddy bear , Rupert , causing Stewie to think Rupert has been kidnapped . Brian takes Stewie to the toy store to try to find a replacement , but ends up admitting he accidentally sold it , after which Stewie exclaims : " You son of a bitch ! " . He attempts to retrieve Rupert by tracking DNA samples against the federal database from the money Brian was paid for Rupert . They discover the man who bought Rupert lives in Quahog , but upon arrival — they discover the house is deserted . After seeing the moving truck and following it , with Mayor West driving , they discover the man now resides in Aspen , Colorado , meaning West drives them no further , only stopping in the Connecticut state line . To get over the mountains , the pair rent a helicopter after discovering " to rent a helicopter , you can pay with cash , check , or a jaunty tune " . Stewie then performs a dance for the man in the office ( with help from Gene Kelly ) , but when Brian crashes the helicopter into the mountain , the two end up next to the entrance to Aspen . 
 Reluctant to give Rupert back to Stewie , Stanford Cordray ( the buyer , voiced by Rob Lowe ) and his family organize a skiing race down the mountain , so if Stewie is the first down , they are allowed to take Rupert away with them and if Stanford wins , he can have Brian . Stewie cheats by installing rockets in his skis , and relaxes to watch his progress . Stewie then crashes into a tree and loses the race . He tells Brian that maybe this means he should give up Rupert , but he proceeds to grab Rupert after telling his personal butler Crohn to throw a cup of hot tea on the child 's face , forcing him to drop the bear . The two make a run for it before the child 's parents notice , then realize they still need to get back to Quahog ( which , by looking at a highway sign at the end , is 2112 miles away , a reference to the Rush 1976 album ) , so they carjack a passing driver in the city and drive home . 
 Meanwhile , Peter purchased his own Evel Knievel gloves at his own yard sale . He decides to use the family car to jump over a row of cars , but is unsuccessful and results in his drivers license being revoked by Joe . Lois arranges for Meg to become Peter 's personal driver , and he makes numerous attempts to annoy Meg , including setting her hat on fire when traveling with his friends . When another car rear ends her and she is insulted by the driver , Meg takes out her repressed rage with Peter on the driver by beating him up ; Peter is impressed , and the two bond in the car . In the end , Joe stops by Peter 's house to reinstate his license . Meg worries that Peter will begin treating her badly again , but Peter says that while he will only do so in front of the family to keep up appearances , and that they will now be " secret best friends . " 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode was written by Patrick Meighan , in his first episode of the season , and , like all Road to .. episodes from 2000 – 2007 , directed by Dan Povenmire , in his second episode of the season . 
 Lois mocking Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story ( or , as it 's called in the scene , <unk> <unk> : The Untold Story ) , citing the movie as a middle finger to the audience by being three episodes slapped together under the guise of a movie ( followed by Brian calling in two bodyguards in suits to take Lois away ) was edited on TV for time reasons . A deleted scene showed one of Peter 's crimes being a hate crime , where during his stunt he hit a car with a Jewish driver . The televised scene changed the Jewish driver to a female virgin driver and the crime being a rape ( her airbag having busted her hymen when it deployed ) and not a hate crime . The scene of Stewie getting high on NyQuil to cope with losing Rupert and mistaking a throw pillow for a cat was cut from TV airings for time reasons . David Goodman noted that he feels the production crew may not have succeeded on this episode as everything falls into place easily , such as the box falling out of the moving truck . Every frame when Stewie is dancing in a montage of Anchors Aweigh took a large amount of work to produce . 
 The montage of Stewie and Brian visiting several U.S. states ( all of which are states where there 's nothing but cornfields ) was a DVD exclusive scene , removed from television for timing purposes . This scene was partially based on series creator Seth MacFarlane traveling the United States after the September 11 , 2001 attacks and realizing there is lots of corn throughout the U.S. A deleted scene directly after the helicopter crash had shown Stewie saying " come here , puss " for a second time , but this was replaced with another . Stewie and Brian carjacking somebody was added to the episode in a later rewrite and censored on television . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Max Burkholder , voice actor Phil LaMarr , actor Rob Lowe , actor Ted McGinley , voice actor Stephen Stanton , actor Connor Trinneer , voice actress Audrey Wasilewski , actor George Wendt ( who voiced Norm Peterson in the episode ) and voice actor Dave Wittenberg ( who voiced Woody Boyd in the episode , originally played by Woody Harrelson ) guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Chris Sheridan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener made minor appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When speaking with Brian at the yard sale , Lois comments that Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story is not a real movie , rather just three individual episodes together , but altering the title to <unk> <unk> : The Untold Story when discussing it with Brian . 
 The music performed at Stewie 's vision of Rupert 's funeral was the hymn Amazing Grace ( played on the bagpipes by Brian ) , while the funeral itself is a reference to Spock 's funeral in Star Trek II : The Wrath of Khan . 
 The ' My Black Son ' scene consisted of a number of 1970s and 1980s television programs , these being Diff 'rent Strokes , Family Ties , Punky Brewster , Laverne and Shirley , Perfect Strangers , Three 's Company , Who 's the Boss ? and Bosom Buddies . It also co @-@ starred Emmanuel Lewis . 
 After Peter crashes his car during his first car @-@ jumping stunt , he refers to Matthew Broderick 's car accident in Northern Ireland in 1987 in which 2 people died . 
 Peter watches an episode of SpongeBob SquarePants in the car which features " The Campfire Song " performed in the actual episode . It had been written by Dan Povenmire for the original SpongeBob episode , but it was allowed in the episode as Nickelodeon gave Family Guy permission to reproduce the music . 
 The entire scene of Stewie singing and dancing in order to secure rental of the helicopter is a reference to the 1945 musical film Anchors Aweigh . The reflection of the original character ( Jerry Mouse from Tom and Jerry ) can be seen on the floor . 
 When Stewie and Brian crash the helicopter down the mountain and Brian visualises Stewie as the devil , this is a reference to such a scene in Planes , Trains and Automobiles . The crash itself is caused by a sector whiteout . 
 The Herman 's Hermits song I 'm into Something Good is heard during Peter 's time with Meg . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a slight improvement over the previous week , the episode was viewed in 8 @.@ 8 million homes in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 1 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , slightly edging out both The Simpsons and American Dad ! . 
 The episode received mixed comments from TV Squad , with Brett Love commenting that " the suspended license plot was a little thin , but that 's forgivable given that this was the b @-@ story for the episode , and there are only 22 minutes to work with . " Love comments positively on the Stewie and Brian relationship in the episode , commenting that , " the Stewie and Brian story is what made the episode for me . It was very well done , right down to the goofy little details . " IGN commented that , " ... for Family Guy to have a great episode , it takes a good story and humorous " manatee " gags . " Road to Rupert " was able to deliver on both these fronts , with the majority of the episode 's attention focused on Stewie and Brian 's road story , meshed with many laugh out loud gags . " 
 = Marketing performance measurement and management = 
 Marketing performance measurement and management ( <unk> ) is the systematic management of marketing resources and processes to achieve measurable gain in return on investment and efficiency , while maintaining quality in customer experience . 
 Marketing performance management is a central facet of the marketing operations function within marketing departments . 
 Marketing performance management relies on a set of measurable performance standards , a pointed focus on outcomes , and clear lines of accountability ( i.e. roles and consequences ) . 
 Marketing performance management is based on six success factors : 1 ) alignment , 2 ) accountability , 3 ) analytics , 4 ) automation , 5 ) alliances , and 6 ) assessment . 
 = = Alignment = = 
 Alignment of marketing activities and investments to business outcomes occurs when a marketing organization establishes a direct line of sight between marketing activities , investments and business outcomes . 
 Alignment begins with customer insights , to ensure that the marketing performance management approach will be rewarded by the marketplace . Secondly , alignment with enterprise objectives ensures that marketing efforts are in sync with what the company is striving to achieve . Enterprise goals can be cascaded to the business unit level and then to the department level to maintain consistency and drive synergy both horizontally and vertically . Marketing objectives that are developed this way can be cascaded to all of the marketing sub @-@ functions for alignment . 
 = = Accountability = = 
 Accountability is the monitoring and measurement of the commitment a person , group , or organization makes to deliver specific , defined results relating to the enterprise ’ s financial and strategic objectives . 
 Selecting the right metrics , integrating performance targets , and producing actionable dashboards are all integral to accountability . 
 Accountability encompasses making a commitment to a particular action , accepting responsibility for completing that action , and then disclosing how well you performed against your commitment . Accountability requires commitments , metrics , and consequences ( positive and negative ) . 
 = = = Metrics = = = 
 <unk> performance standards are called metrics , which are the cornerstone of accountability . Marketing metrics encompass Activity , Output , Operational , and Outcome categories : 
 " Activity metrics " relate to the number of things done in a process , such as the number of new blog posts or the number of events . 
 " Output metrics " relate to the result of a process , such as website traffic , media mentions , or event participants . 
 " Operational metrics " relate to the efficiency and effectiveness of a process , such as cost per lead , revenue per customer , revenue per sales representative , cost per customer , or leads per sales representative . 
 " Outcome metrics " relate to the consequences of a process ’ outcomes , such as revenue , profit , win rate , pipeline contribution , share of preference , share of wallet , or share of market . 
 = = = Indicators = = = 
 To manage causes and effects , managers identify Leading Indicators and Lagging Indicators : 
 " Leading indicators " are metrics that a manager can monitor before stakeholders see results . They are in @-@ process metrics and process @-@ input metrics that serve as warning signals of output , operational , and outcome metrics . Within a workflow diagram , the questions represented by a diamond are typical sources of leading indicators . They indicate whether there will be re @-@ work , scrap , waste , or delays in what the process is meant to achieve . They are actionable and predictive . By monitoring leading indicators , managers can intervene to attain higher performance . 
 " Lagging indicators " are metrics that a manager ’ s stakeholders see . They are post @-@ process metrics ( i.e. output , operational , or outcome metrics ) . Lagging indicators are important for seeing the big picture , but they are not actionable in and of themselves . 
 = = = Reporting = = = 
 Marketing performance can be reported in a wide variety of formats ( verbal , pictorial , graphic , tabular , text , dashboard ) , which are used for accountability and decision @-@ making . Ideally , reports revisit past commitments or forecasts , to enable learning and refinements for future performance . 
 <unk> are particularly important in marketing performance management , visually displaying multiple metrics on a single screen or page . This allows managers to monitor performance at a glance , and to be alerted when performance varies significantly above or below expected levels . Ideally , dashboards show the relationships between leading and lagging indicators . This can empower people at every managerial level . 
 = = Analytics = = 
 Analytics seeks to identify patterns in data by organizing it and applying mathematics , statistics , or algorithms to it . Analytics foster fact @-@ based , data @-@ driven customer , product , market and performance decisions and develop models to support scenario analysis and predict potential outcomes . 
 Marketing analytics can be used to create models to help understand , monitor , and predict customer behavior , such as likelihood to defect or predisposition to purchase . It can help managers quantify performance , make and optimize channel and mix decisions , understand the impact of a campaign on a sales list , and create many other types of insights . 
 Data availability is accelerating at an unprecedented pace , and analytics technologies can help marketers quickly synthesize data from various sources . Analytics can harness the power of data by converting it to actionable information and models that guide strategic investments and decisions that drive marketing performance . 
 = = Automation = = 
 Automation of marketing processes reduces manual labor , errors , and inconsistency . It enables timely , personalized messaging to customers , prospects , and other stakeholders . 
 Automation provides infrastructure for marketing performance management . It spans marketing resource management , campaign automation , business intelligence , data management , reporting platforms , and scenario analysis tools . 
 = = Alliances = = 
 Alliances are arrangements between companies to create additional value together . Distributors , resellers , marketing agencies , and other companies may co @-@ develop , co @-@ promote , and / or co @-@ deliver various parts of the marketing mix ( product , price , promotion , placement ) . 
 Marketing performance management requires information transparency , clear roles , and smooth <unk> between alliance members , both externally and internally . A spirit of alliance among the work groups across the marketing organization , and with other support functions and business units shapes the ecosystem that nurtures or hinders marketing performance . Collaboration cross @-@ functionally is essential to marketing efficiency and effectiveness . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Assessment is the evaluation of strengths , weaknesses , and opportunities in marketing performance management . Assessment is typically conducted by benchmarking other organizations or comparing performance to a standard . Ideally , assessment is supported by a culture of genuine concern , dedication , and willingness among management and employees to continually improve performance . 
 = Hugh de Cressy = 
 Hugh de Cressy ( died 1189 ; sometimes Hugo de <unk> , Hugh de <unk> , or Hugh de <unk> ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman administrator and nobleman . Little is known of his ancestry and he first served two brothers of King Henry II of England before becoming a royal official . He was rewarded with a marriage to an heiress for his service to the king . In England he often served as a royal justice and witnessed documents , which showed his closeness to the king . On the continent , he recruited mercenaries for the royal army and was named constable of the castle of Rouen in the royal lands in France . He died in 1189 after giving lands to various monasteries before his death . 
 = = Background and early life = = 
 Hugh 's family was from Cressy , in Normandy , and his parents were named Roger and <unk> . Nothing further is known about his parents , but he had a brother Berengar , who married Isabel of Gressenhall , daughter of <unk> the Sewer . Hugh served William fitzEmpress , the brother of King Henry II of England from the mid 1150s . William gave Hugh the manor of Harrietsham in Kent . 
 After William 's death in 1164 , Hugh passed into royal service , while also serving as seneschal to the new Earl of Surrey , Hamelin , the illegitimate half @-@ brother of King Henry II . On the <unk> <unk> in 1166 he held one knight 's fee in the barony of Giffard . In 1167 Hugh paid a fine that is recorded in the pipe rolls for the custody of his nephew 's lands at Tickhill . In 1170 , he was present at the coronation of Henry the Young King in June at Westminster Abbey , when Henry II had his heir crowned as a king during the elder Henry 's lifetime . During the Revolt of 1173 – 74 by King Henry 's sons , Hugh was a partisan of the king . The revolt was brought about by the desire of Henry 's three oldest sons to gain some power during Henry 's reign , and by mid 1174 the revolt had been defeated by the king . During the Revolt , Hugh fought at the Battle of Fornham near Fornham St Martin in Suffolk , a victory for royalist forces , but otherwise took little part in the revolt 's suppression . 
 = = Royal service = = 
 Hugh was close to King Henry II , witnessing a large number of royal charters and serving as a royal justice . In 1175 along with Ranulf de Glanville , Hugh served as a royal justice in northern England . He also took part of the great eyre of 1176 that was commanded after the Council of Northampton . Also in 1176 , Henry II summoned Roger as a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ law , one of the first identifiable members of that order in the historical record . During the last 10 years of Henry 's reign , Hugh witnessed 15 royal charters . In 1180 he was in charge of Rouen in Henry 's possession of Normandy , being named constable of the Tower of Rouen . Later , in 1184 , he further served the king by hiring mercenaries in Normandy for service with King Henry II 's campaign in Poitou . He appears to have led military forces for the king as well , being recorded several times as a commander of part of the royal forces in <unk> . He is last recorded in England during the period around 1187 . 
 Hugh married Margaret , one of the daughters and heiresses of William de Chesney , the founder of Sibton Abbey . Margaret was one of three daughters , but she inherited the bulk of her father 's estates . Although Margaret was the eldest daughter , the reason she received the bulk of the estates was King Henry 's desire to reward Hugh , as the king arranged the marriage as well as ensuring that most of her father 's lands went to her . Through Margaret , Hugh gained the barony of Blythburgh in Suffolk , which he had control of by 1174 . He also acquired lands at Rottingdean in Sussex from Margaret . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Hugh died in 1189 around Easter at Rouen . His heir was his son Roger de Cressy , who died in 1246 . Towards the end of his life , sometime between 1186 and 1189 , Hugh gave a church at Cressy to the priory at St Lo in Rouen . On his deathbed he granted lands at <unk> to Blythburgh Priory for the salvation of the souls of his parents and other ancestors as well as the souls of King Henry and Henry 's brother William fitzEmpress . Margaret survived Hugh and married Robert <unk> and lived until at least 1214 , when she paid a fine to the king for the right to her inheritance after the death of her second husband . 
 = Robert L. Eichelberger = 
 Robert Lawrence Eichelberger ( 9 March 1886 – 26 September 1961 ) was a general officer in the United States Army who commanded the Eighth United States Army in the Southwest Pacific Area during World War II . 
 A 1909 graduate of the United States Military Academy at West Point , he saw service in Panama and on the Mexican border before joining the American Expeditionary Force Siberia in 1918 . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for repeated acts of bravery in Siberia . After the war , he transferred to the Adjutant General 's Corps . He attended the Command and General Staff College and the Army War College , and was Secretary of the War Department General Staff , working for the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General Douglas MacArthur . 
 In 1940 , Eichelberger became the Superintendent of the United States Military Academy at West Point . He instituted a number of reforms , cutting back activities such as horseback riding and close order drill , and substituting modern combat training , in which cadets participated in military exercises alongside National Guard units . He acquired Stewart Field as a training facility , which gave cadets a chance to qualify as pilots while still at West Point . He became commander of the 77th Infantry Division in March 1942 , and I Corps in June . 
 In August 1942 , Eichelberger was abruptly sent to the Southwest Pacific Area , where he led American and Australian troops in the bloody Battle of Buna – Gona . In 1944 , he had notable victories at Hollandia and the Battle of Biak . As Commanding General of the newly formed Eighth Army , Eichelberger led the invasion of the Southern Philippines clearing the islands of Mindoro , Marinduque , Panay , Negros , Cebu and Bohol . By July 1945 , his forces had defeated the Japanese on Mindanao . In August 1945 , Eichelberger 's Eighth Army began a three @-@ year stint as part of the Occupation of Japan . He retired from the Army at the end of 1948 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Robert Lawrence Eichelberger was born at Urbana , Ohio on 9 March 1886 , the youngest of five children of George Maley Eichelberger , a farmer and lawyer , and Emma Ring Eichelberger . He grew up on the 235 @-@ acre ( 95 ha ) family farm that had been established by his grandfather . He graduated from Urbana High School in 1903 , and entered Ohio State University , where he joined Phi Gamma Delta fraternity . 
 In 1904 , Eichelberger persuaded his father 's former law partner , William R. Warnock , now the congressman for Ohio 's 8th congressional district , to appoint him to the United States Military Academy at West Point . He entered West Point in June 1905 . His class of 1909 was a distinguished one . Some 28 of them ultimately wore the stars of general officers , including Jacob L. Devers , John C. H. Lee , Edwin F. Harding , George S. Patton and William H. Simpson . Eichelberger was a poor student , as he had been at high school and Ohio State , but did become a cadet lieutenant , and graduated 68th in his class of 103 . 
 Eichelberger was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the 25th Infantry on 11 June 1909 , but was transferred to the 10th Infantry at Fort Benjamin Harrison , Indiana , on 22 July . In March 1911 , the 10th Infantry was despatched to San Antonio , Texas , where it became part of the Maneuver Division , which was formed to undertake offensive operations during the Border War with Mexico . Then , in September , it was sent to the Panama Canal Zone . It was in Panama that Eichelberger met <unk> ( Em ) <unk> , the daughter of Hezekiah A. <unk> , the Chief Justice of the Panama Canal Zone Supreme Court . After a brief courtship , they were married on 3 April 1913 . 
 On returning to the United States in March 1915 , Eichelberger was posted to the 22nd Infantry at Fort Porter , New York . It too was sent to the Mexican border , and was based at Douglas , Arizona , where Eichelberger was promoted to first lieutenant on 1 July 1916 . In September , he became Professor of Military Science and Tactics at Kemper Military School in Boonville , Missouri . 
 = = World War I = = 
 Following the American entry into World War I in April 1917 , Eichelberger was promoted to captain on 15 May . In June he was posted to the 20th Infantry at Fort Douglas , Utah , and commanded a battalion until September , when he was transferred to the newly formed 43rd Infantry at Camp Pike , Arkansas . He was Senior Infantry Instructor at the 3rd Officers ' Training Camp at Camp Pike until February 1918 , when he was assigned to the War Department General Staff in Washington , D.C. , where he became an assistant to Brigadier General William S. Graves , and was promoted to major on 3 June 1918 . 
 In July 1918 , Graves was appointed commander of the 8th Division , which was then based at Palo Alto , California , and scheduled to be sent to France in 30 days . Graves took Eichelberger with him , initially as his Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 3 ( Operations ) . While he was en route to California , Eichelberger learned from Graves that the 8th Division 's destination had changed , and it was now bound for Siberia instead . President Woodrow Wilson had agreed to support the Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War , and Graves would command the American Expeditionary Force Siberia . The American Expeditionary Force Siberia departed San Francisco on 15 August , with Eichelberger as its Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) . 
 Graves was instructed that his mission was political rather than military , and accordingly he was to " maintain strict neutrality " . Eichelberger found himself thrust into a complex political , diplomatic and military environment . Soon after arriving , he was appointed to the ten @-@ nation Inter @-@ Allied Military Council , which was responsible for Allied strategy . Eichelberger became convinced that America 's objectives in Siberia were not necessarily the same as those of her French and British allies , but it was far from clear what they actually were , especially when the State Department and the War Department did not always agree . American policy called for protecting the Trans Siberian Railway , but this was under the control of Admiral Alexander Kolchak 's White Army forces , whom Eichelberger considered to be " murderers " and " cutthroats " . 
 Eichelberger was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for repeated acts of bravery while assigned to the Expeditionary Force . His citation read : 
 For extraordinary heroism in action June 28 – July 3 , 1919 , while serving as assistant chief of staff , G @-@ 2 , American Expeditionary Forces , Siberia . On July 2 , 1919 , after the capture , by American troops of <unk> , an American platoon detailed to clear hostile patrols from a commanding ridge was halted by enemy enfilading fire , seriously wounding the members of the patrol . Colonel Eichelberger , without regard to his own safety and armed with a rifle , voluntarily covered the withdrawal of the platoon . On June 28 , at the imminent danger of his own life , he entered the partisan lines and effected the release of one American officer and three enlisted men in exchange for a Russian prisoner . On July 3 an American column being fired upon when <unk> from a mountain pass , Colonel Eichelberger voluntarily assisted in establishing the firing line , prevented confusion , and , by his total disregard for his own safety , raised the morale of the American forces to a high pitch . 
 For his services in Siberia , Eichelberger was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal , and was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 28 March 1919 . Graves prevented him from receiving the British Distinguished Service Order and the French Legion of Honor , as had other members of the Inter @-@ Allied Military Council . Eichelberger did , however , receive the Japanese Imperial Order of Meiji , Order of the Sacred Treasure and Order of the Rising Sun . Siberia gave Eichelberger a chance to observe the Japanese Army at first hand , and he was impressed by what he saw of their training and discipline . He concluded that , if properly led , they would be more than a match for American troops . The American Expeditionary Force Siberia was withdrawn in April 1920 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Instead of returning to the United States following his service in Siberia , Eichelberger became Assistant Chief of Staff , G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) , of the Philippine Department on 4 May 1920 . Like many officers in the aftermath of World War I , he was reduced in rank to his permanent rank of captain on 30 June 1920 , but was immediately promoted to major again the next day . Em had joined him in Vladivostok in March 1920 , and the two first travelled to Japan before moving on to the Philippines . In March 1921 , Eichelberger became head of the Intelligence Mission to China . He established intelligence offices in Peking and Tientsin , and met the President of the Republic of China , Sun Yat @-@ sen . He finally returned to the United States in May 1921 , where he was assigned to the Far Eastern Section of the G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) Division of the War Department General Staff . 
 A major disappointment for Eichelberger was his failure to make the General Staff Eligibility List ( <unk> ) . The National Defense Act of 1920 required that only officers on this list could be promoted to brigadier general . Concluding that his prospects for promotion in the infantry were poor , at the urging of the Adjutant General , Major General Robert C. Davis , he transferred to the Adjutant General 's Corps on 14 July 1925 . He continued to work with the War Department General Staff , but now in the Adjutant General 's Office . In April 1925 , he was posted to Fort Hayes , Ohio , as Assistant Adjutant General , 5th Corps Area . 
 Davis had offered to nominate Eichelberger for a place at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth . Eichelberger joined 247 other officers there in July 1924 . Since the students were seated alphabetically , he sat next to the officer who topped the class , Major Dwight D. Eisenhower . Other students in the class included Joseph Stilwell , Leonard Gerow and Joseph T. McNarney . Eichelberger graduated as a Distinguished Graduate , one of the top quarter of the class , and stayed on at the Command and General Staff College as its Adjutant General . In 1929 , he became a student at the Army War College . On graduation , he was posted back to the Adjutant General 's Office in Washington , D.C. 
 In 1931 , Eichelberger was sent to West Point as its adjutant . He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 1 August 1934 . In April 1935 , he became Secretary of the War Department General Staff , working for the Chief of Staff of the United States Army , General Douglas MacArthur . Eichelberger transferred back to the infantry in July 1937 , although he remained Secretary of the War Department General Staff until October 1938 , in the rank of colonel from 1 August . 
 The new Chief of Staff , General Malin Craig offered Eichelberger command of the 29th Infantry , the demonstration regiment based at Fort Benning , Georgia . Eichelberger turned this down , as he had been away from the infantry for many years , and some infantry officers might be jealous . Instead , he accepted command of the 30th Infantry , a less prestigious unit stationed at the Presidio of San Francisco , but there were still officers who resented someone attaining command of a regiment at the age of 52 . Before departing , he took a brief course at the Infantry School at Fort Benning to <unk> himself with the infantry . As part of the 3rd Infantry Division , the 30th Infantry took part in a series of major training exercises over the next two years . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Training in the United States = = = 
 Eichelberger was promoted to brigadier general in October 1940 , and the next month received orders to become deputy division commander of the 7th Infantry Division under Stilwell . At the last minute , these orders were changed . Major General Edwin " Pa " Watson interceded with President Franklin Roosevelt to have Eichelberger appointed the Superintendent of the United States Military Academy at West Point . Before taking up the position , Eichelberger met with Craig 's successor as Chief of Staff , General George C. Marshall , who warned him that the courses at the Command and General Staff College and Army War College had been drastically shortened in order to meet the needs of the expanding Army , and that West Point would suffer a similar fate unless Eichelberger could make the course more relevant to the Army 's immediate needs . 
 As superintendent , Eichelberger attempted to " bring West Point into the twentieth century " . He cut back activities such as horseback riding and close order drill , and substituted modern combat training , in which cadets participated in military exercises alongside National Guard units . He acquired Stewart Field as a training facility , and required cadets to undergo basic flight training . This gave cadets a chance to qualify as pilots while still at West Point . Yet he also concerned himself with the dismal state of the West Point football team . Through Pa Watson , he was able to persuade the Surgeon General of the United States Army to waive weight restrictions to allow heavier players to be recruited , and hired Earl Blaik to coach the team . 
 Over time , Marshall came to believe that Eichelberger 's talents were wasted at West Point , but he was opposed by Pa Watson , who wanted Eichelberger to remain at West Point . When Marshall told Watson that Eichelberger 's chances for promotion to major general were being adversely affected by being denied the chance to command a division , Watson added Eichelberger 's name to the top of a promotion list and had the President sign it . In this manner , Eichelberger was promoted to major general in July 1941 . 
 After the United States declaration of war upon Japan in December 1941 , Eichelberger applied for a transfer to an active command . He was given the choice of three new divisions , and chose the 77th Infantry Division , which was activated at Fort Jackson , South Carolina , in March 1942 . The other two divisions were given to Major Generals Omar Bradley and Henry Terrell , Jr . The three generals and their staffs attended a training course at Fort Leavenworth . For his chief of staff , Eichelberger chose Clovis Byers , an officer who had also attended Ohio State and West Point , and had been a fellow member of the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity . 
 Eichelberger 's period in command of the 77th Infantry Division was brief , for on 18 June 1942 he became commander of I Corps , with Byers as his chief of staff . He was awarded the Legion of Merit for his service with the 77th Infantry Division . I Corps consisted of the 8th , 30th and 77th Infantry Divisions . Eichelberger was given the initial task of arranging a demonstration for dignitaries including Winston Churchill , Marshall , Henry Stimson , Sir John Dill and Sir Alan Brooke . The demonstration was judged a success , although the trained eyes of Brooke and Lesley McNair noted flaws . Within days , two of the division commanders were relieved of their commands . Eichelberger was nominated to command American forces in Operation Torch , and he was ordered to conduct training in amphibious warfare with the 3rd , 9th and 30th Infantry Divisions in Chesapeake Bay in cooperation with Rear Admiral Kent Hewitt . 
 = = = Battle of Buna @-@ Gona = = = 
 On 9 August 1942 , his orders were abruptly changed . MacArthur , now Supreme Commander of the Southwest Pacific Area , had requested that a corps headquarters be sent to his command . Major General Robert C. Richardson , Jr . , had originally been detailed for the assignment , but as Marshall informed MacArthur , " Richardson 's intense feelings regarding service under Australian command made his assignment appear unwise . " Eichelberger 's I Corps headquarters was ready for overseas service and had training in amphibious warfare , and Eichelberger had experience working with MacArthur , so Marshall selected him for the job instead . Eichelberger was not happy with the assignment , especially when he found out about Richardson , and " knew General MacArthur well enough to know that he was going to be difficult to get along with " . 
 Eichelberger departed for Australia on 20 August with 22 members of his staff in a B @-@ 24 Liberator . I Corps controlled the two American divisions in Australia : Major General Forrest Harding 's 32nd Infantry Division , based at Camp Cable near Brisbane ; and Major General Horace Fuller 's 41st Infantry Division at Rockhampton , Queensland , where Eichelberger , who was promoted to lieutenant general on 21 October , decided to establish his I Corps headquarters . His I Corps came under the command of Lieutenant General Sir John Lavarack 's Australian First Army . On meeting Australian commanders , Eichelberger noted that many of them " had already been in combat with the British in North Africa , and , though they were usually too polite to say so , considered the Americans to be — at best — inexperienced theorists . " He was disturbed at the level of training received by the two American divisions . Instead of training for jungle warfare , they were following the same syllabus used in the United States . He warned MacArthur and MacArthur 's chief of staff , Major General Richard K. Sutherland , that the divisions could not be expected to meet veteran Japanese troops on equal terms . He decided in September that the 32nd Infantry Division should proceed to New Guinea first , as Camp Cable was inferior to the 41st Infantry Division 's camp at Rockhampton . 
 Eichelberger 's fears were realized when the overconfident 32nd Infantry Division suffered a serious reverse in the Battle of Buna @-@ Gona . Harding was confident that he could capture Buna " without too much difficulty " , but poor staff work , inaccurate intelligence , inadequate training and , above all , Japanese resistance , frustrated the American efforts . The Americans found themselves confronted by a network of well @-@ sited and expertly prepared Japanese positions , accessible only through a swamp . The Americans ' failure damaged their relationship with the Australians and threatened to derail MacArthur 's entire campaign . Eichelberger and a small party from I Corps headquarters were hurriedly flown up to Port Moresby in a pair of C @-@ 47 Dakotas on 30 November . MacArthur ordered Eichelberger to assume control of the battle at Buna . According to Byers and Eichelberger , MacArthur told him " in a grim voice " : 
 " I 'm putting you in command at Buna . Relieve Harding . I am sending you in , Bob , and I want you to remove all officers who won 't fight . Relieve regimental and battalion commanders ; if necessary , put sergeants in charge of battalions and corporals in charge of companies — anyone who will fight . Time is of the essence ; the Japanese may land reinforcements any night . " 
 General MacArthur strode down the breezy veranda again . He said he had reports that American soldiers were throwing away their weapons and running from the enemy . Then he stopped short and spoke with emphasis . He wanted no misunderstandings about my assignment . 
 " Bob , " he said , " I want you to take Buna , or not come back alive . " He paused a moment , and then , without looking at Byers , pointed a finger . " And that goes for your chief of staff , too . " 
 The next day , Eichelberger 's party was flown to Dobodura , where he assumed command of US troops in the Buna area . He relieved Harding , and replaced him with the division 's artillery commander , Brigadier General Albert W. Waldron . He relieved other officers too , appointing a 26 @-@ year @-@ old captain to command a battalion . Some of the 32nd Infantry Division 's officers privately denounced Eichelberger as ruthless and " Prussian " . He set an example by moving among the troops on the front lines , sharing their hardships and danger . Despite the risk , he purposefully wore his three silver stars while at the front , even though he knew Japanese snipers targeted officers , because he wanted his troops to know their commander was present . After the snipers seriously wounded Waldron in the shoulder , Eichelberger appointed Byers to command the 32nd Infantry Division , but he too was wounded on 16 December . This left Eichelberger as the only American general in the forward area , and he assumed personal command of the division . He was not the most senior general present though ; he served under the command of Australian , Lieutenant General Edmund Herring , whom he referred to in letters to Em as " my grand colleague " . 
 After the fall of Buna , Eichelberger was placed in command of the Allied force assembled to reduce the remaining Japanese positions around Sanananda , with Australian Major General Frank Berryman as his chief of staff . The battle continued until 22 January 1943 . The price of victory at Buna was high . The 32nd Division lost 707 dead and 1 @,@ 680 wounded ; another 8 @,@ 286 were hospitalized with tropical diseases , principally malaria . Its men referred to their division cemetery as " Eichelberger Square " . On 24 January , Eichelberger flew back to Port Moresby where he was warmly welcomed by Herring . The next day he flew back to Rockhampton . For the battle , Eichelberger received the Distinguished Service Cross along with ten other generals , all of whom received the same citation . Some , like Herring , had served at the front ; others , like Sutherland , had not . Eichelberger was also created an honorary Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire . Byers recommended Eichelberger for the Medal of Honor but the nomination was disapproved by MacArthur . Another officer on Eichelberger 's staff , Colonel Gordon B. Rogers then submitted the recommendation directly to the War Department . MacArthur informed the War Department that " Among many outside the immediate staff of this officer , there was criticism of his conduct of operations which while not detracting from his personal gallantry led to grave considerations at one time of his relief from command . " 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 In February 1943 , Lieutenant General Walter Krueger 's Sixth United States Army headquarters arrived in Australia . Since Sixth Army would do all the planning , and there was as yet little scope for corps @-@ sized operations , Eichelberger found himself with a training role , preparing the 24th Infantry Division , which had arrived from Hawaii , and the 32nd and 41st Infantry Divisions , which had returned from Papua , for future missions . The War Department asked in May 1943 if Eichelberger could be released to command the First United States Army , but MacArthur would not release him . Later , it asked if he could be released to command the Ninth United States Army , but this was also refused , and this job went to Eichelberger 's West Point classmate William H. Simpson . Instead , he was given responsibility for Eleanor Roosevelt 's visit to Australia in September 1943 . She visited Sydney and Melbourne , and had dinner with the Governor General of Australia , Lord Gowrie , and the Prime Minister of Australia , John Curtin , in Canberra . 
 In January 1944 , Eichelberger was informed that he would be in charge of the next operation , a landing at Hansa Bay with the 24th and 41st Infantry Divisions . However , in March this was cancelled in favor of Operation Reckless , a landing by the same force at Hollandia . The operation meant leapfrogging the Japanese defenses at Hansa Bay , but was risky because it was outside the range of land @-@ based air cover . Cover was instead provided by aircraft carriers of the United States Pacific Fleet , but this meant that the operation had to adhere to a strict timetable . Hoping to avoid a repeat of Buna , Eichelberger meticulously planned the operation , and implemented a thorough training program that emphasized physical fitness , individual initiative , small unit tactics and amphibious warfare . The operation went well , mainly because surprise was achieved and few Japanese were present in the area . However , poor topographical intelligence led to an inability to clear some beaches due to their being backed by swamps . Supplies piled up on the beaches , with fuel and ammunition being stored together in some instances . On 23 April a single Japanese plane ignited a fuel dump , which caused a fire that resulted in 124 casualties and the loss of 60 per cent of the ammunition stockpile . An appalled Krueger felt that Eichelberger had been let down by his staff , and offered to transfer Byers to an assistant division commander 's post , but Eichelberger turned down the offer . 
 In June 1944 , Eichelberger was summoned to Sixth Army headquarters by Krueger . The Battle of Biak , where the 41st Infantry Division had landed in May , was going badly , and the airfields that MacArthur had promised would be available to support the Battle of Saipan were not in American hands . Eichelberger found that the Japanese , who were present in larger numbers than originally reported , were ensconced in caves overlooking the airfield sites . While the Americans were better trained and equipped than at Buna , so too were the Japanese , who employed their new tactics of avoiding costly counterattacks and exacting the maximum toll for ground gained . After seeing the situation for himself , Eichelberger concluded that Fuller 's 41st Infantry Division had not done too badly . Nonetheless , as at Buna , Eichelberger relieved a number of officers that he felt were not performing as the battle ground on . His orders were to supersede Fuller as task force commander rather than relieve him as division commander , but Fuller requested his own relief , and Krueger obliged him . On Eichelberger 's recommendation , Fuller was replaced by Brigadier General Jens A. Doe . Krueger was unimpressed with Eichelberger 's performance on Biak , concluding that Eichelberger 's tactics were unimaginative , and no better than Fuller 's , and may have delayed rather than expedited the capture of the island . On the other hand , MacArthur thought sufficiently highly of Eichelberger 's performance to award him the Silver Star . 
 = = = Philippines Campaign = = = 
 While still on Biak , Eichelberger learned that MacArthur had selected him to command the newly formed Eighth United States Army , which arrived at Hollandia in August 1944 . Eichelberger took two officers with him from I Corps : Byers and Colonel Frank S. Bowen , his G @-@ 3 . The Eighth Army assumed control of operations on Leyte Island from Sixth Army on 26 December , the day after MacArthur and Krueger announced that organized resistance there had ended . The troops there included Eichelberger 's old command , the 77th Infantry Division . In two months , Sixth Army had killed over 55 @,@ 000 Japanese soldiers on Leyte , and estimated that only 5 @,@ 000 remained alive on the island . By 8 May 1945 , the Eighth Army had killed over 24 @,@ 000 more . 
 In January , the Eighth Army entered combat on Luzon , landing Major General Charles P. Hall 's XI Corps on 29 January near San Antonio and Major General Joseph M. Swing 's 11th Airborne Division at Nasugbu , Batangas two days later . Combining with Sixth Army , the Eighth Army enveloped Manila in a great pincer movement . Eichelberger assumed personal command of the operation , which involved an advance on Manila by the lightly equipped 11th Airborne Division . The audacious advance made rapid progress until it was halted by well @-@ prepared positions on the outskirts of Manila . MacArthur awarded Eichelberger another Silver Star . 
 Eighth Army 's final operation of the war was that of clearing out the southern Philippines , including on the major island of Mindanao , an effort that occupied the soldiers of the Eighth Army for the rest of the war . In six weeks , the Eighth Army conducted 14 major and 24 minor amphibious operations , clearing Mindoro , Marinduque , Panay , Negros , Cebu and Bohol . In August 1945 , Eichelberger 's Eighth Army became part of the Occupation of Japan . In the one instance when the Japanese formed a self @-@ help vigilante guard to protect women from rape by off @-@ duty GIs , the Eighth Army ordered armoured vehicles in battle array into the streets and arrested the leaders , and the leaders received long prison terms . He was awarded an oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Service Medal for his services as commander of I Corps , a second for his command of Eighth Army in the Philippines , and a third for the occupation of Japan . He also received the Navy Distinguished Service Medal , two oak leaf clusters to his Silver Star Medal , the Bronze Star Medal and the Air Medal . He also received a number of foreign awards , including the Grand Officer of the Order of Orange Nassau with swords from the Netherlands , Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor from France , Grand Officer of the Order of the Crown and the Croix de Guerre with palm from Belgium , the Order of <unk> Calderón from Ecuador , the Distinguished Service Star , Liberation Medal and Legion of Honor from the Philippines , and the Grand Officer of the Military Order of Italy . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 After nearly 40 years of service , Eichelberger retired with the rank of lieutenant general on 31 December 1948 . In 1950 , he moved to Asheville , North Carolina , where he lived with his wife Em for the rest of his life . He suffered from a number of health problems , including hypertension and diabetes , and had his gall bladder removed . His name appeared in a series of articles for the Saturday Evening Post on his campaigns in the Southwest Pacific , actually written by ghostwriter Milton MacKaye . They subsequently expanded the articles into a book , Our Jungle Road to Tokyo . The book sold reasonably well , and Harry Truman and Omar Bradley requested autographed copies . In 1951 he traveled to Hollywood , where he served as technical consultant on Francis Goes to West Point ( 1952 ) and The Day the Band Played ( 1952 ) , but he was not altogether happy with the results . He turned his hand to writing articles about the Far East for Newsweek , but gave this away in 1954 . He then worked on the lecture circuit , giving speeches about his experiences , but gave this up too in 1955 . He campaigned for Richard Nixon in 1960 . 
 The United States Congress , in recognition of his service , promoted Eichelberger , along with a number of other officers who had commanded armies or similar higher formations , to general in 1954 . He was distressed that Harding and Fuller were still hurt and angry with him over being relieved of their commands , something he felt was really MacArthur 's fault . In turn Eichelberger never forgave Krueger or Sutherland for real or imagined slights . When Sutherland tried to talk , Eichelberger refused to speak to him . Eventually , Eichelberger decided to write a tell @-@ all book that " would destroy the MacArthur myth forever " . For this purpose , he gave his papers to Duke University . Jay <unk> , a historian there , published his letters in 1972 as Dear Miss Em : General Eichelberger 's War in the Pacific 1942 – 1945 . However , Eichelberger maintained his warm wartime relationship with Herring . Herring and his wife Mary stayed with the <unk> in Asheville in 1953 , and they exchanged regular letters . Eichelberger underwent exploratory prostate surgery in Asheville on 25 September 1961 . Complications set in and he died from pneumonia the following day . He was buried with full military honors in Arlington National Cemetery . 
 = = Military decorations and medals = = 
 = = = United States awards = = = 
 Distinguished Service Cross with oak leaf cluster 
 Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters 
 Navy Distinguished Service Medal 
 Silver Star with two oak leaf clusters 
 Legion of Merit 
 Bronze Star Medal 
 Air Medal 
 Mexican Border Service Medal 
 Victory Medal 
 American Defense Service Medal 
 Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal 
 World War II Victory Medal 
 Army of Occupation Medal 
 Source : Inventory of the Robert L. Eichelberger Papers , 1728 @-@ 1998 
 = = = Foreign awards = = = 
 Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE ) , United Kingdom 
 Companion of the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , United Kingdom 
 Grand Officer of the Order of Orange Nassau with swords , Netherlands 
 Grand Officer of the Legion of Honor , France 
 Order of the Rising Sun , Japan 
 Order of the Sacred Treasure , Japan 
 Grand Officer of the Order of the Crown and the Croix de Guerre with palm , Belgium 
 Order of <unk> Calderón , Ecuador 
 Distinguished Service Star , Liberation Medal and Legion of Honor , Philippines 
 Grand Officer of the Military Order of Italy 
 Source : Inventory of the Robert L. Eichelberger Papers , 1728 @-@ 1998 
 = = = Dates of rank = = = 
 = SMS Odin = 
 SMS Odin was the lead ship of her class of coastal defense ships ( Küstenpanzerschiffe ) built for the Imperial German Navy . She had one sister ship , Ägir . Odin , named for the eponymous Norse god , was built by the Kaiserliche Werft Danzig shipyard between 1893 and 1896 , and was armed with a main battery of three 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns . She served in the German fleet throughout the 1890s and was rebuilt in 1901 – 1903 . She served in the VI Battle Squadron after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but saw no action . Odin was demobilized in 1915 and used as a tender thereafter . After the war , she was rebuilt as a merchant ship and served in this capacity until 1935 , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Odin was 79 meters ( 259 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 15 @.@ 20 m ( 49 @.@ 9 ft ) and a maximum draft of 5 @.@ 61 m ( 18 @.@ 4 ft ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 754 long tons ( 3 @,@ 814 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by four coal @-@ fired boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 14 @.@ 4 knots ( 26 @.@ 7 km / h ; 16 @.@ 6 mph ) . She carried 370 t ( 360 long tons ; 410 short tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of approximately 1 @,@ 490 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 760 km ; 1 @,@ 710 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Odin had a crew of 20 officers and 256 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with three 24 cm K L / 35 guns mounted in three single gun turrets . Two were placed side by side forward , and the third was located aft of the main superstructure . They were supplied with a total of 204 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts . Odin also carried three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , two in swivel mounts on the deck amidships and one in the bow , submerged below the waterline . The ship was protected by an armored belt that was 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships , and an armored deck that was 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The conning tower had 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Odin was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Danzig in 1893 , launched on 3 November 1894 , and completed on 7 July 1896 , after which sea trials commenced . She was commissioned into the German fleet on 22 September 1896 . She served in the fleet for her entire peacetime career . Odin participated in the 1900 summer fleet exercises , where she served in the squadron that simulated the German navy , alongside the recently @-@ commissioned battleship Kaiser Friedrich III and the coastal defense ship Frithjof . 
 In 1901 , Odin was taken in hand at the Kaiserliche Werft in Danzig for an extensive reconstruction . Her old boilers were replaced with eight new Marine type boilers and her length was increased to 86 @.@ 15 m ( 282 @.@ 6 ft ) . This increased her displacement to 4 @,@ 376 t ( 4 @,@ 307 long tons ; 4 @,@ 824 short tons ) at full load . The lengthened hull , which improved her hydrodynamic shape , and the improved boilers increased her speed by a full knot , to 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) . Her coal storage was increased to 580 t ( 570 long tons ; 640 short tons ) , which allowed her to steam for an additional 800 nmi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) . The modernization work was completed by 1903 , at which point she returned to active service . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Odin was assigned to the VI Battle Squadron , along with her sister Ägir and the six Siegfried @-@ class coastal defense ships . The Squadron was disbanded on 31 August 1915 to free up the ships ' crews for more important tasks . Odin was thereafter used as a tender in Wilhelmshaven through to the end of the war . She was stricken from the naval register on 6 December 1919 and sold . In 1922 , she was rebuilt as a merchant ship at the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Rüstringen . She was operated by A. Bernstein Co . , out of Hamburg . She continued in this role until 1935 , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = HMS Lord Nelson ( 1906 ) = 
 HMS Lord Nelson was a Lord Nelson @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnought battleship launched in 1906 and completed in 1908 . She was the Royal Navy 's last pre @-@ dreadnought . The ship was flagship of the Channel Fleet when World War I began in 1914 . Lord Nelson was transferred to the Mediterranean Sea in early 1915 to participate in the Dardanelles Campaign . She remained there , becoming flagship of the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron , which was later redesignated the Aegean Squadron . After the Ottoman surrender in 1918 the ship moved to the Black Sea where she remained as flagship before returning to the United Kingdom in May 1919 . Lord Nelson was placed into reserve upon her arrival and sold for scrap in June 1920 . 
 = = Construction and description = = 
 HMS Lord Nelson was laid down by Palmers Shipbuilding and Iron Company at Jarrow on 18 May 1905 and launched on 4 September 1906 . Her completion was greatly delayed by the diversion of her 12 @-@ inch ( 305 mm ) guns and turrets to expedite completion of Dreadnought , and she was not fully completed until October 1908 . Although she was not the last pre @-@ dreadnought laid down for the Royal Navy , she was the last one commissioned . 
 Lord Nelson displaced 17 @,@ 820 long tons ( 18 @,@ 106 t ) at deep load as built , with a length of 443 feet 6 inches ( 135 @.@ 2 m ) , a beam of 79 feet 6 inches ( 24 @.@ 2 m ) , and a draft of 26 feet ( 7 @.@ 9 m ) . She was powered by two four @-@ cylinder inverted vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , which developed a total of 16 @,@ 750 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 490 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 She was armed with four 12 @-@ inch guns arranged in two twin gun turrets , one turret each fore and aft . Her secondary armament consisted of ten 9 @.@ 2 @-@ inch ( 234 mm ) guns , eight in twin gun turrets on each corner of the superstructure , and a single gun turret between them . For defence against torpedo boats , Lord Nelson carried twenty @-@ four QF 12 @-@ pounder 18 cwt guns and two 3 @-@ pounder guns . She also mounted five submerged 18 @-@ inch ( 457 mm ) torpedo tubes for which 23 torpedoes were stowed aboard . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ World War I = = = 
 HMS Lord Nelson was first commissioned in reserve on 1 December 1908 at Chatham Dockyard , being attached to the Nore Division of the Home Fleet with a nucleus crew . She first went into full commission on 5 January 1909 to relieve the battleship HMS Magnificent as flagship of the Nore Division , Home Fleet , and in April became part of the First Division , Home Fleet . She was transferred in January 1911 to the Second Division of the Home Fleet , and in May 1912 to the 2nd Battle Squadron . She was temporarily attached in September 1913 to the 4th Battle Squadron . In April 1914 , she relieved the battleship HMS Queen as Flagship , Vice Admiral , Channel Fleet . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August , Lord Nelson became flagship of the Channel Fleet and was based at Portland . With other ships , she covered the safe transport of the British Expeditionary Force , under the command of Sir John French , to France . On 14 November , she transferred to Sheerness to guard the English coast against the possibility of a German invasion . The ship returned to Portland Harbour on 30 December and patrolled the English Channel until February 1915 . 
 = = = = Dardanelles campaign , 1915 @-@ 1916 = = = = 
 In February 1915 , Lord Nelson was ordered to the Dardanelles to participate in the Dardanelles Campaign . She departed Portland on 18 February and joined the British Dardanelles Squadron at Mudros eight days later . She took part in the bombardment of the inner forts and supported the initial landings in early March . The Ottoman Turkish forts engaged her heavily on 7 March and hit her several times , including by a stone cannonball which landed on the deck and was kept as a souvenir by the Flag Officer , Arthur Baker , at Longcross Church ; she suffered damage to her superstructure and rigging and was holed by one hit below the waterline which flooded two coal bunkers . After repairs at Malta , the ship returned to take part in the main attack on the Narrows forts on 18 March . Later she bombarded Ottoman field batteries on 6 May prior to the Second Battle of Krithia . 
 Lord Nelson relieved the battleship Queen Elizabeth as flagship of the British Dardanelles Squadron on 12 May , flying the flag of Vice @-@ Admiral Rosslyn Erskine @-@ Wemyss . On 20 June , she bombarded docks and shipping at Gallipoli , aided by the spotting of a kite balloon , and inflicted significant damage . Lord Kitchener made his headquarters aboard her in November and , on 22 December , Lord Nelson hoisted the flag of Vice Admiral John de <unk> when he succeeded Wemyss . 
 = = = = Mediterranean operations , 1916 @-@ 18 = = = = 
 With the end of the Dardanelles Campaign in January 1916 , during which Lord Nelson had suffered no casualties , British naval forces in the area were reorganized and Lord Nelson became flagship of the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron , which was redesignated the Aegean Squadron in August 1917 ; under either name , the squadron was dispersed throughout the area to protect Allied @-@ held islands , support the British Army at Salonika , and guard against any attempted breakout from the Dardanelles by the German battlecruiser Goeben and light cruiser Breslau . Lord Nelson spent the remainder of the war based at Salonika and Mudros , alternating between the two bases with her sister ship Agamemnon ; the ship was based mostly at Salonika , with Agamemnon mostly at Mudros . 
 According to naval historian Ian Buxton , the most important role of the Royal Navy was to blockade the Dardanelles and thus guard the Eastern Mediterranean against a breakout by Goeben . On 12 January 1918 , Rear @-@ Admiral Arthur Hayes @-@ Sadler hoisted his flag aboard Lord Nelson at Mudros as the new commander of the Aegean Squadron . Needing transportation to Salonika for a conference with the British Army commander there , and finding his personal yacht unavailable , Hayes @-@ Sadler opted to have Lord Nelson take him there , and thus she was not present when Goeben and Breslau finally made their breakout attempt on 20 January . The ship could not get back to the Dardanelles in time to participate in the resulting Battle of Imbros or intercept Goeben before she gained shelter in the Dardanelles . Lord Nelson was given a short refit at Malta in October . 
 = = = Post @-@ World War I = = = 
 Lord Nelson was part of the British squadron that went to Constantinople in November following the armistice with the Ottoman Empire , after which she served as flagship in the Black Sea . In April 1919 , she conveyed Grand Duke Nicholas and Grand Duke Peter of Russia from the Black Sea to Genoa . 
 Lord Nelson returned to the United Kingdom in May 1919 and was placed in reserve until August , when she was placed on the sale list . On 4 June 1920 , she was sold to Stanlee Shipbreaking Company of Dover . She was resold to Slough Trading Company on 8 November 1920 , then again to German <unk> . She was towed to Germany for scrapping in January 1922 . 
 = It 's All Too Much = 
 " It 's All Too Much " is a song by the English rock group the Beatles from their 1969 album Yellow Submarine . Written by George Harrison in 1967 , it reflects the ideological themes of that year 's Summer of Love . The Beatles recorded the track in May 1967 , shortly after completing their album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . It was one of four new songs they then supplied for the 1968 animated film Yellow Submarine , to meet their contractual obligations to United Artists . 
 Harrison wrote " It 's All Too Much " as a celebration of his experiences with the hallucinogenic drug LSD , although he subsequently found the same realisations in Transcendental Meditation and denounced LSD after visiting Haight @-@ Ashbury in August 1967 . The song features Hammond organ , which provides the track with a drone @-@ like quality typical of Indian music , electric guitar feedback , and an overdubbed brass section . Largely self @-@ produced by the band , the recording displays an informal approach that contrasts with the discipline of the Beatles ' previous work , particularly Sgt. Pepper . The song 's sequence in the Yellow Submarine film has been recognised for its adventurousness in conveying a hallucinogenic experience . 
 Although several Beatles biographers dismiss the track as aimless , " It 's All Too Much " has received praise from many other commentators . Peter Doggett considers it to be " one of the pinnacles of British acid @-@ rock " , while Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone rates it among " the top five all @-@ time psychedelic <unk> in rock history " . Former Gong guitarist Steve Hillage adopted the song during his early years as a solo artist in the late 1970s . Journey , the House of Love , the Grateful Dead and the Church are among the other artists who have recorded or performed the track . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 " It 's All Too Much " reflects George Harrison 's experimentation with the hallucinogenic drug Lysergic acid diethylamide , commonly known as LSD or " acid " . Author Robert Rodriguez describes the track as " gloriously celebratory " , with a lyric that conveys " his acid revelations in a childlike way " . Rather than the song being purely drug @-@ related , Harrison states in his 1980 autobiography that the " realisations " brought about by his LSD experiences were also applicable to meditation . 
 Together with his Beatles bandmate John Lennon and their wives , Harrison first took acid in March 1965 . He likened the heightened awareness induced by the drug to " a light @-@ bulb [ going ] on in my head " and " gaining hundreds of years of experience within twelve hours " . In addition , he credited LSD with being the catalyst for his interest in Indian classical music , particularly the work of Ravi Shankar , and Eastern spirituality . By the time Harrison wrote " It 's All Too Much " , in 1967 , the Indian sitar had temporarily replaced the guitar as his main musical instrument , as he received tuition from Shankar and one of the latter 's protégés , Shambu Das . As with his other songs from this period , however , such as " Within You Without You " and " Blue Jay Way " , Harrison composed the melody on a keyboard instrument . In the case of " It 's All Too Much " , his use of Hammond organ allowed him to replicate the drone @-@ like sound of the harmonium commonly heard in Indian vocal pieces . 
 Coinciding with the counterculture 's preoccupation with enlightenment , 1967 marked the period when LSD use had become widespread among rock musicians and their audience . In a 1999 interview with Billboard magazine , Harrison said his aim had been " to write a rock 'n'roll song about the whole psychedelic thing of the time " . 
 = = Composition and musical structure = = 
 The song is in the key of G major and the time signature throughout is 4 / 4 . The melody is restricted within a G pedal point , with a simple melodic emphasis on scale notes 2 ( A ) and 7 ( F # ) . As a defining characteristic of Indian classical music , such minimal harmonic movement features in many of Harrison 's other Indian @-@ style compositions , including " Within You Without You " and " Blue Jay Way " . 
 Aside from the song 's intro and extended ending ( or coda ) , the composition is structured into three patterns of verse and chorus , with the second and third patterns separated by an instrumental section . The song originally contained a fourth verse – chorus combination , but this would be omitted from the officially released recording . Among musicologists discussing " It 's All Too Much " , Walter Everett describes it as a two @-@ chord composition , whereas Alan Pollack contends that the song 's sole chord is G major , although he concedes that <unk> may well list fleeting changes to C major over the choruses . In Pollack 's opinion , these sections appear to employ IV ( C major ) and ii minor ( A minor ) chords yet , rather than formal changes , " it all boils down to neighbor tone motion in the inner voices superimposed on to the pedal tone of G in the bass . " 
 AllMusic contributor Tom Maginnis writes that the lyrics " reflect the idealist optimism of the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ labeled ' summer of love ' and the kind of chemically enhanced mind @-@ expanding euphoria that pervaded the new ' hippie ' youth culture " . Author Ian Inglis views Harrison 's mention of " the love that 's shining all around here " and " Floating down the stream of time " as especially reflective of the philosophy behind the Summer of Love , while theologian Dale Allison identifies the singer 's " emerging religious worldview " in the first of those phrases . 
 The song quotes a line ( " With your long blonde hair and your eyes of blue " ) from the <unk> ' " Sorrow " , and at one point on the recording , the trumpets play part of Jeremiah Clarke 's " Prince of Denmark 's March " . The Beatles ' use of quotations here pre @-@ dates " All You Need Is Love " , which was written by Lennon and recorded in June 1967 for the group 's appearance on the Our World television broadcast . While noting the similar ideological theme behind the two compositions , Inglis writes of Harrison and Lennon " presenting alternative accounts of the same subject " in the manner of French Impressionists such as Monet , Renoir and Manet , each of whom painted their own interpretations of sites in Paris and Argenteuil . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The Beatles began recording " It 's All Too Much " on 25 May 1967 at De Lane Lea Studios , located on Kingsway in central London . With producer George Martin not in attendance that day , nor for the subsequent session , on the 26th , the band produced the recording themselves . The song had the working title of " Too Much " , a phrase that journalist Robert Fontenot terms " beatnik vernacular for an experience that was exceptionally mindblowing " . The group taped four takes of the basic track , the final version of which extended to over eight minutes , with Harrison playing Hammond organ , Lennon on lead guitar , Paul McCartney on bass , and Ringo Starr on drums . The following day , they added overdubs , comprising vocals , percussion and handclaps . In addition , according to authors Ian MacDonald and Kenneth Womack , Harrison also played lead guitar on the track . 
 MacDonald characterises the 25 – 26 May sessions as " chaotic " and typical of the group 's drug @-@ inspired efforts after completing their album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band late the previous month . On the Sunday following the sessions for " It 's All Too Much " , the four Beatles attended a party at their manager Brian Epstein 's house in Sussex , where Lennon and Harrison introduced music @-@ industry publicist Derek Taylor to LSD . The band returned to De Lane Lea on 2 June , with Martin now participating . That day , the trumpets and bass clarinet parts , played by four session musicians and conducted by Martin , were added to the track . 
 Maginnis describes the opening of the song as " a burst of howling guitar feedback and jubilant , church @-@ like organ " , adding : " The atmosphere hints at Harrison 's fascination with Indian music and Hindu philosophy at the time , having a distinct , Eastern @-@ flavored , droning undercurrent . " Following the intro to " I Feel Fine " in 1964 , " It 's All Too Much " is a rare example of the Beatles ' use of feedback on a recording and suggests the influence of Jimi Hendrix . Womack credits this guitar part to Harrison , who played his Epiphone Casino using " the instrument 's Bigsby [ tremolo ] bar in searing , full vibrato force " . Harrison later rued the prominence of the brass accompaniment , saying : " To this day I am still annoyed that I let them mess it up with those damn trumpets . Basically , the song 's quite good but , you know , messed up with those trumpets . " 
 = = = Mixing = = = 
 The Beatles carried out final mixing on " It 's All Too Much " , again at De Lane Lea , on 12 October 1967 , while completing work on their Magical Mystery Tour EP . In the months since recording the song , Harrison had sworn off acid after visiting the Haight @-@ Ashbury district of San Francisco in August , with Pattie Boyd , Taylor and others . He said he found himself disillusioned at how , rather than an enlightened micro @-@ society , Haight @-@ Ashbury seemed to be a haven for dropouts and drug addicts . On 29 September , Harrison and Lennon appeared on David Frost 's weekly television show , during which they publicly disavowed LSD , and espoused the benefits of Transcendental Meditation . 
 The Beatles considered the song for inclusion in their 1967 TV film Magical Mystery Tour . Instead , they selected it later that year for the soundtrack to the Yellow Submarine animated film ( 1968 ) , to meet their contractual obligations to supply United Artists with four new songs for the project . The version used in the film was a heavily edited version of the track , shortened to 2 : 22 through the inclusion of just two of the original song 's four verses and only the start of the long coda . 
 " It 's All Too Much " was remixed for inclusion on the Yellow Submarine album on 16 October 1968 . The vocals and handclaps were processed using automatic double tracking , so allowing these parts to be split across the stereo image . For this version , the song was edited down from the original eight minutes to a running time of 6 : 28 , making it the longest officially released Beatles track written by Harrison . The edit was achieved by cutting a 35 @-@ second portion from around the three @-@ minute mark , thereby removing the third chorus and the fourth verse ( the last of which had appeared in the film ) , and by fading out before the final minute of the coda . 
 = = Appearance in the Yellow Submarine film = = 
 Discussing the various underground influences in Yellow Submarine , author Stephen Glynn identifies the segment featuring " It 's All Too Much " as being among the film 's " most daring sequences " . Led by art director Heinz Edelmann , the animation for the song reflects the influence of psychedelic artists such as Hapshash and the Coloured Coat , who in turn were inspired by the work of the nineteenth @-@ century illustrator Aubrey Beardsley . Referring to London 's UFO Club , for which the Hapshash team designed promotional posters , Glynn considers the scene to be a cinematic version of Unlimited Freak Out – " a ' happening ' that sought to create a <unk> mind @-@ expanding environment involving music , light and people " . 
 The song appears during the climax of the film , following Lennon 's defeat of the Chief Blue Meanie 's enforcer , the Flying Glove , through the power of the word " Love " . In Womack 's description , in the sequence for " It 's All Too Much " , the Beatles " vanquish the evil Blue Meanies and celebrate as the colorful beauty of friendship and music have been restored to Pepperland " . Author George Case describes the same victory scene as " a psychotropic cartoon dreamscape " and an example of the Beatles ' more overt allusions to the hallucinogenic experience . Speaking in 1999 , Starr said of " It 's All Too Much " : " that 's the [ track ] that really sets the mood of the movie ... that 's where the music and the movie really gel . " 
 The film represented the final episode in the Beatles ' psychedelic period , although the band had already returned to making more roots @-@ based music at the start of 1968 . Referring to the drug @-@ inspired imagery that led Rank to pull Yellow Submarine from its UK cinema run , Glynn writes : " Indeed , the imagery accompanying [ Harrison 's ] ' Only a Northern Song ' and ' It 's All Too Much ' only ' makes sense ' when read as attempting an audio @-@ visual recreation of the hallucinogenic state ... " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 An EP containing " It 's All Too Much " and the three other new soundtrack songs had been scheduled for September 1968 , but a full album was created instead . With the addition of the previously issued " Yellow Submarine " and " All You Need Is Love " to fill out side one of the LP , George Martin 's orchestral pieces from the film made up the second side . Viewed as a secondary release beside the band 's recently issued double LP , The Beatles , the Yellow Submarine album appeared in January 1969 , six months after the film 's London premiere . In January 1996 , " It 's All Too Much " ( backed by " Only a Northern Song " ) was issued on a jukebox @-@ only single , pressed on blue vinyl , as part of a series of Beatles releases by Capitol Records ' CEMA Special Markets division . 
 Recalling the release of Yellow Submarine in his book The Beatles Forever ( 1977 ) , Nicholas Schaffner described " It 's All Too Much " as the only one of the new songs that appeared " to have taken more than a few hours to write " . He added : " [ its ] highlights include some searing Velvet Underground feedback and an unusually witty epigram that just about sums up the Spirit of ' 67 : ' Show me that I 'm everywhere , and get me home for tea . ' " Rodriguez recognises the timing of the song 's release on its public perception . While he notes that the recording was " positively anarchic " in mid @-@ 1967 , by 1969 , when it received widespread release , the song was " slightly less groundbreaking and a little more reactionary to the psychedelic movement that the band itself had helped popularize " . 
 Among the contemporary reviews of the album , Beat Instrumental described " It 's All Too Much " and " Only a Northern Song " as " superb pieces " that " redeem " side one . In his lengthy assessment of the track , Barry Miles of International Times wrote : " Endless , mantric , a round , interwoven , trellised , tessellated , filigreed , <unk> , spiralling is It 's All Too Much [ – ] George 's Indian @-@ timed , with drums fading @-@ in @-@ and @-@ out , spurts of life to a decaying note , multi @-@ level , handclapping number ... High treble notes flicker like moths around the top register . Happy singalong music . " In his 1998 book The Beatles Diary , Miles praised it further as " the most striking piece of psychedelia The Beatles ever recorded " and concluded : " Discordant , off @-@ beat and effortlessly brilliant , the song was ( alongside ' Taxman ' ) Harrison 's finest piece of Western rock music to date . " 
 = = Retrospective assessment and legacy = = 
 Although Yellow Submarine has attained the status of a classic children 's animated film , many Beatles biographers consider the band 's post @-@ Sgt. Pepper 1967 recordings to be substandard work . Among these authors , Mark Hertsgaard cites Martin 's view that the soundtrack album was made up of " bottom of the barrel " material and dismisses " It 's All Too Much " as " little more than formless shrieking " . Ian MacDonald also holds the track in low regard , describing it as a " protracted exercise in drug @-@ mesmerised G @-@ pedal monotony " . Discussing the lyrics , particularly the line " Show me that I 'm everywhere , and get me home for tea " , MacDonald considers the song to be " the locus classicus of English psychedelia " and he comments that in Britain , unlike in America , " tradition , nature , and the child 's @-@ eye @-@ view were the things which sprang most readily to the LSD @-@ heightened Anglo @-@ Saxon mind . " Author and journalist Graham Reid highlights the same line as being the British equivalent of " Tune in , turn on , drop out " , the phrase coined by Timothy Leary that came to define the American psychedelic experience . 
 Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Greg Kot admired the song , saying : " once again , a raga @-@ flavored groove brings out Harrison 's best in the walloping ' It 's All Too Much . ' " That same year , Nigel Williamson of Uncut described it as " a psychedelic classic " that , had it been recorded earlier in 1967 , " would have made Sgt Pepper an even better album " . In the fourth edition of The Rolling Stone Album Guide ( 2004 ) , Rob Sheffield wrote : " Yellow Submarine was a flat soundtrack rather than a real album , but here 's a question : Why is George 's ' It 's All Too Much ' not heralded as one of the top five all @-@ time psychedelic <unk> in rock history ? " Bruce Eder of AllMusic similarly considers the album to be " inessential " and describes the track as " the jewel of the new songs ... resplendent in swirling [ organ ] , larger @-@ than @-@ life percussion , and tidal waves of feedback guitar " and " a virtuoso excursion into otherwise hazy psychedelia " . 
 In Mojo 's The Beatles ' Final Years Special Edition ( 2003 ) , Peter Doggett acknowledged the comparative rarity of " It 's All Too Much " within the Beatles canon and added : " Yet it 's one of the pinnacles of British acid @-@ rock , its sleepwalking rhythm retaining a bizarrely contemporary feel today . " Having included the track in his 2011 list of Harrison 's " 10 Greatest Beatles Songs " , Joe Bosso of MusicRadar commented : " At times the song seems to drift away with Harrison 's dreamy verses , but just as quickly it 's chopping down trees with explosive percussion and thunderous handclaps . Wild guitar breaks by both Harrison and John Lennon help to make It 's All Too Much a dizzying treat . " 
 The song featured in Mojo 's 1997 list " <unk> : The 100 Greatest Classics " , where Jon Savage described it as an " aural pleasure " that included " mad brass and handclaps so luscious that they sound like the chewing of a thousand cows " . In July 2001 , Uncut placed the song at number 43 on its list of " The 50 Greatest Beatles Tracks " . Five year later , Mojo ranked it 85th on the magazine 's list of " The 101 Greatest Beatles Songs " ( between " You Won 't See Me " and " Lovely Rita " ) . The editors credited " It 's All Too Much " with inspiring the Krautrock genre , while Primal Scream singer Bobby Gillespie described it as " a great piece of music " that , in departing from the Beatles ' more regimented approach , evokes " the same feeling you get in ' Be @-@ Bop @-@ A @-@ Lula ' or a Muddy Waters or John Lee Hooker tune " . Writing for the website Ultimate Classic Rock , Dave Swanson considers " It 's All Too Much " to be " one of the band 's most captivating works from the psychedelic era , and one of the Beatles ' great lost songs " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 = = = Steve Hillage = = = 
 Former Gong guitarist Steve Hillage recorded " It 's All Too Much " for his 1976 solo album , L – a version that Eder highlights as " a dazzling cover " and Williamson terms " stunning " . Produced by Todd Rundgren , the recording was also issued as a single . 
 In October 1976 , Phil Sutcliffe of Sounds magazine described Hillage 's adoption of both " It 's All Too Much " and Donovan 's " Hurdy Gurdy Man " as the " policy statements " for his solo career . Speaking to Trouser Press that same month , Hillage said he was drawn to the Beatles song because of its positive message , but especially its success in conveying joy without resorting to escapism . 
 Hillage included " It 's All Too Much " in his concert performances ; live versions from the late 1970s appear on his albums Live Herald ( 1979 ) , BBC Radio 1 Live ( 1992 ) and Rainbow 1977 ( 2014 ) . Reviewing BBC Radio 1 Live for AllMusic , Chris Nickson writes that Hillage 's reading " not only heightens the Eastern @-@ flavored psychedelia , but lets [ the guitarist ] unleash some of his most scorching axe work yet , tearing into the song like a starving man given a five @-@ course meal " . 
 = = = Other artists = = = 
 Journey also issued a recording of the song in 1976 , on their album Look into the Future . Besides the late 1970s renditions , according to Miles , the Beatles ' " It 's All Too Much " " won fresh acclaim from a later wave of acid @-@ rock adventurers " during the early 1990s . The House of Love released a cover of the song as the B @-@ side to " Feel " , the first single from their 1992 album Babe Rainbow . The previous year , Loves Young Nightmare recorded it ( as " All Too Much " ) for Revolution No. 9 : A Tribute to The Beatles in Aid of Cambodia , a multi @-@ artist compilation supplied with Revolver magazine ; the album was reissued in the United States in 1997 , following the popularity there of Britpop bands such as Oasis . The Church included the track on their 1999 covers album A Box of Birds . 
 " It 's All Too Much " has been performed live by the Grateful Dead , by the latter 's associated acts <unk> and Phil Lesh and Friends , and by Yonder Mountain String Band . Other artists who have recorded the song include All About Eve , Paul Gilbert , the Violet Burning , Yukihiro Takahashi and Rich Robinson . A version by former MC5 guitarist Wayne Kramer appeared on the Harrison tribute album Songs from the Material World ( 2003 ) . 
 Experimental musician Greg Davis and jazz singer @-@ songwriter Chris Weisman recorded the track for their 2010 album Northern Songs , a project that The Village Voice described as blending " <unk> " with " gongs , field recordings , and generally orchestrated nirvana " . The Flaming Lips performed " It 's All Too Much " at the George Fest tribute concert in September 2014 , providing " the most sonically pleasing song of the night " , according to Consequence of Sound 's reviewer . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald and Kenneth Womack : 
 George Harrison – lead vocal , Hammond organ , lead guitar , backing vocal , handclaps 
 John Lennon – harmony vocal , lead guitar , handclaps 
 Paul McCartney – harmony vocal , bass , cowbell , handclaps 
 Ringo Starr – drums , tambourine 
 David Mason and three uncredited musicians – trumpets 
 Paul Harvey – bass clarinet 
 = Alkali metal = 
 The alkali metals are a group ( column ) in the periodic table consisting of the chemical elements lithium ( Li ) , sodium ( Na ) , potassium ( K ) , rubidium ( Rb ) , caesium ( Cs ) , and francium ( Fr ) . This group lies in the s @-@ block of the periodic table of elements as all alkali metals have their outermost electron in an s @-@ orbital : this element / electron configuration results in their characteristic properties . The alkali metals provide the best example of group trends in properties in the periodic table , with elements exhibiting well @-@ characterized homologous behaviour . 
 The alkali metals have very similar properties : they are all shiny , soft , highly reactive metals at standard temperature and pressure and readily lose their outermost electron to form cations with charge + 1 . They can all be cut easily with a knife due to their softness , exposing a shiny surface that tarnishes rapidly in air due to oxidation by atmospheric moisture and oxygen . Because of their high reactivity , they must be stored under oil to prevent reaction with air , and are found naturally only in salts and never as the free element . In the modern IUPAC nomenclature , the alkali metals comprise the group 1 elements , excluding hydrogen ( H ) , which is nominally a group 1 element but not normally considered to be an alkali metal as it rarely exhibits behaviour comparable to that of the alkali metals . All the alkali metals react with water , with the heavier alkali metals reacting more vigorously than the lighter ones . 
 All of the discovered alkali metals occur in nature : in order of abundance , sodium is the most abundant , followed by potassium , lithium , rubidium , caesium , and finally francium , which is very rare due to its extremely high radioactivity ; francium occurs only in traces , the product of natural decay chains . Experiments have been conducted to attempt the synthesis of ununennium ( Uue ) , which is likely to be the next member of the group , but they have all met with failure . However , ununennium may not be an alkali metal due to relativistic effects , which are predicted to have a large influence on the chemical properties of superheavy elements ; even if it does turn out to be an alkali metal , it is predicted to have some differences in physical and chemical properties from its lighter homologues . 
 Most alkali metals have many different applications . One of the best @-@ known applications of the pure elements the use of rubidium and caesium in atomic clocks , of which caesium atomic clocks are the most accurate and precise representation of time . A common application of the compounds of sodium is the sodium @-@ vapour lamp , which emits very efficient light . Table salt , or sodium chloride , has been used since antiquity . Sodium and potassium are also essential elements , having major biological roles as electrolytes , and although the other alkali metals are not essential , they also have various effects on the body , both beneficial and harmful . 
 = = Properties = = 
 = = = Physical and chemical = = = 
 The physical and chemical properties of the alkali metals can be readily explained by their having an ns1 valence electron configuration , which results in weak metallic bonding . Hence , all the alkali metals are soft and have low densities , melting and boiling points , as well as heats of sublimation , vaporisation , and dissociation They all crystallize in the body @-@ centered cubic crystal structure , and have distinctive flame colours because their outer s electron is very easily excited . The ns1 configuration also results in the alkali metals having very large atomic and ionic radii , as well as high thermal and electrical conductivity . Their chemistry is dominated by the loss of their lone valence electron to form the + 1 oxidation state , due to the ease of ionizing this electron and the very high second ionization energy . Most of the chemistry has been observed only for the first five members of the group . The chemistry of francium is not well established due to its extreme radioactivity ; thus , the presentation of its properties here is limited . 
 The alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other . For instance , when moving down the table , all known alkali metals show increasing atomic radius , decreasing electronegativity , increasing reactivity , and decreasing melting and boiling points as well as heats of fusion and vaporisation . In general , their densities increase when moving down the table , with the exception that potassium is less dense than sodium . One of the very few properties of the alkali metals that does not display a very smooth trend is their reduction potentials : lithium 's value is anomalous , being more negative than the others . This is because the Li + ion has a very high hydration energy in the gas phase : though the lithium ion disrupts the structure of water significantly , causing a higher change in entropy , this high hydration energy is enough to make the reduction potentials indicate it as being the most electropositive alkali metal , despite the difficulty of ionizing it in the gas phase . 
 The stable alkali metals are all silver @-@ coloured metals except for caesium , which has a golden tint : it is one of only three metals that are clearly coloured ( the other two being copper and gold ) . Additionally , the heavy alkaline earth metals calcium , strontium , and barium , as well as the divalent lanthanides europium and ytterbium , are pale yellow , though the colour is much less prominent than it is for caesium . Their lustre tarnishes rapidly in air due to oxidation . They all crystallize in the body @-@ centered cubic crystal structure , and have distinctive flame colours because their outer s electron is very easily excited . 
 All the alkali metals are highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in nature . Because of this , they are usually stored in mineral oil or kerosene ( paraffin oil ) . They react aggressively with the halogens to form the alkali metal halides , which are white ionic crystalline compounds that are all soluble in water except lithium fluoride ( LiF ) . The alkali metals also react with water to form strongly alkaline hydroxides and thus should be handled with great care . The heavier alkali metals react more vigorously than the lighter ones ; for example , when dropped into water , caesium produces a larger explosion than potassium . The alkali metals have the lowest first ionisation energies in their respective periods of the periodic table because of their low effective nuclear charge and the ability to attain a noble gas configuration by losing just one electron . The second ionisation energy of all of the alkali metals is very high as it is in a full shell that is also closer to the nucleus ; thus , they almost always lose a single electron , forming cations . The alkalides are an exception : they are unstable compounds which contain alkali metals in a − 1 oxidation state , which is very unusual as before the discovery of the alkalides , the alkali metals were not expected to be able to form anions and were thought to be able to appear in salts only as cations . The alkalide anions have filled s @-@ subshells , which gives them more stability and allows them to exist . All the stable alkali metals except lithium are known to be able to form alkalides , and the alkalides have much theoretical interest due to their unusual stoichiometry and low ionisation potentials . <unk> are chemically similar to the <unk> , which are salts with trapped electrons acting as anions . A particularly striking example of an alkalide is " inverse sodium hydride " , H + Na − ( both ions being complexed ) , as opposed to the usual sodium hydride , Na + H − : it is unstable in isolation , due to its high energy resulting from the displacement of two electrons from hydrogen to sodium , although several derivatives are predicted to be metastable or stable . 
 In aqueous solution , the alkali metal ions form aqua ions of the formula [ M ( H2O ) n ] + , where n is the solvation number . Their coordination numbers and shapes agree well with those expected from their ionic radii . In aqueous solution the water molecules directly attached to the metal ion are said to belong to the first coordination sphere , also known as the first , or primary , solvation shell . The bond between a water molecule and the metal ion is a dative covalent bond , with the oxygen atom donating both electrons to the bond . Each coordinated water molecule may be attached by hydrogen bonds to other water molecules . The latter are said to reside in the second coordination sphere . However , for the alkali metal cations , the second coordination sphere is not well @-@ defined as the + 1 charge on the cation is not high enough to polarize the water molecules in the primary solvation shell enough for them to form strong hydrogen bonds with those in the second coordination sphere , producing a more stable entity . The solvation number for Li + has been experimentally determined to be 4 , forming the tetrahedral [ Li ( H2O ) 4 ] + : while solvation numbers of 3 to 6 have been found for lithium aqua ions , solvation numbers less than 4 may be the result of the formation of contact ion @-@ pairs , and the higher solvation numbers may be interpreted in terms of water molecules that approach [ Li ( H2O ) 4 ] + through a face of the tetrahedron , though molecular dynamic simulations may indicate the existence of an octahedral <unk> ion . There are also probably six water molecules in the primary solvation sphere of the sodium ion , forming the octahedral [ Na ( H2O ) 6 ] + ion . While it was previously thought that the heavier alkali metals also formed octahedral <unk> ions , it has since been found that potassium and rubidium probably form the [ K ( H2O ) 8 ] + and [ Rb ( H2O ) 8 ] + ions , which have the square antiprismatic structure , and that caesium forms the 12 @-@ coordinate [ Cs ( H2O ) 12 ] + ion . 
 = = = = Lithium = = = = 
 The chemistry of lithium shows several differences from that of the rest of the group as the small Li + cation polarises anions and gives its compounds a more covalent character . Lithium and magnesium have a diagonal relationship due to their similar atomic radii , so that they show some similarities . For example , lithium forms a stable nitride , a property common among all the alkaline earth metals ( magnesium 's group ) but unique among the alkali metals . In addition , among their respective groups , only lithium and magnesium form covalent organometallic compounds ( e.g. <unk> and <unk> ) . 
 Lithium fluoride is the only alkali metal halide that is not soluble in water , and lithium hydroxide is the only alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent . Conversely , lithium perchlorate and other lithium salts with large anions that cannot be polarized are much more stable than the analogous compounds of the other alkali metals , probably because Li + has a high solvation energy . This effect also means that most simple lithium salts are commonly encountered in hydrated form , because the anhydrous forms are extremely hygroscopic : this allows salts like lithium chloride and lithium bromide to be used in dehumidifiers and air @-@ conditioners . 
 = = = = Francium = = = = 
 Francium is also predicted to show some differences due to its high atomic weight , causing its electrons to travel at considerable fractions of the speed of light and thus making relativistic effects more prominent . In contrast to the trend of decreasing electronegativities and ionisation energies of the alkali metals , francium 's electronegativity and ionisation energy are predicted to be higher than caesium 's due to the relativistic stabilisation of the 7s electrons ; also , its atomic radius is expected to be abnormally low . All known physical properties of francium also deviate from the clear trends going from lithium to caesium , such as the first ionisation energy , electron affinity , and anion polarizability . The <unk> molecule is also polarized as Cs + Fr − , showing that the 7s subshell of francium is much more strongly affected by relativistic effects than the 6s subshell of caesium . Additionally , francium superoxide ( FrO2 ) is expected to have covalent character , unlike the other alkali metal superoxides , because of bonding contributions from the 6p electrons of francium . 
 = = = Nuclear = = = 
 All the alkali metals have odd atomic numbers ; hence , their isotopes must be either odd – odd ( both proton and neutron number are odd ) or odd – even ( proton number is odd , but neutron number is even ) . Odd – odd nuclei have even mass numbers , whereas odd – even nuclei have odd mass numbers . Odd – odd primordial nuclides are rare because most odd – odd nuclei are highly unstable with respect to beta decay , because the decay products are even – even , and are therefore more strongly bound , due to nuclear pairing effects . 
 Due to the great rarity of odd – odd nuclei , almost all the primordial isotopes of the alkali metals are odd – even ( the exceptions being the light stable isotope lithium @-@ 6 and the long @-@ lived radioisotope potassium @-@ 40 ) . For a given odd mass number , there can be only a single beta @-@ stable nuclide , since there is not a difference in binding energy between even – odd and odd – even comparable to that between even – even and odd – odd , leaving other nuclides of the same mass number ( isobars ) free to beta decay toward the lowest @-@ mass nuclide . An effect of the instability of an odd number of either type of nucleons is that odd @-@ numbered elements , such as the alkali metals , tend to have fewer stable isotopes than even @-@ numbered elements . Of the 26 monoisotopic elements that have only a single stable isotope , all but one have an odd atomic number and all but one also have an even number of neutrons . Beryllium is the single exception to both rules , due to its low atomic number . 
 All of the alkali metals except lithium and caesium have at least one naturally occurring radioisotope : sodium @-@ 22 and sodium @-@ 24 are trace radioisotopes produced <unk> , potassium @-@ 40 and rubidium @-@ 87 have very long half @-@ lives and thus occur naturally , and all isotopes of francium are radioactive . Caesium was also thought to be radioactive in the early 20th century , although it has no naturally occurring radioisotopes . ( Francium had not been discovered yet at that time . ) The natural radioisotope of potassium , potassium @-@ 40 , makes up about 0 @.@ 012 % of natural potassium , and thus natural potassium is weakly radioactive . This natural radioactivity became a basis for a mistaken claim of the discovery for element 87 ( the next alkali metal after caesium ) in 1925 . 
 Caesium @-@ 137 , with a half @-@ life of 30 @.@ 17 years , is one of the two principal medium @-@ lived fission products , along with strontium @-@ 90 , which are responsible for most of the radioactivity of spent nuclear fuel after several years of cooling , up to several hundred years after use . It constitutes most of the radioactivity still left from the Chernobyl accident . 137Cs undergoes high @-@ energy beta decay and eventually becomes stable barium @-@ 137 . It is a strong emitter of gamma radiation . 137Cs has a very low rate of neutron capture and cannot be feasibly disposed of in this way , but must be allowed to decay . 137Cs has been used as a tracer in hydrologic studies , analogous to the use of tritium . Small amounts of caesium @-@ 134 and caesium @-@ 137 were released into the environment during nearly all nuclear weapon tests and some nuclear accidents , most notably the Goiânia accident and the Chernobyl disaster . As of 2005 , caesium @-@ 137 is the principal source of radiation in the zone of alienation around the Chernobyl nuclear power plant . 
 = = Periodic trends = = 
 The alkali metals are more similar to each other than the elements in any other group are to each other . For instance , when moving down the table , all known alkali metals show increasing atomic radius , decreasing electronegativity , increasing reactivity , and decreasing melting and boiling points as well as heats of fusion and vaporisation . In general , their densities increase when moving down the table , with the exception that potassium is less dense than sodium . 
 = = = Atomic and ionic radii = = = 
 The atomic radii of the alkali metals increase going down the group . Because of the shielding effect , when an atom has more than one electron shell , each electron feels electric repulsion from the other electrons as well as electric attraction from the nucleus . In the alkali metals , the outermost electron only feels a net charge of + 1 , as some of the nuclear charge ( which is equal to the atomic number ) is cancelled by the inner electrons ; the number of inner electrons of an alkali metal is always one less than the nuclear charge . Therefore , the only factor which affects the atomic radius of the alkali metals is the number of electron shells . Since this number increases down the group , the atomic radius must also increase down the group . 
 The ionic radii of the alkali metals are much smaller than their atomic radii . This is because the outermost electron of the alkali metals is in a different electron shell than the inner electrons , and thus when it is removed the resulting atom has one fewer electron shell and is smaller . Additionally , the effective nuclear charge has increased , and thus the electrons are attracted more strongly towards the nucleus and the ionic radius decreases . 
 = = = First ionisation energy = = = 
 The first ionisation energy of an element or molecule is the energy required to move the most loosely held electron from one mole of gaseous atoms of the element or molecules to form one mole of gaseous ions with electric charge + 1 . The factors affecting the first ionisation energy are the nuclear charge , the amount of shielding by the inner electrons and the distance from the most loosely held electron from the nucleus , which is always an outer electron in main group elements . The first two factors change the effective nuclear charge the most loosely held electron feels . Since the outermost electron of alkali metals always feels the same effective nuclear charge ( + 1 ) , the only factor which affects the first ionisation energy is the distance from the outermost electron to the nucleus . Since this distance increases down the group , the outermost electron feels less attraction from the nucleus and thus the first ionisation energy decreases . ( This trend is broken in francium due to the relativistic stabilization and contraction of the 7s orbital , bringing francium 's valence electron closer to the nucleus than would be expected from non @-@ relativistic calculations . This makes francium 's outermost electron feel more attraction from the nucleus , increasing its first ionisation energy slightly beyond that of caesium . ) 
 The second ionisation energy of the alkali metals is much higher than the first as the second @-@ most loosely held electron is part of a fully filled electron shell and is thus difficult to remove . 
 = = = Reactivity = = = 
 The reactivities of the alkali metals increase going down the group . This is the result of a combination of two factors : the first ionisation energies and atomisation energies of the alkali metals . Because the first ionisation energy of the alkali metals decreases down the group , it is easier for the outermost electron to be removed from the atom and participate in chemical reactions , thus increasing reactivity down the group . The atomisation energy measures the strength of the metallic bond of an element , which falls down the group as the atoms increase in radius and thus the metallic bond must increase in length , making the delocalised electrons further away from the attraction of the nuclei of the heavier alkali metals . Adding the atomisation and first ionisation energies gives a quantity closely related to ( but not equal to ) the activation energy of the reaction of an alkali metal with another substance . This quantity decreases going down the group , and so does the activation energy ; thus , chemical reactions can occur faster and the reactivity increases down the group . 
 = = = Electronegativity = = = 
 Electronegativity is a chemical property that describes the tendency of an atom or a functional group to attract electrons ( or electron density ) towards itself . If the bond between sodium and chlorine in sodium chloride were covalent , the pair of shared electrons would be attracted to the chlorine because the effective nuclear charge on the outer electrons is + 7 in chlorine but is only + 1 in sodium . The electron pair is attracted so close to the chlorine atom that they are practically transferred to the chlorine atom ( an ionic bond ) . However , if the sodium atom was replaced by a lithium atom , the electrons will not be attracted as close to the chlorine atom as before because the lithium atom is smaller , making the electron pair more strongly attracted to the closer effective nuclear charge from lithium . Hence , the larger alkali metal atoms ( further down the group ) will be less electronegative as the bonding pair is less strongly attracted towards them . 
 Because of the higher electronegativity of lithium , some of its compounds have a more covalent character . For example , lithium iodide ( <unk> ) will dissolve in organic solvents , a property of most covalent compounds . Lithium fluoride ( LiF ) is the only alkali halide that is not soluble in water , and lithium hydroxide ( LiOH ) is the only alkali metal hydroxide that is not deliquescent . 
 = = = Melting and boiling points = = = 
 The melting point of a substance is the point where it changes state from solid to liquid while the boiling point of a substance ( in liquid state ) is the point where the vapour pressure of the liquid equals the environmental pressure surrounding the liquid and all the liquid changes state to gas . As a metal is heated to its melting point , the metallic bonds keeping the atoms in place weaken so that the atoms can move around , and the metallic bonds eventually break completely at the metal 's boiling point . Therefore , the falling melting and boiling points of the alkali metals indicate that the strength of the metallic bonds of the alkali metals decreases down the group . This is because metal atoms are held together by the electromagnetic attraction from the positive ions to the delocalised electrons . As the atoms increase in size going down the group ( because their atomic radius increases ) , the nuclei of the ions move further away from the delocalised electrons and hence the metallic bond becomes weaker so that the metal can more easily melt and boil , thus lowering the melting and boiling points . ( The increased nuclear charge is not a relevant factor due to the shielding effect . ) 
 = = = Density = = = 
 The alkali metals all have the same crystal structure ( body @-@ centred cubic ) and thus the only relevant factors are the number of atoms that can fit into a certain volume and the mass of one of the atoms , since density is defined as mass per unit volume . The first factor depends on the volume of the atom and thus the atomic radius , which increases going down the group ; thus , the volume of an alkali metal atom increases going down the group . The mass of an alkali metal atom also increases going down the group . Thus , the trend for the densities of the alkali metals depends on their atomic weights and atomic radii ; if figures for these two factors are known , the ratios between the densities of the alkali metals can then be calculated . The resultant trend is that the densities of the alkali metals increase down the table , with an exception at potassium . Due to having the lowest atomic weight of all the elements in their period and having the largest atomic radius for their periods , the alkali metals are the least dense metals in the periodic table . Lithium , sodium , and potassium are the only three metals in the periodic table that are less dense than water : in fact , lithium is the least dense known solid at room temperature . 
 = = Compounds = = 
 = = = Hydroxides = = = 
 All the alkali metals react vigorously or explosively with cold water , producing an aqueous solution of a strongly basic alkali metal hydroxide and releasing hydrogen gas . This reaction becomes more vigorous going down the group : lithium reacts steadily with effervescence , but sodium and potassium can ignite and rubidium and caesium sink in water and generate hydrogen gas so rapidly that shock waves form in the water that may shatter glass containers . When an alkali metal is dropped into water , it produces an explosion , of which there are two separate stages . The metal reacts with the water first , breaking the hydrogen bonds in the water and producing hydrogen gas ; this takes place faster for the more reactive heavier alkali metals . Second , the heat generated by the first part of the reaction often ignites the hydrogen gas , causing it to burn explosively into the surrounding air . This secondary hydrogen gas explosion produces the visible flame above the bowl of water , lake or other body of water , not the initial reaction of the metal with water ( which tends to happen mostly under water ) . The alkali metal hydroxides are the most basic known hydroxides . 
 Recent research has suggested that the explosive behavior of alkali metals in water is driven by a Coulomb explosion rather than solely by rapid generation of hydrogen itself . All alkali metals melt as a part of the reaction with water . Water molecules ionize the bare metallic surface of the liquid metal , leaving a positively charged metal surface and negatively charged water ions . The attraction between the charged metal and water ions will rapidly increase the surface area , causing an exponential increase of ionization . When the repulsive forces within the liquid metal surface exceeds the forces of the surface tension , it vigorously explodes . 
 = = = Compounds with the group 14 elements = = = 
 Lithium and sodium react with carbon to form <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , which can also be obtained by reaction of the metal with acetylene . Potassium , rubidium , and caesium react with graphite ; their atoms are intercalated between the hexagonal graphite layers , forming graphite intercalation compounds of formulae <unk> ( dark grey , almost black ) , <unk> ( dark grey , almost black ) , <unk> ( blue ) , <unk> ( steel blue ) , and <unk> ( bronze ) ( M 
 = K , Rb , or Cs ) . These compounds are over 200 times more electrically conductive than pure graphite , suggesting that the valence electron of the alkali metal is transferred to the graphite layers ( e.g. M + C − 
 8 ) . Upon heating of <unk> , the elimination of potassium atoms results in the conversion in sequence to <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and finally <unk> . <unk> is a very strong reducing agent and is pyrophoric and explodes on contact with water . While the large alkali metals ( K , Rb , and Cs ) initially form <unk> , the smaller ones initially form <unk> . 
 When the alkali metals react with the heavier elements in the carbon group , ionic substances with cage @-@ like structures are formed , such as the silicide <unk> ( M = 
 K , Rb , or Cs ) , which contains M + and tetrahedral <unk> − 
 4 ions . The chemistry of alkali metal <unk> , involving the <unk> ion <unk> − and other cluster ( Zintl ) ions such as Ge2 − 
 4 , <unk> − 
 9 , Ge2 − 
 9 , and [ ( <unk> ) 2 ] 6 − , is largely analogous to that of the corresponding silicides . Alkali metal <unk> are mostly ionic , sometimes with the <unk> ion ( <unk> − ) , and sometimes with more complex Zintl ions such as <unk> − 
 9 , which appears in <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) . The monatomic <unk> ion ( <unk> − ) is unknown , and indeed its formation is predicted to be energetically unfavourable ; alkali metal <unk> have complex Zintl ions , such as <unk> − 
 9 . 
 = = = Nitrides and pnictides = = = 
 Lithium , the lightest of the alkali metals , is the only alkali metal which reacts with nitrogen at standard conditions , and its nitride is the only stable alkali metal nitride . Nitrogen is an unreactive gas because breaking the strong triple bond in the <unk> molecule ( N2 ) requires a lot of energy . The formation of an alkali metal nitride would consume the ionisation energy of the alkali metal ( forming M + ions ) , the energy required to break the triple bond in N2 and the formation of N3 − ions , and all the energy released from the formation of an alkali metal nitride is from the lattice energy of the alkali metal nitride . The lattice energy is maximised with small , highly charged ions ; the alkali metals do not form highly charged ions , only forming ions with a charge of + 1 , so only lithium , the smallest alkali metal , can release enough lattice energy to make the reaction with nitrogen exothermic , forming lithium nitride . The reactions of the other alkali metals with nitrogen would not release enough lattice energy and would thus be endothermic , so they do not form nitrides at standard conditions . ( Sodium nitride ( <unk> ) and potassium nitride ( <unk> ) , while existing , are extremely unstable , being prone to decomposing back into their constituent elements , and cannot be produced by reacting the elements with each other at standard conditions . ) 
 All the alkali metals react readily with phosphorus and arsenic to form phosphides and arsenides with the formula <unk> ( where M represents an alkali metal and Pn represents a pnictogen ) . This is due to the greater size of the P3 − and <unk> − ions , so that less lattice energy needs to be released for the salts to form . These are not the only phosphides and arsenides of the alkali metals : for example , potassium has nine different known phosphides , with formulae <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , KP , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . While most metals form arsenides , only the alkali and alkaline earth metals form mostly ionic arsenides . The structure of <unk> is complex with unusually short Na – Na distances of 328 – 330 pm which are shorter than in sodium metal , and this indicates that even with these electropositive metals the bonding cannot be straightforwardly ionic . Other alkali metal arsenides not conforming to the formula <unk> are known , such as <unk> , which has a metallic lustre and electrical conductivity indicating the presence of some metallic bonding . The antimonides are unstable and reactive as the Sb3 − ion is a strong reducing agent ; reaction of them with acids form the toxic and unstable gas stibine ( SbH3 ) . <unk> are not even wholly ionic ; they are intermetallic compounds containing partially metallic and partially ionic bonds . 
 = = = Oxides and chalcogenides = = = 
 All the alkali metals react vigorously with oxygen at standard conditions . They form various types of oxides , such as simple oxides ( containing the O2 − ion ) , peroxides ( containing the O2 − 
 2 ion , where there is a single bond between the two oxygen atoms ) , superoxides ( containing the O − 
 2 ion ) , and many others . Lithium burns in air to form lithium oxide , but sodium reacts with oxygen to form a mixture of sodium oxide and sodium peroxide . Potassium forms a mixture of potassium peroxide and potassium superoxide , while rubidium and caesium form the superoxide exclusively . Their reactivity increases going down the group : while lithium , sodium and potassium merely burn in air , rubidium and caesium are pyrophoric ( spontaneously catch fire in air ) . 
 The smaller alkali metals tend to polarise the more complex anions ( the peroxide and superoxide ) due to their small size . This attracts the electrons in the more complex anions towards one of its constituent oxygen atoms , forming an oxide ion and an oxygen atom . This causes lithium to form the oxide exclusively on reaction with oxygen at room temperature . This effect becomes drastically weaker for the larger sodium and potassium , allowing them to form the less stable peroxides . Rubidium and caesium , at the bottom of the group , are so large that even the least stable superoxides can form . Because the superoxide releases the most energy when formed , the superoxide is preferentially formed for the larger alkali metals where the more complex anions are not polarised . ( The oxides and peroxides for these alkali metals do exist , but do not form upon direct reaction of the metal with oxygen at standard conditions . ) In addition , the small size of the Li + and O2 − ions contributes to their forming a stable ionic lattice structure . Under controlled conditions , however , all the alkali metals , with the exception of francium , are known to form their oxides , peroxides , and superoxides . The alkali metal peroxides and superoxides are powerful oxidizing agents . Sodium peroxide and potassium superoxide react with carbon dioxide to form the alkali metal carbonate and oxygen gas , which allows them to be used in submarine air purifiers ; the presence of water vapour , naturally present in breath , makes the removal of carbon dioxide by potassium superoxide even more efficient . All the stable alkali metals except lithium can form red ozonides ( <unk> ) through low @-@ temperature reaction of the powdered anhydrous hydroxide with ozone : the ozonides may be then extracted using liquid ammonia . 
 Rubidium and caesium can form even more complicated oxides than the superoxides . Rubidium can form <unk> and <unk> upon oxidation in air , while caesium forms an immense variety of oxides , such as the <unk> <unk> and several brightly coloured suboxides , such as Cs 
 7O , Cs 
 4O , Cs 
 <unk> 
 3 , Cs 
 3O ( dark @-@ green ) , CsO , Cs 
 3O 
 2 , as well as Cs 
 7O 
 2 . The latter may be heated under vacuum to generate Cs 
 2O . 
 The alkali metals can also react analogously with the heavier chalcogens ( sulfur , selenium , tellurium , and polonium ) , and all the alkali metal chalcogenides are known ( with the exception of francium 's ) . Reaction with an excess of the chalcogen can similarly result in lower chalcogenides , with chalcogen ions containing chains of the chalcogen atoms in question . For example , sodium can react with sulfur to form the sulfide ( <unk> ) and various polysulfides with the formula <unk> ( x from 2 to 6 ) , containing the S2 − x ions . Due to the basicity of the Se2 − and Te2 − ions , the alkali metal selenides and tellurides are alkaline in solution ; when reacted directly with selenium and tellurium , alkali metal polyselenides and <unk> are formed along with the selenides and tellurides with the Se2 − x and Te2 − x ions . The alkali metal polonides are all ionic compounds containing the Po2 − ion ; they are very chemically stable and can be produced by direct reaction of the elements at around 300 – 400 ° C. 
 = = = Hydrides and halides = = = 
 The alkali metals are among the most electropositive elements on the periodic table and thus tend to bond ionically to the most electronegative elements on the periodic table , the halogens , forming salts known as the alkali metal halides . The reaction is very vigorous and can sometimes result in explosions . This includes sodium chloride , otherwise known as common salt . The reactivity becomes higher from lithium to caesium and drops from fluorine to iodine . All of the alkali metal halides have the formula MX where M is an alkali metal and X is a halogen . They are all white ionic crystalline solids . All the alkali metal halides are soluble in water except for lithium fluoride ( LiF ) , which is insoluble in water due to its very high lattice enthalpy . The high lattice enthalpy of lithium fluoride is due to the small sizes of the Li + and F − ions , causing the electrostatic interactions between them to be strong : a similar effect occurs for magnesium fluoride , which lithium has a diagonal relationship with . The alkali metals also react similarly with hydrogen to form ionic alkali metal hydrides . 
 = = = Coordination complexes = = = 
 Alkali metal cations do not usually form coordination complexes with simple Lewis bases due to their low charge of just + 1 and their relatively large size ; thus the Li + ion forms most complexes and the heavier alkali metal ions form less and less . In aqueous solution , the alkali metal ions exist as octahedral hexahydrate complexes ( [ M ( H2O ) 6 ) ] + ) , with the exception of the lithium ion , which due to its small size forms tetrahedral tetrahydrate complexes ( [ Li ( H2O ) 4 ) ] + ) ; the alkali metals form these complexes because their ions are attracted by electrostatic forces of attraction to the polar water molecules . Because of this , anhydrous salts containing alkali metal cations are often used as desiccants . Alkali metals also readily form complexes with crown ethers ( e.g. 12 @-@ crown @-@ 4 for Li + , 15 @-@ crown @-@ 5 for Na + , and 18 @-@ crown @-@ 6 for K + ) and <unk> due to electrostatic attraction . 
 = = = Ammonia solutions = = = 
 The alkali metals dissolve slowly in liquid ammonia , forming hydrogen gas and the alkali metal amide ( <unk> , where M represents an alkali metal ) : this was first noted by Humphry Davy in 1809 and rediscovered by W. Weyl in 1864 . The process may be speeded up by a catalyst . Similar solutions are formed by the heavy divalent alkaline earth metals calcium , strontium , barium , as well as the divalent lanthanides , europium and ytterbium . The amide salt is quite insoluble and readily precipitates out of solution , leaving intensely coloured ammonia solutions of the alkali metals . In 1907 , Charles Krause identified the colour as being due to the presence of solvated electrons , which contribute to the high electrical conductivity of these solutions . At low concentrations ( below 3 M ) , the solution is dark blue and has ten times the conductivity of aqueous sodium chloride ; at higher concentrations ( above 3 M ) , the solution is copper @-@ coloured and has approximately the conductivity of liquid metals like mercury . In addition to the alkali metal amide salt and solvated electrons , such ammonia solutions also contain the alkali metal cation ( M + ) , the neutral alkali metal atom ( M ) , diatomic alkali metal molecules ( M2 ) and alkali metal anions ( M − ) . These are unstable and eventually become the more thermodynamically stable alkali metal amide and hydrogen gas . <unk> electrons are powerful reducing agents and are often used in chemical synthesis . 
 = = = Organometallic = = = 
 Being the smallest alkali metal , lithium forms the widest variety of and most stable organometallic compounds , which are bonded covalently . Organolithium compounds are electrically non @-@ conducting volatile solids or liquids that melt at low temperatures , and tend to form oligomers with the structure ( <unk> ) x where R is the organic group . As the electropositive nature of lithium puts most of the charge density of the bond on the carbon atom , effectively creating a carbanion , organolithium compounds are extremely powerful bases and nucleophiles . For use as bases , <unk> are often used and are commercially available . An example of an organolithium compound is <unk> ( ( <unk> ) x ) , which exists in tetrameric ( x 
 = 4 ) and hexameric ( x = 
 6 ) forms . 
 The application of organosodium compounds in chemistry is limited in part due to competition from organolithium compounds , which are commercially available and exhibit more convenient reactivity . The principal organosodium compound of commercial importance is sodium cyclopentadienide . Sodium tetraphenylborate can also be classified as an organosodium compound since in the solid state sodium is bound to the aryl groups . Organometallic compounds of the higher alkali metals are even more reactive than organosodium compounds and of limited utility . A notable reagent is Schlosser 's base , a mixture of n @-@ butyllithium and potassium tert @-@ butoxide . This reagent reacts with propene to form the compound <unk> ( <unk> ) . cis @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> and trans @-@ 2 @-@ <unk> <unk> when in contact with alkali metals . Whereas isomerization is fast with lithium and sodium , it is slow with the higher alkali metals . The higher alkali metals also favour the sterically congested conformation . Several crystal structures of <unk> compounds have been reported , establishing that they , like the sodium compounds , are polymeric . <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> compounds are all mostly ionic and are insoluble ( or nearly so ) in nonpolar solvents . 
