 A Glenrothes town centre action plan has been developed to create a vision for the wider town centre area . This was informed by a summit that was held in March 2013 which was attended by representatives of the local business community , voluntary groups and other individuals with an interest in the future of Glenrothes Town Centre . In May 2013 , it was agreed at Glenrothes Area Committee to approve the Glenrothes Town Centre Action Plan . A range of projects are being delivered to assist in the regeneration of the town centre . New development is being proposed at sites on North Street and at the eastern entrance of the Kingdom Shopping Centre . 
 Glenrothes is to be home to the UK 's First 100 % Green Data Centre which is to be built at Queensway Business Park . This has been hailed as an extremely significant economic development for the area and a strategically important part of Scotland 's IT infrastructure as a whole . The £ 40 million development will create over 300 construction jobs during the build process and up to 50 full time posts created on completion , including technical and operational staff . The facility will be the first of its kind in the UK drawing its energy from a renewable source with power coming directly from the RWE biomass plant in the town . Queensway Data Centre will accommodate up to 1500 high performance computer racks offering the highest levels of resilience and data security . The facility will be built to a BREEAM outstanding standard with a power usage effectiveness rating of less than 1 @.@ 15 . 
 In Mid @-@ 2015 Tullis Russell Papermakers , a stalwart to the local area economy for around 200 years , went into administration . The Scottish Government and Fife Council established a Fife Taskforce , involving key partners , to support economic growth and employment creation , with particular focus on Glenrothes and Central Fife , to help mitigate the effects of job losses and put in place appropriate support for a sustainable future for the area . Around £ 6 million has been set aside to support the Fife Taskforce ’ s Action Plan which will include projects such as the Queensway Green Technology Park . This supports plans for the regeneration of Queensway Industrial Estate to develop a modern business and technology park which can utilise the proximity to RWE ’ s Biomass Power Generation facility and to the Green Data Centre . A Glenrothes Enterprise Hub is another project to be established which will create a dedicated “ one @-@ stop shop ” approach to develop an entrepreneurial culture and improve overall performance of new enterprises in the local economy . 
 = = Culture and community = = 
 In 1968 Glenrothes was the first town in the UK to appoint a town artist . This is now recognised as playing a significant role , both in a Scottish and in an international context , in helping to create the idea of art being a key factor in creating a sense of place . Two town artists , David Harding ( 1968 – 78 ) and Malcolm Robertson ( 1978 – 91 ) , were employed in the lifetime of the GDC . Both artists , supported by a number of assistants , created a large variety of artworks and sculptures that are scattered throughout the town . Other artists have also contributed to the creation of the town 's artworks . The first sculpture erected in Glenrothes was " Ex Terra " , created by Benno <unk> . " The Good Samaritan " sculpture in Riverside Park was produced by Edinburgh @-@ based sculptor , Ronald Rae , who was commissioned by the GDC to produce a piece of art work in celebration of the town 's 40th anniversary in 1988 . 
 The town has won numerous awards locally and nationally for the quality of its landscaping ; something that is promoted by the " Take a Pride in Glenrothes " ( <unk> ) group . The Glenrothes Development Corporation devoted around one third of land in Glenrothes to the provision of open space . As a consequence the town has numerous parks , the largest being Balbirnie Park , Carleton Park , <unk> Park , Riverside Park , and Warout Park . The Lomond Hills Regional Park borders and enters the town to the north and east . 
 The Rothes Halls complex is the town 's main theatre , exhibition , conference and civic centre venue . The town 's central library and a cafe also form part of the complex . When the new town of Glenrothes began construction , a number of small venues served the community for entertainment purposes . However , despite frequent requests from the community , no plan for a larger @-@ scale theatre or community hall made it past the planning stages . By the 1970s , calls from the community and District Council for an entertainment venue increased . In 1972 , a working party was formed to investigate potential sites and designs for such a building ; designs for a town centre complex were agreed upon , but financial constraints meant they were not followed through . In 1983 , proposals were put forward for what would become Rothes Halls . Again , financial constraints delayed construction , but in 1993 the building was finally constructed , offering state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facilities and some of the biggest , most flexible theatre spaces available in Fife . The Rothes Halls was officially opened by actor and director Richard Wilson on 30 November 1993 . Since then , Rothes Halls has played host to a vast range of local , national and international shows ; popular music and entertainment acts , and amateur societies have all performed there . 
 The Glenrothes & Area Heritage Centre established a permanent base in November 2013 following a series of successful temporary exhibitions held previously in the town centre . The heritage centre is run by local volunteers and operates from a shop unit in the Kingdom Shopping Centre . It focuses on the history of the Glenrothes area from a period between the early 19th century to the late 20th century . 
 Glenrothes Hospital is a community hospital located in the <unk> Lodge area to the northwest of the town centre . Opened in October 1981 the hospital has over 80 nursing staff and over 60 beds , as well as around 20 day hospital beds . Glenrothes Hospital provides a wide range of services including ; speech and language therapy , occupational therapy , physiotherapy , dietetics , district nurses , health visitors , podiatry , hospital pharmacy and x @-@ ray services . There is , however , no accident and emergency service within this hospital . 
 A war memorial was constructed in Glenrothes in 2007 following the deaths of two local Black Watch soldiers in Iraq . Prior to this Glenrothes was in the unusual position of not being able to host its own Remembrance Sunday commemorations . Unlike traditional memorials , the Glenrothes war memorial consists of two interlinking rings of standing stones . 
 There are a number of social clubs and organisations operating within Glenrothes which contribute to the cultural and community offerings of the town . These include an art club , various youth clubs , a floral art club , amateur theatre groups , a choral society and a variety of sports clubs . Glenrothes hosts an annual gala which is held at Warout Park and has a variety of family activities including a dog show , highland dancing and a travelling funfair with stalls . Summer and winter festivals were held in Riverside Park in 2012 . The summer festival included sporting events along with arts and crafts , food stalls and fairground shows . The winter festival coincided with bonfire night celebrations and included the town 's annual fireworks display which was previously held at Warout Park . Markinch and Thornton each host an annual Highland Games and the other surrounding villages host their own annual gala days and festivals . 
 The town has a large variety of established sports facilities including two 18 @-@ hole golf courses ( Glenrothes and Balbirnie ) , a football stadium at Warout and a major sports complex , the Michael Woods Sports and Leisure Centre . The new centre was named after the late SNP Councillor Michael Woods in a controversial decision taken by the Glenrothes Area Committee in 2012 . The sports centre was recognised for its architectural quality in the 2014 Scottish Property Awards , coming second place in the Architectural Excellence Award for Public Buildings . 
 The local football club is the Glenrothes F.C. , a junior side who play at Warout Park . Glenrothes also has a rugby club based at Carleton Park and a cricket club who play at Riverside Park . The Road Running Festival in Glenrothes is the largest annual sporting event in the town with over 1500 people of all ages and levels of fitness taking part and has been held annually since 1983 . The town is also an established destination in hosting the BDO British International Championships for darts which are held annually at the town 's <unk> club . 
 Glenrothes has a twin @-@ town link with Böblingen , a city in Baden @-@ Württemberg in Germany since 1971 . As early as 1962 a local councillor had suggested that the town might " twin " with a town on the Continent . Some years later a friendship grew up between teachers at Glenrothes High School and the ' Gymnasium ' in Böblingen which eventually led to the twinning of the towns . Since then there have been a number of exchanges on official , club and personal levels . 
 Famous people associated with the town include the actor Dougray Scott who grew up in Glenrothes and attended Auchmuty High School . Douglas Mason , known as one of the engineers of the " Thatcher revolution " and the " father of the poll tax " set up home in Glenrothes in the 1960s and spent most of his adult life living there . Henry McLeish , the former First Minister of Scotland lived in Glenrothes , having been brought up in nearby <unk> . Glenrothes town centre is home to the building involved in the notorious <unk> scandal , which ultimately led to McLeish 's resignation as First Minister in 2001 . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The most prominent landmarks in Glenrothes are the River Leven Bridge , the Tullis Russell factory chimneys , Raeburn Heights ; a residential tower block and Fife House ; an office block , both of which sit at the western corners of the town centre . The River Leven Bridge , which spans Riverside Park and carries the town 's Western Distributor Road , is a cable @-@ stayed bridge that was completed in 1995 . The bridge was designed by Dundee @-@ based Nicoll Russell Studios , Architects and was commissioned by the Glenrothes Development Corporation ( GDC ) as a landmark creating a gateway into Riverside Park that could be seen from further afield . The bridge was constructed by Balfour Beatty Construction ( Scotland ) and it was the first reinforced @-@ concrete cable @-@ stayed structure ever built in the UK . 
 A number of Glenrothes ' artworks and sculptures act as landmarks at major gateways into the town , such as the " Giant Irises " at Leslie Roundabout , and the Glenrothes " Gateway <unk> " at Bankhead Roundabout . Former town artist Malcolm Robertson produced the " Giant Irises " sculpture as Glenrothes ' contribution to the Glasgow Garden Festival . The sculpture was the winner of the John Brown Clydebank award for the " Most Original and Amusing Artifact " and following the festival , it was re @-@ erected at Leslie Roundabout . A number of other sculptures were relocated in 2011 to more visually prominent locations around the town creating new landmarks . Four pieces of Glenrothes artworks have been awarded listed status by Historic Scotland . " Ex Terra " has been listed at Category B and the " The Birds " , " The <unk> " and " Work " ( or Industry , Past and Present ) at Category C. Historic Scotland has also produced a website , a video and an information brochure dedicated to the Glenrothes town art . 
 Glenrothes is home to the remains of ancient stone circles which can be seen at Balbirnie and Balfarg in the northeast of the town . The Balfarg henge was constructed around <unk> and contains the remnants of a stone circle which has been partly reconstructed . The henge was excavated between 1977 and 1978 prior to the development of a new housing estate . The Balbirnie henge which is only located approximately 500m away from Balfarg was excavated between 1970 and 1971 . In order to allow widening of the A92 the stones were moved a short distance to a new location at North Lodge and reconstructed as nearly as possible in the original way . The stone circle has been carbon dated as being from the bronze age . It is thought that the <unk> stone circle and the Balfarg circle once formed part of a larger ceremonial complex . 
 There are a number of former stately homes located in Glenrothes . Balbirnie House , the category @-@ A listed Georgian former home of the Balfour family , was bought along with its grounds in 1969 by the GDC from the Balfour family to be developed as Balbirnie Park and golf course . The house was later occupied and restored by the GDC in 1981 , to stop the property falling into disrepair . This led to potential interest and the house was converted into a four @-@ star hotel in 1989 . The B @-@ listed former stable block of the house was converted into a craft centre . Balgeddie House , a C @-@ Listed former Edwardian residence of Sir Robert Spencer Nairn located in the northwest of the town , has also been converted into a high quality hotel . Leslie House , the category @-@ A listed 17th century former home of the Leslie family , became a care home for the elderly in 1945 ; owned by the Church of Scotland . The building was in the process of being renovated , when the interior and roof of the house were destroyed by a fire in February 2009 . This has put the redevelopment on hold . Much of the former grounds of Leslie House have been used to create Riverside Park . Collydean precinct hosts a ruin of a 17th @-@ century house called Pitcairn House which was built for and first occupied by Archibald <unk> famous Scottish physician . 
 The town is also home to a number of churches which act as important landmarks as a result of their unique architectural styles and sometimes their locations at key road junctions . The three earliest churches are now listed buildings . These are St. Margaret 's Church in Woodside ( category C listed ) , St. Paul 's RC Church in Auchmuty ( category A listed ) , and St. Columba 's Church on Church Street ( category A listed ) in the town centre . St. Paul 's RC was designed by architects Gillespie , Kidd and Coia . In 1993 it was listed as one of sixty key monuments of post @-@ war architecture by the international conservation organisation <unk> . The church sits at a junction between two main distributor roads . St Columba 's Church , designed by architects Wheeler & Sproson , underwent significant restoration in 2009 . Internally the church contains a large mural created by Alberto <unk> titled ' The Way of the Cross ' , which was completed in 1962 . Externally the church with its distinctive triangular iron bell tower and Mondrian inspired stain glass windows acts as a landmark at the south @-@ western gateway to the town centre . 
 One other local landmark of worthy mention is Balgonie Castle , located east of Glenrothes on the south bank of the River Leven near Milton of Balgonie and Coaltown of Balgonie . The castle keep dates from the 14th century , and the remaining structures were added piecemeal until the 18th century . The keep has been recently restored , although other parts of the castle are roofless ruins . The castle was awarded category A listing in 1972 by Historic Scotland . 
 = = Education = = 
 Early precincts in the town were served by their own primary schools which were to be provided on the basis of one school for every 1 @,@ 000 houses . The first primary school to be opened in Glenrothes was Carleton Primary School , built in 1953 in Woodside . In total thirteen primary schools were developed in the town , twelve of which are non @-@ denominational and one which serves catholic pupils . In February 2014 Fife Council 's Executive Committee voted to close one of Glenrothes ' primary schools at <unk> . This was done as part of a wider school estate review which sought to reduce costs . The closure has faced considerable local opposition and the proposals were called @-@ in by the Scottish Government , but it was subsequently announced that the closure of the school would go ahead as planned . 
 There are three secondary schools in Glenrothes , the earliest of which is Auchmuty High School , opened in 1957 . Secondary Schools were to be provided on the basis of one school for every 4 @,@ 000 houses . Glenwood High School was built in 1962 to serve the western precincts . Prior to 1966 older pupils had to attend schools in neighbouring towns to continue " Higher " examinations as Auchmuty and Glenwood only provided for pupils at junior secondary level . Glenrothes High School was built in 1966 to accommodate pupils at a higher level . However changes in the education system nationally meant that both Auchmuty and Glenwood were raised to full high school status in the 1970s . Auchmuty High School serves the east and southern parts of Glenrothes as well as the villages of Markinch , Coaltown of Balgonie and Thornton . As part of the £ 126 million Building Fife 's Future Project a replacement for Auchmuty was completed and opened to pupils in 2013 . Glenrothes High School serves the central and northern areas in the town . Glenwood High School serves the western parts of Glenrothes and the villages of Leslie and Kinglassie . Catholic pupils in Glenrothes attend St Andrew 's High School in neighbouring Kirkcaldy . 
 Further education in the town is provided at Fife College ; created in August 2013 from the merger between the former Adam Smith College and Carnegie College which was based in Dunfermline . Construction of a Glenrothes college campus began in the early 1970s , originally specialising in paper manufacturing , mechanical engineering and electrical engineering courses . A second institute known as <unk> ( Fife Institute of Physical and Recreational Education ) was built adjacent catering for sport and physical education as well as providing a sports centre for the town . The Glenrothes campus of the college is located at Stenton Road in Viewfield . A smaller campus also exists within the Southfield Industrial Estate . The Stenton Road Campus was significantly extended in 2010 with the development of the " Future Skills Centre " . This centre includes new departments in engineering , construction , renewables and science to cater for emerging industries specialising in renewable energy and low carbon technologies as well as provide training for major engineering projects . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Glenrothes has a planned road network with original masterplans establishing the principle that " through traffic " be bypassed around the housing precincts by a network of " Freeway " and " Highway " distributor roads . These would connect each precinct to the purposely designed town centre and to the industrial estates . Another element that was adopted was the use of roundabouts at junctions instead of traffic lights which would allow traffic to flow freely . 
 The town has direct dual @-@ carriageway access to the M90 via the A92 Trunk Road . The A92 passes north / south through the town and connects Glenrothes with Dundee in the north and Dunfermline in the southwest where it merges with the M90 . This gives Glenrothes a continuous dual @-@ carriageway link to Edinburgh and the major central Scotland road networks , whilst much of the route north to Dundee remains a single @-@ carriageway . Local campaigners have for a number of years sought the upgrade of the A92 north of Glenrothes . The <unk> road passes east / west through the town and connects it with <unk> in the east and <unk> and the M90 in the west . The <unk> Kinglassie Road , described in early masterplans as the Southern Freeway , links Glenrothes to the former mining communities of <unk> and Kinglassie , and to Westfield . The route is a dual carriageway between Bankhead Roundabout and as far west as Fife Airport . Early masterplans show that this route was originally intended to be upgraded to provide <unk> connections to the A92 Chapel junction in Kirkcaldy , however this has never been implemented . 
 The town has a major bus station in the town centre providing frequent links to the cities of Dundee , Edinburgh , Glasgow and Perth as well as to surrounding towns and villages . Two railway stations on the edge of the main town serve the Glenrothes area - Glenrothes with Thornton railway station and Markinch railway station . Glenrothes is home to an airfield , Fife Airport ( ICAO code <unk> ) , which is used for general aviation with private light aircraft . Edinburgh Airport is the nearest international airport to Glenrothes , Dundee Airport operates daily flights to London , Birmingham and Belfast . 
 A purposely designed pedestrian and cycle system was also created using a network of ring and radial routes throughout the town . This includes a near three mile continuous linear cycle path , called <unk> Way , which extends across the length of Glenrothes , from Leslie in the west , to Woodside in the east . Glenrothes is connected to the National Cycle Network via Route 766 which runs north from Kirkcaldy to north of Glenrothes , linking to the wider network via Route 76 and Route 1 . 
 = Liberum veto = 
 The liberum veto ( Latin for " the free veto " ) was a parliamentary device in the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth . It was a form of unanimity voting rule that allowed any member of the Sejm ( legislature ) to force an immediate end to the current session and nullify any legislation that had already been passed at the session by shouting Sisto <unk> ! ( Latin : " I stop the activity ! " ) or Nie <unk> ! ( Polish : " I do not allow ! " ) . The rule was in place from the mid @-@ 17th to the late 18th century in the Sejm 's parliamentary deliberations . It was based on the premise that since all Polish noblemen were equal , every measure that came before the Sejm had to be passed unanimously . The principle of liberum veto was a key part of the political system of the Commonwealth , strengthening democratic elements and checking royal power , going against the European @-@ wide trend of having a strong executive ( absolute monarchy ) . 
 Many historians hold that the principle of liberum veto was a major cause of the deterioration of the Commonwealth political system — particularly in the 18th century , when foreign powers bribed Sejm members to paralyze its proceedings — and the Commonwealth 's eventual destruction in the partitions of Poland and foreign occupation , dominance and manipulation of Poland for the next 200 years or so . Piotr Stefan Wandycz wrote that the " liberum veto had become the sinister symbol of old Polish anarchy . " In the period of 1573 – 1763 , about 150 sejms were held , out of which about a third failed to pass any legislation , mostly due to liberum veto . The expression Polish parliament in many European languages originated from this apparent paralysis . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 This rule evolved from the principle of unanimous consent , which derived from the traditions of decision @-@ making in the Kingdom of Poland , and developed under the federative character of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian Commonwealth . Each deputy to a Sejm was elected at a sejmik ( the local sejm for a region ) and represented the entire region . He thus assumed responsibility to his sejmik for all decisions taken at the Sejm . Since all noblemen were considered equal , a decision taken by a majority against the will of a minority ( even if only a single sejmik ) was considered a violation of the principle of political equality . 
 At first , the dissenting deputies were often convinced or cowed back to withdraw their objections . Also , in its early manifestation , the rule was used to strike down only individual laws , not to dissolve the chamber and throw out all measures passed . For example , as historian Władysław Czapliński describes in the Sejm of 1611 context , some resolutions were struck down , but others passed . From the mid @-@ 17th century onward , however , an objection to any item of Sejm legislation from a deputy or senator automatically caused other , earlier adopted legislation to be rejected . This was because all legislation adopted by a given Sejm formed a whole . 
 It is commonly , and erroneously , believed that a Sejm was first disrupted by means of liberum veto by a Trakai deputy , Władysław <unk> , in 1652 . In reality , he only vetoed the continuation of the Sejm 's deliberations beyond the statutory time limit . He had , however , set up a dangerous precedent . Over the proceedings of the next few sejms , the veto was still occasionally overruled , but the acceptance of it was gradually extended . It was fewer than 20 years later , in 1669 , in Kraków , that the entire Sejm was prematurely disrupted on the strength of the liberum veto before it had finished its deliberations . This was done by the Kiev deputy , Adam <unk> . The practice spiraled out of control , and in 1688 the Sejm was dissolved before the proceedings had begun or the Marshal of the Sejm was elected . 
 = = = Zenith = = = 
 During the reign of John III Sobieski ( 1674 – 1696 ) , half of Sejm proceedings were scuttled by the veto . The practice also spread from the national Sejm to local sejmik proceedings . In the first half of the 18th century , it became increasingly common for Sejm sessions to be broken up by liberum veto , as the Commonwealth 's neighbours – chiefly Russia and Prussia — found this a useful tool to frustrate attempts at reforming and strengthening the Commonwealth . By bribing deputies to exercise their vetoes , Poland 's neighbours could derail any measures not to their liking . The Commonwealth deteriorated from a European power into a state of anarchy . Only a few Sejms were able to meet during the reign of the House of Saxony in Poland ( 1696 – 1763 ) , the last one in 1736 . Only eight out of 18 Sejm sessions during the reign of Augustus II ( 1697 – 1733 ) passed legislation . For a period of 30 years around the reign of Augustus III , only one session was able to pass legislation ( 1734 – 1763 ) . The government was near collapse , giving rise to the term " Polish anarchy " , and the country was managed by provincial assemblies and magnates . 
 Disruption of the Commonwealth governance caused by the liberum veto was highly significant . In the period of 1573 – 1763 , about 150 Sejms where held , of which 53 failed to pass any legislation . Historian Jacek Jędruch notes that out of the 53 disrupted Sejms , 32 were disrupted due to liberum veto . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 The 18th century saw an institution known as a " confederated sejm " evolve . It was a parliament session that operated under the rules of a confederation . Its primary purpose was to avoid disruption by the liberum veto , unlike the national Sejm , which was paralyzed by the veto during this period . On some occasions , a confederated sejm was formed of the whole membership of the national Sejm , so that the liberum veto would not operate there . 
 The second half of the 18th century , marking the age of the Enlightenment in Poland , also witnessed an increased trend aiming at the reform of the inefficient governance of the Commonwealth . Reforms of 1764 – 1766 improved the proceedings of the Sejm . They introduced majority voting for non @-@ crucial items , including most economic and tax matters , and outlawed binding instructions from sejmiks . The road to reform was not easy , as conservatives , supported by foreign powers , opposed most of the changes , attempting to defend liberum veto and other elements perpetuating the inefficient governance , most notably through the Cardinal Laws of 1768 . 
 The liberum veto was finally abolished by the Constitution of 3 May 1791 , adopted by a confederated sejm , which permanently established the principle of majority rule . The achievements of that constitution , however – which historian Norman Davies called " the first constitution of its kind in Europe " — were undone by another confederated sejm , meeting at Grodno in 1793 . That Sejm , under duress from Russia and Prussia , ratified the Second Partition of Poland , anticipating the final disappearance of the Polish @-@ Lithuanian state two years later . 
 = = Significance = = 
 Harvard political scientist Grzegorz <unk> , assessing the history of the liberum veto in the Kingdom of Poland , 1569 @-@ 1795 , concludes : 
 The principle of the liberum veto preserved the feudal features of Poland 's political system , weakened the role of the monarchy , led to anarchy in political life , and contributed to the economic and political decline of the Polish state . Such a situation made the country vulnerable to foreign invasions and ultimately led to its collapse . 
 Political scientist Dalibor <unk> noted that the " principle of liberum veto played an important role in [ the ] emergence of the unique Polish form of constitutionalism " and acted as a significant constraint on the powers of the monarch by making the " rule of law , religious tolerance and limited constitutional government ... the norm in Poland in times when the rest of Europe was being devastated by religious hatred and despotism . " It was seen as one of the key principles of the Commonwealth political system and culture , the Golden Liberty . 
 At the same time , historians hold that the principle of liberum veto was a major cause of the deterioration of the Commonwealth political system and Commonwealth 's eventual downfall . Deputies bribed by magnates or foreign powers , or simply content to believe they were living in some kind of " Golden Age " , for over a century paralysed the Commonwealth 's government , stemming any attempts at reform . Piotr Stefan Wandycz wrote that the " liberum veto had become the sinister symbol of old Polish anarchy . " Wagner echoed him thus : " Certainly , there was no other institution of old Poland which has been more sharply criticized in more recent times than this one . " . 
 = = Modern parallels and popular culture = = 
 A 2004 Polish collectible card game , Veto , set in the background of a royal election during an election sejm , is named after this procedure . 
 Until the early 1990s , IBM had a decision @-@ making process called " non @-@ concur " in which any department head could veto a company @-@ wide strategy if it didn 't fit in with his department 's outlook . This effectively turned IBM into several independent fiefdoms . " Non @-@ concur " was eliminated by CEO Louis Gerstner who was brought in to revive the declining company . 
 = The Boat Race 1865 = 
 The 22nd Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 8 April 1865 . Oxford won by four lengths in a time of 21 minutes 24 seconds . The race , described as " one of the most sensational races in this history " thus far , was umpired by Joseph William Chitty . It was the first time that a crew had won the Boat Race having been behind at Hammersmith Bridge . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1864 race by nine lengths , with Oxford leading overall with eleven victories to Cambridge 's ten . 
 Cambridge were coached by their non @-@ rowing president J. G. Chambers ( who had rowed in the 1862 and 1863 races ) , while Oxford 's coach was G. Morrison ( who had rowed for Oxford three times as well as being a non @-@ rowing president in 1862 ) . Both university boats were constructed by J. & S. Salter of Oxford using cedar wood . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 11 @.@ 25 lb ( 74 @.@ 8 kg ) , 1 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their Light Blue opposition . Cambridge saw the return of five former Blues , including the cox Francis Archer and number four Robert Kinglake , both of whom had represented the university twice before . Three of Oxford 's crew had rowed in the previous year 's race . 
 = = Race = = 
 Both crews had initially returned to the boathouses upon the instruction of their boat club president 's who had demanded the steamers stay behind the start . Oxford won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . Following an indifferent start from both crews , Cambridge took the lead , and were a length ahead by Bishop 's Creek . To avoid the steamers pressing from behind , the Light Blue cox Archer steered his boat to the middle to the river , while his counterpart , Charles Tottenham , manoeuvred too close to the bank , resulting in a two @-@ length lead for Cambridge by Craven Cottage . By the Crab Tree pub , the lead was three lengths . Despite dominating the race , by the time the crews passed below Hammersmith Bridge , Oxford had reduced the lead to three @-@ quarters of a length , and at The Doves pub , the lead was down to half a length . 
 Soon after the Oxford boat overlapped their opponents yet Cambridge pushed away again before Chiswick Eyot where the Dark Blues once began to overlap the Light Blues ' stern . Cambridge 's stroke Lawes reacted and pushed to keep the lead , but by Chiswick Church the crews were level . Oxford 's better line in the river saw them draw away rapidly from Cambridge , whereupon the Light Blues were regarded as " falling to pieces " . Oxford 's lead at Barnes Bridge was around three lengths , and by the time they passed the finishing line they had won by four lengths in a time of 21 minutes 24 seconds , securing the Dark Blue 's fifth consecutive win and taking the overall record to 12 – 10 in their favour . Drinkwater suggested that , of the 22 races conducted thus far , it was " one of the most sensational races in this history " , while Burnell described it as a " splendid race " . 
 = Mount Vesuvius = 
 Mount Vesuvius ( pronunciation : / <unk> / ; Italian : Monte Vesuvio [ <unk> <unk> ] , Latin : Mons Vesuvius [ <unk> <unk> ] ; also <unk> or <unk> in Roman sources ) is a stratovolcano in the Gulf of Naples , Italy , about 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) east of Naples and a short distance from the shore . It is one of several volcanoes which form the Campanian volcanic arc . Vesuvius consists of a large cone partially encircled by the steep rim of a summit caldera caused by the collapse of an earlier and originally much higher structure . 
 Mount Vesuvius is best known for its eruption in AD 79 that led to the burying and destruction of the Roman cities of Pompeii , Herculaneum , and several other settlements . That eruption ejected a cloud of stones , ash , and fumes to a height of 33 km ( 20 @.@ 5 mi ) , spewing molten rock and pulverized pumice at the rate of 1 @.@ 5 million tons per second , ultimately releasing a hundred thousand times the thermal energy released by the Hiroshima bombing . At least 1 @,@ 000 people died in the eruption . The only surviving eyewitness account of the event consists of two letters by Pliny the Younger to the historian Tacitus . 
 Vesuvius has erupted many times since and is the only volcano on the European mainland to have erupted within the last hundred years . Today , it is regarded as one of the most dangerous volcanoes in the world because of the population of 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 people living nearby and its tendency towards explosive ( Plinian ) eruptions . It is the most densely populated volcanic region in the world . 
 = = Mythology = = 
 Vesuvius has a long historic and literary tradition . It was considered a divinity of the Genius type at the time of the eruption of 79 AD : it appears under the inscribed name Vesuvius as a serpent in the decorative frescos of many <unk> , or household shrines , surviving from Pompeii . An inscription from Capua to <unk> <unk> indicates that he was worshipped as a power of Jupiter ; that is , Jupiter Vesuvius . 
 The historian Diodorus Siculus relates a tradition that Hercules , in the performance of his labors , passed through the country of nearby Cumae on his way to Sicily and found there a place called " the <unk> Plain " ( <unk> <unk> , " plain of fire " ) , " from a hill which anciently vomited out fire ... now called Vesuvius . " It was inhabited by bandits , " the sons of the Earth , " who were giants . With the assistance of the gods he pacified the region and went on . The facts behind the tradition , if any , remain unknown , as does whether Herculaneum was named after it . An epigram by the poet Martial in 88 AD suggests that both Venus , patroness of Pompeii , and Hercules were worshipped in the region devastated by the eruption of 79 . Mount Vesuvius was regarded by the Romans as being devoted to the hero and demigod Hercules . 
 = = Origin of the name = = 
 Vesuvius was a name of the volcano in frequent use by the authors of the late Roman Republic and the early Roman Empire . Its collateral forms were <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Writers in ancient Greek used <unk> or <unk> . Many scholars since then have offered an etymology . As peoples of varying ethnicity and language occupied Campania in the Roman Iron Age , the etymology depends to a large degree on the presumption of what language was spoken there at the time . Naples was settled by Greeks , as the name Nea @-@ polis , " New City " , testifies . The <unk> , a native Italic people , lived in the countryside . The Latins also competed for the occupation of Campania . Etruscan settlements were in the vicinity . Other peoples of unknown provenance are said to have been there at some time by various ancient authors . 
 Some theories about its origin are : 
 From Greek <unk> 
 = " not " prefixed to a root from or related to the Greek word <unk> = 
 " I quench " , in the sense of " unquenchable " . 
 From Greek <unk> 
 = " I hurl " and <unk> " violence " , " hurling violence " , * <unk> , taking advantage of the collateral form . 
 From an Indo @-@ European root , * <unk> < * <unk> < * ( a ) <unk> , " shine " sense " the one who lightens " , through Latin or <unk> . 
 From an Indo @-@ European root * wes = 
 " hearth " ( compare e.g. Vesta ) 
 = = Physical appearance = = 
 Vesuvius is a distinctive " humpbacked " mountain , consisting of a large cone ( Gran <unk> ) partially encircled by the steep rim of a summit caldera caused by the collapse of an earlier and originally much higher structure called Monte Somma . The Gran <unk> was produced during the eruption of AD 79 . For this reason , the volcano is also called Somma @-@ Vesuvius or Somma @-@ Vesuvio . 
 The caldera started forming during an eruption around 17 @,@ 000 ( or 18 @,@ 300 ) years ago and was enlarged by later paroxysmal eruptions ending in the one of AD 79 . This structure has given its name to the term " <unk> volcano " , which describes any volcano with a summit caldera surrounding a newer cone . 
 The height of the main cone has been constantly changed by eruptions but is 1 @,@ 281 m ( 4 @,@ 203 ft ) at present . Monte Somma is 1 @,@ 149 m ( 3 @,@ 770 ft ) high , separated from the main cone by the valley of <unk> di Cavallo , which is some 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) long . The slopes of the mountain are scarred by lava flows but are heavily vegetated , with scrub and forest at higher altitudes and vineyards lower down . Vesuvius is still regarded as an active volcano , although its current activity produces little more than steam from vents at the bottom of the crater . Vesuvius is a stratovolcano at the convergent boundary where the African Plate is being subducted beneath the Eurasian Plate . Layers of lava , scoria , volcanic ash , and pumice make up the mountain . Their mineralogy is variable , but generally silica @-@ undersaturated and rich in potassium , with <unk> produced in the more explosive eruptions . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Vesuvius was formed as a result of the collision of two tectonic plates , the African and the Eurasian . The former was subducted beneath the latter , deeper into the earth . As the water @-@ saturated sediments of the oceanic African plate were pushed to hotter depths in the earth , the water boiled off and caused the melting point of the upper mantle to drop enough to create partial melting of the rocks . Because magma is less dense than the solid rock around it , it was pushed upward . Finding a weak place at the Earth 's surface it broke through , producing the volcano . 
 The volcano is one of several which form the Campanian volcanic arc . Others include Campi Flegrei , a large caldera a few kilometres to the north west , Mount <unk> , 20 kilometres ( 12 mi ) to the west on the island of Ischia , and several undersea volcanoes to the south . The arc forms the southern end of a larger chain of volcanoes produced by the subduction process described above , which extends northwest along the length of Italy as far as Monte Amiata in Southern Tuscany . Vesuvius is the only one to have erupted within recent history , although some of the others have erupted within the last few hundred years . Many are either extinct or have not erupted for tens of thousands of years . 
 = = Eruptions = = 
 Mount Vesuvius has erupted many times . The famous eruption in 79 AD was preceded by numerous others in prehistory , including at least three significantly larger ones , the best known being the Avellino eruption around 1800 BC which engulfed several Bronze Age settlements . Since 79 AD , the volcano has also erupted repeatedly , in 172 , 203 , 222 , possibly 303 , 379 , 472 , 512 , 536 , 685 , 787 , around 860 , around 900 , 968 , 991 , 999 , 1006 , 1037 , 1049 , around 1073 , 1139 , 1150 , and there may have been eruptions in 1270 , 1347 , and 1500 . The volcano erupted again in 1631 , six times in the 18th century , eight times in the 19th century ( notably in 1872 ) , and in 1906 , 1929 , and 1944 . There has been no eruption since 1944 , and none of the post @-@ 79 eruptions were as large or destructive as the Pompeian one . 
 The eruptions vary greatly in severity but are characterized by explosive outbursts of the kind dubbed Plinian after Pliny the Younger , a Roman writer who published a detailed description of the 79 AD eruption , including his uncle 's death . On occasion , eruptions from Vesuvius have been so large that the whole of southern Europe has been blanketed by ash ; in 472 and 1631 , Vesuvian ash fell on Constantinople ( Istanbul ) , over 1 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 750 mi ) away . A few times since 1944 , landslides in the crater have raised clouds of ash dust , raising false alarms of an eruption . 
 = = = Before AD 79 = = = 
 Scientific knowledge of the geologic history of Vesuvius comes from core samples taken from a 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) plus bore hole on the flanks of the volcano , extending into Mesozoic rock . Cores were dated by potassium – argon and argon – argon dating . The mountain started forming 25 @,@ 000 years ago . Although the area has been subject to volcanic activity for at least 400 @,@ 000 years , the lowest layer of eruption material from the Somma mountain lies on top of the 40 @,@ 000 ‑ year ‑ old Campanian Ignimbrite produced by the Campi Flegrei complex , and was the product of the <unk> Plinian eruption 25 @,@ 000 years ago . 
 It was then built up by a series of lava flows , with some smaller explosive eruptions interspersed between them . However , the style of eruption changed around 19 @,@ 000 years ago to a sequence of large explosive plinian eruptions , of which the 79 AD one was the most recent . The eruptions are named after the tephra deposits produced by them , which in turn are named after the location where the deposits were first identified : 
 The Basal Pumice ( Pomici di Base ) eruption , 18 @,@ 300 years ago , VEI 6 , saw the original formation of the Somma caldera . The eruption was followed by a period of much less violent , lava producing eruptions . 
 The Green Pumice ( Pomici <unk> ) eruption , 16 @,@ 000 years ago , VEI 5 . 
 The Mercato eruption ( Pomici di Mercato ) – also known as Pomici <unk> or Pomici Ottaviano – 8000 years ago , VEI 6 , followed a smaller explosive eruption around 11 @,@ 000 years ago ( called the <unk> <unk> eruption ) . 
 The Avellino eruption ( Pomici di Avellino ) , 3800 years ago , VEI 5 , followed two smaller explosive eruptions around 5 @,@ 000 years ago . The Avellino eruption vent was apparently 2 km west of the current crater , and the eruption destroyed several Bronze Age settlements of the Apennine culture . Several carbon dates on wood and bone offer a range of possible dates of about 500 years in the mid @-@ 2nd millennium BC . In May 2001 , near Nola , Italian archaeologists using the technique of filling every cavity with plaster or substitute compound recovered some remarkably well @-@ preserved forms of perishable objects , such as fence rails , a bucket and especially in the vicinity thousands of human footprints pointing into the Apennines to the north . The settlement had huts , pots , and goats . The residents had hastily abandoned the village , leaving it to be buried under pumice and ash in much the same way that Pompeii was later preserved . Pyroclastic surge deposits were distributed to the northwest of the vent , travelling as far as 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from it , and lie up to 3 m ( 9 @.@ 8 ft ) deep in the area now occupied by Naples . 
 The volcano then entered a stage of more frequent , but less violent , eruptions until the most recent Plinian eruption , which destroyed Pompeii . 
 The last of these may have been in 217 BC . There were earthquakes in Italy during that year and the sun was reported as being dimmed by a haze or dry fog . Plutarch wrote of the sky being on fire near Naples and Silius <unk> mentioned in his epic poem <unk> that Vesuvius had thundered and produced flames worthy of Mount Etna in that year , although both authors were writing around 250 years later . Greenland ice core samples of around that period show relatively high acidity , which is assumed to have been caused by atmospheric hydrogen sulfide . 
 The mountain was then quiet ( for 295 years , if the 217 BC date for the last previous eruption is true ) and was described by Roman writers as having been covered with gardens and vineyards , except at the top which was craggy . The mountain may have had only one summit at that time , judging by a wall painting , " Bacchus and Vesuvius " , found in a Pompeiian house , the House of the Centenary ( Casa del Centenario ) . 
 Several surviving works written over the 200 years preceding the 79 AD eruption describe the mountain as having had a volcanic nature , although Pliny the Elder did not depict the mountain in this way in his Naturalis Historia : 
 The Greek historian Strabo ( ca 63 BC – AD 24 ) described the mountain in Book V , Chapter 4 of his <unk> as having a predominantly flat , barren summit covered with sooty , ash @-@ coloured rocks and suggested that it might once have had " craters of fire " . He also perceptively suggested that the fertility of the surrounding slopes may be due to volcanic activity , as at Mount Etna . 
 In Book II of De architectura , the architect Vitruvius ( ca 80 – 70 BC - ? ) reported that fires had once existed abundantly below the mountain and that it had spouted fire onto the surrounding fields . He went on to describe Pompeiian pumice as having been burnt from another species of stone . 
 Diodorus Siculus ( ca 90 BC – ca 30 BC ) , another Greek writer , wrote in Book IV of his Bibliotheca Historica that the Campanian plain was called fiery ( <unk> ) because of the mountain , Vesuvius , which had spouted flame like Etna and showed signs of the fire that had burnt in ancient history . 
 = = = Eruption of AD 79 = = = 
 In the year of 79 AD , Mount Vesuvius erupted in one of the most catastrophic and famous eruptions of all time . Historians have learned about the eruption from the eyewitness account of Pliny the Younger , a Roman administrator and poet . 
 Mount Vesuvius spawned a deadly cloud of stones , ash and fumes to a height of 33 km ( 20 @.@ 5 mi ) , spewing molten rock and pulverized pumice at the rate of 1 @.@ 5 Mt / s , ultimately releasing a hundred thousand times the thermal energy released by the Hiroshima bombing . The towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum were destroyed by pyroclastic flows and the ruins buried under dozens of feet of tephra . 
 = = = = Precursors and foreshocks = = = = 
 The 79 AD eruption was preceded by a powerful earthquake seventeen years beforehand on February 5 , AD 62 , which caused widespread destruction around the Bay of Naples , and particularly to Pompeii . Some of the damage had still not been repaired when the volcano erupted . The deaths of 600 sheep from " tainted air " in the vicinity of Pompeii indicates that the earthquake of 62 may have been related to new activity by Vesuvius 
 The Romans grew accustomed to minor earth tremors in the region ; the writer Pliny the Younger even wrote that they " were not particularly alarming because they are frequent in Campania " . Small earthquakes started taking place on 20 August 79 becoming more frequent over the next four days , but the warnings were not recognised . 
 = = = = Scientific analysis of the eruption = = = = 
 Reconstructions of the eruption and its effects vary considerably in the details but have the same overall features . The eruption lasted two days . The morning of the first day was perceived as normal by the only eyewitness to leave a surviving document , Pliny the Younger . In the middle of the day an explosion threw up a high @-@ altitude column from which ash began to fall , blanketing the area . Rescues and escapes occurred during this time . At some time in the night or early the next day pyroclastic flows in the close vicinity of the volcano began . Lights were seen on the mountain interpreted as fires . People as far away as Misenum fled for their lives . The flows were rapid @-@ moving , dense and very hot , knocking down wholly or partly all structures in their path , incinerating or suffocating all population remaining there and altering the landscape , including the coastline . These were accompanied by additional light tremors and a mild tsunami in the Bay of Naples . By evening of the second day the eruption was over , leaving only haze in the atmosphere through which the sun shone weakly . 
 The latest scientific studies of the ash produced by Vesuvius reveals a multi @-@ phase eruption . The initial major explosion produced a column of ash and pumice ranging between 15 and 30 kilometres ( 49 @,@ 000 and 98 @,@ 000 ft ) high , which rained on Pompeii to the southeast but not on Herculaneum upwind . The chief energy supporting the column came from the escape of steam superheated by the magma , created from ground water seeping over time into the deep faults of the region . 
 Subsequently the cloud collapsed as the gases expanded and lost their capability to support their solid contents , releasing it as a pyroclastic surge , which reached Herculaneum but not Pompeii . Additional explosions reinstituted the column . The eruption alternated between Plinian and Peléan six times . Surges 3 and 4 are believed by the authors to have destroyed Pompeii . Surges are identified in the deposits by dune and cross @-@ bedding formations , which are not produced by fallout . 
 Another study used the magnetic characteristics of over 200 samples of roof @-@ tile and plaster fragments collected around Pompeii to estimate equilibrium temperature of the pyroclastic flow . The magnetic study revealed that on the first day of the eruption a fall of white pumice containing clastic fragments of up to 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) fell for several hours . It heated the roof tiles up to 140 ° C ( 284 ° F ) . This period would have been the last opportunity to escape . 
 The collapse of the Plinian columns on the second day caused pyroclastic density currents ( <unk> ) that devastated Herculaneum and Pompeii . The depositional temperature of these pyroclastic surges ranged up to 300 ° C ( 572 ° F ) . Any population remaining in structural refuges could not have escaped , as the city was surrounded by gases of incinerating temperatures . The lowest temperatures were in rooms under collapsed roofs . These were as low as 100 ° C ( 212 ° F ) . 
 = = = = The Two <unk> = = = = 
 The only surviving eyewitness account of the event consists of two letters by Pliny the Younger to the historian Tacitus . Pliny the Younger describes , amongst other things , the last days in the life of his uncle , Pliny the Elder . Observing the first volcanic activity from Misenum across the Bay of Naples from the volcano , approximately 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) , the elder Pliny launched a rescue fleet and went himself to the rescue of a personal friend . His nephew declined to join the party . One of the nephew 's letters relates what he could discover from witnesses of his uncle 's experiences . In a second letter the younger Pliny details his own observations after the departure of his uncle . 
 The two men saw an extraordinarily dense cloud rising rapidly above the mountain . This cloud and a request by messenger for an evacuation by sea prompted the elder Pliny to order rescue operations in which he sailed away to participate . His nephew attempted to resume a normal life , but that night a tremor awoke him and his mother , prompting them to abandon the house for the courtyard . Further tremors near dawn caused the population to abandon the village and caused wave action in the Bay of Naples . 
 The early light was obscured by a black cloud through which shone flashes , which Pliny likens to sheet lightning , but more extensive . The cloud obscured Point Misenum near at hand and the island of <unk> ( Capri ) across the bay . Fearing for their lives , the population began to call to each other and move back from the coast along the road . A rain of ash fell , causing Pliny to shake it off periodically to avoid being buried . Later that same day the ash stopped falling and the sun shone weakly through the cloud , encouraging Pliny and his mother to return to their home and wait for news of Pliny the Elder . 
 Pliny 's uncle Pliny the Elder was in command of the Roman fleet at Misenum , and had meanwhile decided to investigate the phenomenon at close hand in a light vessel . As the ship was preparing to leave the area , a messenger came from his friend <unk> ( wife of <unk> ) living on the coast near the foot of the volcano explaining that her party could only get away by sea and asking for rescue . Pliny ordered the immediate launching of the fleet galleys to the evacuation of the coast . He continued in his light ship to the rescue of <unk> 's party . 
 He set off across the bay but in the shallows on the other side encountered thick showers of hot cinders , lumps of pumice and pieces of rock . Advised by the helmsman to turn back he stated " Fortune favors the brave " and ordered him to continue on to Stabiae ( about 4 @.@ 5 km from Pompeii ) . 
 Pliny the Elder and his party saw flames coming from several parts of the mountain . After staying overnight , the party was driven from the building by an accumulation of material , presumably , tephra , which threatened to block all egress . They woke Pliny , who had been napping and emitting loud snoring . They elected to take to the fields with pillows tied to their heads to protect them from rockfall . They approached the beach again but the wind prevented the ships from leaving . Pliny sat down on a sail that had been spread for him and could not rise even with assistance when his friends departed . Though Pliny the Elder died , his friends ultimately escaped by land . 
 In the first letter to Tacitus , Pliny the Younger suggested that his uncle 's death was due to the reaction of his weak lungs to a cloud of poisonous , sulphurous gas that wafted over the group . However , Stabiae was 16 km from the vent ( roughly where the modern town of Castellammare di Stabia is situated ) and his companions were apparently unaffected by the fumes , and so it is more likely that the corpulent Pliny died from some other cause , such as a stroke or heart attack . His body was found with no apparent injuries on the next day , after dispersal of the plume . 
 = = = = Casualties from the eruption = = = = 
 Along with Pliny the Elder , the only other noble casualties of the eruption to be known by name were Agrippa ( a son of the Herodian Jewish princess Drusilla and the procurator Antonius Felix ) and his wife . 
 By 2003 , around 1 @,@ 044 casts made from impressions of bodies in the ash deposits had been recovered in and around Pompeii , with the scattered bones of another 100 . The remains of about 332 bodies have been found at Herculaneum ( 300 in arched vaults discovered in 1980 ) . What percentage these numbers are of the total dead or the percentage of the dead to the total number at risk remain completely unknown . 
 Thirty @-@ eight percent of the 1 @,@ 044 were found in the ash fall deposits , the majority inside buildings . These are thought to have been killed mainly by roof collapses , with the smaller number of victims found outside of buildings probably being killed by falling roof slates or by larger rocks thrown out by the volcano . The remaining 62 % of remains found at Pompeii were in the pyroclastic surge deposits , and thus were probably killed by them – probably from a combination of suffocation through ash inhalation and blast and debris thrown around . In contrast to the victims found at Herculaneum , examination of cloth , frescoes and skeletons show that it is unlikely that high temperatures were a significant cause . Herculaneum , which was much closer to the crater , was saved from tephra falls by the wind direction , but was buried under 23 metres ( 75 ft ) of material deposited by pyroclastic surges . It is likely that most , or all , of the known victims in this town were killed by the surges . 
 People caught on the former seashore by the first surge died of thermal shock . No boats have been found , indicating they may have been used for the earlier escape of some of the population . The rest were concentrated in arched chambers at a density of as high as 3 persons per square metre . As only 85 metres ( 279 ft ) of the coast have been excavated , the casualties waiting to be excavated may well be as high as the thousands . 
 = = = Later eruptions from the 3rd to the 19th century = = = 
 Since the eruption of 79 AD , Vesuvius has erupted around three dozen times . It erupted again in 203 , during the lifetime of the historian Cassius Dio . In 472 , it ejected such a volume of ash that ashfalls were reported as far away as Constantinople . The eruptions of 512 were so severe that those inhabiting the slopes of Vesuvius were granted exemption from taxes by Theodoric the Great , the Gothic king of Italy . Further eruptions were recorded in 787 , 968 , 991 , 999 , 1007 and 1036 with the first recorded lava flows . The volcano became quiescent at the end of the 13th century and in the following years it again became covered with gardens and vineyards as of old . Even the inside of the crater was filled with shrubbery . 
 Vesuvius entered a new phase in December 1631 , when a major eruption buried many villages under lava flows , killing around 3 @,@ 000 people . Torrents of boiling water were also ejected , adding to the devastation . Activity thereafter became almost continuous , with relatively severe eruptions occurring in 1660 , 1682 , 1694 , 1698 , 1707 , 1737 , 1760 , 1767 , 1779 , 1794 , 1822 , 1834 , 1839 , 1850 , 1855 , 1861 , 1868 , 1872 , 1906 , 1926 , 1929 , and 1944 . 
 = = = Eruptions in the 20th century = = = 
 The eruption of April 7 , 1906 , killed more than 100 people and ejected the most lava ever recorded from a Vesuvian eruption . Italian authorities were preparing to hold the 1908 Summer Olympics when Mount Vesuvius erupted , devastating the city of Naples . Funds were diverted to the reconstruction of Naples , requiring a new location for the Olympics to be found . 
 The last major eruption was in March 1944 . It destroyed the villages of San Sebastiano al Vesuvio , Massa di Somma , Ottaviano , and part of San Giorgio a <unk> . From March 18 to 23 , 1944 , lava flows appeared within the rim . There were outflows . Small explosions then occurred until the major explosion took place on March 18 , 1944 . 
 At the time of the eruption , the United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) 340th Bombardment Group was based at Pompeii Airfield near <unk> , Italy , just a few kilometres from the eastern base of the mountain . The tephra and hot ash damaged the fabric control surfaces , the engines , the Plexiglas windscreens and the gun turrets of the 340th 's B @-@ 25 Mitchell medium bombers . Estimates ranged from 78 to 88 aircraft destroyed . 
 The eruption could be seen from Naples . Different perspectives and the damage caused to the local villages were recorded by USAAF photographers and other personnel based nearer to the volcano . 
 = = = The future = = = 
 Large plinian eruptions which emit lava in quantities of about 1 cubic kilometre ( 0 @.@ 24 cu mi ) , the most recent of which overwhelmed Pompeii , have happened after periods of inactivity of a few thousand years . <unk> eruptions producing about 0 @.@ 1 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 024 cu mi ) , such as those of 472 and 1631 , have been more frequent with a few hundred years between them . Following the 1631 eruption until 1944 every few years saw a comparatively small eruption which emitted 0 @.@ 001 – 0 @.@ 01 km ³ of magma . It seems that for Vesuvius the amount of magma expelled in an eruption increases very roughly linearly with the interval since the previous one , and at a rate of around 0 @.@ 001 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 00024 cu mi ) for each year . This gives an approximate figure of 0 @.@ 06 cubic kilometres ( 0 @.@ 014 cu mi ) for an eruption after 60 years of inactivity . 
 Magma sitting in an underground chamber for many years will start to see higher melting point constituents such as olivine crystallising out . The effect is to increase the concentration of dissolved gases ( mostly steam and carbon dioxide ) in the remaining liquid magma , making the subsequent eruption more violent . As gas @-@ rich magma approaches the surface during an eruption , the huge drop in pressure caused by the reduction in weight of the overlying rock ( which drops to zero at the surface ) causes the gases to come out of solution , the volume of gas increasing explosively from nothing to perhaps many times that of the accompanying magma . Additionally , the removal of the higher melting point material will raise the concentration of felsic components such as silicates potentially making the magma more viscous , adding to the explosive nature of the eruption . 
 The government emergency plan for an eruption therefore assumes that the worst case will be an eruption of similar size and type to the 1631 VEI 4 one . In this scenario the slopes of the mountain , extending out to about 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) from the vent , may be exposed to pyroclastic flows sweeping down them , whilst much of the surrounding area could suffer from tephra falls . Because of prevailing winds , towns to the south and east of the volcano are most at risk from this , and it is assumed that tephra accumulation exceeding 100 kg / m ² – at which point people are at risk from collapsing roofs – may extend out as far as Avellino to the east or Salerno to the south east . Towards Naples , to the north west , this tephra fall hazard is assumed to extend barely past the slopes of the volcano . The specific areas actually affected by the ash cloud will depend upon the particular circumstances surrounding the eruption . 
 The plan assumes between two weeks and 20 days ' notice of an eruption and foresees the emergency evacuation of 600 @,@ 000 people , almost entirely comprising all those living in the zona <unk> ( " red zone " ) , i.e. at greatest risk from pyroclastic flows . The evacuation , by trains , ferries , cars , and buses is planned to take about seven days , and the evacuees will mostly be sent to other parts of the country rather than to safe areas in the local Campania region , and may have to stay away for several months . However , the dilemma that would face those implementing the plan is when to start this massive evacuation , since if it is left too late then thousands could be killed , while if it is started too early then the precursors of the eruption may turn out to have been a false alarm . In 1984 , 40 @,@ 000 people were evacuated from the Campi Flegrei area , another volcanic complex near Naples , but no eruption occurred . 
 Ongoing efforts are being made by the government at various levels ( especially of Campania ) to reduce the population living in the red zone , by demolishing illegally constructed buildings , establishing a national park around the whole volcano to prevent the future construction of buildings and by offering sufficient financial incentives to people for moving away . One of the underlying goals is to reduce the time needed to evacuate the area , over the next 20 or 30 years , to two or three days . 
 The volcano is closely monitored by the <unk> Vesuvio in Naples with extensive networks of seismic and gravimetric stations , a combination of a GPS @-@ based geodetic array and satellite @-@ based synthetic aperture radar to measure ground movement , and by local surveys and chemical analyses of gases emitted from fumaroles . All of this is intended to track magma rising underneath the volcano . No magma has been detected within 10 km of the surface , and so the volcano is classified by the Observatory as at a Basic or Green Level . 
 = = Vesuvius today = = 
 The area around Vesuvius was officially declared a national park on June 5 , 1995 . The summit of Vesuvius is open to visitors and there is a small network of paths around the mountain that are maintained by the park authorities on weekends . 
 There is access by road to within 200 metres ( 660 ft ) of the summit ( measured vertically ) , but thereafter access is on foot only . There is a spiral walkway around the mountain from the road to the crater . 
 = = <unk> , <unk> = = 
 The first funicular cable car on Mount Vesuvius opened in 1880 . It was later destroyed by the 1944 eruption . " <unk> , <unk> " , a famous Neapolitan song with lyrics by journalist <unk> Turco set to music by composer Luigi Denza , commemorates its opening . 
 = Grey 's Anatomy ( season 6 ) = 
 The sixth season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , commenced airing on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on September 24 , 2009 , and concluded on May 20 , 2010 . The season was produced by ABC Studios , in association with ShondaLand Production Company and The Mark Gordon Company ; the showrunner being Shonda Rhimes . Actors Ellen Pompeo , Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl , and Justin Chambers reprised their roles as surgical residents Meredith Grey , Cristina Yang , Izzie Stevens , and Alex Karev , respectively . Heigl was released from her contract in the middle of the season , while T.R. Knight did not appear as George O 'Malley , because Knight was released from his contract at the conclusion of season five . Main cast members Patrick Dempsey , Chandra Wilson , James Pickens , Jr . , Sara Ramirez , Eric Dane , Chyler Leigh , and Kevin McKidd also returned , while previous recurring star Jessica Capshaw was promoted to a series regular , and Kim Raver was given star billing after the commencement of the season . 
 The season follows the story of surgical interns , residents and their competent mentors , as they experience the difficulties of the competitive careers they have chosen . It is set in the surgical wing of the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital , located in Seattle , Washington . A major storyline of the season is the characters adapting to change , as their beloved co @-@ worker Stevens departed following the breakdown of her marriage , O 'Malley died in the season premiere — following his being dragged by a bus , and new cardiothoracic surgeon Teddy Altman is given employment at the hospital . Further storylines include Shepherd being promoted to chief of surgery , Seattle Grace Hospital merging with the neighboring Mercy West — introducing several new doctors , and several physicians lives being placed into danger — when a grieving deceased patient 's husband embarks on a shooting spree at the hospital , seeking revenge for his wife 's death . 
 The series ended its sixth season with 13 @.@ 26 million viewers , ranking # 17 in terms of ratings , the lowest the series had ever ranked up to then . The season received mixed critical feedback , with the season 's premiere and finale given heavier critical acclaim , in contrast to the middle . The season was one of the least acclaimed in terms of awards and nominations , being the show 's only season not to warrant a Primetime Emmy nomination . Despite the negative aspects of ratings and awards , the season managed to receive a spot on Movieline 's top ten list . Buena Vista released the season onto a DVD box @-@ set , being made available to regions 1 and 2 . 
 = = Cast = = 
 The sixth season had thirteen roles receiving star billing , with twelve of them returning from the previous season , one of whom previously in a recurring guest capacity . The regulars portray the surgeons from the fictional Seattle Grace Hospital as new rivalries and romantic relationships begin to develop after the hospital 's merger with Mercy West . Meredith Grey , a surgical resident and the protagonist of the series , is portrayed by Ellen Pompeo . Fellow residents Cristina Yang , Izzie Stevens and Alex Karev are portrayed by Sandra Oh , Katherine Heigl and Justin Chambers , respectively . Attending general surgeon Miranda Bailey was portrayed by Chandra Wilson whose main storylines throughout the season focus on her divorce and the development of new romantic relationships . Seattle Grace Hospital 's Chief of Surgery and general surgeon Richard Webber was portrayed by James Pickens , Jr . , who returns to alcoholism after being sober for twenty years . 
 Sara Ramirez acted as bisexual orthopedic surgeon Callie Torres , Eric Dane played womanizer plastic surgeon Mark Sloan , Kevin McKidd continued his portrayal of trauma surgeon Owen Hunt , while Patrick Dempsey acted as chief of neurosurgery Derek Shepherd . Meredith 's half @-@ sister and second @-@ year surgical resident Lexie Grey was portrayed by Chyler Leigh . After having previously appeared in a multi @-@ episode arc in a guest star capacity in the show 's fifth season , Jessica Capshaw began receiving star billing in the season 's premiere episode in the role of attending pediatric surgeon Arizona Robbins , love interest to Callie Torres . The ninth episode of the season marked the introduction of the new chief of cardiothoracic surgery Teddy Altman , portrayed by Kim Raver , whose mysterious romantic past with Owen Hunt develops into one of the season 's main stories . Starting with the nineteenth episode of the season , Raver began receiving star billing . 
 The sixth season introduces several new recurring characters who start to develop progressive and expansive storylines throughout the season . Mercy West surgical residents Reed Adamson , Charles Percy , April Kepner and Jackson Avery were portrayed by Nora Zehetner , Robert Baker , Sarah Drew and Jesse Williams , respectively . Jason George portrayed Miranda Bailey 's love interest , anesthesiologist Ben Warren . Thatcher Grey ( Jeff Perry ) and Sloan Riley ( Leven Rambin ) have been part of the season 's main story arcs , while numerous episodic characters have made guest appearances : Sara Gilbert as Kim Allen , Demi Lovato as Haley , Marion Ross as Betty , Mandy Moore as Mary Portman , Ryan Devlin as Bill Portman , Nick Purcell as Doug , Michael O 'Neill as Gary Clark , Danielle Panabaker as Kelsey , Adrienne Barbeau as Jodie Crawley , Héctor Elizondo as Mr. Torres , Amy Madigan as Dr. Wyatt , and Missi Pyle as Jasmine . Former series regular Kate Walsh returned to the series as a special guest star , portraying neonatal surgeon and obstetrician @-@ gynecologist Addison Montgomery . 
 = = Production = = 
 The season was produced by Touchstone Television ABC Studios , The Mark Gordon Company , Shondaland and was distributed by Buena Vista International , Inc .. The executive producers were creator Shonda Rhimes , Betsy Beers , Mark Gordon , Krista Vernoff , Rob Corn , Mark Wilding , Joan Rater and James D. Parriott . The regular directors were Shonda Rhimes , Krista Vernoff , Stacy McKee , William Harper , Debora Cahn , Allan Heinberg and Peter Nowalk . At the conclusion of season five , T.R. Knight was released from his contract , following a disagreement with Rhimes . When asked to make a ' flashback ' appearance in season six , Knight declined . Heigl 's appearances in the season were sporadic , seeing Stevens depart and return twice . Although she was scheduled to appear in the final five episodes of the season , Heigl requested that she be released from her contract 18 months early , and made her final appearance on January 21 , 2010 . Heigl explained that she wanted to spend more time with her family , and did not think it would be respectful to Grey 's Anatomy viewers to have Izzie return and depart yet again . The season 's two @-@ hour opener showed the doctors of Seattle Grace Hospital , grieving the loss of their deceased friend , O 'Malley . The special 's writer , Vernoff , commented : " It ’ s heartbreaking . I fell in love with George , like many of you did , in season one . " 
 The ninth episode of the season , " New History " , saw the arrival of Altman , which ended up forming a love triangle between her , Hunt , and Yang . Raver commented on this : " She was in Iraq with Owen . She 's a cardiac surgeon . She 's really good at what she does . There 'll be some interesting stuff between Teddy , Cristina , and Owen . " The episode 's writer , Heinberg , offered his insight : 
 " Teddy 's arrival at Seattle Grace unleashes all manner of complications for Owen , Cristina , and herself . Cristina ’ s immediately suspicious that Owen and Teddy were more than friends during their time together in Iraq . Teddy confesses to Owen that she apparently misread their mutual history , and walks away from him , mortified . And Owen ’ s left haunted by Teddy ’ s confession , now forced to re @-@ examine his own history -- and his feelings for both Teddy and Cristina . 
 " I Like You So Much Better When You 're Naked " saw the departure of Stevens , following the breakdown of her marriage with Karev . Series ' writer Joan Rater commented on this : " Izzie getting the clean scan back gives Alex the freedom to leave . Because he never would have left her when she was sick , he 's a good guy . And I 'm not saying that Alex ever consciously thought , I can ’ t leave her while she 's sick , but now that she 's not , now that she seems like she ’ s going to get better , it just comes to him . He deserves more . He 's a good guy and he deserves more . But loving Izzie showed him that he can be good , is good . So it was a little gift . And when he tells Izzie he 's done , he 's not bitter or angry , he 's just done . " The writing of the two @-@ part season six finale , caused struggle to Rhimes . She elaborated on this : 
 = = Reception = = 
 Grey 's Anatomy 's sixth season opened up to 17 @.@ 04 million viewers with a 6 @.@ 7 / 17 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . Although the rating was a 1 % decrease from season five 's opener , it managed to rank first for its time @-@ slot and the entire night , in terms of both ratings and viewership , and served as the season 's most viewed episode . " Sympathy for the Parents " was the season 's least viewed episode , and up to that point , the series ' as well , garnering only 9 @.@ 87 million viewers . The season 's finale garnered 16 @.@ 13 million viewers , and received a 6 @.@ 2 / 18 rating , ranking first for its time @-@ slot and the entire night , in terms of both ratings and viewership . Although the finale was a success for the night , it was a 1 % decrease from season five 's finale , but served as the season 's second most viewed episode . Overall , the season ranked at # 17 for the year , and had an average of 13 @.@ 26 million viewers , a 5 % decrease from the previous season 's ranking . 
 The season received mixed reviews among television critics . Speaking of the premiere , Glenn Diaz of BuddyTV noted that the special foreshadowed a " very dark " season , adding : " The talk between George 's mom and one of the surgeons [ Torres ] proved to be one of the more heart @-@ breaking scenes in an episode that in itself is heartbreaking enough . " In contrast , Kelly West of TV Blend was critical of the premiere , writing : " I don ’ t think based on the first episode that we can say that Grey ’ s is headed in a new direction , nor do I think the writers are making much of an effort to bring the series back to the greatness that was its earlier seasons . That said , this is Grey ’ s Anatomy and with that comes the usual drama , sex , love and <unk> medical mysteries thrown in the mix to keep things moving . If that ’ s what you ’ re looking for , I think you ’ ll enjoy the season premiere just fine . " Capshaw 's performance this season was praised , with The TV Addict calling her " immensely likeable " . Although " Sympathy for the Parents " was the least viewed episode , TV Fanatic called the episode " touching " , praising Chambers ' performance . TV Fanatic 's reaction to the season was fairly mixed , with Steve Marsi saying that Grey 's Anatomy was facing an identity crisis after viewing " Give Peace a Chance " . He said that : " Still popular but lacking its past magic , it 's trying to decide what to become . All we can say is that if it becomes what we saw 12 hours ago , we are all for it . Last week saw the doctors plunging into ER @-@ style chaos with 12 different doctors giving 12 different accounts of one case . Last night , we saw something else equally unusual . " He praised Patrick Dempsey 's performance , saying : " Again , it was a single case that took up the entire hour , but instead of 12 doctors ' version of events , the focus was largely on just one , and the best one : Dr. Derek Shepherd . Patrick Dempsey 's McDreamy character may be eye candy , but he 's got substance . Last night 's episode proved that in spades , and was one of the series ' best in some time . " 
 The season 's finale Death And All His Friends was highly praised . Marsi gave the episode five stars , and expressed that it may have been the best episode of the series , adding : " The writing and acting were absolutely stellar , and may lead to many Emmy nominations , but even more impressively , despite a killing spree , it remained distinctly Grey 's . Some of the back @-@ and @-@ <unk> between the characters were truly memorable , and some of the developments so heartbreaking that we don 't even know where to begin now . Seriously , the Season 6 finale left us laying awake afterward thinking about everything , a feeling we haven 't had from Grey 's in years and rarely achieved by any program . " John Kubicek of BuddyTV also noted that the finale was the best episode , adding : " [ It was ] two of the best hours of television all year . It was certainly the best Grey 's Anatomy has ever been , which is saying a lot since I 'd written the show off for the past few years . No show does a big traumatic event like Grey 's Anatomy , and the shooter gave the show license for heightened drama with five major characters being shot over the two hours . It was emotional , expertly paced and had me in tears for most of the finale . " Entertainment Weekly wrote , " At any rate , now you can at least see where it all began . And while you ’ re still pondering how Grey ’ s can still be so damn good sometimes , " 
 The season was one of the least acclaimed of the series , in terms of awards and nominations . Despite not being nominated for a Primetime Emmy , the show received two Creative Arts Emmy Awards : Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup For A Series , Miniseries , Movie Or A Special for " How <unk> " and Outstanding Makeup For A Single @-@ Camera Series ( Non @-@ Prosthetic ) for " Suicide is Painless " . The season also received a nomination for Outstanding Drama Series at the GLAAD Media Awards . Wilson was awarded the NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Directing in a Dramatic Series for her directing in " Give Peace a Chance " . The season also ranked at # 10 on Movieline 's top ten list . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 The number in the " No. in series " column refers to the episode 's number within the overall series , whereas the number in the " No. in season " column refers to the episode 's number within this particular season . " U.S. viewers in millions " refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live . The sixth season 's episodes are altogether 1032 minutes in length . 
 = = Ratings = = 
 = = = Live + SD ratings = = = 
 = = DVD Release = = 
 = 1899 Carrabelle hurricane = 
 The 1899 Carrabelle hurricane caused significant damage in the Dominican Republic and the Florida Panhandle . The second tropical cyclone and second hurricane of the 1899 Atlantic hurricane season , the storm was first observed south of the Dominican Republic on July 28 , 1899 . Shortly thereafter , it made landfall in Azua Province , Dominican Republic with an intensity equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Early on July 29 , the system weakened to a tropical storm , shortly before emerging into the Atlantic Ocean . It then moved west @-@ northwestward and remained at the same intensity for the next 24 hours . The storm made landfall near Islamorada , Florida on July 30 . It then brushed Southwest Florida before emerging into the Gulf of Mexico . The storm began to re @-@ intensify on July 31 and became a hurricane later that day . Early on August 1 , it peaked with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , several hours before making landfall near Apalachicola , Florida at the same intensity . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated over Alabama on August 2 . 
 In the Dominican Republic , three large schooners were wrecked at Santo Domingo ; only one crew member on the three vessels survived . " Great " damage was reported along coastal sections of the country while a loss of telegraph service impacted most of interior areas . In Florida , damage in the city of Carrabelle was extensive , where only nine houses remained . Losses in the city reached approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 1899 USD ) . At least 57 shipping vessels were destroyed ; damage from these ships collectively totaled about $ 375 @,@ 000 . Additionally , 13 lumber vessels were beached . Many boats at the harbor and the wharfs in Lanark were wrecked ; large portions of stores and pavilions in the city were damaged . The towns of Curtis Mill and McIntyre were completely destroyed , while the resort city of St. Teresa suffered significant damage . Overall , seven deaths were confirmed in Florida and losses in the state reached at least $ 1 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A " violent hurricane " was first observed near the south coast of Hispaniola at 1200 UTC on July 27 . Within the next six hours , the storm made landfall in Azua Province , Dominican Republic with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) – equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Early on July 28 , it weakened to tropical storm while moving northwestward across northern Haiti . A few hours later , the storm emerged into the Atlantic near Port @-@ de @-@ Paix . The system maintained intensity for over 24 hours as it moved northwestward and parallel to the north coast of Cuba . At 1000 UTC on July 30 , the storm made landfall in Islamorada , Florida on Upper Matecumbe Key with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . It weakened slightly and then moved just offshore or struck the mainland portion of Monroe County , Florida . Early on July 31 , the storm began to re @-@ strengthen while entering the eastern Gulf of Mexico . 
 HURDAT – the North Atlantic hurricane database – indicated that the system re @-@ intensified into a hurricane at 1200 UTC on July 31 . Further deepening occurred , with the storm becoming a Category 2 hurricane early on August 1 . Later that day , the hurricane made landfall between Carrabelle and Eastpoint , Florida with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . Reports at landfall indicate that the storm was small , spanning a diameter of only 40 miles ( 64 km ) . At 1800 UTC on August 1 – about an hour after it moved inland – a weather station measured the storm 's minimum barometric pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Early on August 2 , it weakened to a tropical storm and then a tropical depression several hours later . Shortly thereafter , it dissipating over southern Alabama . 
 = = Impact = = 
 News reports indicate that a " violent " hurricane struck the Dominican Republic on July 28 . Three large schooners were wrecked at Santo Domingo ; only one crew member on the three vessels survived . " Great " damage was reported along coastal sections of the country , while a loss of telegraph service impacted most of interior areas . 
 Due to " somewhat threatening " weather conditions on July 30 and July 31 , advisories were issued to stations across Florida , warning of the potential for strong winds . As a result , 40 vessels , coasting schooners , and spongers remained at port in Cedar Key . According to the <unk> at Cedar Key , " they [ the ships and sailors ] would have sailed and some would have been lost " had they not received warnings . 
 At the time of the storm , it was described as " the most disastrous cyclone that ever visited this section of Florida " . Losses from the storm in Florida reached at least $ 1 million . The city of Carrabelle was devastated as only nine houses in the city remained . According to the mayor , about 200 families were left homeless . The New York Times stated that , " Carrabelle is literally wiped from the map . " Losses in the city reached approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 . One fatality occurred in Carrabelle when a house collapsed on a woman ; numerous other people in the area sustained injuries . At least 57 shipping vessels were destroyed , including 14 barques , 40 small boats , and 3 pilot boats . Losses for these ships collectively totaled about $ 375 @,@ 000 . At the Chattahoochee , then known as River Junction , a mass meeting of citizens was held on August 4 to collect money for the victims of the storm in Carrabelle . 
 Additionally , 13 lumber vessels were beached . A 30 mile ( 48 km ) portion of the Carrabelle , Tallahassee and Georgia Railroad was washed away . A passenger train was blown over 100 yards from the track , injuring many passengers . Many boats at the harbor and the wharfs in Lanark were wrecked . The local summer resort of Lanark Inn was blown into the Gulf of Mexico . Large portions of stores and pavilions in the city were damaged . At McIntyre , virtually the entire town was destroyed , except for only two mill boilers . The city of Curtis Mill was completely destroyed . Additionally , the resort city of St. Teresa suffered significant damage . A total of fifteen ships either destroyed or beached at Dog Island , including the Benjamin C. Cromwell and James A. Garfield . At least 15 people were reported missing . Six drowning deaths were confirmed in association with this storm . 
 = Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) = 
 Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) is the debut studio album by the American hip hop group Wu @-@ Tang Clan , released November 9 , 1993 , on Loud Records and distributed through RCA Records . Recording sessions for the album took place during 1992 to 1993 at Firehouse Studio in New York City , and it was mastered at The Hit Factory . The album 's title originates from the martial arts film The 36th Chamber of Shaolin ( 1978 ) . The group 's de facto leader RZA , also known as Prince Rakeem , produced the album entirely , utilizing heavy , eerie beats and a sound largely based on martial @-@ arts movie clips and soul music samples . 
 The distinctive sound of Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) created a blueprint for hardcore hip hop during the 1990s and helped return New York City hip hop to national prominence . Its sound also became greatly influential in modern hip hop production , while the group members ' explicit , humorous , and free @-@ associative lyrics have served as a template for many subsequent hip hop records . Serving as a landmark record in the era of hip hop known as the East Coast Renaissance , its influence helped lead the way for several other East Coast hip hop artists , including Nas , The Notorious B.I.G. , Mobb Deep , and Jay @-@ Z. 
 Despite its raw , underground sound , the album had surprising chart success , peaking at number 41 on the US Billboard 200 chart . By 1995 , it was certified Platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America , and has sold over two million copies in the United States . Initially receiving positive reviews from most music critics , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) is widely regarded as one of the most significant albums of the 1990s , as well as one of the greatest hip hop albums ever . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 In the late 1980s , cousins Robert Diggs , Gary Grice , and Russell Jones formed a group named Force of the Imperial Master , also known as the All in Together Now Crew . Each member recorded under an alias : Grice as The Genius , Diggs as Prince Rakeem or The Scientist , and Jones as The Specialist . The group never signed to a major label , but caught the attention of the New York rap scene and was recognized by rapper Biz Markie . By 1991 , The Genius and Prince Rakeem were signed to separate record labels . The Genius released Words from the Genius ( 1991 ) on Cold Chillin ' Records and Prince Rakeem released Ooh I Love You Rakeem ( 1991 ) on Tommy Boy Records . Both were soon dropped by their labels . Embittered but <unk> , they took on new monikers ( The Genius became GZA while Prince Rakeem became RZA ) and refocused their efforts . RZA discussed the matter in their release The Wu @-@ Tang Manual ( 2005 ) , stating " [ Tommy Boy ] made the decision to sign House of Pain over us . When they dropped me , I was thinking , ' Damn , they chose a bunch of <unk> shit over me . ' " 
 RZA began collaborating with Dennis Coles , latter known as Ghostface Killah , another rapper from the Stapleton Projects apartment complex in Staten Island . The duo decided to create a hip hop group whose ethos would be a blend of " Eastern philosophy picked up from kung fu movies , watered @-@ down Nation of Islam preaching picked up on the New York streets , and comic books . " 
 Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) was recorded at Firehouse Studio in New York City from 1992 to 1993 . The album was produced , mixed , arranged , and programmed by RZA , and was mastered at The Hit Factory in New York City by Chris Gehringer . Because of an extremely limited budget , the group was only able to record in a small , inexpensive studio ; with up to eight of the nine Wu @-@ Tang members in the studio at once , the quarters were frequently crowded . To decide who appeared on each song , RZA forced the Wu @-@ Tang rappers to battle with each other . This competition led to the track " Meth Vs . Chef " , a battle between Method Man and Raekwon over the rights to rap over RZA 's beat ; this track was left off the Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's debut album but surfaced on Method Man 's debut , <unk> ( 1994 ) . 
 = = Title significance = = 
 The true meaning of the album 's title is not well known or understood . According to a Five Percent philosophy , known as the Supreme Mathematics , the number 9 means " to bring into existence , " and this meant everything to the group 's debut album . The group was made of 9 members , each of whom had 4 chambers of the heart , which are 2 atria , and 2 ventricles . All of this is the root for " 36 Chambers " , being that 9 x 4 
 = 36 . 
 In reference to the 1978 kung fu film The 36th Chamber of Shaolin that the group enjoyed watching , the Clan considered themselves as lyrical masters of the 36 chambers , and arrived onto the rap scene while appearing to be ahead , and more advanced over others , with " knowledge of 36 chambers of hip hop music when everyone else in hip hop was striving to attain the knowledge of 35 lessons . " Also , while the human body has 108 pressure points ( 1 + 0 + 8 = 
 9 ) , only the Wu @-@ Tang martial artists learned and understood that 36 of those pressure points are deadly ( 9 + 36 
 = 45 ) ( 4 + 5 = 
 9 ) The lyrics and rhymes of the 9 members are to be considered as 36 deadly lyrical techniques for pressure points . All of this is the basis for the album title , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) , being that 9 members x 4 chambers = 36 . However , this is just a theory ; the true significance of the title is not definitively known . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Group leader RZA produced Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) by creating sonic collages from classic soul samples and clips from martial arts movies such as Shaolin and Wu Tang ( 1981 ) . He complemented the rappers ' performances with " lean , menacing beats that evoked their gritty , urban surroundings more effectively than their words , " according to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic . The use of soul samples and various esoteric clips , and the technique by which RZA employed them in his beats , was unique and largely unprecedented in hip hop . The gritty sound of Enter the Wu @-@ Tang is due , at least in part , to the use of cheap equipment to produce the album . 
 Many critics argue that the minimalist means of production plays directly into the appealing " street " quality that makes the album a classic , including Ben Yew , who stated , " Because [ RZA ] didn 't have the best mixing or recording equipment , the album is wrought with a ' dirty ' quality — the drums have more bass and are more hard @-@ hitting than they are crisp and clean ; the samples have an eerie , almost haunting type of echo ; and the vocals , because each member 's voice is already aggressive and gritty , perfectly match the production . " Although Ol ' Dirty Bastard is given co @-@ production credit on " Da Mystery of Chessboxin ' " and Method Man is co @-@ credited for " Wu @-@ Tang Clan Ain 't <unk> ta F ' Wit , " critics and admirers universally credit RZA with developing a " dusty yet digital production style [ that ] helped legitimize the use of more diverse sample sources to the hardcore New York rap massive , breaking away from James Brown based beats and embracing a style that turned the Underdog theme into the menacing coda for a group of underground terrorists . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Enter the Wu Tang ushered in a new standard for hip hop at a time when hip hop music was dominated by the jazz @-@ influenced styles of A Tribe Called Quest , the Afrocentric viewpoints of Public Enemy , and the rising popularity of West Coast gangsta rap . The album 's explicit , humorous and free @-@ associative lyrics have been credited for serving as a template for many subsequent hip hop records . Rolling Stone described the album as possessing an aesthetic that was " low on hype and production values [ and ] high on the idea that indigence is a central part of blackness . " While the lyrical content on Enter the Wu @-@ Tang generally varies from rapper to rapper , the basic themes are the same — urban life , martial arts movies , comic book references , and marijuana — and the setting is invariably the harsh environment of New York City . The lyrics have a universally dark tone and seem at times to be simply aggressive cries . AllMusic contributor Steve Huey praises the lyricists for their originality and caustic humor , stating " Some were outsized , theatrical personalities , others were cerebral storytellers and lyrical technicians , but each had his own distinctive style ... Every track on Enter the Wu @-@ Tang is packed with fresh , inventive rhymes , which are filled with martial arts metaphors , pop culture references ( everything from <unk> to Lucky Charms cereal commercials to Barbra Streisand 's " The Way We Were " ) , bizarre threats of violence , and a truly twisted sense of humor . " 
 With the exception of " Method Man " and GZA 's " Clan in da Front " , every song features multiple rappers contributing verses of varying lengths . The verses are essentially battle rhymes , mixed with humor and outsized tales of urban violence and drug use . There is some debate about whether the lyrics on 36 Chambers are properly classified as gangsta rap or something else entirely . In a Stylus Magazine review , writer Gavin Mueller evokes the bleakness of the Wu @-@ Tang world view : 
 [ T ] he lyrics reach back to New York 's own Rakim : dense battle rhymes potent with metaphors . Each Wu MC links his rhymes to crime and violence , allowing his preoccupations to surface subtly and indirectly , rather than spouting off overt gangsta @-@ isms designed to shock ... The hood imagery of the lyrics is utterly pervasive and uncompromising , immersing the listener in a foreign land smack in the middle of New York . There is no celebration here , and little hope . 
 All nine original Wu @-@ Tang Clan members contribute vocals on Enter the Wu @-@ Tang . Masta Killa only appears on one track , contributing the last verse of " Da Mystery of Chessboxin , ' " but all the other rappers appear on at least two songs . Method Man and Raekwon are the most prolific of the group , featured on eight tracks . Though the performers have widely differing techniques , the chemistry between them is a key ingredient of the album 's success . Pitchfork Media asserts that " Half the charm is in the cast 's idiosyncrasies : ODB 's hovering sing @-@ song , Raekwon 's fake stutter , Ghostface 's verbal tics , Method Man 's hazy , dusted voice . " 
 = = Singles = = 
 " Protect Ya Neck " and " <unk> " were the first tracks recorded by the Wu @-@ Tang Clan . " Protect Ya Neck " is a free @-@ associative and braggadocious battle rap featuring eight of the nine Wu @-@ Tang members , and " <unk> " tells stories of a little kid getting shot ( RZA 's little brother ) , and another one who contracts HIV after having unprotected sex . They were independently released as the " Protect Ya Neck " / " After Laughter Comes Tears " single , which RZA financed by demanding $ 100 ( USD ) from each rapper who wanted a verse on the A @-@ side . The single was re @-@ released in a much larger pressing , with " Method Man " as the B @-@ side . 
 " Method Man " reached number 69 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 17 on the Billboard Hot Rap Tracks chart . " Method Man " gained significant airplay partly for its catchy refrain , which copies the refrain of Hall & Oates ' " Method of Modern Love " ( " The M @-@ E @-@ T @-@ H @-@ O @-@ D ... Man " ) . 
 " C.R.E.A.M. " , featuring Raekwon and <unk> Deck , was the second single from the album and the first new A @-@ side to be released after the group signed with Loud / RCA . Its lyrics deal with the struggle of poverty and the desire to earn money by any means . It was the Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's most successful single , reaching number 60 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number 8 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart . The single topped the Hot Dance Music / Maxi @-@ Singles Sales chart . " Can It Be All So Simple " , featuring Ghostface Killah and Raekwon , was the album 's third single . The single failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 , but reached number 24 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart in 1994 . A remix of the song was included on Raekwon 's debut solo album Only Built 4 Cuban Linx ... ( 1995 ) . 
 The group made music videos for the three A @-@ sides and for " Method Man " , " Da Mystery of Chessboxin ' " , and " Wu @-@ Tang Clan Ain 't <unk> ta Fuck Wit " . As the group 's profile increased , the quality of their videos improved ; though the " Protect Ya Neck " video resembled a home movie , later videos were directed by rising hip hop music video director Hype Williams . The videos received almost no airplay on MTV , but were extremely popular on video @-@ by @-@ request channels such as The Box . Touré wrote in his 1993 Rolling Stone review that " in Brooklyn , N.Y. , right now and extending back a few months , the reigning fave is the Wu @-@ Tang Clan , who are to the channel what Guns N ' Roses are to MTV . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial reaction = = = 
 Upon its release , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) received rave reviews from most music critics . In an article for The Source , The Ghetto Communicator wrote " This record is harsh , but so is the world that we live in . For B @-@ boys n <unk> who come from the core of the hard , this is the hip @-@ hop album you 've been waiting for " . Rolling Stone 's review was decidedly ambivalent , praising the album 's sound , but noting that " Wu @-@ Tang ... are more ciphers than masterful creations . In refusing to commodify themselves , they leave blank the ultimate canvas — the self . " Entertainment Weekly was more enthusiastic , giving the album an A , and writing that " With its rumble jumble of drumbeats , peppered with occasional piano plunking , Enter has a raw , pass @-@ the @-@ mike flavor we haven 't heard since rap was pop 's best @-@ kept secret . " Robert Christgau found the Wu @-@ Tang Clan " grander " and " <unk> " than their West Coast contemporaries and concluded , " Expect the masterwork this album 's reputation suggests and you 'll probably be <unk> will speak directly only to indigenous hip hoppers . Expect a glorious human mess , as opposed to the ominous platinum product of their opposite numbers , and you 'll realize the dope game isn 't everyone 's dead @-@ end street " . 
 Music journalist Touré declared of the album , that " This is hip @-@ hop you won 't find creeping up the Billboard charts but you will hear booming out of Jeep stereos in all the right neighborhoods . " However , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang had surprising chart success , despite its raw , underground sound . It peaked at number 41 on the Billboard 200 chart and reached number eight on Billboard 's Top R & B / Hip Hop Albums chart . The album continued to sell steadily and was eventually certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America on May 15 , 1995 . 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 Since its release , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang has risen in stature to become one of the most highly regarded albums in hip hop . The album was originally given a rating of 4 @.@ 5 mics out of 5 in The Source magazine in 1994 ; however , it was given a classic 5 mic rating in a later issue of the magazine . Similar to The Source , XXL magazine gave the album a classic rating of " XXL " in its retrospective 2007 issue . In the book Spin Alternative Record Guide ( 1995 ) , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) has a critical rating of 8 / 10 from Spin . In 2003 , Rolling Stone named the album among the " 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , asserting that " East @-@ coast hip @-@ hop made a return in 1993 . " The magazine later listed it as one of the " Essential Albums of the 90s " and " 100 Best Debut Albums of All Time . " The Source cited Enter the Wu @-@ Tang as one of the " 100 Best Rap Albums " , while also naming " Protect Ya Neck / Method Man " and " C.R.E.A.M. " among the " 100 Best Rap Singles " . MTV declared it among " The Greatest Hip @-@ Hop Albums of All Time " , while Blender named the album among the " 500 CDs You Must Own " . Oliver Wang , author of Classic Material : The Hip @-@ Hop Album Guide described it " as timeless an album as hip @-@ hop has ever seen . " 
 Publications based outside of the United States have acclaimed 36 Chambers as well ; Australia 's Juice magazine placed it at number 40 on its list of " 100 Greatest Albums of the ' 90s " , and Les Inrockuptibles ranked it number 59 on a list of " The 100 Best Albums 1986 – 1996 " . In naming Enter the Wu @-@ Tang one of the 50 best albums of the 1990s , Pitchfork Media staff member Rollie Pemberton summed up the album 's critical recognition by writing : 
 This is the sound of accidental fame . Something as unique and unusual as this record isn 't supposed to find itself at the height of commercial viability ; it 's supposed to smolder underground , hidden from the view of mainstream America , who surely would not be ready for such a challenge . But America was ready , in part because this one challenged convention , not listeners . Sure , its sloppy drum programming , bizarre song structures , and unpolished sound quality disturbed commercial rap purists , but the talent was so inherent and obvious , and the charisma so undeniable , that it propelled the Wu @-@ Tang Clan to the height of the rap game , and today stands not just as the hip @-@ hop classic that introduced the concept of obscure thematic characters ( each member 's name references old kung @-@ fu movies ) , but also bridged the gap between traditional old @-@ school sensibilities and the technical lyricism of today . 
 In 2010 , Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) was included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 = = = East Coast hip hop = = = 
 Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) is one of the most influential albums in hip hop history . Adam Heimlich of the New York Press considers the album a touchstone of hardcore hip @-@ hop , a gritty , stripped @-@ down , dark and violent subgenre of hip hop and the signature sound of New York City 's rap scene during the mid @-@ 1990s . He writes that , " the Wu @-@ Tang Clan ... all but invented 90s New York rap , back when the notion of an East Coast gangsta still meant Schoolly D or Kool G. Rap .... [ They ] designed the manner and style in which New York artists would address what Snoop and Dre had made rap 's hottest topics : drugs and violence . " As the album helped return New York City hip hop to national prominence , a new generation of New York rappers , many of them inspired by the Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's example , released a flurry of classic albums that later became known as the East Coast Renaissance . Enter the Wu @-@ Tang has been recognized by critics as a landmark album in the movement . AllMusic indicates that the success of the album paved the way for Nas , The Notorious B.I.G. Mobb Deep and Jay @-@ Z. 
 At the time of the album 's release , mainstream hip hop was dominated by West Coast hip hop . Enter the Wu Tang ( along with the critically acclaimed Illmatic and the commercial success of Ready to Die ) was able to shift the emphasis away from the melodious , synthesizer @-@ driven G @-@ funk and restore interest into the East Coast hip hop scene . According to one columnist , " When Enter the Wu @-@ Tang : The 36 Chambers first graced the pages of rap lore in 1993 , Dr. Dre 's funk @-@ filled , West Coast gangster rap dominated the business . Though this initial dominance was difficult to overcome , Wu @-@ Tang still managed to carve out a piece of rap history . " 
 = = = Hip hop production = = = 
 RZA 's production on Wu @-@ Tang Clan 's debut album had a profound and significant influence on subsequent hip hop producers . The distinctive sound of Enter the Wu @-@ Tang has been credited for creating a blueprint for hardcore hip hop in the mid @-@ 1990s . <unk> asserts that Enter the Wu @-@ Tang 's production formula " transformed the sound of underground rap into mainstream formula , and virtually changed the face of contemporary music as <unk> once knew it . " Many successful rap producers have admitted to the influence of RZA 's beats on their own production efforts . 9th Wonder , a producer and former member of Little Brother , is one of many whose vocal sampling styles are inspired by RZA . The album 's reliance on soul music samples was novel at the time , but 21st century producers such as The Alchemist , Kanye West and Just Blaze now rely on this technique . According to Allmusic , the production on two Mobb Deep albums , The Infamous and Hell on Earth ( 1996 ) , are " indebted " to RZA 's early production with Wu @-@ Tang Clan . 
 = = = Subsequent Wu @-@ Tang work = = = 
 Following Enter the Wu @-@ Tang 's success , the individual members of the group negotiated and signed solo contracts with a variety of different labels : Method Man signed with Def Jam , Ol ' Dirty Bastard with Elektra , GZA with Geffen Records , and Ghostface Killah with Epic Records . This expansion across the music industry was an element of RZA 's stated plan for industry @-@ wide domination , wherein " All Wu releases are deemed to be 50 percent partnerships with Wu @-@ Tang Productions and each Wu member with solo deal must contribute 20 percent of their earnings back to Wu @-@ Tang Productions , a fund for all Wu members . " 
 On Enter the Wu @-@ Tang 's effect on the group and the music industry , the Milwaukee Journal 's Aaron Justin @-@ <unk> wrote " The Wu showed us that a hip @-@ hop group can control its own destiny in the tangled web of the industry . It owns publishing rights , controls its samples and has 90 % influence over its career . And that control , that outlook for the future , is what makes it the best . " Wu @-@ Tang Clan have produced four subsequent group albums since Enter the Wu @-@ Tang , including Wu @-@ Tang Forever ( 1997 ) , which is certified as a quadruple platinum record . None of the subsequent Wu @-@ Tang Clan albums have garnered the critical accolades that their debut was accorded . 
 In 2013 , the group reunited , at the behest of RZA , for an album and tour celebrating the 20th anniversary of the album 's release . The album was titled A Better Tomorrow and the tour included dates throughout the United States , Europe and Russia . All original members of the group who performed on Enter the Wu @-@ Tang participated in both the tour and reunion album , excepting Ol ' Dirty Bastard , who died in 2004 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = CD = = = 
 Tracks 1 – 5 are on the Shaolin Sword side of the album and tracks 6 – 12 are on the Wu @-@ Tang Sword side . 
 An asterisk ( * ) indicates international version bonus track 
 = = = Vinyl / cassette = = = 
 The vinyl and cassette track order is slightly different to that of the CD : 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Enter the Wu @-@ Tang ( 36 Chambers ) adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 The information regarding accolades attributed to Enter the Wu @-@ Tang is taken from AcclaimedMusic.net , except for lists with additional sources . 
 ( * ) designates lists that are unordered . 
 = Barn owl = 
 The barn owl ( Tyto alba ) is the most widely distributed species of owl , and one of the most widespread of all birds . It is also referred to as the common barn owl , to distinguish it from other species in its family , Tytonidae , which forms one of the two main lineages of living owls , the other being the typical owls ( Strigidae ) . The barn owl is found almost everywhere in the world except polar and desert regions , Asia north of the Himalayas , most of Indonesia , and some Pacific islands . 
 Phylogenetic evidence shows that there are at least three major lineages of barn owl , one in Eurasia and Africa , one in Australasia and one in the Americas , and some highly divergent taxa on islands . Some authorities further split the group , recognising up to five species , and further research needs to be done to clarify the position . There is a considerable variation between the sizes and colour of the approximately 28 subspecies but most are between 33 and 39 cm ( 13 and 15 in ) in length with wingspans ranging from 80 to 95 cm ( 31 to 37 in ) . The plumage on head and back is a mottled shade of grey or brown , the underparts vary from white to brown and are sometimes speckled with dark markings . The face is characteristically heart @-@ shaped and is white in most subspecies . This owl does not hoot , but utters an eerie , drawn @-@ out shriek . 
 The barn owl is nocturnal over most of its range , but in Britain and some Pacific islands , it also hunts by day . Barn owls specialise in hunting animals on the ground and nearly all of their food consists of small mammals which they locate by sound , their hearing being very acute . They mate for life unless one of the pair gets killed , when a new pair bond may be formed . Breeding takes place at varying times of year according to locality , with a clutch , averaging about four eggs , being laid in a nest in a hollow tree , old building or fissure in a cliff . The female does all the incubation , and she and the young chicks are reliant on the male for food . When large numbers of small prey are readily available , barn owl populations can expand rapidly , and globally the bird is considered to be of least conservation concern . Some subspecies with restricted ranges are more threatened . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The barn owl was one of several species of bird first described in 1769 by the Tyrolean physician and naturalist Giovanni Antonio Scopoli in his Anni <unk> @-@ Naturales . He gave it the scientific name Strix alba . As more species of owl were described , the genus name Strix came to be used solely for the wood owls in the typical owl family Strigidae , and the barn owl became Tyto alba in the barn owl family Tytonidae . The name literally means " white owl " , from the onomatopoeic Ancient Greek <unk> ( <unk> ) for an owl – compare English " <unk> " – and Latin alba , " white " . The bird is known by many common names which refer to its appearance , call , habitat , or its eerie , silent flight : white owl , silver owl , demon owl , ghost owl , death owl , night owl , rat owl , church owl , cave owl , stone owl , monkey @-@ faced owl , hissing owl , hobgoblin or hobby owl , <unk> owl , white @-@ breasted owl , golden owl , <unk> owl , screech owl , straw owl , barnyard owl , and delicate owl . " Golden owl " might also refer to the related golden masked owl ( T. aurantia ) . " <unk> owl " and , particularly in the UK and in India , " screech owl " , refers to the piercing calls of these birds . The latter name is also applied to a different group of birds , the screech @-@ owls in the genus <unk> . 
 The ashy @-@ faced owl ( T. <unk> ) was for some time included in T. alba , and by some authors its populations from the Lesser Antilles still are . Based on DNA evidence , König , Weick & Becking ( 2009 ) recognised the American Barn Owl ( T. furcata ) and the Curaçao Barn Owl ( T. <unk> ) as separate species . They also proposed that T. a. delicatula should be split off as a separate species , to be known as the eastern barn owl , which would include the subspecies T. d. <unk> , T. d. meeki , T. d. crassirostris and T. d. <unk> . However , the International Ornithological Committee has doubts about this and states that the split of Tyto delicatula from T. alba " may need to be revisited " . Some island subspecies are occasionally treated as distinct species , a move which should await further research into barn owl phylogeography . According to Bruce in the Handbook of Birds of the World , Volume 5 : Barn @-@ owls to Hummingbirds , " a review of the whole group [ is ] long overdue " . Molecular analysis of mitochondrial DNA shows a separation of the species into two clades , an Old World alba and a New World furcata , but this study did not include T. a. delicatula which the authors seem to have accepted as a separate species . A high amount of genetic variation was also found between the Indonesian T. a. <unk> and other members of the alba clade . 
 The barn owl has a wider distribution than any other species of owl . Many subspecies have been proposed over the years but several are generally considered to be intergrades between more distinct populations . Twenty to thirty are usually recognised , varying mainly in body proportions , size and colour . Island forms are mostly smaller than mainland ones , and those inhabiting forests have darker plumage and shorter wings than those occurring in open grasslands . Barn owls range in colour from the almost beige @-@ and @-@ white nominate subspecies , <unk> and <unk> , to the nearly black @-@ and @-@ brown <unk> . 
 In the Handbook of Birds of the World , Volume 5 : Barn @-@ owls to Hummingbirds , the following subspecies are listed : 
 = = Description = = 
 The barn owl is a medium @-@ sized , pale @-@ coloured owl with long wings and a short , squarish tail . There is considerable size variation across the subspecies with a typical specimen measuring about 33 to 39 cm ( 13 to 15 in ) in overall length , with a wingspan of some 80 to 95 cm ( 31 to 37 in ) . Adult body mass is also variable with male owls from the Galapagos weighing 260 g ( 9 @.@ 2 oz ) while male Pacific barn owls average 555 g ( 19 @.@ 6 oz ) . In general , owls living on small islands are smaller and lighter , perhaps because they have a higher dependence on insect prey and need to be more manoeuvrable . The shape of the tail is a means of distinguishing the barn owl from typical owls when seen in the air . Other distinguishing features are the undulating flight pattern and the dangling , feathered legs . The pale face with its heart shape and black eyes give the flying bird a distinctive appearance , like a flat mask with oversized , oblique black <unk> , the ridge of feathers above the beak somewhat resembling a nose . 
 The bird 's head and upper body typically vary between pale brown and some shade of grey ( especially on the forehead and back ) in most subspecies . Some are purer , richer brown instead , and all have fine black @-@ and @-@ white speckles except on the remiges and rectrices ( main wing feathers ) , which are light brown with darker bands . The heart @-@ shaped face is usually bright white , but in some subspecies it is brown . The underparts , including the <unk> ( lower leg ) feathers , vary from white to reddish buff among the subspecies , and are either mostly <unk> or bear a varying number of tiny blackish @-@ brown speckles . It has been found that at least in the continental European populations , females with more spotting are healthier than plainer birds . This does not hold true for European males by contrast , where the spotting varies according to subspecies . The beak varies from pale horn to dark buff , corresponding to the general plumage hue , and the iris is blackish brown . The talons , like the beak , vary in colour , ranging from pink to dark pinkish @-@ grey and the talons are black . 
 On average within any one population , males tend to have fewer spots on the underside and are paler in colour than females . The latter are also larger with a strong female T. alba of a large subspecies weighing over 550 g ( 19 @.@ 4 oz ) , while males are typically about 10 % lighter . Nestlings are covered in white down , but the heart @-@ shaped facial disk becomes visible soon after hatching . 
 Contrary to popular belief , the barn owl does not hoot ( such calls are made by typical owls , like the tawny owl or other members of the genus Strix ) . It instead produces the characteristic <unk> scream , ear @-@ shattering at close range , an eerie , long @-@ drawn @-@ out shriek . Males in courtship give a shrill twitter . Both young and old can hiss like a snake to scare away intruders . Other sounds produced include a purring chirrup denoting pleasure , and a " kee @-@ yak " , which resembles one of the vocalisations of the tawny owl . When captured or cornered , the barn owl throws itself on its back and flails with sharp @-@ taloned feet , making for an effective defence . In such situations it may emit rasping sounds or clicking snaps , produced probably by the beak but possibly by the tongue . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 The barn owl is the most widespread <unk> species in the world , occurring in every continent except Antarctica . Its range includes all of Europe ( except Fennoscandia and Malta ) , most of Africa apart from the Sahara , the Indian subcontinent , Southeast Asia , Australia , many Pacific Islands , and North , Central and South America . In general it is considered to be sedentary , and indeed many individuals , having taken up residence in a particular location , remain there even when better foraging areas nearby become vacant . In the British Isles , the young seem largely to disperse along river corridors and the distance travelled from their natal site averages about 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) . 
 In continental Europe the distance travelled is greater , commonly somewhere between 50 and 100 kilometres ( 31 and 62 mi ) but exceptionally 1 @,@ 500 km ( 932 mi ) , with ringed birds from the Netherlands ending up in Spain and in Ukraine . In the United States , dispersal is typically over distances of 80 and 320 km ( 50 and 199 mi ) , with the most travelled individuals ending up some 1 @,@ 760 km ( 1 @,@ 094 mi ) from the point of origin . Movements in the African continent include 1 @,@ 000 km ( 621 mi ) from Senegambia to Sierra Leone and up to 579 km ( 360 mi ) within South Africa . In Australia there is some migration as the birds move towards the northern coast in the dry season and southward in the wet , and also nomadic movements in association with rodent plagues . Occasionally , some of these birds turn up on Norfolk Island , Lord Howe Island or New Zealand , showing that crossing the ocean is not beyond their capabilities . In 2008 , barn owls were recorded for the first time breeding in New Zealand . The barn owl has been successfully introduced into the Hawaiian island of Kauai in an attempt to control rodents , however it has been found to also feed on native birds . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Like most owls , the barn owl is nocturnal , relying on its acute sense of hearing when hunting in complete darkness . It often becomes active shortly before dusk and can sometimes be seen during the day when relocating from one roosting site to another . In Britain , on various Pacific Islands and perhaps elsewhere , it sometimes hunts by day . This practice may depend on whether the owl is mobbed by other birds if it emerges in daylight . However , in Britain , some birds continue to hunt by day even when mobbed by such birds as magpies , rooks and black @-@ headed gulls , such diurnal activity possibly occurring when the previous night has been wet making hunting difficult . By contrast , in southern Europe and the tropics , the birds seem to be almost exclusively nocturnal , with the few birds that hunt by day being severely mobbed . 
 Barn owls are not particularly territorial but have a home range inside which they forage . For males in Scotland this has a radius of about 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) from the nest site and an average size of about 300 hectares . Female home ranges largely coincide with that of their mates . Outside the breeding season , males and females usually roost separately , each one having about three favoured sites in which to conceal themselves by day , and which are also visited for short periods during the night . Roosting sites include holes in trees , fissures in cliffs , disused buildings , chimneys and <unk> and are often small in comparison to nesting sites . As the breeding season approaches , the birds move back to the vicinity of the chosen nest to roost . 
 The barn owl is a bird of open country such as farmland or grassland with some interspersed woodland , usually at altitudes below 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) but occasionally as high as 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) in the tropics . This owl prefers to hunt along the edges of woods or in rough grass strips adjoining pasture . It has an effortless wavering flight as it quarters the ground , alert to the sounds made by potential prey . Like most owls , the barn owl flies silently ; tiny serrations on the leading edges of its flight feathers and a hairlike fringe to the trailing edges help to break up the flow of air over the wings , thereby reducing turbulence and the noise that accompanies it . <unk> extensions to the barbules of its feathers , which give the plumage a soft feel , also minimise noise produced during wingbeats . The behaviour and ecological preferences may differ slightly even among neighbouring subspecies , as shown in the case of the European T. a. guttata and T. a. alba that probably evolved , respectively , in allopatric glacial refugia in southeastern Europe , and in Iberia or southern France . 
 = = = Diet and feeding = = = 
 The diet of the barn owl has been much studied ; the items consumed can be ascertained from identifying the prey fragments in the pellets of indigestible matter that the bird regurgitates . Studies of diet have been made in most parts of the bird 's range , and in moist temperate areas over 90 % of the prey tends to be small mammals , whereas in hot , dry , unproductive areas , the proportion is lower , and a great variety of other creatures are eaten depending on local abundance . Most prey is terrestrial but bats and birds are also taken , as well as lizards , amphibians and insects . Even when they are plentiful and other prey scarce , earthworms do not seem to be consumed . 
 In North America and most of Europe , voles predominate in the diet and shrews are the second most common food choice . Mice and rats form the main foodstuffs in the Mediterranean region , the tropics , sub @-@ tropics and Australia . Barn owls are usually more specialist feeders in productive areas and generalists in drier areas . On the Cape Verde Islands , geckos are the mainstay of the diet , supplemented by birds such as plovers , godwits , turnstones , weavers and pratincoles , and on a rocky islet off the coast of California , a clutch of four young were being reared on a diet of Leach 's storm petrel ( Oceanodroma <unk> ) . In Ireland , the accidental introduction of the bank vole in the 1950s led to a major shift in the barn owl 's diet : where their ranges overlap , the vole is now by far the largest prey item . Locally <unk> rodent species in the weight class of several grams per individual usually make up the single largest proportion of prey . In the United States , rodents and other small mammals usually make up ninety @-@ five percent of the diet and worldwide , over ninety percent of the prey caught . 
 The barn owl hunts by flying slowly , quartering the ground and hovering over spots that may conceal prey . It may also use branches , fence posts or other lookouts to scan its surroundings , and this is the main means of prey location in the oil palm plantations of Malaysia . The bird has long , broad wings , enabling it to manoeuvre and turn abruptly . Its legs and toes are long and slender which improves its ability to forage among dense foliage or beneath the snow and gives it a wide spread of talons when attacking prey . Studies have shown that an individual barn owl may eat one or more voles ( or their equivalent ) per night , equivalent to about twenty @-@ three percent of the bird 's bodyweight . Excess food is often cached at roosting sites and can be used when food is scarce . 
 Small prey is usually torn into chunks and eaten completely including bones and fur , while prey larger than about 100 g ( 4 oz ) , such as baby rabbits , <unk> <unk> , or <unk> vlei rats , is usually dismembered and the inedible parts discarded . Contrary to what is sometimes assumed , the barn owl does not eat domestic animals on any sort of regular basis . Regionally , non @-@ rodent foods are used as per availability . On bird @-@ rich islands , a barn owl might include some fifteen to twenty percent of birds in its diet , while in grassland it will gorge itself on swarming termites , or on Orthoptera such as <unk> katydids , Jerusalem crickets ( <unk> ) or true crickets ( Gryllidae ) . Bats and even frogs , lizards and snakes may make a minor but significant contribution to the diet ; small <unk> like <unk> shrews may be a secondary prey of major importance . 
 The barn owl has acute hearing , with ears placed asymmetrically . This improves detection of sound position and distance and the bird does not require sight to hunt . The facial disc plays a part in this process , as is shown by the fact that with the ruff feathers removed , the bird can still locate the source in azimuth but fails to do so in elevation . Hunting nocturnally or <unk> , this bird can target its prey and dive to the ground , penetrating its talons through snow , grass or brush to seize small creatures with deadly accuracy . Compared to other owls of similar size , the barn owl has a much higher metabolic rate , requiring relatively more food . Weight for weight , barn owls consume more rodents — often regarded as pests by humans — than possibly any other creature . This makes the barn owl one of the most economically valuable wildlife animals for agriculture . Farmers often find these owls more effective than poison in keeping down rodent pests , and they can encourage barn owl habitation by providing nest sites . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Barn owls living in tropical regions can breed at any time of year , but some seasonality in nesting is still evident . Where there are distinct wet and dry seasons , egg @-@ laying usually takes place during the dry season , with increased rodent prey becoming available to the birds as the vegetation dies off . In arid regions , such as parts of Australia , breeding may be irregular and may happen in wet periods , triggered by temporary increases in the populations of small mammals . In temperate climates , nesting seasons become more distinct and there are some seasons of the year when no egg @-@ laying takes place . In Europe and North America , most nesting takes place between March and June when temperatures are increasing . The actual dates of egg @-@ laying vary by year and by location , being correlated with the amount of prey @-@ rich foraging habitat around the nest site and often with the phase of the rodent abundance cycle . An increase in rodent populations will usually stimulate the local barn owls to begin nesting ; thus , even in the cooler parts of its range , two broods are often raised in a good year . 
 Females are ready to breed at ten to eleven months of age although males sometimes wait till the following year . Barn owls are usually monogamous , sticking to one partner for life unless one of the pair dies . During the non @-@ breeding season they may roost separately , but as the breeding season approaches they return to their established nesting site , showing considerable site fidelity . In colder climates , in harsh weather and where winter food supplies may be scarce , they may roost in farm buildings and in barns between hay bales , but they then run the risk that their selected nesting hole may be taken over by some other , earlier @-@ nesting species . Single males may establish feeding territories , patrolling the hunting areas , occasionally stopping to hover , and perching on lofty eminences where they screech to attract a mate . Where a female has lost her mate but maintained her breeding site , she usually seems to manage to attract a new spouse . 
 Once a pair @-@ bond has been formed , the male will make short flights at dusk around the nesting and roosting sites and then longer circuits to establish a home range . When he is later joined by the female , there is much chasing , turning and twisting in flight , and frequent screeches , the male 's being high @-@ pitched and tremulous and the female 's lower and harsher . At later stages of courtship , the male emerges at dusk , climbs high into the sky and then swoops back to the vicinity of the female at speed . He then sets off to forage . The female meanwhile sits in an eminent position and preens , returning to the nest a minute or two before the male arrives with food for her . Such feeding behaviour of the female by the male is common , helps build the pair @-@ bond and increases the female 's fitness before egg @-@ laying commences . 
 Barn owls are cavity nesters . They choose holes in trees , fissures in cliff faces , the large nests of other birds such as the hamerkop ( Scopus <unk> ) and , particularly in Europe and North America , old buildings such as farm sheds and church towers . Buildings are preferred to trees in wetter climates in the British Isles and provide better protection for fledglings from inclement weather . Trees tend to be in open habitats rather than in the middle of woodland and nest holes tend to be higher in North America than in Europe because of possible predation by raccoons ( Procyon lotor ) . No nesting material is used as such but , as the female sits incubating the eggs , she draws in the dry furry material of which her regurgitated pellets are composed , so that by the time the chicks are hatched , they are surrounded by a carpet of shredded pellets . Oftentimes other birds such as jackdaws ( Corvus monedula ) nest in the same hollow tree or building and seem to live harmoniously with the owls . 
 Before commencing laying , the female spends much time near the nest and is entirely provisioned by the male . Meanwhile , the male roosts nearby and may cache any prey that is surplus to their requirements . When the female has reached peak weight , the male provides a ritual presentation of food and copulation occurs at the nest . The female lays eggs on alternate days and the clutch size averages about five eggs ( range two to nine ) . The eggs are chalky white , somewhat elliptical and about the size of bantam 's eggs , and incubation begins as soon as the first egg is laid . While she is sitting on the nest , the male is constantly bringing more provisions and they may pile up beside the female . The incubation period is about thirty days , hatching takes place over a prolonged period and the youngest chick may be several weeks younger than its oldest sibling . In years with plentiful supplies of food , there may be a hatching success rate of about 75 % . The male continues to copulate with the female when he brings food which makes the newly hatched chicks vulnerable to injury . 
 The chicks are at first covered with greyish @-@ white down and develop rapidly . Within a week they can hold their heads up and shuffle around in the nest . The female tears up the food brought by the male and distributes it to the chicks . Initially these make a " <unk> " sound but this soon changes into a food @-@ demanding " snore " . By two weeks old they are already half their adult weight and look naked as the amount of down is insufficient to cover their growing bodies . By three weeks old , quills are starting to push through the skin and the chicks stand , making snoring noises with wings raised and tail stumps waggling , begging for food items which are now given whole . The male is the main provider of food until all the chicks are at least four weeks old at which time the female begins to leave the nest and starts to roost elsewhere . By the sixth week the chicks are as big as the adults but have slimmed down somewhat by the ninth week when they are fully fledged and start leaving the nest briefly themselves . They are still dependent on the parent birds until about thirteen weeks and receive training from the female in finding , and eventually catching , prey . 
 = = = Moulting = = = 
 Feathers become abraded over time and all birds need to replace them at intervals . Barn owls are particularly dependent on their ability to fly quietly and manoeuvre efficiently , and in temperate areas their prolonged moult lasts through three phases over a period of two years . The female starts to moult while incubating the eggs and brooding the chicks , a time when the male feeds her so she does not need to fly much . The first primary feather to be shed is the central one , number 6 , and it has regrown completely by the time the female resumes hunting . Feathers 4 , 5 , 7 and 8 are dropped at a similar time the following year and feathers 1 , 2 , 3 , 9 and 10 in the bird 's third year of adulthood . The secondary and tail feathers are lost and replaced over a similar timescale , again starting while incubation is taking place . In the case of the tail , the two outermost tail feathers are first shed followed by the two central ones , the other tail feathers being moulted the following year . 
 In temperate areas , the male owl moults rather later in the year than the female , at a time when there is an abundance of food , the female has recommenced hunting and the demands of the chicks are lessening . Unmated males without family responsibilities often start losing feathers earlier in the year . The moult follows a similar prolonged pattern to that of the female and the first sign that the male is moulting is often when a tail feather has been dropped at the roost . A consequence of moulting is the loss of thermal insulation . This is of little importance in the tropics and barn owls here usually moult a complete complement of flight feathers annually . The hot @-@ climate moult may still take place over a long period but is usually concentrated at a particular time of year outside the breeding season . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 Predators of the barn owl include large American opossums ( Didelphis ) , the common raccoon , and similar carnivorous mammals , as well as eagles , larger hawks and other owls . Among the latter , the great horned owl ( Bubo virginianus ) in the Americas and the Eurasian eagle @-@ owl ( B. bubo ) are noted predators of barn owls ( though there is little evidence for predation on wild birds by great horned owls ) . In Europe , the chief diurnal predators are the northern goshawk ( Accipiter gentilis ) and the common buzzard ( Buteo buteo ) . The goshawk and the eagle owl are on the increase because of the greater protection these birds now receive . 
 When disturbed at its roosting site , an angry barn owl lowers its head and sways it from side to side , or the head may be lowered and stretched forward and the wings drooped while the bird emits hisses and makes snapping noises with its beak . A defensive attitude involves lying flat on the ground or crouching with wings spread out . 
 Barn owls are hosts to a wide range of parasites . Fleas are present at nesting sites and externally the birds are attacked by feather lice and feather mites which chew the barbules of the feathers and which are transferred from bird to bird by direct contact . Blood @-@ sucking flies such as <unk> avicularia are often present , moving about among the plumage . Internal parasites include the fluke <unk> <unk> , the tape worm <unk> <unk> , several species of parasitic round worm and spiny @-@ headed worms in the genus <unk> . These gut parasites are acquired when the birds feed on infected prey which provide intermediate hosts for the parasites . There is some indication that female birds with more and larger spots have a greater resistance to external parasites . This is correlated with smaller bursae of Fabricius , glands associated with antibody production , and a lower fecundity of the blood @-@ sucking fly <unk> <unk> that attacks nestlings . 
 = = = Lifespan = = = 
 Unusually for such a medium @-@ sized carnivorous animal , the barn owl exhibits r @-@ selection , producing large number of offspring with a high growth rate , many of which have a relatively low probability of surviving to adulthood . While wild barn owls are thus decidedly short @-@ lived , the actual longevity of the species is much higher – captive individuals may reach twenty years of age or more . But occasionally , a wild bird reaches an advanced age . The American record age for a wild barn owl is eleven and a half years , while a Dutch bird was noted to have reached an age of seventeen years , ten months . Another captive barn owl , in England , lived to be over twenty @-@ five years old . Taking into account such extremely long @-@ lived individuals , the average lifespan of the barn owl is about four years , and statistically two @-@ thirds to three @-@ quarters of all adults survive from one year to the next . However , the mortality is not evenly distributed throughout the bird 's life , and only one young in three manages to live to its first breeding attempt . 
 The most significant cause of death in temperate areas is likely to be starvation , particularly over the autumn and winter period when first year birds are still perfecting their hunting skills . In northern and upland areas , there is some correlation between mortality in older birds and adverse weather , deep @-@ lying snow and prolonged low temperatures . Collision with road vehicles is another cause of mortality , and may result when birds forage on mown verges . Some of these birds are in poor condition and may have been less able to evade oncoming vehicles than fit individuals would have been . Historically , many deaths were caused by the use of pesticides , and this may still be the case in some parts of the world . Collisions with power @-@ lines kill some birds and shooting accounts for others , especially in Mediterranean regions . 
 = = Status and conservation = = 
 Barn owls are relatively common throughout most of their range and not considered globally threatened . However , locally severe declines from organochlorine ( e.g. , DDT ) poisoning in the mid @-@ 20th century and rodenticides in the late 20th century have affected some populations , particularly in Europe and North America . Intensification of agricultural practices often means that the rough grassland that provides the best foraging habitat is lost . While barn owls are prolific breeders and able to recover from short @-@ term population decreases , they are not as common in some areas as they used to be . A 1995 – 1997 survey put their British population at between 3 @,@ 000 and 5 @,@ 000 breeding pairs , out of an average of about 150 @,@ 000 pairs in the whole of Europe . In the USA , barn owls are listed as endangered species in seven Midwestern states , and in the European Community they are considered a Species of European Concern . 
 In some areas , it may be an insufficiency of suitable nesting sites that is the factor limiting barn owl numbers . The provision of nest boxes under the eaves of buildings and in other locations can be very successful in increasing the local population . In Malaysia , large areas of rainforest were felled to make way for oil palm plantations and with few tree cavities for breeding , the barn owl population , with its ability to control rodent pests , diminished . The provision of two hundred nest boxes in a trial saw almost one hundred percent occupancy and as the programme expanded , the plantations supported one of the densest barn owl populations in the world . Similarly , providing nesting boxes has increased the number of barn owls in rice @-@ growing areas of Malaysia where the rodents do much damage to the crop . However , although barn owl numbers have increased in both these instances , it is unclear as to how effective this biological control of the rats is as compared to the trapping and baiting that occurred previously . 
 Common names such as " demon owl " , " death owl " , or " ghost owl " show that traditionally , rural populations in many places considered barn owls to be birds of evil omen . Consequently , they were often persecuted by farmers who were unaware of the benefit these birds bring . The Canary barn owl is particularly at risk , and as late as 1975 , hunting by fearful locals was limiting the population on Fuerteventura where only a few dozen pairs remain . On Lanzarote a somewhat larger number of these birds still seem to exist , but altogether this particular subspecies is precariously rare : Probably less than three hundred and perhaps fewer than two hundred individuals still remain . Similarly , the birds on the western Canary Islands which are usually assigned to the nominate subspecies have declined much , and here wanton destruction seems still to be significant . On Tenerife they seem relatively numerous but on the other islands , the situation looks about as bleak as on Fuerteventura . Due to their assignment to the nominate subspecies , which is common in mainland Spain , the western Canary Islands population is not classified as threatened . 
 In the United Kingdom , the " Barn Owl Nest Box Scheme " is promoted by the World Owl Trust and has many participants in local areas such as Somerset , where a webcam has been set up inside a nest box in which seven young were reared in 2014 . Another barn owl nest box live @-@ streaming webcam located in California , United States has proved popular online . In May 2012 , it was revealed that farmers in Israel and Jordan had , over a period of ten years , replaced pesticides with barn owls in a joint conservation venture called " Project Barn Owl " . 
 = Loch Arkaig treasure = 
 The treasure of Loch Arkaig , sometimes known as the Jacobite gold , was a large amount of specie provided by Spain to finance the Jacobite rising in Scotland in 1745 , and rumoured still to be hidden at Loch Arkaig in Lochaber . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1745 , Prince Charles Edward Stuart ( Bonnie Prince Charlie ) arrived in Scotland from France and claimed the thrones of Scotland , England and Ireland , in the name of his father James Stuart ( the Old Pretender ) . Although Charles asserted that his venture was supported by Louis XV of France , and that the arrival of French forces in Scotland was imminent , in truth France had little intention to intervene on the Stuarts ' behalf . However , some limited financial support was supplied by both Spain and the Pope . 
 Spain pledged some 400 @,@ 000 livres ( or Louis d 'Or ) per month for the Jacobite cause . However , getting this money to the rebel army was the difficulty . The first instalment ( sent via Charles ' brother Henry who was resident in France ) was dispatched in 1745 . The French sloop Hazard ( renamed the Prince Charles ) successfully landed its monies on the west coast of Scotland . Unfortunately for the Jacobites , the riches were soon captured by Clan Mackay , who were loyal to King George II , in the Skirmish of Tongue . 
 = = Treasure arrives = = 
 In April 1746 , the ships Mars and Bellona arrived in Scotland with 1 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 livres ( another Spanish instalment , plus a large French supplement ) . However , on learning of the Jacobite defeat at the Battle of Culloden on 16 April , the ships left , unloading only the Spanish money at Loch nan Uamh , Arisaig on 30 April ( the same place from where the prince had disembarked the year before , and would later embark for France ) . Thus , seven caskets of Spanish gold arrived in Scotland . As the Jacobite cause was by then lost , with the army scattered and the prince and his lieutenants in hiding , the money was to be used to assist the Jacobite clansmen ( then being subjected to the brutalities of the government forces of the Duke of Cumberland ) and to facilitate the escape of leading Jacobites to the continent . 
 Six caskets ( one having been stolen by McDonald of <unk> 's men ) were brought to Loch Arkaig ( just north of Fort William ) and hidden . Their secret was entrusted to Murray of Broughton , one of the Jacobite fugitives . Murray began the distribution to clan chiefs , but when he was apprehended by the government ( and later turned state 's evidence ) the treasure was entrusted first to Lochiel , the chief of Clan Cameron , and then to Macpherson of Cluny , head of Clan Macpherson . Cluny was hiding in a cave at Ben Alder , which came to be known as " the cage " , and when Charles briefly joined him there , Cluny had control of the money , which was still hidden at Arkaig . 
 = = Treasure hunt = = 
 Charles finally escaped Scotland in the French frigate L <unk> and arrived back in France in September 1746 . However , the fate of the money is not as clear . Cluny is believed to have retained control of it , and during his long years as a fugitive was at the centre of various futile plots to finance another uprising . Indeed , he remained in hiding in his Highland " cage " for the next eight years . Meanwhile , a cash @-@ strapped Charles was constantly looking for his money and at least some of it came to him later , paying for the minting of a campaign medal in the 1750s . However , it is said that all of the gold was never recovered . Charles , years later , accused Cluny of embezzlement . Whatever the case , the gold became a source of discord and grievance among the surviving Jacobites . 
 In 1753 , Archibald Cameron — Lochiel 's brother , who was acting as secretary to the Old Pretender — was sent back to Scotland to locate the treasure . However , whilst staying secretly at <unk> by Loch Katrine , he was betrayed ( apparently by the notorious " Pickle " , a Hanoverian spy ) and arrested . He was charged under the Act of Attainder for his part in the 1745 uprising and sentenced to death , being drawn and then hanged on 7 June 1753 , at Tyburn ( the last Jacobite to be executed ) . 
 The trail then goes cold . However , the Stuarts ' papers ( now in the possession of Queen Elizabeth II ) record a host of claims , counter @-@ claims and accusations among the Highland chiefs and Jacobites in exile , as to the fate of the monies . The historian Andrew Lang ( who was one of the first people to research the papers since Walter Scott secured them for the crown ) recorded , in his book Pickle the Spy ( 1897 ) , the sordid tale , and the involvement of both the prince and his father in trying to locate the monies . The Stuart papers also include an account from around 1750 , drawn up in Rome by Archibald Cameron , which indicates that Cluny had not or could not account for all of it . 
 According to Clan Cameron records , some French gold coins were found buried in nearby woods in the 1850s . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 The " Arkaig treasure " is featured in Nigel Tranter 's historical fiction novel Gold for Prince Charlie . 
 The missing treasure features in Neil Munro 's novel Children of the Tempest , a love story set in the Outer Hebrides in the late 18th century . Published originally in 1903 , <unk> 2002 . 
 = History of Indiana = 
 The history of human activity in Indiana , a US state in the Midwest , began with migratory tribes of Native Americans who inhabited Indiana as early as 8000 BC . Tribes succeeded one another in dominance for several thousand years and reached their peak of development during the period of Mississippian culture . The region entered recorded history in the 1670s when the first Europeans came to Indiana and claimed the territory for the Kingdom of France . After France ruled for 100 years ( with little settlement in this area ) , it was defeated by Great Britain in the French and Indian War ( Seven Years ' War ) and ceded its territory east of the Mississippi . Britain held the land for more than twenty years , until after its defeat in the American Revolutionary War . At that time , Britain ceded the entire trans @-@ Allegheny region , including what is now Indiana , to the new United States . 
 The United States government divided the trans @-@ Allegheny region into several new territories . The largest of these was the Northwest Territory , which was progressively divided into several smaller territories by the United States Congress . In 1800 , the Indiana Territory was the first new territory established from a portion of the Northwest Territory . The territory grew in population and development until it was admitted to the Union in 1816 as the nineteenth state , Indiana . Following statehood , the newly established state government laid out on an ambitious plan to transform Indiana from a segment of the frontier into a developed , well populated , and thriving state . The state 's founders initiated a program that led to the construction of roads , canals , railroads , and state @-@ funded public schools . Despite the noble aims of the project , profligate spending ruined the state 's credit . By 1841 the state was near bankruptcy and forced to liquidate most of its public works . By its new constitution of 1851 , it restricted rights of free blacks and excluded them from the suffrage . During the 1850s , the state 's population grew to exceed one million . The ambitious program of its founders was realized as Indiana became the fourth @-@ largest state in terms of population , as measured by the 1860 census . 
 Indiana became politically influential and played an important role in the Union during the American Civil War . Indiana was the first western state to mobilize for the war , and its soldiers participated in almost every engagement during the war . Following the Civil War , Indiana remained politically important as it became a critical swing state in U.S. Presidential elections . It helped decide control of the presidency for three decades . During the Indiana Gas Boom of the late 19th century , industry began to develop rapidly in the state . The state 's Golden Age of Literature began in the same time period , increasing its cultural influence . By the early 20th century , Indiana developed into a strong manufacturing state and attracted numerous immigrants and internal migrants to its industries . It experienced setbacks during the Great Depression of the 1930s . Construction of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway , expansion of the auto industry , urban development , and two wars contributed to the state 's industrial growth . During the second half of the 20th century , Indiana became a leader in the pharmaceutical industry due to the innovations of companies such as Eli Lilly . 
 = = Early civilizations = = 
 Following the end of the last glacial period , Indiana 's topography was dominated by spruce and pine forests and was home to mastodon , caribou , and saber @-@ toothed cats . While Northern Indiana had been covered by glaciers , Southern Indiana remained unaltered by the ice 's advance , leaving plants and animals that could sustain human communities . Indiana 's earliest known inhabitants were Paleo @-@ Indians . Evidence exists that humans were in Indiana as early as the Archaic stage ( 8000 – 6000 BC ) . Hunting camps of the nomadic Clovis culture have been found in Indiana . Carbon dating of artifacts found in the Wyandotte Caves of Southern Indiana shows humans mined flint there as early 2000 BC . These nomads ate quantities of freshwater mussels from local streams , as shown by their shell mounds found throughout southern Indiana . 
 The Early Woodland period in Indiana came between 1000 BC and 200 AD and produced the Adena culture . It domesticated wild squash and made pottery , which were large cultural advances over the Clovis culture . The natives built burial mounds ; one of this type has been dated as the oldest earthwork in Anderson 's Mounds State Park . 
 Natives in the Middle Woodland period developed the Hopewell culture and may have been in Indiana as early as 200 BC . The Hopewells were the first culture to create permanent settlements in Indiana . About 1 AD , the Hopewells mastered agriculture and grew crops of sunflowers and squash . Around 200 AD , the Hopewells began to construct mounds used for ceremonies and burials . The Hopewells in Indiana were connected by trade to other native tribes as far away as Central America . For unknown reasons , the Hopewell culture went into decline around 400 and completely disappeared by 500 . 
 The Late Woodland era is generally considered to have begun about 600 AD and lasted until the arrival of Europeans in Indiana . It was a period of rapid cultural change . One of the new developments — which has yet to be explained — was the introduction of masonry , shown by the construction of large , stone forts , many of which overlook the Ohio River . Romantic legend used to attribute the forts to Welsh Indians who supposedly arrived centuries before Christopher Columbus reached the Caribbean . Archaeologists and other scholars have found no evidence for that theory and believe that the cultural development was engendered by the Mississippian culture . 
 = = = Mississippians = = = 
 Evidence suggests that after the collapse of the Hopewell , Indiana had a low population until the rise of the Fort Ancient and Mississippian culture around 900 AD . The Ohio River Valley was densely populated by the Mississippians from about 1100 to 1450 AD . Their settlements , like those of the Hopewell , were known for their ceremonial earthwork mounds . Some of these remain visible at locations near the Ohio River . The Mississippian mounds were constructed on a grander scale than the mounds built by the Hopewell . The agrarian Mississippian culture was the first to grow maize in the region . The people also developed the bow and arrow and copper working during this time period . 
 Mississippian society was complex , dense , and highly developed ; the largest Mississippian city of Cahokia ( in Illinois ) contained as many as 30 @,@ 000 inhabitants . They had a class society with certain groups specializing as artisans . The elite held related political and religious positions . Their cities were typically sited near rivers . Representing their cosmology , the central developments were dominated by a large central mound , several smaller mounds , and a large open plaza . Wooden palisades were built later around the complex , apparently for defensive purposes . The remains of a major settlement known as Angel Mounds lie east of present @-@ day Evansville . Mississippian houses were generally square @-@ shaped with plastered walls and thatched roofs . For reasons that remain unclear , the Mississippians disappeared in the middle of the 15th century , about 200 years before the Europeans first entered what would become modern Indiana . Mississippian culture marked the high point of native development in Indiana . 
 It was during this period that American Bison began a periodic east – west trek through Indiana , crossing the Falls of the Ohio and the Wabash River near modern @-@ day Vincennes . These herds became important to civilizations in southern Indiana and created a well @-@ established Buffalo Trace , later used by European @-@ American pioneers moving west . 
 Before 1600 , a major war broke out in eastern North America among Native Americans ; it was later called the Beaver Wars . Five American Indian Iroquois tribes confederated to battle against their neighbors . The Iroquois were opposed by a confederation of primarily Algonquian tribes including the Shawnee , Miami , Wea , Pottawatomie , and the Illinois . These tribes were significantly less advanced than the Mississippian culture that had preceded them . The tribes were semi @-@ nomadic , used stone tools rather than copper , and did not create the large @-@ scale construction and farming works of their Mississippian predecessors . The war continued with sporadic fighting for at least a century as the Iroquois sought to dominate the expanding fur trade with the Europeans . They achieved this goal for several decades . During the war , the Iroquois drove the tribes from the Ohio Valley to the south and west . They kept control of the area for hunting grounds . 
 As a result of the war , several tribes , including the Shawnee , migrated into Indiana , where they attempted to resettle in land belonging to the Miami . The Iroquois gained the military advantage after they were supplied with firearms by the Europeans . With their superior weapons , the Iroquois subjugated at least thirty tribes and nearly destroyed several others in northern Indiana . 
 = = = European contact = = = 
 When the first Europeans entered Indiana during the 1670s , the region was in the final years of the Beaver Wars . The French attempted to trade with the Algonquian tribes in Indiana , selling them firearms in exchange for furs . This incurred the wrath of the Iroquois , who destroyed a French outpost in Indiana in retaliation . Appalled by the Iroquois , the French continued to supply the western tribes with firearms and openly allied with the Algonquian tribes . A major battle — and a turning point in the conflict — occurred near modern South Bend when the Miami and their allies repulsed a large Iroquois force in an ambush . With the firearms they received from the French , the odds were evened . The war finally ended in 1701 with the Great Peace of Montreal . Both Indian confederacies were left exhausted , having suffered heavy casualties . Much of Ohio , Michigan and Indiana was left depopulated as many tribes fled west to escape the fighting . 
 The Miami and Pottawatomie nations returned to Indiana following the war . Other tribes , such as the Algonquian Lenape , were pushed westward into the Midwest from the East Coast by encroachment of European colonists . Around 1770 the Miami invited the Lenape to settle on the White River . The Shawnee arrived in present @-@ day Indiana after the three other nations . These four nations were later to be participants in the Sixty Years ' War , a struggle between native nations and European settlers for control of the Great Lakes region . Hostilities with the tribes began early . The Piankeshaw killed five French fur traders in 1752 near the Vermilion River . But the tribes also traded successfully with the French for decades . 
 = = Colonial period = = 
 French fur traders from Canada were the first Europeans to enter Indiana , beginning in the 1670s . The quickest route connecting the New France districts of Canada and Louisiana ran along Indiana 's Wabash River . The Terre Haute highlands were once considered the border between the two French districts . This made Indiana a vital part of French lines of communication and trade routes . The French established Vincennes as a permanent settlement in Indiana during European rule , but the population of the area remained primarily Native American . As French influence grew in the region , Great Britain , competing with France for control of North America , came to believe that control of Indiana was important to halt French expansion on the continent . 
 = = = France = = = 
 The first European outpost within modern Indiana was <unk> , a French trading post established in 1673 near the Kankakee River . French explorer René @-@ Robert Cavelier , Sieur de La Salle came to the area in 1679 , claiming it for King Louis the XIV of France . La Salle came to explore a portage between the St. Joseph and Kankakee rivers , and Father <unk> , who traveled with La Salle , marked trees along the way . The marks survived to be photographed in the 19th century . In 1681 , La Salle negotiated a common defense treaty between the Illinois and Miami nations against the Iroquois . 
 Further exploration of Indiana led to the French establishing an important trade route between Canada and Louisiana via the Maumee and Wabash rivers . The French built a series of forts and outposts in Indiana as a hedge against the westward expansion of the British colonies from the east coast of North America and to encourage trade with the native tribes . The tribes were able to procure metal tools , cooking utensils , and other manufactured items in exchange for animal pelts . The French built Fort Miamis in the Miami town of Kekionga ( modern Fort Wayne , Indiana ) . France assigned Jean Baptiste Bissot , Sieur de Vincennes , as the first agent to the Miami at Kekionga . 
 In 1717 , François @-@ Marie <unk> de <unk> established the post of Ouiatenon ( modern Lafayette , Indiana ) to discourage the Wea from coming under British influence . In 1732 , François @-@ Marie Bissot , Sieur de Vincennes , established a similar post near the Piankeshaw in the town that still bears his name . Although the forts were garrisoned by men from New France , Fort Vincennes was the only outpost to maintain a permanent European presence until the modern day . Jesuit priests accompanied many of the French soldiers into Indiana in an attempt to convert the natives to Christianity . The Jesuits conducted missionary activities , lived among the natives and learned their languages , and accompanied them on hunts and migrations . Gabriel <unk> , one of the first missionaries in Indiana , taught among the Kaskaskia as early as 1712 . The missionaries came to have great influence among the natives and played an important role in keeping the native tribes allied with the French . 
 During the French and Indian War , the North American front of the Seven Years ' War in Europe , the British directly challenged France for control of the region . Although no pitched battles occurred in Indiana , the native tribes of the region supported the French . At the beginning of the war , the tribes sent large groups of warriors to support the French in resisting the British advance and to raid British colonies . Using Fort Pitt as a forward base , British commander Robert Rogers overcame the native resistance and drove deep into the frontier to capture Fort Detroit . The rangers moved south from Detroit and captured many of the key French outposts in Indiana , including Fort Miamis and Fort Vincennes . As the war progressed , the French lost control of Canada after the fall of Montreal . No longer able to effectively fight the British in interior North America , they lost Indiana to British forces . By 1761 the French were entirely forced out of Indiana . Following the French expulsion , the native tribes , led by Chief Pontiac , confederated in an attempt to rebel against the British without French assistance . While Pontiac was besieging British @-@ held Fort Detroit , other tribes in Indiana rose up against the British . They were forced to surrender Fort Miamis and Fort Ouiatenon . In 1763 , while Pontiac was fighting the British , the French signed the Treaty of Paris and ceded control of Indiana to the British . 
 = = = Great Britain = = = 
 When the British gained control of Indiana , the entire region was in the middle of Pontiac 's Rebellion . During the next year , British officials negotiated with the various tribes , splitting them from their alliance with Pontiac . Eventually , Pontiac lost most of his allies , forcing him to make peace with the British on July 25 , 1766 . As a concession to Pontiac , Great Britain issued a proclamation that the territory west of the Appalachian Mountains was to be reserved for Native Americans . Despite the treaty , Pontiac was still considered a threat to British interests , but after he was murdered on April 20 , 1769 , the region saw several years of peace . 
 After Britain established peace with the natives , many of the former French trading posts and forts in the region were abandoned . Fort Miamis was maintained for several years because it was considered to be " of great importance " , but even it was eventually abandoned . The Jesuit priests were expelled , and no provisional government was established ; the British hoped the French in the area would leave . Many did leave , but the British gradually became more accommodating to the French who remained and continued the fur trade with the Native American nations . 
 In 1768 , a treaty was negotiated between several of the British colonies and the Iroquois . The Iroquois sold their territorial claims to the colonies as part of the treaty . The company created to hold that claim was named the Indiana Land Company , the first recorded use of the word Indiana . The claim was disputed by the colony of Virginia , which did not participate in the treaty because it already laid claim to the land through its royal charter . In 1773 , the territory of Indiana was brought under the administration of Province of Quebec to appease its French population . The Quebec Act was listed as one of the Intolerable Acts the Thirteen Colonies cited as a reason for the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War . The thirteen colonies thought themselves entitled to the territory for their support of Great Britain during the French and Indian War , and were incensed that it was given to the enemy the colonies had been fighting . 
 Although the United States gained official possession of the region following the conclusion of the American Revolution , British influence on its Native American allies in the region remained strong , especially near Fort Detroit . This influence caused the Northwest Indian War , which began when British @-@ influenced native tribes refused to recognize American authority and were backed in their resistance by British merchants in the area . American military victories in the region and the ratification of the Jay Treaty , which called for British withdrawal from the region 's forts , caused a formal evacuation , but the British were not fully expelled from the area until the conclusion of the War of 1812 . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 After the outbreak of the American Revolution , George Rogers Clark was sent from Virginia to enforce its claim to much of the land in the Great Lakes region . In July 1778 , Clark and about 175 men crossed the Ohio River and took control of Kaskaskia , Vincennes , and several other villages in British Indiana . The occupation was accomplished without firing a shot because Clark carried letters from the French ambassador stating that France supported the Americans . These letters made most of the French and Native American inhabitants of the area unwilling to support the British . 
 The fort at Vincennes , renamed Fort Sackville by the British , had been abandoned years earlier and no garrison was present when the Americans occupied it . Captain Leonard Helm became the first American commandant at Vincennes . To counter Clark 's advance , the British under Lieutenant Governor Henry Hamilton reoccupied Vincennes with a small force . In February 1779 , Clark arrived at Vincennes in a surprise winter expedition and retook the town , capturing Hamilton in the process . This expedition secured most of southern Indiana for the United States . 
 In 1780 , emulating Clark 's success at Vincennes , French officer Augustin de La Balme organized a militia force of French residents to capture Fort Detroit . While marching to Detroit , the force stopped to sack Kekionga . The delay proved fatal when the expedition met the warriors of the Miami tribe under Miami Chief Little Turtle along the Eel River , and the entire force was killed or captured . Clark organized another assault on Fort Detroit in 1781 , but it was aborted when Chief Joseph Brant captured a significant part of Clark 's army at a battle known as Lochry 's Defeat , near present @-@ day Aurora , Indiana . 
 Other minor skirmishes occurred in Indiana , including the battle at Petit Fort in 1780 . In 1783 , when the war came to an end , Britain ceded the entire trans @-@ Allegheny region to the United States — including Indiana — in the peace treaty negotiated in Paris . 
 Clark 's militia was under the authority of the state of Virginia , and although a continental flag was flown over Fort Sackville , the area was governed as Virginia territory until the state gave it to the United States federal government in 1784 . Clark was awarded large tracts of land in southern Indiana for his service in the war and modern Clark County is named in his honor . 
 = = Indiana Territory = = 
 In 1785 , the Northwest Indian War began . In an attempt to end the native rebellion , the Miami town of Kekionga was attacked unsuccessfully by General Josiah Harmar and Northwest Territory Governor Arthur St. Clair . St. Clair 's Defeat is the worst defeat of the U.S. Army by Native Americans in history , leaving almost the entire army dead or captured . The defeat led to the appointment of General " Mad Anthony " Wayne who organized the Legion of the United States and defeated a Native American force at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794 . In 1795 , the Treaty of Greenville was signed and a small part of eastern Indiana was opened for settlement . Fort Miami at Kekionga was occupied by the United States , who rebuilt it as Fort Wayne . After the treaty , the powerful Miami nation considered themselves allies with the United States . The war ended hostilities with the Native Americans , leaving them victorious in 31 of the 37 recorded incidents involving white settlers during the 18th century . 
 The Northwest Territory was formed by the Congress of the Confederation on July 13 , 1787 , and included all land between the Appalachian Mountains , the Mississippi River , the Great Lakes and the Ohio River . This single territory became the states of Ohio , Michigan , Indiana , Illinois , Wisconsin , and part of eastern Minnesota . The act established an administration to oversee the territory and had the land surveyed in accordance with The Land Ordinance of 1785 . At the time the territory was created , there were only two American settlements in what would become Indiana : Vincennes and Clark 's Grant . The population of the northwest included fewer than 5 @,@ 000 Europeans . The Native American population was estimated to be near 20 @,@ 000 , but may have been as high as 75 @,@ 000 . 
 On July 4 , 1800 , the Indiana Territory was established out of Northwest Territory in preparation for Ohio 's statehood . The Indiana Land Company , which still held claim to Indiana , had been dissolved by a United States Supreme Court decision in 1798 . The name Indiana meant " Land of the Indians " , and referred to the fact that most of the area north of the Ohio River was still inhabited by Native Americans . ( Kentucky , South of the Ohio River , had been a traditional hunting ground for tribes that resided north of the river , and early American settlers in Kentucky referred to the North bank as the land of the Indians . ) Although the company 's claim was extinguished , Congress used their name for the new territory . The Indiana Territory contained present day Indiana , Illinois , Michigan , Wisconsin and part of Minnesota . Those areas were separated out in 1805 and 1809 . The first Governor of the Territory was William Henry Harrison , who served from 1800 until 1813 . Harrison County was named in honor of Harrison , who later become the ninth President of The United States . He was succeeded by Thomas Posey who served from 1813 until 1816 . 
 The first capital was established in Vincennes where it remained for thirteen years . After the territory was reorganized in 1809 , the legislature made plans to move the capital to Corydon to be more centralized with the population . Corydon was established in 1808 on land donated by William Henry Harrison . The new capitol building was finished in 1813 and the government quickly relocated following the outbreak of war on the frontier . 
 As the population of the territory grew , so did the people 's exercising of their freedoms . In 1809 , the territory was granted permission to fully elect its own legislature for the first time . Before that , Governor Harrison appointed the legislature . Although Article 6 of the Northwest Ordinance had prohibited slavery , it had existed in the region since French rule . In addition , settlers from the Upper South occupied areas along the Ohio River , bringing slaves with them . They wanted to have it be legal in the territory , but others from the northern states opposed the expansion of slavery into this region . The anti @-@ slavery party won a strong majority in the first election . Governor Harrison was at odds with the new legislature , which proceeded to overturn the indenturing and pro @-@ slavery laws he had enacted . Slavery remained the defining issue in the state for the decades to follow . In these early decades , although the legislature did not encourage free blacks to settle here , it extended suffrage to them . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 The first major event in the territory was the resumption of hostilities with the Indians . Unhappy with their treatment since the peace of 1795 , the native tribes , led by the Shawnee Chief Tecumseh and his brother Tenskwatawa , formed a coalition against the Americans . Tecumseh 's War started in 1811 when General William Henry Harrison led his army to rebuff aggressive movements of Tecumseh 's confederation . The war continued until the Battle of Tippecanoe which firmly ended the Native American uprising and allowed the Americans to take full control of all of Indiana . The Battle earned Harrison national fame , and the nickname " Old Tippecanoe " . 
 The war between Tecumseh and Harrison merged with the War of 1812 when the remnants of the Indian Confederation allied with the British in Canada . The Siege of Fort Harrison is considered to be the United States ' first land victory during the war . Other battles that occurred in the modern state of Indiana include the Siege of Fort Wayne , the Pigeon Roost Massacre and the Battle of the Mississinewa . The Treaty of Ghent , signed in 1814 , ended the war and relieved American settlers from their fears of the nearby British and their Indian allies . This marked the end of hostilities with the Native Americans in Indiana . Of the 58 recorded incidents between Native Americans and the United States in Indiana during the 19th century , 43 were Indian victories . 
 = = Statehood = = 
 In 1812 , Jonathan Jennings defeated Harrison 's chosen candidate and became the territory 's representative to Congress . Jennings immediately introduced legislation to grant Indiana statehood , even though the population of the entire territory was under 25 @,@ 000 , but no action was taken on the legislation because of the outbreak of the War of 1812 . 
 Posey had created a rift in the politics of the territory by supporting slavery , much to the chagrin of opponents like Jennings , Dennis Pennington , and others who dominated the Territorial Legislature and who sought to use the bid for statehood to permanently end slavery in the territory . 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 In early 1816 , the Territory approved a census and Pennington was named to be the census enumerator . The population of the territory was found to be 63 @,@ 897 , above the cutoff required for statehood . A constitutional convention met on June 10 , 1816 , in Corydon . Because of the heat of the season , the delegation moved outdoors on many days and wrote the constitution beneath the shade of a giant elm tree . The state 's first constitution was completed on June 29 , and elections were held in August to fill the offices of the new state government . In November Congress approved statehood . 
 Jennings and his supporters had control of the convention and Jennings was elected its president . Other notable delegates at the convention included Dennis Pennington , Davis Floyd , and William Hendricks . Pennington and Jennings were at the forefront of the effort to prevent slavery from entering Indiana and sought to create a constitutional ban on it . Pennington was quoted as saying " Let us be on our guard when our convention men are chosen that they be men opposed to slavery " . They succeeded in their goal and a ban was placed in the new constitution . But , persons already held in bondage stayed in that status for some time . That same year Indiana statehood was approved by Congress . While settlers did not want slavery , they also wanted to exclude free blacks , and established barriers to their immigration to the state . 
 Jonathan Jennings , whose motto was " No slavery in Indiana " , was elected governor of the state , defeating Thomas Posey 5 @,@ 211 to 3 @,@ 934 votes . Jennings served two terms as governor and then went on to represent the state in congress for another 18 years . Upon election , Jennings declared Indiana a free state . The abolitionists won a key victory in the 1820 Indiana Supreme Court case of Polly v. Lasselle ; slavery was finally extinct by 1830 . 
 As the northern tribal lands gradually opened to white settlement , Indiana 's population rapidly increased and the center of population shifted continually northward . Indianapolis was selected to be the site of the new state capital in 1820 because of its central position within the state . The city founders assumed the White River would serve as a major transportation artery ; however , the waterway was too sandy for navigation . In 1825 , Indianapolis replaced Corydon as the seat of government . The government became established in the Marion County Courthouse as the second state capital building . 
 = = = Early development = = = 
 The National Road reached Indianapolis in 1829 , connecting Indiana to the Eastern United States . It was also about this time that citizens of Indiana became known as Hoosiers and the state took on the motto " Crossroads of America " . In 1832 , construction began on the Wabash and Erie Canal , a project connecting the waterways of the Great Lakes to the Ohio River . Railroads soon made the canal system obsolete . These developments in transportation served to economically connect Indiana to the Northern East Coast , rather than relying solely on the natural waterways which connected Indiana to the Mississippi River and Gulf Coast states . 
 In 1831 , construction on the third state capitol building began . This building , designed by the firm of Ithiel Town and Alexander Jackson Davis , had a design inspired by the Greek Parthenon and opened in 1841 . It was the first statehouse that was built and used exclusively by the state government . 
 The state suffered from financial difficulties during its first three decades . Jonathan Jennings attempted to begin a period of internal improvements . Among his projects , the Indiana Canal Company was reestablished to build a canal around the Falls of the Ohio . The Panic of 1819 caused the state 's only two banks to fold . This hurt Indiana 's credit , halted the projects , and hampered the start of new projects until the 1830s , after the repair of the state 's finances during the terms of William Hendricks and Noah Noble . Beginning in 1831 , large scale plans for statewide improvements were set into motion . <unk> on the internal improvements led to a large deficit that had to be funded by state bonds through the newly created Bank of Indiana and sale of over nine million acres ( 36 @,@ 000 km ² ) of public land . By 1841 the debt had become unmanageable . Having borrowed over $ 13 million , the equivalent to the state 's first fifteen years of tax revenue , the government could not even pay interest on the debt . The state narrowly avoided bankruptcy by negotiating the liquidation of the public works , transferring them to the state 's creditors in exchange for a 50 % reduction in the state 's debt . The internal improvements began under Jennings paid off as the state began to experience rapid population growth that slowly remedied the state 's funding problems . The improvements led to a fourfold increase in land value , and an even larger increase in farm produce . 
 During the 1840s , Indiana completed the removal of the Native American tribes . The majority of the Potawatomi voluntarily relocated to Kansas in 1838 . Those who did not leave were forced to travel to Kansas in what came to be called the Potawatomi Trail of Death , leaving only the Pokagon Band of Potawatomi Indians in the Indiana area . The majority of the Miami tribe left in 1846 , although many members of the tribe were permitted to remain in the state on lands they held privately under the terms of the 1818 Treaty of St. Mary 's . The other tribes were also convinced to leave the state voluntarily through the payment of subsidies and land grants further west . The Shawnee migrated westward to settle in Missouri , and the Lenape migrated into Canada . The other minor tribes in the state , including the Wea , moved westward , mostly to Kansas . 
 By the 1850s , Indiana had undergone major changes : what was once a frontier with sparse population had become a developing state with several cities . In 1816 , Indiana 's population was around 65 @,@ 000 , and in less than 50 years , it had increased to more than 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 Because of the rapidly changing state , the constitution of 1816 began to be criticized . Opponents claimed the constitution had too many appointed positions , the terms established were inadequate , and some of the clauses were too easily manipulated by the political parties that did not exist when then constitution was written . The first constitution had not been put to a vote by the general public , and following the great population growth in the state , it was seen as inadequate . A constitutional convention was called in January 1851 to create a new one . The new constitution was approved by the convention on February 10 , 1851 , and submitted for a vote to the electorate that year . It was approved and has since been the official constitution . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 Frontier Indiana was prime ground missionary for the Second Great Awakening , with a never @-@ ending parade of camp meetings and revivals . Baptist church records show an intense interest in private moral behavior at the weekly meetings , including drinking and proper child @-@ rearing practices . The most contentious issue was <unk> controversy , in which the more traditional elements denounced missionary societies as unbiblical . 
 Eastern Presbyterian and Congregational denominations funded an aggressive missionary program , 1826 – 55 , through the American Home Missionary Society ( <unk> ) . It sought to bring sinners to Christ and also to modernize society promoted middle class values , mutual trust among the members , and tried to minimize violence and drinking . The <unk> were the <unk> and they displayed their annoyance at the new morality being imposed on society . The political crisis came in 1854 @-@ 55 over a pietistic campaign to enact " dry " prohibition of liquor sales . They were strongly opposed by the " wets , " especially non @-@ <unk> , the Catholics , Episcopalians , the <unk> elements , and the German recent arrivals . Prohibition failed in 1855 and the moralistic pietistic Protestants switched to a new , equally moralistic cause , the anti @-@ slavery crusade led by the new Republican Party . 
 = = Education = = 
 For a list of institutions , see Category : Universities and colleges in Indiana . 
 The earliest institutions of education in Indiana were missions , established by French Jesuit priests to convert local Native American nations . The Jefferson Academy was founded in 1801 as a public university for the Indiana Territory , and was reincorporated as Vincennes University in 1806 , the first in the state . 
 The 1816 constitution required that Indiana 's state legislature create a " general system of education , ascending in a regular gradation , from township schools to a state university , wherein tuition shall be gratis , and equally open to all " . It took several years for the legislature to fulfill its promise , partly because of a debate about whether a new public university should be founded to replace the territorial university . The 1820s saw the start of free public township schools . During the administration of William Hendricks , a plot of ground was set aside in each township for the construction of a schoolhouse . 
 The state government chartered Indiana University in Bloomington in 1820 as the State Seminary . Construction began in 1822 , the first professor was hired in 1823 , and classes were offered in 1824 . 
 Other state colleges were established for specialized needs . They included Indiana State University , established in Terre Haute in 1865 as the state normal school for training teachers . Purdue University was founded in 1869 as the state 's land @-@ grant university , a school of science and agriculture . Ball State University was founded as a normal school in the early 20th century and given to the state in 1918 . 
 Public colleges lagged behind the private religious colleges in both size and educational standards until the 1890s . Asbury College ( now Depauw University ) was Methodist . Wabash College was Presbyterian ; they led the Protestant schools . The University of Notre Dame , founded by Rev Edward Sorin in 1842 , proclaims itself as a prominent Catholic college . Indiana lagged the rest of the Midwest with the lowest literacy and education rates into the early 20th century . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 In the early 19th century , most transportation of goods in Indiana was done by river . Most of the state 's estuaries drained into the Wabash River or the Ohio River , ultimately meeting up with the Mississippi River , where goods were transported to and sold in St. Louis or New Orleans . 
 The first road in the region was the Buffalo Trace , an old bison trail that ran from the Falls of the Ohio to Vincennes . After the capitol was relocated to Corydon , several local roads were created to connect the new capitol to the Ohio River at Mauckport and to New Albany . The first major road in the state was the National Road , a project funded by the federal government . The road entered Indiana in 1829 , connecting Richmond , Indianapolis , and Terre Haute with the eastern states and eventually Illinois and Missouri in the west . The state adopted the advanced methods used to build the national road on a statewide basis and began to build a new road network that was usable year @-@ round . The North @-@ South Michigan Road was built in the 1830s , connecting Michigan and Kentucky and passing through Indianapolis in the middle . These two new roads were roughly perpendicular within the state and served as the foundation for a road system to encompass all of Indiana . 
 In 1832 , the state began construction on the Wabash and Erie Canal . The canal was started at Lake Erie , passed through Fort Wayne , and connected to the Wabash River . This new canal made water transport possible from New Orleans to Lake Erie on an internal route rather than sailing around the whole of the Eastern United States and entering through Canada . Other canal projects were started , but all were abandoned before completion due to the state 's foundering credit after the devaluation of the bonds . 
 The first railroad in Indiana was built in Shelbyville in the late 1830s . The first major line was completed in 1847 , connecting Madison with Indianapolis . By the 1850s , the railroad began to become popular in Indiana . The railroad brought major changes to Indiana and enhanced the state 's economic growth . Although Indiana 's natural waterways connected it to the South via cities such as St. Louis and New Orleans , the new rail lines ran East @-@ West , and connected Indiana with the economies of the northern states . As late as mid @-@ 1859 , no rail line yet bridged the Ohio or Mississippi rivers . Because of an increased demand on the state 's resources and the embargo against the Confederacy , the rail system was mostly completed by the end of the American Civil War . 
 = = Suffrage and racial discrimination = = 
 Indiana put further restrictions on blacks , prohibiting them from testifying in court in a case against a white man . The new constitution of 1851 expanded suffrage for white males , but excluded blacks from suffrage . While the state did not have legal segregation , it excluded black children from public schools as a matter of custom . 
 = = = Temperance movement = = = 
 Temperance became a part of the evangelical Protestant initiative during Indiana 's pioneer era and early statehood . Many Hoosiers freely indulged in drinking locally distilled whiskey on a daily basis , with binges on election days and holidays , and during community celebrations Reformers announced that the devil was at work and must be repudiated . A state temperance society formed in 1829 and local temperance societies soon organized in Indianapolis , Fort Wayne , and Logansport . By the 1830s pietistic ( evangelical ) Protestants and community leaders had joined forces to curb consumption of alcohol . In 1847 the Indiana General Assembly passed a local option bill that allowed a vote on whether to prohibit alcohol sales in a township . The liquor issue pitted wets and <unk> in stable uncompromising coalitions that formed a main theme of Hoosier politics into the 1930s . 
 By the 1850s Indiana 's Republican party , whose adherents tended to favor the temperance movement , began challenging the state 's Democrats , who supported personal freedom and a limited federal government , for political power . Early temperance legislation in Indiana earned only limited and temporary success . In 1853 Republicans persuaded the state legislature to pass a local option law that would allow township voters to declare their township dry , but it was later deemed unconstitutional . In 1855 a statewide prohibition law was passed , but it met the same fate as the local option . In the decades to come Protestant churches , especially the Methodists , Baptists , Presbyterians , Disciples of Christ , Quakers , and women 's groups would continue to support temperance efforts and gave strong support to the mostly dry Republican Party . The Catholics , Episcopalians and Lutherans stood opposed and gave strong support to the wet Democratic Party . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 Indiana , a free state and the boyhood home of Abraham Lincoln , remained a member of the Union during the American Civil War . Indiana regiments were involved in all the major engagements of the war and almost all the engagements in the western theater . Hoosiers were present in the first and last battles of the war . During the war , Indiana provided 126 infantry regiments , 26 batteries of artillery , and 13 regiments of cavalry to the cause of the Union . 
 In the initial call to arms issued in 1861 , Indiana was assigned a quota of 7 @,@ 500 men — a tenth of the amount called — to join the Union Army in putting down the rebellion . So many volunteered in the first call that thousands had to be turned away . Before the war ended , Indiana contributed 208 @,@ 367 men to fight and serve in the war . Casualties were over 35 % among these men : 24 @,@ 416 lost their lives in the conflict and over 50 @,@ 000 more were wounded . 
 At the outbreak of the war , Indiana was run by a Democratic and southern sympathetic majority in the state legislature . It was by the actions of Governor Oliver Morton , who illegally borrowed millions of dollars to finance the army , that Indiana could contribute so greatly to the war effort . Morton suppressed the state legislature with the help of the Republican minority to prevent it from assembling during 1861 and 1862 . This prevented any chance the Democrats might have had to interfere with the war effort or to attempt to secede from the Union . 
 = = = Raids = = = 
 Two raids on Indiana soil during the war caused a brief panic in Indianapolis and southern Indiana . The Newburgh Raid on July 18 , 1862 , occurred when Confederate officer Adam Johnson briefly captured Newburgh by convincing the Union troops garrisoning the town that he had cannon on the surrounding hills , when in fact they were merely camouflaged stovepipes . The raid convinced the federal government that it was necessary to supply Indiana with a permanent force of regular Union Army soldiers to counter future raids . 
 The most significant Civil War battle fought in Indiana was a small skirmish during Morgan 's Raid . On the morning of July 9 , 1863 , Morgan attempted to cross the Ohio River into Indiana with his force of 2 @,@ 400 Confederate cavalry . After his crossing was briefly contested , he marched north to Corydon where he fought the Indiana Legion in the short Battle of Corydon . Morgan took command of the heights south of Corydon and shot two shells from his batteries into the town , which promptly surrendered . The battle left 15 dead and 40 wounded . Morgan 's main body of troopers briefly raided New Salisbury , Crandall , Palmyra , and Salem . Fear gripped the capitol , and the militia began to form there to contest Morgan 's advance . After Salem , however , Morgan turned east , raiding and skirmishing along this path and leaving Indiana through West Harrison on July 13 into Ohio , where he was captured . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 The Civil War had a major effect on the development of Indiana . Before the war , the population was generally in the south of the state , where many had entered via the Ohio River , which provided a cheap and convenient means to export products and agriculture to New Orleans to be sold . The war closed the Mississippi River to traffic for nearly four years , forcing Indiana to find other means to export its produce . This led to a population shift to the north where the state came to rely more on the Great Lakes and the railroad for exports . 
 Before the war , New Albany was the largest city in the state , mainly because of its river contacts and extensive trade with the South . Over half of Hoosiers with over $ 100 @,@ 000 lived in New Albany . During the war , the trade with the South came to a halt , and many residents considered those of New Albany as too friendly to the South . The city never regained its stature . It was stilled as a city of 40 @,@ 000 with its early @-@ Victorian Mansion @-@ Row buildings remaining from the boom period . 
 = = Post @-@ Civil War era = = 
 = = = Economic growth = = = 
 Ohio River ports had been stifled by an embargo on the Confederate South and never fully recovered their economic prominence , leading the south into an economic decline . By contrast , northern Indiana experienced an economic boom when natural gas was discovered in the 1880s , which directly contributed to the rapid growth of cities such as Gas City , Hartford City , and Muncie where a glass industry developed to utilize the cheap fuel . The Indiana gas field was then the largest known in the world . The boom lasted until the early 20th century , when the gas supplies ran low . This began northern Indiana 's industrialization . 
 The development of heavy industry attracted thousands of European immigrants in the late 19th and early 20th centuries , as well as internal migrants , both black and white , from the rural and small town South . These developments dramatically altered the demographics of the state . Indiana industrial cities were among the destinations of the Great Migration . After World War II , industrial restructuring and the shifts in heavy industry resulted in Indiana 's becoming part of the Rust Belt . 
 In 1876 , chemist Eli Lilly , a Union colonel during the Civil War , founded Eli Lilly and Company , a pharmaceutical company . His initial innovation of gelatin @-@ coating for pills led to a rapid growth of the company that eventually developed as Indiana 's largest corporation , and one of the largest corporations in the world . Over the years , the corporation developed many widely used drugs , including insulin , and it became the first company to mass @-@ produce penicillin . The company 's many advances made Indiana the leading state in the production and development of medicines . 
 Charles Conn returned to Elkhart after the Civil War and established C.G. Conn Ltd . , a manufacturer of musical instruments . The company 's innovation in band instruments made Elkhart an important center of the music world , and it became a base of Elkhart 's economy for decades . Nearby South Bend experienced continued growth following the Civil War , and became a large manufacturing city centered around the Oliver Farm Equipment Company , the nation 's leading plow producer . Gary was founded in 1906 by the United States Steel Corporation as the home for its new plant . 
 The administration of Governor James D. Williams proposed the construction of the fourth state capitol building in 1878 . The third state capitol building was razed and the new one was constructed on the same site . Two million dollars was appropriated for construction and the new building was completed in 1888 . The building was still in use in 2008 . 
 The Panic of 1893 had a severely negative effect on the Hoosier economy when many factories closed and several railroads declared bankruptcy . The Pullman Strike of 1894 hurt the Chicago area and coal miners in southern Indiana participated in a national strike . Hard times were not limited to industry ; farmers also felt a financial pinch from falling prices . The economy began to recover when World War I broke out in Europe , creating a higher demand for American goods . Despite economic setbacks , advances in industrial technology continued throughout the last years of the 19th and into the 20th century . On July 4 , 1894 , Elwood Haynes successfully road tested his first automobile , and opened the Haynes @-@ Apperson auto company in 1896 . In 1895 , William Johnson invented a process for casting aluminum . 
 = = = Political battleground = = = 
 During the postwar era , Indiana became a critical swing state that often helped decide which party controlled the presidency . Elections were very close , and became the center of frenzied attention with many parades , speeches and rallies as election day approached ; voter turnout ranging over 90 % to near 100 % in such elections as 1888 and 1896 . In remote areas , both sides paid their supporters to vote , and occasionally paid supporters of the opposition not to vote . Despite allegations , historians have found very little fraud in national elections . 
 To win the electoral vote , both national parties looked for Indiana candidates for the national tickets ; a Hoosier was included in all but one presidential election between 1880 and 1924 . 
 In 1888 , Indiana Senator Benjamin Harrison , grandson of territorial Governor William Henry Harrison , was elected President after an intense battle that attracted more than 300 @,@ 000 partisans to Indianapolis to hear him speak from his famous front porch . Fort Benjamin Harrison was named in his honor . Five Hoosiers were elected as Vice @-@ President . The most recent was Dan Quayle , elected in 1988 . 
 = = = High culture = = = 
 The last decades of the 19th century began what is known as the " golden age of Indiana literature " , a period that lasted until the 1920s . Edward Eggleston wrote The Hoosier Schoolmaster ( 1871 ) , the first best seller to originate in the state . Many other followed , including Maurice Thompson 's Hoosier Mosaics ( 1875 ) , and Lew Wallace 's Ben @-@ Hur ( 1880 ) . Indiana developed a reputation as the " American heartland " following several widely read novels beginning with Booth Tarkington 's The Gentleman from Indiana ( 1899 ) , Meredith Nicholson 's The Hoosiers ( 1900 ) , and Thompson 's second famous novel , Alice of Old Vincennes ( 1900 ) . James Whitcomb Riley , known as the " Hoosier Poet " and the most popular poet of his age , wrote hundreds of poems celebrating Hoosier themes , including Little Orphant Annie . A unique art culture also began developing in the late 19th century , beginning the Hoosier School of landscape painting and the Richmond Group of impressionist painters . The painters were known for their use of vivid colors and artists including T. C. Steele , whose work was influenced by the colorful hills of southern Indiana . Prominent musicians and composers from Indiana also reached national acclaim during the time , including Paul Dresser whose most popular song , " On the Banks of the Wabash , Far Away " , was later adopted as the official state song . 
 = = = Prohibition and woman suffrage = = = 
 By the late nineteenth and early twentieth century , prohibition and woman suffrage had become the major reform issues in the state . Although supporters and their opponents closely linked the two movements , temperance received a broader hearing than the efforts toward equal suffrage . While the congregations of Protestant churches in Indiana supported temperance , few provided a forum for discussions on women 's voting rights . 
 The drive for woman suffrage began in the 1870s , and was sponsored by the leaders of the prohibition movement , especially the Woman 's Christian Temperance Union ( WCTU ) . The Indiana chapter of the WCTU was formed in 1874 with Zerelda G. Wallace as its first president . The Indiana branch of the American Woman Suffrage Association was re @-@ established in 1869 . In 1878 May Wright Sewall founded the Indianapolis Equal Suffrage Society , and fought for world peace before the nation plunged into World War I. Several Indiana women also became temperance leaders and took an active role in the movement . 
 The first major effort to give women the right to vote in all non @-@ federal elections attempted to amend the state constitution . It passed by both houses of the state legislature in 1881 ; however , the bill failed to pass in the next legislative session in 1883 as state law required . Temperance efforts fared little better . In 1881 the Indiana chapter of the WCTU , along with organizations participating in the Indiana Grand Council of Temperance , successfully lobbied the Indiana General Assembly to pass an amendment to the state constitution to prohibit the manufacture and sale of alcoholic beverages in the state , but the Indiana Liquor League and a Democratic majority in the state legislature killed the bill in the legislative session in 1883 . Following these legislative defeats woman suffrage and prohibition became sensitive issues in local politics as the Democrats rallied the opposition . In German strongholds such as Fort Wayne , opposition to prohibition and woman suffrage was strong until World War I. As one historian notes , " within German <unk> family traditions , women in particular were sharply defined in terms of family responsibilities . Suffrage and women 's rights ran counter to deep social and religious traditions that placed women in a subservient relationship to men . " Renewed interest in woman suffrage did not occur until the end of the century , while prohibition crusaders continued to press for legislative action . 
 To gain political power in favor of prohibition legislation , a state Prohibition Party was formed in 1884 ; however , it was never able to effectively mobilize a significant force of voters within the state . Many temperance advocates continued to work within the more established political parties . One legislative success occurred in 1895 , when the state legislature passed the Nicholson law , a local option law authored by S. E. Nicholson , a Quaker minister who served in the state legislature and was a leader of the national Anti @-@ Saloon League . The League became a political powerhouse , mobilizing pietistic Protestant voters ( that is , members of the major denominations except Lutherans and Episcopalians ) to support dry legislation . The Nicholson law allowed voters in a city or township to file a remonstrance that would prevent an individual saloon owner from acquiring a liquor license . Additional legislative efforts to extend the Nicholson law and achieve statewide prohibition in Indiana would not occur until the early twentieth century . 
 In May , 1906 , in Kokomo , a meeting was called to try to revive the defunct Indiana suffragist movement . An Indiana Auxiliary of the National American Woman Suffrage Association was formed and officers were elected . The officers included : Sarah Davis , President ; Laura Schofield , first vice @-@ president ; Anna Dunn Noland , second vice @-@ president ; Mrs. E. M. Wood , secretary ; Marion Harvie Barnard , treasurer ; and Jane Pond and Judge Samuel <unk> , auditors . 
 = = = High profile crime = = = 
 Hoosiers were fascinated with crime and criminals . Some historians have argued that the popularity of bandits and their exploits in robbing banks and getting away with murder derived from working class resentment against the excesses of the Gilded Age . A group of brothers from Seymour , who had served in the Civil War , formed the Reno Gang , the first outlaw gang in the United States . The Reno Gang , named for the brothers , terrorized Indiana and the region for several years . They were responsible for the first train robbery in the United States which occurred near Seymour in 1866 . Their actions inspired a host of other outlaw gangs who copied their work , beginning several decades of high @-@ profile train robberies . Pursued by detectives from the Pinkerton Detective Agency , most of the gang was captured in 1868 and lynched by vigilantes . Other notorious Hoosiers also flourished in the post @-@ war years , including Belle <unk> , an infamous " black widow " serial killer . She killed more than twenty people , most of them men , between 1881 and her own murder in 1908 . 
 In response to the Reno Gang and other criminals , several white cap groups began operating in the state , primarily in the southern counties . They began carrying out lynchings against suspected criminals , leading the state to attempt to crack down on their practices . By the turn of the 20th century , they had become so notorious that anti @-@ lynching laws were passed and in one incident the governor called out the militia to protect a prisoner . When the white caps showed up to lynch him , the militia opened fire , killing one and wounding eleven . Vigilante activity decreased following the incident , and remained low until the rise of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s . 
 Crime stories grabbed the headlines in the 1920s and 1930s . After Prohibition took effect in 1920 until its demise in 1933 , it opened up a financial bonanza for criminal activity , especially underground bootlegging and the smuggling of liquor into Chicago , Gary , South Bend , Fort Wayne , Indianapolis , Evansville and other thirsty cities . Enforcement was haphazard ; the Anti @-@ Saloon League was more of a lobbying agency and never rallied community support for enforcement . The KKK called for punishment of bootleggers and set up the " Horse Thief Detective Association " ( <unk> ) to make extra @-@ legal raids on speakeasies and gambling joints . It seldom cooperated with law enforcement or the state or federal courts . Instead gave enforcement a bad name . Arthur Gillom , a Republican elected state attorney general over Klan opposition in 1924 , did not tolerate its extra @-@ legal operations . Instead , " He stressed the dangers of citizens relinquishing their constitutional rights and personal freedoms , and emphasized the importance of representative government ( at all levels ) , states ' rights , and the concept of separation of church and state . " When Rev. Shumaker proposed that " personal liberty had to be sacrificed in order to save people , " Gilliom replied that surrendering power and individual freedoms was a slippery slope to centralized government and tyranny . 
 John Dillinger , a native of Indianapolis , began his streak of bank robberies in Indiana and the Midwest during the 1920s . He was in prison 1924 to 1933 . After a return to crime , Dillinger was returned to prison the same year , but escaped with the help of his gang . His gang was responsible for multiple murders and the theft of over $ 300 @,@ 000 . Dillinger was killed by the FBI in a shootout in Chicago in 1934 . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 = = = Economic modernization = = = 
 Although industry was rapidly expanding throughout the northern part of the state , Indiana remained largely rural at the turn of the 20th century with a growing population of 2 @.@ 5 million . Like much of the rest of the American Midwest , Indiana 's exports and job providers remained largely agricultural until after World War I. Indiana 's developing industry , backed by inexpensive natural gas from the large Trenton Gas Field , an educated population , low taxes , easy access to transportation , and business @-@ friendly government , led Indiana to grow into one of the leading manufacturing states by the mid @-@ 1920s . 
 The state 's central location gave it an dense network of railroads . The line most identified with the state was the Monon Line . It provided passenger service for students en route to Purdue , Indiana U. and numerous small colleges , painted its cars in school colors , and was especially popular on football weekends . The Monon was merged into larger lines in 1971 , closed its passenger service , and lost its identity . Entrepreneurs built an elaborate " interurban " network of light rails to connect rural areas to shopping opportunities in the cities . They began operation in 1892 , and by 1908 there were 2 @,@ 300 miles of track in 62 counties . The automobile made the lines unprofitable unless the <unk> was Chicago . By 2001 the " South Shore " was the last one ; it still operating from South Bend to Chicago . 
 In 1907 , Indiana became the first state to adopt eugenics legislation , that allowed the involuntary sterilization of dangerous male criminals and the mentally defectives . It was never put in effect and in 1921 Indiana became the first state to rule such legislation unconstitutional when the Supreme Court of Indiana acted . A revised eugenics law was passed in 1927 , and it remained in effect until 1974 . 
 The Indianapolis Motor Speedway complex was built in 1909 , inaugurating a new era in history . Most Indiana cities within 200 miles of Detroit became part of the giant automobile industry after 1910 . The Indianapolis speedway was a venue for auto companies to show off their products . The Indianapolis 500 quickly became the standard in auto racing as European and American companies competed to build the fastest automobile and win at the track . Industrial and technological industries thrived during this era , George Kingston developed an early carburetor in 1902 ; in 1912 , Elwood Haynes received a patent for stainless steel . 
 = = = Statewide prohibition = = = 
 In the first two decades of the twentieth century the Indiana Anti @-@ Saloon League ( IASL ) , formed in 1898 as a state auxiliary of the national Anti @-@ Saloon League , and the Woman 's Christian Temperance Union successfully organized pressure on Indiana politicians , especially members of the Republican party , to support the dry cause . The IASL , although not the first organization to take up the dry crusade in Indiana , became a key force behind efforts at attaining passage of statewide prohibition in early 1917 , and rallied state support for ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution in 1919 . The IASL 's success , under the leadership of Edward S. Shumaker , an ordained Methodist minister , made it a model for the League 's other state organizations . Shumaker made clear to politicians he did not care whether they drank , but insisted they vote for dry laws or face defeated in the next election by dry voters . 
 In 1905 passage of the Moore amendment expanded the state 's Nicholson local option law to apply to all liquor license applicants within a local township or city ward . The next step was to seek countywide prohibition . The IASL appealed to the general public , holding large rallies in Indianapolis and elsewhere , to support a county option law that would provide a more restrictive ban on alcohol . In September 1908 Indiana governor J. Frank Hanly , a Methodist , Republican , and teetotaler , called for a special legislative session to establish a county option that would allow county voters to prohibit alcohol sales throughout their county . The state legislature passed the bill with only a narrow margin . By November 1909 seventy of Indiana 's ninety @-@ two counties were dry . In 1911 a Democratic legislative majority replaced the county option with the Proctor law , a less @-@ geographically restrictive local option , and the number of dry counties was reduced to twenty @-@ six . Despite the setback prohibition advocates continued to lobby legislators for support . In December 1917 several temperance organizations formed the Indiana Dry Federation to fight the politically powerful liquor interests , with the IASL joining the group a short time later . The Federation and the League vigorously campaigned for statewide prohibition , which the Indiana General Assembly adopted in February 1917 . Subsequent legal challenges delayed implementation of statewide prohibition until 1918 , when a court ruled in June that Indiana 's prohibition law was constitutionally valid . 
 On January 14 , 1919 , Indiana became the twenty @-@ fifth state to ratify the Eighteenth Amendment , which mandated nationwide prohibition . Three days later Nebraska became the thirty @-@ sixth state to ratify the amendment , providing the two @-@ thirds majority of states required to amend the U.S. Constitution . With the beginning of nationwide Prohibition on January 17 , 1920 , after formal ratification of the Eighteenth Amendment the previous day , efforts turned to enforcement of the new law . Protestant support for Prohibition remained intense in Indiana in the 1920s . Shumaker and the IASL lead a statewide grassroots campaign that successfully passed a new prohibition law for the state . Sponsored by Indiana representative Frank Wright and known as the Wright bone @-@ dry law , it was enacted in 1925 . The Wright law was part of a national trend toward stricter prohibition legislation and imposed severe penalties for alcohol possession . 
 The Great Depression and the election of Democratic party candidates in 1932 ended widespread national support for Prohibition . Franklin D. Roosevelt , who included repeal of the Eighteenth Amendment as a major issue of his presidential campaign in 1932 , made good on his promise to American voters . On December 5 , 1933 , the Twenty @-@ first Amendment repealed the Eighteenth Amendment and ended nationwide Prohibition . However , Indiana 's legislature continued to regulate alcohol within the state through allocation of state liquor licenses and prohibition of sales on Sunday . 
 = = = Women 's activism = = = 
 Middle @-@ class Indiana women learned organizational skills through the suffrage and temperance movements . By the 1890s they were applying their new skills to the needs of their home communities , by organizing women 's clubs , the combined literary activity with social activism focused on such needs as public health , sanitation , and good schools . The women increasingly learn to focus their energies on obtainable objectives through specialized local organizations . In Lafayette , for example , the suffragists concentrated in the Lafayette Franchise League , while those oriented toward social concerns worked through the Lafayette Charity Organization Society ( <unk> ) , the Free Kindergarten and Industrial School Association ( <unk> ) , and the Martha Home . 
 Middle class black women activists were organized through their Baptist and Methodist churches , and under the leadership of Hallie Quinn Brown formed a statewide umbrella group , the Indiana Association of Colored Women 's Clubs . They sponsored 56 clubs in 46 cities in the state , with 2000 members by 1933 , and a budget of over $ 20 @,@ 000 . Most members were public school teachers or hairdressers , as well as women active and local business in the black community , and in government positions . They affiliated with the National Federation of Afro @-@ American Women , headed by Mrs. Booker T. Washington , and became part of her husband 's powerful network of black activists . One of the most prominent member in Indiana was Madame C. J. Walker of Indianapolis , who owned a nationally successful business selling beauty and hair products for black women . Club meetings focused on home @-@ making classes , research and statistics regarding the status of blacks in Indiana and nationwide , suffrage , and anti @-@ lynching activism . The local clubs operated rescue missions , nursery schools , and educational programs . 
 = = = Floods = = = 
 Between March 23 and March 27 , 1913 , Indiana and more than a dozen other states experienced major flooding during the Great Flood of 1913 ; it was Indiana 's worst flood disaster up to that time . The weather system that created the unprecedented flooding arrived in Indiana on Sunday , March 23 , with a major tornado at Terre Haute . In four days , rainfall topped nine inches in southern Indiana , more than half of it falling within a twenty @-@ four @-@ hour period on March 25 . Heavy rains , runoff , and rising rivers resulted in extensive flooding in northeast , central , and southern Indiana . Indiana 's flood @-@ related deaths were estimated at 100 to 200 , with flood damage estimated at $ 25 million ( in 1913 dollars ) . State and local communities handled their own disaster response and relief . The American Red Cross , still a small organization at that time , established a temporary headquarters in Indianapolis and served the six hardest @-@ hit Indiana counties . Indiana governor Samuel M. Ralston appealed to Indiana cities and other states for relief assistance and appointed a trustee to receive relief funds and arrange for distribution of supplies . Independent organizations , such as the Rotary Club of Indianapolis and others , helped with local relief efforts . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Hoosiers were divided about entering World War I. Before Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare and tried to enlist Mexico as a military ally in 1917 , most Hoosiers wanted the U.S. to be neutral in the war . Support for Britain came from professions and businessmen . Opposition came from churchmen , women , farmers and Irish Catholics and German @-@ American elements . They called for neutrality and strongly opposed going to war to rescue the British Empire . Influential Hoosiers who opposed involvement in the war included Democratic Senator John W. Kern , and Vice President Thomas R. Marshall . Supporters of military preparedness included James Whitcomb Riley and George Ade . Most of the opposition dissipated when the United States officially declared war against Germany in April 1917 , but some teachers lost their jobs on suspicion of disloyalty , and public schools could no longer teach in German . Socialist leader Eugene V. Debs , from Terre Haute , went to federal prison for encouraging young men to evade the draft . 
 The Indiana National Guard was federalized during WWI ; many units were sent to Europe . A separate organization , the Liberty Guard , had been formed in 1910 , primarily for social purposes : members marched in parades and at patriotic events . Governor Samuel Ralston had to call out the Liberty Guard in November 1913 to put down a growing workers strike in Indianapolis . By 1920 , the state decided to formalize this group , renaming it the Indiana Civil Defense Force and supplying it with equipment and training . In 1941 , the unit was named the Indiana Guard Reserve ; it effectively became a state militia . During World War II , it was again federalized and members were called up by the federal government . 
 Indiana provided 130 @,@ 670 troops during the war ; a majority of them were drafted . Over 3 @,@ 000 men died , many from influenza and pneumonia . To honor the Hoosier veterans of the war , the state began construction of the Indiana World War Memorial . 
 = = = Twenties and the Great Depression = = = 
 The war @-@ time economy provided a boom to Indiana 's industry and agriculture , which led to more urbanization throughout the 1920s . By 1925 , more workers were employed in industry than in agriculture in Indiana . Indiana 's greatest industries were steel production , iron , automobiles , and railroad cars . 
 Scandal erupted across the state in 1925 when it was discovered that over half the seats in the General Assembly were controlled by the Indiana Ku Klux Klan , including members of three political parties . The Klan pushed an anti @-@ Catholic legislative agenda , including a ban on parochial education . During the 1925 General Assembly session , Grand Dragon D. C. Stephenson boasted , " I am the law in Indiana . " Stephenson was convicted for the murder of Madge Oberholtzer that year and sentenced to life in prison . After Governor Edward L. Jackson , whom Stephenson helped elect , refused to pardon him , Stephenson began to name many of his co @-@ conspirators . This led the state 's making a string of arrests and indictments against political leaders , including the governor , mayor of Indianapolis , the attorney general , and many others . The crackdown effectively rendered the Klan powerless . 
 During the 1930s , Indiana , like the rest of the nation , was affected by the Great Depression . The economic downturn had a wide @-@ ranging negative impact on Indiana . Urbanization declined . Governor Paul V. McNutt 's administration struggled to build from scratch a state @-@ funded welfare system to help the overwhelmed private charities . During his administration , spending and taxes were cut drastically in response to the Depression . The state government was completely reorganized . McNutt also enacted the state 's first income tax . On several occasions , he declared martial law to put an end to worker strikes . 
 During the Great Depression , unemployment exceeded 25 % statewide . Southern Indiana was hard hit , and unemployment topped 50 % during the worst years . The federal Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) began operations in Indiana in July 1935 . By October of that year , the agency had put 74 @,@ 708 Hoosiers to work . In 1940 , there were still 64 @,@ 700 people working for agency . The majority of these workers were employed to improve the state 's infrastructure : roads , bridges , flood control projects , and water treatment plants . Some helped index collections of libraries , and artists were employed to create murals for post offices and libraries . Nearly every community had a project to work on . 
 During the 1930s , many local businesses collapsed , several railroads went bankrupt , and numerous small rural banks folded . Manufacturing came to an abrupt halt or was severely cut back due the dwindling demand for products . The Depression continued to negatively affect Indiana until the buildup for World War II . The effects continued to be felt for many years thereafter . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The economy began to recover in 1933 , but unemployment remained high among youth and older workers until 1940 , when the federal government built up supplies and armaments going into World War II . 
 Indiana participated in the mobilization of the nation 's economy and resources . Domestically , the state produced munitions in an army plant near <unk> . The P @-@ 47 fighter @-@ plane was manufactured in Evansville at Republic Aviation . The steel produced in northern Indiana was used in tanks , battleships , and submarines . Other war @-@ related materials were produced throughout the state . Indiana 's military bases were activated , with areas such as Camp Atterbury reaching historical peaks in activity . 
 The population was highly supportive of the war efforts . The political left supported the war ( unlike World War I , which Socialists opposed . ) The churches showed much less pacifism than in 1914 . The Church of God , based in Anderson , had a strong pacifist element , reaching a high point in the late 1930s . The Church regarded World War II as a just war because America was attacked . Anti @-@ Communist sentiment has since kept strong pacifism from developing in the Church of God . Likewise the Quakers , with a strong base near Richmond , generally regarded World War II as a just war and about 90 % served , although there were some conscientious objectors . The Mennonites and Brethren continued their pacifism , but the federal government was much less hostile than before . The churches helped their young men to both become conscientious objectors and to provide valuable service to the nation . Goshen College set up a training program for unpaid Civilian Public Service jobs . Although the young women pacifists were not liable to the draft , they volunteered for unpaid Civilian Public Service jobs to demonstrate their patriotism ; many worked in mental hospitals . 
 The state sent nearly 400 @,@ 000 Hoosiers who enlisted or were drafted . More than 11 @,@ 783 Hoosiers died in the conflict and another 17 @,@ 000 were wounded . Hoosiers served in all the major theaters of the war . Their sacrifice was honored by additions to the World War Memorial in Indianapolis , which was not finished until 1965 . 
 Tens of thousands of women volunteered for war service , through agencies such as the Red Cross . Representative was Elizabeth Richardson of Mishawaka . She served coffee and doughnuts to combat soldiers in England and France from a Red Cross <unk> . She died in a plane crash in 1945 in France . 
 = = 21st century = = 
 Central Indiana was struck by a major flood in 2008 , leading to widespread damage and the evacuations of hundreds of thousands of residents . It was the costliest disaster in the history of the state , with early damage estimates topping $ 1 billion . 
 In 2012 , Indiana 's exports totaled US $ 34 @.@ 4 billion , a record high for the state . The rate of export growth in 2012 was faster in Indiana than it was for the Nation . 
 = Mongol siege of Kaifeng = 
 In the Mongol siege of Kaifeng from 1232 to 1233 , the Mongol Empire captured Kaifeng , the capital of the Jurchen Jin dynasty . The Mongols and Jurchens had been at war for nearly two decades , beginning in 1211 after the Jurchens refused the Mongol offer to submit as a vassal . Ögedei Khan sent two armies to besiege Kaifeng , one led by himself , and the other by his brother Tolui . Command of the forces , once they converged into a single army , was given to Subutai who led the siege . The Mongols arrived at the walls of Kaifeng on April 8 , 1232 . 
 The siege deprived the city of resources , and its residents were beset with famine and disease . Jurchen soldiers defended the city with fire lances and bombs of gunpowder , killing many Mongols and severely injuring others . The Jurchens tried to arrange a peace treaty , but the assassination of a Mongol diplomat foiled their efforts . Emperor Aizong , the Jurchen emperor , fled the city for the town of Caizhou . The city was placed under the command of General Cui Li , who executed the emperor 's loyalists and promptly surrendered to the Mongols . The Mongols captured Kaifeng on February 26 , 1233 , and looted the city . The dynasty fell two years later after the suicide of Aizong and the capture of Caizhou in 1234 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Genghis Khan was declared <unk> in 1206 . The Mongols had united under his leadership , and defeated the rival tribes of the steppes . In the same period , China was divided into three separate states . In the north , the Jurchen Jin dynasty controlled Manchuria and all of China north of the Huai River . The Tangut Western Xia ruled parts of the western China , while the Song Dynasty reigned over the south . The Mongols subjugated Western Xia in 1210 . In that same year , the Mongols renounced their vassalage to the Jin . Hostilities between the Jin and Mongols had been building up . The Mongols coveted the prosperity of Jurchen territory . They may have also harbored a grudge against the Jin for assassinating <unk> , one of Genghis ' predecessors , and for the Jin emperor Wanyan Yongji 's rude behavior to Genghis when Wanyan Yongji was still a Jurchen prince . 
 The Mongols learned that a famine had struck the Jin , and invaded in 1211 . Two armies were dispatched by the Mongols into Jurchen territory , with one under the command of Genghis . The Jin built up its armies and reinforced its cities in preparation for the Mongol incursion . The Mongol strategy was based on capturing small settlements and ignoring the fortifications of major cities . They looted the land and retreated in 1212 . The Mongols returned the next year and besieged Zhongdu , the capital of the Jin , in 1213 . The Mongols were not able to penetrate the walls of the city in the Battle of Zhongdu , but intimidated the Jin emperor into paying tribute . They withdrew in 1214 . Later in the year , fearing another siege , the Jin moved their capital from Zhongdu to Kaifeng . The Mongols besieged Zhongdu once more in 1215 once they learned that the Jin court had fled from the city . The city fell on May 31 , and by 1216 , large swaths of Jin territory were under Mongol control . 
 Meanwhile , the Jin had been afflicted by multiple revolts . In Manchuria , the Khitans , under the leadership of Yelü <unk> , declared their independence from the Jin and allied with the Mongols . Yelü was enthroned a puppet ruler subordinate to the Mongols in 1213 , and given the title emperor of the Liao Dynasty . The Jurchen expedition sent against him commanded by Puxian <unk> was not successful . <unk> , realizing the Jin dynasty was on the verge of collapse , rebelled and declared himself king of <unk> in 1215 . Further south , rebellions had broken out in Shandong beginning with Yang Anguo 's revolt in 1214 . The rebels were known as Red Coats , from the color of the uniforms they wore starting in 1215 . After the fall of Zhongdu in 1215 , the Mongols downsized their war effort against the Jin , and shifted their resources in preparation for the invasion of Central Asia . The Jurchens tried to make up for their territorial losses to the Mongols by invading the Song in 1217 . The invasion was fruitless , so the Jin wanted to negotiate for peace , but the Song rebuffed the offers . By 1218 , Jurchen diplomats were prohibited from traveling to the Song . The Mongol war against the Jurchens had subsided , but not stopped , and went on through the early 1220s under the command of the general <unk> . <unk> died from sickness in 1223 , and the Mongol campaigns against the Jin wound down . The Jin settled for peace with the Song , but the Song continued to assist the Red Coats insurgency against the Jin . Genghis Khan fell ill and died in 1227 . Ögedei was his successor , and he renewed the war against the Jin in 1230 . 
 = = Siege of Kaifeng = = 
 Two Mongol armies were dispatched in 1230 to capture the Jin capital of Kaifeng , then named Bian . The plans were to have one army approach the city from the north , while the second attacked from the south . Ögedei Khan headed the army based in Shanxi and his brother Tolui commanded the army stationed in Shaanxi . An illness incapacitated Ögedei and Tolui , and they relinquished their roles in the campaign . Ögedei later regained his health , but Tolui died the next year . Subutai led the combined Mongol forces once the two armies converged in late 1231 and early 1232 . The Mongols reached the Yellow River on January 28 , 1232 , and began amassing around Kaifeng on February 6 . They besieged the city on April 8 . 
 The Jurchens tried to end the siege by negotiating a peace treaty . There was some progress towards an agreement in the summer of 1232 , but the assassination of the Mongol diplomat Tang Qing and his entourage by the Jurchens made further talks impossible . The Jin grew desperate . They had enlisted most of the available men in the empire to either defend Kaifeng or fight against the Mongols on the front lines . While the negotiations were ongoing , a plague was devastating the population of the city . Starvation was rampant . The supplies stored in Kaifeng were running out , even with what had been forcibly seized from people . The city 's political disintegration created unfounded fears that there was an internal threat . Several residents of the city were executed on the suspicion that they were traitors . 
 The defense of the city did not collapse immediately . The Jin held out for months before the city fell . The Jurchen emperor was afforded the opportunity to escape in late 1232 , and departed with a retinue of court officials . He left the governance of the city to the General Cui Li and moved to the city of Guide in Henan on February 26 , 1233 , then Caizhou on August 3 . The retreat of the emperor was ruinous to the morale of the soldiers defending the city . In the wake of the emperor 's departure , Cui ordered the execution of those loyal to the emperor who had remained in the city . He realized that prolonging the siege was suicidal , and offered to surrender to the Mongols . Cui opened the gates of Kaifeng and the Mongols were let into the city . He was later killed outside of battle in a personal dispute , for insulting the wife of someone under his command . 
 The Mongols looted the city when it fell , but atypical to most sieges in the time period , they permitted trade . The richest residents of the city sold their luxury belongings to Mongol soldiers for critically needed food supplies . Male members of the royal family residing in the city were captured and executed . 
 = = Military technology = = 
 Historian Herbert Franke observed in his assessment of the battle that the siege is significant for historians of military technology . Many of the details of the siege are known to historians , based on a comprehensive account of the battle compiled by a Jin official living in the besieged city . The Jurchens fired explosives , propelled by trebuchets , at the opposing army . A contemporaneous record of the battle recounts the process by which the bombs were launched . First , a soldier ignited the fuse . The rope of the trebuchet was pulled , launching the bomb into the air . The bomb produced a large explosion the moment it landed , inflicting damage that could penetrate armor . The explosion sometimes sparked a fire on the grass of the battlefield , which could burn a soldier to death , even if he survived the initial blast . The bombs were more primitive than modern explosives , and occasionally they would fail to detonate or detonated too early . Mongol soldiers counteracted the bombs by digging trenches leading up to the city , which they covered with shielding made of cowhide , to protect from the explosives fired overhead . The Jurchen official reports , in a translation provided by historian Stephen Turnbull : 
 Therefore the Mongol soldiers made cowhide shields to cover their approach trenches and men beneath the walls , and dug as it were niches , each large enough to contain a man , hoping that in this way the troops above would not be able to do anything about it . But someone suggested the technique of lowering the thunder crash bombs on iron chains . When these reached the trenches where the Mongols were making their dugouts , the bombs were set off , with the result that the cowhide and the attacking soldiers were all blown to bits , and not even a trace being left behind . 
 The infantry of the Jin were armed with fire lances . The fire lance was a spear , with a tube of gunpowder attached to it . The mixture contained , besides the gunpowder ingredients of sulfur , charcoal , and saltpeter , ground porcelain and iron filings . The flame that shot from the lance reached a distance of three meters . The heated tinder that ignited the weapon was stored in a small iron box toted by the Jurchen soldiers in battle . Once the gunpowder was consumed , the fire lance could be wielded like a normal spear , or replenished by a new tube filled with gunpowder . 
 The bombs and fire lances of the Jin were the only two weapons of the Jurchens that the Mongols were wary of facing . The Jurchen deployment of gunpowder was extensive , but it is not certain if the Mongols had acquired gunpowder from the Jurchens before this point . Herbert Franke maintains that gunpowder was in the arsenal of both combatants , but Turnbull believes that only the Jurchens made use of it . The Mongols loaded their catapults with large stones or bombs of gunpowder , which were fired at the Jin fortifications . The barrage inflicted casualties in the city and had a psychological impact on the soldiers operating the Jurchen trebuchets . 
 = = Historical significance = = 
 The siege of Kaifeng crippled the Jin dynasty , but did not destroy it . The penultimate emperor of the dynasty , Emperor Aizong , had evaded capture , but was left destitute after the siege . He sent his diplomats to entreat the neighboring Song Dynasty for help . They warned that the Mongols would invade the Song once the Jin fell , and requested supplies from the Song . The Song refused the offer . The Song , who had fought multiple wars against the Jin , resented the Jurchens for their conquest of northern China decades earlier . Instead of aiding the Jin , the Song allied with the Mongols . They cooperated militarily and captured the last of the cities still controlled by the Jin . In December 1233 , the Mongols besieged Caizhou , where Aizong had fled to from Kaifeng . The emperor was unable to escape the town under siege , and resorted to suicide . On February 9 , 1234 , the Mongols broke through the defenses of Caizhou . Emperor Mo , Emperor Aizong 's intended successor , resided in the same town and was killed in battle soon after . His reign lasted less than two days , from February 9 to his death in February 10 . The Jin dynasty ended with the fall of Caizhou . 
 = Rymdkapsel = 
 Rymdkapsel is a 2013 minimalist real @-@ time strategy video game by indie developer <unk> , the studio of Martin Jonasson . Players build a space station using tetromino pieces while managing resources and minions , defending against attacks , and extending the base towards four monoliths at the edges of the level . The game was built over a year and a half and was inspired by the base @-@ building aspects of the Command & Conquer series . It was Jonasson 's first full game as an indie developer . Rymdkapsel was released on May 7 , 2013 for PlayStation Mobile , and was later ported to iOS , Android , Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux . Reviewers gave the game generally favorable reviews , where they appreciated its simplicity and challenge , but not its brevity and slow start . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Players build a space station on a flat plane using tetromino @-@ shaped floors that represent rooms . Rectangular workers generate the resources to build more spaces by working in these rooms . The workers occasionally must defend the base against attackers , who come in waves of increasing difficulty . The player can have the workers research four TMA @-@ 1 @-@ style monoliths for additional shield , speed , and generator upgrades . Rooms are used for special purposes : mineral mining ( extractors ) , growing food ( gardens ) , cooking it ( kitchens ) , making workers ( quarters ) , and creating power ( reactors ) . The goal is to flourish and protect the station 's inhabitants , but there are three concrete objectives : research all four monoliths , survive 28 waves , and research all monoliths in under 45 minutes . The game ends if all workers are killed . There is a tutorial , but no story . The player is not specifically told about the endgame goals . 
 = = Development = = 
 In 2012 , <unk> developer Martin Jonasson began to make a space station game that considered what he found enjoyable and least stressful about real @-@ time strategy games . The game coalesced as he revised and removed features over the course of its year and a half of development . Rymdkapsel was written in <unk> , a programming language similar to ActionScript 3 that let Jonasson use the same code base for iOS , Android , and PC releases . He had used the language for years and had been making games for 20 years , primarily with Adobe Flash . Jonasson left his web development job in 2010 to " go indie " , and Rymdkapsel was his " first full @-@ time game " . The game 's name translates as " space capsule " in the Swedish language , which Jonasson liked as a title for its uniqueness and foreign overtones , though he acknowledged that the name was difficult for English speakers and made the game hard to find in the App Store . 
 He began the game after the 2012 Game Developers Conference as a weeklong diversion from another project , and slowly iterated into a full version . Jonasson started to prototype a game about a space station with a hull breach that releases the station 's occupants into outer space . Within a day , he built a feature where players could build the station using tetromino blocks . He liked this direction better than the hull breach , and abandoned the latter idea by the end of prototyping . He built the room construction mechanics within a day , and to make the construction more challenging , later added three different resources to be spent towards room construction . When the resources did not " look as interesting " as he wanted , he added minions to defend the station . The minions — shown as small white boxes — have retained their original design . It is an example of the minimalist design theme that pervades the work . Jonasson has said that he kept the artificial intelligence " a bit stupid on purpose " ( doing things such as stealing food intended for other minions ) because he found their actions " a bit adorable " . He otherwise removed the features he felt were not vital to the game . Jonasson then added " conflict " to the game by putting the minions in danger of being removed . 
 Jonasson 's game design was inspired by real @-@ time strategy game Command & Conquer , where he enjoyed managing his home base but not attacking the enemy . He designed the game to last 45 minutes , which he felt to be a proper length , whereupon the difficulty ramps up to require station defense over base construction . He felt that it was reasonable to reach all four monoliths within that time to be ready for the endgame sequence , and that the limit made players expand outwards rather than keeping the station small and easy to defend . The sole map is hand @-@ balanced , which made him reluctant to fulfill player requests to randomize it . He also considered adding a " zen " mode , which would pressure the player less . The music was composed by Niklas Ström . 
 The game was released on May 7 , 2013 for PlayStation Vita and PlayStation Mobile . It was later included as a prize for completing " quests " in a Sony E3 2013 promotion . It is available on Android via the PlayStation Mobile app . The iOS and Android releases were released on July 25 , 2013 . Microsoft Windows , OS X , and Linux versions were released on January 30 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " generally favorable " reviews , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Critics compared Rymdkapsel 's gameplay to Tetris and SimCity . Of its visual style , The New York Times published that the game makes others in the real @-@ time strategy genre " feel needlessly garnished " . Reviewers generally appreciated the game 's simplicity and challenge , but not its brevity and slow start . IGN 's Steve Watts thought that the game made too many " design concessions " to its minimalism , though he considered the style " gorgeous " , and felt that he was never fully in control of his base . Eurogamer 's Tom Bramwell said that the game 's minimalism extended to its core gameplay , where the player should strive to " play the game less and less " . Joseph Leray of TouchArcade described the game 's balance and pacing as " impeccable " . He gave Rymdkapsel a perfect score and wrote that it felt as if it were custom @-@ made for iOS . Bryan Vore of Game Informer criticized the game 's lack of features and thought that it " fizzled out with no fanfare " as a " creative " idea but without sufficient " polish " . The Verge 's Trent Wolbe called the soundtrack " a minimalist achievement " . Jonasson announced that the game had sold 200 @,@ 000 copies as of December 2 , 2013 , due in large part to its inclusion in a Humble Bundle sale . 
 = Beefsteak ( banquet ) = 
 A beefsteak is a type of banquet in which sliced beef tenderloin is served to diners as all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat finger food . The dining style originated in 19th @-@ century New York City as a type of working @-@ class celebration but went into a decline in the mid @-@ 20th century . Resurrected by caterers in New Jersey , the beefsteak banquet style is now popular in that state 's Bergen and Passaic counties , and is enjoying a revival in New York City , where the style originated , due to the reemergence of a biannual beefsteak in Brooklyn . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Beefsteak banquets originated among the working class of New York City in the mid @-@ 1800s as celebratory meals or " testimonials " . The meal would generally be set up by an organization wishing to laud or raise money for politicians , newly promoted friends , or celebrities . Tammany Hall regularly threw beefsteaks as political fundraisers , often enough that it was a large portion of beefsteak business in New York and " when Tammany Hall [ got ] a setback , beefsteaks [ got ] a setback " . Sophie Tucker and Bill Robinson had beefsteaks thrown for them in the 1930s . 
 Early beefsteaks were held in a relaxed , men @-@ only atmosphere , with diners sitting on crates and eating with their fingers off of rough , improvised tables in saloons , rental halls , or residential basements . Food and drink were the focus of the evening , and entertainment often consisted simply of those present telling stories and singing amongst themselves . Brass bands were sometimes hired . 
 = = = Early organization = = = 
 Though the centerpiece of beefsteak culture was indisputably the frenzied consumption of beef and beer , with diners eating with their fingers and drinking with abandon , serving styles varied . 1930s @-@ era beefsteaks could be grouped into two styles , referred to by Joseph Mitchell in a 1939 The New Yorker article as " East Side " and " West Side " and roughly corresponding to the geographic separation of New York City into the same @-@ named areas . Each group claimed to Mitchell to have originated beefsteak banquets and to have the most authentic serving and eating styles . 
 " East Side " beefsteaks were largely patronized by the working @-@ class and immigrants , and the center of the East Side beefsteak world was at First Avenue and Nineteenth Street in Manhattan . East Side beefsteaks were heavily meat @-@ centered , with courses consisting of items like sliced beef short loin , beef kidneys , and ground beef trimmings ( referred to as " hamburgers " ) . One East Side beefsteak was reported to have consisted of " 3 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) of steak , 1 @,@ 500 pounds ( 680 kg ) of lamb chops , 425 pounds ( 193 kg ) of hamburger and 1 @,@ 300 pounds ( 590 kg ) of kidneys wrapped with bacon . " 
 " West Side " beefsteaks , on the other hand , were often thrown at " gentlemen @-@ only " establishments centered on Eleventh Avenue and 23rd Street . West Side beefsteaks tended more toward expansive menus , with courses including crab meat , lamb chops , and baked potatoes to go along with the beef loin . Diners at West Side beefsteaks were allowed to use disposable forks for some courses , but were expected to eat the beef course with their fingers . 
 = = = Dining style = = = 
 Both schools of thought in New York agreed that eating with one 's fingers and not being afraid to get messy were integral to the culture of the beefsteak . No matter which type of beefsteak a diner attended , the main course was beef loin dipped in butter @-@ based sauce and served thinly sliced on rounds of bread ( day @-@ old bread , at East Side beefsteaks ; fresh toast , at West Side ) . <unk> were considered unnecessary ; diners generally wore aprons with which they could wipe the grease off their hands . Food was dispatched from the kitchen laid out on trays and waiters continued bringing out trays until diners could literally eat no more ( In his New Yorker article , Joseph Mitchell quotes one man as saying , " I 'm so full I 'm about to pop . Push those kidneys a little nearer , if you don 't mind . " ) . Beer flowed freely during banquets in pre @-@ prohibition years . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 With the passing of the 18th and 19th amendments to the U.S. Constitution , in 1919 and 1920 , respectively , the traditional men @-@ only , beer @-@ soaked format of the beefsteak began to change . Politicians began including newly enfranchised women voters in their beefsteak banquets after the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment , and with the attendance of women came corresponding social niceties . Cocktails , popularized by illicit drinkers during Prohibition , replaced pitchers of beer , and " fruit cups [ , ] and fancy salads " were soon added to beefsteak menus . Orchestras were hired in place of old @-@ fashioned brass bands and storytellers , and the long @-@ forbidden knives and forks began to appear on beefsteak tables . By the 1930s , according to Joseph Mitchell , beefsteaks were no longer the manly , messy affairs they had once been ; they were now closer to formal meals in which beef and bread happened to feature heavily . The cheerful gluttony of the past was tempered by female sensibilities ; " women , " Mitchell reported , " do not esteem a glutton , and at a contemporary beefsteak it is unusual for a man to do away with more than six pounds of meat and thirty glasses of beer . " 
 In 1938 , " Hap " Nightingale , a butcher in Clifton , New Jersey , began catering parties in his area according to the old @-@ time beefsteak formula . He offered a set , all @-@ you @-@ can @-@ eat menu of French fries and sliced beef tenderloin on bread . His business thrived locally , and the company has since been passed down through ensuing generations of Nightingales , all of whom continued to adhere to the tried @-@ and @-@ true formula . 
 = = Current practice = = 
 The modern beefsteak banquet hews fairly closely to the early @-@ 1900s model , although the expansive selections found at an old @-@ fashioned " West Side " beefsteak have been tapered down to beef , fried potatoes , and tossed salad . Butter is sometimes replaced by margarine , and a pasta course makes an occasional appearance , but attendees at beefsteaks still expect to be fed mostly abundant quantities of beef tenderloin . Modern beefsteak attendees often follow an unspoken protocol to leave their bread slices uneaten . Piling them up in front of one 's plate instead of consuming them " saves valuable stomach capacity for more beef while simultaneously serving as an informal scorekeeping system " . 
 = = Modern distribution = = 
 Beefsteak banquets have largely vanished from New York City , where they originated , but remain widespread in Bergen and Passaic counties in New Jersey . The institution is now almost entirely limited to these areas , save for a popular biannual beefsteak held in Brooklyn ; while residents of Bergen and Passaic counties consider them an ingrained part of regional culture and regularly stage beefsteak fundraisers ( caterers interviewed in a New York Times article stated that they " put on about 1 @,@ 000 of them in the region [ in 2007 ] " ) , across the county line in Essex County , for example , they remain nearly unheard of . 
 Regis High School ( a Jesuit school on the Upper East Side ) hosts an annual alumni affair ( Jug Night ) featuring traditional East Side beefsteak fare . 
 Political fundraiser beefsteak banquets are no longer common in New Jersey ; beefsteaks now usually raise money for fire departments , policemen 's benevolent associations , and other charitable organizations . Nostalgia for beefsteaks among foodies continues , and gourmet beefsteaks are sometimes staged by New York @-@ area restaurants . 
 Since 2009 , two Wesleyan University graduates , Andrew <unk> and Derek Silverman , have thrown a biannual " beefsteak for beefsteak 's sake " in Brooklyn , to revive the tradition of the beefsteak banquet in its place of origin , New York City . 
 = Fermium = 
 Fermium is a synthetic element with symbol Fm and atomic number 100 . It is a member of the actinide series . It is the heaviest element that can be formed by neutron bombardment of lighter elements , and hence the last element that can be prepared in macroscopic quantities , although pure fermium metal has not yet been prepared . A total of 19 isotopes are known , with 257Fm being the longest @-@ lived with a half @-@ life of 100 @.@ 5 days . 
 It was discovered in the debris of the first hydrogen bomb explosion in 1952 , and named after Enrico Fermi , one of the pioneers of nuclear physics . Its chemistry is typical for the late actinides , with a preponderance of the + 3 oxidation state but also an accessible + 2 oxidation state . Owing to the small amounts of produced fermium and all of its isotopes having relatively short half @-@ lives , there are currently no uses for it outside of basic scientific research . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Fermium was first discovered in the fallout from the ' Ivy Mike ' nuclear test ( 1 November 1952 ) , the first successful test of a hydrogen bomb . Initial examination of the debris from the explosion had shown the production of a new isotope of plutonium , 244 
 94Pu : this could only have formed by the absorption of six neutrons by a uranium @-@ 238 nucleus followed by two β − decays . At the time , the absorption of neutrons by a heavy nucleus was thought to be a rare process , but the identification of 244 
 94Pu raised the possibility that still more neutrons could have been absorbed by the uranium nuclei , leading to new elements . 
 Element 99 ( einsteinium ) was quickly discovered on filter papers which had been flown through the cloud from the explosion ( the same sampling technique that had been used to discover 244 
 94Pu ) . It was then identified in December 1952 by Albert Ghiorso and co @-@ workers at the University of California at Berkeley . They discovered the isotope 253Es ( half @-@ life 20 @.@ 5 days ) that was made by the capture of 15 neutrons by uranium @-@ 238 nuclei – which then underwent seven successive beta decays : 
 <formula> 
 Some 238U atoms , however , could capture another amount of neutrons ( most likely , 16 or 17 ) . 
 The discovery of fermium ( Z 
 = 100 ) required more material , as the yield was expected to be at least an order of magnitude lower than that of element 99 , and so contaminated coral from the Enewetak atoll ( where the test had taken place ) was shipped to the University of California Radiation Laboratory in Berkeley , California , for processing and analysis . About two months after the test , a new component was isolated emitting high @-@ energy α @-@ particles ( 7 @.@ 1 MeV ) with a half @-@ life of about a day . With such a short half @-@ life , it could only arise from the β − decay of an isotope of einsteinium , and so had to be an isotope of the new element 100 : it was quickly identified as 255Fm ( t = 
 20 @.@ 07 ( 7 ) hours ) . 
 The discovery of the new elements , and the new data on neutron capture , was initially kept secret on the orders of the U.S. military until 1955 due to Cold War tensions . Nevertheless , the Berkeley team were able to prepare elements 99 and 100 by civilian means , through the neutron bombardment of plutonium @-@ 239 , and published this work in 1954 with the disclaimer that it was not the first studies that had been carried out on the elements . The ' Ivy Mike ' studies were declassified and published in 1955 . 
 The Berkeley team had been worried that another group might discover lighter isotopes of element 100 through ion bombardment techniques before they could publish their classified research , and this proved to be the case . A group at the Nobel Institute for Physics in Stockholm independently discovered the element , producing an isotope later confirmed to be 250Fm ( t1 / 2 = 30 minutes ) by bombarding a 238 
 92U target with oxygen @-@ 16 ions , and published their work in May 1954 . Nevertheless , the priority of the Berkeley team was generally recognized , and with it the prerogative to name the new element in honour of the recently deceased Enrico Fermi , the developer of the first artificial self @-@ sustained nuclear reactor . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 There are 19 isotopes of fermium listed in <unk> 2003 , with atomic weights of 242 to 260 , of which 257Fm is the longest @-@ lived with a half @-@ life of 100 @.@ 5 days . <unk> has a half @-@ life of 3 days , while <unk> of 5 @.@ 3 h , 252Fm of 25 @.@ 4 h , 254Fm of 3 @.@ 2 h , 255Fm of 20 @.@ 1 h , and 256Fm of 2 @.@ 6 hours . All the remaining ones have half @-@ lives ranging from 30 minutes to less than a millisecond . The neutron @-@ capture product of fermium @-@ 257 , <unk> , undergoes spontaneous fission with a half @-@ life of just 370 ( 14 ) microseconds ; <unk> and 260Fm are also unstable with respect to spontaneous fission ( t1 / 2 = 1 @.@ 5 ( 3 ) s and 4 ms respectively ) . This means that neutron capture cannot be used to create nuclides with a mass number greater than 257 , unless carried out in a nuclear explosion . As 257Fm is an α @-@ emitter , decaying to <unk> , and no fermium isotopes undergo beta minus decay ( which would produce isotopes of the next element , mendelevium ) , fermium is also the last element that can be prepared by a neutron @-@ capture process . 
 = = Production = = 
 Fermium is produced by the bombardment of lighter actinides with neutrons in a nuclear reactor . Fermium @-@ 257 is the heaviest isotope that is obtained via neutron capture , and can only be produced in nanogram quantities . The major source is the 85 MW High Flux Isotope Reactor ( HFIR ) at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee , USA , which is dedicated to the production of transcurium ( Z > 96 ) elements . In a " typical processing campaign " at Oak Ridge , tens of grams of curium are irradiated to produce decigram quantities of californium , milligram quantities of berkelium and einsteinium and picogram quantities of fermium . However , nanogram and microgram quantities of fermium can be prepared for specific experiments . The quantities of fermium produced in 20 – 200 kiloton thermonuclear explosions is believed to be of the order of milligrams , although it is mixed in with a huge quantity of debris ; 40 picograms of 257Fm was recovered from 10 kilograms of debris from the ' Hutch ' test ( 16 July 1969 ) . 
 After production , the fermium must be separated from other actinides and from <unk> fission products . This is usually achieved by ion exchange chromatography , with the standard process using a cation exchanger such as <unk> 50 or <unk> eluted with a solution of ammonium α @-@ hydroxyisobutyrate . Smaller cations form more stable complexes with the α @-@ hydroxyisobutyrate anion , and so are preferentially eluted from the column . A rapid fractional crystallization method has also been described . 
 Although the most stable isotope of fermium is 257Fm , with a half @-@ life of 100 @.@ 5 days , most studies are conducted on 255Fm ( t1 / 2 
 = 20 @.@ 07 ( 7 ) hours ) as this isotope can be easily isolated as required as the decay product of 255Es ( t1 / 2 = 
 39 @.@ 8 ( 12 ) days ) . 
 = = Synthesis in nuclear explosions = = 
 The analysis of the debris at the 10 @-@ megaton Ivy Mike nuclear test was a part of long @-@ term project , one of the goals of which was studying the efficiency of production of transuranium elements in high @-@ power nuclear explosions . The motivation for these experiments was as follows : synthesis of such elements from uranium requires multiple neutron capture . The probability of such events increases with the neutron flux , and nuclear explosions are the most powerful neutron sources , providing densities of the order 1023 neutrons / cm2 within a microsecond , i.e. about 1029 neutrons / ( cm2 · s ) . In comparison , the flux of the HFIR reactor is 5 × 1015 neutrons / ( cm2 · s ) . A dedicated laboratory was set up right at Enewetak Atoll for preliminary analysis of debris , as some isotopes could have decayed by the time the debris samples reached the U.S. The laboratory was receiving samples for analysis , as soon as possible , from airplanes equipped with paper filters which flew over the atoll after the tests . Whereas it was hoped to discover new chemical elements heavier than fermium , those were not found after a series of megaton explosions conducted between 1954 and 1956 at the atoll . 
 The atmospheric results were supplemented by the underground test data accumulated in the 1960s at the Nevada Test Site , as it was hoped that powerful explosions conducted in confined space might result in improved yields and heavier isotopes . Apart from traditional uranium charges , combinations of uranium with americium and thorium have been tried , as well as a mixed plutonium @-@ neptunium charge . They were less successful in terms of yield that was attributed to stronger losses of heavy isotopes due to enhanced fission rates in heavy @-@ element charges . Isolation of the products was found to be rather problematic , as the explosions were spreading debris through melting and vaporizing rocks under the great depth of 300 – 600 meters , and drilling to such depth in order to extract the products was both slow and inefficient in terms of collected volumes . 
 Among the nine underground tests , which were carried between 1962 and 1969 and codenamed Anacostia ( 5 @.@ 2 kilotons , 1962 ) , Kennebec ( < 5 kilotons , 1963 ) , Par ( 38 , kilotons , 1964 ) , Barbel ( < 20 kilotons , 1964 ) , Tweed ( < 20 kilotons , 1965 ) , <unk> ( 13 kilotons , 1966 ) , Kankakee ( 20 @-@ 200 kilotons , 1966 ) , Vulcan ( 25 kilotons , 1966 ) and Hutch ( 20 @-@ 200 kilotons , 1969 ) , the last one was most powerful and had the highest yield of transuranium elements . In the dependence on the atomic mass number , the yield showed a saw @-@ tooth behavior with the lower values for odd isotopes , due to their higher fission rates . The major practical problem of the entire proposal was however collecting the radioactive debris dispersed by the powerful blast . Aircraft filters adsorbed only about 4 × 10 − 14 of the total amount and collection of tons of corals at Enewetak Atoll increased this fraction by only two orders of magnitude . Extraction of about 500 kilograms of underground rocks 60 days after the Hutch explosion recovered only about 10 − 7 of the total charge . The amount of transuranium elements in this 500 @-@ kg batch was only 30 times higher than in a 0 @.@ 4 kg rock picked up 7 days after the test . This observation demonstrated the highly nonlinear dependence of the transuranium elements yield on the amount of retrieved radioactive rock . In order to accelerate sample collection after explosion , shafts were drilled at the site not after but before the test , so that explosion would expel radioactive material from the epicenter , through the shafts , to collecting volumes near the surface . This method was tried in the Anacostia and Kennebec tests and instantly provided hundreds kilograms of material , but with actinide concentration 3 times lower than in samples obtained after drilling ; whereas such method could have been efficient in scientific studies of short @-@ lived isotopes , it could not improve the overall collection efficiency of the produced actinides . 
 Although no new elements ( apart from einsteinium and fermium ) could be detected in the nuclear test debris , and the total yields of transuranium elements were disappointingly low , these tests did provide significantly higher amounts of rare heavy isotopes than previously available in laboratories . So 6 × 109 atoms of 257Fm could be recovered after the Hutch detonation . They were then used in the studies of thermal @-@ neutron induced fission of 257Fm and in discovery of a new fermium isotope <unk> . Also , the rare 250Cm isotope was synthesized in large quantities , which is very difficult to produce in nuclear reactors from its progenitor 249Cm – the half @-@ life of 249Cm ( 64 minutes ) is much too short for months @-@ long reactor <unk> , but is very " long " on the explosion timescale . 
 = = Natural occurrence = = 
 Because of the short half @-@ life of all isotopes of fermium , any primordial fermium , that is fermium that could be present on the Earth during its formation , has decayed by now . Synthesis of fermium from naturally occurring actinides uranium and thorium in the Earth crust requires multiple neutron capture , which is an extremely unlikely event . Therefore , most fermium is produced on Earth in scientific laboratories , high @-@ power nuclear reactors , or in nuclear weapons tests , and is present only within a few months from the time of the synthesis . The transuranic elements from americium to fermium did occur naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The chemistry of fermium has only been studied in solution using tracer techniques , and no solid compounds have been prepared . Under normal conditions , fermium exists in solution as the Fm3 + ion , which has a hydration number of 16 @.@ 9 and an acid dissociation constant of 1 @.@ 6 × 10 − 4 ( pKa = 3 @.@ 8 ) . Fm3 + forms complexes with a wide variety of organic ligands with hard donor atoms such as oxygen , and these complexes are usually more stable than those of the preceding actinides . It also forms anionic complexes with ligands such as chloride or nitrate and , again , these complexes appear to be more stable than those formed by einsteinium or californium . It is believed that the bonding in the complexes of the later actinides is mostly ionic in character : the Fm3 + ion is expected to be smaller than the preceding <unk> + ions because of the higher effective nuclear charge of fermium , and hence fermium would be expected to form shorter and stronger metal – ligand bonds . 
 Fermium ( III ) can be fairly easily reduced to fermium ( II ) , for example with samarium ( II ) chloride , with which fermium coprecipitates . The electrode potential has been estimated to be similar to that of the ytterbium ( III ) / ( II ) couple , or about − 1 @.@ 15 V with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode , a value which agrees with theoretical calculations . The <unk> + / <unk> couple has an electrode potential of − 2 @.@ 37 ( 10 ) V based on <unk> measurements . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Although few people come in contact with fermium , the International Commission on Radiological Protection has set annual exposure limits for the two most stable isotopes . For fermium @-@ 253 , the ingestion limit was set at 107 becquerels ( 1 Bq is equivalent to one decay per second ) , and the inhalation limit at 105 Bq ; for fermium @-@ 257 , at 105 Bq and 4000 Bq respectively . 
 = Hurricane Bob = 
 Hurricane Bob was one of the costliest hurricanes in New England history . The second named storm and first hurricane of the 1991 Atlantic hurricane season , Bob developed from an area of low pressure near The Bahamas on August 16 . The depression steadily intensified , and became Tropical Storm Bob late on August 16 . Bob curved north @-@ northwestward as a tropical storm , but re @-@ curved to the north @-@ northeast after becoming a hurricane on August 17 . As such , it brushed the Outer Banks of North Carolina on August 18 and August 19 , and subsequently intensified into a major hurricane ( Category 3 or greater on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale ) . After peaking in intensity with maximum sustained winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , Bob weakened slightly as it approached the coast of New England . 
 Bob made landfall twice in Rhode Island as a Category 2 hurricane on August 19 , first on Block Island and then in Newport . Upon doing so , it became the only hurricane to make landfall in the contiguous United States during the 1991 season . Moving further inland , Bob rapidly weakened , and deteriorated to a tropical storm while emerging into the Gulf of Maine . Shortly thereafter , Bob made landfall in Maine as a strong tropical storm early on August 20 . Bob entered the Canadian province of New Brunswick a few hours later , where it transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . By August 21 , the remnants of Bob crossed Newfoundland and re @-@ emerged into the open Atlantic Ocean . The remnants traveled a long distance across the northern Atlantic Ocean , and finally dissipated west of Portugal on August 29 . 
 Bob left extensive damage throughout New England in its wake , totaling approximately $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 1991 USD , $ 2 @.@ 61 billion 2016 USD ) . This made it the second costliest United States hurricane at the time ; as of 2013 , it ranked thirty @-@ second in the category . In addition , seventeen fatalities were reported in association with Bob . The loss of life and most of the damage occurred as a result of high winds and rough seas . There were six confirmed tornadoes during its passage . Bob is the most recent hurricane to hit the New England states directly as a hurricane . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Bob originated from the remnants of a frontal trough to the southeast of Bermuda on August 12 . The system tracked towards the southwest and later west towards the Bahamas . By August 15th , satellite analysis of the system found a weak low pressure area a couple hundred miles east of the Bahamas . Operationally , the system was not declared a tropical depression until 0600 UTC on August 16 after a reconnaissance mission into the storm found a closed circulation and flight level winds of 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) . After post @-@ storm analysis , it was determined that the low had developed into a depression around 0000 UTC . Several hours after being designated , the system began to develop convective banding features . Roughly 18 hours after being declared a depression , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) upgraded it to a tropical storm , giving it the name Bob . At this time , Bob was situated roughly 140 mi ( 225 km ) northeast of Nassau , Bahamas . The storm tracked slowly towards the northwest in response to the deep layer mean flow it was embedded within . 
 A deepening trough over the eastern United States was forecast to turn the storm toward the north on August 16 . This turn took place earlier than forecasters anticipated . The storm slowly intensified as convection was displaced from the center of circulation ; however , upper @-@ level outflow was well @-@ defined and intensification of the storm was expected as it tracked over the Gulf Stream . Later that day , Bob began to consolidate and a reconnaissance plane recorded hurricane @-@ force winds at 1719 UTC , following this reading , the NHC upgraded the storm to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Shortly after , the hurricane began to turn towards the north @-@ northeast in response to a subtropical ridge over the Atlantic and the trough over the southeastern United States . 
 By August 18 , the NHC noted that the hurricane was asymmetrical , having uneven distribution of the wind radii . Later that day , deep convection continued to form and an eye later appeared on satellite imagery . Early the next day , the eye became increasingly defined as the center of Bob passed roughly 35 mi ( 55 km ) from the North Carolina coastline . By 0600 UTC , Hurricane Hunters recorded flight level winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , corresponding to surface winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) . At this time , the barometric pressure of the storm also decreased to 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) , the lowest pressure recorded during the storm . After attaining this intensity , the hurricane tracked quickly northeast at 25 mph ( 35 km / h ) , steered by the trough over the southeast United States , an upper @-@ level cutoff low over the Great Lakes Region and the subtropical ridge over the Atlantic . 
 The track of Bob by August 19 was similar to that of Hurricane Carol in 1954 , another major hurricane that impacted New England . Significantly cooler sea surface temperatures in the path of the hurricane resulted in weakening , leading to the eye becoming cloud @-@ filled . Later on August 19 , the western portion of the eyewall brushed the eastern tip of Long Island . Around 1800 UTC , the center of Bob made landfall near Newport , Rhode Island with winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , making it a Category 2 hurricane . The storm quickly weakened as it tracked through Rhode Island and Massachusetts before entering the Gulf of Maine . Around 0130 UTC on August 20 , the now weakened Tropical Storm Bob made another landfall near Rockport , Maine with winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . 
 Later that day , Bob had crossed through Maine and part of New Brunswick , Canada and entered the Gulf of St. Lawrence . Around 1800 UTC , the former hurricane transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . Early the next day , the storm passed over northern Newfoundland before re @-@ entering the Atlantic Ocean . Rapidly tracking eastward , the storm briefly weakened to the equivalent of a tropical depression on August 22 . After restrengthening to tropical storm @-@ force winds , the remnants of Bob turned towards the southeast and slowed . Once more , the extratropical system weakened to the equivalent of a tropical depression ; however , it did not re @-@ intensify . The storm slowly tracked towards the east before dissipating off the coast of Portugal on August 29 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Watches and warnings = = = 
 Several hours after the declaration of Tropical Storm Bob on August 16 , the Government of the Bahamas issued a tropical storm warning for the northwestern Bahamas , between the islands of Andros and Eleuthera . After the storm turned northward , this warning was discontinued as tropical storm @-@ force winds were no longer expected to affect the islands . Shortly before Bob was upgraded to a hurricane on August 17 , the NHC issued a hurricane watch for coastal areas of North Carolina between Little River Inlet northward to Virginia Beach , Virginia . Roughly four hours after this watch , it was upgraded to a hurricane warning . A new hurricane watch was issued late on August 17 , encompassing areas between Virginia Beach northward to Cape Henlopen , Delaware . This watch was also upgraded to a warning on August 18 as Bob paralleled the Mid @-@ Atlantic coastline . During the afternoon hours , a tropical storm warning was declared for areas in the lower Chesapeake Bay area , including Norfolk , Virginia . 
 A new , extensive hurricane warning was issued late on August 18 as forecasts showed Bob moving directly over southern New England . The warning covered areas between Cape Henlopen , Delaware to Plymouth , Massachusetts , including Long Island and Long Island Sound . Early on August 19 , all watches and warnings south of Cape Lookout , North Carolina were discontinued and the hurricane warning was extended northward to encompass areas south of Eastport , Maine . The Canadian Hurricane Centre began issuing warnings for Atlantic Canada later that day . Nova Scotia , Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick were placed under wind and heavy rain warnings . By the morning of August 20 , all watches and warnings in the United States were discontinued ; however , a brief tropical storm warning was declared for coastal Maine between Rockland and Eastport before the remnants of Bob moved through eastern Canada . The advisories for Atlantic Canada were later discontinued after the system moved out of the region . 
 = = = Mid @-@ Atlantic states and the Carolinas = = = 
 Following the issuance of a hurricane warning in North Carolina on August 17 , mandatory evacuation orders were declared for the outermost islands in the state . Local police assisted significant traffic as an estimated 50 @,@ 000 to 100 @,@ 000 people left the region . At the height of the evacuations , delays in some places exceeded three hours . Despite the large number of evacuees , an additional 50 @,@ 000 people were estimated to have stayed home and wait out the storm . Several bridges in the area were shut down prior to Bob 's arrival as hurricane @-@ force winds were likely to create life @-@ threatening conditions on them . The National Park Service in the state also shut down campgrounds across the Outer Banks . An evacuation shelter was also opened in Carteret County . 
 In Virginia , 125 planes were relocated from Langley Air Force Base to Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base in Dayton , Ohio . Roughly 400 people evacuated from coastal areas in Maryland , and stores in Ocean City reported a substantial increase in sales related to storm preparation . Further north in New Jersey , casinos prepared sandbags to protect the structures and tape to cover windows . 
 In Suffolk County , New York , emergency officials were unsure of whether or not to issue evacuation orders for residents along coastal areas . This contemplation led to " mixed messages " on the ability of the government being sent to the public . By the evening of August 19 , the evacuation order was not issued ; however , the county was placed under a state of emergency and disaster centers were opened . The American Red Cross opened four shelters on Long Island that housed 800 people during the storm . 
 = = = New England and Canada = = = 
 Prior to Bob 's arrival in New England , officials in Connecticut and Rhode Island declared a state of emergency in anticipation of significant damage . All state workers in the area were told to go home early and prepare for the storm . The Connecticut Legislature canceled a session on the state 's budget and Governor Lowell P. Weicker , Jr. activated the emergency operations center . Submarines stationed in Groton left port and waited out the storm under water . Airplane and train service was disrupted throughout the Mid @-@ Atlantic states and New England in relation to Bob . The American Red Cross opened 23 shelters in 16 communities in Connecticut . In neighboring Rhode Island , the agency set up 40 shelters , and there were an additional 25 shelters unaffiliated with the agency . About 3 @,@ 500 people statewide evacuated , including 2 @,@ 000 on Block Island . Several people injured themselves while preparing for the storm . 
 In Massachusetts , thousands of residents evacuated Cape Cod , leading to an 11 mi ( 18 km ) backup on the Sagamore Bridge . There were nine shelters set up in the region , which became overcrowded with evacuees . There were about 50 @,@ 000 people who left their homes statewide , of which 6 @,@ 500 went to shelters . On Martha 's Vineyard , electronic stores reported their best business sales in years , with supplies of D @-@ batteries being cleaned off the shelves . Many residents purchased these as well as battery @-@ powered radios and flashlights . President George H. W. Bush , staying at his home in Kennebunkport , Maine , evacuated to Pease Air Force Base in New Hampshire . To avoid possible risks by using helicopter , he drove by motorcade to the base . During this time , portions of Interstate 95 were closed to allow him direct access to the Air Force base ; however , this created many miles of backup as thousands of residents moved inland . Eight shelters were opened in New Hampshire , and about 5 @,@ 200 people – mostly tourists – evacuated the coastline . There were 49 shelters opened in neighboring Maine , and about 8 @,@ 600 people evacuated along the coastline in York County . 
 In the Bay of Fundy , fishermen were urged to return to port in fears of large swells from Hurricane Bob . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout the east coast of the United States , Hurricane Bob produced moderate rainfall and substantial damage . Damage totaled about $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ( 1991 USD ) . That included about $ 700 million through cleanup costs , uninsured losses , and food claims . That made it , at the time , the second costliest United States hurricane , although the total was due to the storm passing through a densely populated region . As of 2010 , Hurricane Bob ranked as the 22nd costliest tropical cyclone in the United States mainland . Across its track , the hurricane left 2 @.@ 1 million people without power . There were six confirmed tornadoes , along with thirteen unconfirmed tornadoes . 
 = = = Carolinas and Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = 
 As the center of the Hurricane Bob passed several hundred miles east of South Carolina with only slight effects on the state . However , the storm produced large swells that caught a swimmer in Myrtle Beach in strong undertow ; this swimmer drowned to death . 
 A crew of three sailed from Little River ( Horry County , South Carolina ) en route to Rhode Island . The hurricane destroyed the mast , leaving the crew stranded over the open ocean in shark @-@ infested waters . After 12 days , the United States Coast Guard rescued the three . 
 On 18 August 1991 , Hurricane Bob brushed the Outer Banks of North Carolina , bringing strong winds and heavy rains . Although a maximum of 5 @.@ 30 inches ( 135 mm ) of rain fell at the National Weather Service office building at Cape Hatteras , little heavy rain fell inland of the Outer Banks . One person was killed in the state in relation to Bob , and damage from the storm was estimated at $ 8 million ( 1991 USD ) . The community of Duck , North Carolina , received the highest recorded onshore sustained winds in the state , 62 miles per hour ( 100 km / h ) , whereas the highest gusts reached 74 miles per hour ( 119 km / h ) at Cape Hatteras . Diamond Shoal Light recorded a sustained wind of 85 @.@ 0 knots ( 157 @.@ 4 km / h ; 97 @.@ 8 mph ) with a gust of 106 @.@ 7 knots ( 197 @.@ 6 km / h ; 122 @.@ 8 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 962 @.@ 1 millibars ( 962 @.@ 1 hPa ) on the evening of 18 / 19 August 1991 . Cape Hatteras also recorded a storm surge of 2 @.@ 6 to 4 @.@ 6 ft ( 0 @.@ 79 to 1 @.@ 40 m ) . 
 Flooding was reported throughout the Outer Banks in relation to the heavy rains and storm surge of the storm . The storm required the shutdown of North Carolina Highway 12 , the only highway connecting the area to the mainland , isolating those who decided to stay behind . Many residents lost power as numerous power lines fell from strong winds . Six brief tornadoes , ranging between F0 and F1 on the Fujita scale , struck the state within squall lines in the outer rainbands of Hurricane <unk> were recorded . Four tornadoes in Dare County , North Carolina , caused $ 256 @,@ 000 in damage . Near Cape Hatteras , wind severely damaged one structure , which lost its roof and some siding . 
 As the hurricane passed east of Virginia , it produced minimal rainfall and wind gusts of up to 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) . No one reported damage beyond some minor beach erosion in Sandbridge , Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 In Ocean City , Maryland , a brief period of heavy rainfall caused street flooding . High waves caused minimal beach erosion and overwash along the coastline . 
 High tides to 5 @.@ 9 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) occurred along the Delaware coastline . 
 Farther north , the storm caused widespread beach erosion along the Jersey Shore , while heavy rains caused street flooding . 
 The heaviest rains outside New England fell in Bridgehampton , New York , where 7 @.@ 18 inches ( 182 mm ) fell during the passage of the storm . Two reported tornadoes struck Long Island . High winds destroyed apple , corn , and peach fields along Long Island . After a dry summer , the sudden deluge wrecked potato crops , resulting in $ 20 million in crop damage ; , about one @-@ sixth of the agricultural output of the region . High winds caused power outages for 477 @,@ 765 Long Island Lighting Company customers for a period of nearly five days . Most power outages occurred in the East End . One person died in a car accident while a traffic light was offline , and another person died when a falling tree struck a train conductor . The high waves destroyed fish nets offshore and caused beach erosion and the widespread destruction of boats along the coast . Statewide damage totaled over $ 75 million . 
 = = = New England = = = 
 Before Bob made landfall in New England , it passed directly over Block Island , Rhode Island . Stations on the island recorded gusts to 105 mph ( 169 km / h ) near the upper end of their range , indicating that the winds were likely stronger . On the mainland , winds peaked at 90 mph ( 144 km / h ) in Narragansett . In the state , the storm surge — the rise of water above the normal tide — was 6 @.@ 6 ft ( 2 @.@ 0 m ) in the capital city of Providence , while the peak storm tide — the rise of water including the normal high tide — was 16 @.@ 5 ft ( 5 @.@ 0 m ) at the mouth of the Sakonnet River . At the latter location , the estimate was based on high @-@ water marks , which included wave effects . The high waves resulted in extensive beach erosion along the state 's coastline , which washed out several roads in Coventry . There was flooding reported along the Pocasset River . Rainfall in the state peaked at 7 @.@ 13 in ( 181 mm ) in North Foster . In Rhode Island , where the hurricane made landfall , Bob caused about 200 @,@ 000 power outages ; about 60 % of residents in the state and southeastern Massachusetts were left without power . During the storm , treatment plants spilled over 100 million tons of sewage due to overflow into Narragansett Bay . Damage totaled over $ 115 million . 
 While moving over Rhode Island , the strong winds of Bob extended westward into Connecticut , peaking at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) near Groton ; there , a gust of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) was reported . High winds downed trees in every county in the state , although wind damage was heaviest in the southeastern portion near the coast . Overall there were about 315 @,@ 000 people left without power in Connecticut . A man in Sterling died after being struck by a falling tree limb . The highest storm surge was 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in New London . Coastal flooding was limited to New London County , although coastal damage was minimal . One woman died while on a capsized sailboat . In Norwich , a rainfall total of 6 @.@ 22 in ( 158 mm ) was reported , which was the statewide peak . Flooding was minor , limited to streams and small rivers . Total damage in the state was estimated around $ 49 million , including $ 4 @.@ 5 million in crop damage . There was one death due to a fire that occurred during the storm 's passage , and there were five other deaths across the state . 
 The most significant area affected by Bob was Massachusetts , where over $ 1 billion in damage occurred . A C @-@ MAN station in Buzzards Bay recorded winds every hour and observed peak sustained winds of 77 mph ( 124 km / h ) , along with gusts to 89 mph ( 143 km / h ) . Sustained winds in the state peaked at 100 mph ( 161 km / h ) in Provincetown , and there was an unofficial report of a gust of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) in Brewster . The highest rainfall total in the state was 7 @.@ 06 in ( 179 mm ) in Westfield . Storm surges in the state were most significant along Buzzards Bay , peaking at 5 @.@ 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) in New Bedford and Woods Hole . High waves eroded the beach around Chatham Light , leaving behind a 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) cliff . Other locations , including southward @-@ facing shores along Martha 's Vineyard and Nantucket , lost 50 ft ( 15 m ) of beach from erosion . Boat damage was significant in the region . The hurricane left over 500 @,@ 000 people without power , including all of Cape Cod . Damage was heaviest from Buzzards Bay eastward to Cape Cod , and at least 61 houses were destroyed . Damage was also extensive to apple and peach orchards across these areas , and agricultural damage was estimated around $ 10 million . The state also suffered $ 69 million in damage to public property . 
 Although it remained offshore of the state , Bob produced strong winds in New Hampshire , with gusts reaching 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) at Pease Air National Guard Base . Mount Washington experienced 7 @.@ 46 in ( 189 mm ) of precipitation during the storm 's passage . Both the Lovell and <unk> rivers experienced flooding due to the storm , and widespread flooding occurred in urban areas in the south and central portions of the state . There were two deaths in the state , one from an automobile accident and the other due to a capsized boat . High winds downed widespread trees and power lines , causing 30 @,@ 000 people to lose power statewide . Damage was estimated around $ 2 million . In neighboring Vermont , the highest rainfall report was 4 @.@ 27 in ( 108 mm ) in Vernon . 
 Although moving across Maine as a tropical storm , Bob still maintained strong winds , producing gusts to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) in Portland . A station in <unk> reported a gust of 92 mph ( 148 km / h ) before it was blown away , and another station recorded a gust of 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) . A total of 169 @,@ 200 customers lost power during the hurricane , some of whom remaining without electricity for a week . There was a tornado reported in St. Albans , which downed multiple trees , damaged a few houses , and moved a boathouse three blocks away ; its status as a tornado was not confirmed . As it passed the region , the storm produced a 2 @.@ 77 ft ( 0 @.@ 84 m ) storm tide . The heaviest rainfall nationwide from the hurricane fell at the Portland International Jetport , where 8 @.@ 24 in ( 209 mm ) fell during its passage . This contributed to August 1991 being the wettest month on record in Portland . At the time , its 24 ‑ hour rainfall total of 7 @.@ 83 in ( 199 mm ) was the highest on record , although it was surpassed in October 1996 by an extratropical system fueled by Hurricane Lili . The rains from Bob led to a record flow rate along the <unk> River , although that record was also surpassed by the 1996 system . River flooding washed out five bridges and roads across southwestern Maine . One man died due to being swept away by floodwaters , and another died in the ocean while on a life raft . A total of 700 houses were affected by the storm , including one that was destroyed and three that sustained major damage . Damage in the area around Portland totaled over $ 25 @.@ 7 million , and there were three deaths . 
 = = = Atlantic Canada = = = 
 After causing severe damage in the United States , the remnants of Hurricane Bob moved into Atlantic Canada . The highest rainfall amount in the country was 4 @.@ 37 in ( 111 mm ) in northern New Brunswick . St. John 's , Newfoundland and Labrador recorded a record 1 inch ( 26 mm ) of rainfall during the storm 's passage . Gusty winds were observed across the region , and winds reached 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) in Digby , Nova Scotia . In Nova Scotia , two 17 @-@ year @-@ old girls were washed out to sea near Cape <unk> after being caught in rough swells produced by the storm . Rescue officials quickly began searching operations ; however , it was later confirmed that the two had drowned . In Fredericton , New Brunswick , tropical storm @-@ force winds downed trees and power lines , resulting in scattered power outages . Lightning associated with strong storms also reportedly struck some trees in the area . A two @-@ story home in Pointe @-@ Verte collapsed due to high winds . In Petit @-@ Rocher , five fishing boats sank after being overwhelmed by large swells at port . Firefighters in the area were surveying the town all night on August 20 , checking for downed power lines and trees . Power outages were also reported on Prince Edward Island . The storm left about $ 1 million in damage ( 1991 CAD ) on Grand Manan Island in the Bay of Fundy . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the storm 's passage , the Long Island Lighting Company used 165 workers to restore the power outages on Long Island . In Connecticut , state officials deployed about 200 trucks to remove debris on roads . The Massachusetts National Guard was activated to assist in relief efforts . In Rhode Island , a man was killed while repairing damage caused by Bob . Beaches in the state re @-@ opened by five days after the storm . The hurricane mixed the waters in Long Island Sound and prevented the algae bloom that happened in previous summers . In the days after Bob , the Commonwealth Electric Company brought electricians from outside the company and put their own workers on 16 ‑ hour shifts to restore power across Massachusetts . Most Massachusetts residents , excluding those living on Cape Cod , had their power restored within five days . The hurricane struck toward the end of the summer , which significantly impacted the tourism season already in the midst of a recession . The New England coast was affected by a powerful nor 'easter known as the Perfect Storm about two months after the hurricane struck the region . Some locations experienced worse damage from the October storm than from Bob . 
 Due to the high damage from Hurricane Bob , president George H.W. Bush declared the following states as disaster ( in order ) : Rhode Island , Massachusetts , Maine , Connecticut , New Hampshire , and New York . Damage in Maine was insufficient to qualify for individual family assistance . Instead , the declaration allocated federal funding to reimburse cities for debris removal , repairing damaged public buildings , and other municipal expenses for each of the states . Despite the declaration , the federal government did not immediately provide aid to the affected region . This was partially due to President Bush considering the storm a " disaster but not an emergency " , which therefore required cuts from other budgets to offset the relief aid . This was in opposition to the Democratic @-@ controlled Congress , who requested an expedited process . Because of its impact , the name Bob was retired by the World Meteorological Organization in the spring of 1992 , and will never be used again for an Atlantic hurricane . It was replaced with " Bill " in the 1997 season . 
 = Banjo @-@ Tooie = 
 Banjo @-@ Tooie is a platform video game developed by Rare and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 . It was first released on 19 November 2000 in North America and on 12 April 2001 in Europe , and later re @-@ released as an Xbox Live Arcade game for the Xbox 360 on 29 April 2009 . It is the second instalment in the Banjo @-@ Kazooie series and serves as a sequel to the original Banjo @-@ Kazooie . The story of the game follows series protagonists Banjo and Kazooie as they attempt to stop the plans of antagonist Gruntilda and her two sisters from <unk> the inhabitants of the game 's world . 
 Development of the game started in June 1998 , directly after the release of its predecessor . Several new features were cut from the game due to time constraints and limitations of the Nintendo 64 hardware . Banjo @-@ Tooie features levels that are significantly larger than those of its predecessor and requires the player to complete various challenges such as solving puzzles , collecting items , and defeating bosses . It also includes a multiplayer mode where up to four players can compete in several minigames . Upon release , the game sold more than three million copies and received critical acclaim from video game critics . The game is also included in the Rare Replay video game compilation , released for the Xbox One in 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Similar to its predecessor Banjo @-@ Kazooie , Banjo @-@ Tooie features three @-@ dimensional worlds containing items to be collected . Among the items are golden jigsaw pieces , called Jiggies , that are used to complete jigsaw puzzles that unlock the levels . Instead of exploring the hub world in search of incomplete puzzle boards as in Banjo @-@ Kazooie , a singular board is used within a temple where Master <unk> resides . Whenever the player has obtained the number of Jiggies required , a timed puzzle @-@ completion challenge can be played , after which <unk> grants access to each world . Each puzzle challenge requires more Jiggies than the last . 
 Musical notes return in Banjo @-@ Tooie , but are now used to learn new moves from Bottles ' brother , the drill sergeant <unk> , who assumes Bottles ' role from the first game . All of Banjo and Kazooie 's moves from the first game are immediately accessible in Banjo @-@ Tooie , and the player can acquire several new moves such as first @-@ person aiming , new egg types , and the ability to play as Banjo and Kazooie separately , with each gaining moves they can only use while on their own . Mumbo Jumbo also returns , this time as a playable character who can venture out into each world and use specific magic spells to help Banjo and Kazooie proceed . Taking over Mumbo 's previous role of transforming the duo into different forms is <unk> Wumba , a Native American woman who acts as Mumbo 's rival . 
 Another feature introduced in Banjo @-@ Tooie is the direct connections between its worlds . In Banjo @-@ Kazooie the titular duo would be transported to each level via special doors in Gruntilda 's lair , but in Banjo @-@ Tooie the levels are physically connected at multiple points and are effectively extensions of the Isle o ' Hags hub world . In addition , the train <unk> can be used to migrate minor characters between worlds which contain stations . The game also includes a multiplayer mode where up to four players can play each of the game 's single @-@ player minigames in customisable competitions . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two years following Gruntilda 's first defeat by Banjo and Kazooie , the two are playing poker with their friends Mumbo Jumbo and Bottles in Banjo 's house . Meanwhile , Gruntilda 's sisters <unk> and <unk> arrive in a large digging machine , the Hag 1 , and destroy the boulder trapping Gruntilda with a magical spell . Unfortunately Gruntilda 's time spent underground has rotted her flesh away and reduced her to a skeleton . Seeking revenge , Gruntilda destroys Banjo 's house before fleeing with her sisters . Banjo , Kazooie , and Mumbo escape the house , but Bottles , who stays behind believing it is all a joke , gets caught in the blast and is killed . The three remaining friends swear to track Gruntilda down and put an end to her plans . 
 Following the witches ' trail , Banjo and Kazooie arrive at <unk> Village on the Isle o ' Hags , where King Jingaling , king of all the <unk> , explains that his subjects were frightened away by the Hag 1 and scattered throughout the island . He gives the two their first Jiggy as a token of gratitude to help find them . Meanwhile , Gruntilda 's sisters introduce her to a cannon called the " Big @-@ O @-@ Blaster " ( B.O.B. ) that can suck the life force from any given target . They test B.O.B. on King Jingaling , who consequently is turned into a zombie . Gruntilda plans to charge B.O.B. long enough to blast the entire island and use the stolen life force to restore her body . The witch 's most loyal minion , Klungo , is sent out to hinder Banjo and Kazooie in their progress by fighting them , but after taking many beatings from Gruntilda as punishment for losing to them , Klungo eventually abandons her and sides with Banjo and Kazooie . 
 Finally reaching Gruntilda 's fortress at Cauldron Keep , Banjo and Kazooie confront the witch and her sisters in a trivia quiz show named the Tower of Tragedy Quiz in which losing competitors will be flattened under one @-@ tonne weights . <unk> and <unk> lose to Banjo and Kazooie , getting crushed , but Gruntilda escapes . Banjo and Kazooie then reverse the effects of B.O.B. , resurrecting both King Jingaling and Bottles , who celebrate at Bottles ' house along with Klungo . Banjo and Kazooie enter the top of the fortress and defeat Gruntilda , destroying most of her body and the Hag 1 along with her . The two return to Bottles ' house with their remaining friends ( <unk> , Mumbo , and Wumba ) to find that everyone else has celebrated without them , much to their disappointment . They instead head to Cauldron Keep and play a game of hacky @-@ sack with Gruntilda 's head , who vows to have her revenge . 
 = = Development = = 
 Banjo @-@ Tooie was developed by Rare and designed by Gregg Mayles , who previously worked on Banjo @-@ Kazooie . Development of the game started in June 1998 . Some features that were originally cut during the development of Banjo @-@ Kazooie , such as some of its worlds and a multiplayer game mode , were instead integrated into Banjo @-@ Tooie . An additional world set in a castle was planned , but due to time constraints , it was scrapped during development and assets from it were used in constructing Cauldron Keep . The game features roughly 150 total characters , including enemies and non @-@ playable characters . 
 Originally , Rare planned to include an additional mode , called Bottles ' Revenge , where a second player could play as an undead version of Bottles and take control of enemy characters to hinder Banjo in his quest , with the players swapping roles if the enemy character managed to defeat Banjo . The idea was ultimately scrapped because the developers ran out of time to debug it , despite admitting that " it did work rather well " . However , it would later serve as the inspiration behind the " Counter Operative " multiplayer mode in Perfect Dark . Bosses were originally to be able to be controllable by the second player as well , but the only boss that the developers had working when they dropped the mode was the third boss , ' Old King Coal ' . The developers also planned to implement a feature , called " Stop ' N ' Swop " , that would have allowed data to be transferred from Banjo @-@ Kazooie to Banjo @-@ Tooie so that players could unlock additional bonuses in Banjo @-@ Tooie . However , due to hardware limitations of the Nintendo 64 system , the feature was ultimately dropped . It is , however , included in the Xbox Live re @-@ release . Despite this , Rare decided to include at least some of the additional bonuses within the game . 
 The music was composed by Grant Kirkhope , who previously worked as the main composer for Perfect Dark , Donkey Kong 64 , and Banjo @-@ Kazooie . As Banjo @-@ Tooie was a larger game than its predecessor , Kirkhope had twice the memory space in the game 's cartridge for sound effects and music . Kirkhope initially had to pause his work on Banjo @-@ Tooie to work on other projects first , but ultimately the music score for the game was completed on time . Like the original , the themes heard in the game were designed to be interactive , which dynamically change to reflect the player 's location . Due to the game having larger memory space Kirkhope was able to combine two MIDI files to channel different fades of music when the player moves to different locations . The developers initially aimed for a fourth quarter 1999 release , but the game was ultimately delayed . Banjo @-@ Tooie was presented at the 2000 Electronic Entertainment Expo and released on 20 November 2000 . The game supports the Nintendo 64 Rumble Pak . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon release , Banjo @-@ Tooie was critically acclaimed and sold more than three million copies worldwide . Johnny Liu of Game Revolution considered Banjo @-@ Tooie to be a worthy successor to Banjo @-@ Kazooie and highlighted the scale of its worlds . Also commenting on the scale , GamePro remarked that the game is so large that players might lose their way and forget what they are supposed to do . Similarly , Jes Bickham of GamesRadar described Banjo @-@ Tooie as a game that requires a massive time @-@ investment on the player 's part , saying that " Keeping track of what you can do next , or where you can re @-@ visit to get something new , requires either a photographic memory or copious note @-@ taking " . 
 In a very positive review , Nintendo Power referred to Banjo @-@ Tooie as " the perfect cross between Donkey Kong 64 and Banjo @-@ Kazooie " , noting that it features less backtracking between levels that " [ Donkey Kong 64 ] over @-@ ambitiously played to the hilt " . The publication also stated that " If there 's one disappointment , it 's the halfhearted resolve of the Ice Key mystery introduced two years ago in Banjo @-@ Kazooie . " Shane Satterfield , writing for GameSpot , praised the game 's level design and progression , stating that the constant collecting of Jiggies " keeps the controller glued to your hand and your eyes in a fixed gaze " . 
 The graphics of the game were declared to be some of the best on the Nintendo 64 due to their rich textures , long drawing distance , and real @-@ time shadow generation , but were also criticised for their inconsistent frame rate during certain points in the game . Despite this , Satterfield noted that the action level of the game was normally low enough that it " does not significantly distract from the experience " . Liu of Game Revolution said that the graphics were " beautiful " , but admitted that the game did not meet the same level of awe as its predecessor . Despite the praise , Mark Green of N64 Magazine felt that although Banjo @-@ Tooie delivers " a decent complement of clever puzzles and enjoyable run @-@ and @-@ jump moments , it does not " feel as fresh or as exciting " as previous Rare platformers . The game earned the GameSpot 's Best Platform Game accolade for 2000 . 
 = = Re @-@ releases = = 
 An Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Tooie , developed by 4J Studios , was released for the Xbox 360 on 29 April 2009 . This version features a smoother frame rate and high @-@ definition graphics , and supports the " Stop ' N ' Swop " connectivity with the Xbox Live Arcade version of its predecessor , allowing players to unlock the bonuses included in the original Nintendo 64 version as well as new content related to the Xbox 360 . The Xbox Live Arcade version of Banjo @-@ Tooie received mixed to favourable reviews from video game critics , featuring an aggregate score of 73 out of 100 at Metacritic . In 2015 , the Xbox Live Arcade version of the game was included as part of the Rare Replay video game compilation for Xbox One . 
 = Hit ' Em Up = 
 " Hit ' Em Up " is a diss song by rap artist Tupac Shakur ( 2Pac ) , featuring his group the Outlawz . It is the B @-@ side to the single " How Do U Want It " , released on June 4 , 1996 , from the album All Eyez on Me . The song ’ s lyrics contain vicious insults to several East Coast rappers , chief among them , Shakur 's former friend turned rival , The Notorious B.I.G. , also known as Biggie Smalls . The song was recorded in Los Angeles , California at Can Am Studios in May 1996 . Reporter Chuck Philips , who interviewed Shakur at Can Am , described the song as " a caustic anti @-@ East Coast jihad in which the rapper threatens to eliminate Biggie , Sean Combs ( Puffy ) , and a slew of Bad Boy artists and other New York acts . " The song was produced by long @-@ time collaborator Johnny " J " and samples the bassline from " Don 't Look Any Further " by Dennis Edwards and interpolates " Get Money " by Biggie Smalls group Junior M.A.F.I.A. , which used the Dennis Edwards sample as well . The video , itself described as infamous , includes impersonations of Biggie , Puffy and Lil ' Kim . 
 " Hit ' Em Up " had a large role in exacerbating the East Coast – West Coast hip hop rivalry . Following its release , the East Coast rappers insulted in the song responded through tracks of their own . The controversy surrounding the song is due in part to Shakur ’ s murder only three months after its release . 
 The song is widely considered by the American hip hop community as one of the greatest " diss tracks " ever recorded due to its explicit lyrical content and the seriousness of violent intent by Shakur and his colleagues towards their competitors . 
 = = Origins = = 
 " Hit ' Em Up " was written and recorded in Can Am Studios in Los Angeles , California in May 1996 . For the song , Shakur recruited the members of the former group <unk> whom he had worked with previously , and was eager to work with again . Together , the rappers ( along with other associates ) formed the original lineup of the Outlawz . The first and third verses are performed by Shakur , while the second verse is performed by Hussein Fatal , the fourth by <unk> <unk> and the fifth by <unk> Mean . 
 The ferocity of Shakur 's raging vocals , as said by long @-@ time collaborator and producer of " Hit ' Em Up " Johnny " J " , was entirely authentic . He explained that Shakur was initially fueled by his anger against Biggie and Bad Boy Records for the belief that they had a role in the November 30 , 1994 ambush and attack on Shakur . He claimed that Biggie and his crew knew of his shooting and wanted him dead . Shakur used this fury , which Johnny " J " described as " superhuman " , to attack Biggie and other East Coast rappers . Johnny " J " also stated that he had never seen Shakur so angry and that the words he rapped were in no way an act , describing the recording process as the most " hard @-@ core he had ever done . " Although he was very happy with the work he had put into it and the resulting song , Johnny " J " went on to say that he had no desire to work on anything of that magnitude again . 
 Shakur was also enraged by Biggie 's release of " Who Shot Ya ? " provocatively only months after the shooting incident , and although it did not mention Shakur 's name , he believed it was directed towards him , but it was not . Shakur admitted to releasing " Hit ' Em Up " as a response to " Who Shot Ya ? " In a Vibe interview , the rapper called out Sean “ Puffy ” Combs and Biggie Smalls and accused both of them for setting him up , or obtaining knowledge of the attack , and not cautioning him . He also singled out business men James Rosemond ( " Jimmy Henchman " ) , and Jacques <unk> ( " Haitian Jack " ) of orchestrating the assault . Shakur announced the names of his ostensible conspirators to Kevin Powell , a journalist for Vibe ; however , to mask their true identities , Vibe referred to Henchman as “ Booker , ” and Jack as “ Nigel ” in the published interview . Persons familiar with the interview say they used different names after the magazine received threats from Henchman . A former Vibe editor denied receiving threats , but neglected to explain why the magazine substituted aliases for Henchman and Haitian Jack . 
 Henchman promised Shakur $ 7 @,@ 000 to duo with Lil Shawn , a rapper whom the business man represented at that time . In a 2008 article by Philips , Henchman was implicated in organizing the assault , and in 2012 by his long @-@ time friend Dexter Isaac , who confessed to attacking Shakur on Henchman 's orders . He was confirmed as a source for Philip 's earlier story and in Henchman 's own confession according to prosecutors at his 2012 trial . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The lyrics in " Hit ' Em Up " were aimed primarily at Biggie and Puffy . Shakur viciously insults Biggie throughout , the first line by Shakur is " That 's why I fucked your bitch , you fat motherfucker " , and threatens retaliation in " Hit ' Em Up " , saying " Now you 're about to feel the wrath of a menace . " He also used the song as a platform to express his belief that Biggie was guilty of stealing his style of rapping , and was merely imitating his lifestyle . This notion is addressed in the verse in " Now it 's all about Versace , you copied my style . " He also touches topically on their early friendship with the line " Biggie , remember when I used to let you sleep on the couch ? " and their subsequent fallout . Towards the end of the song Tupac disses Mobb Deep , saying " Don 't one of you niggas got sickle cell or something ? You fucking with me , nigga you fuck around and get a seizure or a heart attack " , referring to Prodigy , a member of Mobb Deep , suffering from sickle cell disease . Mobb Deep responded by releasing Drop a Gem on ' Em , which was released shortly after Tupac 's death , however recorded before . " Hit ' Em Up " features much profanity and was issued a Parental Advisory label , using the word " fuck " and " motherfucker " over 35 times in the song . 
 The bassline in " Hit ' Em Up " is taken from the 1984 Dennis Edwards song " Don 't Look Any Further " . The chorus of " Hit ' Em Up " is a play on the chorus of Junior <unk> 's " Player 's Anthem . " The phrase " take money " is repeated throughout the song , which is a play on Junior <unk> 's recent release " Get Money " , which is also the beat used in " Hit ' Em Up " . Faith Evans , who at the time was Biggie 's estranged wife , was reportedly seen with Shakur after a public breakup with Biggie . Journalist Chuck Philips spotted Faith Evans at Can Am when he interviewed Shakur a year earlier in 1995 . People at the studio told the reporter that Faith Evans also contributed — that the R & B chanteuse recorded one or more “ Take Money ” background vocals that would appear on “ Hit Em Up . ” In his October 1995 interview of the rapper , Philips remembered in 2012 , " I was so unaware of the bi @-@ coastal rap war that I suspected nothing when Faith Evans appeared with Shakur at Can Am . The estranged wife of Biggie was recording background vocals for " Wonder Why They Call U Bitch " , a song which was at the time yet to be released . According to Shakur she had given him gifts of clothing , which he offered as proof of a relationship in an interview . Using this against Biggie in " Hit ' Em Up " , Shakur continued to fuel the rumors of a sexual relationship with Evans in the song 's line " You claim to be a player , but I fucked your wife . " Claims of an affair with Evans appear three times in the song . 
 Shakur also attacked many other people associated with Bad Boy Records and with Biggie , such as Lil ' Kim and Junior M.A.F.I.A. He exclaimed that their lifestyle and what they rapped about were fraudulent , and that they were not from the streets . He believed that they were only perpetuating the drama and did not understand the situation they were getting into . Bronx rapper Chino XL was also insulted for vulgar comments he made about Shakur on his song " <unk> ! " . In the original recording , Shakur also insulted Jay Z at the ending segment , but removed it after being convinced by Outlawz members that Carter had nothing to do with the conflict between Death Row and Bad Boy . After Jay Z 's debut album ( which featured Biggie on " Brooklyn 's Finest " ) was subsequently released after " Hit ' Em up " , Shakur included Jay Z amongst the many other East Coast rappers to be insulted in his next studio album . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Hit ' Em Up " was filmed in a warehouse off Slauson Avenue near Fox Hills Mall in Los Angeles in May 1996 . It was filmed by the production company Look Hear Productions . Shakur raps in a white room with The Outlawz , as well as in purple @-@ caged room and a black room with bullet holes in the background . TV monitors in the background show clips of Shakur , Puffy , and Biggie Smalls , and even clips from the video " Made Niggaz . " The video featured actors who were recalled from their prior roles in the music video for " 2 of <unk> Most Wanted " to impersonate some of those who were attacked in " Hit ' Em Up . " This included Biggie , whose stand @-@ in stares <unk> into the camera and sports a <unk> and jacket , similar to one Biggie would wear . During the moments where Shakur raps about his claimed affair with Evans , the Biggie impersonator crouches near the camera while Shakur yells in his face . Puffy is also impersonated , appearing with a high @-@ top fade and leaning towards the camera , lowering and raising his sunglasses . 
 During the shooting of the video , Shakur was engaged in an argument with someone , who was heard telling him " You 'll get shot . " His armed bodyguard assured him that he had nothing to worry about . He also broke up a fight involving his friend Muta during the filming , and fired a production assistant on set . The assistant was answering Shakur 's pager and returning his personal calls without his consent . Many callers were confused or angry that a female assistant was answering Shakur 's calls . The assistant had mistakenly lost the pager , and with Shakur already growing wary of her , fired her for that reason . 
 Like the song , the video for " Hit ' Em Up " has also been called " infamous " . The pro @-@ West Coast track 's music video featured the members crushing buildings in Manhattan , which was already done in another pro @-@ West Coast music video for " New York , New York " by Tha Dogg Pound earlier . The music video for " Hit ' Em Up " can be found on Tupac : Live at the House of Blues DVD . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Upon finishing the recording of the song , Shakur felt very positively about the track , saying the " song is going to be playing in every club . <unk> are calling from everywhere , wanting to get a piece of this . " " Hit ' Em Up " appeared first as a B @-@ side , on the single " How Do U Want It " , by Shakur featuring The Outlawz . On June 4 , 1996 under the label Death Row Records , " Hit ' Em Up " was released on compact disc , 12 @-@ inch , and a 45 RPM . The original cover for the single had Puffy 's head on a snake 's body , and Biggie 's head on a pig 's . It also appeared posthumously on several compilations , including the 2004 release of Shakur 's last recorded live performance , Live at the House of Blues . " Hit ' Em Up " was also remixed on Nu @-@ <unk> <unk> . Upon its release , " Hit ' Em Up " received frequent radio airplay , which was attributed to the public interest in the ongoing feud and radio stations ' desire to garner high ratings . However , some radio stations , such as the Los Angeles @-@ based <unk> , refused to play it . The follow @-@ up to " Hit ' Em Up " was the song " Bomb First ( My Second Reply ) " . 
 " Hit ' Em Up " has been called " controversial , " " infamous , " " disturbing , " and " brutal . " Shakur 's insults against virtually the entire East Coast scene of rappers were said to be ferocious . The song , along with " Dear Mama , " has been viewed as one of Shakur 's songs that resonated with and was spoken of the most by young people . Some felt that " Hit ' Em Up " showcased Shakur ranting and raving like a fool , and J.R. Reynolds of Billboard called it horrendous , noting that Shakur revealed his true colors upon recording the song . He also went on to say that although sympathetic to the shooting , " Hit ' Em Up " had " fan [ <unk> ] the flames of hatred ... and affect [ ed ] an entire black culture 's psyche " ; he called the song " repugnant and unacceptable . " Among associates of Shakur , it was called a " bad @-@ luck song . " Los Angeles radio director Bruce St. James called the song " the be @-@ all , end @-@ all , curse @-@ word , dirty @-@ lyric , violent song of all time " [ sic ] . Game 's manager has called it the best diss record . Documentary filmmaker Carl Weston believed that " most people in Biggie 's shoes would have wanted to at least hurt Tupac " in a Spin magazine interview . 
 Among musicians , the song drew criticism from singer Dionne Warwick , and disapproval from fellow rappers Kool Moe Dee and Chuck D , as written in their book There 's a God on the Mic : The True 50 Greatest MCs . They felt that although Shakur was one of the most substantive rappers of that period , he had gone too far with " Hit ' Em Up , " causing some of Shakur 's fans to turn on him , according to the two rappers . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Shakur and the Death Row crew attended a boxing match in Las Vegas , where he was murdered in 1996 . In retrospect of the events which ensued only a few months afterward , the song has been viewed as the turning point in the feud between Shakur and Biggie , where things were said and sung which could never be taken back during the remainder of Shakur 's life . This has led to it being dubbed as the beginning of the war between the East Coast and the West Coast , and the centerpiece in what became the most venomous battle in rap history . 
 In 2002 , Chuck Philips reported that the Crips ' Orlando Anderson pulled the trigger that killed Shakur and Biggie helped pay for the gun . Although Biggie 's family produced computerized receipts to show that Biggie was in the studio at the time of the murder , The New York Times called the evidence " inconclusive " noting : 
 The pages purport to be three computer printouts from Daddy 's House , indicating that Wallace was in the studio recording a song called Nasty Boy on the afternoon Shakur was shot . They indicate that Wallace wrote half the session , was In and out / sat around and laid down a ref , shorthand for a reference vocal , the equivalent of a first take . But nothing indicates when the documents were created . And Louis Alfred , the recording engineer listed on the sheets , said in an interview that he remembered recording the song with Wallace in a late @-@ night session , not during the day . He could not recall the date of the session but said it was likely not the night Shakur was shot . " We would have heard about it , " Mr. Alfred said . " 
 Philips ' article was based on police affidavits and court documents as well as interviews with investigators , witnesses to the crime and members of the Southside Crips who had never before discussed the killing outside the gang . As Assistant Managing Editor of the LA Times Mark <unk> wrote : " Philips ' story has withstood all challenges to its accuracy , ... [ and ] remains the definitive account of the Shakur slaying . " 
 " Hit ' Em Up " has been studied by and with academics , and it has been used as a part of a series of lessons for building the means to communicate with younger people . Its main role in these lessons is to define anger in rap music . Biggie was shot and killed six months after Shakur 's death . 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = From Biggie = = = 
 After hearing " Hit ' Em Up " Biggie continued proclaiming his innocence in the shooting incident . He also remarked that the song " Who Shot Ya ? " was written before Shakur was shot and thus , was not about him . Regarding the lyrics aimed at his wife Faith , Biggie expressed an inability to find merit in what Shakur had claimed . He believed that Shakur intended to attack him through Faith , although he remained unsure of whether an encounter between them had occurred . Ultimately , he thought that if something had occurred it was none of his business , and that Shakur should not have publicly disclosed this information in a song . Biggie responded to this matter in a similar fashion to " Hit ' Em Up " , rapping in a joint release by himself and Jay @-@ Z in the song " Brooklyn 's Finest " , where he says " If Faye have twins , she 'd probably have two <unk> . Get it ? Tupac 's ? " Shortly after the release of " Hit ' Em Up " , Evans went on the radio and denied that she had been with Shakur . 
 = = = From other artists = = = 
 Puffy had trouble understanding the sheer rage Shakur had expressed for Biggie in " Hit ' Em Up " . He also responded by reinforcing his and Biggie 's innocence regarding the shooting and went on to say that prior to the incident they " were friends " , and that they " would have never done nothing to hurt him . " In an interview with Vibe Magazine concerning Shakur 's allegations of Biggie and Puffy having prior knowledge of the ambush , Puffy stated : 
 He ain 't mad at the niggas that shot him ; he knows where they 're at . He knows who shot him . If you ask him , he knows , and everybody in the street knows , and he 's not stepping to them , because he knows that he 's not gonna get away with that shit . To me , that 's some real sucker shit . Be mad at everybody , man ; don 't be using niggas as scapegoats . We know that he 's a nice guy from New York . All shit aside , Tupac is a nice , good @-@ hearted guy . 
