 = = = Junior 's Grill = = = 
 Junior 's Grill was a restaurant located in East Campus next to Tech Tower . The restaurant was first opened in 1948 under the name Pilgrim 's and was originally located on the corner of North Avenue and Techwood Drive . Its name changed to Junior 's Grill in 1958 , and it moved locations twice since then . Junior 's Grill moved to its former location in the Bradley Building in 1994 when it was forced out of its old location by the need to construct apartments for the 1996 Summer Olympics . It was owned and operated by Tommy <unk> , a Tech ' EE grad . 
 The former restaurant housed pieces of Tech history , including aerial photographs of campus from various years , assorted Georgia Tech memorabilia , portraits of prominent individuals in Tech 's history , and a section of the goalpost from Tech 's 1990 National Championship game in the Citrus Bowl . Junior 's Grill closed April 2011 , citing slow business as the reason . 
 = = = Homecoming = = = 
 Georgia Tech Homecoming is a celebration held once a year for alum of the Institute to return to campus and take part in several festivities and Institute traditions . The themed homecoming festivities all lead up to a Saturday football contest . The events are usually lead off with various Greek sports tournaments followed by the Mini 500 , Freshman Cake Race , and the Wreck Parade . Every year the student body elects a Mr. and Ms. Georgia Tech . These are two individuals who have excelled in academics and <unk> on Tech campus . The titles changed from homecoming king and queen to Mr. and Ms. Georgia Tech in 1987 at the request of Dean James E. Dull . 
 The first homecoming was organized by ANAK in 1916 . In 2008 , Georgia Tech hosted the Virginia Cavaliers for its 92nd homecoming celebration and ended a twelve game win streak in homecoming contests . Tech is 44 @-@ 13 @-@ 1 since 1949 in its homecoming football games . 
 = = = = Mini 500 = = = = 
 The Mini 500 is a tricycle race held during homecoming every year that requires teams to complete laps around Peters Parking Deck on East Campus . Men must complete 15 laps , while women must complete 10 . There are mandatory pit stops in which the front tire must be rotated 3 times during the course of the race . Because the average racer weighs more than the average 5 @-@ year @-@ old , the car is allowed one support brace to be welded onto the frame . 
 The race traces its roots back to the early 1960s , when fraternity pledges were forced to ride tricycles around campus as a form of hazing . The race was eventually formalized in 1969 , and rules were instituted to make the Mini 500 an instant classic . 
 = = = = Wreck Parade = = = = 
 The Ramblin ' Wreck Parade is a parade of classic cars and engineering oddities held before every homecoming football game . There are three classes of vehicles , which participate in the competition . The first class is known simply as classic cars and these are vehicles over a certain age limit ( currently 25 years ) . The second class is known as fixed bodies and these vehicles are normal cars , which have only been cosmetically modified retaining their original drive train . These are often themed , but are distinctly different from floats and are prohibited from being " pseudo @-@ wrecks displaying <unk> " . The third class is the contraption category and these vehicles feature drive trains completely fabricated by students ranging from pendulum propulsion to pulse jet engines . Vehicles must feature an " indirect " drive system and are judged both on creativity and effective operation . 
 The Wreck parade dates back to 1929 when The Technique began an " Old Ford Race " to Athens . In 1932 , the race was deemed unsafe by the administration so a parade of contraptions was created to subdue student protests . The parade has run every year since 1932 except for the years of 1942 @-@ 1943 . The American fuel shortage caused by World War II stopped the parade . In 1944 , the parade was renewed except the contraptions had to be human powered . Gasoline power was allowed again in 1946 . 
 = = = = Freshman Cake Race = = = = 
 The Freshman Cake Race is a foot race from the Russ Chandler Stadium to Bobby Dodd Stadium that takes place before sunrise ( about 6 : 00 am ) on the morning of the homecoming game . This distance is about a one @-@ half mile , so the crowd of several hundred participants engages in a mad sprint over the relatively short distance . The race runs through the middle of the campus 's Greek sector and is often subject to tampering by fraternity students . The competitors are supposed to be freshmen ( students with less than 30 hours of credit ) , and the race is split up by gender . The winners receive cakes baked by faculty , alumni , or students , and all participants receive cupcakes . The winners also receive a kiss from Mr. or Ms. Georgia Tech at the homecoming half @-@ time show . 
 The race began as a cross @-@ country race in 1911 . In 1913 , the winners received cakes from wives , mothers , and other women affiliated with Tech . The race was initially mandatory for all students . 
 = = = Spirit Organizations = = = 
 = = = = Ramblin ' Reck Club = = = = 
 The Ramblin ' Reck Club was founded in 1930 as the Yellow Jacket Club to help bolster school spirit . Coach William Alexander found campus spirit to be particularly low during the Great Depression . His successful football program and the other athletic teams had very few student fans attending the games . In 1930 , Alexander approached Professor Fred Wenn about organizing and founding such a club , who agreed to take up the task . 
 The Yellow Jacket Club helped facilitate the Freshman Cake Race and helped to organize the first Wreck Parades in 1932 . The Yellow Jacket Club were the strict student enforcement of the freshmen RAT rules as well . The Yellow Jacket Club maintained prestige and political power on campus until late 1944 . The Yellow Jacket Club was in charge of the 1945 school @-@ wide Spring Social and failed to properly organize the event . The Technique , Blueprint , and Omicron Delta Kappa rejuvenated the major event but the Yellow Jackets ' reputation was severely tarnished . On May 8 , 1945 the Yellow Jacket Club staged a last @-@ ditch effort to reorganize the traditions club but by July 14 , 1945 the club was disbanded . 
 When new freshmen arrived on campus in 1945 , the student body was concerned that traditions would be lost with the disbandment of the Yellow Jackets . A new traditions club was actively pursued by Anak to instill the rich Tech tradition into new freshmen . The new club was the Ramblin ' Reck Club and it was established in late July 1945 . The first order of business for the new Ramblin ' Reck Club was to stage a Pep Meeting and traditions review for new freshmen . Reck Club was designed to prevent political domination by individual social fraternities as Yellow Jacket Club had been . Membership in Reck Club was limited to two individuals per fraternity or military ROTC program . A group known as the T @-@ Club was charged with upholding the RAT rules with incoming freshmen . 
 Four years after Tech became coed , Reck Club became the first non @-@ faith based organization on campus to admit a female member . Paula Stevenson was the club 's first female member in 1956 . Under Reck Club , the strict RAT rules slowly faded away . Anti @-@ hazing laws severely diminished Reck Club 's ability to punish Tech freshmen for disobeying the RAT rules in 1965 . By 1967 , the Club was given a more wholesome duty . 
 Reck Club was given charge of the Ramblin ' Wreck in 1967 following the disbandment of the Student Council 's Reck Committee . A member from Reck Club known as the Wreck Driver has been elected annually since 1967 to drive the Wreck onto Grant Field for football games and other school functions . 
 Reck Club was the first group to make attempts at humanoid mascots on Tech Campus . The first was a bee costume donned by Judi McNair of Reck Club . She sported her bee costume to home basketball games and pep rallies . In 1973 , a spandex @-@ clad hero named T @-@ Man and his faithful sidekick T2 patrolled campus in search of opposing mascots and fans . T @-@ Man would perform spirit skits at pep rallies and home basketball games . Often seen riding in the Ramblin ' Wreck , T @-@ Man was an anonymous member of the Reck Club until his mysterious disappearance in 1975 . 
 The Ramblin ' Reck Club today oversees several homecoming traditions such as the Freshman Cake Race , the Mini 500 , and the Wreck Parade . Reck Club also serves as a bridge between Georgia Tech Athletics and the Georgia Tech student body organizing the Swarm cheering section , pep rallies , flashcards sections , and other spirit related events . 
 = = = = Bull Dog Club = = = = 
 The Bull Dog Club was an honor society created in 1910 originally as a social branch of Tech 's <unk> Society . The Bull Dogs first major role was facilitating the first cross country races that eventually evolved into the Freshman Cake Race . The Bull Dogs only admitted rising juniors and seniors into their ranks in order to maintain prestige and honor in the club . 
 The Bull Dogs rise to Institute prominence also lead to their eventual demise . The Bull Dogs put a particular emphasis on mediating campus @-@ wide sporting events . The Bull Dogs utilized their Cake Race ties to the Athletic Association in order to coordinate the first <unk> on the athletic playing fields . 
 The Bull Dogs also aided in spirit and tradition upkeep on campus by aiding in Ramblin ' Wreck Parade judging , homecoming queen selection , and homecoming dance planning . Despite the Bull Dogs roles in homecoming celebrations , their intramural coordination became their primary focus by the 1960s . With the planning of the Student Athletic Center , <unk> were placed under official Institute control rather than the Bull Dogs and in 1969 the Bull Dogs were disbanded , relinquishing all homecoming duties to Ramblin ' Reck Club and the student government . 
 = = = = Georgia Tech Bands = = = = 
 The Georgia Tech Bands are student musical groups fielded at many of the home athletic and schoolwide events . None of the musicians receive scholarships for participating in the assorted bands meaning the bands are composed entirely of volunteers . 
 Every home football game and most away games include a 300 member Georgia Tech marching band performing during dead ball time and half @-@ time . The GT Bands also field smaller pep bands at home basketball , ice hockey , and volleyball games . The bands are known to follow teams for special events such as bowl games and basketball tournaments . The ice hockey pep band in particular travels to Savannah every year for the Thrasher cup . The band has some of the richest traditions on campus , including a strict enforcement of RAT caps amongst first year band members , no matter their actual year in college . 
 The first Georgia Tech bands were formed in 1908 and led by Robert " Biddy " Bidez . Bidez lead the group until his graduation in 1912 . He was succeeded by another student named Mike Greenblatt who continued in Bidez 's footsteps until 1913 . Greenblatt wrote the first versions of " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " . The first professional band director was Frank " Wop " Roman . Roman is noted for writing Tech 's Alma Mater as well as " Up With the White and Gold " . Roman copyrighted " Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech " in 1919 and led the bands until his death in 1928 . Since Roman there have been seven professional band directors . The directors have had varying levels of success and longevity . 
 = = = = Swarm = = = = 
 The Swarm is a spirit group consisting of 900 Georgia Tech students found seated along the north end zone during home football games and on the court during basketball games . The Swarm was started by the Suzanne " Suzy Swarm " Robinson of the Ramblin ' Reck Club in 1996 to increase the amount of student participation in the stands . The Swarm was only 250 members when it began in 1996 . The group increased to 650 members by 2001 and is currently 900 members strong . All Swarm members donate to the Alexander @-@ Tharpe fund and are given gold t @-@ shirts before every football and basketball season . One of the more popular traditions amongst Swarm members is the " Running of the Swarm . " Because all Swarm seating is general admission , there are no reserved seats . The Swarm members must run once the gate is opened to get the best seats . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 A flashcard display is performed at every home football game by students . The flashcard section was first formed in 1957 by an organization known as the Block @-@ T Club . The idea for a flashcard section and group to organize its efforts was conceived by members of the Sigma Chi fraternity . Through the support of Ramblin ' Reck Club the first flashcard section featured 400 freshmen and highly coordinated flashcard images . The original flashcard sections were completely voluntary but now the Swarm maintains the tradition as a mandatory requirement of being a member of Swarm . 
 = = = = Goldfellas = = = = 
 The Goldfellas are a group of Georgia Tech <unk> that paint their entire bodies yellow spelling out witty phrases in black letters on their chest . These painted fans attend every home football game and are located behind the South end zone goalpost . Occasionally , the Goldfellas will attend home basketball , volleyball , or other sporting events . The group had its origins in the 1998 Georgia Tech football season , when a group of guys painted up for the homecoming game against the favored Virginia Cavaliers , the second of the fabled 41 @-@ 38 games . The Jackets upset the Cavaliers and the tradition was started and passed on by residents in the now defunct Area II dormitories . Each member is given a unique face design that is retired upon his graduation . The group is not considered an official club as its members do not bow to any charters and are not affiliated with Swarm . The Goldfellas take pride in their complete lack of clothing besides a yellow wig and gym shorts . The group never sits during the course of a football game , not even during halftime . The largest gathering of the Goldfellas occurred in the 2007 football game against rival University of Georgia with over 80 Tech students painted up with the Goldfellas for the event . 
 = = = Fight songs = = = 
 = = = = Up With the White and Gold = = = = 
 Oh well it 's up with the White and Gold , 
 Down with the Red and Black , 
 Georgia Tech is out for a victory . 
 We 'll drop the battle @-@ axe on Georgia 's head , 
 When we meet her our team is sure to beat her . 
 Down on the old farm there will be no sound 
 Till our bow @-@ wows rip through the air ; 
 When the battle is over Georgia 's team will be found 
 With the Yellow Jackets swarming around ! 
 = = = = Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech = = = = 
 I 'm a Ramblin ' Wreck from Georgia Tech is Georgia Tech 's fight song . The composition is based on Son of a Gambolier by Charles Ives ( 1895 ) , and the lyrics are based on an old English and Scottish drinking song of the same name . Ramblin ' Wreck is played after every Georgia Tech score ( directly after a field goal / safety and preceded by Up With the White and Gold after a touchdown ) in a football game , and frequently during timeouts at basketball games . The title refers to the Ramblin ' Wreck , one of Tech 's mascots and a nickname for Tech students . 
 = = = = Alma Mater = = = = 
 Oh , sons of Tech , arise , behold ! 
 The banner as it reigns supreme , 
 For from on high the White and Gold 
 Waves in its triumphant gleam . 
 The spirit of the cheering throng 
 <unk> with joy revealing 
 A brotherhood in praise and song , 
 In memory of the days gone by . 
 Oh , Scion of the Southland ! 
 In our hearts you shall forever fly . 
 We cherish thoughts so dear for thee , 
 Oh , Alma Mater , in our prayer . 
 We plead for you in victory , 
 And in the victory we share ! 
 But when the battle seems in vain 
 Our spirits never falter , 
 We 're ever one in joy or pain , 
 And our union is a lasting bond . 
 Oh ! May we be united . 
 Till the victory of life is won . 
 = = = = Budweiser Song = = = = 
 At every football game and every home basketball game , the fans of Georgia Tech perform an unusual dance at the end of the 3rd quarter in football and during the second to last television timeout of basketball . The dance is a simple bobbing motion which alternates every other person ( simulating the up @-@ and @-@ down motion of the heads of the familiar team of Clydesdale horses ) and is performed to the tune of an old Budweiser jingle . The Georgia Tech additional lyrics are as follows : 
 Go Georgia Tech ! 
 Go Georgia Tech ! 
 Go Georgia Tech ! 
 Go Georgia Tech ! 
 When you say Bud ... <unk> , you 've said it all ! 
 = = = Pi Mile Road Race = = = 
 The Dean George C. Griffin Pi Mile 5K Road Race is run annually in the Spring on the Georgia Tech campus . One of the longest continually running races in Atlanta , it is named after former Dean of Students , George C. Griffin , in honor of his tenure as a track and cross country coach . The race founder is alumnus L. <unk> " Mac " Anderson , class of 1967 . The first race in 1973 was 3 miles long and was expanded to 3 @.@ 14 miles after 1975 — hence the Pi Mile . In 2002 , the race distance was slightly shortened to 5 kilometers , <unk> to attract more runners . Another race tradition is the Ghost Run , where all the entrants sign up as George P. Burdell ; participants pay the fee and get a t @-@ shirt but do not have to run . 
 Part of the race is run along the Tyler Brown Pi @-@ Mile Trail , a 3 @.@ 14 @-@ mile running course around well @-@ lit areas of the Georgia Tech campus , designated with disc @-@ shaped markers and maps along the way . Tyler Brown was a former Student Government Association President who ran daily for ROTC and pushed heavily for a well @-@ lit and safe running trail . Tyler Brown was killed in action in Iraq on September 14 , 2004 . The trail was completed in December 2004 and was dedicated in his honor in April 2005 . 
 = = Legends = = 
 = = = Yellow Jackets = = = 
 The term Yellow Jacket or Yellowjacket has been used to refer to students and the various sports teams as early as the 1890s . Fans of Georgia Tech would often wear yellow jackets to sporting events in support of the early Georgia Tech teams . The early football teams , lacking gold fabric for jerseys , wore yellow jerseys . John Heisman told the Atlanta Constitution that he wanted his teams to be referred to as the Yellow Jackets in October 1905 . In November 1906 , the Atlanta Journal portrayed a University of Georgia football player being attacked by a yellowjacket with the words " Somebody 's going to get stung " as the caption . This would be the first time and not the last time that the Georgia Tech sports teams would be referred to as the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets . 
 Buzz Bee became the anthropomorphized Yellow Jacket in 1979 . He was initially an impromptu student volunteer but is now an official cheerleader that requires an intense tryout process . This Buzz character would be the model for a new Georgia Tech emblem , designed in 1985 by Mike Lester . 
 = = = George P. Burdell = = = 
 The legendary imaginary Tech student George P. Burdell who enrolled in 1927 is said to possess nearly every degree Georgia Tech offers , after many students took a variety of classes in his name . In 1927 , a student , receiving 2 enrollment forms , also enrolled as George P. Burdell and attended as both names , so Burdell obtained a B.S. 1930 , got a Master 's , and in World War II , went to Harvard and joined the Army Air Forces . Since the 1960s , some students have managed to re @-@ enroll George P. Burdell in the Institute registrar 's computers . When Tech switched to online class registration , Burdell took every course offered that term . After initially vigorously searching for the hackers , the Institute has since accepted the presence of George P. Burdell in every year 's class . George P. Burdell is also a common tool for pranks at various school events and games . He usually gets paged over the stadium public address system at away sporting events . 
 = = = The Cumberland Game = = = 
 In 1916 , Georgia Tech 's football team ( coached by John Heisman — for whom the trophy is named ) defeated Cumberland 222 @-@ 0 , the largest margin of victory in college football history . Cumberland 's total net yardage was -28 ( minus 28 ) , and it had only one play for positive yards . Cumberland did not record a first down . Georgia Tech scored every time it got the ball ; although one page on Cumberland 's web site says that Georgia Tech scored on every offensive play , the play @-@ by @-@ play posted on its site indicates otherwise . Cumberland beat Georgia Tech 's baseball team 22 to 0 the previous year , reportedly with the help of professional players Cumberland had hired as " ringers , " an act which apparently infuriated Heisman . 
 = = = 41 – 38 = = = 
 41 – 38 is the score of two victories by Georgia Tech over Virginia in college football . 
 In 1990 , Virginia won its first seven games and raced out to a # 1 ranking in both polls . Undefeated but unheralded Georgia Tech came into Scott Stadium in Charlottesville and beat the Cavaliers 41 – 38 on a last @-@ second field goal by Scott Sisson . This victory set off celebrations back in Atlanta that culminated in GT students breaking into Bobby Dodd Stadium , closed for the road game that weekend , and tearing down a goalpost ( a common victory celebration when a game is played on one 's home field ) . GT went on to be ACC champion and co @-@ national champion with Colorado that season , which included Colorado 's Fifth Down Game against Missouri . Virginia 's season spiraled downhill from there , going 1 – 3 to finish 8 – 4 and ranked only # 22 . 
 In 1998 , the first year since 1990 that both teams had come into this game with high hopes , # 25 GT hosted undefeated # 7 UVA , and again pulled off the upset . This time , the Jackets came from three touchdowns behind and survived a 54 @-@ yard field goal miss by UVA kicker Todd Braverman as time ran out . Since then , any time the two teams have met with rankings and bowl positions on the line , GT fans have used " 41 – 38 " as a rallying cry , similar to Miami fans ' " Wide Right " against Florida State . 
 = = = Sideways the Dog = = = 
 Sideways ( March 1 , 1945 – August 14 , 1947 ) was a black and white female terrier who was thrown from a car near the Georgia Tech campus . Her injuries left the front and rear portions of her body out of alignment with each other and caused her to walk with an off @-@ center gait , leading to her nickname . She was a favorite of the students , and often slept in a different dorm room every night , being fed through the generosity of the student body and Brittain Dining Hall . She would often wander into classes and sleep during boring lectures . 
 Sideways died after accidentally ingesting some rat poison in one of the dorm rooms , and is buried on the grounds near the southeast corner of Tech Tower . A plaque marks her resting spot and briefly tells her story . It reads , " Sideways . Ever faithful and true . Companion of student body of Ga . Tech . " 
 The headstone was recently rotated 90 degrees clockwise from what is shown in the picture at right so that Sideways may be in death as she was in life . 
 = = = Stumpy 's bear = = = 
 After defeating the California Golden Bears in the 1929 Rose Bowl Game , Tech fullback Jack " Stumpy " Thomason acquired a live bear while in California . He brought the bear back to Tech and raised the bear in Atlanta . Named Bruin , the bear made a habit of drinking too much beer and rummaging through Midtown Atlanta dumpsters . After a lot of Atlantan complaints and two arrests by local police , Stumpy agreed to cage Bruin in Bobby Dodd Stadium . Bruin left Tech campus with Stumpy when Stumpy was acquired by the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1930 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 From 1940 to 1987 , Tech offered a class called <unk> , which was required for graduation for students . The class was developed by Coach Fred <unk> for the Naval School , which was located at Georgia Tech before and during World War II . He taught students how to float in water for extended periods of time with ankles and wrists bound , how ( unbound ) to swim 50 yards ( 46 m ) underwater , and other water survival skills . At the time it was considered a prime example of the difficulty of Tech 's curriculum , and referred to in jest by students as " Drowning 101 . " 
 = = = ANAK Society = = = 
 The ANAK Society is said to be the only official secret society on campus . Since its founding in 1908 , the ANAK Society has selected seniors who " exhibit a true love for Georgia Tech through their campus involvement and compassion for their fellow students , " according to their website . While members used to be publicly selected at the semi @-@ annual IFC dances when they were " tapped " on the shoulder , membership in the Society has been secret since 1960 . Only when members reach graduation are they publicly announced in The Technique . Most of the work of the Society is conducted anonymously with members seeking no recognition for their service . ANAK claims to have had a hand in establishing The Technique , The Blueprint , the Student Government Association , the Ramblin ' Reck Club , and Tech 's peaceful integration . 
 = = Jargon = = 
 = = = North Avenue Trade School = = = 
 Georgia Tech is sometimes called the " North Avenue Trade School , " although this was never its official title . The name stems from the fact that the campus is bordered to the south by North Avenue , and that the school in its earlier years was operated much like a trade school , with students working part of the day in a machine shop , and the other part of the day in classrooms . Today the name is still used in a humorous manner : the campus bookstore even sells shirts bearing the name " North Avenue Trade School . " 
 = = = The Institute = = = 
 Traditionally , Georgia Tech has been called " the Institute " while discouraging the nicknames " the university " or " the college " . The Institute had been divided into " Schools " which are now called " Colleges " for each field of study . When Georgia Tech 's football team played the University of Miami for its 2006 Homecoming game , several students were seen wearing gold t @-@ shirts that said , " Screw the U , Fear the I ! " ( mocking Miami 's tradition of being called the U ) . 
 The Georgia Institute of Technology is one of only five Division I Bowl Subdivision football programs without " University " in the school 's name . The others are Boston College and the three service academies ( United States Air Force Academy , United States Military Academy and the United States Naval Academy ) . 
 = = = Getting <unk> = = = 
 " Getting shafted " generally refers to the rigorous academic difficulty of Georgia Tech 's curriculum . The physical manifestation of this phrase is the Kessler Campanile , a " shaft @-@ like " structure near the Student Center . The phallic shape of the structure invites its designation as a shafting device . 
 = = = The Ratio = = = 
 The Ratio ( always capitalized ) refers to Georgia Tech 's traditionally high ratio of male to female students . 
 = = = TBS = = = 
 Due to the Ratio ( always capitalized , see above ) , some students have felt that certain women at Georgia Tech may be stuck up because of all the attention they get from an overwhelming number of males . These students call the behavior of the female in this scenario as " Tech Bitch Syndrome " or " TBS " for short . 
 Women against the term claim that they are often labeled the term without warrant . An analysis of the term was done by Georgia Tech 's Sexual Violence and Prevention Initiative . 
 = = = Getting Out = = = 
 " Getting out " refers to graduating from Georgia Tech . Graduates typically say " I got out " rather than that they graduated from Georgia Tech . 
 = = = Ma Tech = = = 
 An affectionate name used by students and alumni for their Alma Mater . 
 = = = The Hill = = = 
 A nickname given to Tech 's academic administration and historic district . Topographically , Tech 's first administrative buildings were built on an actual hill in Atlanta . As campus expanded onto surrounding lower terrain , the Hill became a much more prominent sight on campus . The term now is typically used in derision when referring to the administration . Former Tech Interim President Gary Schuster 's blog , titled , " Notes from the Hill " , refers to this nickname . 
 The Hill also refers to the steep incline of Bobby Dodd Way ( which most students now refer to as " Freshman Hill " ) , which residents of East Campus must trek up in order to attend class . The climb is often referred to as a hike up the Freshman Hill as many freshman dorms are located around the bottom of Freshman Hill . 
 = Cattle egret = 
 The cattle egret ( Bubulcus ibis ) is a cosmopolitan species of heron ( family Ardeidae ) found in the tropics , subtropics and warm temperate zones . It is the only member of the monotypic genus Bubulcus , although some authorities regard its two subspecies as full species , the western cattle egret and the eastern cattle egret . Despite the similarities in plumage to the egrets of the genus Egretta , it is more closely related to the herons of Ardea . Originally native to parts of Asia , Africa and Europe , it has undergone a rapid expansion in its distribution and successfully colonised much of the rest of the world in the last century . 
 It is a white bird adorned with buff plumes in the breeding season . It nests in colonies , usually near bodies of water and often with other wading birds . The nest is a platform of sticks in trees or shrubs . Cattle egrets exploit drier and open habitats more than other heron species . Their feeding habitats include seasonally inundated grasslands , pastures , farmlands , wetlands and rice paddies . They often accompany cattle or other large mammals , catching insect and small vertebrate prey disturbed by these animals . Some populations of the cattle egret are migratory and others show post @-@ breeding dispersal . 
 The adult cattle egret has few predators , but birds or mammals may raid its nests , and chicks may be lost to starvation , calcium deficiency or disturbance from other large birds . This species maintains a special relationship with cattle , which extends to other large grazing mammals ; wider human farming is believed to be a major cause of their suddenly expanded range . The cattle egret removes ticks and flies from cattle and consumes them . This benefits both species , but it has been implicated in the spread of tick @-@ borne animal diseases . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The cattle egret was first described in 1758 by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae as Ardea ibis , but was moved to its current genus by Charles Lucien Bonaparte in 1855 . Its genus name Bubulcus is Latin for herdsman , referring , like the English name , to this species ' association with cattle . Ibis is a Latin and Greek word which originally referred to another white wading bird , the sacred ibis , but was applied to this species in error . 
 The cattle egret has two geographical races which are sometimes classified as full species , the western cattle egret , B. ibis , and eastern cattle egret , B. coromandus . The two forms were split by <unk> and Bruce , but were regarded as conspecific by almost all other recent authors until the publication of the influential Birds of South Asia . The eastern subspecies B. ( i . ) coromandus , described by Pieter Boddaert in 1783 , breeds in Asia and Australasia , and the western nominate form occupies the rest of the species range , including the Americas . Some authorities recognise a third Seychelles subspecies , B. i. seychellarum , which was first described by Finn Salomonsen in 1934 . 
 Despite superficial similarities in appearance , the cattle egret is more closely related to the genus Ardea , which comprises the great or typical herons and the great egret ( A. alba ) , than to the majority of species termed egrets in the genus Egretta . Rare cases of hybridization with little blue herons Egretta caerulea , little egrets Egretta garzetta and snowy egrets Egretta thula have been recorded . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cattle egret is a stocky heron with an 88 – 96 cm ( 35 – 38 in ) wingspan ; it is 46 – 56 cm ( 18 – 22 in ) long and weighs 270 – 512 g ( 9 @.@ 5 – 18 @.@ 1 oz ) . It has a relatively short thick neck , a sturdy bill , and a hunched posture . The non @-@ breeding adult has mainly white plumage , a yellow bill and greyish @-@ yellow legs . During the breeding season , adults of the nominate western subspecies develop orange @-@ buff plumes on the back , breast and crown , and the bill , legs and irises become bright red for a brief period prior to pairing . The sexes are similar , but the male is marginally larger and has slightly longer breeding plumes than the female ; juvenile birds lack coloured plumes and have a black bill . 
 B. i. coromandus differs from the nominate subspecies in breeding plumage , when the buff colour on its head extends to the cheeks and throat , and the plumes are more golden in colour . This subspecies ' bill and tarsus are longer on average than in B. i. ibis . B. i. seychellarum is smaller and shorter @-@ winged than the other forms . It has white cheeks and throat , like B. i. ibis , but the nuptial plumes are golden , as with B. i. coromandus . Individuals with abnormally grey , melanistic plumages have been recorded . 
 The positioning of the egret 's eyes allows for binocular vision during feeding , and physiological studies suggest that the species may be capable of crepuscular or nocturnal activity . Adapted to foraging on land , they have lost the ability possessed by their wetland relatives to accurately correct for light refraction by water . 
 This species gives a quiet , throaty <unk> @-@ rack call at the breeding colony , but is otherwise largely silent . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The cattle egret has undergone one of the most rapid and wide reaching natural expansions of any bird species . It was originally native to parts of Southern Spain and Portugal , tropical and subtropical Africa and humid tropical and subtropical Asia . In the end of the 19th century it began expanding its range into southern Africa , first breeding in the Cape Province in 1908 . Cattle egrets were first sighted in the Americas on the boundary of Guiana and Suriname in 1877 , having apparently flown across the Atlantic Ocean . It was not until the 1930s that the species is thought to have become established in that area . 
 The species first arrived in North America in 1941 ( these early sightings were originally dismissed as escapees ) , bred in Florida in 1953 , and spread rapidly , breeding for the first time in Canada in 1962 . It is now commonly seen as far west as California . It was first recorded breeding in Cuba in 1957 , in Costa Rica in 1958 , and in Mexico in 1963 , although it was probably established before that . In Europe , the species had historically declined in Spain and Portugal , but in the latter part of the 20th century it expanded back through the Iberian Peninsula , and then began to colonise other parts of Europe ; southern France in 1958 , northern France in 1981 and Italy in 1985 . Breeding in the United Kingdom was recorded for the first time in 2008 only a year after an influx seen in the previous year . In 2008 , cattle egrets were also reported as having moved into Ireland for the first time . 
 In Australia , the colonisation began in the 1940s , with the species establishing itself in the north and east of the continent . It began to regularly visit New Zealand in the 1960s . Since 1948 the cattle egret has been permanently resident in Israel . Prior to 1948 it was only a winter visitor . 
 The massive and rapid expansion of the cattle egret 's range is due to its relationship with humans and their domesticated animals . Originally adapted to a commensal relationship with large grazing and browsing animals , it was easily able to switch to domesticated cattle and horses . As the keeping of livestock spread throughout the world , the cattle egret was able to occupy otherwise empty niches . Many populations of cattle egrets are highly migratory and dispersive , and this has helped the species ' range expansion . The species has been seen as a vagrant in various sub @-@ Antarctic islands , including South Georgia , Marion Island , the South Sandwich Islands and the South Orkney Islands . A small flock of eight birds was also seen in Fiji in 2008 . 
 In addition to the natural expansion of its range , cattle egrets have been deliberately introduced into a few areas . The species was introduced to Hawaii in 1959 , and to the Chagos Archipelago in 1955 . Successful releases were also made in the Seychelles and Rodrigues , but attempts to introduce the species to Mauritius failed . Numerous birds were also released by Whipsnade Zoo in England , but the species was never established . 
 Although the cattle egret sometimes feeds in shallow water , unlike most herons it is typically found in fields and dry grassy habitats , reflecting its greater dietary reliance on terrestrial insects rather than aquatic prey . 
 = = Migration and movements = = 
 Some populations of cattle egrets are migratory , others are dispersive , and distinguishing between the two can be difficult for this species . In many areas populations can be both sedentary and migratory . In the northern hemisphere , migration is from cooler climes to warmer areas , but cattle egrets nesting in Australia migrate to cooler Tasmania and New Zealand in the winter and return in the spring . Migration in western Africa is in response to rainfall , and in South America migrating birds travel south of their breeding range in the non @-@ breeding season . Populations in southern India appear to show local migrations in response to the monsoons . They move north from Kerala after September . During winter , many birds have been seen flying at night with flocks of Indian pond herons ( <unk> <unk> ) on the south @-@ eastern coast of India and a winter influx has also been noted in Sri Lanka . 
 Young birds are known to disperse up to 5 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 100 mi ) from their breeding area . Flocks may fly vast distances and have been seen over seas and oceans including in the middle of the Atlantic . 
 = = Status = = 
 This species has a large range , with an estimated global extent of occurrence of 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km2 ( 3 @,@ 900 @,@ 000 sq mi ) . Its global population estimated to be 3 @.@ 8 – 6 @.@ 7 million individuals . For these reasons , the species is evaluated as Least Concern . On the other hand , the expansion and establishment of the species over large ranges has led it to be classed as an invasive species ( although little , if any impact has been noted yet ) . 
 = = Breeding = = 
 The cattle egret nests in colonies , which are often , but not always , found around bodies of water . The colonies are usually found in woodlands near lakes or rivers , in swamps , or on small inland or coastal islands , and are sometimes shared with other wetland birds , such as herons , egrets , ibises and cormorants . The breeding season varies within South Asia . Nesting in northern India begins with the onset of monsoons in May . The breeding season in Australia is November to early January , with one brood laid per season . The North American breeding season lasts from April to October . In the Seychelles , the breeding season of the subspecies <unk> seychellarum is April to October . 
 The male displays in a tree in the colony , using a range of ritualised behaviours such as shaking a twig and sky @-@ pointing ( raising his bill vertically upwards ) , and the pair forms over three or four days . A new mate is chosen in each season and when re @-@ nesting following nest failure . The nest is a small untidy platform of sticks in a tree or shrub constructed by both parents . Sticks are collected by the male and arranged by the female , and stick @-@ stealing is rife . The clutch size can be anywhere from one to five eggs , although three or four is most common . The pale bluish @-@ white eggs are oval @-@ shaped and measure 45 mm × 53 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in × 2 @.@ 1 in ) . Incubation lasts around 23 days , with both sexes sharing incubation duties . The chicks are partly covered with down at hatching , but are not capable of fending for themselves ; they become capable of regulating their temperature at 9 – 12 days and are fully feathered in 13 – 21 days . They begin to leave the nest and climb around at 2 weeks , fledge at 30 days and become independent at around the 45th day . 
 The cattle egret engages in low levels of brood parasitism , and there are a few instances of cattle egret eggs being laid in the nests of snowy egrets and little blue herons , although these eggs seldom hatch . There is also evidence of low levels of intraspecific brood parasitism , with females laying eggs in the nests of other cattle egrets . As much as 30 % extra @-@ pair copulations have been noted . 
 The dominant factor in nesting mortality is starvation . Sibling rivalry can be intense , and in South Africa third and fourth chicks inevitably starve . In the dryer habitats with fewer amphibians the diet may lack sufficient vertebrate content and may cause bone abnormalities in growing chicks due to calcium deficiency . In Barbados , nests were sometimes raided by vervet monkeys , and a study in Florida reported the fish crow and black rat as other possible nest raiders . The same study attributed some nestling mortality to brown pelicans nesting in the vicinity , which accidentally , but frequently , dislodged nests or caused nestlings to fall . In Australia , Torresian crows , wedge @-@ tailed eagles and white @-@ bellied sea eagles take eggs or young , and tick infestation and viral infections may also be causes of mortality . 
 = = Feeding = = 
 The cattle egret feeds on a wide range of prey , particularly insects , especially grasshoppers , crickets , flies ( adults and maggots ) , and moths , as well as spiders , frogs , and earthworms . In a rare instance they have been observed foraging along the branches of a banyan tree for ripe figs . The species is usually found with cattle and other large grazing and browsing animals , and catches small creatures disturbed by the mammals . Studies have shown that cattle egret foraging success is much higher when foraging near a large animal than when feeding singly . When foraging with cattle , it has been shown to be 3 @.@ 6 times more successful in capturing prey than when foraging alone . Its performance is similar when it follows farm machinery , but it is forced to move more . In urban situations cattle egrets have also been observed foraging in peculiar situations like railway lines . 
 A cattle egret will weakly defend the area around a grazing animal against others of the same species , but if the area is swamped by egrets it will give up and continue foraging elsewhere . Where numerous large animals are present , cattle egrets selectively forage around species that move at around 5 – 15 steps per minute , avoiding faster and slower moving herds ; in Africa , cattle egrets selectively forage behind plains zebras , waterbuck , blue wildebeest and Cape buffalo . Dominant birds feed nearest to the host , and obtain more food . 
 The cattle egret may also show versatility in its diet . On islands with seabird colonies , it will prey on the eggs and chicks of terns and other seabirds . During migration it has also been reported to eat exhausted migrating landbirds . Birds of the Seychelles race also indulge in some kleptoparasitism , chasing the chicks of sooty terns and forcing them to disgorge food . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 A conspicuous species , the cattle egret has attracted many common names . These mostly relate to its habit of following cattle and other large animals , and it is known variously as cow crane , cow bird or cow heron , or even elephant bird , rhinoceros egret . Its Arabic name , abu <unk> , means " father of ticks " , a name derived from the huge number of parasites such as avian ticks found in its breeding colonies . 
 The cattle egret is a popular bird with cattle ranchers for its perceived role as a biocontrol of cattle parasites such as ticks and flies . A study in Australia found that cattle egrets reduced the number of flies that bothered cattle by pecking them directly off the skin . It was the benefit to stock that prompted ranchers and the Hawaiian Board of Agriculture and Forestry to release the species in Hawaii . 
 Not all interactions between humans and cattle egrets are beneficial . The cattle egret can be a safety hazard to aircraft due to its habit of feeding in large groups in the grassy verges of airports , and it has been implicated in the spread of animal infections such as <unk> , infectious bursal disease and possibly Newcastle disease . 
 = Freddy Spaghetti = 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " is the second season finale of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 30th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 20 , 2010 . In the episode , as Ron helps state auditors make governmental cuts amid a government shutdown , Leslie tries to save a children 's concert starring musician Freddy Spaghetti . Meanwhile , Andy asks April to be his girlfriend , while Ann tries to cope with her renewed feelings for Andy following her breakup with Mark . 
 The episode was written by Daniel J. Goor and directed by Jason Woliner . " Freddy Spaghetti " featured the second performances of Adam Scott and Rob Lowe as two state auditors sent to help Pawnee through its budget crisis , as well as the second appearance by Natalie Morales as Tom 's girlfriend Lucy . Jama Williamson reprised her recurring guest role as Tom 's ex @-@ wife Wendy , and comedian and writer Brian McCann portrayed Freddy Spaghetti . 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " marked the final performance for Paul Schneider playing Mark Brendanawicz as a regular cast member . The final scene between Mark and Leslie , sitting on a bench together at a lot Leslie hopes to turn into a park , mirrored their scenes together in the first season finale " Rock Show " . " Freddy Spaghetti " was also a turning point in the romantic subplot between Andy and April , who share their first kiss in the episode . 
 According to Nielsen Media Research , " Freddy Spaghetti " was seen by 4 @.@ 55 million household viewers , a five percent increase in viewership compared to the previous episode , " The Master Plan " . The episode received generally positive reviews , with many commentators calling it a strong ending to an excellent season . " Freddy Spaghetti " and the rest of the second season of Parks and Recreation was released on DVD in the United States on November 30 , 2010 , which included an extended 26 @-@ minute " producer 's cut " of the episode . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Pawnee government has shut down due to a budget crisis . When Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) explains at a town meeting that a family concert featuring children 's entertainer Freddy Spaghetti ( Brian McCann ) must be cancelled due to the shutdown , the citizens are outraged . Leslie visits state auditors Chris ( Rob Lowe ) and Ben ( Adam Scott ) seeking a way to keep the concert , but Ben insists there is simply no money for it . When Leslie goes to city planner Mark ( Paul Schneider ) to vent about her situation and seek help , she is stunned to learn that he has taken a buyout and plans to join a construction company , partially in response to Ann ( Rashida Jones ) having broken up with him ; she angrily calls him " Mark <unk> @-@ Quits " . Meanwhile , Ann is struggling with her redeveloping feelings for her ex @-@ boyfriend Andy ( Chris Pratt ) . Later , Ann suggests to Leslie she should hold the concert at Lot 48 , as it is not a park and therefore not shut down . Meanwhile , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) and Andy finally reveal their feelings to each other , but April still rejects him , believing Andy still has feelings for Ann . 
 Meanwhile , Ron ( Nick Offerman ) has been assigned to a task force to help fix the city 's budget problem . A small government advocate , Ron is delighted at the prospect of deep municipal cuts , gloating and chanting at the cuts Chris and Ben propose , but when he learns the auditors plan to fire Leslie , Ron refuses and offers his job instead . In explaining her dedication , Ron accidentally alerts them about the Freddy Spaghetti concert . Chris and Ben arrive to the concert to shut it down , but Leslie tells them everything has been donated and nothing is on the taxpayer 's dime . However , Leslie learns Freddy Spaghetti has booked another gig . She asks Andy to play instead , but he is hit by a car while driving his new motorcycle home to retrieve his guitar , breaking his right arm . Just as the concert begins , Freddy Spaghetti surprisingly arrives , having been paid by Ben to perform at Leslie 's concert . Ben explains he is not a bad person , but the budget still has to be slashed . 
 Visiting Andy in the hospital , Ann suddenly kisses him , but immediately stops and guiltily walks out . Later , April , also relieved to see Andy is fine , finally agrees to go out with him . After they kiss , Andy decides to be honest and tells her about the earlier kiss with Ann . April angrily storms out , taking back her decision to go out with him . That night , Leslie sits on a bench in the empty Lot 48 and Mark joins her , with both appearing happy to be able to talk to each other . Mark tells her that if more people like her worked in local government , he wouldn 't be leaving , and gives her plans he drew up for a park at Lot 48 before giving her a goodbye kiss on the cheek and walking way forever . The next day , Ron withdraws from the budget task force and appoints Leslie in his place . As Tom ( Aziz Ansari ) and his new girlfriend Lucy ( Natalie Morales ) are clearing out his office , he notices Ron is wearing a red shirt and black pants , the " Tiger Woods " outfit he always wears the day after having sex . Tom 's ex @-@ wife Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) then appears and kisses Ron and the two leave together , shocking Tom . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " was written by Daniel J. Goor , who previously penned the episodes " The Reporter " , " Hunting Trip " and " Leslie 's House " . The idea of state auditors visiting Pawnee , and the subsequent government shutdown there , was conceived from news reports at the time of a number of states considering shutting down schools , parks and other services due to the global recession . During an interview with the Los Angeles Times , Parks and Recreation co @-@ creator Michael Schur cited stories about Kansas City closing down a great number of their public schools , and Idaho threatening to shut down the state parks department . In that interview , he said , " The entire state of Idaho was threatening to shut down the Parks department , and Idaho is essentially just one large park . " That line , almost verbatim , was used in the script when Ben explained to Leslie the seriousness of the economic recession around the nation . 
 Schur said the writing staff had difficulty scripting the scene where Ann kisses Andy : " We had a lot of discussions about this because we didn 't want Ann to be too much of a jerk and kiss a guy who likes another girl , and we didn 't want Andy to be too much of a jerk because he likes April . It was very delicate . " The episode marked a turning point for the romantic subplot between April and Andy , who shared their first kiss of the series in " Freddy Spaghetti " . Goor said filming of that scene , " They nailed the kiss immediately . " While trying to get April to talk to him , Andy pretends he doesn 't want to talk to her at all , which he incorrectly calls " reverse psychiatry " instead of reverse psychology . This line was improvised by Chris Pratt . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " was the final episode to feature Paul Schneider as a regular cast member as Mark Brendanawicz . Schneider left the series , and though Schur claimed that both the producers and Schneider were interested in having him return for guest appearances in future episodes , Schneider stated that he was not interested in returning and had never been contacted about it . The final scene between Leslie and Mark in " Freddy Spaghetti " , in which the two sit together at Lot 48 , mirrors their scenes together in the first season finale , " Rock Show " , in which the two shared a kiss while overlooking the lot while it was still a construction pit . Schur said of the scene , " It 's great because Leslie and Mark , it was such a disastrous moment last time ( at the pit ) and he didn 't really respect her , and a lot 's happened in a year . " Goor said of using that setting , " I liked the symmetry of having it play a critical , and opposite role in this finale . Last year , they sat on the bench and kissed , and it seemed like they might be getting back together . This year , they sat on the bench and Mark kissed Leslie goodbye . " The bench they sit in during that scene is the same one they sat on during their kiss scene in " Rock Show " . Throughout the second season , that bench was in Leslie 's office . Schur said , " We decided that in the reality of the show she brought it to the lot for this moment . It 's a little bit of a stretch , but , you know . " 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " marked the second appearances by Adam Scott and Rob Lowe as state auditors sent to solve Pawnee 's budget problems . Lowe 's Chris Traeger character is energetic , eccentric and overly cheerful , whereas Scott 's Ben Wyatt is more pragmatic and realistic . Scott was always intended to become a regular cast member starting in the third season , while Lowe was originally expected to appear only in a few more episodes in a guest role . However , after those episodes were filmed , Lowe later joined the show as a regular cast member . Lowe improvised many aspects of his character , including when he handed Ben a water bottle and said , " You should hydrate , " and when he clapped after Leslie sang at the concert , " If you 're happy and you know it , clap your hands . " Additionally , the episode was the second appearance of Natalie Morales as Lucy , a Pawnee bartender and romantic interest for Tom . " Freddy Spaghetti " also included appearances by recurring guest stars Jama Williamson , who plays Tom Haverford 's ex @-@ wife Wendy , and Cooper Thornton , who plays the sarcastic and deadpan Dr. Harris , who tended to Andy 's broken arm . Comedian and writer Brian McCann portrayed Freddy Spaghetti himself in the episode . While singing at the concert , McCann improvised a great deal of non @-@ child @-@ friendly dialogue that could not be used in the final episode . Among them were a song about how he pays too much alimony to his wife , and another about meeting all the children 's mothers backstage after the show . Guy Stevenson , a MADtv writer and friend of Parks and Recreation cast member Retta , played the man who shouted during a municipal meeting , " With the government shut down , who 's going to stop Al @-@ Qaeda ? " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was directed by Jason Woliner , who previously directed the Parks and Recreation episodes " Beauty Pageant " and " Woman of the Year " . The idea of Andy injuring himself in a motorcycle accident was conceived early in the filming of the second season by Chris Pratt . Pratt 's stunt double , Joe <unk> III , is considered one of the leading motorcycle stuntmen in the United States , and Pratt suggested that a stunt involving Andy crashing a motorcycle would be very funny . <unk> filmed two takes of the crash in " Freddy Spaghetti " , and the first take was used in the final episode . At the beginning of the episode , while roller @-@ skating through the corridors of city hall , Andy unsuccessfully tries to jump over a desk and falls violently to the ground . Unlike the motorcycle crash , Pratt performed that stunt himself , and had to film about six takes of it . 
 During one scene , Ron slips and falls on the grass while running to warn Leslie about Ben 's plan to shut down the Freddy Spaghetti concert . That fall was neither scripted nor accidental , but rather planned and improvised by Nick Offerman . Aziz Ansari described the physical comedy as " one of my favorite shots in the series " . In a different scene , April is chewing on a hay @-@ straw while raking hay before the concert , and angrily spits the straw out when Andy tries to talk to her . That moment was improvised by actress Aubrey Plaza . Woliner asked her not to do it , but she insisted , correctly predicting it would make the final cut if she did it . In a different scene , Ron eats a turkey leg wrapped in bacon . The original script called simply for a large turkey leg , but a props employee suggested wrapping it in bacon based on Ron 's well @-@ known affinity for the food . It was Woliner who suggested that Ron say the snack was nicknamed " the Swanson " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 During one scene , Leslie visits Tom at home , only to find him wearing a robe and entertaining Lucy . Tom insists he is about to have sex , explaining , " Why else would Boyz II Men 's " On Bended Knee " be playing right now ? " , referring to a song in the background . The line was improvised by Aziz Ansari and , originally , the song was not playing , but Michael Schur said the line was so funny that he successfully sought permission to use the song and added it to the background in post @-@ production . At the Freddy Spaghetti concert , Leslie asks a little girl which song was her favorite , to which she replies " <unk> and the Jets " , a pasta @-@ inspired version of the Elton John song " Benny and the Jets " . This line was thought of by Amy Poehler . 
 While packing his office at the end of the episode , Tom frantically looks for his autographed photo of actor Jamie Foxx . Ansari said he had been trying to work a reference to Foxx into the show for months . Tom 's observation that Ron always dresses like golf pro Tiger Woods after having sex was a joke previously used in the episode " Ron and Tammy " . The original joke was written before the story of Woods ' extramarital affairs scandal broke in the news in November 2009 . " Freddy Spaghetti " included a reference to the previous episode " Galentine 's Day " , in which Andy discussed a song he wrote called " Sex Hair " , about how one could tell someone had sex based on how matted their hair is . In the season finale , Andy rewrites the song to be called " Pickle Hair " so it can be played at the kid @-@ friendly concert . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Freddy Spaghetti " was seen by an estimated 4 @.@ 55 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It marked a five percent increase in viewership compared to the previous episode , " The Master Plan " , which itself had increased in the ratings compared to the previous week . " Freddy Spaghetti " also had a higher rating than the first season finale , " Rock Show " . Parks and Recreation ranked second in its timeslot with " Freddy Spaghetti " , behind the fifth season finale of the Fox crime drama Bones , but higher than the tenth season finale of the CBS crime drama CSI : Crime Scene Investigation and an episode of the ABC science @-@ fiction drama FlashForward . 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " received generally positive reviews . Leonard Pierce of The A.V. Club felt the script balanced all the character subplots extremely well , writing , " It 's this ability to hold down the ' situation ' part of situation comedy , while never scrimping on the comedy , that makes it the class of the NBC lineup — the purest , if not the best , sitcom on the air . " Pierce also complimented the final scene between Leslie and Mark , which he said brought the season to " a touching full circle " . IGN writer Matt Fowler ranked the episode as " outstanding " and claimed it highlighted the strengths of Leslie , by emphasizing the passion with which she views her job , and Ron , by showing how much he cares for his employees even though he hates his job . Fowler said Schneider 's departure was handled well , even though he described Mark as the show 's least interesting character . HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall said " Freddy Spaghetti " did a good job of bringing closure to the season and starting new storylines regarding Pawnee 's budget problems . Sepinwall praised the chemistry between Poehler and Scott , as well as Lowe 's comedic performance , but said the April and Andy romantic subplot was less consistently effective than the similar pairing between Jim and Pam Halpert on the NBC comedy , The Office . 
 New York magazine writer Steve Kendell said , " The finale was as on point as any episode this year — smart , funny , crisply written , and poignant . " Kandell said Mark accepting a buyout felt like a " perfectly sensible and organic to the story " way to remove the character from the series , and described the ending scene with Ron and Wendy as an effective cliffhanger building up to the third season . Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic said , " We can sum up the episode in one word : perfection . " Hochberger praised the characterization in the script , and particularly enjoyed that the former pit , a long @-@ time device for the series , was used for the concert and Mark 's departure . CraveOnline writer Blair Marnell described " Freddy Spaghetti " as one of the best episodes of the series . He praised the writing , particularly the jokes involving Andy and Ron 's love of budget cuts , but said Leslie 's character ultimately carried the story and had the best jokes . Kona Gallagher of TV Squad said the episode " end [ ed ] an already phenomenal season on a high note " and said she loved the symmetry of the finale . Gallagher particularly praised Scott 's new character , claiming " his bruised idealism is a nice match for Leslie 's blind idealism " , but said Lowe 's character continued to lack depth , and described the April and Andy subplot as predictable . 
 " Freddy Spaghetti " was the last new episode of Parks and Recreation to air for eight months ( until " Go Big or Go Home " ) because , after the season finale aired , NBC announced the show was being moved to an undisclosed midseason premiere date to allow the network 's new comedy , Outsourced , to run in the Thursday two @-@ hour comedy schedule block . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell noted this move by NBC against the show bore some " thematic similarities " between the government shutdown plot of " Freddy Spaghetti " . It was eventually announced the Parks and Recreation third season would premiere on January 20 , 2011 . 
 = = DVD release = = 
 After " Freddy Spaghetti " aired , a producer 's cut of the episode was featured on the official NBC website . It included four extra minutes of deleted scenes , plus additional footage with Lowe , Scott and the regular cast members . This version of the episode , along with the 22 @-@ minute television version and the other 23 second season episodes of Parks and Recreation , was later released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on November 30 , 2010 . The DVD included deleted scenes for each episode . 
 Among the deleted scenes in the producer 's cut were a scene of Tom and Lucy running off to Ann 's house to have sex , where they are interrupted by a nonchalant and seemingly unfazed Chris Traeger . Another cut scene included Tom and Ann in which the two share a pleasant moment and Tom cheers her up over her conflicting romantic feelings , only for Tom to ruin it by proposing three @-@ way sex between them and Lucy . The DVD also included a commentary track for " Freddy Spaghetti " featuring Amy Poehler , Aziz Ansari , Nick Offerman , Rashida Jones , Adam Scott , Aubrey Plaza , Chris Pratt , Jim O 'Heir , Retta and Michael Schur . 
 = Kota Kinabalu = 
 Kota Kinabalu ( Malaysian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] , Jawi : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> ) , formerly known as Jesselton , is the capital of the state of Sabah , Malaysia . It is also the capital of the West Coast Division of Sabah . The city is located on the northwest coast of Borneo facing the South China Sea . The Tunku Abdul Rahman National Park lies to its west and Mount Kinabalu , which gave the city its name , is located to its east . Kota Kinabalu has a population of 452 @,@ 058 and , including the adjacent Penampang and Putatan districts , the metro area has an estimated population of 628 @,@ 725 . 
 In the 15th century , the area of Kota Kinabalu was under the influence of Bruneian Empire . In the 19th century , the British North Borneo Company ( BNBC ) first set up a settlement near the Gaya Island . However , it was destroyed by fire in 1897 by a freedom fighter named Mat Salleh . In July 1899 , the place which is located opposite to the Gaya Island , was identified as a suitable place for settlements . Development in the area was started soon after that ; and the place was named " Api @-@ <unk> " before it was renamed after the vice @-@ chairman of BNBC as " Jesselton " . Jesselton became a major trading port in the area , and was connected to the North Borneo Railway . Jesselton suffered destructions during World War II . Japanese occupation of Jesselton had caused several local uprisings but they were eventually defeated by the Japanese . After the war , BNBC was unable to finance the high cost of reconstructions and the place was ceded to the British Crown Colony . The British Crown declared Jesselton as the new capital of North Borneo in 1946 and started to rebuild the town . After the formation of Malaysia , North Borneo was <unk> as Sabah . In 1967 , Jesselton was renamed as Kota Kinabalu . Kota Kinabalu was granted city status in 2000 . 
 Kota Kinabalu is often known as KK both in Malaysia and internationally . It is a major tourist destination and a popular gateway for travellers visiting Sabah and Borneo . Kinabalu Park is located about 90 kilometres from the city and there are many other tourist attractions in and around the city . Kota Kinabalu is also one of the major industrial and commercial centres of East Malaysia . These two factors combine to make Kota Kinabalu one of the fastest growing cities in Malaysia . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Kota Kinabalu is named after Mount Kinabalu , which is situated about 50 kilometres east @-@ northeast of the city . Kinabalu is derived from the name Aki Nabalu meaning the " revered place of the dead . " Aki means " ancestors " or " grandfather " , and Nabalu is a name for the mountain in the Dusun language . There is also a source claiming that the term originated from Ki Nabalu , Ki meaning " have " or " exist " , and Nabalu meaning " spirit of the dead " . 
 Kota is a Malay word for a " fort " , " town " , or a " city " . It is also used formally in a few other Malaysian towns and cities , for example , Kota Bharu , Kota Tinggi , and Kota <unk> . It can also be used informally to refer to any towns or cities . Hence , a direct translation of the name Kota Kinabalu into English would be " City of Kinabalu " or " Kinabalu City " . 
 Wendy Law Suart wrote in her book on North Borneo , The Lingering Eye , " there is in the Sabah State Museum a Dutch map of Borneo and the Celebes dated 1657 in which the settlement where Jesselton was to stand is clearly labelled Api Api . It may have some connection with the seaside tree with breathing roots that bears the same name " . 
 = = = Original names = = = 
 Besides Jesselton , there have been a number of other theories regarding the origins of the original name for Kota Kinabalu . The most popular , as mentioned above , is Api @-@ Api , or simply Api , which is a Malay word meaning ' Fire ' . There are claims , however , that Kota Kinabalu was actually named after a nearby river called Sungai Api @-@ Api . In Chinese , the city is still known as ' Api ' , which is the Hakka pronunciation for <unk> ( Simplified Chinese ; Traditional Chinese : <unk> ; Pinyin : <unk> <unk> ) . 
 Besides Api @-@ Api , another suggested historical name is <unk> , which roughly means " below the coconut tree " in the Bajau language . The Bajau locals purportedly used this name to refer to a village in the southern part of the city which was filled with coconut trees . Another name was <unk> Mata which literally means " transit eye " , but can be loosely translated as " pleasing to the eye " . It is a name purportedly given by fishermen from Gaya Island referring to the strip of land which today is downtown Kota Kinabalu . Today , all these names have been immortalised as names of streets or buildings around the city . Some examples are <unk> <unk> , Api @-@ Api Centre and <unk> Mata Street . 
 = = History = = 
 Since the 15th century , the area of Jesselton was under the influence of the Bruneian Empire . In the late 1800s , the British North Borneo Company ( BNBC ) began to establish colonies throughout North Borneo . In 1882 , BNBC founded a small settlement in the area known as Gaya Bay , which was already inhabited by Bajau people . The first settlement was on Gaya Island . In 1897 , this first settlement was burned and destroyed by the indigenous Bajau @-@ Suluk freedom fighter Mat Salleh . 
 After the destruction , BNBC decided to relocate the settlement to the more easily defended mainland at <unk> Bay ( now Sepanggar Bay ) in 1898 . However that location was found to be unsuitable and in July 1899 , Mr. Henry Walker , a Land Commissioner , identified a 30 acres ( 12 ha ) site opposite Gaya Island as a replacement for <unk> . This fishing village named Api @-@ Api ( see Original names below ) was chosen due to its proximity to the North Borneo Railway and its natural port that provided good anchorage , which was up to 24 feet deep . 
 By the end of 1899 , construction had started on <unk> , a pier and government buildings . This new administrative centre was renamed Jesselton after Sir Charles Jessel , who was the then Vice @-@ Chairman of BNBC . Eventually , Jesselton became a major trading post of North Borneo , dealing in rubber , rattan , honey , and wax . The North Borneo Railway was used to transport goods to the Jesselton harbour . The Malay and Bajau uprisings during those times were not uncommon , and BNBC worked to quell the long @-@ standing threat of piracy in the region . Jesselton suffered a large destruction when it was razed by the British to retreated from the Japanese and suffered more destruction when the Allies bombed it in 1945 . After the Japanese takeover of Borneo , it was again renamed Api . Several rebellions against the Japanese military administration took place in Api . One major rebellion occurred on 10 October 1943 by a group called Kinabalu Guerrillas , consisting of local inhabitants . Japanese forces quelled the rebellion after its leader , Albert Kwok , was arrested and executed in 1944 . At the later stages of the war , what remained of the town was destroyed again by Allied bombings day and night for over six months as part of the Borneo Campaign in 1945 , leaving only three buildings standing . The war in North Borneo ended with the official surrender of the Japanese 37th Army by Lieutenant General Baba Masao in Labuan on 10 September 1945 . 
 After the war on the edge of bankruptcy , the British North Borneo Company returned to administer Jesselton but was unable to finance the huge costs of reconstruction . They gave control of North Borneo to the British Crown on 18 July 1946 . The new colonial government elected to rebuild Jesselton as the capital of North Borneo instead of Sandakan , which had also been destroyed by the war . The Crown Colony administration designed a plan , later known as the " Colonial Office Reconstruction and Development Plan for North Borneo : 1948 – 1955 ” , to rebuild North Borneo . This plan provided £ 6 @,@ 051 @,@ 939 for the rebuilding of infrastructure in North Borneo . When the Crown Colony of North Borneo together with Sarawak , Singapore and the Federation of Malaya formed the Federation of Malaysia in 1963 , it became known as Sabah , and Jesselton remained its capital . On 22 December 1967 , the State Legislative Assembly under Chief Minister Tun Mustapha bin Datu Harun passed a bill renaming Jesselton as Kota Kinabalu . The city was upgraded to city status on 2 February 2000 . 
 = = Capital city = = 
 Being the capital city of Sabah , Kota Kinabalu plays an important role in the political and economic welfare of the population of the entire state . It is the seat of the state government where almost all of their ministries and agencies are based . Most of the Malaysian federal government agencies and departments are also located in Kota Kinabalu . The Sabah State Legislative Assembly is located at the nearby Likas Bay . There are four members of parliament ( MPs ) representing the four parliamentary constituencies in the city : Sepanggar ( <unk> ) , Kota Kinabalu ( <unk> ) , Putatan ( <unk> ) , and Penampang ( <unk> ) . The city also elects 9 representatives to the state legislature from the state assembly districts of <unk> , Inanam , Likas , Api @-@ Api , Luyang , Tanjung Aru , Petagas , Kepayan , <unk> , Menggatal , Tuaran , Lido , and <unk> . 
 = = = Local authority and city definition = = = 
 The city is administered by the Kota Kinabalu City Hall ( Dewan Bandaraya Kota Kinabalu ) . The current mayor of Kota Kinabalu is Yeo Boon Hai , who took over from Datuk Abidin <unk> on 2 February 2016 . Datuk <unk> in turn became the second mayor of the city after taking over from Datuk Abdul Ghani Rashid in 2006 . The city obtained city status on 2 February 2000 , and prior to this it was administered by Majlis Perbandaran Kota Kinabalu ( Kota Kinabalu Municipal Council / Kota Kinabalu Town Hall ) . 
 The city is defined within the borders of what is the district , formerly the municipality , of Kota Kinabalu . With an area of 351 square kilometres , it is the smallest but the most populous district in Sabah . It encompasses Tanjung Aru and Kepayan in the south , up to Telipok and Sepanggar in the north . The urban expanse of the city however extends into the district of Penampang on the south of the city border , which includes the towns of <unk> and Putatan . The combined area of Kota Kinabalu ( district ) and the contiguous built up areas in Penampang and Putatan is known as Greater Kota Kinabalu . The district of Penampang has an area of 466 square kilometres , and is administered by Majlis Daerah Penampang ( Penampang District Council ) . 
 On one end of the scale , Kota Kinabalu may sometimes only refer to , especially by local inhabitants , the city centre or central business district near the sea facing Gaya Island . On the other end of the scale , it may also refer to the metropolitan area which includes urban Kota Kinabalu ( Greater Kota Kinabalu ) , and the surrounding towns of Papar and <unk> in the south , and Tuaran and Tamparuli in the north , being within its zone of influence . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Kota Kinabalu is located on the west coast of Sabah . The city lies on a narrow flatland between the Crocker Range to the east and the South China Sea to the west . There are six islands off the coast of the city . The largest is Gaya Island , the site of the first British settlement . Approximately 8 @,@ 000 people live there . The smaller islands , mainly uninhabited , are named Sapi Island , Manukan Island , Sulug Island , Mamutik Island and Sepanggar Island to the north . Sepanggar island is located north of the National Park opposite Sepanggar Bay . 
 Flat land is at a premium in the city centre , and there is a strict limit to the height of buildings : the airport is 7 km ( 4 mi ) away , and the city is directly in the flight path . Most of the Central Business District ( CBD ) today is built on land reclaimed from the sea . The original local plant life has largely disappeared , but several hills within the city ( too steep for building ) are still clothed with tropical rainforest . One of these is Signal Hill , which confines the CBD to the shore . In the area of Likas Bay , the remnants of an extensive mangrove forest was nearly lost . In 1996 , a perceptive state government stepped in and declared 24 acres ( 9 @.@ 7 ha ) of the forest as a protected area . This forest is now known as the Kota Kinabalu City Bird Sanctuary . The sanctuary was given additional protection as a State Cultural Heritage Site in 1998 . 
 The five islands ( of Gaya , Sapi , Manukan , Sulug , Mamutik ) opposite the city , and their surrounding waters , are also preserved as the Tunku Abdul Rahman National Park . The park was named in honour of the first Prime Minister of Malaysia , Tunku Abdul Rahman . The park is a popular recreational spot for tourists and local people . The Kota Kinabalu city centre , consisting of mostly businesses and the government , includes Karamunsing , the port area ( Tanjung <unk> ) , Signal Hill , Kampung Air , <unk> , <unk> , Asia City , Gaya Street ( Old Town ) , Bandaran Berjaya , Api @-@ Api , Sutera Harbour and Sembulan . Outlying neighbourhoods and residential suburbs include Kepayan Ridge , Tanjung Aru , Petagas , Kepayan , Lido , Lintas , <unk> , Bukit Padang , Luyang , Damai , Lok Kawi , Bukit Bendera , <unk> , <unk> , Likas and <unk> . The city is growing steadily and the urban sprawl extends to the towns of Inanam , Menggatal , Sepanggar , Telipok and south of the district border to Penampang , Putatan , and Lok Kawi . Kota Kinabalu is generally isolated from the rest of the country ; it is located about 1 @,@ 624 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 009 mi ) from Kuala Lumpur in Peninsular Malaysia and 804 kilometres ( 500 mi ) from Kuching in the neighbouring state of Sarawak . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 As part of Sabah area , Kota Kinabalu features a typical equatorial climate with constant temperature , considerable amount of rain and high humidity . Two prevailing monsoons characterise the climate of this part of Sabah are the Northeast Monsoon and the Southwest Monsoon . The Northeast Monsoon occurs between November and March , while the Southwest Monsoon occurs between May and September . There are also two successive inter @-@ monsoons from April to May and from September to October . 
 During the 1995 – 2004 period , Kota Kinabalu 's average temperature ranges from 26 ° C ( 79 ° F ) to 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) . April and May are the hottest months , while January is the coolest one . The average annual rainfall is around 2 @,@ 400 millimetres and varies markedly throughout the year . February and March are typically the driest months while rainfall peaks in the inter @-@ monsoon period in October . The wind speed ranges from 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 9 m / s during the Northeast Monsoon but is significantly lower to 0 @.@ 3 to 3 @.@ 3 m / s during the Southwest Monsoon . 
 = = Demography = = 
 There have not been any official or popular adjectives , or <unk> , to describe the people of Kota Kinabalu . A simple way to describe the people of the city is " orang KK " , where orang means " person " or " people " in Malay . The terms " <unk> @-@ ites " and " <unk> @-@ <unk> " have also been used to a limited extent . People from Sabah are called Sabahans . 
 = = = Ethnicity and religion = = = 
 The Malaysian Census 2010 Report estimated the population of Kota Kinabalu at 452 @,@ 058 . The city 's population today is a mixture of many different races and ethnicities . Non @-@ Malaysian citizens form the plurality of the city population with 110 @,@ 556 people followed by Chinese ( 93 @,@ 429 ) , Bajau / Suluk ( 72 @,@ 931 ) , Kadazan @-@ Dusun ( 69 @,@ 993 ) , other Bumiputras ( 59 @,@ 607 ) , Bruneian Malays ( 35 @,@ 835 ) , Murut ( 2 @,@ 528 ) , Indian ( 2 @,@ 207 ) and others ( 5 @,@ 482 ) . The Chinese are mostly Hakkas and reside mainly in the Luyang area . There is also a sizeable Cantonese @-@ speaking population and smaller communities of Hokkien and Foochow @-@ speaking Chinese scattered throughout all areas of the city . Most of the Foochow speakers in particular emigrated to Sabah from the neighbouring Malaysian state of Sarawak . Penampang district is populated mainly by Kadazans , while <unk> and Dusuns mainly reside in Likas , Sembulan , Inanam , Menggatal , Sepanggar and Telipok . The Brunei Malays and Bajau / <unk> are Muslims . The Kadazans mainly practice Christianity , whilst the Chinese are mainly Buddhists , Taoist or Christians . There are numerous Roman Catholic , Basel ( Lutheran ) , Anglican , Evangelical , and Methodist churches throughout the city . A small number of Hindus , Sikhs , Animists , and secularists can also be found . 
 There is also a sizeable Filipino population in the city . The first wave of migrants arrived in the late 15th century during the Spanish colonisation , while a later wave arrived in the early 1970s , driven away from the Philippines by political and economic uncertainties there . Most of the earlier migrants have been naturalised as Malaysian citizens . However , there are still some Filipinos living in the city without proper documentation as illegal immigrants . Most of the Filipino migrants are <unk> ( Suluk ) coming from the southern parts of Philippines . The city also is home to immigrants from Indonesia . 
 There is a small population of Indians , Pakistanis and Eurasians scattered around the city . More recently , the number of expatriates living in the city , whether temporarily or permanently , have also increased . Most of them come from China , South Korea , Japan , Australia , Taiwan and Europe . 
 Interracial marriages are not uncommon and Kadazan @-@ Chinese intermarriages are particularly common . The mixed race offspring of Kadazan and Chinese are referred to as Sino @-@ Kadazans or simply " <unk> " . 
 = = = Languages = = = 
 The people of Kota Kinabalu mainly speak Malay , with a distinct Sabahan creole . However , as almost 50 % of Kota Kinabalu residents are of Chinese descent , Chinese is also widely spoken . Among the Chinese , the most commonly spoken varieties are <unk> Hakka ( Simplified Chinese : <unk> ; Traditional Chinese : <unk> ) and Mandarin . Additionally , most Chinese can speak Cantonese , although with widely varying levels of fluency . Almost all residents are also able to speak English , especially the younger generation . However , some find it difficult to speak fluently due to a limited vocabulary and the general lack of usage of the English language as a conversational lingua franca among Sabahans as a whole . 
 The number of Kadazan @-@ Dusun speakers is thought to have dropped significantly throughout Sabah , especially in larger towns or cities like Kota Kinabalu . However , some effort has been taken by some to revive the usage of the language . Kadazan has been considered an endangered language , along with the culture of ethnic Kadazans . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Besides being the capital city , Kota Kinabalu is also the main industrial and commercial centre for Sabah . The economy is dominated by the primary sector of industry . Historically , the secondary sector dominated the economy , but due to rapid urbanisation and economic development , this sector of the economy is slowly diminishing . More recently , a move towards a more tertiary @-@ based industry has become more apparent , especially with regards to the boom in the tourism industry . Many state @-@ level , national @-@ level and international commercial banks , as well as some insurance companies have their headquarters or branches here . The overseas Chinese population also contributes to the development of KK since their immigration in the late 19th century . Their original role involved ' coolie ' ( slavery work ) and today many Chinese work as shopowners . 
 A number of industrial and manufacturing companies also have plants here , especially in the industrial districts of Likas , <unk> , and Inanam . The ongoing construction of the 8 @,@ 320 @-@ acre ( 33 @.@ 7 km2 ) Kota Kinabalu Industrial Park ( <unk> ) in Sepanggar is intended to boost the city 's industrial and commercial activity , making it a major growth centre in East Malaysia , as well for the BIMP @-@ EAGA ( Brunei @-@ Indonesia @-@ Malaysia @-@ Philippines East ASEAN Growth Area ) region . Kota Kinabalu also hosts numerous national , regional and international conferences or trade fairs every year , including the biennial Sabah International Expo , the Asia Pacific <unk> Conference by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) , the ASEAN Australian Engineering Congress , and many others . These events are normally held at the Sutera Harbour resort . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Land = = = 
 The internal roads linking different parts of the city are generally state roads constructed and maintained by the state 's Public Works Department . Most major internal roads are dual @-@ carriageways . One of the major roads here is Lintas @-@ Tuaran Bypass Road , which together serves almost as a ring road , circling the city and connecting the districts and suburbs surrounding the city , namely Putatan , Penampang , Luyang , Likas , Inanam , Menggatal , Sepanggar and Tuaran . There are currently no freeways in the city or in any other part of Sabah . The city is linked by highways to other towns in Sabah . These are mainly federal roads maintained by the national Public Works Department . Highway routes from Kota Kinabalu include : 
 Kota Kinabalu – Tuaran – Tamparuli – Kota <unk> – Kota <unk> – <unk> – Kudat 
 Kota Kinabalu – Penampang – ( Putatan – Lok Kawi ) – Papar – Beaufort – <unk> ( part of the Pan Borneo Highway ) 
 Kota Kinabalu – Penampang – Tambunan – Keningau – Tenom – <unk> ( part of the Pan Borneo Highway ) 
 Kota Kinabalu – Tuaran – Tamparuli – Kundasang – Ranau – Telupid – Sandakan – Tawau ( part of the Pan Borneo Highway ) 
 = = = = Public transportation = = = = 
 Regular bus services operate in the city . Aside from buses , minibuses or vans are used as an alternative mode of public transport . There are two main bus terminals in the city centre . The terminal along Tun Razak Road provide bus services to different parts of the city and its outskirts , while the terminal near Bandaran Berjaya provides intercity services to destinations south of the city ( Papar , Tenom , Beaufort etc . ) . A third bus terminal , the North Kota Kinabalu Bus Terminal in Inanam district , services intercity buses heading towards destinations north and north @-@ east of the city ( Tuaran , Kudat , Ranau , Sandakan , Tawau , Semporna etc . ) . Taxis are available throughout the city . 
 A railway system formerly known as the North Borneo Railway was established in 1896 by the British North Borneo Company . It was built for the main purpose of transporting commodities from the Interior Division to the port in Kota Kinabalu during the British occupation . The railway line connects Kota Kinabalu to Tenom and several other towns in between , and it is the only railway system operating in East Malaysia . Today , the railway is known as the Sabah State Railway , and it provides daily services for commuters , travellers , as well as for cargo transportation . A separate company operates the leisure tour also called the North Borneo Railway , which caters mainly for tourists . The train station and terminal is located in Tanjung Aru . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 Kota Kinabalu International Airport ( KKIA ) ( ICAO Code : <unk> ) is a main hub for Malaysia Airlines and a secondary hub for AirAsia and MASWings . It has one terminal and is the second busiest airport in Malaysia after Kuala Lumpur International Airport and is one of the main gateways into Sabah and East Malaysia . In addition to domestic flights within Sabah and Malaysia , KKIA is also serviced by international flights to several cities in southeast and northeast Asia , as well as Perth in Australia . The city will also become a secondary hub for a new airline called <unk> . 
 = = = Sea = = = 
 Kota Kinabalu has two ports : Kota Kinabalu Port and Sepanggar Bay Container Port ( <unk> ) . Kota Kinabalu Port mainly handles loose / bulk cargo , while <unk> operates as a naval base for the Royal Malaysian Navy and an oil depot in addition to handling containerised cargo . In 2004 , Kota Kinabalu Port handled about 3 @.@ 6 million tonnes of freight cargo , the third highest in the state after Sandakan Port and Tawau Port . However , it handles the highest number of containers in the state , with 153 @,@ 793 twenty @-@ foot equivalent units ( TEU ) of containers handled in 2006 . Sepanggar Bay Port will have an annual capacity of 200 @,@ 000 TEU when its container terminal is completed . All ports in Sabah are managed and operated by Sabah Ports Sdn Bhd . 
 The Kota Kinabalu Ferry Service operates from a passenger ferry terminal located at Jesselton Point , providing ferry and motorboat services to nearby islands . There are also regular scheduled ferry services to Labuan . 
 = = Other utilities = = 
 = = = Courts of law and legal enforcement = = = 
 The current court complex is located along <unk> Road . It contains the High Court , Sessions Court , and the Magistrate Court . Another court for the Sharia law were also located in the area of Sembulan . 
 The Sabah Police Contingent Headquarters is located in Kepayan . There are two district headquarters in the city , the Kota Kinabalu District police headquarters located in Karamunsing , and the Penampang District headquarters . Both also operate as police stations . Other police stations are found in KKIA , Tanjung Aru , Putatan , and Menggatal . Police substations ( Pondok Polis ) are found in Luyang , Likas , Telipok and <unk> . The city 's traffic police headquarters is located along Lorong Dewan near Gaya Street , and the marine police headquarters is located near the city ferry terminal along Tun Razak Road . 
 Kota Kinabalu Central Prison is located in Kepayan . Temporary lock @-@ ups or prison cells are found in most police stations around the city . 
 = = = Healthcare = = = 
 There are three public hospitals , six publics health clinic , two child and mother health clinics , six village clinics , one mobile clinic and six 1Malaysia clinics in Kota Kinabalu . Queen Elizabeth General Hospital , which is located along Penampang Road and named after Queen Elizabeth II , is the largest public hospital in the state with 589 beds . Built in 1957 , it is the most important healthcare centre in the city and one of three general hospitals in Sabah . Hospital Wanita dan Kanak @-@ kanak ( Sabah Women and Children Hospital ) serves as a referral hospital for children and women . Hospital Mesra Bukit Padang ( Bukit Padang Mental Hospital ) , which opened in 1971 , provides psychiatric services for the entire state . 
 Sabah Medical Centre is the largest private hospital with 134 beds in Sabah . In addition , three other large private health facilities are Gleneagles Kota Kinabalu with 70 beds , Damai Specialist Centre with 56 beds and Rafflesia Medical Centre with 14 beds . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 There are many government or state schools in and around the city . Among the well @-@ established and prestigious boarding schools in Sabah is Sekolah Menengah Sains Sabah , formally known as Sekolah <unk> <unk> Sabah ( <unk> ) , which is located at Bukit Padang . Other secondary schools are SM La Salle , Sekolah Menengah Shan Tao , Sekolah Menengah Taman Tun Fuad , Sekolah Menengah Likas , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Perempuan Likas , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan St. Francis Convent , Sekolah Menengah All Saints , Sekolah Menengah Stella Maris , Sekolah Menengah Saint Michael , Maktab Sabah , KK High School , Sekolah Menengah Lok Yuk , Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Agama Kota Kinabalu and Sekolah Menengah Kebangsaan Agama Tun <unk> . There are also a number of independent private schools in the city . Among them are Sabah <unk> Tsin Secondary School , Kian Kok Middle School , Maktab Nasional and Seri <unk> Secondary School . Classes usually begin at 7 am and end at 1 pm except for boarding schools , in which classes begins as early as 6 @.@ 30 am and end at 2 pm . Children aged 7 must attend primary education , which consists of six years of learning , while those aged 13 can pursue their studies in lower secondary education for three years . After completing their Lower Secondary Examination , students enter Upper Secondary education , where they will be streamed into either the Science stream or the Arts stream based on their examination results . Students who choose to study at boarding schools will be placed into the Science stream . Currently , there are four boarding schools in Sabah . 
 There are two international schools teaching the British Curriculum . Sayfol International School Sabah teaches from kindergarten to the GCE ' A ' Levels , which is taken at age 18 ( pre @-@ university ) . Sayfol International School is the sister school of the established and highly successful Sayfol International School in Kuala Lumpur . Kinabalu International School ( <unk> ) is part of the Federation of British International Schools in South and East Asia ( <unk> ) . Both English medium schools are located in Bukit Padang . Another international school is the Kinabalu Japanese School , one of four Japanese schools in Malaysia and the Kota Kinabalu Indonesian School . Both schools caters to children of Japanese and Indonesian expatriates working and living around the city . 
 Universiti Malaysia Sabah ( UMS ) , founded in 1994 , is the largest university in Sabah . Its main campus is located on a 999 @-@ acre ( 4 @.@ 04 km2 ) piece of land , on a hill facing the South China Sea at Sepanggar Bay , about 10 kilometres north of the city centre . It also has branch campuses in Labuan and Sandakan . It is considered as one of the most beautiful universities in Malaysia . The oldest university in Sabah is Universiti Teknologi MARA Sabah which was co @-@ founded by UiTM and <unk> Sabah in 1973 . The university has been certified by the Kota Kinabalu City Hall as a litter @-@ free university . There are also a number of private colleges and one polytechnic operating in the city , which are Universiti Tun Abdul Razak , <unk> International College , <unk> College , Kinabalu Commercial College , Informatics College , Kota Kinabalu Polytechnic and Institut Sinaran . The established Public College Tunku Abdul Rahman is located in the <unk> area . Many affluent residents send their children overseas to pursue either secondary or tertiary education . 
 Libraries : 
 The Sabah State Library Headquarters is located off Penampang Road and is the largest library in the state . Other public libraries include the Kota Kinabalu City ( Regional ) Library , Penampang Branch Library and Menggatal Village Library . These libraries are operated by the Sabah State Library department . Other libraries or private libraries can be found in schools , colleges , or universities . 
 = = Culture and leisure = = 
 = = = Attractions and recreation spots = = = 
 = = = = Cultural = = = = 
 There are a number of cultural venues in Kota Kinabalu . The Sabah State Museum , situated near the Queen Elizabeth Hospital , is the main museum of Sabah . In the vicinity of the museum are the Science and Technology Centre , Sabah Art Gallery , and the <unk> Botanic Gardens . Wisma Budaya Art Gallery in the city centre hosts some national as well as regional art exhibitions . The <unk> <unk> building in Penampang is home to the Kadazan @-@ Dusun Cultural Association ( <unk> ) . It hosts the annual <unk> or Harvest Festival and the <unk> <unk> beauty contest , which is held concurrently , in May . Monsopiad Cultural Village ( Kampung Monsopiad ) features cultural shows related to the Kadazan @-@ Dusun culture . It is named after the legendary Kadazan @-@ Dusun headhunting warrior , Monsopiad . 
 = = = = Historical = = = = 
 The Padang Merdeka or Town Field is the site where the declaration of Sabah 's independence and formation of Malaysia took place . The declaration was announced by Sabah 's first Chief Minister , Tun Fuad Stephens , on 16 September 1963 , also known as Malaysia Day . Today the site hosts the annual City Day celebration on 2 February , Merdeka Day celebration on 31 August , and a number of other celebrations and functions . 
 The Atkinson Clock Tower near Bandaran Berjaya was built by Mary Edith Atkinson in 1905 in memory of her son , Francis George Atkinson . It was formerly used as a navigation aid for ships . It is only one of three pre @-@ World War II buildings to survive the war . The Petagas War Memorial , located near KKIA , is a reminder of those who died when they went against the Japanese forces during World War II . It is situated at the place where the Kinabalu <unk> were killed by the Japanese army in 1944 . The Double Six Monument , located in Sembulan , is also a memorial to remember Sabah 's first Chief Minister and six other state ministers who died on a plane crash known as the Double Six Tragedy on 6 June 1976 . 
 = = = = Leisure and conservation areas = = = = 
 There are many leisure spots and conserved areas in and around Kota Kinabalu . <unk> Samudra ( KK Waterfront ) is a waterfront entertainment spot in the city centre which features restaurants , cafes , pubs , and a nightclub . The Royal Sabah Turf Club in Tanjung Aru hosts weekly horse racing events but has since closed and moved to <unk> Race Course in Tuaran due to the expansion of Kota Kinabalu International Airport . The North Borneo Railway , which begins its journey from Tanjung Aru station , offers a scenic tour of the countryside in the West Coast Division and the Interior Division . The railway journey ends in the town of Tenom . Sutera Harbour Golf & Country Club near the city centre was built on reclaimed land . It features a golf and country club , a marina , and two hotels . 
 Tanjung Aru , located about 6 kilometres from the city centre , is one of the beaches along the West Coast . Its name was derived from the casuarina trees ( locally called Aru trees ) that grow on the shoreline . The beach is over 2 kilometres in length and is complemented with a number food and drink stalls , restaurants , and night entertainment clubs . In the vicinity of Tanjung Aru lies the Kinabalu Golf Club , Prince Philip Botanical Park , KK Yacht Club , and Shangri @-@ La 's Tanjung Aru Beach Resort . This beach is famous for its sunset . 
 Located within the Likas Bay area is the Kota Kinabalu City Bird Sanctuary . With an area of 24 acres ( 9 @.@ 7 ha ) , it is one of the few remaining patches of mangrove forest that once existed extensively along the coastal region of Kota Kinabalu . It was conserved in September 1996 by the State Government to assist and foster a better understanding and awareness of the value of wetlands . The Sabah Zoological and Botanical Park ( Lok Kawi Wildlife Park ) in Lok Kawi , about 20 kilometres south of the city , is the first zoo in Sabah . Set on a 280 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 1 km2 ) piece of land , it is arguably the largest zoo in Malaysia . The Green Connection aquarium just outside the centre of KK showcases the fish , coral and reptile biodiversity of Sabah , with exhibits on many of the aquatic ecosystems of Sabah . At the Green Connection aquarium , there are 5 of the top 10 wildlife icons of Borneo like sharks , rays , coral , fish and snakes . 
 Tun Fuad Stephens Park , located in Bukit Padang , is a popular jogging and hiking spot among locals . It is surrounded by forests and also features a man @-@ made lake . It has a few food stalls and restaurants . Tunku Abdul Rahman Park is a State Park consisting of the islands of Sapi , Mamutik , Manukan , Sulug and Gaya . It is a popular spot for snorkelling . The park is about a 15 to 30 minutes boat ride away from the city ferry terminal . <unk> River in Penampang and <unk> Falls near Inanam are also popular places for picnics and leisure bathing . 
 Outside the city , Crocker Range Park , occupying a stretch of c . 20 x 80 km of the Crocker Range mountain chain to the city 's southeast ( roughly between Tenom and Tambunan , is a popular spot for jungle trekking and camping . Kota Kinabalu is also the gateway to one of the most popular conservation areas in Malaysia , Kinabalu Park . The park is a two @-@ hour drive away from the city and Mount Kinabalu , which is the 10th highest peak in South @-@ East Asia and the highest in Malaysia , is located there . The Rafflesia Forest Reserve near Tambunan , which is 30 kilometres away from Kota Kinabalu , is also within the Crocker Range National Park boundary . One of the smaller species of Rafflesia , R. pricei , can be found there . The Gunung Emas Highland Resort , which is nearby , is another spot famous for its scenery and cool climate . The Tuaran Crocodile Farm , about 30 kilometres north of the city , has around 1400 crocodiles in its enclosure , making it the largest of its kind in Sabah . 
 = = = = Other sights = = = = 
 The Tun Mustapha Tower ( formerly Sabah Foundation Building ) is about a 10 @-@ minute drive from the city centre . This 30 @-@ storey glass building is supported by high @-@ tensile steel rods , one of only three buildings in the world that is built using this method . 
 Other buildings and sites in the city are the stilt villages found in the areas of Sembulan , Tanjung Aru , Kampung Likas , and Kampung <unk> in Gaya Island . These houses are built on shallow coastal waters and are homes for the Bajau and Suluk inhabitants . 
 The Sabah State Mosque in Sembulan is the main mosque in the city . The City Mosque on Likas Bay is another significant landmark in the city . 
 The Signal Hill Observatory near the CBD offers a scenic view of the city centre , the islands , and the sea . 
 = = = = Shopping = = = = 
 Kota Kinabalu also features a number of shopping malls . These include Imago Mall KK Times Square , Oceanus Waterfront Mall , Kompleks Karamunsing , Centre Point , Wisma Merdeka , Warisan Square , Plaza Wawasan , Kompleks Asia City , City Mall , KK Plaza , Megalong Mall , Suria Sabah and 1Borneo , which is the largest <unk> in Kota Kinabalu . Karamunsing , where Kompleks Karamunsing is situated , is an area that has more computer shops per capita than anywhere else in Sabah . The weekly Gaya Street Sunday Market features a gathering of local hawkers selling a wide range of items from traditional ethnic cultural souvenirs to pets and flowers . The Kota Kinabalu Handicraft Market ( formerly known as the Filipino Market ) features vendors selling traditional handicrafts , souvenirs and foodstuffs . 
 = = = = Entertainment = = = = 
 There are six cinemas in Kota Kinabalu : 2 Golden Screen Cinemas ( commonly known as GSC ) , MBO cinemas located at Imago Mall Kota Kinabalu Times Square , <unk> Cineplex at Centre Point Mall and Megalong Cineplex at Megalong Mall . One of the GSC cinemas is located at Suria Sabah Shopping Mall , while the other is located at 1Borneo . Both GSC cinemas hold eight cinema halls each . 1Borneo <unk> and Sutera Harbour Marina have bowling alleys and pool tables . A new cinema known as the MBO Cinemas with a capacity of 1 @,@ 038 is located in the newly Imago Mall , KK Times Square . 
 Kota Kinabalu is well known as live seafood market . There are many live seafood restaurants such as Hua Hing Seafood Restaurant ( located at <unk> Complex ) around the city . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 The Likas Sports Complex in Kota Kinabalu provides various sporting and recreational facilities for public use . It has , among others , a 20 @,@ 000 @-@ seater football ( soccer ) stadium , badminton , tennis , and squash courts , a gymnasium , an Olympic size swimming pool , a driving range , hockey fields and a new Youth Challenge park consisting of an international standard skate park and indoor climbing centre . It is the largest sports complex in the state and has hosted numerous national as well as international sporting events . Likas Stadium is the home stadium of Sabah FA , also known as <unk> . There is another sports complex in Penampang which also has a full @-@ sized football stadium . 
 There are four golf courses in Kota Kinabalu , namely the Sabah Golf and Country Club in Bukit Padang , Kinabalu Golf Club in Tanjung Aru , Sutera Harbour Golf and Country Club , and <unk> Golf and Country Club . 
 Kota Kinabalu has hosted a number of national sporting events such as the 2002 Sukma Games , international tournaments such as the 1994 Karate World Championships and the 2008 <unk> Super Series Masters Finals badminton tournament . It is also the starting point of the annual international Borneo Safari 4x4 Challenge . Kota Kinabalu has been one of the circuits for the F2 Powerboat <unk> World Cup Series in December every year since 2007 . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Kota Kinabalu is home to one of Asia 's favourite jazz festivals , the KK Jazz Festival . It has become an annual event . International performers such as <unk> ( Venezuela ) , award @-@ winning Korean jazz diva Nah Youn Sun , Hong Kong 's Junk Unit , Malaysia 's Double Take , <unk> and Mood Indigo from UK have all previously performed at the festival . 
 <unk> Street Press Magazine is Kota Kinabalu 's only free monthly magazine that promotes local Sabah music . The magazine was launched in March 2009 , and was supported by the local government and was referred by Sabah 's Minister of Culture , Environment & Tourism , YB Datuk <unk> <unk> , as a publication that will introduce and promote new local musicians while serving up the latest information on the local entertainment scene . 
 = = = Radio stations = = = 
 Several national radio stations have their office in the city , this include Hitz FM Sabah ( 100 @.@ 8 ) , Era FM Sabah ( 102 @.@ 4 ) , TEA FM ( 102 @.@ 8 ) and MY FM Sabah ( 104 @.@ 0 ) . 
 = = International relations = = 
 Several countries have set up their consulates in Kota Kinabalu , including Australia , Brunei , China , Denmark , France , Finland , Indonesia , Japan , Romania , Slovakia , Sweden and the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Sister cities = = = 
 Kota Kinabalu currently has six sister cities : 
 = = = Others = = = 
 Sabah State Government and <unk> ( Danish Co @-@ operation for Environment and Development ) : Sabah Integrated Coastal Zone Management ( <unk> ) 
 = Mormons = 
 Mormons ( / <unk> / ) are a religious and cultural group related to Mormonism , the principal branch of the Latter Day Saint movement of Restorationist Christianity , which began with Joseph Smith in upstate New York during the 1820s . After Smith 's death in 1844 , the Mormons followed Brigham Young to what would become the Utah Territory . Today , most Mormons are understood to be members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) . Some Mormons are also either independent or non @-@ practicing . The center of Mormon cultural influence is in Utah , and North America has more Mormons than any other continent , though the majority of Mormons live outside the United States . 
 Mormons have developed a strong sense of communality that stems from their doctrine and history . During the 19th century , Mormon converts tended to gather to a central geographic location , and between 1852 and 1890 a minority of Mormons openly practiced plural marriage , a form of religious polygamy . Mormons dedicate large amounts of time and resources to serving in their church , and many young Mormons choose to serve a full @-@ time proselytizing mission . Mormons have a health code which eschews alcoholic beverages , tobacco , coffee , tea , and other addictive substances . They tend to be very family @-@ oriented , and have strong connections across generations and with extended family , reflective of their belief that families can be sealed together beyond death . Mormons also have a strict law of chastity , requiring abstention from sexual relations outside of heterosexual marriage and fidelity within marriage . 
 Mormons self @-@ identify as Christian , although some non @-@ Mormons dispute this and some of their beliefs differ from mainstream Christianity . Mormons believe in the Bible , as well as other books of scripture , such as the Book of Mormon . They have a unique view of cosmology , and believe that all people are spirit @-@ children of God . Mormons believe that returning to God requires following the example of Jesus Christ , and accepting his atonement through ordinances such as baptism . They believe that Christ 's church was restored through Joseph Smith and is guided by living prophets and apostles . Central to Mormon faith is the belief that God speaks to his children and answers their prayers . 
 Due to their high birth and conversion rates , the Mormon population has grown significantly in recent decades rising from around three million in 1970 to over 15 million in 2015 . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 The word " Mormons " most often refers to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( LDS Church ) because of their belief in the Book of Mormon , though members often refer to themselves as Latter @-@ day Saints or sometimes just Saints . The term " Mormons " has been embraced by most adherents of Mormonism , most notably Mormon fundamentalists , while other Latter Day Saint denominations , such as the Community of Christ , have rejected it . Both LDS Church members ( or " Latter @-@ day Saints " ) and members of fundamentalist groups commonly use the word " Mormon " in reference to themselves . The LDS Church , however , disagrees with this self @-@ characterization , and encourages the use of the word " Mormon " only in reference to LDS Church members . Church leaders also encourage members to use the church 's full name to emphasize its focus on Jesus Christ . 
 The word " Mormon " is often associated with polygamy ( or plural marriage ) , which was a distinguishing practice of many early Mormons ; however it was renounced by the LDS Church in 1890 and discontinued over the next 15 years . Today , polygamy is practiced within Mormonism only by people that have broken with the LDS Church . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the Mormons has shaped them into a people with a strong sense of unity and communality . From the start , Mormons have tried to establish what they call " Zion " , a utopian society of the righteous . Mormon history can be divided into three broad time periods : ( 1 ) the early history during the lifetime of Joseph Smith , ( 2 ) a " pioneer era " under the leadership of Brigham Young and his successors , and ( 3 ) a modern era beginning around the turn of the 20th century . In the first period , Smith had tried literally to build a city called Zion , in which converts could gather . During the pioneer era , Zion became a " landscape of villages " in Utah . In modern times , Zion is still an ideal , though Mormons gather together in their individual congregations rather than a central geographic location . 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Mormons trace their origins to the visions that Joseph Smith reported having in the early 1820s while living in upstate New York . In 1823 , Smith said an angel directed him to a buried book written on golden plates containing the religious history of an ancient people . Smith published what he said was a translation of these plates in March 1830 as the Book of Mormon , named after Mormon , the ancient prophet – historian who compiled the book . On April 6 , 1830 , Smith founded the Church of Christ . The early church grew westward as Smith sent missionaries to preach the restored gospel . In 1831 , the church moved to Kirtland , Ohio where missionaries had made a large number of converts and Smith began establishing an outpost in Jackson County , Missouri , where he planned to eventually build the city of Zion ( or the New Jerusalem ) . In 1833 , Missouri settlers , alarmed by the rapid influx of Mormons , expelled them from Jackson County into the nearby Clay County , where local residents took them in . After Smith led a mission , known as Zion 's Camp , to recover the land , he began building Kirtland Temple in Lake County , Ohio , where the church flourished . When the Missouri Mormons were later asked to leave Clay County in 1836 , they secured land in what would become Caldwell County . 
 The Kirtland era ended in 1838 , after the failure of a church @-@ sponsored bank caused widespread defections , and Smith regrouped with the remaining church in Far West , Missouri . During the fall of 1838 , tensions escalated into the Mormon War with the old Missouri settlers . On October 27 , the governor of Missouri ordered that the Mormons " must be treated as enemies " and be exterminated or driven from the state . Between November and April , some eight thousand displaced Mormons migrated east into Illinois . 
 In 1839 , the Mormons converted a swampland on the banks of the Mississippi River into Nauvoo , Illinois and began construction of the Nauvoo Temple . The city became the church 's new headquarters and gathering place , and it grew rapidly , fueled in part by converts immigrating from Europe . Meanwhile , Smith introduced temple ceremonies meant to seal families together for eternity , as well as the doctrines of eternal progression or exaltation , and plural marriage . Smith created a service organization for women called the Relief Society , as well as an organization called the Council of Fifty , representing a future <unk> " Kingdom of God " on the earth . Smith also published the story of his First Vision , in which the Father and the Son appeared to him while he was about 14 years old . This vision would come to be regarded by some Mormons as the most important event in human history after the birth , ministry , and resurrection of Jesus Christ . 
 In 1844 , local prejudices and political tensions , fueled by Mormon peculiarity and internal dissent , escalated into conflicts between Mormons and " anti @-@ Mormons " . On June 27 , 1844 , Smith and his brother Hyrum were killed by a mob in Carthage , Illinois . Because Hyrum was Smith 's logical successor , their deaths caused a succession crisis , and Brigham Young assumed leadership over the majority of Latter Day Saints . Young had been a close associate of Smith 's and was senior apostle of the Quorum of the Twelve . Smaller groups of Latter Day Saints followed other leaders to form other denominations of the Latter Day Saint movement . 
 = = = Pioneer era = = = 
 For two years after Smith 's death , conflicts escalated between Mormons and other Illinois residents . To prevent war , Brigham Young led the Mormon pioneers ( constituting most of the Latter Day Saints ) to a temporary winter quarters in Nebraska and then , eventually ( beginning in 1847 ) , to what became the Utah Territory . Having failed to build Zion within the confines of American society , the Mormons began to construct a society in isolation , based on their beliefs and values . The cooperative ethic that Mormons had developed over the last decade and a half became important as settlers branched out and colonized a large desert region now known as the Mormon Corridor . <unk> efforts were seen as religious duties , and the new villages were governed by the Mormon bishops ( local lay religious leaders ) . The Mormons viewed land as commonwealth , devising and maintaining a co @-@ operative system of irrigation that allowed them to build a farming community in the desert . 
 From 1849 – 52 , the Mormons greatly expanded their missionary efforts , establishing several missions in Europe , Latin America , and the South Pacific . Converts were expected to " gather " to Zion , and during Young 's presidency ( 1847 – 77 ) over seventy thousand Mormon converts immigrated to America . Many of the converts came from England and Scandinavia , and were quickly assimilated into the Mormon community . Many of these immigrants crossed the Great Plains in wagons drawn by oxen , while some later groups pulled their possessions in small handcarts . During the 1860s , newcomers began using the new railroad that was under construction . 
 In 1852 , church leaders publicized the previously secret practice of plural marriage , a form of polygamy . Over the next 50 years , many Mormons ( between 20 and 30 percent of Mormon families ) entered into plural marriages as a religious duty , with the number of plural marriages reaching a peak around 1860 , and then declining through the rest of the century . Besides the doctrinal reasons for plural marriage , the practice made some economic sense , as many of the plural wives were single women who arrived in Utah without brothers or fathers to offer them societal support . 
 By 1857 , tensions had again escalated between Mormons and other Americans , largely as a result of accusations involving polygamy and the theocratic rule of the Utah Territory by Brigham Young . In 1857 , U.S. President James Buchanan sent an army to Utah , which Mormons interpreted as open aggression against them . Fearing a repeat of Missouri and Illinois , the Mormons prepared to defend themselves , determined to torch their own homes in the case that they were invaded . The relatively peaceful Utah War ensued from 1857 to 1858 , in which the most notable instance of violence was the Mountain Meadows massacre , when leaders of a local Mormon militia ordered the killing of a civilian emigrant party that was traveling through Utah during the escalating tensions . In 1858 , Young agreed to step down from his position as governor and was replaced by a non @-@ Mormon , Alfred Cumming . Nevertheless , the LDS Church still wielded significant political power in the Utah Territory . 
 At Young 's death in 1877 , he was followed by other LDS Church presidents , who resisted efforts by the United States Congress to outlaw Mormon polygamous marriages . In 1878 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Reynolds v. United States that religious duty was not a suitable defense for practicing polygamy , and many Mormon polygamists went into hiding ; later , Congress began seizing church assets . In September 1890 , church president Wilford Woodruff issued a Manifesto that officially suspended the practice of polygamy . Although this Manifesto did not dissolve existing plural marriages , relations with the United States markedly improved after 1890 , such that Utah was admitted as a U.S. state in 1896 . After the Manifesto , some Mormons continued to enter into polygamous marriages , but these eventually stopped in 1904 when church president Joseph F. Smith disavowed polygamy before Congress and issued a " Second Manifesto " calling for all plural marriages in the church to cease . Eventually , the church adopted a policy of excommunicating members found practicing polygamy , and today seeks actively to distance itself from " fundamentalist " groups that continue the practice . 
 = = = Modern times = = = 
 During the early 20th century , Mormons began to reintegrate into the American mainstream . In 1929 , the Mormon Tabernacle Choir began broadcasting a weekly performance on national radio , becoming an asset for public relations . Mormons emphasized patriotism and industry , rising in socioeconomic status from the bottom among American religious denominations to middle @-@ class . In the 1920s and 1930s , Mormons began migrating out of Utah , a trend hurried by the Great Depression , as Mormons looked for work wherever they could find it . As Mormons spread out , church leaders created programs that would help preserve the tight @-@ knit community feel of Mormon culture . In addition to weekly worship services , Mormons began participating in numerous programs such as Boy Scouting , a Young Women organization , church @-@ sponsored dances , ward basketball , camping trips , plays , and religious education programs for youth and college students . During the Great Depression , the church started a welfare program to meet the needs of poor members , which has since grown to include a humanitarian branch that provides relief to disaster victims . 
 During the later half of the 20th century , there was a retrenchment movement in Mormonism in which Mormons became more conservative , attempting to regain their status as a " peculiar people " . Though the 1960s and 1970s brought changes such as Women 's Liberation and the Civil Rights Movement , Mormon leaders were alarmed by the erosion of traditional values , the sexual revolution , the widespread use of recreational drugs , moral relativism , and other forces they saw as damaging to the family . Partly to counter this , Mormons put an even greater emphasis on family life , religious education , and missionary work , becoming more conservative in the process . As a result , Mormons today are probably less integrated with mainstream society than they were in the early 1960s . 
 Although black people have been members of Mormon congregations since Joseph Smith 's time , before 1978 , black membership was small . From 1852 to 1978 , the LDS Church enforced a policy that restricted men of black African descent from being ordained to the church 's lay priesthood . The church was sharply criticized for its policy during the civil rights movement , but the policy remained in force until a 1978 reversal that was prompted in part by questions about mixed @-@ race converts in Brazil . In general , Mormons greeted the change with joy and relief . Since 1978 , black membership has grown , and in 1997 there were approximately 500 @,@ 000 black members of the church ( about 5 percent of the total membership ) , mostly in Africa , Brazil and the Caribbean . Black membership has continued to grow substantially , especially in West Africa , where two temples have been built . Many black Mormons are members of the Genesis Group , an organization of black members that predates the priesthood ban , and is endorsed by the church . 
 The LDS Church grew rapidly after World War II and became a world @-@ wide organization as missionaries were sent across the globe . The church doubled in size every 15 to 20 years , and by 1996 , there were more Mormons outside the United States than inside . In 2012 , there were an estimated 14 @.@ 8 million Mormons , with roughly 57 percent living outside the United States . It is estimated that approximately 4 @.@ 5 million Mormons - roughly 30 % of the total membership - regularly attend services . A majority of U.S. Mormons are white and non @-@ Hispanic ( 84 percent ) . Most Mormons are distributed in North and South America , the South Pacific , and Western Europe . The global distribution of Mormons resembles a contact diffusion model , radiating out from the organization 's headquarters in Utah . The church enforces general doctrinal uniformity , and congregations on all continents teach the same doctrines , and international Mormons tend to absorb a good deal of Mormon culture , possibly because of the church 's top @-@ down hierarchy and a missionary presence . However , international Mormons often bring pieces of their own heritage into the church , adapting church practices to local cultures . 
 Chile , Uruguay , and several areas in the South Pacific have a higher percentage of Mormons than the United States ( which is at about 2 percent ) . South Pacific countries and dependencies that are more than 10 percent Mormon include American Samoa , the Cook Islands , Kiribati , Niue , Samoa , and Tonga . 
 = = Culture and practices = = 
 Isolation in Utah had allowed Mormons to create a culture of their own . As the faith spread around the world , many of its more distinctive practices followed . Mormon converts are urged to undergo lifestyle changes , repent of sins , and adopt sometimes foreign standards of conduct . Practices common to Mormons include studying scriptures , praying daily , fasting regularly , attending Sunday worship services , participating in church programs and activities on weekdays , and refraining from work on Sundays when possible . The most important part of the church services is considered to be the Lord 's Supper ( commonly called sacrament ) , in which church members renew covenants made at baptism . Mormons also emphasize standards they believe were taught by Jesus Christ , including personal honesty , integrity , obedience to law , chastity outside of marriage and fidelity within marriage . 
 In 2010 , around 13 – 14 percent of Mormons lived in Utah , the center of cultural influence for Mormonism . Utah Mormons ( as well as Mormons living in the Intermountain West ) are on average more culturally and / or politically conservative than those living in some cosmopolitan centers elsewhere in the U.S. Utahns self @-@ identifying as Mormon also attend church somewhat more on average than Mormons living in other states . ( Nonetheless , whether they live in Utah or elsewhere in the U.S. , Mormons tend to be more culturally and / or politically conservative than members of other U.S. religious groups . ) Utah Mormons often place a greater emphasis on pioneer heritage than international Mormons who generally are not descendants of the Mormon pioneers . 
 Mormons have a strong sense of communality that stems from their doctrine and history . LDS Church members have a responsibility to dedicate their time and talents to helping the poor and building the church . The church is divided by locality into congregations called " wards " , with several wards making up a " stake " . The vast majority of church leadership positions are lay positions , and church leaders may work 10 to 15 hours a week in unpaid church service . Observant Mormons also contribute 10 percent of their income to the church as tithing , and are often involved in humanitarian efforts . Many LDS young men , women and elderly couples choose to serve a proselytizing mission , during which they dedicate all of their time to the church , without pay . 
 Mormons adhere to the Word of Wisdom , a health law or code that is interpreted as prohibiting the consumption of tobacco , alcohol , coffee and tea , while encouraging the use of wholesome herbs , grains , fruits , and a moderate consumption of meat . The Word of Wisdom is also understood to forbid other harmful and addictive substances and practices , such as the use of illegal drugs and abuse of prescription drugs . Mormons also oppose behaviors such as viewing pornography and gambling . 
 The concept of a united family that lives and progresses forever is at the core of Latter @-@ day Saint doctrine , and Mormons place a high importance on family life . Many Mormons hold weekly family home evenings , in which an evening is set aside for family bonding , study , prayer and other wholesome activities . Latter @-@ day Saint fathers who hold the priesthood typically name and bless their children shortly after birth to formally give the child a name . Mormon parents hope and pray that their children will gain testimonies of the " gospel " so they can grow up and marry in temples . 
 Mormons have a strict law of chastity , requiring abstention from sexual relations outside of opposite @-@ sex marriage and strict fidelity within marriage . All sexual activity ( heterosexual and homosexual ) outside of marriage is considered a serious sin , with marriage recognized as only between a man and a woman . Same @-@ sex marriages are not performed or supported by the LDS Church . Church members are encouraged to marry and have children , and Latter @-@ day Saint families tend to be larger than average . Mormons are opposed to abortion , except in some exceptional circumstances , such as when pregnancy is the result of incest or rape , or when the life or health of the mother is in serious jeopardy . Many practicing adult Mormons wear religious undergarments that remind them of covenants and encourage them to dress modestly . Latter @-@ day Saints are counseled not to partake of any form of media that is obscene or pornographic in any way , including media that depicts graphic representations of sex or violence . Tattoos and body piercings are also discouraged , with the exception of a single pair of earrings for LDS women . 
 LGBT Mormons , or Mormons who self @-@ identify as gay , lesbian , or bisexual , remain in good standing in the church if they abstain from homosexual relations and obey the law of chastity . While there are no official numbers , LDS Family Services estimates that there are on average four or five members per LDS ward who experience same @-@ sex attraction . Gary Watts , former president of Family Fellowship , estimates that only 10 percent of homosexuals stay in the church . Many of these individuals have come forward through different support groups or websites discussing their homosexual attractions and concurrent church membership . 
 = = Groups within Mormonism = = 
 = = = Latter @-@ day Saints = = = 
 Members of the LDS Church , also known as Latter @-@ day Saints , constitute over 99 percent of Mormons . The beliefs and practices of LDS Mormons are generally guided by the teachings of LDS Church leaders . There are , however , several smaller groups that differ from " mainstream " Mormonism in various ways . 
 LDS Church members who do not actively participate in worship services or church callings are often called " less @-@ active " ( akin to the qualifying expressions non @-@ observant or non @-@ practicing used in relation to members of other religious groups ) . The LDS Church does not release statistics on church activity , but it is likely that about 40 percent of Mormons in the United States and 30 percent worldwide regularly attend worship services . Reasons for inactivity can include lifestyle issues and problems with social integration . Activity rates tend to vary with age , and disengagement occurs most frequently between age 16 and 25 . A majority of less active members return to church activity later in life . Former Latter @-@ day Saints who seek to disassociate themselves from the religion are often referred to as ex @-@ Mormons . 
 = = = Fundamentalist Mormons = = = 
 Members of sects that broke with the LDS Church over the issue of polygamy have become known as fundamentalist Mormons ; these groups differ from mainstream Mormonism primarily in their belief in and practice of plural marriage . There are thought to be between 20 @,@ 000 and 60 @,@ 000 members of fundamentalist sects , ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 4 percent of Mormons ) , with roughly half of them practicing polygamy . There are a number of fundamentalist sects , the largest two being the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ Day Saints ( FLDS Church ) and the Apostolic United Brethren ( AUB ) . In addition to plural marriage , some of these groups also practice a form of Christian communalism known as the law of consecration or the United Order . The LDS Church seeks to distance itself from all such polygamous groups , excommunicating their members if discovered practicing or teaching it , and today a majority of Mormon fundamentalists have never been members of the LDS Church . 
 = = = Liberal Mormons = = = 
 Liberal Mormons , also known as Progressive Mormons , take an interpretive approach to LDS teachings and scripture . They look to the scriptures for spiritual guidance , but do not necessarily believe the teachings to be literally or uniquely true . For liberal Mormons , revelation is a process through which God gradually brings fallible human beings to greater understanding . Liberal Mormons place doing good and loving fellow human beings above the importance of believing correctly . In a separate context , members of small progressive breakaway groups have also adopted the label . 
 = = = Cultural Mormons = = = 
 Cultural Mormons are individuals who do not believe some ( or many ) of the doctrines of LDS Church , but who self @-@ identify as Mormon . Usually this is a result of having been raised in the LDS faith , or as having converted and spent a large portion of one 's life as an active member of the LDS Church . Cultural Mormons may or may not be actively involved with the church , and in some cases may not even be officially members of the church . 
 = = Beliefs = = 
 Mormons have a scriptural canon consisting of the Bible ( both Old and New Testaments ) , the Book of Mormon , and a collection of revelations and writings by Joseph Smith known as the Doctrine and Covenants and Pearl of Great Price . Mormons however have a relatively open definition of scripture . As a general rule , anything spoken or written by a prophet , while under inspiration , is considered to be the word of God . Thus , the Bible , written by prophets and apostles , is the word of God , so far as it is translated correctly . The Book of Mormon is also believed to have been written by ancient prophets , and is viewed as a companion to the Bible . By this definition , the teachings of Smith 's successors are also accepted as scripture , though they are always measured against , and draw heavily from the scriptural canon . 
 Mormons believe in " a friendly universe " , governed by a God whose aim it is to bring his children to immortality and eternal life . Mormons have a unique perspective on the nature of God , the origin of man , and the purpose of life . For instance , Mormons believe in a pre @-@ mortal existence where people were literal spirit children of God , and that God presented a plan of salvation that would allow his children to progress and become more like him . The plan involved the spirits receiving bodies on earth and going through trials in order to learn , progress , and receive a " fulness of joy " . The most important part of the plan involved Jesus , the eldest of God 's children , coming to earth as the literal Son of God , to conquer sin and death so that God 's other children could return . According to Mormons , every person who lives on earth will be resurrected , and nearly all of them will be received into various kingdoms of glory . To be accepted into the highest kingdom , a person must fully accept Christ through faith , repentance , and through ordinances such as baptism and the laying on of hands . 
 According to Mormons , a deviation from the original principles of Christianity , known as the Great Apostasy , began not long after the ascension of Jesus Christ . It was marked with the corruption of Christian doctrine by Greek and other philosophies , with followers dividing into different ideological groups . Mormons claim the martyrdom of the Apostles led to a loss of Priesthood authority to administer the church and its ordinances . Mormons believe that God restored the early Christian church through Joseph Smith . In particular , Mormons believe that angels such as Peter , James , John , John the Baptist , Moses , and Elijah appeared to Smith and others and bestowed various priesthood authorities on them . Mormons believe that their church is the " only true and living church " because of the divine authority restored through Smith . Mormons self @-@ identify as being Christian , while many Christians , particularly evangelical Protestants , disagree with this view . Mormons view other religions as having portions of the truth , doing good works , and having genuine value . 
 Though the LDS Church has a top @-@ down hierarchical structure with a president – prophet dictating revelations for the whole church , there is a bottom @-@ up aspect as well . Ordinary Mormons have access to the same inspiration that is thought to guide their prophets , and are encouraged to seek their own personal revelations . Mormons see Joseph Smith 's first vision as proof that the heavens are open , and that God answers prayers . They place considerable emphasis on " asking God " to find out if something is true . Most Mormons do not claim to have had heavenly visions like Smith 's in response to prayers , but feel that God talks to them in their hearts and minds through the Holy Ghost . Though Mormons have some beliefs that are considered strange in a modernized world , they continue to hold onto their beliefs because they feel God has spoken to them . 
 = Casablanca ( film ) = 
 Casablanca is a 1942 American romantic drama film directed by Michael Curtiz and based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison 's unproduced stage play Everybody Comes to Rick 's . The film stars Humphrey Bogart , Ingrid Bergman , and Paul Henreid ; it also features Claude Rains , Conrad Veidt , Sydney Greenstreet , Peter Lorre , and Dooley Wilson . Set during World War II , it focuses on an American expatriate who must choose between his love for a woman and helping her Czech Resistance leader husband escape the Vichy @-@ controlled city of Casablanca to continue his fight against the Nazis . 
 Story editor Irene Diamond convinced producer Hal B. Wallis to purchase the film rights to the play in January 1942 . Brothers Julius and Philip G. Epstein were initially assigned to write the script . However , despite studio resistance , they left to work on Frank Capra 's Why We Fight series early in 1942 . Howard E. Koch was assigned to the screenplay until the Epsteins returned a month later . Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites , but his work would later go uncredited . Wallis chose Curtiz to direct the film after his first choice , William Wyler , became unavailable . Principal photography began on May 25 , 1942 , ending on August 3 ; the film was shot entirely at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , with the exception of one sequence at Van Nuys Airport in Van Nuys , Los Angeles . 
 Although Casablanca was an A @-@ list film with established stars and first @-@ rate writers , no one involved with its production expected it to be anything out of the ordinary . It was just one of hundreds of pictures produced by Hollywood every year . Casablanca was rushed into release to take advantage of the publicity from the Allied invasion of North Africa a few weeks earlier . It had its world premiere on November 26 , 1942 , in New York City and was released nationally in the United States on January 23 , 1943 . The film was a solid if unspectacular success in its initial run . 
 Casablanca did account for three Academy Awards – Best Picture , Director ( Curtiz ) and Adapted Screenplay ( the Epsteins and Koch ) – and gradually its reputation grew . Its lead characters , memorable lines , and pervasive theme song have all become iconic and the film consistently ranks near the top of lists of the greatest films in history . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In December 1941 , American expatriate Rick Blaine is the proprietor of an upscale nightclub and gambling den in Casablanca . " Rick 's Café Américain " attracts a varied clientele : Vichy French and German officials ; refugees desperate to reach the still neutral United States ; and those who prey on them . Although Rick professes to be neutral in all matters , it is later revealed he ran guns to Ethiopia during its war with Italy and fought on the Loyalist side in the Spanish Civil War . 
 Petty crook Ugarte shows up and boasts to Rick of " letters of transit " obtained by murdering two German couriers . The papers allow the bearers to travel freely around German @-@ controlled Europe and to neutral Portugal , and are thus almost priceless to the refugees stranded in Casablanca . Ugarte plans to sell them at the club that night , and asks Rick to hold them . Before he can meet his contact , he is arrested by the local police under the command of Captain Louis Renault , an unabashedly corrupt Vichy official . Ugarte dies in custody without revealing that he entrusted the letters to Rick . 
 At this point , the reason for Rick 's bitterness — former lover Ilsa Lund — walks into his establishment . Upon spotting Rick 's friend and house pianist , Sam , Ilsa asks him to play " As Time Goes By . " Rick storms over , furious that Sam has disobeyed his order never to perform that song , and is stunned to see Ilsa . She is accompanied by her husband , Victor Laszlo , a renowned fugitive Czech Resistance leader . They need the letters to escape to America to continue his work . German Major Strasser has come to Casablanca to see that Laszlo does not succeed . 
 When Laszlo makes inquiries , Ferrari , a major underworld figure and Rick 's friendly business rival , divulges his suspicion that Rick has the letters . In private , Rick refuses to sell at any price , telling Laszlo to ask his wife the reason . They are interrupted when Strasser leads a group of officers in singing " Die Wacht am Rhein . " Laszlo orders the house band to play " La Marseillaise . " When the band looks to Rick , he nods his head . Laszlo starts singing , alone at first , then patriotic fervor grips the crowd and everyone joins in , drowning out the Germans . In retaliation , Strasser has Renault close the club . 
 That night , Ilsa confronts Rick in the deserted café . When he refuses to give her the letters , she threatens him with a gun , but then confesses that she still loves him . She explains that when they met and fell in love in Paris in 1940 , she believed her husband had been killed attempting to escape from a concentration camp . Later , while preparing to flee with Rick from the imminent fall of the city to the German army , she learned that Laszlo was alive and in hiding . She left Rick without explanation to nurse her sick husband . 
 Rick 's bitterness dissolves . He agrees to help , letting her believe that she will stay with him when Laszlo leaves . When Laszlo unexpectedly shows up , having narrowly escaped a police raid on a Resistance meeting , Rick has waiter Carl spirit Ilsa away . Laszlo , aware of Rick 's love for Ilsa , tries to persuade him to use the letters to take her to safety . When the police arrest Laszlo on a minor , trumped @-@ up charge , Rick convinces Renault to release him by promising to set him up for a much more serious crime : possession of the letters . To allay Renault 's suspicions , Rick explains that he and Ilsa will be leaving for America . When Renault tries to arrest Laszlo as arranged , Rick forces him at gunpoint to assist in their escape . At the last moment , Rick makes Ilsa board the plane to Lisbon with her husband , telling her that she would regret it if she stayed — " Maybe not today , maybe not tomorrow , but soon and for the rest of your life . " 
 Strasser , tipped off by Renault , drives up alone . Rick kills him when he tries to intervene . When policemen arrive , Renault pauses , then orders them to " round up the usual suspects . " Renault suggests to Rick that they join the Free French in Brazzaville . As they walk away into the fog , Rick says , " Louis , I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 The play 's cast consisted of 16 speaking parts and several extras ; the film script enlarged it to 22 speaking parts and hundreds of extras . The cast is notably international : only three of the credited actors were born in the United States ( Bogart , Dooley Wilson , and Joy Page ) . The top @-@ billed actors are : 
 Humphrey Bogart as Rick Blaine . Rick was his first truly romantic role . 
 Ingrid Bergman as Ilsa Lund . Bergman 's official website calls Ilsa her " most famous and enduring role " . The Swedish actress 's Hollywood debut in Intermezzo had been well received , but her subsequent films were not major successes until Casablanca . Film critic Roger Ebert called her " luminous " , and commented on the chemistry between her and Bogart : " she paints his face with her eyes " . Other actresses considered for the role of Ilsa included Ann Sheridan , Hedy Lamarr , Luise Rainer and Michèle Morgan . Producer Hal Wallis obtained the services of Bergman , who was contracted to David O. Selznick , by lending Olivia de Havilland in exchange . 
 Paul Henreid as Victor Laszlo . Henreid , an Austrian actor who had emigrated in 1935 to flee Nazi persecution , was reluctant to take the role ( it " set [ him ] as a stiff forever " , according to Pauline Kael ) , until he was promised top billing along with Bogart and Bergman . Henreid did not get on well with his fellow actors ; he considered Bogart " a mediocre actor . " Bergman called Henreid a " prima donna " . 
 The second @-@ billed actors are : 
 Claude Rains as Captain Louis Renault . Rains was an English actor born in London . He had previously worked with Michael Curtiz on The Adventures of Robin Hood . He later played the villain in Alfred Hitchcock 's Notorious , <unk> with Ingrid Bergman . 
 Conrad Veidt as Major Heinrich Strasser . He was a refugee German actor who had appeared in The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari . He fled the Nazis , but was frequently cast as a Nazi in American films . 
 Sydney Greenstreet as Signor Ferrari . Another Englishman , Greenstreet had previously starred with Lorre and Bogart in his film debut in The Maltese Falcon . 
 Peter Lorre as Signor Ugarte . Born in Austria @-@ Hungary , Lorre fled Nazi Germany in 1933 after starring in Fritz Lang 's first sound movie , M ( 1931 ) . Greenstreet and Lorre appeared in several films together over the next few years , although they did not share a scene in Casablanca . 
 Also credited are : 
 Curt Bois as the pickpocket . Bois was a German @-@ Jewish actor and refugee . He had one of the longest careers in film , making his first appearance in 1907 and his last in 1987 . 
 Leonid <unk> as Sascha , the Russian bartender infatuated with Yvonne . He was born into a Jewish family in Russia and had immigrated to the United States . He told Aljean Harmetz , author of Round Up the Usual Suspects : The Making of Casablanca , that he was cast because he was Bogart 's drinking buddy . He was not the first choice for the role ; he replaced Leo <unk> , who was deemed not funny enough . 
 Madeleine LeBeau as Yvonne , Rick 's soon @-@ discarded girlfriend . The French actress was married to fellow Casablanca performer Marcel Dalio until their divorce in 1942 . She was the last surviving cast member until her death on May 1 , 2016 . 
 Joy Page as <unk> Brandel , the young Bulgarian refugee . The third credited American , she was the stepdaughter of Jack L. Warner , the studio head . 
 John Qualen as Berger , Laszlo 's Resistance contact . He was born in Canada , but grew up in the United States . He appeared in many of John Ford 's films . 
 S. Z. <unk> ( credited as S. K. <unk> ) as Carl , the waiter . The Jewish @-@ Hungarian actor fled Germany in 1939 . His three sisters later died in a concentration camp . 
 Dooley Wilson as Sam . He was one of the few American members of the cast . A drummer , he had to fake playing the piano . Even after shooting had been completed , producer Wallis considered dubbing over Wilson 's voice for the songs . He had originally considered changing the character to a woman and casting singers Hazel Scott , Lena Horne , or Ella Fitzgerald . 
 Notable uncredited actors are : 
 Leon Belasco as a dealer in Rick 's Cafe . A Russian @-@ American character actor , he appeared in 13 films the year Casablanca was released . 
 Marcel Dalio as Emil the croupier . He had been a star in French cinema , appearing in Jean Renoir 's La Grande Illusion and La <unk> du Jeu . After he fled the fall of France and went to America , he was reduced to bit parts in Hollywood . He had a key role in another of Bogart 's films , To Have and Have Not . 
 Helmut <unk> as Jan Brandel , the Bulgarian roulette player married to <unk> Brandel . Another Austrian , he had spent time in a concentration camp after the Anschluss , but left Europe after being freed . 
 William Edmunds as a contact man at Rick 's . He usually played characters with heavy accents , such as Martini in It 's a Wonderful Life ( 1946 ) . 
 Gregory Gaye as the German banker who is refused entry to the casino by Rick . Gaye was a Russian @-@ born actor who went to the United States in 1917 after the Russian Revolution . 
 <unk> Meyer as the Dutch banker who runs " the second largest banking house in Amsterdam " . Meyer was a Danish actor . 
 George London , one of those who sing " La Marseillaise " . London was a Montreal @-@ born bass @-@ baritone opera singer . 
 Georges <unk> as a conspirator . 
 Corinna Mura as the guitar player who sings " Tango Delle Rose " while Laszlo is consulting with Berger , and later accompanies the crowd on " La Marseillaise " . 
 Dan Seymour as Abdul the doorman . He was an American actor who often played villains , including the principal one in To Have and Have Not , and one of the secondary ones in Key Largo , both opposite Bogart . 
 Gerald Oliver Smith as the Englishman whose wallet is stolen . Smith was an English actor . 
 Norma Varden as the Englishwoman whose husband has his wallet stolen . She was a famous English character actress . 
 Jean Del Val as the French police radio announcer who ( following the opening montage sequence ) reports the news of the murder of the two German couriers . 
 Leo White as the waiter Emile ( not to be confused with the croupier Emil ) , from whom Renault orders a drink when he sits down with the <unk> . White was a familiar face in many Charlie Chaplin two @-@ reelers in the 1910s , usually playing an upper @-@ class antagonist . 
 Frank Puglia as a Moroccan rug merchant 
 Much of the emotional impact of the film has been attributed to the large proportion of European exiles and refugees who were extras or played minor roles ( in addition to leading actors Paul <unk> , Conrad Veidt and Peter Lorre ) : such as Louis V. Arco , Trude Berliner , Ilka <unk> , Lotte <unk> , Richard Ryen , Ludwig Stössel , Hans Twardowski , and Wolfgang <unk> . A witness to the filming of the " duel of the anthems " sequence said he saw many of the actors crying and " realized that they were all real refugees " . Harmetz argues that they " brought to a dozen small roles in Casablanca an understanding and a desperation that could never have come from Central Casting " . They were frequently cast as Nazis in war films , even though many were Jewish . 
 The comedian Jack Benny may have had an unbilled cameo role , as was claimed by a contemporary newspaper advertisement and reportedly in the Casablanca press book . When asked in his column " Movie Answer Man " , critic Roger Ebert first replied , " It looks something like him . That 's all I can say . " He wrote in a later column , " I think you 're right . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The film was based on Murray Burnett and Joan Alison 's then @-@ unproduced play Everybody Comes to Rick 's . The Warner Bros. story analyst who read the play , Stephen <unk> , called it ( approvingly ) " sophisticated hokum " , and story editor Irene Diamond , who had discovered the unproduced play on a trip to New York in 1941 , convinced producer Hal Wallis to buy the rights in January 1942 for $ 20 @,@ 000 , the most anyone in Hollywood had ever paid for an unproduced play . The project was renamed Casablanca , apparently in imitation of the 1938 hit Algiers . Although an initial filming date was selected for April 10 , 1942 , delays led to a start of production on May 25 . Filming was completed on August 3 , and the production cost $ 1 @,@ 039 @,@ 000 ( $ 75 @,@ 000 over budget ) , above average for the time . Unusually , the film was shot in sequence , mainly because only the first half of the script was ready when filming began . 
 The entire picture was shot in the studio , except for the sequence showing Major Strasser 's arrival , which was filmed at Van Nuys Airport , and a few short clips of stock footage views of Paris . The street used for the exterior shots had recently been built for another film , The Desert Song , and redressed for the Paris flashbacks . It remained on the Warners backlot until the 1960s . The set for Rick 's was built in three unconnected parts , so the internal layout of the building is indeterminate . In a number of scenes , the camera looks through a wall from the cafe area into Rick 's office . 
 The background of the final scene , which shows a Lockheed Model 12 Electra Junior airplane with personnel walking around it , was staged using little person extras and a proportionate cardboard plane . Fog was used to mask the model 's unconvincing appearance . Nevertheless , the Disney 's Hollywood Studios theme park in Orlando , Florida purchased a Lockheed 12A for its Great Movie Ride attraction , and initially claimed that it was the actual plane used in the film . 
 Film critic Roger Ebert called Hal Wallis the " key creative force " for his attention to the details of production ( down to insisting on a real parrot in the Blue Parrot bar ) . 
 The difference between Bergman 's and Bogart 's height caused some problems . She was some two inches ( 5 cm ) taller than Bogart , and claimed Curtiz had Bogart stand on blocks or sit on cushions in their scenes together . 
 Later , there were plans for a further scene , showing Rick , Renault and a detachment of Free French soldiers on a ship , to incorporate the Allies ' 1942 invasion of North Africa . It proved too difficult to get Claude Rains for the shoot , and the scene was finally abandoned after David O. Selznick judged " it would be a terrible mistake to change the ending . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The original play was inspired by a trip to Europe made by Murray Burnett and his wife in 1938 , during which they visited Vienna shortly after the Anschluss and were affected by the anti @-@ Semitism they saw . In the south of France , they went to a nightclub that had a multinational clientele , among them many exiles and refugees , and the prototype of Sam . 
 The first writers assigned to the script were twins Julius and Philip Epstein , who , against the wishes of Warner Brothers , left at Frank Capra 's request early in 1942 to work on the Why We Fight series in Washington , D.C. While they were gone , the other credited writer , Howard Koch , was assigned ; he produced some thirty to forty pages . When the Epstein brothers returned after about a month , they were reassigned to Casablanca and — contrary to what Koch claimed in two published books — his work was not used . In the final Warner Bros. budget for the film , the Epsteins were paid $ 30 @,@ 416 , while Koch earned $ 4 @,@ 200 . 
 In the play , the Ilsa character is an American named Lois Meredith ; she does not meet Laszlo until after her relationship with Rick in Paris has ended . Rick is a lawyer . To make Rick 's motivation more believable , Wallis , Curtiz , and the screenwriters decided to set the film before the attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 The uncredited Casey Robinson assisted with three weeks of rewrites , including contributing the series of meetings between Rick and Ilsa in the cafe . Koch highlighted the political and melodramatic elements , while Curtiz seems to have favored the romantic parts , insisting on retaining the Paris flashbacks . Wallis wrote the final line , " Louis , I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship , " after shooting had been completed . Bogart had to be called in a month after the end of filming to dub it . 
 Despite the many writers , the film has what Ebert describes as a " wonderfully unified and consistent " script . Koch later claimed it was the tension between his own approach and Curtiz 's which accounted for this : " Surprisingly , these disparate approaches somehow meshed , and perhaps it was partly this tug of war between Curtiz and me that gave the film a certain balance . " Julius Epstein would later note the screenplay contained " more corn than in the states of Kansas and Iowa combined . But when corn works , there 's nothing better . " 
 The film ran into some trouble with Joseph Breen of the Production Code Administration ( the Hollywood self @-@ censorship body ) , who opposed the suggestions that Captain Renault extorted sexual favors from his supplicants , and that Rick and Ilsa had slept together in Paris . Extensive changes were made , with several lines of dialogue removed or altered . All direct references to sex were deleted ; Renault 's selling of visas for sex , and Rick and Ilsa 's previous sexual relationship were implied elliptically rather than referenced explicitly . Also , in the original script , when Sam plays " As Time Goes By " , Rick remarks , " What the — — are you playing ? " This line implying a curse word was removed at the behest of the Hays Office . 
 = = = Direction = = = 
 Wallis ' first choice for director was William Wyler , but he was unavailable , so Wallis turned to his close friend Michael Curtiz . Curtiz was a Hungarian Jewish émigré ; he had come to the U.S. in the 1920s , but some of his family were refugees from Nazi Europe . 
 Roger Ebert has commented that in Casablanca " very few shots ... are memorable as shots , " as Curtiz wanted images to express the story rather than to stand alone . He contributed relatively little to development of the plot . Casey Robinson said Curtiz " knew nothing whatever about story ... he saw it in pictures , and you supplied the stories . " 
 Critic Andrew Sarris called the film " the most decisive exception to the auteur theory " , of which Sarris was the most prominent proponent in the United States . Aljean Harmetz has responded , " nearly every Warner Bros. picture was an exception to the auteur theory " . Other critics give more credit to Curtiz . Sidney Rosenzweig , in his study of the director 's work , sees the film as a typical example of Curtiz 's highlighting of moral dilemmas . 
 The second unit montages , such as the opening sequence of the refugee trail and the invasion of France , were directed by Don Siegel . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
 The cinematographer was Arthur Edeson , a veteran who had previously shot The Maltese Falcon and Frankenstein . Particular attention was paid to photographing Bergman . She was shot mainly from her preferred left side , often with a softening gauze filter and with catch lights to make her eyes sparkle ; the whole effect was designed to make her face seem " ineffably sad and tender and nostalgic " . Bars of shadow across the characters and in the background variously imply imprisonment , the crucifix , the symbol of the Free French Forces and emotional turmoil . Dark film noir and expressionist lighting was used in several scenes , particularly towards the end of the picture . Rosenzweig argues these shadow and lighting effects are classic elements of the Curtiz style , along with the fluid camera work and the use of the environment as a framing device . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music was written by Max Steiner , who was best known for the score for Gone with the Wind . The song " As Time Goes By " by Herman <unk> had been part of the story from the original play ; Steiner wanted to write his own composition to replace it , but Bergman had already cut her hair short for her next role ( María in For Whom the Bell Tolls ) and could not re @-@ shoot the scenes which incorporated the song , so Steiner based the entire score on it and " La Marseillaise " , the French national anthem , transforming them to reflect changing moods . 
 Particularly notable is the " duel of the songs " between Strasser and Laszlo at Rick 's cafe . In the soundtrack , " La Marseillaise " is played by a full orchestra . Originally , the opposing piece for this iconic sequence was to be the " Horst Wessel Lied " , a Nazi anthem , but this was still under international copyright in non @-@ Allied countries . Instead " Die Wacht am Rhein " was used . The opening bars of the " Deutschlandlied " , the national anthem of Germany , are featured throughout the score as a motif to represent the Germans , much as " La Marseillaise " is used to represent the Allies . 
 Other songs include : 
 " It Had to Be You " , music by Isham Jones , lyrics by Gus Kahn 
 " Shine " , music by Ford Dabney , lyrics by Cecil Mack and Lew Brown 
 " Avalon " , music and lyrics by Al Jolson , Buddy <unk> and Vincent Rose 
 " <unk> " , by Alberto Dominguez 
 " The Very Thought of You " , by Ray Noble , and 
 " Knock on Wood " , music by M. K. Jerome , lyrics by Jack Scholl , the only original song . 
 The piano featured in the Paris flashback sequences was sold in New York City on December 14 , 2012 , at Sotheby 's for more than $ 600 @,@ 000 to an anonymous bidder . The piano Sam " plays " in Rick 's Café Américain , put up for auction with other film memorabilia by Turner Classic Movies and Bonhams in New York in November 2014 , sold for $ 3 @.@ 4 million . 
 = = Timing of release = = 
 Although an initial release date was anticipated for spring 1943 , the film premiered at the Hollywood Theater in New York City on November 26 , 1942 , to coincide with the Allied invasion of North Africa and the capture of Casablanca . In the 1 @,@ 500 @-@ seat theater , the film grossed $ 255 @,@ 000 over ten weeks . It went into general release on January 23 , 1943 , to take advantage of the Casablanca Conference , a high @-@ level meeting in the city between British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and American President Franklin D. Roosevelt . It was a substantial but not spectacular box @-@ office success , taking $ 3 @.@ 7 million on its initial U.S. release , making it the seventh highest @-@ grossing film of 1943 . The Office of War Information prevented screening of the film to troops in North Africa , believing it would cause resentment among Vichy supporters in the region . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Initial response = = = 
 Casablanca received " consistently good reviews " . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote , " The Warners ... have a picture which makes the spine tingle and the heart take a leap . " The newspaper applauded the combination of " sentiment , humor and pathos with taut melodrama and bristling intrigue " . While Crowther noted its " devious convolutions of the plot " , he praised the screenplay quality as " of the best " and the cast 's performances as " all of the first order " . 
 The trade paper Variety commended the film 's " combination of fine performances , engrossing story and neat direction " and the " variety of moods , action , suspense , comedy and drama that makes Casablanca an A @-@ 1 entry at the <unk> " " Film is splendid anti @-@ Axis propaganda , particularly inasmuch as the propaganda is strictly a by @-@ product of the principal action and contributes to it instead of getting in the way . " The review also applauded the performances of Bergman and Henreid and note that " Bogart , as might be expected , is more at ease as the bitter and cynical operator of a joint than as a lover , but handles both assignments with superb finesse . " 
 Some other reviews were less enthusiastic . The New Yorker rated it only " pretty tolerable " . 
 = = = Lasting influence = = = 
 The film has grown in popularity . Murray Burnett called it " true yesterday , true today , true tomorrow " . By 1955 , the film had brought in $ 6 @.@ 8 million , making it the third most successful of Warners ' wartime movies ( behind Shine On , Harvest Moon and This Is the Army ) . On April 21 , 1957 , the Brattle Theater of Cambridge , Massachusetts , showed the film as part of a season of old movies . It was so popular that it began a tradition of screening Casablanca during the week of final exams at Harvard University , which continues to the present day . Other colleges have adopted the tradition . Todd Gitlin , a professor of sociology who had attended one of these screenings , has said that the experience was " the acting out of my own personal rite of passage " . The tradition helped the movie remain popular while other famous films of the 1940s have faded away . By 1977 , Casablanca was the most frequently broadcast film on American television . 
 On the film 's 50th anniversary , the Los Angeles Times called Casablanca 's great strength " the purity of its Golden Age <unk> [ and ] the enduring craftsmanship of its resonantly hokey dialogue " . Bob Strauss wrote in the newspaper that the film achieved a " near @-@ perfect entertainment balance " of comedy , romance , and suspense . 
 According to Roger Ebert , Casablanca is " probably on more lists of the greatest films of all time than any other single title , including Citizen Kane " because of its wider appeal . Ebert opined that Citizen Kane is generally considered to be a " greater " film , but Casablanca is more loved . In his opinion , the film is popular because " the people in it are all so good " , and it is " a wonderful gem " . Ebert said that he has never heard of a negative review of the film , even though individual elements can be criticized , citing unrealistic special effects and the stiff character / portrayal of Laszlo . Critic Leonard Maltin considers Casablanca to be " the best Hollywood movie of all time . " 
 Rick , according to Rudy Behlmer , is " not a hero ... not a bad guy " : he does what is necessary to get along with the authorities and " sticks his neck out for nobody " . The other characters , in Behlmer 's words , are " not cut and dried " and come into their goodness over the course of the film . Renault begins as a collaborator with the Nazis who extorts sexual favors from refugees and has Ugarte killed . Even Ilsa , the least active of the main characters , is " caught in the emotional struggle " over which man she really loves . By the end , however , " everybody is sacrificing . " Behlmer also emphasized the variety in the picture : " it 's a blend of drama , melodrama , comedy [ and ] intrigue " . 
 A few reviewers have had reservations . To Pauline Kael , " It 's far from a great film , but it has a special appealingly schlocky romanticism ... " Umberto Eco wrote that " by any strict critical standards ... Casablanca is a very mediocre film . " He viewed the changes the characters undergo as inconsistent rather than complex : " It is a comic strip , a hotch @-@ potch , low on psychological credibility , and with little continuity in its dramatic effects . " However , he added that due to the presence of multiple archetypes which allow " the power of Narrative in its natural state without Art intervening to discipline it " , it is a movie reaching " Homeric depths " as a " phenomenon worthy of awe . " 
 In the November / December 1982 issue of American Film , Chuck Ross claimed that he retyped the screenplay to Casablanca , changing the title back to Everybody Comes to Rick 's and the name of the piano player to Dooley Wilson , and submitted it to 217 agencies . Eighty @-@ five of them read it ; of those , thirty @-@ eight rejected it outright , thirty @-@ three generally recognized it ( but only eight specifically as Casablanca ) , three declared it commercially viable , and one suggested turning it into a novel . 
 = = = Influence on later works = = = 
 Many subsequent films have drawn on elements of Casablanca . Passage to Marseille reunited Bogart , Rains , Curtiz , Greenstreet and Lorre in 1944 . There are similarities between Casablanca and two later Bogart films , To Have and Have Not ( 1944 ) and Sirocco ( 1951 ) . 
 Parodies have included the Marx Brothers ' A Night in Casablanca ( 1946 ) , Neil Simon 's The Cheap Detective ( 1978 ) , and Out Cold ( 2001 ) . Indirectly , it provided the title for the 1995 neo @-@ noir film The Usual Suspects . Woody Allen 's Play It Again , Sam ( 1972 ) appropriated Bogart 's Casablanca persona as the fantasy mentor for Allen 's <unk> character , featuring actor Jerry Lacy in the role of Bogart . 
 The film Casablanca was a plot device in the science @-@ fiction television movie <unk> at the Memory Bank ( 1983 ) , based on John Varley 's story . It was referred to in Terry Gilliam 's dystopian Brazil ( 1985 ) . Warner Bros. produced its own parody in the homage <unk> , a 1995 Bugs Bunny cartoon . In Casablanca , a novella by Argentine writer Edgar Brau , the protagonist somehow wanders into Rick 's Café Américain and listens to a strange tale related by Sam . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 Casablanca has been subjected to many different readings . <unk> account for the film 's popularity by claiming that its inclusion of a whole series of stereotypes paradoxically strengthens the film . Umberto Eco explained : 
 Thus Casablanca is not just one film . It is many films , an anthology . Made haphazardly , it probably made itself , if not actually against the will of its authors and actors , then at least beyond their control . And this is the reason it works , in spite of aesthetic theories and theories of film making . For in it there unfolds with almost telluric force the power of Narrative in its natural state , without Art intervening to discipline it . 
 ... When all the archetypes burst in shamelessly , we reach Homeric depths . Two clichés make us laugh . A hundred clichés move us . For we sense dimly that the clichés are talking among themselves , and celebrating a reunion . 
 Eco also singled out sacrifice as one of the film 's key themes : " the myth of sacrifice runs through the whole film . " It was this theme which resonated with a wartime audience that was reassured by the idea that painful sacrifice and going off to war could be romantic gestures done for the greater good . 
 Koch also considered the film a political allegory . Rick is compared to President Franklin D. Roosevelt , who gambled " on the odds of going to war until circumstance and his own submerged nobility force him to close his casino ( partisan politics ) and commit himself — first by financing the Side of Right and then by fighting for it . " The connection is reinforced by the film 's title , which means " white house " . 
 Harvey Greenberg presents a Freudian reading in his The Movies on Your Mind , in which the transgressions which prevent Rick from returning to the United States constitute an Oedipus complex , which is resolved only when Rick begins to identify with the father figure of Laszlo and the cause which he represents . Sidney Rosenzweig argues that such readings are reductive , and that the most important aspect of the film is its ambiguity , above all in the central character of Rick ; he cites the different names which each character gives Rick ( Richard , Ricky , Mr. Rick , Herr Rick , boss , and so on ) as evidence of the different meanings which he has for each person . 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Because of its November 1942 release , the New York Film Critics decided to include the film in its 1942 award season for best picture . Casablanca lost to In Which We Serve . However , the Academy stated that since the film went into national release in the beginning of 1943 , it would be included in that year 's nominations . Casablanca was nominated for eight Academy Awards , and won three . As Bogart stepped out of his car at the Academy Awards ceremony , " the crowd surged forward , almost engulfing him and his wife , Mayo <unk> . It took 12 police officers to rescue the two , and a red @-@ faced , startled , yet smiling Bogart heard a chorus of cries of ' good luck ' and ' here ’ s looking at you , kid ' as he was rushed into the theater . " 
 When the award for Best Picture was announced , producer Hal B. Wallis got up to accept , but studio head Jack L. Warner rushed up to the stage " with a broad , flashing smile and a look of great self @-@ satisfaction , " Wallis later recalled . " I couldn 't believe it was happening . Casablanca had been my creation ; Jack had absolutely nothing to do with it . As the audience gasped , I tried to get out of the row of seats and into the aisle , but the entire Warner family sat blocking me . I had no alternative but to sit down again , humiliated and furious ... Almost forty years later , I still haven 't recovered from the shock . " This incident would lead Wallis to leave Warner Bros. in April . 
 In 1989 , the film was one of the first 25 films selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry as being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . In 2005 , it was named one of the 100 greatest films of the last 80 years by Time magazine ( the selected films were not ranked ) . Screenwriting teacher Robert McKee maintains that the script is " the greatest screenplay of all time " . In 2006 , the Writers Guild of America , West agreed , voting it the best ever in its list of the 101 greatest screenplays . The film has been selected by the American Film Institute for many of their lists . 
 = = Home media releases = = 
 Casablanca was initially released on Betamax and VHS by Magnetic Video and later by CBS / Fox Video ( as United Artists owned the rights at the time ) . It was next released on laserdisc in 1991 , and on VHS in 1992 — both from MGM / UA Home Entertainment ( distributing for Turner Entertainment Co . ) , which at the time was distributed by Warner Home Video . It was first released on DVD in 1997 by MGM , containing the trailer and a making @-@ of featurette ( Warner Home Video reissued the DVD in 2000 ) . A subsequent two @-@ disc special edition , containing audio commentaries , documentaries , and a newly remastered visual and audio presentation , was released in 2003 . 
 An HD DVD was released on November 14 , 2006 , containing the same special features as the 2003 DVD . Reviewers were impressed with the new high @-@ definition transfer of the film . 
 A Blu @-@ ray release with new special features came out on December 2 , 2008 ; it is also available on DVD . The Blu @-@ ray was initially only released as an expensive gift set with a booklet , a luggage tag and other assorted gift @-@ type items . It was eventually released as a stand @-@ alone Blu @-@ ray in September 2009 . On March 27 , 2012 , Warner released a new 70th Anniversary Ultimate Collector 's Edition Blu @-@ ray / DVD combo set . It includes a brand @-@ new 4K restoration and new bonus material . 
 = = Sequels and other versions = = 
 Almost from the moment Casablanca became a hit , talk began of producing a sequel . One titled Brazzaville ( in the final scene , Renault recommends fleeing to that Free French @-@ held city ) was planned , but never produced . Since then , no studio has seriously considered filming a sequel or outright remake . François Truffaut refused an invitation to remake the film in 1974 , citing its cult status among American students as his reason . Attempts to recapture the magic of Casablanca in other settings , such as <unk> ( 1980 ) , " a South American @-@ set retooling of Casablanca " , and Havana ( 1990 ) have been poorly received . 
 Stories of a Casablanca remake or sequel nonetheless persist . In 2008 , the Daily Mail reported that Madonna was pursuing a remake set in modern @-@ day Iraq . In 2012 , both The Daily Telegraph and Entertainment Weekly reported on efforts by Cass Warner , granddaughter of Harry Warner and friend of the late Howard Koch , to produce a sequel featuring the search by Rick Blaine and Ilsa Lund 's illegitimate son for the whereabouts of his biological father . 
 The novel As Time Goes By , written by Michael Walsh and published in 1998 , was authorized by Warner . The novel picks up where the film leaves off , and also tells of Rick 's mysterious past in America . The book met with little success . David Thomson provided an unofficial sequel in his 1985 novel Suspects . 
 There have been two short @-@ lived television series based upon Casablanca , both considered prequels . The first aired from 1955 to 1956 , with Charles McGraw as Rick and Marcel Dalio , who played Emil the croupier in the movie , as Renault ; it aired on ABC as part of the wheel series Warner Bros. Presents . There were ten hour @-@ long episodes . Another , briefly broadcast on NBC in 1983 , starred David Soul as Rick , Ray Liotta as Sacha , and Scatman Crothers as a somewhat elderly Sam . Five hour @-@ long episodes were produced . 
 There were several radio adaptations of the film . The two best @-@ known were a thirty @-@ minute adaptation on The Screen Guild Theater on April 26 , 1943 , starring Bogart , Bergman , and Henreid , and an hour @-@ long version on the Lux Radio Theater on January 24 , 1944 , featuring Alan Ladd as Rick , Hedy Lamarr as Ilsa , and John Loder as Victor Laszlo . Two other thirty @-@ minute adaptations were aired : on Philip Morris Playhouse on September 3 , 1943 , and on Theater of Romance on December 19 , 1944 , in which Dooley Wilson reprised his role as Sam . 
 Julius Epstein made two attempts to turn the film into a Broadway musical , in 1951 and 1967 , but neither made it to the stage . The original play , Everybody Comes to Rick 's , was produced in Newport , Rhode Island , in August 1946 , and again in London in April 1991 , but met with no success . The film was adapted into a musical by the Takarazuka Revue , an all @-@ female Japanese musical theater company , and ran from November 2009 through February 2010 . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Casablanca was part of the film colorization controversy of the 1980s , when a colorized version aired on the television network WTBS . In 1984 , MGM / UA hired Color Systems Technology to colorize the film for $ 180 @,@ 000 . When Ted Turner of Turner Broadcasting System purchased MGM / UA 's film library two years later , he canceled the request , before contracting American Film Technologies ( AFT ) in 1988 . AFT completed the colorization in two months at a cost of $ 450 @,@ 000 . Turner later reacted to the criticism of the colorization , saying , " [ Casablanca ] is one of a handful of films that really doesn 't have to be colorized . I did it because I wanted to . All I 'm trying to do is protect my investment . " 
 The Library of Congress deemed that the color change differed so much from the original film that it gave a new copyright to Turner Entertainment . When the colorized film debuted on WTBS , it was watched by three million viewers , not making the top @-@ ten viewed cable shows for the week . Although Jack Matthews of the Los Angeles Times called the finished product " state of the art " , it was mostly met with negative critical reception . It was briefly available on home video . Gary Edgerton , writing for the Journal of Popular Film & Television criticized the colorization , " ... Casablanca in color ended up being much blander in appearance and , overall , much less visually interesting than its 1942 predecessor . " Bogart 's son Stephen said , " if you 're going to colorize Casablanca , why not put arms on the Venus de Milo ? " 
 = = Rumors = = 
 Several rumors and misconceptions have grown up around the film , one being that Ronald Reagan was originally chosen to play Rick . This originates in a press release issued by the studio early on in the film 's development , but by that time the studio already knew that he was going into the Army , and he was never seriously considered . George Raft claimed that he had turned down the lead role . Studio records make clear , however , that Wallis was committed to Bogart from the start . 
 Another well @-@ known story is that the actors did not know until the last day of shooting how the film was to end . The original play ( set entirely in the cafe ) ended with Rick sending Ilsa and Laszlo to the airport . During scriptwriting , the possibility was discussed of Laszlo being killed in Casablanca , allowing Rick and Ilsa to leave together , but as Casey Robinson wrote to Hal Wallis before filming began , the ending of the film " set up for a swell twist when Rick sends her away on the plane with Laszlo . For now , in doing so , he is not just solving a love triangle . He is forcing the girl to live up to the idealism of her nature , forcing her to carry on with the work that in these days is far more important than the love of two little people . " It was certainly impossible for Ilsa to leave Laszlo for Rick , as the production code forbade showing a woman leaving her husband for another man . The concern was not whether Ilsa would leave with Laszlo , but how this result could be engineered . The problem was solved when the Epstein brothers , Julius and Philip , were driving down Sunset Boulevard and stopped for the light at Beverly Glen . At that instant the identical twins turned to each other and simultaneously cried out , " Round up the usual suspects ! " By the time they had driven past Fairfax and the Cahuenga Pass and through the Warner Brothers studio 's portals at Burbank , in the words of Julius Epstein , " the idea for the farewell scene between a tearful Bergman and a suddenly noble Bogart " had been formed and all the problems of the ending had been solved . 
 The confusion was probably caused by Bergman 's later statement that she did not know which man she was meant to be in love with . While rewrites did occur during the filming , Aljean Harmetz 's examination of the scripts has shown that many of the key scenes were shot after Bergman knew how the film would end ; any confusion was , in critic Roger Ebert 's words , " emotional " , not " factual " . 
 = = Errors and inaccuracies = = 
 The film has several logical flaws , the foremost being the two " letters of transit " which enable their bearers to leave Vichy French territory . According to the audio , Ugarte says the letters had been signed by ( depending on the listener ) either Free French General Charles de Gaulle or Vichy General Maxime Weygand . The English subtitles on the official DVD read de Gaulle , while the French ones specify Weygand . Weygand had been the Vichy Delegate @-@ General for the North African colonies until November 1941 , a month before the film is set . De Gaulle was the head of the Free French government in exile , so a letter signed by him would have provided no benefit . A classic MacGuffin , the letters were invented by Joan Alison for the original play and never questioned . Rick suggests to Renault that the letters would not have allowed Ilsa to escape , let alone Laszlo : " People have been held in Casablanca in spite of their legal rights . " 
 In the same vein , though Laszlo asserts that the Nazis cannot arrest him , saying , " This is still unoccupied France ; any violation of neutrality would reflect on Captain Renault , " Ebert points out , " It makes no sense that he could walk around freely . ... He would be arrested on sight . " Harmetz , however , suggests that Strasser intentionally allows Laszlo to move about , hoping that he will tell them the names of Resistance leaders in occupied Europe in exchange for Ilsa being allowed to leave for Lisbon . 
 In addition , no uniformed German troops were stationed in Casablanca during World War II , and neither American nor French troops occupied Berlin in 1918 . 
 According to Harmetz , few of the refugees portrayed would have gone to Casablanca at the time portrayed . The usual route out of Germany was via Vienna , Prague , Paris , and London . Others tried to go from Paris through the Pyrenees to Spain . The film 's technical advisor , Robert <unk> , traced the path to Morocco shown in Casablanca 's opening scene . 
 = = Quotations = = 
 One of the lines most closely associated with the film — " Play it again , Sam " — is a misquotation . When Ilsa first enters the Café <unk> , she spots Sam and asks him to " Play it once , Sam , for old times ' sake . " After he feigns ignorance , she responds , " Play it , Sam . Play ' As Time Goes By ' . " Later that night , alone with Sam , Rick says , " You played it for her , you can play it for me , " and " If she can stand it , I can ! Play it ! " 
 Rick 's toast to Ilsa , " Here 's looking at you , kid " , used four times , is not in the draft screenplays , but has been attributed to something Bogart said to Bergman as he taught her poker between takes . It was voted the fifth most memorable line in cinema in AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes by the American Film Institute . 
 Six lines from Casablanca appeared in the AFI list , the most of any film ( Gone with the Wind and The Wizard of Oz tied for second with three apiece ) . The other five are : 
 " Louis , I think this is the beginning of a beautiful friendship . " — 20th 
 " Play it , Sam . Play ' As Time Goes By ' . " — 28th 
 " Round up the usual suspects . " — 32nd 
 " We 'll always have Paris . " — 43rd 
 " Of all the gin joints in all the towns in all the world , she walks into mine . " — 67th 
 Additionally , the line " Ilsa , I 'm no good at being noble , but it doesn 't take much to see that the problems of three little people don 't amount to a hill of beans in this crazy world " was nominated for the list , but was not selected . 
 = New Jersey Route 12 = 
 Route 12 is a state highway located in Hunterdon County , New Jersey , United States . It runs 11 @.@ 69 mi ( 18 @.@ 81 km ) from the <unk> @-@ Frenchtown Bridge at the Delaware River border with Pennsylvania in Frenchtown east to an intersection with U.S. Route 202 ( US 202 ) and Route 31 at the Flemington Circle in Flemington . The route is mostly a two @-@ lane undivided road that passes through rural areas of woodland and farmland . It intersects Route 29 and County Route 513 ( CR 513 ) in Frenchtown , CR 519 in Kingwood Township , CR 579 on the border of Delaware Township and Raritan Township , and CR 523 in Raritan Township . 
 The route was designated in 1927 to run from Frenchtown to Raritan , Somerset County , running along its current alignment to Flemington and following present @-@ day US 202 between Flemington and Raritan . By the 1940s , US 202 and Route 29 replaced Route 12 east of Flemington , and the route was officially designated to end in Flemington in 1953 . There are currently plans to modify or eliminate three traffic circles along the route in Flemington to ease traffic congestion . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 12 begins at the <unk> @-@ Frenchtown Bridge over the Delaware River in Frenchtown at the Pennsylvania / New Jersey border , where it connects to Pennsylvania Route 32 . The bridge and short portion of its eastern approach is maintained by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission . The route continues through the downtown area of Frenchtown as county @-@ maintained ( designated and signed by Hunterdon County as County Route 610 ) two @-@ lane undivided Bridge Street . Here , it intersects Trenton Avenue which is also the northern terminus of Route 29 before turning north onto Race Street and intersecting the southern terminus of CR 513 . Route 12 heads east on Kingwood Avenue and passes through residential areas . The route crosses into Kingwood Township , where it becomes maintained by the New Jersey Department of Transportation with two eastbound lanes and one westbound lane . As Route 12 climbs into the Hunterdon Plateau , it heads through a mix of woods and farms with intermittent residences , narrowing to one lane in each direction at the top of the plateau before crossing CR 519 in <unk> . 
 Route 12 continues southeast through rural areas , crossing the <unk> Creek before intersecting CR 615 , where it becomes the Samuel Hill Highway . A short distance past this intersection , the route briefly passes through the southern corner of Franklin Township before entering Delaware Township . Here , the road crosses <unk> Creek before coming to an intersection with CR 579 . Past this intersection , Route 12 enters Raritan Township , where it continues through rural areas with some residences . The residential development along the road increases before it reaches the <unk> 's Circle ( a traffic circle ) with CR 523 . Past the traffic circle , the route crosses a small stream and enters Flemington . Here , Route 12 passes businesses before crossing the Black River & Western Railroad and coming to the Main Street Circle , a modern @-@ designed roundabout , where it intersects CR 611 and <unk> Avenue . From here , the route continues east a short distance as a four @-@ lane divided highway before ending at US 202 and Route 31 at the Flemington Circle . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 12 was legislated as a new route in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering that was to run from Frenchtown east to Route 28 in Raritan borough , running along its current alignment to Flemington and following present @-@ day US 202 to Raritan . By the 1940s , US 202 and Route 29 were designated along the alignment of Route 12 between Flemington and Raritan , cutting the route 's eastern terminus back to Flemington . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 12 was officially legislated to run from Frenchtown to US 202 and Route 69 ( now Route 31 ) in Flemington . There are currently plans to modify or eliminate the three traffic circles along Route 12 in Flemington in order to ease traffic congestion along the route . The Main Street Circle was converted to a modern roundabout in 2010 while plans are still being thought out for the other two traffic circles . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Deutschland @-@ class battleship = 
 The Deutschland class was a group of five pre @-@ dreadnought battleships built for the German Kaiserliche Marine . The class comprised Deutschland , Hannover , Pommern , Schlesien , and Schleswig @-@ Holstein . Built between 1903 and 1908 , the ships closely resembled those of the preceding Braunschweig class , though they had stronger armor protection . They were made obsolete before they were even completed by the launch of the revolutionary Royal Navy battleship HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . As a result , they were the last ships of that type built for the German Navy . They were followed by the Nassau @-@ class battleships , Germany 's first dreadnought battleships . 
 With the commissioning of the Deutschland class , the fleet had enough battleships to form two full battle squadrons ; the fleet was then reorganized into the High Seas Fleet , which saw combat during World War I. Despite their obsolescence , all five of these ships were present at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . In the confused night actions , Pommern was torpedoed and sunk . After the battle , the four surviving ships were removed from the front @-@ line fleet and employed in secondary tasks . The Treaty of Versailles permitted Germany to retain several old battleships for coastal defense , including the four Deutschland @-@ class ships . 
 However , instead of being used as a coastal defense ship , Deutschland was broken up in 1920 – 1922 . Hannover was to be converted into a target vessel , although this was never done . She was eventually broken up in 1944 – 1946 . Schlesien and Schleswig @-@ Holstein were the only two vessels of the class to see continued front @-@ line service in the Reichsmarine and later the Kriegsmarine . Both ships saw limited duty during World War II , which was inaugurated by the firing of Schleswig @-@ Holstein 's main guns at the Polish fortress at Westerplatte . Near the end of the war the two ships were both sunk . 
 = = Design = = 
 The five Deutschland @-@ class battleships were the last pre @-@ dreadnoughts built by the German Navy . They were similar to the preceding Braunschweig @-@ class ships — Deutschland was nearly identical , though the design was modified slightly after the lead ship was laid down . The four subsequent ships had a somewhat different boiler arrangement and slightly thicker armor compared to the Braunschweig @-@ class ships . All five vessels of the Deutschland class dispensed with the turret mountings for the secondary 17 centimeters ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns ; all of these guns were mounted in casemates in the hull . The ships were built despite rumors of the capabilities of the revolutionary HMS Dreadnought then under construction . Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz insisted on their construction , since larger ships would have necessitated widening the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal . This would have put a prohibitive strain on the naval budget for the year . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The Deutschland @-@ class ships were 125 @.@ 90 m ( 413 ft 1 in ) long at the waterline and 127 @.@ 60 m ( 418 ft 8 in ) overall . They had a beam of 22 @.@ 20 m ( 72 ft 10 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 21 m ( 26 ft 11 in ) forward . The ships were designed to displace 13 @,@ 191 metric tons ( 12 @,@ 983 long tons ) with a standard load , and displaced up to 14 @,@ 218 metric tons ( 13 @,@ 993 long tons ) at full load . The Deutschland @-@ class ships ' hulls were built with transverse and longitudinal steel frames . Steel hull plates were riveted to the structure created by the frames . The hull was split into twelve watertight compartments , although Pommern had thirteen compartments . The hull included a double bottom that ran for 84 percent of the length of the ship . 
 The ships handled less easily than the preceding Braunschweig @-@ class ships , though they suffered less marked weather helm . Their metacentric height was <unk> m ( 3 ft 3 in ) . The ships ' crews numbered 35 officers and 708 enlisted men . When one of them was a squadron flagship , the crew was augmented by 13 officers and 66 enlisted men ; while serving as a second command ship , 2 officers and 23 enlisted men were added to her standard crew . After she became a training ship in 1935 , Schlesien 's crew consisted of 29 officers and 559 enlisted men , plus up to 214 cadets . Schleswig @-@ Holstein differed somewhat ; her crew as a training ship numbered 31 officers and 565 men and up to 175 cadets . Deutschland and her sisters carried a number of smaller vessels , including two picket boats , one admiral 's barge , two launches , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Deutschland and her sisters were equipped with three @-@ shaft triple expansion steam engines . The ships had a single rudder and three screw propellers . The two outer propellers were three @-@ bladed , and 4 @.@ 80 m ( 15 ft 9 in ) in diameter . The center screw had four blades and was 4 @.@ 50 m ( 14 ft 9 in ) in diameter . Steam was supplied to the engines by twelve marine @-@ type boilers , four for each engine , with the exception of Deutschland . This ship was boilered as in Braunschweig , with eight marine @-@ type boilers and six cylindrical boilers . Deutschland 's engines were rated at 16 @,@ 000 PS ( 15 @,@ 781 ihp ; 11 @,@ 768 kW ) , while the other four ships ' engines were rated at 17 @,@ 000 PS ( 16 @,@ 767 ihp ; 12 @,@ 503 kW ) . The design speed for all of the ships was 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) , though on trials all five ships exceeded the figure . 
 The ships were designed to carry 700 metric tons ( 690 long tons ; 770 short tons ) of coal , though additional spaces could be utilized as fuel storage , which increased fuel capacity to 1 @,@ 540 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 520 long tons ; 1 @,@ 700 short tons ) . This provided a maximum range of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Electrical power was supplied from four turbo @-@ generators that supplied 260 kilowatts ( 350 hp ) each at 110 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The armament of the Deutschland class was nearly identical to that of the preceding Braunschweig class , although it was rearranged slightly and increased in number . The primary armament consisted of four 28 cm ( 11 in ) SK L / 40 quick @-@ firing guns in two twin turrets , one forward and one to the rear of the main superstructure . The turrets were the Drh.L. C / 01 model , which allowed elevation to 30 ° and depression to − 5 ° . At maximum elevation , the guns could hit targets out to 18 @,@ 830 m ( 20 @,@ 590 yd ) . The guns fired 240 kg ( 530 lb ) shells in both high @-@ explosive and armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) types . Muzzle velocity for both types of shells was 820 m / s ( 2 @,@ 690 f / s ) . At a range of 12 @,@ 000 m ( 13 @,@ 000 yd ) , the AP shells could penetrate armor plating up to 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) thick . 
 The secondary battery consisted of fourteen 17 cm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) guns mounted in casemates amidships . Five were emplaced in the top deck and two one deck higher in the superstructure on either side . The casemates allowed elevation to 22 ° and depression to − 5 ° . At 22 ° , the guns could engage targets 14 @,@ 500 m ( 15 @,@ 900 yd ) . Each gun was supplied with 130 armor @-@ piercing shells , and fired at a rate of approximately 5 per minute . The guns had an arc of train of 160 ° . 
 The ships were armed with twenty @-@ two 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) quick @-@ firing guns in single mounts , which were manually operated . The guns fired 14 @.@ 8 kg ( 33 lb ) high @-@ explosive shells at up to 12 rounds per minute . They were supplied with 140 shells each . The guns could hit targets out to 11 @,@ 000 m ( 12 @,@ 000 yd ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The Deutschland @-@ class ships were equipped with Krupp cemented armor . Deutschland had a slightly different arrangement in the belt armor and the citadel in the superstructure . Deutschland 's belt was 225 mm ( 8 @.@ 9 in ) at the waterline and tapered to 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) on the lower edge . Her sister ships ' belts was increased in thickness to 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) at the waterline and down to 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) on the bottom edge . In Deutschland , the citadel armor was 160 mm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) thick , while on the other four ships the armor was 170 mm thick . All five ships had an armored deck that was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . 
 The main battery gun turrets had armored sides that were 280 mm ( 11 in ) thick and roofs that were 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The barbettes that held the turrets were armored with 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick steel . The casemate guns were protected by 35 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 in ) thick armor plating . Their forward conning towers were protected by 300 mm ( 12 in ) on the sides , while the rear conning towers had 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) worth of armor . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Deutschland was ordered for the German fleet under the contract designation " N. " She was laid down at the Germaniawerft dockyard in 1903 , under construction number 109 . She was launched on 20 November 1904 ; once she left the stocks fitting out work commenced . This included the installation of the ship 's armament , completion of the interior compartments , and the finishing of the superstructure . By mid 1906 work on the ship was finished . Deutschland was commissioned into the fleet on 3 August of that year . Hannover was ordered as " O " and laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft Wilhelmshaven in 1904 . She was launched on 29 September 1905 and commissioned on 1 October 1907 . 
 Pommern was laid down at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Stettin under the provisional name " P " in 1904 . She was launched on 2 December 1905 and commissioned into the fleet on 1 October 1907 . In 1904 , Schlesien was laid down at the Schichau @-@ Werke in Danzig under the provisional name " R. " She was launched on 28 May 1906 and commissioned on 5 May 1908 . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was ordered from the Germaniawerft dockyard under the contract name " Q. " Her keel was laid there in 1905 . Launched on 17 December 1906 , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was completed by July 1908 and commissioned on the 6th , the last ship of the five to join the fleet . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 Following their commissioning beginning in 1906 , the ships joined the II Battle Squadron of the Heimatflotte ( Home Fleet ) , which also included the Braunschweig @-@ class ships . Deutschland replaced Kaiser Wilhelm II as the flagship of the fleet . Once the II Battle Squadron was complete , the fleet was reorganized as the Hochseeflotte ( High Seas Fleet ) . The five ships conducted several training cruises and fleet maneuvers every year until 1914 ; these included cruises into the Atlantic Ocean and the Baltic Sea and annual tours of Norway . In 1913 , Deutschland was replaced as fleet flagship by the new dreadnought Friedrich der Grosse . The five ships were in Norway for the annual fleet visit in July 1914 . The threat of war forced the cruise to be cut short , and all of the ships were back in German ports by the end of the month . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 The ships of the Deutschland class continued to serve in the II Battle Squadron during World War I. The ships conducted patrols in the mouth of the Elbe River in the first weeks of the war while the rest of the fleet was still being mobilized . They also took part in most of the major fleet actions in the first two years of the war . This primarily included acting as a support force for the battlecruisers that bombarded the English coast in the hopes of luring out a portion of the British fleet . 
 The five ships participated in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 under the command of Admiral von Mauve , where they formed the Second Battle Squadron ( the Squadron was completed by a sixth pre @-@ Dreadnought , the Hessen of the Braunschweig class ) . Towards the end of the fleet battle on the evening of 31 May , the five Deutschland @-@ class ships came to the aid of the mauled battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . The Deutschlands intervened and prevented the British battlecruisers under Admiral David Beatty from pursuing the German ships . In the darkness , the Germans had difficulty making out their targets and failed to score any hits ; the British , however , managed to hit three of the Deutschlands . Pommern was forced briefly to haul out of line . During the night actions , Pommern was torpedoed . The torpedo detonated an ammunition magazine and destroyed the ship , killing all hands on board . The German fleet reached Wilhelmshaven by mid @-@ day of 1 June , where the undamaged dreadnoughts of the Nassau and Helgoland classes took up defensive positions . 
 By the end of 1916 , the four remaining ships were withdrawn from service with the fleet . They were placed into reserve on 15 August 1917 . Deutschland and Schleswig @-@ Holstein became barracks ships in Wilhelmshaven and Kiel , respectively . Hannover was used as a guard ship in the Danish belt , and Schlesien became a training ship in Kiel . Guns removed from these ships starting in 1917 were used by the Imperial Army in WWI as railway guns . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 Following the German defeat in World War I , three of the Deutschland @-@ class battleships were allowed to be retained in the German Navy , which was reorganized as the Reichsmarine : Hannover , Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Schlesien , along with several of the Braunschweig @-@ class battleships . Deutschland was instead scrapped in 1922 . The three remaining pre @-@ dreadnought battleships were modernized in the 1920s , which included the replacement of the ships ' 17 cm guns with 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) pieces . 
 Hannover was the first of all the old battleships to come in service with the Reichsmarine in February 1921 as fleet flagship in the Baltic . Her first homeport was Swinemünde but she was transferred to Kiel in 1922 . In 1923 the German Navy adopted a new command structure and Braunschweig became flagship of the Fleet . In October 1925 , Hannover was moved to the North Sea station . She was decommissioned in March 1927 when Schlesien returned to active service . With newly built masts but still three funnels she entered service again replacing Elsass in February 1930 until September 1931 . 
 In 1932 , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was re @-@ boilered and converted into a cadet training ship . One of the most significant changes visually was the trunking of the two forward funnels into a single larger smoke stack . Schlesien was made the flagship of the battleship squadron in January 1933 . In May 1935 , the Reichsmarine was again reorganized as the Kriegsmarine . By this time , only Schlesien and Schleswig @-@ Holstein were still operating as warships ; the four Braunschweig @-@ class ships had been disposed of or converted into auxiliary ships . 
 Hannover was struck from the navy list in 1936 and destined for the scrapyard . There were ideas to rebuilt her as a target ship especially for aircraft , although this never occurred . Schlesien was re @-@ boilered and converted into a training ship as well in 1936 . The following year , Schlesien toured South America , including a stop in Argentina in December . By 1939 , both ships had been replaced in front @-@ line service by newer ships , and were instead relegated to training duties . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 In August 1939 , Schleswig @-@ Holstein conducted what was purported to be a ceremonial tour of the Baltic to commemorate the sinking of the light cruiser SMS Magdeburg in August 1914 . At the conclusion of the tour , the ship was towed into the port of Danzig opposite the Polish military depot at Westerplatte . At 04 : 47 on 1 September , Schleswig @-@ Holstein fired the first shots of World War II , when she opened fire on the base in Westerplatte . A detachment of marines then stormed the fortress , which resisted for seven days . Throughout the battle , Schleswig @-@ Holstein provided artillery support . During the operation Schlesien remained in her training ship role , though she briefly acted as an icebreaker for U @-@ boats . 
 Schleswig @-@ Holstein and Schlesien then participated in the occupation of Denmark and invasion of Norway , respectively , in April 1940 . Afterward , Schleswig @-@ Holstein was again removed from front @-@ line service and used as a training ship , while Schlesien resumed her ice @-@ breaking duties . In March 1941 , Schlesien escorted mine @-@ layers in the Baltic . After returning from this operation , she became a barracks ship in Gotenhafen . 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , Schlesien 's and Schleswig @-@ Holstein 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was considerably strengthened to allow them to be used as an air defense ships in the port of Gotenhafen . Schleswig @-@ Holstein was attacked by RAF bombers in December 1944 , and although she was sunk in shallow water , her weapons could still be used . After a fire permanently disabled the ship , her crew was sent ashore to assist in the defense of Marienburg . Starting in 1944 , Hannover was broken up for scrap ; work lasted until 1945 . Schlesien provided fire support for German troops in the vicinity of Gotenhafen between 15 and 21 March 1945 . In April , Schlesien was moved to Swinemünde to restock her ammunition supply as well as evacuate 1 @,@ 000 wounded soldiers from the front . On 3 May she struck a mine outside Swinemünde ; the following day she was scuttled by her crew in shallow water . Both ships were broken up in situ after the war . 
 = Svalbard Satellite Station = 
 Svalbard Satellite Station ( Norwegian : Svalbard <unk> ) or SvalSat is a satellite ground station located on Platåberget near Longyearbyen in Svalbard , Norway . Opened in 1997 , it is operated by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , a joint venture between Kongsberg Defence & Aerospace and the Norwegian Space Centre ( NSC ) . SvalSat and KSAT 's Troll Satellite Station ( TrollSat ) in Antarctica are the only ground stations that can see a low altitude polar orbiting satellite ( e.g. , in sun @-@ synchronous orbit ) on every revolution as the earth rotates . The facility consists of 31 multi @-@ mission and customer @-@ dedicated antennas which operate in the C , L , S and X bands . The station provides ground services to more satellites than any other facility in the world . 
 Customers with their own installations include the European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites ( EUMETSAT ) , the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) , the European Space Agency ( ESA ) and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) . The station also reads and distributes data from the Japanese <unk> solar research satellite . The facility has seen a large increase in smaller customers after 2004 , when the Svalbard Undersea Cable System started providing a fiber Internet connection . Concessions for downloading are only issued to civilian satellites , yet some data has been indirectly used by armed forces . There is a disagreement as to whether this constitutes a breach of the Svalbard Treaty . 
 = = History = = 
 The European Space Research Organization ( ESRO ) established Kongsfjord Telemetry Station in Ny @-@ Ålesund as one of its four initial European Space Tracking Network stations . The facility remained in use from 1967 to 1974 , but was closed as it was not suitable for ESRO 's second generation of satellites . During the planning of the station , Longyearbyen had been proposed as a location , and it was largely political concerns by Norwegian authorities to create permanent activity in Ny @-@ Ålesund which lead ESRO to accept the location . 
 In the 1990s , NSC operated Tromsø Satellite Station ( TSS ) , which was used as a ground station for a limited number of satellites . After Rolf Skår was appointed director of NSC , plans were launched to try to win the ground station contract for NASA 's planned Earth Observing System ( EOS ) . NASA was considering locating the ground station in Greenland , at McMurdo Station in Antarctica or at <unk> in Sweden . Skår invited a NASA delegation to visit Svalbard , and from 1996 NSC and NASA started negotiating a contract to establish a ground station at Longyearbyen . 
 Svalbard was chosen because of its high latitude from which every polar @-@ orbiting satellite above 500 kilometers ( 310 mi ) can be seen on every revolution as the earth rotates within its orbital plane . For the EOS program , Svalbard was supplemented by Poker Flat Research Range in Fairbanks , Alaska . Construction of the road up to Platåberget started in 1996 and a relay station was built to send the data to Isfjord Radio before being sent onwards to a geostationary satellite . The first installation was an 11 @-@ meter ( 36 ft ) parabolic antenna with S and X band capability . 
 The first satellite to use SvalSat was Landsat 7 , which was launched on 15 April 1999 . It was followed up by three other EOS satellites : Terra , Aqua and QuikSCAT . To ensure a sustainable financing of operations , NSC started negotiating with other potential customers . However , the project was rejected by the Indian Space Research Organisation . Instead , a cooperation was made with Kongsberg Aerospace and Defence and Lockheed Martin , who built the second antenna as a joint venture . In 2001 , a German research group applied for permission to establish a ground station in Ny @-@ Ålesund . NSC feared that the competition could undermine the financial capabilities of SvalSat . However , no facility in Ny @-@ Ålesund was built . 
 In 2002 , ownership and operations of the facility were consolidated and taken over by the newly created Kongsberg Satellite Services . Lockheed Martin was no longer interested in owning a share of the facility , and sold their shares . NSC and Kongsberg merged their interests in the new company , which also took over TSS . By 2004 , six antennas , between 9 and 13 meters ( 30 and 43 ft ) in diameter , had been installed . 
 Northrop Grumman and Raytheon decided in 2002 to locate its ground station for National Polar @-@ orbiting Operational Environmental Satellite System , the successor of EOS , to Helsinki , Finland , instead of Svalbard . The reason was lack of optical fiber cable connection to the archipelago . NSC took initiative to build such a cable in July 2002 and gained interest from NASA , NOAA and Telenor . The cable was financed by the satellite operators paying the same fee for the transmission of data as they would have to pay for a satellite connection until the cable was paid for . A 40 million United States dollar contract was signed with Tyco International for two cables between Harstad on the mainland and Longyearbyen . Construction started in June 2003 and was completed in January 2004 . 
 Starting in 2007 , SvalSat was expanded with 12 antennas . Five are used for Galileo , while the remaining are used for a large array of customers . In 2007 and 2008 , both Terra and Landsat 7 were hacked twice . The hackers were able to achieve all steps which would have been necessary to take control over the satellites , but did not actually take control . The operation commanded the satellites via SvalSat , which it was able to hack via the Internet connection . 
 In his 2011 book <unk> , Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation journalist Bård <unk> argues that SvalSat is used for military intelligence and thus is violating the Svalbard Treaty . Specifically , <unk> provides evidence that downloaded images of the earth are used for intelligence and military activities . For instance , a Landsat image taken during the Libyan Civil War was sold by the Italian company e @-@ <unk> to the Italian Armed Forces . Similarly , an Technology Experiment Satellite image was sold to the United States Armed Forces during the War in Afghanistan and Arirang @-@ 2 images of North Korean installations have been sold to the United States . All three satellites use SvalSat as one of their ground stations . According to Governor Odd Olsen <unk> , even if a military should indirectly use information downloaded from SvalSat , this would not be a breach of the treaty . A dissertation by Professor Geir <unk> concludes that even if a ground station was directly used for downloading military intelligence from military satellites , it would still be permitted by the treaty . 
 = = Operation = = 
 SvalSat is owned and operated by Kongsberg Satellite Services ( KSAT ) , which is again equally owned by the Kongsberg Defence and Aerospace and the Norwegian Space Centre , the latter which is again owned by the Ministry of Trade and Industry . Of KSAT 's 120 employees , 22 are stationed in Longyearbyen and work at SvalSat . KSAT is not tied to a particular operator of satellites and some of the antennas communicate with multiple satellites , thus reducing costs compared to dedicated ground stations . For a typical satellite , data is delivered to the end customer no more than 30 minutes after downloading . 
 All ground stations are connected to KSAT 's Tromsø Network Operation Center , which is also connected to the TSS and TrollSat . This allows for redundancy as also TSS and TrollSat can be used to communicate with the satellites . Some customers have direct access to their installations in Longyearbyen without having to route via the Tromsø Network Operation Center . The operation center is responsible for backup , scheduling and conflict resolution . The facility uses interoperability and shared ground services , such as a common protocol for communication and similar design of the antennas , to increase flexibility and reduce costs and risk . 
 KSAT operates two polar ground stations optimized for low Earth orbit ( LEO ) satellites , the other being TrollSat at Troll in Antarctica . These are the only two ground stations able to see a polar @-@ orbiting satellite on every revolution . By using both stations , customers can communicate with a satellite twice per orbit . 
 All satellites which use SvalSat need a concession from the Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority . Such a concession is only awarded to satellites which would abide by the treaty and explicitly excludes any military satellites . However , this does not prevent information from dual @-@ use satellites being sold to military organizations . The Governor of Svalbard inspects the station twice per year . This includes checking the logs of satellites SvalSat has communicated with , but not the actual information transferred . All SvalSat employees need a security clearance from NATO and the Norwegian Armed Forces . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 SvalSat is located on Platåberget , a mountain plateau 400 to 500 meters ( 1 @,@ 300 to 1 @,@ 600 ft ) above mean sea level just outside Longyearbyen on the island of Spitsbergen in Svalbard , Norway . The location on the 78th parallel north is favorable to communication with satellites in low polar orbits . The facility consists of 31 antenna systems , both multi @-@ mission and customer dedicated , making SvalSat the world 's largest commercial ground station . They are variously capable of communication in the C , L , S and X bands . SvalSat makes use of the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems ' Space Link Extension protocols , an international standard for ground station to satellite communication . Most antennas use the S band for tracking , telemetry and commanding and the X band for high @-@ speed data download . 
 Originally , SvalSat used a combination of a 2 megabits per second ( Mb / s ) leased line , several Integrated Services Digital Network lines and a 55 Mbit / s satellite Internet access via <unk> for data transmission off the island . From 2004 , the Svalbard Undersea Cable System gives two redundant fiber lines to the mainland , each providing 10 <unk> per second . The fiber connection is operated by Telenor . Power is supplied from Longyearbyen Power Station , In case of a power outage , the facility is equipped with an uninterruptible power supply and has a standby generator capable of supplying power for two weeks . 
 The facility consists of a 600 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 6 @,@ 500 sq ft ) main operations building , a 70 @-@ square @-@ meter ( 750 sq ft ) building for the emergency power supply , a transformer station , and a mobile research station , in addition to the radomes . The lot is located above Store Norske Spitsbergen Kulkompani 's Mine 3 and is leased to KSAT . The facility is connected to Longyearbyen via a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ kilometer ( 2 @.@ 2 mi ) long private road . When the road is closed because of avalanches and land slides , helicopter transport is used . There is a road connecting all the antennas to ease maintenance . Installations at SvalSat not related to satellite communication include a measuring station for radioactive particles in the air operated by Norwegian Seismic Array , a telecommunications installation operated by Telenor , a weather station operated by the Norwegian Meteorological Institute , with information relayed to Svalbard Airport , Longyear , and a weather station operated by SvalSat . 
 Antennas are placed according to customer specifications , which normally involves a distance of 200 meters ( 660 ft ) between antennas . This is to ensure that antennas do not shade each other and that their electromagnetic noise and radio noise do not interfere with each other . Locations are chosen to maximize satellite pass durations , view a calibration station on <unk> , provide visibility of the Clarke Belt for geostationary satellite antennas , or visibility to Isfjord Radio for terrestrial communications antennas . 
 = = Customers = = 
 SvalSat is part of NASA 's Near Earth Network . This includes support for the Earth Observing System , which includes satellites such as Aqua , Aura , Ice , Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite , and QuikSCAT , as well as the Small Explorer program which includes Galaxy Evolution Explorer , the Submillimeter Wave Astronomy Satellite , Swift Gamma @-@ Ray Burst Mission , <unk> <unk> Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics , Interface Region Imaging Spectrograph , and Transition Region and Coronal Explorer . SvalSat and Poker Flat are collectively responsible for half of the network 's 140 daily passes . Satellites operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration using SvalSat includes the Suomi National Polar @-@ Orbiting Partnership and the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program . Other American satellites include the United States Geological Survey 's Landsat 5 and Landsat 7 and the private Iridium Communications ' satellites . 
 The European Space Agency operates Svalbard @-@ 3 ( SG @-@ 3 ) , a 13 @-@ meter ( 43 ft ) dish antenna which is able to transmit in the S band and receive in the S and X band . ESA uses the facility for tacking , telemetry , <unk> , radiometric measurements and system validation . Satellites include European Remote @-@ Sensing Satellite 2 and Envisat . The European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites uses SvalSat as a ground station for its MetOp satellites , which allows communication with all MetOp orbits . SvalSat serves as one of five uplink stations and as a sensor station for Galileo . Five antennas are used for Galileo , including one with a 10 @-@ meter ( 33 ft ) diameter and four at 4 meters ( 13 ft ) . 
 The Norwegian Coastal Administration uses SvalSat to track ships ' Automatic Identification System in Norwegian waters via <unk> @-@ 1 . The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency uses SvalSat for its <unk> mission . Other customers include MacDonald , <unk> and Associates 's Radarsat @-@ 1 and Radarsat @-@ 2 , the Taiwanese National Space Organization 's <unk> @-@ 2 , the Korea Aerospace Research Institute of South Korea 's Arirang @-@ 2 , the Indian Space Research Organisation 's Technology Experiment Satellite , <unk> @-@ 1 and <unk> @-@ 2 , the German <unk> constellation , the Italian Space Agency 's <unk> @-@ <unk> and the German Aerospace Center 's <unk> @-@ X. 
 = Operation Zeppelin ( deception plan ) = 
 Operation Zeppelin ( along with its follow up subsidiaries , Vendetta and Turpitude ) was a major military deception operation run by the British during the Second World War . It formed part of Operation Bodyguard , the cover plan for the invasion of Normandy in 1944 , and was intended to mislead German intelligence as to the Allied invasion plans in the Mediterranean theatre that year . The operation was planned by ' A ' Force and implemented by means of visual deception and misinformation . 
 Zeppelin was executed in five phases between February and July 1944 . The story behind each stage developed various invasion threats against Greece , Albania , Croatia , Turkey , Bulgaria and France . The latter portions of the operation received their own codenames . Vendetta referred to a threat toward Southern France close to D @-@ Day whilst Turpitude was the codename for the final stage of Zeppelin , an overland threat to Greece and Bulgaria . 
 It is unclear how much impact Zeppelin had on German response in the region , though the aims of the deception were achieved ( tying up German defensive forces in the Mediterranean beyond D @-@ Day ) . Post @-@ war analysis of German intelligence documents indicated that they did overstate Allied forces in the way Zeppelin intended . However , the German high command did not come to expect a major invasion in the Balkans . 
 = = Background = = 
 In preparation for the 1944 invasion of Normandy , the Allied nations conducted a complex series of deceptions under the codename Bodyguard . This was a large strategic plan with the aim of misleading the German high command as to Allied intentions in 1944 . Whilst the main focus of Bodyguard was on the invasion of Western France , additional plans supported operations in the Mediterranean and Scandinavia . 
 In 1941 , ' A ' Force ( the Cairo @-@ based department responsible for deception operations in the North Africa ) had begun an operation , codenamed Cascade , to inflate the number of troops in the region by creating fictional divisions . By 1943 the use of notional formations had proved a useful part of deception operations , and the practice formed the basis for key parts of Bodyguard . The Allies invaded Italy in September 1943 and by the end of the year had occupied most of the south of the country . Thirty @-@ eight divisions were deployed across the Mediterranean theatre , mostly in Italy with some in North Africa . 
 The various deceptions to fulfil the Mediterranean portion of Bodyguard were given the codename Zeppelin , with follow up subsidiaries called Vendetta and Turpitude . Its initial overall aims were to tie down German defensive forces in the region , but without suggesting too great a threat to Southern France ( until the Allies had decided whether or not to conduct landings there ) . 
 Planning for the operation was begun by ' A ' Force in January 1944 . The deception required an increase in the fictional troops that Operation Cascade had created . Operation Wantage succeeded from Cascade on 6 February with the aim over inflating Allied troops by thirty percent . 
 = = Operation = = 
 Zeppelin , and its constituent plans Vendetta and Turpitude , focused on tying down German resources in Southern France and The Balkans . Its aim was , during early 1944 , to distract attention from a potential Allied invasion of Southern France ( Operation Dragoon ) by creating a fictional threat against Crete and Croatia . It also intended to tie up troops in the Eastern Mediterranean so they would not be re @-@ deployed to France during the Allied campaign . Zeppelin 's " story " would be that the notional British Twelfth Army were preparing for an amphibious landing , from North Africa into The Balkans , supported by a Russian overland invasion into Albania and Polish forces staged out of Italy . 
 Zeppelin was put across through various means . Double agents relayed messages about troop movements , dummy formations and radio traffic were created and searches were conducted for local guides and maps , as would be made in preparation for a real invasion . Nearly 600 messages were sent through agents , who were used extensively and at considerable risk of exposure . Dummy formations were created in Italy and Libya , Colonel Victor Jones began depicting both an Armoured and Airborne divisions near Tobruk for the first stage of the operation . 
 The first stage of Zeppelin commenced on 8 February , with threats to Greece and Crete . A provisional date for the supposed invasion was set at 29 March ( to take advantage of the full moon ) . On 10 March the operation moved to a second stage , where the fictional operation was delayed until April and May to join up with a supposed Russian invasion of Bulgaria . Stage two was communicated through an sub @-@ plan called <unk> , involving double agents back in England . The story passed to the Germans was that radio messages would inform friendly leaders in Yugoslavia of the intended invasion dates and any delays . 
 The third stage of Zeppelin involved a delay until 21 May , on the basis that the Russians had asked for them to be synchronised with their own invasion plans . This ran from 21 April until 9 May , when a major revision to the plans ( stage four ) was introduced . The Twelfth Army and Polish forces would land in Albania and Croatia , bypassing Greece due to mutiny within Allied Greek forces in Africa , with an invasion set in June . A major invasion of Southern France was also added , codenamed Vendetta . 
 = = = Vendetta = = = 
 The Allies had already decided to mount an invasion of southern France ( Dragoon ) , which occurred in August 1944 . Vendetta 's story was agreed in the first week of May and deception work started on 9 May . Its aim was to detain German forces in Southern France for up to twenty five days following the Normandy landings . The plan threatened a landing near Sete ( chosen for its distance from the Dragoon landing site ) by the US Seventh Army , consisting of fictional divisions , and some French units . Vendetta was supported by a diplomatic deception , Operation Royal Flush , which requested support from the Spanish government to allow injured soldiers to be evacuated following an invasion . 
 For Vendetta , stores were stockpiled in Algerian ports and Allied troops were given maps for the supposed landing zones . A naval exercise , involving sixty ships , was run between 9 and 11 June which included embarking thousands of men and vehicles from the US 91st Infantry Division . On 11 June , the Algerian borders were closed , a natural precursor to invasion . 
 The deception could not be maintained for long . The British carriers Indomitable and Victorious , that had formed a key part of the naval deception , left for the Indian Ocean . Meanwhile the 91st left to deploy in Italy . From 24 June the Allies began to wind down Vendetta with the story that due to German forces remaining in the south of France ( rather than moving to Normandy ) that the invasion had been delayed . 
 = = = Turpitude = = = 
 The final phase of Zeppelin was codenamed Turpitude , the story for which was an overland invasion of Greece by British troops via Turkey and the Soviet Union via Bulgaria . It was planned in the most part by ' A ' Force 's Michael Crichton in Cairo . Deception efforts for Turpitude were focused in Syria , and around the ports of Tripoli and <unk> . The Allies hoped to indicate a spoiling attack against the island of Rhodes before the main attack against Salonika . Turpitude finished on 26 June and Zeppelin officially came to a close on 6 July 1944 . 
 Turpitude was communicated through visual deceptions in Syria by all three armed forces . The RAF flew reconnaissance flights across the supposed targets , whilst the Navy set up major facilities in the Syrian coastal ports ( anti @-@ aircraft guns , search lights and other efforts that might hide major activity ) . Along the Turkish border the British Ninth Army ( the small force protecting Syria ) , the 31st Indian Armoured Division and 20th Armoured Division ( a fictional division , really the dummy tanks of Jones ' 24th Armoured Brigade ) put on a show of readiness . Political deception , via Royal Flush , was also used to hint heavily at Allied actions in the region . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The Allies considered Zeppelin to have achieved its main objective of tying down German forces in the region until after the invasion of Normandy , although it did not appear to convince German high command that major Allied landings would occur in the Mediterranean . Instead , Zeppelin helped the Allies achieve their objective by convincing the Germans of the threat of small invasions , stopping them from removing the defensive forces . According to Jacob Field , the operation successfully detained 25 divisions in defensive positions in the region . 
 The operation did affect German analysis of Allied troop strength . In early 1944 the Allies had 38 divisions in the region , but the German battle plan identified up to 71 . Whether directly related to Zeppelin or not , German forces remained in the Mediterranean throughout May 1944 , and so were not available to reinforce Normandy in June . 
 With Vendetta the Allies may have oversold the deception . Vendetta 's various deceptions , coupled with political overtures in Spain ( Operation Royal Flush ) , created what German intelligence called " wealth of alarming reports " . However , these were assessed as deceptive in nature probably due to their volume . In mid @-@ June the German command decided that although the Allies had enough troops in North Africa to effect an invasion they lacked the landing craft to actually undertake the operation . Despite this , the reports had held enough credibility in late May and early June that , on the eve of the Normandy Landings , German divisions were deploying in defensive positions along the southern coast . Troops did not begin moving north until June and July . 
 Turpitude had an impact in Turkey , with reports in early June of discussion within the country 's political and military spheres . On 10 June , the German ambassador to Turkey reported that the government were concerned about the possibility of the Allies using the country as a staging ground . The ambassador 's report , which included details of Allied military build up in the area , was treated with scepticism by German high command who were unable to verify some of the information . However , the German intelligence apparatus issued warnings of probable Allied operations in the region , and requested " exceptional vigilance " from forces stationed there . 
 = French ironclad Couronne = 
 The French ironclad Couronne ( " Crown " ) was the first iron @-@ hulled ironclad warship built for the French Navy in 1859 – 62 . She was the first such ship to be laid down , although the British armoured frigate HMS Warrior was completed first . The ship participated in the Franco @-@ Prussian War of 1870 – 71 , but saw no combat . She was served as a gunnery training ship from 1885 to 1908 before she was hulked the following year and became a barracks ship in Toulon . Couronne was scrapped in 1934 , over 70 years after she was completed . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Designed by the French naval architect Camille <unk> as an iron @-@ hulled version of the Gloire @-@ class ironclads , Couronne was also intended to fight in the line of battle , unlike the first British ironclads . The ship was classified as an armoured frigates because she only had a single gun deck and her traditional disposition of guns arrayed along the length of the hull also meant that she was a broadside ironclad . The ship was 80 @.@ 85 metres ( 265 ft 3 in ) long , with a beam of 17 metres ( 55 ft 9 in ) . She had a maximum draft of 7 @.@ 8 metres ( 25 ft 7 in ) , a depth of hold of 9 @.@ 7 metres ( 31 ft 10 in ) and displaced 6 @,@ 428 tonnes ( 6 @,@ 326 long tons ) . The ship 's metacentric height of 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 6 ft ) meant that she rolled less and was a better sea boat than the <unk> . Her gun ports were slightly higher above the waterline than those of her predecessors , 2 metres ( 6 ft 7 in ) , and Couronne took aboard less water as well . She had a crew of 570 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship had a single horizontal return connecting @-@ rod compound steam engine that drove a six @-@ bladed , 5 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 19 ft 0 in ) propeller using steam provided by eight Indret oval boilers for a designed speed of 12 @.@ 5 knots ( 23 @.@ 2 km / h ; 14 @.@ 4 mph ) . Figures for the engine 's designed power vary wildly , from 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 200 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 400 kW ) , but Couronne reached 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) from 2 @,@ 597 metric horsepower ( 1 @,@ 910 kW ) during her sea trials . She carried a maximum of 675 tonnes ( 664 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 2 @,@ 410 nautical miles ( 4 @,@ 460 km ; 2 @,@ 770 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The details of Couronne 's sailing rig are not precisely known , but presumably she was fitted with a light barquentine rig with three masts like that of the Gloire @-@ class ships . It is also unknown if she had the same multiple changes of rigging as those ships . 
 Couronne was armed with 36 Modèle 1860 164 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) rifled breech @-@ loading guns , 30 of which were positioned on the single gun deck in the broadside . The remaining 4 guns were placed on the upper deck as chase guns . They fired a 44 @.@ 9 @-@ kilogram ( 99 @.@ 0 lb ) shell at a muzzle velocity of only 322 metres per second ( 1 @,@ 060 ft / s ) and proved to be ineffective against armour . The ship was rearmed multiple times during her career , the first of which was the replacement of the chase guns by four 220 @-@ millimetre ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) howitzers in 1864 and the replacement of the rest of the guns by improved Modèle 1864 guns . The ship was subsequently rearmed with 16 Modèle 1864 or 1866 194 @-@ millimetre ( 7 @.@ 6 in ) guns on her main deck and six 164 @.@ 7 @-@ millimetre guns on the upper deck as chase guns . Her final armament configuration before she became a gunnery training ship in 1881 was eight 240 @-@ millimetre ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) Modèle 1870 guns and four 194 @-@ millimetre Modèle 1870 guns on the main deck . A pair of 120 @-@ millimetre ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns and a dozen 37 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 5 @-@ barrelled Hotchkiss revolving cannon were mounted on the upper deck . 
 Couronne 's wrought iron hull was completely protected by armour plates 120 millimetres thick . The armour backing consisted of two layers of teak , totaling 380 millimetres ( 15 in ) in thickness , an iron lattice work 33 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) thick , and the 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) side of the hull . The ship had a conning tower with armour 100 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick and 12 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of armour underneath the wooden upper deck . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Ordered on 4 March 1858 , Couronne was laid down at the Arsenal de Lorient on 14 February 1859 , launched on 28 April 1861 and commissioned on 2 February 1862 at a cost of 6 @,@ 018 @,@ 885 francs . On 19 June 1864 , Couronne played an incidental role in the Battle of Cherbourg as she escorted the Confederate commerce raider CSS Alabama out of French territorial waters to her fight with USS Kearsarge . While assigned to the Mediterranean Fleet , the ship made a port visit in August 1865 to Brest where the fleet hosted the British Channel Fleet . A few days later the French fleet made a reciprocal visit to Portsmouth where it was hosted by the Channel Fleet . 
 During the Franco @-@ Prussian War the ship was assigned to Vice Admiral Léon Martin <unk> 's squadron that blockaded German ports in the Heligoland Bight in August and September 1870 . The four German ironclads at Wilhelmshaven sortied in search of the French squadron in early August before the French arrived and in mid @-@ September after the French were forced to abandon the blockade for lack of coal . Couronne returned to Toulon on 10 December . In 1876 , she was assigned to the Mediterranean Squadron . From 1881 to 1885 , Couronne was reconstructed to serve as a gunnery training ship , replacing Souverain : her armour was replaced by wood of the same thickness , two boilers were removed and her propeller was replaced . Her rigging was replaced by a full ship rig and iron spar deck and poop decks were fitted which gave her the appearance of a steam ship of the line of the Napoléon type . The ship was rearmed with an assortment of guns of various calibres for training purposes . Her crew and trainees numbered 1200 officers and enlisted men . Couronne was replaced as a gunnery training ship on 1 December 1908 and disarmed on 1 September 1909 . She was subsequently converted to a floating barracks at Toulon until she was scrapped in 1934 . 
 = Angel Bakeries = 
 Angel Bakeries ( Hebrew : <unk> אנג 'ל Ma <unk> Angel ) , also known as Angel 's Bakery , is the largest commercial bakery in Israel , producing 275 @,@ 000 loaves of bread and 275 @,@ 000 rolls daily and controlling 30 percent of the country 's bread market . With a product line of 100 different types of bread products and 250 different types of cakes and cookies , Angel sells its goods in 32 company @-@ owned outlets nationwide and distributes to 6 @,@ 000 stores and hundreds of hotels and army bases . It also exports to the United States , United Kingdom , France , Belgium and Denmark . 
 Founded in 1927 in Jerusalem by Salomon Angel , Angel Bakeries introduced to the Israeli market the first sliced bread , plant @-@ based emulsifiers , and new baking technologies . It has always been family @-@ run , at first by Salomon with his brothers and sons , then by Salomon 's grandsons , and today by Salomon 's great @-@ grandsons . The company , Salomon A. Angel Ltd . , is publicly traded on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange , with a turnover of $ 180 million in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 The original Angel 's Bakery was established in Bayit <unk> by Salomon ( Shlomo ) Angel , a seventh @-@ generation Jerusalemite and scion of a Sephardi family that traced its lineage back to Jews who were expelled from Spain in 1492 . Born in the <unk> Sha <unk> neighborhood of Jerusalem , Angel was originally a teacher in an Alliance school in Jerusalem , where he fell in love with the principal ’ s daughter . But principal Chaim Farhi would only allow him to marry his daughter , Esther , if he left teaching and " earned a livelihood " . Salomon agreed and became a dry @-@ goods merchant . The couple married in 1916 and had three sons and three daughters . 
 Angel became a successful dry @-@ goods merchant , traveling regularly to Alexandria , Damascus , and Beirut to buy flour and other basic foodstuffs to sell in Jerusalem . In 1927 one of Angel 's customers , the Trachtenberg Bakery in Bayit <unk> , went bankrupt . Angel decided to pay off the bakery 's debts and assume ownership , bringing in his father Avraham and three brothers as partners . A few years later , two of his brothers , Leon and <unk> , left to open their own bakery in Haifa . 
 Angel improved the bread @-@ making operation by introducing Israel 's first automated weighing machines and investing in new production lines . He often slept overnight at the bakery during the week and returned to his home in Talpiot when the bakery was closed on Shabbat . Later he built an apartment over the bakery to house his family . In the 1930s , the bakery employed 25 workers and had one production line that turned out 8 @,@ 500 loaves per day . It delivered bread to stores in two trucks and a horse and wagon . During World War II , the bakery contracted to supply bread to the British army , necessitating the purchase of large American @-@ made ovens that could turn out 540 loaves per hour . 
 Angel 's Bakery played a key role in feeding Jerusalem residents during the 1948 War of Independence . When Arabs lay siege to the city and attacked convoys that attempted to bring food and supplies through the narrow mountain pass from Tel Aviv , water and flour were in short supply . Fire trucks were employed to shuttle water to the bakery and " flour was swept up off the bakery floor " . Angel 's son Danny , who was a Haganah fighter defending the besieged Old City , recalled that the bakery would send bread in convoys to the fighters in the Old City and Mount Scopus , and hide guns and ammunition in the sacks of bread . One of the first horses used for the Jewish assault on the Arabs ' Old City positions came from Angel 's Bakery ; its feet were wrapped in old flour sacks so the British wouldn 't detect it . 
 = = = New baking technologies = = = 
 In the 1950s Salomon 's three sons , Avraham , Ovadia and Danny , assumed managerial positions ; they became co @-@ CEOs after Salomon 's death in 1966 . In 1958 Angel 's Bakery moved to its present location in the Givat Shaul industrial zone at the corner of Beit <unk> and <unk> Streets . The site was chosen because it stood across the street from a flour mill . The Angel brothers built Israel 's first flour silo and commissioned a Texas company to construct a 750 @-@ foot pipeline to convey flour directly from the mill to the silo to the bakery . Today this pipeline brings 120 tons of flour to the bakery daily . The invention , initially opposed by the Jerusalem municipality for being above @-@ ground , won the Kaplan Prize for distinction in productivity and efficiency . 
 Also in 1965 , the brothers introduced new long ovens and kneading machines . That same year , they produced the country 's first sliced bread and bread containing soy flour . 
 To enter the whole wheat bread market , the bakery imported its own wheat @-@ cleaning machine from Hungary ; the machine actually had to be smuggled out since Hungary did not have diplomatic relations with Israel at the time . However , health @-@ food consumers were wary of the first whole @-@ wheat loaves because they were white , not brown . Working with the Health Food Association , Angel 's came up with the solution of adding all @-@ natural molasses to the bread to give it a brown color . 
 Angel 's developed the only production line in Israel with the capacity to produce 3 @,@ 300 loaves of bread per hour . Thirteen other bread production lines in its various plants each yield over 2 @,@ 000 loaves per hour . One production line in Jerusalem has the capacity to turn out 10 @,@ 000 <unk> in three hours . On each day of the eight @-@ day Hanukkah festival , the Jerusalem plant also fries up 250 @,@ 000 <unk> , the jelly @-@ filled doughnut favored by Israelis at this season . 
 The bakery 's digitally controlled ovens continually adjust temperatures to accommodate the fermenting and baking processes ; these ovens can also bake different types of bread at different temperatures on the top and bottom of each oven . Despite the emphasis on innovation and automation , Angel 's challahs are still braided by hand . 
 = = = Expansion and diversification = = = 
 Angel 's Bakery opened its landmark factory store adjacent to the Givat Shaul plant in 1984 . The store offers a full selection of packaged breads , rolls , and muffins , <unk> , <unk> , fancy cakes , handmade pastries , coffee and soft drinks . For many years , visitors could watch bakers braid challahs through a large side window . At the end of the Passover holiday , a long line of customers traditionally forms outside the store after midnight , waiting to buy the first bread off the production line . 
 Also in 1984 , the company began producing pastries and cakes in a factory in Jerusalem , and beginning in the 1990s it began building and acquiring other bakeries in a move to diversify its products and marketing base . It built a new bakery in Lod in 1995 and purchased the <unk> Tam bakery in <unk> in 1999 . Today the company owns and operates five plants : 
 Jerusalem – serving Jerusalem and its environs 
 Kfar <unk> ( Oranim Bakery ) – serving Northern Israel 
 Lod – serving Central Israel and the Gush Dan region 
 <unk> – serving Southern Israel 
 Beit Shemesh – dedicated factory for cakes and pastries distributed nationwide 
 The company has branched into the baking of breads with special grains and added dietary fibers , reduced @-@ calorie and vitamin @-@ fortified breads , and certified organic products . 
 In 2002 , it introduced <unk> pita , challah , rolls , <unk> , " artisan " breads , and pizza bases , which are flash frozen and sold to customers or stores that complete the baking process themselves for a fresher product . 
 In keeping with government regulations , Angel Bakeries also produces several varieties of price @-@ controlled bread ( Hebrew : לחם <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) for the low @-@ income sector . 
 In the late 1990s , the company opened a chain of cafe / <unk> in four Jerusalem shopping districts . Besides selling the company 's bakery @-@ fresh goods , the Angel Cafe serves salads , sandwiches , pasta dishes , desserts , coffees , teas , and soft drinks . 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Angel Bakeries owns a fleet of 200 trucks that transport its products to 32 company @-@ owned outlets , 6 @,@ 000 stores , and hundreds of hotels and army bases throughout Israel . The distribution schedule is fully computerized and designed to operate on a " just in time " basis : All the bread that needs to be delivered to a specific location is programmed to come off the production line right before it is loaded onto a truck and sent off , guaranteeing maximum freshness . 
 Angel Bakeries is an approved supplier to the Domino 's Pizza chain in Israel , and the sole supplier of hamburger buns to McDonald 's restaurants in Israel . It also exports to the United States , United Kingdom , France , Belgium and Denmark . In terms of input , the company uses over 5 @,@ 000 tons of flour per month . 
 = = Compliance with Jewish law = = 
 In the interests of keeping the bread kosher ( Angel Bakeries carries the hechsher of both the <unk> <unk> and the Orthodox Union ) , Angel 's son Ovadia , a trained chemist , collaborated with others at the Angel 's @-@ owned Adumim Chemicals plant to develop a new formula for the emulsifiers that bind water and oil in the bread @-@ making process . In those early days , emulsifiers were made with animal @-@ based fats which were not kosher . Ovadia Angel and his team produced emulsifiers from hydrogenated fats , a vegetable @-@ based source , and later sold this new knowledge to other companies . 
 Another kashrut challenge which the bakery overcame in the early 1950s concerned the ability to produce fresh bread for sale on Sunday mornings after the plant had been closed for Shabbat in accordance with Jewish law . Normally dough takes four to six hours to rise , but the bakery acquired a mixer made by Tweedy of Burnley , England , which could produce dough in only two hours , thus allowing the bakery to bake bread on Saturday night in time for Sunday @-@ morning deliveries . Today Angel Bakeries owns nine such mixers , five of which are used in its Jerusalem plant . 
 Angel Bakeries operates year @-@ round except for Shabbat , Yom Tov , and Passover week . In accordance with Jewish law , it annually sells its stock to a non @-@ Jew before Passover so that it does not own chametz over the holiday . 
 = = Family business = = 
 Angel 's was the first Israeli bakery to go public on the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange , in 1984 . However , it remains a family business . In the 1980s Salomon ’ s grandchildren moved into managerial positions . Avraham , the eldest brother , who headed the financial division , was succeeded by his daughter Ruthie . Ovadia passed down the directorship of production and technology to his son Gadi . Danny handed over the company directorship to his son Yaron . 
 Angel Bakeries employs 1 @,@ 800 workers , including Israelis , Palestinians , and new immigrants . Some of its workers are third @-@ generation employees . In its over 80 @-@ year history , the bakery has never had a strike . 
 = = Retail brands = = 
 Angel Bakeries ( Hebrew : <unk> אנג 'ל Ma <unk> Angel ) – white , " dark white " and whole @-@ wheat sliced bread , whole @-@ wheat and multi @-@ grain breads , challahs , pita bread , light / sugar @-@ free breads , rolls , buns 
 <unk> <unk> ( Hebrew : לחם <unk> ) – pre @-@ germinated whole @-@ wheat bread 
 French @-@ style bread ( Hebrew : לחם אנג 'ל <unk> <unk> ) – handmade bread using traditional French baking methods 
 <unk> ( Hebrew : <unk> ) – bestselling children 's buns with free plastic sandwich bags in each package 
 Wheat crisps ( Hebrew : <unk> ) – 19 @-@ calorie crackers 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 The intersection of <unk> <unk> and <unk> Streets , on the northeastern corner of the bakery , was named Shlomo Angel Square by the Jerusalem municipality in honor of the company 's founder . 
 Danny Angel ( 1920 – 2009 ) , who worked in the family business from the age of 7 until his death at age 89 was the public face of the company . He was the recipient of many awards , including the Jerusalem Prize , Jerusalem Worthy , and Notable Industrialist . He was president of the Manufacturers Association of Israel , the Rotary Club of Israel , and the Variety Club of Israel , which he helped found . He had many friends in the political echelon as well . In recognition of their longtime friendship , Jerusalem mayor Teddy Kollek always gave Danny Angel an honorary spot at the bottom of his electoral list . In 2008 , mayoral candidate Nir Barkat continued the tradition and placed Angel 's name at the bottom of his electoral list . Angel 's funeral was attended by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert , Likud party leader Benjamin Netanyahu , and other government officials . 
 = = Angel 's Bakery , Brooklyn = = 
 Joe Angel , a great @-@ great @-@ grandson of Salomon Angel who , like his cousins , helped out at the family bakery in Jerusalem , moved to the United States in 1969 and earned a degree in bakery management from Kansas State University . In 1981 he opened his own Angel 's Bakery in Brooklyn , New York , specializing in muffins , cookies and cakes . 
 = Sonnet 102 = 
 Sonnet 102 is one of the 154 sonnets written by English playwright and poet William Shakespeare . It is one of the Fair Youth sonnets , in which Shakespeare writes of an unnamed youth with whom the poet is enamored . Sonnet 102 is among a series of seemingly connected sonnets , from Sonnet 100 to Sonnet 103 , in which the poet speaks of a silence between his Muse and himself . The exact date of writing is unknown , and there is contention among scholars about when they were written . Paul Hammond among other scholars believes that sonnets 61 @-@ 103 were written primarily during the early 1590s , and then being edited or added to later , during the early 1600s ( decade ) . Regardless of date of writing , it was published later along with the rest of the sonnets of the 1609 Quarto . 
 In the sonnet , the poet writes of why he has stopped showering his muse with flowery praise and adoration . In his analysis of Shakespeare 's Sonnets , David West suggests that the sequence of sonnets 100 @-@ 103 and the silence described are a response to the infidelity of the Fair Youth in the Rival Poet sequence of sonnets ( 78 @-@ 86 ) , which has caused a rift between the poet and his Muse . He writes of how immediately following the Rival Poet sonnets , the Poet begins to speak of his lover being false and having forsaken him . West claims that this ultimately culminates in sonnets 100 @-@ 103 , where the Poet expresses his regret over what has transpired . 
 = = Paraphrase = = 
 In this sonnet , the speaker is explaining that though he has been writing poetry in adoration of his muse less frequently , his feelings for him are as strong as they 've ever been . Gwynne Blakemore Evans believes that this is an attempt to apologize for a period of silence . The poet goes on to explain that his silence is simply him not wanting to cheapen his praise by making it common . Below is a paraphrase of the sonnet written in prose : 
 My love is stronger than it 's ever been , even though my love may seem to have diminished . I do not love less , even though I don 't show it as much . Love becomes a commodity when it 's spoken of too highly and too frequently . I used to sing my praises very frequently when our love was new , like the nightingale which sings in the summer and stops at summers end . It 's not that the summer is less pleasant for the nightingale , it 's simply that the songs of other birds fill the air , and when things become common , they become less dear . It 's for this reason , I , like the nightingale , have stopped writing . I do not wish my poems to become boring . 
 = = Structure = = 
