 Sonnet 102 is an English or Shakespearean sonnet . The English sonnet has three quatrains , followed by a final rhyming couplet . It follows the typical rhyme scheme of the form abab cdcd efef gg and is composed in iambic pentameter , a type of poetic metre based on five pairs of metrically weak / strong syllabic positions . The 8th line exemplifies a regular iambic pentameter : 
 × / × / × / × / × / 
 And stops her pipe in growth of riper days . ( 102 @.@ 8 ) 
 The 1st and 3rd lines have a final <unk> syllable or feminine ending : 
 × / × / × / × / × / ( × ) 
 My love is strengthened , though more weak in seeming ; ( 102 @.@ 1 ) 
 / 
 = ictus , a metrically strong syllabic position . × = 
 nonictus . ( × ) = <unk> syllable . 
 = = Context = = 
 Sonnet 102 is a part of the Fair Youth sequence , and it is also connected with the surrounding sonnets ( 100 , 101 , and 103 ) in detailing a silence that has arisen between the poet and his muse . David West contends that this sequence may be in response to the Rival Poet sequence . The Rival Poet sequence of sonnets mention a rival for either the affections of the Fair Youth , or that they are addressing other writers that may be a " worthier pen " ( Sonnet 79 ) . There is a rather long list of people that scholars believe are likely candidates for the title of the fair youth addressed in the Sonnets : William Herbert , Earl of Pembroke ; Philip Herbert , Earl of Montgomery ; and Henry Wriothesley , Third Earl of Southampton are the most common candidates . 
 There has also been speculation of the identity of the Rival Poet . George Chapman and Christopher Marlowe , are typically considered to be the two most likely rivals , due to their publicity , profession , relations , and standing with Shakespeare during the presumed time of writing . 
 = = Exegesis = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 While there is no consensus as to what specifically has caused the silence that has grown between the speaker and his muse , sonnet 102 seems to be an attempt to mend the relationship by claiming that he still loves as strongly as he ever has . Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones has given the following overview : " Still claiming to have fallen silent , the poet claims that he loves just as much , though he shows it less , for fear of wearisome repetition . " 
 = = = Quatrain 1 = = = 
 In the first quatrain the poet describes that he has become quiet about the love he has for his muse , but this doesn 't mean that his love is less . Rather , he claims that it is for the exact opposite reason . Carl <unk> feels that the tone established here is like an tangential thought from Sonnet 100 and Sonnet 101 . Publishing sonnets about his love have become a kind of currency . This is a use of a common proverb of the time : " He praises who wishes to sell . " David West suggests that this may also be viewed as an attack at the Rival Poet , in an attempt to cheapen the The Rival Poet 's love . 
 = = = Quatrain 2 = = = 
 In the second quatrain , the poet elaborates upon his sentiments made in the first quatrain , comparing the present silence to the relationship when it was new . He uses seasonal imagery to set up his atmosphere , which he continues to use in line three , where we also encounter an allusion to the myth of Philomela , which can be a poetic name for the nightingale . In Ovid 's Metamorphoses , the myth of Philomela involves Tereus , the King of Thrace , who kidnaps his wife 's sister , Philomela , and then he rapes her and cuts out her tongue to silence her . There is contention among scholars as to whether Shakespeare actively utilizes the Philomela allusion , Stephen Booth contends that there is " no active reference to Philomela . " This is to say that Stephen Booth feels that Shakespeare is not invoking Philomela for any reason beyond the poetic name for the nightingale . In A Moving <unk> , however , Christina <unk> contends that the Shakespeare views the Fair Youth 's silence as a violation of the same magnitude as Tereus 's rape of Philomela , and the cause of the poet 's silence . Since his lover has betrayed him in favor of the Rival Poet , he chooses to silence himself . 
 On line 8 , " His " is the word which appears in the original 1609 Quarto . Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones has edited this to become " her , " as many scholars think that " his " may be a misreading of the manuscript , which may have read " hir " . This change is frequently made by editors , as Philomel is referred to as feminine throughout the rest of the sonnet . However , there are scholars who defend the use of " his " . Stephen Booth simply contends that this is done to move away from the mythological allusion and focuses on the nightingale : It is the male nightingale that sings . While David West also offers a defense of the use of " his , " his reasoning differs greatly from Booth . West contends that Shakespeare used his for a variety of reasons , among his reasons being to avoid " the embarrassment of comparing [ his lover ] to a female . " Another reason defense put forth by West is a difference in language . In Elizabethan times , his was used as a neutral pronoun , often used where a modern writer would use " its " . 
 = = = Quatrain 3 = = = 
 The third quatrain continues the metaphor of the nightingale and seasonal imagery to further stress that the poet 's silence is not because their love is less pleasant . The nightingale is used as a metaphor to explain that just because he doesn 't flatter the Fair Youth , doesn 't mean that he loves less . As one scholar put it , " too much praise ceases to please " . The poet explains his silence further in line 11 , that the wild birds physically burden the tree branches as well as crowd the air with their songs . This may represent the myriad of love sonnets being published in attempt to flatter and please their muses . A similar interpretation of line 12 by Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones is given , in which she claims that the poet is addressing the many circulating love sonnets as somewhat redundant , describes them as " pleasures which have become familiar are no longer intensely enjoyable " . This is a usage of another common proverb ; " Too much familiarity breeds contempt . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The couplet summarizes the sonnet in two lines , " Therefore , like her , I sometime hold my tongue , because I would not dull you with my song " . This is a clear statement from the poet vocalizing for the final time that he will not dull , bore , or represent his muse in a tedious way by creating a sonnet as exhausted and cliched as his contemporaries . In his analysis of the couplet , Stephen Booth compares the couplet to a proverb : " My desire is not to dull you , if I cannot delight you . " Booth suggests that the poet does not wish to make his lover seem common with overabundant praise . <unk> similarly suggests that the poet does not wish his praises to become annoying . Helen Vendler suggests that the poet uses proverbial language here to address the Fair Youth 's seeming obsession with receiving praise ; a personal plea would fall on deaf ears , so he makes his case rather impersonal . 
 = Do Somethin ' = 
 " Do Somethin ' " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her first greatest hits album , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative ( 2004 ) . It was written and produced by Christian Karlsson and Pontus Winnberg ( known collectively as Bloodshy & Avant ) , with additional writing by Henrik Jonback and Angela Hunte . Originally , the song was never intended to be released as a single . Spears , however , wanted to shoot a music video for it , and had to convince her record company . It was then released on February 14 , 2005 by Jive Records as the second single from the album worldwide except North America . The dance @-@ pop song features usage of electric guitars , and its lyrics allude to having a good time and not caring about other people 's judgement . 
 " Do Somethin ' " received generally favorable reviews from critics , and received comparisons to Gwen Stefani 's 2004 single " What You Waiting For ? " . Although the single was not released in the United States , it charted on many of Billboard 's component charts due to digital downloads , managing to reach number 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 . It was also successful worldwide , reaching top ten positions in countries such as Australia , Denmark , Sweden and the United Kingdom . By the end of 2005 , " Do Somethin ' " was one of the best @-@ selling singles in Australia and Belgium that year . 
 An accompanying music video , co @-@ directed by Billie Woodruff and Spears , who is credited as her alter ego " Mona Lisa " , portrays the singer and four female friends dancing and performing in a nightclub . The usage of a Louis Vuitton dashboard in the video resulted in a lawsuit against Jive Records , which ended with Louis Vuitton winning € 80 @,@ 000 in damages . The video was also banned in all European TV channels . Spears performed " Do Somethin ' " during the The M + M 's Tour in 2007 , The Circus Starring Britney Spears in 2009 and Britney : Piece of Me in 2013 – 15 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On August 13 , 2004 , Spears announced through Jive Records the release of her first greatest hits compilation titled Greatest Hits : My Prerogative , due November 16 , 2004 . The title was chosen after the album 's lead single , Spears 's cover version of Bobby Brown 's 1988 single " My Prerogative " . The cover was produced by Swedish production team Bloodshy & Avant , who produced her single " Toxic " from her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . A DVD of the same name was also released the same day , containing Spears 's music videos . The tracklist was officially revealed on September 13 , 2004 . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative included three new tracks : " My Prerogative " , " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " and " Do Somethin ' " , all of them produced by Bloodshy & Avant . The producers recorded and arranged the main instrumentation of " Do Somethin ' " at Murlyn Studios , in Stockholm , Sweden . Spears recorded her vocals at Battery Studios in New York City . Background vocals were provided by Spears , Angelo Hunte and <unk> . The song was never planned to be released as a single . However , Spears wanted to shoot a music video for the song and had to fight with her record label to do it . She explained she was " a little disappointed " that she had to convince them " that making this video was the right thing to do at th [ e ] time " . " Do Somethin ' " was released as the second single from Greatest Hits : My Prerogative on February 14 , 2005 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Do Somethin ' " is a dance @-@ pop song with usage of electric guitars and a " bump beat " , as described by Spence D. of IGN . He also noted the song is " filled with faux string bursts and <unk> ' 70s synth gurgle ( think Zapp / Gap Band era ) and plenty of treated guitar and bass " . According to the sheetmusic published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , it is set at a moderately fast tempo with 130 beats per minute . The song is written in the key of E minor , and Spears ' vocal range spans from the low note of E3 to the high note of C6 . Lyrically , " Do Somethin ' " refers to having fun while being watched by other people , which is perceived in lines such as " Somebody pass my guitar / So I can look like a star . " Tim Lee of musicOMH compared the song 's style to Gwen Stefani 's " What You Waiting For ? " ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Do Somethin ' " received positive reviews from contemporary critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said that along with " I 've Just Begun ( Having My Fun ) " , they are " two very good previously unreleased tunes " . Annabel Leathes of BBC Online commented , " two robust , unreleased tracks [ that ] suggest , however , that she may still be churning out a few more <unk> before taking time out to sing lullabies to her brood " , while Christy Lemire of the Associated Press noted that both songs " provide Britney with further opportunities to proclaim her need to have fun and be herself , which have been running themes throughout her last two albums " . Ann Powers of Blender called " Do Somethin ' " " a decent bit of crunk where she raps in a cutesy @-@ poo drawl that suggests she could have nabbed the Dukes of Hazzard sexpot role from Jessica Simpson " . Spence D. of IGN considered the song " interesting for its many interpretations , no less " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Although " Do Somethin ' " was never physically released in the United States , the song peaked at number 100 on the Billboard Hot 100 due to digital downloads on April 26 , 2005 . The song also charted on Billboard 's Pop 100 and Hot Digital Songs at number 63 and 49 , respectively . As of August 2010 , " Do Somethin ' " has sold 363 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . In Australia , the song debuted at number 8 on the week of March 7 , 2005 . It has since been certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) with sales of over 35 @,@ 000 copies . On the same week , it debuted in the UK Singles Chart at number 6 . " Do Somethin ' " was also successful in Europe , inside the Top 10 in Belgium ( Flanders ) , Hungary , Sweden , Denmark and Ireland , and inside the Top 20 in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Germany , Norway , Switzerland and the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 The music video for " Do Somethin ' " was filmed in December 2004 in Los Angeles , California . It was co @-@ directed by Spears and Billie Woodruff , who previously worked with her in " Born to Make You Happy " . Spears described the shoot as " hectic " , adding it was filmed " in a record @-@ breaking five hours " . She also commented about co @-@ directing with Woodruff , saying that " he had no no ego whatsoever , and the whole process was just so much fun " . Spears is credited as " Mona Lisa " in the video , as she said " I kinda think she 's like my alter ego whenever I feel like being mean or possibly like <unk> ' people around to get stuff right ... It 's kinda easier to be called ' Mona Lisa ' instead of Britney " . The video was also choreographed and styled entirely by Spears , with clothing from Juicy Couture . Spears ultimately added that working behind the camera inspired her to become a director in the future , explaining , " After doing about 20 videos , it gets kind of boring playing the same role . I feel like being behind the camera is sometimes more satisfying than being in front of it " . 
 = = = Synopsis and reception = = = 
 In the music video , Spears wears a pink midriff T @-@ shirt reading " Love Boat " and a pin <unk> going to a club named Hole in the Wall with four blond bandmates . During the first verse , they fly in a pink Hummer and move their heads to the beat on the song , while Spears puts the truck on autopilot . The Hummer 's dashboard has a Louis Vuitton pattern . They finally arrive to the club and dance in the dancefloor while being stared at by other people . Near the end of the video , Spears and her bandmates start performing on a stage . The video also includes intercut scenes of Spears in a separate room , wearing black underwear and a white mini fur coat , that was compared to the black @-@ and @-@ white scenes in the music video for " My Prerogative " . 
 Jennifer Vineyard of MTV described Spears 's attitude in the video as " [ going ] back and forth between trying to look sexy and then goofy " . Since the music video was not going to be serviced in the United States , it was set to premiere in MTV UK on January 21 , 2005 . However , it was leaked online on January 18 , 2005 . 
 On November 18 , 2007 , it was reported by Forbes that LVMH 's Louis Vuitton won a lawsuit on 80 @,@ 000 EUR in damages for the close @-@ up shots of the truck 's dashboard , which featured the brand 's logo without authorization . The tribunal found the director of the video had clearly emphasized the logo . The tribunal ruled that responsibility for the unauthorized use lay with Sony BMG , its subsidiary Zomba Group of Companies as well as MTV Online , and not Spears herself . The music video was also banned in all European TV channels . The edited video was re @-@ released through VEVO on July 19 , 2015 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Spears performed " Do Somethin ' " during The M + M 's Tour in May 2007 . After a performance of " Breathe on Me " from In the Zone , in which Spears and her four female dancers picked a man from the audience and danced seductively around him , the stage went dark for a few seconds . Shortly after , Spears took the stage again wearing a hot pink bra , a white fur coat and a jean skirt to perform the song . The choreography was a mimicry of the music video . The song was also performed at her 2009 tour , The Circus Starring Britney Spears . It was the second song of the fourth and last act , titled " Electro Circ " . In some parts of the performance , Spears and her dancers carried giant guns that shot sparks . During the first shows of the first North American leg , she wore a gold metal bodysuit . However , on March 8 , 2009 , at the Tampa show , Spears suffered a wardrobe malfunction after her performance of " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , which caused the outfit being changed to a sparkly black bodysuit . The song is currently being performed in Spears ' Las Vegas residency Britney : Piece of Me . She is seen wearing a bodysuit and doing a routine with black chairs . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Beth Phoenix = 
 Elizabeth " Beth " Kocianski ( born November 24 , 1980 ) is an American retired professional wrestler , better known by her ring name Beth Phoenix . She is best known for her time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , where she is a former WWE Divas Champion and a three @-@ time WWE Women 's Champion . 
 Kocianski had a successful amateur wrestling career in high school , before being trained by the All <unk> . After her debut in May 2001 , she wrestled for numerous independent promotions , and was the inaugural GLORY Champion . She also appeared at the inaugural Shimmer Women Athletes shows . In 2004 , she began working for Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) , and signed a developmental contract with WWE in October 2005 . She debuted on WWE 's Raw brand in May 2006 , but suffered a legitimate broken jaw the following month . As a result , she had numerous surgeries and returned to OVW for further training . While there , she won the OVW Women 's Championship twice , although her second reign is not officially recognized by OVW . 
 She returned to the Raw brand in July 2007 , and was heavily pushed , dominating the other WWE Divas and gaining the nickname , " The Glamazon " . She won her first WWE Women 's Championship at the No Mercy pay @-@ per @-@ view in October , and held it for six months . She then developed an on @-@ screen relationship with Santino Marella , dubbed " Glamarella " , and won the Women 's Championship for a second time in August 2008 , although she lost it in January 2009 . In January 2010 , at the Royal Rumble she became the second woman in the history to enter the Royal Rumble match , and went on to win the Women 's Championship for the third time in April , holding it for a month . In October 2011 , Phoenix won the WWE Divas Championship for the first time and lost it in April 2012 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Kocianski was born in Elmira , New York and raised by Polish parents . When she was eleven years old , she won a coloring contest with a prize of tickets to a television taping for the World Wrestling Federation . Kocianski credits this as when she fell in love with professional wrestling . She cites Owen Hart and Ted DiBiase as her favorite wrestlers . Kocianski attended Notre Dame High School in Elmira , where she played tennis and ran track . She was voted prom queen in her senior year . Kocianski is a graduate from Canisius College in Buffalo , New York with a bachelor 's degree in criminal justice and Public Relations . While wrestling in OVW , Kocianski also worked as a waitress at a local restaurant . 
 = = Amateur wrestling career = = 
 Kocianski began wrestling on the Notre Dame High School scholastic wrestling team . She was the first female varsity wrestler in the school 's history . She became the North @-@ East freestyle women 's champion in 1999 , and also won at the New York State Fair Tournament the same year . At the time , she was also a member of USA Wrestling , a freestyle wrestling association . Her life goal was , according to her , to become a professional wrestler , and she believed that having a solid amateur background would help her reach it . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Training and independent circuit ( 2001 – 2005 ) = = = 
 After graduating from high school in 1998 , she enrolled in both a professional wrestling school and Canisius College in Buffalo , New York . Her first choice for wrestling school was Stu Hart 's Dungeon , but because of the location , she decided on a more local school . At the school , she was trained by the All <unk> ( Joey Knight and Robin <unk> ) , who themselves had trained in the Hart Dungeon . She later stated that Nora Greenwald , who was known in the World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) as Molly Holly , had paid for her to attend wrestling school after Carolan had given her a demo tape of her work . Her professional wrestling debut match was against Alexis Laree . She then worked for various independent promotions , including Cleveland All Pro Wrestling and Apocalypse Wrestling , against both male and female wrestlers , using the name " Phoenix " . In 2002 , she was one of the first wrestlers in GLORY , an independent organization for women , and was the inaugural champion . She then joined Far North Wrestling ( FNW ) , and was the only female wrestler in the promotion . She defeated Joey Knight and Kevin Grace in 2003 to become the FNW Cruiserweight Champion . Later in 2003 she took part in World Xtreme Wrestling 's annual Women 's Elite 8 tournament where she made it to the final , before losing to April Hunter . She returned two years later and defeated Nikki Roxx , but was bested in the second round by eventual winner Alicia . The following month , Phoenix appeared at the inaugural taping for the Ring of Honor sister promotion Shimmer Women Athletes ; during Volume 1 she was pinned by Shimmer founder Allison Danger but scored an upset victory in a non @-@ title match against NWA Midwest Women 's Champion MsChif . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2004 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 Kocianski was invited to a tryout with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in May 2004 , and then relocated to Louisville , Kentucky to work for their then @-@ developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) . She debuted on OVW television in July 2004 , having changed her ring name to " Beth Phoenix " , and became the on @-@ screen girlfriend and valet of Chris Masters . The storyline was short lived , and the following month Phoenix was repackaged as the manager of Aaron " The Idol " Stevens . She signed a developmental contract with WWE on October 20 , 2005 , the same month that she broke her hand . The duo was then joined by Shelly Martinez , who Phoenix soon feuded with in early 2006 . Phoenix then stopped appearing regularly on OVW after debuting on WWE 's Raw television show . 
 After sustaining an injury , Phoenix returned to action in OVW on August 16 , 2006 , defeating Serena . Phoenix began regularly competing for the OVW Women 's Championship , unsuccessfully challenging the champion ODB in a battle royal and a four @-@ way match , which was won by Serena . At the October 4 OVW television tapings , however , Phoenix defeated Serena to win the championship . She lost the championship to Victoria Crawford in a gauntlet match on October 20 , and won it back the next day ; however , Crawford 's title reign is not officially recognised , and as a result , neither is Phoenix 's second reign . Phoenix officially dropped the championship in a gauntlet match at the November 1 television taping , after she was eliminated by Katie Lea , who eventually won the match . 
 On the November 6 episode of OVW , Phoenix came out with her own championship , and claimed to still be the women 's champion . As a result , a ladder match was set up , where the winner would become the undisputed OVW Women 's Champion . Lea won the match and was presented with the title belt on the first show of 2007 . Throughout 2007 , Phoenix continued to wrestle in numerous women 's matches in OVW . Phoenix made her last appearance in OVW at their August 15 television tapings where she lost to Lea in a number one contenders match . 
 = = = = Trish Stratus ' ally ( 2006 ) = = = = 
 Phoenix debuted on WWE 's main roster on the May 8 , 2006 , episode of Raw as a fan favorite by attacking Mickie James while James was assaulting Trish Stratus . After this incident , James berated Phoenix for " ruining everything " and questioned why she showed up in the first place . A week later , Phoenix was formally introduced by Stratus and then attacked a distracted James on Stratus 's behalf . When James finally escaped , Phoenix claimed that James had " ruined her life " , and would not let her get away with it , before calling her a " psycho " . On the following episode of Raw , Phoenix attacked James after her match with Torrie Wilson . Then , on the May 29 episode of Raw , Phoenix and Wilson , with Stratus in their corner , teamed together to defeat Candice Michelle and Victoria , who had James in their corner . During the June 5 episode of Raw , Phoenix suffered a legitimately fractured mandible during a match with Victoria , but was able to continue the match , and emerged victorious despite the injury . She spent a year having surgeries and recovering , including getting a titanium plate and nine screws placed in her jaw , but she was only out of action for two months , as she returned to action in OVW instead of on the main roster . 
 = = = = The Glamazon ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 On the July 9 , 2007 , episode of Raw , Phoenix returned as a villain , when Melina claimed to be injured . Phoenix replaced Melina in a tag team match as Jillian Hall 's partner , and the two lost to Candice Michelle and Mickie James . At the SummerSlam pay @-@ per @-@ view , Phoenix won the Interpromotional Divas battle royal to become the number one contender for Michelle 's WWE Women 's Championship . Phoenix was then pushed as a dominating Diva , dubbing herself a " Glamazon " and attacking Mickie James , Jillian Hall , and Michelle on the September 10 episode of Raw . At Unforgiven , however , she failed to capture the Women 's Championship from Michelle . Their storyline rivalry continued when Phoenix pinned Michelle during a non @-@ title mixed tag team match on Raw on September 24 . 
 At No Mercy in October , Phoenix defeated Michelle to win her first WWE Women 's Championship . She retained the title on the October 22 episode of Raw in a two out of three falls match , in which Candice Michelle was injured by Phoenix shaking the rope , causing her to fall off the top turnbuckle and legitimately break her clavicle . 
 During a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match at Survivor Series , Phoenix 's team lost after Melina was pinned by Mickie James . On the November 26 episode of Raw , James defeated Melina in a number one contenders match for Phoenix 's Women 's Championship , setting up a title match between the two at Armageddon , a match in which Phoenix successfully defended her Women 's title . On New Year 's Eve 2007 , Phoenix successfully defended her title in a Triple Threat match against Melina and James , after pinning Melina . 
 Phoenix , along with then @-@ ally Melina , took part in the Playboy BunnyMania Lumberjack match at WrestleMania XXIV , where she defeated the team of Ashley and Maria . On April 14 , 2008 Phoenix faced Mickie James with her Women 's Championship on the line and lost , ending her reign as champion . Phoenix received a rematch on the May 5 episode of Raw , but lost after Melina unintentionally hit her in the face with her boot . On the May 12 episode of Raw , Melina and Phoenix partnered to face Maria and James . Phoenix and Melina partnered up to face James and Maria . During the match , Melina unintentionally knocked Phoenix off of the ring apron , resulting in Phoenix abandoning Melina , which allowed James and Maria to pick up the win . Later that night , Melina and Phoenix brawled in a backstage segment , ending their alliance . At Judgment Day , Phoenix failed to regain the Women 's Championship in a Triple Threat match after James pinned Melina to retain the title . At One Night Stand , Phoenix defeated Melina in the first women 's " I Quit " match in WWE history . The next night on Raw , Phoenix teamed with Katie Lea Burchill to defeat Melina and James in a tag team match . She was pinned by James one week later in a non @-@ title match , and was once again attacked by Melina post @-@ match . 
 = = = = Glamarella ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 After a month absence from television , Phoenix returned on the July 14 episode of Raw , where she defeated Santino Marella after he issued an open challenge to any WWE wrestler backstage . The storyline continued the following week after Marella lost to the returning D @-@ Lo Brown . Phoenix confronted Marella after the match , and they briefly grappled with each other before unexpectedly sharing a kiss , to which both expressed considerable confusion . 
 The two then became an on @-@ screen power couple , and the pairing of Phoenix and Marella later became known by the portmanteau Glamarella . Within the team , she acted as the " straight @-@ woman " of sorts , berating Marella or reacting in disbelief to his over @-@ the @-@ top , embarrassing antics . At SummerSlam , they defeated Kofi Kingston and Mickie James in an intergender tag team match . Phoenix pinned James , winning the Women 's Championship , while Marella won Kingston 's Intercontinental Championship . She successfully defended the Women 's Championship against Candice Michelle at No Mercy . 
 On December 8 , 2008 , Phoenix received the " Slammy Award " for Diva of the Year . Phoenix then began feuding with Melina , who had returned from injury in November . This storyline included the debut of Rosa Mendes , who was introduced as Phoenix 's " superfan " . At the Royal Rumble in January 2009 , Phoenix lost the Women 's Championship to Melina . At WrestleMania XXV , Phoenix competed in the 25 @-@ Diva battle royal , but was eliminated by Marella , who competed in drag , claiming to be his twin sister " Santina " . After WrestleMania , Glamarella separated , as Phoenix was unhappy with Santino pretending to be " Santina " . Phoenix had a brief scripted rivalry with both " Santina " and Marella , and challenged " Santina " for the " Miss WrestleMania " title , but was unsuccessful . 
 = = = = <unk> with LayCool ( 2009 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 After a brief hiatus , Phoenix returned on the July 27 episode of Raw , teaming with Alicia Fox and Rosa Mendes in a losing effort to Mickie James , Gail Kim , and Kelly Kelly . Phoenix had her first opportunity for the WWE Divas Championship , being narrowly defeated by the defending champion , Mickie James , on the August 31 episode of Raw , after winning a number one contender 's battle royal that same night . 
 On the October 12 episode of Raw , it was announced that Phoenix had been traded to the SmackDown brand . Phoenix made her in @-@ ring debut for the brand on the October 30 episode of SmackDown , defeating Jenny Brooks , an " enhancement talent " . In January 2010 , at the Royal Rumble , she entered the Royal Rumble match and eliminated The Great Khali , before she was eliminated by CM Punk . With her entry , she became the second woman in history to enter the Royal Rumble match , with the first being Chyna . 
 After being told by Vickie Guerrero , the SmackDown consultant , that she would not be receiving a Women 's Championship opportunity , Phoenix turned face after she saved Tiffany from an attack by Guerrero and LayCool ( Michelle McCool and Layla ) on the March 12 episode of SmackDown . She then went on to defeat McCool and Layla in a tag team match involving Tiffany . The feud with McCool continued at WrestleMania XXVI , where they were on opposing teams in a 10 @-@ Diva tag team match , which Phoenix 's team lost , although they won a rematch the following night on Raw . Phoenix received a match for the Women 's Championship against McCool at Extreme Rules in April , where she defeated McCool in an " Extreme Makeover " match to win her third Women 's Championship . On the May 6 episode of Superstars , Phoenix tore her ACL in a match against Rosa Mendes , and as a result , one week later on SmackDown , McCool invoked her rematch clause to face Phoenix in a two @-@ on @-@ one handicap match along with Layla , where Layla pinned Phoenix to become the new Women 's Champion . 
 Phoenix returned from her injury at November 's Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view , and attacked the former co @-@ Champions Michelle McCool and Layla , after they lost the WWE Divas Championship to Natalya . Phoenix and Natalya then formed an alliance , and at TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs in December , Phoenix and Natalya defeated LayCool in the first Divas Tag Team Tables match in WWE history . 
 = = = = Divas Champion / Divas Of Doom ( 2011 – 2012 ) = = = = 
 As part of the 2011 Supplemental Draft on April 26 , 2011 , Phoenix returned to the Raw brand . On the August 1 episode of Raw , Phoenix won a battle royal to become the number one contender to the WWE Divas Championship , and afterward attacked champion Kelly Kelly to provoke a feud . Phoenix later declared that she was tired of the " perky bimbos " that comprised the rest of the Divas division , and was on a mission to make a mockery of the other Divas , and was joined by Natalya to form The Divas of Doom . Phoenix went on to unsuccessfully challenged Kelly for the championship at SummerSlam . Throughout September , The Divas of Doom feuded with Kelly and Eve Torres on Raw and The <unk> ( AJ and Kaitlyn ) on SmackDown . Phoenix challenged Kelly for the Divas Championship again at Night of Champions , but was unsuccessful . At Hell in a Cell in October , Phoenix defeated Kelly to win the Divas Championship for the first time , with help from Natalya . In a rematch on the October 14 episode of SmackDown , Phoenix successfully retained the championship . At Vengeance , Phoenix successfully defended the championship against Eve Torres , with both Natalya and Kelly banned from ringside . Phoenix successfully retained her championship against Torres again at Survivor Series on November 20 in a Lumberjill match , and against Kelly at TLC : Tables , Ladders & Chairs on December 18 . 
 Further successful defenses followed against Torres on the January 30 , 2012 , episode of Raw and Tamina Snuka at Elimination Chamber on February 19 . After this , Phoenix competed only sporadically for a few months , including a tag team match at WrestleMania XXVIII , where she and Eve Torres were defeated by Kelly Kelly and Maria Menounos . On the April 6 episode of SmackDown , Phoenix lost to Nikki Bella in a non @-@ title match , following Kelly 's interference . On the April 23 episode of Raw , Phoenix lost her Divas Championship to Nikki Bella in a Lumberjill match , after suffering a storyline ankle injury . At Extreme Rules , Phoenix was scheduled to face Nikki in a rematch for the Divas Championship , however she was not medically cleared to compete and was replaced by the returning Layla , who ended up winning the title . Phoenix made two unsuccessful attempts at regaining the Divas Championship from Layla at Over the Limit in May and at No Way Out in June , respectively . 
 In September , Kaitlyn was attacked by an unknown assailant prior to her championship match at Night of Champions . Upon her return , she announced her assailant had blonde hair , and Assistant SmackDown General Manager Eve Torres accused Phoenix before attacking her . On the September 28 episode of SmackDown , Phoenix was suspended by Torres , but the suspension was later reversed by SmackDown General manager Booker T. On the October 1 episode of Raw , Phoenix lost to Torres . Phoenix reverted to her villainous persona on the October 18 episode of Superstars , when she berated Kaitlyn for thinking that Phoenix attacked her and demanded respect from Kaitlyn , before losing to her in a singles match . On the October 29 episode of Raw , Phoenix was defeated by AJ Lee in a singles match , but the match was restarted by Raw Managing Supervisor Vickie Guerrero , allowing Phoenix to win . After the match , in storyline , Guerrero fired Phoenix for her poor performance . In reality , Phoenix had given her notice to WWE in September and left the company for family reasons . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Phoenix , along with Candice Michelle and Layla El , appeared in the February 2009 issue of FLEX Magazine . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kocianski is a Christian . Kocianski was married to Joey Carolan , known by the ring name Joey Knight , but they have since divorced . In early February 2014 , Adam Copeland , who was known in WWE as Edge , announced the birth of their daughter , named Lyric Rose Copeland , born six weeks earlier on December 12 , 2013 . On June 4 , 2016 , it was announced that Kocianski and Copeland had welcomed their second child , a girl named Ruby Ever Copeland , born on May 31 , 2016 . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Beth Valley Driver ( Death Valley driver , sometimes from the second rope ) 
 Chokebomb 
 Delayed fisherman suplex 
 Down in Flames ( Michinoku driver II ) 
 Glam Slam ( Elevated double chickenwing <unk> to a wheelbarrow facebuster ) 
 Signature moves 
 Atomic drop , sometimes followed by a running double axe handle 
 Bearhug 
 Bodyscissors 
 Canadian backbreaker rack 
 Cloverleaf 
 Dragon sleeper 
 Military press transitioned into either a drop or a slam 
 Modified full nelson 
 Pendulum backbreaker 
 Reverse chinlock 
 Running hip attack to an opponent seated at the corner 
 Running turnbuckle thrust 
 Slingshot suplex 
 Sidewalk slam 
 Turnbuckle powerbomb 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Aaron Stevens 
 Brent Albright 
 Chris Masters 
 Santino Marella 
 Nicknames 
 " The Fabulous Firebird " 
 " The Glamazon " 
 " The Total Package of Women 's Wrestling " 
 " The Über Diva " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Count On It " by Jim Johnston ( June 5 , 2006 – September 24 , 2007 ) 
 " Glamazon " by Jim Johnston ( October 7 , 2007 – October 29 , 2012 ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 = = = Amateur wrestling = = = 
 North @-@ East Wrestling 
 Women 's Champion ( 1999 ) 
 New York State Fair 
 Women 's Champion ( 1999 ) 
 = = = Professional wrestling = = = 
 Far North Wrestling 
 FNW Cruiserweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 George Tragos / Lou Thesz International Wrestling Institute 
 Frank Gotch Award ( 2015 ) 
 GLORY Wrestling 
 GLORY Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 OVW Women 's Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her 2 of the top 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2008 and 2012 
 World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Women 's Championship ( 3 times ) 
 Slammy Award ( 1 time ) 
 Diva of the Year ( 2008 ) 
 = 2008 Belgian Grand Prix = 
 The 2008 Belgian Grand Prix ( formally the <unk> ING Belgian Grand Prix ) was a Formula One motor race held on 7 September 2008 at the Circuit de Spa @-@ Francorchamps near the town of Spa , Belgium . It was the 13th race of the 2008 Formula One season . The 44 @-@ lap race was won by Felipe Massa for the Ferrari team , after the initial winner , McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton , was penalised for cutting a chicane and gaining an advantage over Ferrari 's Kimi Räikkönen . 
 Hamilton started from pole position alongside title rival Massa . Hamilton 's McLaren teammate Heikki Kovalainen started from third next to the 2007 winner Kimi Räikkönen . Following a spin by Hamilton on the second lap , Räikkönen led most of the race , until rain fell on lap 41 and Hamilton performed the penalised pass . Räikkönen crashed on the following lap as the rain became heavier . Massa finished second on the road after Hamilton , followed by Nick Heidfeld of BMW Sauber . 
 Hamilton received a 25 @-@ second penalty , which demoted him to third place and advanced Massa and Heidfeld to first and second positions . McLaren appealed the decision at the Fédération Internationale de l 'Automobile ( FIA ) International Court of Appeal . Their case , however , was declared inadmissible , with the Court ruling that 25 second penalties cannot be challenged . The penalty prompted global press discussion , primarily from the United Kingdom and Italy , with several former drivers questioning the decision . Massa 's retroactive victory , with Hamilton demoted to third , narrowed the gap in the Championship from six points to just two . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Heading into the 13th race of the season , McLaren driver Lewis Hamilton was leading the Drivers ' Championship with 70 points ; Ferrari driver Felipe Massa was in second place with 64 points . With 57 points , Ferrari 's Kimi Räikkönen was third , followed by Robert Kubica with 55 points . In the Constructors ' Championship , Ferrari led 121 points to McLaren 's 113 . 
 Following the 2008 European Grand Prix on 24 August , mid @-@ season testing took place at Italy 's Autodromo Nazionale Monza . Ferrari concentrated on their aerodynamic set @-@ up during tests on Monza 's long straights . Massa set the quickest times on the first day , ahead of McLaren driver Heikki Kovalainen . BMW Sauber 's Nick Heidfeld was quickest on the second day . Massa spun off into the gravel at the Ascari chicane , bringing a brief halt to testing . Hamilton was fastest on the third day . Kubica lost control of his car and drove off the track , limiting BMW 's testing time as minor repairs were performed on the underside of his car . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Three practice sessions were held before the Sunday race – two on Friday , and one on Saturday . The Friday morning and afternoon sessions each lasted 90 minutes ; the third session , on Saturday morning , lasted for an hour . The first session was held on a dry track under cloudy skies ; Massa was fastest with a time of 1 : 47 @.@ 284 , just quicker than his Ferrari teammate Räikkönen . The McLarens of Hamilton and Kovalainen , Alonso , Webber , Bourdais and Vettel completed the top eight . Light rain during the second session grew momentarily heavier half @-@ way through , forcing the teams to switch to their wet set @-@ ups . Hamilton led for most of the running , before Alonso , Massa and Kovalainen set faster times late in the session on a drying track . Räikkönen , Piquet , Coulthard , Bourdais and Webber all had off @-@ track excursions with little damage done ; a Fisichella spin at Stavelot forced the session to be halted for ten minutes while the debris was removed and water was cleared from the track . Conditions had not improved by the following morning for the start of the final period of practice , but a drying track late in the session allowed Heidfeld to record the best time , a 1 : 47 @.@ 876 , ahead of Kovalainen , Alonso , Hamilton , Massa , Vettel and Räikkönen . 
 Saturday afternoon 's qualifying session was divided into three parts . In the first 20 @-@ minute period , cars finishing 16th or lower were eliminated . The second qualifying period lasted for 15 minutes , at the end of which the fastest ten cars went into the final period , to determine their grid positions for the race . Cars failing to make the final period were allowed to be refuelled before the race but those competing in it were not , and so carried more fuel than they had done in the earlier qualifying sessions . 
 Hamilton clinched his fifth pole position of the season with a time of 1 : 47 @.@ 338 , ahead of Felipe Massa , who qualified second 0 @.@ 34 seconds behind his McLaren rival . A mistake @-@ free run allowed Kovalainen to take third place on the grid , alongside Räikkönen in fourth . Heidfeld took fifth , ahead of Alonso , Webber and Kubica . Bourdais – after setting the quickest time in the first session – took ninth , one place ahead of his Toro Rosso teammate Vettel . Toyota driver Jarno Trulli qualified 11th after he experienced problems generating heat into his tyres ; his teammate Timo Glock experienced similar problems and lined up from 13th behind Piquet . Coulthard and Rosberg took the next two grid spots , ahead of the Honda pair of Rubens Barrichello and Jenson Button , who both believed they had maximised the performance of their cars . Force India driver Adrian Sutil , Williams driver Kazuki Nakajima and Fisichella took the final three positions . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Nelson Piquet was the only driver not to start with the softer compound dry @-@ weather tyres on a track which was still drying from morning rain , with the Brazilian opting for the harder tyre available . There was a strong chance of showers predicted during the race . Several cars were slow away on the slippery track , most notably Kovalainen . The main beneficiaries off the line were Piquet and Trulli , who each gained five places . Trulli was hit from behind at the first corner by Bourdais , who also had a quick start . The Toyota suffered diffuser and gearbox damage from the incident , spinning later in the lap . Kovalainen and Heidfeld also collided at the start . This allowed Alonso to gain several places . Sebastian Vettel locked his brakes and ran wide , losing two places . Fisichella collided with Nakajima on the first lap and had to pit to fix a broken front wing and punctures . Hamilton led from Räikkönen who managed to pass his Ferrari teammate Felipe Massa on the Kemmel straight . 
 On the second lap , Hamilton spun at La Source and lost his lead to Räikkönen on the next straight . Glock lost several places over the first few laps due to a lack of grip from his tyres . On lap ten , Heikki Kovalainen attempted to pass Webber at the Bus Stop chicane , but hit Webber on the side , causing the Australian to spin . Although the McLaren driver later dismissed the contact as " a racing accident " , he was given a drive @-@ through penalty , which he took on lap 14 , dropping him to 15th place . 
 By the ten @-@ lap mark , Räikkönen had opened a three @-@ second lead over Hamilton . Hamilton was the first of the leaders to pit , on lap 11 , followed by Räikkönen a lap later . Massa and Alonso pitted on lap 13 , with Heidfeld a lap after them . Heidfeld 's BMW teammate Robert Kubica pitted on lap 15 , along with Bourdais . Räikkönen maintained his lead over Hamilton after the round of pit stops , followed by Massa , Alonso and Bourdais . 
 Piquet retired on lap 13 , after spinning off and colliding with a wall . Following the race , the Renault driver blamed damp patches on the track for the incident , adding that " It 's a shame because I 'm sure we could have done something today . " On lap 17 , Rubens Barrichello retired with a gearbox problem , suffering from a failing sixth gear and engine over @-@ revving . 
 The first nine runners continued in the same order until Räikkönen and Hamilton both took their second pit stops on lap 25 , with Alonso pitting on lap 27 , Massa on lap 28 , and Heidfeld on lap 31 . Bourdais and Kubica pitted on laps 32 and 33 , respectively . 
 Following the second round of pit stops , Räikkönen was five seconds ahead of Hamilton , but Hamilton began to close in on Räikkönen during the last stint as a result of the tyres better suiting his McLaren Mercedes . Heavy rain began to fall on lap 41 . Hamilton closed the gap on Räikkönen to under a second , still six seconds ahead of Massa . Hamilton attempted to pass Räikkönen at the Bus Stop chicane , but he cut across the corner . Consequently , Hamilton led out of the chicane but allowed Räikkönen to re @-@ pass him halfway down the straight . Hamilton then passed him again at the La Source hairpin under braking . Räikkönen tried to double @-@ back on Hamilton to regain the position but the line was defended , resulting in Räikkönen touching his front wing on Hamilton 's rear tyre . The rain started coming down more heavily and Nico Rosberg spun at <unk> corner , rejoining in front of the two frontrunners and causing Hamilton to run onto the grass . At the next corner , Räikkönen spun and gave the lead back to Hamilton . Räikkönen then lost control of his Ferrari through the Blanchimont corner and collided with the barrier , ending his race . 
 Hamilton was first to finish the race , having cautiously driven his car to the line in very wet conditions , followed by Massa and Heidfeld . Heidfeld rose from ninth position during the final laps due to the superior grip of the intermediate tyres put on during a pit stop two laps prior to the end of the race . Fernando Alonso and Timo Glock similarly benefited from intermediate tyres , Alonso finishing fourth and Glock eighth , having passed Webber on the final corner . Conversely , Toro Rosso drivers Bourdais and Vettel , who were third and fourth with one lap to go , were pushed down to seventh and fifth positions due to the lack of grip of their dry @-@ weather tyres . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Timo Glock was handed a 25 @-@ second penalty for overtaking Mark Webber under yellow flags during the final lap of the race . The penalty pushed Glock from eighth to ninth place . 
 Hamilton appeared on the podium and subsequent press conference in the winner 's position . When questioned on the incident at the press conference , Hamilton defended his actions : 
 [ Räikkönen ] pushed me to the point where I would either have been on the kerb and crashed into him or have to go on the escape route , so I went on the escape route . I understood I had to let him past , so I did . I got in his tow and he was ducking and diving left and right and I did the same and managed to get back to the inside of him . But then he hit me at the apex of the corner but I think I was pretty much gone from there . 
 Two hours after the race , the FIA stewards for the race issued a statement announcing that Hamilton was guilty of contravening Article 30 @.@ 3 ( a ) of the 2008 FIA Formula One Sporting Regulations and Appendix L , Chapter 4 , Article 2 ( g ) of the International Sporting Code , which both state that cutting a chicane and gaining an advantage is subject to a drive @-@ through penalty . As the race had finished , a 25 @-@ second penalty was added to Hamilton 's time instead . As a result of this penalty , Massa was promoted to winner of the Grand Prix , and Hamilton was dropped down to third position . 
 On 9 September , McLaren lodged an official complaint with the FIA about the incident . In the appeal hearing on 22 September , McLaren alleged that they had twice been advised by race director Charlie Whiting that Hamilton had correctly returned the position to Räikkönen . Furthermore , they presented telemetry evidence suggesting that Hamilton had not only crossed the finish line after Räikkönen , but that he was travelling 6 @.@ 7 km / h slower at the time . 
 As drive @-@ through penalties are not admissible for appeal , McLaren 's lawyer Mark Phillips QC attempted to convince the court that since the penalty was in the form of time added on , the case was valid . They presented the previous case of Vitantonio Liuzzi at the 2007 Japanese Grand Prix , specifically the FIA 's claim that the presiding chief steward at the race , Tony Scott Andrews , had admitted fault in awarding the penalty to Liuzzi . Andrews denied the FIA 's allegation . McLaren went on to use the case as a precedent for the Spa incident . The Court stated that this analogy was invalid , since in Liuzzi 's case the admissibility of his appeal was not contested . 
 On 23 September , the Court of Appeal issued its decision , ruling that the appeal was inadmissible . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Other Formula One drivers believed that Hamilton had gained an advantage . Sébastien Bourdais of Toro Rosso said that " the penalty is really rough but in the end it 's up to you to give the position back or not . Pretty straightforward " . The view was reiterated by his fellow drivers Nico Rosberg and Jarno Trulli . Trulli believed that " Hamilton got an advantage by cutting the chicane " , saying , " Had he stayed on the road , he wouldn 't have had the speed to overtake the Ferrari . In the same way at Monza someone could cut the first chicane , catch a rival 's draft , and overtake him under braking at Roggia " . 
 Former world champion Niki Lauda said that he did " not understand this completely wrong decision " , adding " It 's unbelievable how the best driver in yesterday 's race makes no mistakes and only gets six points " . He called for the formation of permanent race stewards , instead of the temporary steward system currently in place . He called it " the worst judgement in the history of F1 " , saying , " It 's absolutely unacceptable when three [ stewards ] influence the championship like this " . Three @-@ time world champion Jackie Stewart said that " F1 attracts the largest capital investment in sport , but it ’ s being overseen by people who are not doing it full @-@ time and we get inconsistent decisions " . 
 The original penalty received mixed reactions in the world press . Byron Young in Britain 's Daily Mirror said that it was the stewards ' decision " that mars sport and turns fans away , that ruins the efforts of even the best competitors , taints the day and leaves fans wondering what exactly they are ' fans ' of " . The Finnish daily newspaper Helsingin Sanomat noted that though the Grand Prix had " crushed " Räikkönen 's championship dreams , Hamilton had adhered " with the rules of racing " in giving the position back . The newspaper put Räikkönen 's disappointment down to his crash , rather than the chicane incident . In Italy , La Gazzetta dello Sport declared that the decision was justified , stating that Hamilton " should have waited at least another turn rather than attacking so soon " . 
 The incident and subsequent court hearing led to a clarification by the FIA , saying that drivers must wait one further corner after cutting a chicane before attempting another overtaking manoeuvre . Formula One driver and a director of the Grand Prix Drivers ' Association Mark Webber said that the clarification had made the issue much clearer : 
 Lewis would probably never ever have had a crack at Kimi around the outside at the first part of the Bus Stop without knowing he had the option of going onto the asphalt part . I think we 've got to get on top of the chicanes going forward , and we 're not too far away from that at the moment , where drivers know that if you gain a position or gain an advantage , you have to give it back a bit more . 
 = = Classification = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 ^ Hamilton given a 25 @-@ second penalty for cutting a chicane and gaining an advantage , losing first place . 
 ^ Glock given a 25 @-@ second penalty for overtaking Webber under yellow @-@ flags , losing eighth place . 
 = = Championship standings after the race = = 
 Bold text indicates who still has a theoretical chance of becoming World Champion . 
 = Howard Staunton = 
 Howard Staunton ( 1810 – 22 June 1874 ) was an English chess master who is generally regarded as having been the world 's strongest player from 1843 to 1851 , largely as a result of his 1843 victory over Saint @-@ Amant . He promoted a chess set of clearly distinguishable pieces of standardised shape — the Staunton pattern promulgated by Nathaniel Cook — that is still the style required for competitions . He was the principal organiser of the first international chess tournament in 1851 , which made England the world 's leading chess centre and caused Adolf Anderssen to be recognised as the world 's strongest player . 
 From 1840 onwards he became a leading chess commentator , and won matches against top players of the 1840s . In 1847 he entered a parallel career as a Shakespearean scholar . Ill health and his two writing careers led him to give up competitive chess after 1851 . In 1858 attempts were made to organise a match between Staunton and Morphy , but they failed . It is often alleged that Staunton deliberately misled Morphy while trying to avoid the match , but it is also possible Staunton overestimated his chances of getting physically fit and of making time available for a match . 
 Modern commentators consider Staunton 's understanding of positional play to have been far ahead of his contemporaries ' . Although not an all @-@ out attacking player , he attacked when his preparations were complete . His chess articles and books were widely read and encouraged the development of chess in the United Kingdom , and his Chess @-@ Player 's Handbook ( 1847 ) was a reference for decades . The chess openings the English Opening and Staunton Gambit were named for his advocacy of them . Staunton has been a controversial figure since his own time , and his chess writings could be spiteful . On the other hand , he maintained good working relationships with several strong players and influential chess enthusiasts , and demonstrated excellent management skills . 
 = = Life = = 
 Most information about Staunton 's early life is based on claims he made . Record of his birth or baptism has never been found . The chess historian H. J. R. Murray summarised the information that he " gleaned " from various sources : Staunton was born in 1810 , reputedly the natural son of Frederick Howard , fifth Earl of Carlisle ; he was neglected in youth , receiving little or no education ; although he spent some time in Oxford , he was never a member of the University ; when he came of age he inherited a few thousand pounds , which he soon squandered ; in later life Staunton often used to tell how he had once played Lorenzo in the Merchant of Venice , with the famous English actor Edmund Kean playing Shylock . 
 = = = 1836 – 42 , first steps in chess = = = 
 In 1836 Staunton came to London , where he took out a subscription for William Greenwood Walker 's Games at Chess , actually played in London , by the late Alexander McDonnell Esq . Staunton was apparently twenty @-@ six when he took a serious interest in chess . He said that at that time the strongest players he saw in London , Saint @-@ Amant and George Walker , could easily have given him rook odds . In 1838 he played many games with Captain Evans , inventor of the Evans Gambit , and also lost a match against the German chess writer Aaron Alexandre . He had improved sufficiently by 1840 to win a match against the German master H.W. <unk> , a slow , cautious player with great defensive skill . 
 From May to December 1840 Staunton edited a chess column for the New Court Gazette . He then became chess editor of the magazine British Miscellany , and his chess column developed into a separate magazine , the Chess Player 's Chronicle , which Staunton owned and edited until the early 1850s . 
 = = = 1843 , competitive peak = = = 
 Early in 1843 Staunton prevailed in a long series of games against John Cochrane , a strong player and chess theoretician . Chessmetrics treats these games incorrectly as one match when it was in fact a series of matches , and lists it as Staunton 's best performance . 
 A little later that year he lost a short match ( 2 ½ – 3 ½ ) in London against the visiting French player Saint @-@ Amant , who was generally regarded as the world 's strongest active player . 
 Staunton challenged Saint @-@ Amant to a longer match to be played in Paris for a stake of £ 100 , equivalent to about £ 73 @,@ 000 in 2006 's money . Then he prepared new opening lines , especially those beginning 1.c4 , which became known as the English Opening after this match . He also took Thomas Worrall and Harry Wilson to Paris as his assistants ; this is the first known case where seconds were used in a match . Staunton gained a seven @-@ game lead but then struggled to keep it before winning the match 13 – 8 ( eleven wins , four draws , and six losses ) in December 1843 . 
 Saint @-@ Amant wanted a third match , but Staunton was initially unwilling as he had developed heart palpitations during the second match . Von der Lasa later suggested this was why Staunton faded in the second match . However , after a long , difficult negotiation , which he reported in the Chess Player 's Chronicle , Staunton went to Paris intending to start their third match in October 1844 , but he caught pneumonia while travelling and almost died ; the match was postponed and never took place . 
 Several modern commentators regard Staunton as de facto World Champion after his match victory over Saint @-@ Amant , although that title did not yet formally exist . After Saint @-@ Amant 's defeat , no other Frenchmen arose to continue the French supremacy in chess established by Philidor , <unk> , La Bourdonnais and Saint @-@ Amant . Some contemporary English commentators , mainly in Staunton 's Chess Player 's Chronicle , and some later writers hailed Staunton as the world champion . The response was less enthusiastic elsewhere in Europe . Even in England some writers suggested other players , notably Buckle or von der Lasa , were stronger . 
 = = = 1845 – 48 , chess writer and promoter = = = 
 In 1845 Staunton began a chess column for the Illustrated London News , which became the most influential chess column in the world and which he continued for the rest of his life . Although his articles mostly focused on over @-@ the @-@ board play , a significant number featured correspondence chess . Some followed with enthusiasm the progress of promising youngsters , including Paul Morphy . Staunton produced over 1 @,@ 400 weekly articles for the Illustrated London News . 
 The first chess match by electric telegraph took place in 1844 , between Washington and Baltimore . In April 1845 Staunton and Captain Kennedy travelled to Gosport to play two games by telegraph against a group in London . Staunton took a long @-@ term interest in this solution to the difficulties of travel , and reported telegraph games in the Illustrated London News . In 1871 his report of a telegraphic match between Sydney and Adelaide calculated that the 74 moves of the longest game had travelled a total of 220 @,@ 000 miles ( not much less than the distance between Earth and Moon ) . 
 In 1847 Staunton published his most famous work , The Chess @-@ Player 's Handbook , which is still in print . It contained over 300 pages of opening analysis , and almost 100 pages of endgame analysis . Staunton 's Handbook was based on Bilguer and von der Lasa 's Handbuch des Schachspiels ( first published in 1843 ) , but enhanced by many variations and analyses of Staunton 's own . His book The Chess @-@ Player 's Companion followed in 1849 . 
 He still found time for two matches in 1846 , comfortably beating the professionals Bernhard Horwitz ( fourteen wins , three draws , and seven losses ) and Daniel Harrwitz . The match against Harrwitz was set up in a very unusual way : seven games in which Staunton gave Harrwitz odds of pawn and two moves ( Staunton won four and lost three ) , seven games where he gave pawn and move ( Staunton lost six and won one ) , and seven at no odds ( Staunton won all seven ) . 
 = = = 1849 , marriage and design of a chess set = = = 
 On 23 July 1849 Staunton married Frances Carpenter Nethersole , who had had eight children by a previous marriage . 
 In 1849 Nathaniel Cook registered a chess set design , and Jaques of London obtained the manufacturing rights . Staunton advertised the new set in his Illustrated London News chess column , pointing out that the pieces were easily identifiable , very stable , and good @-@ looking . Each box was signed by Staunton , and Staunton received a royalty on each set sold . The design became popular , and has been the standard for both professional and amateur chess players ever since . Anthony Saidy and Norman Lessing wrote that , " if a vote was taken among chess @-@ players as to which pieces they most enjoyed playing with , ... the Staunton chessmen would win by an overwhelming margin . " 
 = = = 1851 , London International Tournament = = = 
 Staunton proposed and then took the lead in organising the first ever international tournament , as he thought the Great Exhibition of 1851 presented a unique opportunity , because the difficulties that obstructed international participation would be greatly reduced . He may also have been motivated by reports that a few years earlier Ludwig Bledow had proposed to organise an international tournament in Germany , whose winner was to be recognised as the world champion . Staunton and his colleagues had ambitious objectives for this tournament , including convening a " Chess Parliament " to complete the standardisation of various rules and procedures for competitive chess and for writing about chess . Staunton also proposed the production of a compendium showing what was known about chess openings , preferably as a table . Before the tournament started Captain Kennedy and the Liberty Weekly Tribune in Missouri wrote that the winner should be regarded as " the World 's Chess Champion " . 
 The organisers obtained financial contributions from Europe , the US and Asia , enabling the committee to set up a prize fund of £ 500 , equivalent to about £ 359 @,@ 000 in 2006 's money . 
 Despite the generally enthusiastic response , several major players were unable to participate , including von der Lasa , Saint @-@ Amant and Cochrane . Adolf Anderssen was at first deterred by the travel costs , but accepted his invitation when Staunton offered to pay Anderssen 's travel expenses out of his own pocket if necessary . The committee had also organised a " London Provincial Tournament " for other British players , and " promoted " some of the entrants to play in the International Tournament to obtain the right number of players for a knock @-@ out tournament . 
 The tournament was a success , but disappointing for Staunton personally ; in the second round he was knocked out by Anderssen , who won the tournament convincingly ; and in the play @-@ off for third place Staunton was narrowly beaten by Elijah Williams . Staunton 's defeat by Williams suggests that Staunton had over @-@ stretched himself by acting as both a competitor and the Secretary of the organising committee . 
 The London Chess Club , which had fallen out with Staunton and his colleagues , organised a tournament that was played a month later and had a multi @-@ national set of players ( many of whom had competed in Staunton 's tournament ) , and the result was the same – Anderssen won . 
 In 1852 Staunton published his book The Chess Tournament , which recounted in detail the efforts required to make the London International Tournament happen and presented all the games with his comments on the play . Unfortunately some of Staunton 's comments in the book and in the Illustrated London News were intemperate , because he was disappointed with the placing he achieved . 
 = = = 1852 – 60 , final stages of playing career and Shakespeare publication = = = 
 Immediately after the London International tournament Staunton challenged Anderssen to a match of twenty @-@ one games , for £ 100 . Anderssen accepted the challenge but the match could not be arranged : Staunton was physically unfit for an immediate contest , and Anderssen had to return to work . 
 Carl Jaenisch had arrived too late for the tournament ; Staunton convincingly won a match with him soon after ( seven wins , one draw , and two losses ) . Later in 1851 Staunton played a match against Elijah Williams , who had won their play @-@ off for third place in the London International tournament . Staunton won more games ( six wins , three draws , and four losses ) but lost the match because he had given Williams a three @-@ game start . 
 In 1853 , while trying to arrange a match against Anderssen , Staunton met von der Lasa in Brussels . The two began a match , but had to abandon it in the middle of the thirteenth game , with von der Lasa leading ( five wins , four losses , and three draws ) . Staunton was unfit to continue because of heart palpitations , which had affected him in the second match against Saint @-@ Amant in 1843 . In von der Lasa 's opinion there was no chance that Staunton 's health would be good enough for a serious contest from 1853 onwards . 
 In the mid @-@ 1850s Staunton obtained a contract with the publishers Routledge to edit the text of Shakespeare . This edition appeared in parts from 1857 to 1860 , and Staunton 's work was praised by experts . 
 While Staunton was busy with the Shakespeare edition , he received a courteous letter from the New Orleans Chess Club , inviting him to that city to play Paul Morphy , who had won the recent First American Chess Congress . Staunton replied , thanking the New Orleans Chess Club and Morphy " for the honor implied in your selection of me as the opponent of such a champion " and pointing out that he had not competed for several years and was working six days a week ( on editing Shakespeare ) , and that he could not possibly travel across the Atlantic for a match . He also wrote in the Illustrated London News that he had " been compelled , by laborious literary occupation , to abandon the practice of chess , beyond the indulgence of an occasional game ... If Mr. Morphy — for whose skill we entertain the liveliest admiration — be desirous to win his spurs among the chess chivalry of Europe , he must take advantage of his purposed visit next year ; he will then meet in this country , in France , in Germany and in Russia , many champions ... ready to test and do honor to his prowess . " Chess historian H. J. R. Murray wrote that Staunton 's letter and article should have been interpreted as a courteous refusal of the offer , but that Morphy interpreted them differently , and one of the main reasons for his visit to Europe in 1858 was the hope of playing a match with Staunton . Some other chess historians disagree with Murray 's interpretation of Staunton 's response . Staunton did offer to play Morphy by electric telegraph , a technology whose progress and uses for chess he reported enthusiastically . However this offer arrived after Morphy had left for Europe — which perhaps was fortunate , as the newly laid cable broke down after a month and was not replaced until 1866 . 
 Upon arriving in England in June 1858 , Morphy promptly challenged Staunton to a match . At first , Staunton declined Morphy 's offer saying that the challenge came too late . Morphy did not give up negotiations and urging Staunton to play . In early July Staunton agreed provided he was given time to get back into practice on openings and endgames , and provided that he could manage all this without breaking the publication contract for his Shakespearean work . In early August , Morphy wrote asking Staunton when the match could occur , and Staunton asked again for a delay of some weeks . Staunton competed in a tournament that started in on 22 August in Birmingham , but this was a knock @-@ out tournament and he was eliminated in the second round by Johann Löwenthal , after playing a total of four games . This was to be Staunton 's last public chess competition . <unk> Murray wrote that Staunton had overexerted himself and damaged his health by trying both to get ahead of schedule on the Shakespeare project and to play some competitive chess . Just before Staunton left London for Birmingham , his old enemy George Walker published an article accusing him of trying to delay the match indefinitely , and Staunton received another letter from Morphy pressing him to name a date for the match . Staunton and Morphy met socially in Birmingham and , after a tense discussion , Staunton agreed to play in early November . Just after the tournament a letter signed by " Anti @-@ book " appeared in Staunton 's column in the Illustrated London News , alleging that Morphy did not actually have the money for his share of the stakes . This letter is widely thought to have been written by Staunton himself ; if so , he must have written it immediately after reading Walker 's article and Morphy 's letter and immediately before leaving for Birmingham . Around this time Morphy wrote to friends in the US asking them to obtain the stake money for the Staunton match . Morphy 's family refused to contribute as they " should not allow him to play a money match either with his own money or anyone else 's " , but the New Orleans Chess Club sent £ 500 . Meanwhile , Morphy went to Paris to play against continental masters . In September the Illustrated London News printed both a complimentary full @-@ page article about Morphy and a complimentary mention of him in its chess column . On 6 October 1858 , while in Paris Morphy wrote Staunton an open letter which was also circulated to several publications , in which Morphy complained about Staunton 's conduct . Staunton replied on 9 October , re @-@ stating the difficulties he faced , but now giving them as reasons to cancel the match . On 23 October , Staunton published his entire reply along with a partial copy of Morphy 's open letter , omitting the reference to the " Anti @-@ book " letter . Various chess columns then printed anonymous and acrimonious letters . Morphy took no part in any of this , but wrote to Lord Lyttelton , the president of the British Chess Association , explaining his own efforts to bring about the match , accusing Staunton of avoiding the match by all means short of admitting he did not wish to play , complaining about Staunton 's representation of the facts in the Illustrated London News , and demanding " that you shall declare to the world it is through no fault of mine that this match has not taken place . " Lyttelton replied that it was reasonable for Staunton to decline the match , but that in his opinion Staunton should have done so plainly in his first letter to America , but had instead often given the impression that he would soon be ready to start the match . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 Staunton continued writing the chess column in Illustrated London News until his death in 1874 , greeting new developments with enthusiasm . In 1860 he published Chess Praxis , a supplement to his 1847 work The Chess Player 's Handbook . The new book devoted 168 pages to presenting many of Morphy 's games and praised the American 's play . Five years later Staunton published Great Schools of England ( 1865 ) , whose main subject was the history of major English public schools but which also presented some progressive ideas : learning can only take place successfully if the active interest of the student is engaged ; corporal punishment is to be avoided and <unk> should be abolished . But most of his later life was occupied in writing about Shakespeare , including : a <unk> reproduction of the 1600 Quarto of Much Ado about Nothing in 1864 and of the First Folio of Shakespeare in 1866 ; and papers on <unk> Corruptions of Shakespeare 's Text , published from 1872 to his death . All these works were highly regarded at the time . When he died suddenly of heart disease , on 22 June 1874 , he was at his desk writing one of these papers . At the same time he was also working on his last chess book , Chess : Theory and Practice , which was published posthumously in 1876 . 
 A memorial plaque now hangs at his old residence of 117 Lansdowne Road , London W11 . In 1997 a memorial stone bearing an engraving of a chess knight was raised over his grave at Kensal Green Cemetery in London , which had previously been unmarked and neglected . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Staunton has been a controversial figure ever since his own time . In the words of chess journalist Mark Weeks , " Staunton represents a unique challenge to chess history . Many players immediately associate his name with Paul Morphy , as in ' Staunton ducked a match with Morphy ' . ... This is extremely unfair , as it concentrates the focus on Staunton to a relatively minor , factually controversial incident , while it ignores his significant achievements . " As chess historian Edward Winter writes , " The issue of national bias does , unfortunately , require consideration in the Staunton – Morphy affair . " Chess historian Dale Brandreth makes a similar point , from an American perspective : " the fact is that the British have always had their ' thing ' about Morphy . They just can 't seem to accept that Staunton was an unmitigated bastard in his treatment of Morphy because he knew damned well he could never have made any decent showing against him in a match . " However , Frederick Edge ( 1830 – 82 ) and Philip W. Sergeant ( 1872 – 1952 ) , two of Staunton 's harshest critics , were British , while former world champion Bobby Fischer ( 1943 – 2008 ) , one of the biggest fans of both Staunton and Morphy , was American . 
 = = = The Staunton – Morphy controversy = = = 
 Chess historians trace much of the 20th @-@ century animosity against Staunton to books by Sergeant about Morphy . Sergeant in turn made use of a book by Edge , who accompanied Morphy to Europe in 1858 as his secretary and personal assistant , but returned to the US in January 1859 , a few months before Morphy . Opinions of Edge 's value as a historical source vary widely : 
 American chess journalist Daniel Willard Fiske , reviewing Edge 's book , commented , " Mr. Morphy expressly disclaims any connection with it in any way or manner . ... will afford the reader a half @-@ hour 's entertainment " . 
 Sergeant 's books and David Lawson 's Paul Morphy The Pride and Sorrow of Chess ( New York , 1976 ) make extensive use of Edge 's book , but note Edge 's strong anti @-@ Staunton bias . Lawson also suggests that Morphy had seen the manuscript of Edge 's book , disliked its treatment of the Staunton affair so much that he disavowed it , and objected to Edge 's treatment of other matters . 
 Chess historians H. J. R. Murray , David Hooper and Ken Whyld described Edge as unreliable and having an extreme bias against Staunton . 
 Edward Winter wrote " The word ' liar ' has been applied to [ Edge ] by a small number of ( English , notably ) authors , but what is the precise basis ? That he was anti @-@ Staunton is incontestable , but was being anti @-@ Staunton a sign of mendacity , prejudice or , for that matter , clear @-@ sightedness ? " 
 Edge 's letters to Fiske show that Edge regarded Morphy as lazy and rather helpless , and himself as the one who would make Morphy 's name immortal , and that Morphy wanted to keep the negotiations with Staunton discreet while Edge insisted on making them as public as possible . 
 <unk> Murray wrote that Staunton 's response to Morphy 's initial challenge and his article about the same in the Illustrated London News should have been interpreted as a courteous refusal of the offer , but that Morphy interpreted them differently , and one of the main reasons for his visit to Europe in 1858 was the hope of playing a match with Staunton . Murray also commented on the whole affair , " In all this there is but little in which we can reproach Staunton , beyond the fact that he kept open the possibility of a match for so long , and even here there is a good deal that could be urged in justification of the course followed by Staunton " but also noted that both sides were playing tactical games with each other in front of the public , and that comments made by both players or their respective supporters were acrimonious . In response to Morphy 's complaints Lord Lyttelton , then president of the British Chess Association , said that it was reasonable for Staunton to decline the match , but that in his opinion Staunton should have done so plainly in his first letter to America , but had instead often given the impression that he would soon be ready to start the <unk> von der Lasa later wrote , although not specifically about this affair , that he thought there was no chance of Staunton 's health being good enough for a serious contest from 1853 onwards . William Norwood Potter wrote in his obituary of Staunton in the City of London Chess Magazine , " ... nor were his innuendoes concerning Morphy otherwise than an utterly unworthy means of getting out of an engagement , which he could have either declined with a good grace at first , or afterwards have honourably asked to be released from . Nevertheless , all said and done , Staunton was , as we have often heard a distinguished enemy of his say , emphatically a MAN . There was nothing weak about him , and he had a backbone that never curved with fear of any one . " 
 Some 20th @-@ century commentators have been more critical of Staunton . However some well @-@ known chess writers , including Fred Reinfeld , Israel " Al " Horowitz and Reuben Fine , have been criticised by chess historians for their lack of accuracy , both in general and specifically where Staunton is concerned . Edward Winter writes , " It is unwise for the ' non @-@ playing ' historian to publish his own analysis , although he may be a useful compiler . Similarly , players who are <unk> in , and indifferent to , chess history should not touch it . " William Hartston wrote of Staunton 's non @-@ match with Morphy , " Sadly , this blemish on Staunton the man also did considerable harm to the reputation among later generations of Staunton the chess player . " G.H. Diggle wrote in the British Chess Magazine , " That [ Staunton ] excused himself ... from playing a match against the greatest player of the century , then at the zenith of his youth and fame , was no tragedy for chess . The contest would have been a fiasco . But it would have been happier , both for the young champion and the old , had the latter never said he would play at all . " 
 = = = Playing strength and style = = = 
 There is a famous story that Paul Morphy described Staunton as the author of " some devilish bad games " . Chess historian Edward Winter traced this back to a book published in 1902 , whose author said he had seen a copy of Staunton 's The Chess Tournament in which Morphy had written " some devilish bad games " on the title page ; Winter was unable to trace the copy . Around the time of Staunton 's death Morphy is said to have commented that Staunton may have been the strongest player of his time , had great analytical ability and judgement of positions but lacked the imagination required to deliberately create opportunities for combinations . 
 Twentieth @-@ century opinions of Staunton 's play varied enormously . Fred Reinfeld , Al Horowitz and Reuben Fine all condemned it . On the other hand , Savielly Tartakower wrote , " A remarkable feature of Staunton 's play is the number of ultra @-@ modern ideas with which he was familiar , e.g. the restricted centre , the <unk> development , bilateral work , the theory of the local engagement , etc . , and , last but not least , the English Opening ( sometimes called the Staunton Opening ) . " Garry Kasparov considered Staunton " by the early 1840s ... superior to all his rivals " . Bobby Fischer opined that " Staunton was the most profound opening analyst of all time . He was more theorist than player , but nonetheless he was the strongest player of his day ... In addition , he understood all of the positional concepts which modern players hold dear , and thus — with Steinitz — must be considered the first modern player . " 
 The website Chessmetrics ranks Staunton as world number one from May 1843 to August 1849 , in the top ten from July 1851 to May 1853 , and in the top five from June 1853 to January 1856 . 
 From the early 1840s to 1851 Staunton could successfully give odds to almost any UK @-@ based player , including eventually John Cochrane ; the exceptions were Henry Thomas Buckle , to whom Staunton gave pawn and move in 1843 and lost their match ( six losses , no draws , one win ) , and Elijah Williams in 1851 , against whom Staunton won more games but lost the match because he had given Williams a three @-@ game start . According to match records collected by Jeremy P. <unk> , the only players who were successful against Staunton without receiving odds from 1840 to 1852 were : Saint @-@ Amant , who won their first match in London in 1843 and lost their second , longer match in Paris the same year ; Adolf Anderssen , who eliminated Staunton from the 1851 London International tournament ; and Elijah Williams , who beat Staunton in the play @-@ off for third place in the same tournament . Before 1840 Staunton was still a relative beginner , and after 1851 his health was too fragile for serious competition . In the late 1840s some UK commentators wrote that Buckle was stronger , and von der Lasa was regarded by some as the world 's best . Staunton did not play von der Lasa until 1853 , and was forced by ill @-@ health to abandon the match . 
 In his own time Staunton was regarded as belonging to the " closed " category of chess players ( along with for example Philidor and József Szén ) rather than to the " heroic " category ( which included La Bourdonnais , Morphy and Anderssen ) — instead of seeking immediate combat , Staunton deferred it until he was ready . The closed English Opening got its name from Staunton 's frequent use of it , especially against Saint @-@ Amant in 1843 . However he was noted for the accuracy and incisiveness of his combinations . 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Staunton 's virtues and defects were both on a large scale . Former World Champion Kasparov commented that Staunton " founded and edited the magazine Chess Player 's Chronicle ... wrote a chess column ( 1845 – 1874 ) , studied opening theory ... published four remarkable books ... endorsed the famous ' Staunton pieces ' ... organized the first international chess tournament in history ... " However British International Master William Hartston wrote that Staunton 's many achievements were done " with the full weight of an arrogant and pompous nature which has scarcely been matched in the history of the game . " Even contemporaries sympathetic to Staunton admitted that he could be spiteful in response to unexpected defeats , and to proposals or arguments that he considered ill @-@ founded or malicious . Staunton had a highly volatile relationship with George Walker , the founder of the London Chess Club , a dedicated populariser of chess and one of Staunton 's earliest supporters . 
 Staunton 's enemies gave as good as they got . Chess journalism could be a bruising business in those days , even when Staunton was not involved . However it does seem that Staunton was involved in more than his fair share of chess disputes . H. J. R. Murray suggested that these frequent wars of words may have originated from leading players ' and commentators ' jealousy over Staunton 's unexpected rise to the top in the early 1840s , and from snobbish disdain about his humble and possibly illegitimate birth . Saidy and Lessing wrote that , " He can hardly be blamed if the struggles and privations of his youth warped his character so that he became a jealous , suspicious , and vitriolic man . " 
 On the other hand , Staunton 's often @-@ criticized description of Anderssen as Germany 's second best player , after Anderssen had won the 1851 London International tournament , may have been reasonable on the basis of what is now known about von der Lasa 's skill . Staunton was sometimes an objective chess commentator : a large percentage of his 1860 book Chess Praxis was devoted to Morphy 's games , which he praised highly ; and in The Chess @-@ Player 's Companion ( 1849 ) Staunton sometimes criticised his own play , and presented a few of his losses . 
 Staunton showed excellent management skills in building the team to organise the London International tournament of 1851 , and determination and resourcefulness in overcoming the difficulties of getting enough competitors . He also maintained good working relationships with important players and enthusiasts , for example : <unk> and Cochrane helped him to prepare for his second match against Saint @-@ Amant ; Captain Evans agreed to be one of his seconds in that match and later helped Staunton to organise the 1845 telegraphic match ; the Calcutta Chess Club contributed £ 100 to help finance the London International Tournament in 1851 , and in addition its principal officers Cochrane and T.C. Morton made two of the four largest personal contributions ; Staunton corresponded with von der Lasa for over 30 years , although they only met once ; Staunton 's last letter to von der Lasa , November 1873 , expressed his sorrow at the deaths of various masters and enthusiasts , including Saint @-@ Amant and especially Carl Jaenisch . In conversation Staunton was charming and witty . 
 Despite the disappointing way in which his playing career ended , Staunton continued to write with enthusiasm about the progress of new technologies , players and developments in chess theory . At the time of his death his last book , Chess : Theory and Practice , was sufficiently complete to be published posthumously in 1876 , and it was described as up @-@ to @-@ date fourteen years after his death . 
 = = = Influence on chess = = = 
 Staunton proposed and was the principal organiser of the first international chess tournament , which proved that such events were possible , and which produced a clear consensus on who was the world 's strongest player — Adolf Anderssen . All subsequent international tournaments took place in Great Britain until Paris 1867 . 
 Contemporaries , including Steinitz and Morphy , regarded Staunton 's writings on chess openings as among the best of their time . His Chess @-@ Player 's Handbook ( 1847 ) immediately became the leading English @-@ language chess textbook . It went through twenty @-@ one reprints by 1935 , spawned several imitators , and remained in print ( in a revised edition ) until the 1940s . Around 1888 Staunton 's Chess : Theory and Practice , published posthumously in 1876 , was regarded as modern in most respects , but there was a growing need for more up @-@ to @-@ date analysis of openings . His obituary in The City of London Chess Magazine said , " ... his literary labours are the basis upon which English Chess Society ... stands " . 
 His play , however , had little influence on other players of the day . William Hartston explains that , " ... his chess understanding was so far ahead of his time . A deep strategist living in an era when shallow tactics were still the rule , Staunton 's conceptions could not be assimilated by his contemporaries . " Staunton 's style and the openings that accompanied it were eclipsed by the more directly aggressive styles of Anderssen and Morphy , which dominated chess from 1851 until Steinitz unveiled his positional approach in 1873 . 
 There is little evidence that Staunton had much direct influence on modern chess . Although he introduced the English Opening , it has been called " really a twentieth @-@ century invention " that only became fully respectable after future World Champion Mikhail Botvinnik began playing it in the 1930s . Similarly , although he was an early champion of the Sicilian Defense , which is today the most popular opening , and the most successful response to 1.e4 , he seems to have had little influence on how the Sicilian is played today : he regarded it as a safe defensive line , while it is now treated as a vigorous but slightly risky counter @-@ attack . On the other hand , Raymond Keene wrote that " Taimanov revived some old , forgotten ideas of Staunton ... " in the Sicilian . 
 Staunton introduced the Staunton Gambit against the Dutch Defense ( 1.d4 f5 <unk> ! ? ) . Although it was once a feared attacking line , it has been out of favour since the mid @-@ 1920s , and is thought to " offer White equality at best " . Staunton also analysed a different gambit approach to the Dutch , <unk> followed by g4 . In 1979 Viktor Korchnoi , one of the world 's leading players , successfully introduced this line into top @-@ class competition , but later authorities concluded , as Staunton had , that Black gets a good game with 2 ... Nf6 <unk> d5 ! 
 Staunton also advocated the <unk> Opening 1.e4 e5 2.Nf3 Nc6 <unk> , which was often called " Staunton 's Opening " . It is rarely played today because it allows Black to choose between a sharp counter @-@ attack and a safe line that usually leads to a draw . 
 = = = His other writings = = = 
 Staunton 's edition of Shakespeare 's plays was respected . 
 = = Staunton Memorial Tournament = = 
 Between 2003 and 2009 , a Howard Staunton Memorial Tournament was held at Simpson 's @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Strand , London , a restaurant which Staunton regularly visited in the 19th century to play and discuss chess ( it was then a coffee house known as " The Divan " or " Simpson 's Divan " ) . The 2008 tournament was the strongest to be held in London since 1986 . 
 = = Notable games = = 
 " John Cochrane vs Howard Staunton , match London 1841 " . Staunton calmly focuses on his queenside attack and then shows that his opponent 's kingside attack simply exposed the white king . 
 " John Cochrane vs Howard Staunton , match London 1842 " . Cochrane starts an apparently threatening attack while behind in development ; Staunton sacrifices a piece for a counterattack that leads to a decisive material advantage . 
 " Howard Staunton vs Pierre de Saint Amant , match Paris 1843 " . Staunton develops faster , weakens his opponent 's K @-@ side , creates threats on the queenside and then launches a mating attack . 
 " Pierre de Saint Amant vs Howard Staunton , match Paris 1843 " . Staunton develops his pieces more effectively in a closed position . When Saint Amant mistakenly opens the position , Staunton produces a sacrificial combination that gives him an easily won endgame . 
 " Staunton @-@ Horwitz , match , London 1851 , game 7 – English Opening " . Staunton uses a modern @-@ looking formation in the English Opening , with both Bishops fianchettoed ; gains superior space and mobility ; weakens his opponent 's queenside and then kingside ; and wins by a brisk attack . 
 " Adolf Anderssen et al. vs Howard Staunton et al . , 1857 , in Manchester " . Staunton 's team adopts a Hippopotamus formation , opens the center to start a queenside attack , and uses a couple of small sacrificial combinations to halt Anderssen 's kingside attack and gain a decisive material advantage . 
 = = Tournament results = = 
 Sources : 
 = = Match results = = 
 Sources : 
 Notes : 
 In some cases it is known who won but not by what score . 
 Books and articles about most players often omit games at odds . But Staunton gave odds , usually successfully , in his matches against most UK @-@ based players and most of his matches were played this way . 
 " P + 1 " means " Pawn and move " , " P + 2 " means " Pawn and two moves " . 
 In the second column of scores , " + " shows games Staunton won , " – " shows his losses , " = " shows draws . 
 = Nebraska ( The Walking Dead ) = 
 " Nebraska " is the eighth episode of the second season of the post @-@ apocalyptic horror television series The Walking Dead . It originally aired on AMC in the United States on February 12 , 2012 . In the episode , the survivors deal with the aftermath of the barn shooting , which causes Hershel Greene ( Scott Wilson ) to order Rick 's group to leave and then start drinking and disappear from the group , leading Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) to try to find him . Meanwhile , Dale Horvath ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) becomes more suspicious of Shane Walsh 's ( Jon Bernthal ) actions . 
 " Nebraska " was written by Evan Reilly and directed by Clark Johnson . Two trailers were released as part of promoting the episode ; the former aired shortly after the broadcast of its predecessor , " Pretty Much Dead Already " , while the latter premiered a month preceding the airing of " Nebraska " . Following the broadcast of the episode , The Walking Dead took a three @-@ month hiatus from television . It features guest appearances from Michael Raymond @-@ James and Aaron Munoz , as well as appearances from several recurring actors and actresses including Lauren Cohan , Scott Wilson , Emily Kinney and IronE Singleton . 
 The episode received general acclaim from television critics , who praised the episode 's concluding scene alongside the character development and storylines . Upon airing , it attained 8 @.@ 10 million viewers and a 4 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . " Nebraska " achieved the strongest demographic ratings out of any basic cable telecast in history until the airing of the series ' second season finale . The episode became the highest @-@ rated basic cable television program of the day , as well as the most @-@ viewed cable program of the week . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the grisly massacre of all the walkers in the barn , a grieving Hershel Greene ( Scott Wilson ) demands Rick Grimes ( Andrew Lincoln ) and the rest of the survivors to leave his land . Rick confronts Shane ( Jon Bernthal ) , who accuses Rick of being just as delusional as Hershel and argues that , despite Hershel 's denials , the old man knew of Sophia 's presence in the barn the entire time ( Hershel and Maggie denied this , stating that it was Otis who put the walkers in the barn ) . Shane also confronts Dale ( Jeffrey DeMunn ) , arguing that , unlike Dale , he is keeping the group safe . The group decides to bury a few of the walkers , including Sophia ( Madison Lintz ) and Hershel 's wife and stepson , and burn the other bodies . 
 Carol ( Melissa McBride ) refuses to attend Sophia 's memorial service , saying that her daughter died a long time ago and the corpse at the farm was not Sophia . Carol sinks into a deep depression and tears up plants in the nearby woods ( including a Cherokee Rose ) to vent her bottled up anger . Shane later finds her emerging from the woods in a semi @-@ catatonic state and helps her wash her dirty hands , telling her he had no idea Sophia was in the barn . Lori ( Sarah Wayne Callies ) , meanwhile , is horrified when Carl ( Chandler Riggs ) coldly states that killing Sophia was the right thing to do , and he would have killed her himself . 
 Hershel finally throws out his wife 's belongings , before disappearing . His absence is not noted until his younger daughter Beth ( Emily Kinney ) collapses and goes into a catatonic state . The survivors discover that Hershel has begun to drink again , for the first time since Maggie 's ( Lauren Cohan ) birth . Over the objections of Shane , Lori , and Maggie , Rick and Glenn ( Steven Yeun ) , believing Hershel may be at a bar in town , go out to find him . 
 Dale argues with Andrea ( Laurie Holden ) and T @-@ Dog ( IronE Singleton ) when they say they agree with Shane 's actions in clearing the walkers from the barn . Dale later has a private conversation with Lori , wherein he shares his suspicions that Shane sacrificed Otis to the walkers . He warns Lori that Shane may end up killing someone else . 
 As Beth 's condition deteriorates , Lori asks Daryl ( Norman Reedus ) to drive into town to check on Rick . When Daryl refuses , Lori accuses him of being selfish , an accusation which Daryl furiously denies in light of what he had to go through during the search for Sophia . He ends by stating that he 's " done looking for people " . Lori then leaves the group by herself to find Rick , but along the way her car hits a walker on the road and overturns into a ditch . 
 Rick and Glenn find Hershel in the town bar , relapsing into his alcoholic habits and lamenting his futile hopes of a cure for his reanimated loved ones . After some time , Rick finally convinces Hershel to return to his family , just as two men enter the bar — Dave ( Michael Raymond @-@ James ) and Tony ( Aaron Munoz ) . From the two men , Rick hears that Fort Benning , the survivors ' initial target destination , may be overrun with walkers . The situation at the bar deteriorates as Dave and Tony stubbornly prod Rick 's group into revealing the location of the farm , going as far as to offer up their services if allowed to stay there . Rick , however , rejects their offer and flatly refuses the two men safe haven . Frustrated by Rick 's response , Dave reaches for his gun , but Rick is quicker on the draw and kills them both with his revolver . The episode ends with Shane , Andrea , and T @-@ Dog burning the remaining walkers . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Nebraska " was written by Evan Reilly and directed by Clark Johnson . Following the broadcast of the previous installment , " Pretty Much Dead Already " , The Walking Dead took a three @-@ month hiatus from television . Two trailers were released as part of an advertising campaign for the episode ; the first was broadcast after " Pretty Much Dead Already " aired , while the second aired in January 2012 . A promotional image was released shortly thereafter , which featured Rick Grimes holding up a gun at Sophia . The first three minutes of " Nebraska " were leaked online . 
 The episode introduces two new characters to the series , portrayed by Aaron Munoz ( Tony ) and Michael Raymond @-@ James ( Dave ) . Although they were killed off in the episode , writer Robert Kirkman wanted to evoke a reaction that the characters would recur throughout the series . " With the casting of those two guys and everything involving that scene we were really trying to convince the audience that they were going to be new regulars , so the end would be that much more shocking . " Kirkman felt that Tony and Dave represent new threats and anxieties for the group . " I think this was a particularly good episode coming back because the two guys in the bar represent new threats and they are really just the tip of the iceberg , " he stated . " It 's really good to come back and be off of the farm and see that there are more dangerous things out there than the zombies . Things just keep getting worse from here . " . " The Regulator " by Clutch was the song used as the closing title sequence . 
 Johnson devised the scene in which Rick shot and killed Dave and Tony in a bar , and presented it to Reilly . Johnson sought to authorize man 's animalistic qualities during a state of disaster . Reilly contacted showrunner Glen Mazzara via cell phone , and wanted to add the scene to the episode 's script . " That was an incredible scene , " reflected Lincoln . " We were so lucky to get such cracking actors . And we didn 't play the problem , we just played the fact that this is a reunion of human beings . The tension is inherent in the fact that they encounter this other group . " 
 " Nebraska " contains a stunt sequence , in which Lori Grimes slams into a walker , causing her to swerve on the side of the road and overturn her car . Kirkman said of the scene : " I had nothing to do with it . But it did turn out really well . I love the trailers for this season where it 's like , " This is happening : People shooting guns ! Cars are flipping ! ' " 
 = = Title reference = = 
 Tony shares with Rick the rumors survivor groups have circulated about safe destinations . Nebraska is one such rumored location , considered safe - Dave explains - because of its low population and numerous guns . When Rick refuses safe haven at the farm to Dave and Tony , Tony asks where else he would suggest they go . Rick 's reply , " I hear Nebraska 's nice " , triggers Tony and Dave to draw their guns on Rick , who shoots them first . 
 Nebraska was also notable as " Ground Zero " ( i.e. , the target of ) Russian nuclear bombs in the 1950s and 60s , in the event of a nuclear war . Therefore , the Federal Civil Defense Administration ( <unk> ) devised plans that would give civilians a chance to survive a nuclear war , and cartons of " <unk> " ( compressed biscuits made from grain ) and dairy @-@ based milk bars , collectively designed to satisfy survivors ' nutritional requirements during a stay in a fallout shelter , were stored in fallout shelters throughout the United States . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Nebraska " was originally broadcast on February 12 , 2012 in the United States on AMC . Upon airing , the episode garnered 8 @.@ 10 million viewers and a 4 @.@ 2 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , making it the most @-@ viewed episode of the series thus far . Following two encore presentations , total viewership accumulated to 10 @.@ 1 million . The episode attained 5 @.@ 4 million viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic , while subsequently obtaining 4 @.@ 4 million viewers in the 25 – 54 demographic ; this makes " Nebraska " the highest @-@ rated basic cable telecast in history demographically up until the airing of the second season finale , " Beside the Dying Fire " . The accolade was previously held by the second season premiere , " What Lies Ahead " , which received 4 @.@ 8 million spectators amongst adults in the 18 – 49 demographic and 4 @.@ 2 million viewers in the 25 – 54 demographic . " Nebraska " became the highest @-@ rated basic cable program of the day , as well as the most @-@ watched basic cable telecast of the week dated February 12 . Ratings and total viewership increased significantly from the previous installment , " Pretty Much Dead Already " , which garnered 6 @.@ 62 million viewers and a 3 @.@ 5 ratings amongst key adults between 18 and 49 . 
 " Nebraska " debuted in 122 countries worldwide in 35 languages . In the United Kingdom , the episode garnered 737 @,@ 200 viewers thus making it the most @-@ viewed television program of the week on FX . " Nebraska " attracted a 3 @.@ 05 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , translating to 558 @,@ 400 viewers . It subsequently becoming the highest @-@ rated telecast on pay television . Similarly , " Nebraska " achieved the highest demographic ratings out of any pay television program in Spain and Italy , where it attained a 3 @.@ 93 rating ( 193 @,@ 080 viewers ) and a 3 @.@ 26 rating ( 215 @,@ 264 ) in the 18 – 49 demographic , respectively . In Spain , the episode received 330 @,@ 000 viewers and aired simultaneously with an episode of Castle , ultimately outperforming it by 78 % . In Italy , it obtained 328 @,@ 180 spectators , denoting a 19 % increase from " What Lies Ahead " . " Nebraska " performed well demographically in several Latin American countries . In Chile , the episode garnered a 0 @.@ 78 in the 18 – 49 demographic , thereby becoming the highest @-@ rated telecast on pay television there . It outperformed its timeslot in that respective demographic by 136 % . Similarly , " Nebraska " outperformed the timeslot average by 24 % in Argentina , ultimately attaining a 0 @.@ 88 rating amongst adults in the 18 – 49 group . In Mexico and Colombia , the episode obtained a 2 @.@ 19 rating and a 1 @.@ 07 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , respectively . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Nebraska " was widely lauded by television commentators . Alex Strachan of the Ottawa Citizen felt that the episode was very poignant , adding that various scenes were " beautifully acted " . In his A – review , Verne Gay of Newsday opined that " Nebraska " accurately established the progression of a dark atmosphere for the second half of the season . Rawlings asserted that the episode gives the audience " plenty to chew on " , and that it nicely sets up a foundation for future storylines . The A.V. Club 's Zack Halden evoked similar sentiments ; " ' Nebraska ' doesn ’ t entirely rectify this concern , but it ’ s a solid hour of television , and a promising indication of where the series is headed . " Writing for IGN , Eric Goldman commended the installment 's sense of direction ; " I liked how this episode thrust us right back into it , and the understandable misery everyone was going through . [ ... ] It was a mixture of chaos , sadness and zombie killing — a mixture this show can do very well . " Concluding his review , Goldman issued " Nebraska " an eight out of ten , signifying a " great " rating . The Atlantic 's Scott Meslow iterated : " ' Nebraska ' largely spends its first two acts reiterating things that happened earlier in the season , which in this case can somewhat be forgiven [ ... ] . But just when it looks as though the series will devote another episode to wheel @-@ spinning , " Nebraska " surprises with a final act that serves as a reminder of why it 's too soon to give up on The Walking Dead . " Morgan Jeffrey of Digital Spy noted that it successfully addressed the concerns of fans about the episodic pace , while also raising expectations for succeeding installments . Not all reviewers were enthusiastic about the episode as the general consensus . Boston Herald journalist Mark Perigard affirmed that " Nebraska " was inferior to its predecessor , ultimately giving it a C + grade . Starlee Kine of New York wrote that it was " just one huge whirlpool of pointless drama , pulling everything in its path under with it " , while Entertainment Weekly writer Darren Franich thought that it was a setback from the previous episode . 
 Commentators criticized the character development of Lori Grimes . Goldman was angry upon viewing the crash sequence , avouching that it stunted any development intended for the scene . He stated , " The Walking Dead really needs to work on strengthening its female characters , and it doesn 't help when Lori has a major accident for such a stupid reason , getting distracted as she looked at a map while she drove . Yeah , yeah , there was a zombie in the road , but it could have been an animal [ ... ] just as easily , and it really undercut the intended drama of her situation when it just seems so stupid that it happened at all . " Halden thought that the foundation set up for furthering storyline progression was contrived , while Aaron Rutkoff of The Wall Street Journal said that the premise of the dilemma made no sense . Jeffery was much more optimistic about the scene , ultimately evaluating it as a " jaw @-@ dropping moment " . 
 Critics adulated the character development of Rick Grimes , as well as the concluding scene of " Nebraska " . Kine appreciated the attempt to incorporate a suspenseful feeling in the series . She wrote : " Mazzara wants to infuse some horror movie suspense back into the show and his intentions are evident in this scene . Even though I personally didn ’ t find it that tense , I appreciated the effort . It means that the show is trying to expand and become about something bigger . " Los Angeles Times ' Gina McIntyre felt that Rick emulated Justified character <unk> Givens , and Halden commented that Rick was becoming " something of a badass " . Halden further praised the conclusion of the episode , calling it the series ' best scenes . " This is one of the best scenes I ’ ve seen on the show so far , and it does any number of things that The Walking Dead has struggled with in the past , " he opined . " The tension builds naturally [ ... ] , the dialogue has actual subtext , and there ’ s a clear sense of risk here that never pauses to telegraph itself . " Meslow affirmed that the scene was an achievement for the writers . " There are characters with new information [ ... ] , " Meslow commented . " There is dialogue with subtext [ ... ] . There is intriguing parallel plotting [ ... ] . And there 's the surprisingly swift , violent dénouement , when Rick guns down Dave and Tony before they can do the same to him . It 's a necessary action , given the circumstances , but it also rings in an honest @-@ to @-@ god character change for our hero , who , having dispatched zombie Sophia , seems to have developed a new recognition of the ruthlessness and self @-@ centeredness it may take to survive in this new world order . " HitFix writer Alan Sepinwall appreciated James ' performance , and opined that the scene was " as suspenseful as any the show has ever done featuring actual monsters " . 
 Jeffrey complimented Bernthal 's performance , while Josh Wigler of MTV celebrated his scene with DeMunn . Wigler summated : " Jon Bernthal and Jeffrey DeMunn are very likely the finest actors on The Walking Dead , and their increasingly tense interactions have been a highlight in recent episodes . ' Nebraska ' was no exception , with Shane giving Dale an <unk> about ' <unk> ' and why he did what he had to do . " 
 = Western Area Command ( RAAF ) = 
 Western Area Command was one of several geographically based commands raised by the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) during World War II . It was formed in January 1941 , and controlled RAAF units located in Western Australia . Headquartered at Perth , Western Area Command was primarily responsible for air defence , aerial reconnaissance and protection of the sea lanes within its boundaries . Its aircraft conducted anti @-@ submarine operations throughout the war , and attacked targets in the Dutch East Indies during the Borneo campaign in 1945 . Western Area Command continued to operate following the end of the war , before its responsibilities were subsumed in 1954 by the RAAF 's new functional command @-@ and @-@ control system ; the headquarters was disbanded two years later . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Prior to World War II , the Royal Australian Air Force was small enough for all its elements to be directly controlled by RAAF Headquarters in Melbourne . After war broke out in September 1939 , the Air Force began to decentralise its command structure , commensurate with expected increases in manpower and units . Between March 1940 and May 1941 , the RAAF divided Australia and New Guinea into four geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control zones : Central Area , Southern Area , Western Area , and Northern Area . The roles of these area commands were air defence , protection of adjacent sea lanes , and aerial reconnaissance . Each was led by an Air Officer Commanding ( AOC ) responsible for the administration and operations of all air bases and units within his boundary . 
 Western Area Command , headquartered in Perth , was formed on 9 January 1941 to control all RAAF units in Western Australia . These included No. 14 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron , No. 25 ( General Purpose ) Squadron and No. 5 Initial Training School at RAAF Station Pearce ; No. 9 Elementary Flying Training School at Cunderdin ; and the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ raised No. 4 Service Flying Training School at Geraldton . RAAF Headquarters had maintained control of Western Australian units pending the area 's formation . Western Area 's inaugural AOC was Group Captain ( acting Air Commodore ) Hippolyte " Kanga " De La Rue . His senior air staff officer was Group Captain Alan Charlesworth . Headquarters staff numbered forty @-@ one , including fifteen officers . No. 14 Squadron , operating Lockheed Hudsons , and No. 25 Squadron , flying CAC Wirraways , were responsible for convoy escort and anti @-@ submarine patrol . Shortly after taking command , De La Rue lobbied RAAF Headquarters for a force of long @-@ range Catalina flying boats to augment No. 14 Squadron 's Hudsons , but none were made available . 
 By mid @-@ 1941 , RAAF Headquarters had determined to form training units in the southern and eastern states into semi @-@ geographical , semi @-@ functional groups separate to the area commands . This led to the establishment in August of No. 1 ( Training ) Group in Melbourne , covering Victoria , Tasmania and South Australia , and No. 2 ( Training ) Group in Sydney , covering New South Wales and Queensland ; at the same time , Central Area was dissolved and its responsibilities divided between Southern and Northern Areas , and No. 2 ( Training ) Group . Western Area , uniquely among the area commands , retained responsibility for training , as well as operations and maintenance , within its boundaries . In November 1941 , all available aircraft from Nos. 14 and 25 Squadrons , as well as eight Avro Ansons from No. 4 Service Flying Training School , took part in the search for HMAS Sydney after it was sunk by the German raider Kormoran ; a Hudson and an Anson each located lifeboats bearing Kormoran 's crew . Following the outbreak of the Pacific War , Northern Area was split in January 1942 into North @-@ Western and North @-@ Eastern Areas , to counter separate Japanese threats to Northern Australia and New Guinea , respectively . In May , a new area command , Eastern Area , was raised to control units within New South Wales and southern Queensland . The same month , the Air Board proposed raising No. 3 ( Training ) Group and No. 8 ( Maintenance ) Group to control training and maintenance units in Western Australia but , though approved by the Federal government , this did not take place . As of 31 May 1942 , Western Area headquarters staff numbered 247 , including seventy @-@ two officers . 
 No. 35 ( Transport ) Squadron , operating de Havilland Fox Moth and DH.84 Dragon aircraft , was raised under Western Area 's control at Pearce on 4 March 1942 . No. 77 Squadron , equipped with P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks , was formed at Pearce on 16 March ; it was at this time the only fighter squadron available to defend Perth and Fremantle , and De La Rue worked assiduously to prepare it for operations . No. 6 Fighter Sector Headquarters , Perth , became operational on 2 May . As of 20 April , operational authority over all RAAF combat infrastructure , including area commands , was invested in the newly established Allied Air Forces ( AAF ) Headquarters under South West Pacific Area Command ( SWPA ) . Some finetuning of Western Area 's boundaries occurred in August : as well as the Northern Territory , North @-@ Western Area was given responsibility for the portion of Western Australia north of a line drawn south @-@ east from Yampi Sound to the Northern Territory border . September 1942 saw the formation of RAAF Command , led by Air Vice Marshal Bill Bostock , to oversee the majority of Australian flying units in the SWPA . Bostock exercised control of air operations through the area commands , although RAAF Headquarters continued to hold overarching administrative authority over all Australian units . In November , construction began on an airfield under Western Area 's control at Corunna Downs , near Port Hedland . Australia 's closest air base to Surabaya , it would serve as a staging post for Allied bombers bound for targets in the Dutch East Indies , allowing them to avoid Japanese fighter stations between Darwin and Java . De la Rue handed Western Area over to Air Commodore Raymond Brownell in December 1942 ; by the end of the month , headquarters staff numbered 488 , including ninety @-@ five officers . 
 By April 1943 , Western Area controlled four combat units : No. 14 Squadron , flying Bristol Beaufort reconnaissance @-@ bombers out of Pearce ; No. 25 Squadron , tasked with dive @-@ bombing missions in Wirraways based at Pearce ; No. 76 Squadron , flying P @-@ 40 Kittyhawks out of <unk> ( Exmouth Gulf ) ; and No. 85 Squadron , operating CAC Boomerang fighters from Pearce . The area command was also able to call on US Navy Catalinas of Patrol Wing 10 , based at Crawley , for reconnaissance and anti @-@ submarine missions . The Beauforts and Catalinas flew several hundred maritime patrols during 1943 . In March 1944 , Western Area went on high alert in response to concerns that a Japanese naval force would raid Western Australia . Perth was reinforced with Nos. 452 and 457 Squadrons , and Exmouth Gulf with Nos. 18 , 31 , and 120 Squadrons , but no attack ensued and the units were directed to return to their home bases . The US Navy withdrew Patrol Wing 10 mid @-@ year , curtailing Western Area 's ability to conduct long @-@ range maritime reconnaissance ; No. 14 Squadron 's fifteen serviceable Beauforts had to fly patrols of up to twenty @-@ two hours in duration to search for German submarines reported in the area . As of 31 May 1944 , Western Area headquarters staff numbered 686 , including 118 officers . 
 Having converted to Vultee Vengeance dive bombers in August 1943 , No. 25 Squadron moved from Pearce to Cunderdin in January 1945 and re @-@ equipped with B @-@ 24 Liberator heavy bombers . The Liberators were employed on anti @-@ submarine patrol off Cape Leeuwin later that month , owing to No. 14 Squadron 's Beauforts being fully committed to other tasks . Between April and July , No. 25 Squadron provided Western Area 's contribution to the Borneo campaign , supporting the Allied invasions of Tarakan , Labuan – Brunei and Balikpapan . Staging through Corunna Downs , the Liberators bombed Japanese airfields in the Dutch East Indies that were within range of Tarakan , up until the day of the landings on 1 May . They attacked Malang near Surabaya at night prior to the landings at Labuan , and conducted daylight raids against Java in the lead @-@ up to the Balikpapan operation that commenced on 1 July . No. 14 Squadron had ceased its regular anti @-@ submarine patrols on 23 May following the end of hostilities in Europe , but remained on standby in case any U @-@ boats were found to be still active . In July 1945 , Brownell was appointed to command the newly formed No. 11 Group on Morotai ; he handed Western Area over to his senior air staff officer , Group Captain Colin Hannah , who held temporary command for the remainder of the war . 
 = = = Post @-@ war activity and disbandment = = = 
 Following the end of the Pacific War in August 1945 , SWPA was dissolved and RAAF Headquarters again assumed full control of all its operational formations , including the area commands . Hannah handed over command of Western Area to Group Captain Douglas Wilson in October . The RAAF shrank dramatically with demobilisation ; wartime units were scheduled for dissolution in several stages , including reconnaissance @-@ bomber squadrons by the end of 1945 , and other bomber units by September 1946 . No. 14 Squadron was disbanded at Pearce in December 1945 . No. 25 Squadron 's Liberators repatriated former prisoners of war from the Dutch East Indies to Australia until January 1946 ; the unit was disbanded in July that year . Wilson was placed on the retired list in February 1946 , and Hannah again assumed temporary command of Western Area until posted to Britain that October . Group Captain Bill Garing took over as Officer Commanding Western Area the following month , by which time headquarters staff numbered 117 , including thirty @-@ one officers . 
 In September 1946 , the Chief of the Air Staff , Air Vice Marshal George Jones , proposed reducing the five extant mainland area commands ( North @-@ Western , North @-@ Eastern , Eastern , Southern , and Western Areas ) to three : Northern Area , covering Queensland and the Northern Territory ; Eastern Area , covering New South Wales ; and Southern Area , covering Western Australia , South Australia , Victoria and Tasmania . The Australian Government rejected the plan and the wartime area command boundaries essentially remained in place . No. 25 Squadron re @-@ formed as a Citizen Air Force unit at Pearce in April 1948 , operating P @-@ 51 Mustangs and , later , de Havilland Vampire fighters . As well as training reservists , the squadron was responsible for Western Australia 's air defence . Garing handed over command in November 1948 ; by the end of the month , Western Area headquarters staff numbered fourteen , including seven officers . 
 Group Captain ( later Air Commodore ) Bill Hely took command of Western Area in October 1951 . During Operation Hurricane , the British atomic test in the Montebello Islands in October 1952 , Hely coordinated air support including supply and observation flights by Dakotas of No. 86 ( Transport ) Wing . He completed his term as AOC Western Area in September 1953 , by which time headquarters staff numbered thirty @-@ one , including fifteen officers . Commencing the next month , the RAAF was reorganised from a geographically based command @-@ and @-@ control system into one based on function . In February 1954 , the newly constituted functional organisations — Home , Training , and Maintenance Commands — assumed control of all operations , training and maintenance from Western Area Command . Western Area remained in existence , but only as one of Home Command 's " remote control points " . The headquarters was finally disbanded on 30 November 1956 . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 As at 30 April 1942 , Western Area 's order of battle comprised : 
 RAAF Station Pearce 
 No. 14 ( General Reconnaissance ) Squadron 
 No. 25 ( General Purpose ) Squadron 
 No. 35 ( Transport ) Squadron 
 No. 77 ( Fighter ) Squadron 
 No. 6 Fighter Sector Headquarters , Perth 
 = Punakha Dzong = 
 The Punakha Dzong , also known as <unk> Dechen <unk> Dzong ( meaning very awesome dzong " the palace of great happiness or bliss " ) , is the administrative centre of Punakha District in Punakha , Bhutan . Constructed by Ngawang Namgyal , 1st Zhabdrung Rinpoche , in 1637 – 38 , it is the second oldest and second largest dzong in Bhutan and one of its most majestic structures . The dzong houses the sacred relics of the southern Drukpa Lineage of the Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism , including the <unk> <unk> and the sacred remains of Ngawang Namgyal and the <unk> Pema Lingpa . 
 Punakha Dzong was the administrative centre and the seat of the Government of Bhutan until 1955 , when the capital was moved to Thimphu . It is listed as a tentative site in Bhutan 's Tentative List for UNESCO inclusion . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Dzong is located at the confluence of the Pho <unk> ( father ) and Mo <unk> ( mother ) rivers in the Punakha – <unk> valley . The source of the Mo chu river is in the northern hills of <unk> and Laya in Bhutan , and in Tibet . The Po Chu River is fed by glaciers in the <unk> region of the Punakha valley . After the confluence of these two rivers , the main river is known as Puna Tsang chu or <unk> River and flows down through <unk> Phodrang , crosses the Bhutan – India border at <unk> and eventually meets the Brahmaputra River . 
 In view of the healthy climate in the region , Punakha is the winter capital of Bhutan . The head of the clergy of Bhutan with his entourage of monks spend the winter in this dzong . Jacaranda trees grow around the dzong , blooming with mauve flowers in the spring . 
 = = History = = 
 According to a local legend , the sage Padmasambhava prophesized that “ a person named Namgyal will arrive at a hill that looks like an elephant ” . Ngawang Namgyal , 1st Zhabdrung Rinpoche , found the peak of the hill , which appeared in the shape of trunk of an elephant as prophesized , and built the dzong in 1637 @-@ 38 . 
 Another legend tells how <unk> <unk> , the architect , had a vision in a dream after the Zhabdrung ordered him to sleep under a small structure which contained a statue of the Buddha , known as Dzong Chug " small dzong " . In his dream , prompted by the psychic powers of the Zhabdrung , he had a clear vision of a palace for Guru Rinpoche . The vision was imprinted on the architect 's mind , enabling him to conceive the plan for the dzong without putting the vision on paper and to build it . On the basis of the dream vision of the architect , the building of the dzong was started in 1637 and completed in 1638 , at the place where the Dzong Chug had existed . During this period , Ngawang Namgyal became the first leader of a unified Bhutan , following his concerted efforts to unify the country into one unit . 
 The dzong was consecrated in the name of <unk> Dechen Phodrang . In 1639 , a commemorative chapel was erected to house the arms seized from the Tibetans who were defeated by the Bhutanese on this spot . The Zhabdrung also set up a monastic order with 600 monks ( brought from Cheri Gompa of upper Thimphu valley ) and he lived here till his death . 
 The spire at the top of the utse ( the dzong ’ s central tower or the main tower ) was added in 1676 by Gyaltsen Tenzin Rabgye – the abbot of the dzong . Further additions were made during the period 1744 to 1763 , when <unk> Wangchuk was the ruler . A large thangka known as <unk> ( great ) <unk> of the Zhabdrung was donated to the Dzong by the Desi ( ruler ) . This thangka is displayed during the <unk> held once a year here . The 7th Dalai Lama donated the brass roof for the dzong . 
 The House of Wangchuck currently rules the country . This monarchy was established in 1907 . The same year , Punakha Dzong was the site of the coronation of Ugyen Wangchuck ( or Deb <unk> ) as the first Druk Gyalpo . At that time , Punakha was the capital of Bhutan . Three years later , a treaty was signed at Punakha whereby the British agreed not to interfere in Bhutanese internal affairs and Bhutan allowed Britain to direct its foreign affairs . 
 From 1744 to 1763 , the dzong was enlarged substantially during the rule of the 13th desi , when <unk> Wangchuk was the chief abbot of Bhutan . Several fires between 1750 and 1849 caused damages to the Dzong . In the 1897 earthquake , the dzong was severely damaged and also suffered numerous fires . In 1986 , the dzong was partially destroyed by fire 
 = = = Royal wedding = = = 
 The wedding of the Druk Gyalpo , Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck , and his fiancée , Jetsun Pema , was held at the Punakha Dzong on 13 October 2011 . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The dzong is part of the Drukpa Lineage of the Kagyu school of Tibetan Buddhism in Bhutan . It is the second oldest and most majestic dzong in Bhutan built at the orders of Ngawang Namgyal . It is a six @-@ storied structure with a central tower or utse at an average elevation of 1 @,@ 200 metres ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) with a scenic , mountainous background . The materials used in building the Dzong consisted of compacted earth , stones and timber in doors and windows . 
 The dzong was constructed as an “ embodiment of Buddhist values ” and was one of the 16 dzongs built by the Zhabdrung during his rule from 1594 to 1691 . The dzong measures 180 metres ( 590 ft ) in length with a width of 72 metres ( 236 ft ) and has three <unk> ( courtyards ) . The defensive fortifications built in the dzong to protect it from enemy attacks consist of a steep wooden draw stairway and a heavy wooden door that is closed at night . After the dzong suffered damage due to a fire , a large prayer hall was added in 1986 . 
 Administrative offices of the dzong , a very large , white @-@ washed stupa and a bodhi tree are located in the first courtyard . Also seen in the same courtyard , on the far left , are a mound of stones and a chapel dedicated to the queen of the nāgas . The residential quarters of monks are located in the second courtyard , with the utse intervening in between the first and the second courtyards . There are two historic halls in this courtyard ; one of Ugyen Wangchuk , who subsequently became the King and another hall where the King was decorated in 1905 with the Order of the Knight Commander of the Indian Empire by John Claude White . The third courtyard is at the southernmost end of the dzong where the remains of Pema Lingpa and Ngawang Namgyal are preserved . <unk> Lakhang ( ' <unk> ' literally means " sacred embalmed body " ) in the third courtyard has the well preserved embalmed body of Zhabdrung . This Lakhang was rebuilt in 1995 . The casket containing the embalmed body is not opened at all . However , the place is visited by the King and the Je Khenpo mainly to seek blessings before assuming their offices . 
 Flash floods resulting from glacial lake outburst flooding in the upper reaches of the valley , are a common occurrence in the Mo Chu and Pho Chu rivers , and in the past caused flooding and damage to the dzong , especially in 1957 , 1960 and 1994 . Fires and earthquakes have also further added to the problem . In 1996 , flash floods in the Pho Chu river damaged the large stupa and caused several deaths . 
 After a major refurbishing work carried out in the " <unk> <unk> tradition " ( an ancient tradition of crafts in wood carving , masonry , metal work , painting , and several other skills ) , the Dzong now has several new <unk> , over 200 new religious images , and several other treasures . A consecration ceremony known as the “ <unk> ceremony ” performed by His Holiness the Je Khenpo and the monks of the <unk> ( central monk body ) was held from May 13 to 15 , 2004 , corresponding to the 12th to 14th day of the third Bhutanese month . The restoration works were largely funded by the Government of India and the Dzong stands fully restored to its past glory . After complete restoration of the Dzong to its old glory , notable images , statues and thangkas are displayed in the Dzong . These include murals depicting life story of Buddha done during the rule of the second druk desi . Large gilded statues of Buddha , Guru Rinpoche and Zhabdrung which belong to mid 18th century , and gilded panels on pillars are also here . 
 A covered wooden cantilever bridge crossing the Mo Chu river was built together with the Dzong in the 17th century . This bridge was washed away by a flash flood in 1957 . In 2006 , work started on a new wooden cantilever bridge in the traditional style , with a free span of 55 metres ( 180 ft ) . It was completed in 2008 . In 2008 , after completion of the cantilever bridge , the new bridge was hailed as a celebration of “ 100 years of Wangchuck Monarchy in 2008 and to the coronation of His Majesty King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck in the Punakha Dzong ” . Thus , the Dzong has been the venue for coronation of all the kings of Bhutan . A memorial honouring the 23 people who died in the dzong in the glacial floods in 1994 has also been erected just outside the dzong . 
 = = Festivals = = 
 <unk> is the annual festival held at the Dzong , which is largely attended by people from all villages and far places of the district . The <unk> " self @-@ created " image of Avalokiteśvara enshrined in the utse of the dzong ( brought by the Zhabdrung from Tibet ) is displayed during the festival . During this five @-@ day festival , also known as Punakha festival , held in February / March , there are some very impressive displays . The important display is a re @-@ enactment of the Tibetan invasion of Bhutan in 1639 where the Tibetans were defeated . In this theatrical display , which was conceived by the <unk> , a mock throwing of a relic to the Mo chu river is dramatized . 
 The final day of the festival marks the display of an image of Zhabdrung followed by a group dance performance by 136 people , dressed as warriors , in the main courtyard . At the end of the performance , the dancers descend down the front entrance of the dzong in revelry – whistling and shouting . The Monks led by the Je Khenpo of the Dzong then parade to the Mo chu river bank with lot of fan fare . Je Khenpo then flings oranges into the river marking the <unk> <unk> , which is considered an offering to the nāgas residing below the river bed . After this act , the traditional mask dances commemorating the construction of the Dzong are performed in the Dzong premises . 
 Another ritual observed every year at this dzong is called the <unk> <unk> , and is a worship for departed souls . 
 Current Festivals 
 Pel <unk> <unk> Wangchen ( <unk> ) 
 = Japanese battleship Mikasa = 
 Mikasa ( <unk> ) is a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built for the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) in the late 1890s , and was the only ship of her class . Named after Mount Mikasa in Nara , Japan , the ship served as the flagship of Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō throughout the Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , including the Battle of Port Arthur on the second day of the war and the Battles of the Yellow Sea and Tsushima . Days after the end of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Mikasa 's magazine accidentally exploded and sank the ship . She was salvaged and her repairs took over two years to complete . Afterwards , the ship served as a coast @-@ defence ship during World War I and supported Japanese forces during the Siberian Intervention in the Russian Civil War . 
 After 1922 , Mikasa was decommissioned in accordance with the Washington Naval Treaty and preserved as a museum ship at Yokosuka . She was badly neglected during the post @-@ World War II Occupation of Japan and required extensive refurbishing in the late 1950s . She is now fully restored as a museum ship and can be visited at Mikasa Park in Yokosuka . 
 Mikasa is the last remaining example of a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship anywhere in the world . 
 = = Background = = 
 Combat experience in the First Sino @-@ Japanese War of 1894 – 1895 convinced the Imperial Japanese Navy of weaknesses in the Jeune Ecole naval philosophy , which emphasized torpedo boats and commerce raiding to offset expensive heavily armoured ships , and Japan embarked on a program to modernize and expand its fleet in preparation for further confrontations . In particular , Japan promulgated a ten @-@ year naval build @-@ up programme , with the construction of six battleships and six armoured cruisers at its core . These ships were paid for from the £ 30 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 indemnity paid by China after losing the First Sino @-@ Japanese War . 
 As with the earlier Fuji and Shikishima @-@ class battleships , Japan lacked the technology and capability to construct its own battleships , and turned again to the United Kingdom for the four remaining battleships of the programme . Mikasa , the last of these ships , was ordered from the Vickers shipyard in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness in 1898 at the cost of £ 880 @,@ 000 ( 8 @.@ 8 million yen at that time ) . Although she closely resembled several of the other ships ordered in this program , she was the only ship in her class . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The design of Mikasa was a modified version of the Formidable @-@ class battleships of the Royal Navy with two additional 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns . Mikasa had an overall length of 432 feet ( 131 @.@ 7 m ) , a beam of 76 feet ( 23 @.@ 2 m ) , and a normal draught of 27 feet 2 inches ( 8 @.@ 3 m ) . She displaced 15 @,@ 140 long tons ( 15 @,@ 380 t ) at normal load . The crew numbered about 830 officers and enlisted men . 
 The ship was powered by two vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one propeller , using steam generated by 25 Belleville boilers . The engines were rated at 15 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 11 @,@ 000 kW ) , using forced draught , and designed to reach a top speed of 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) although Mikasa proved to be faster during her sea trials in December 1901 . The ship reached a top speed of 18 @.@ 45 knots ( 34 @.@ 17 km / h ; 21 @.@ 23 mph ) using 16 @,@ 341 indicated horsepower ( 12 @,@ 185 kW ) . She carried a maximum of 2 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @,@ 000 long tons ) of coal which allowed her to steam for 9 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 17 @,@ 000 km ; 10 @,@ 000 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 Mikasa 's main battery consisted of the same four Elswick Ordnance Company 40 @-@ calibre twelve @-@ inch guns used in all of the preceding Japanese battleships . They were mounted in twin @-@ gun barbettes fore and aft of the superstructure that had armoured hoods to protect the guns and were usually called gun turrets . The hydraulically powered mountings could be loaded at all angles of traverse while the guns were loaded at a fixed angle of + 13 @.@ 5 ° . They fired 850 @-@ pound ( 386 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 400 ft / s ( 730 m / s ) . 
 The ship 's secondary armament consisted of fourteen 45 @-@ calibre 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) quick @-@ firing guns mounted in casemates . Ten of these guns were positioned on the main deck and the other four guns were placed above them at the corners of the superstructure . They fired 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ( 700 m / s ) . Protection against torpedo boat attacks was provided by twenty QF 12 @-@ pounder 12 cwt guns . The 12 @-@ pounders fired 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) , 12 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 5 @.@ 7 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 2 @,@ 359 ft / s ( 719 m / s ) . Lighter guns consisted of eight 47 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) three @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and eight 47 @-@ millimetre 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . The three @-@ pounder gun fired 3 @.@ 19 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 45 kg ) projectiles at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 927 ft / s ( 587 m / s ) while the 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pounder fired 2 @.@ 5 @-@ pound ( 1 @.@ 1 kg ) shells at a muzzle velocity of 1 @,@ 420 ft / s ( 430 m / s ) . The ship was also equipped with four submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes , two on each broadside . 
 The waterline armour belt of Mikasa consisted of Krupp cemented armour that had a maximum thickness of 9 inches ( 229 mm ) over the middle of the ship . It was only 4 inches ( 102 mm ) thick at the ends of the ship and was surmounted by a six @-@ inch strake of armour that ran between the barbettes . The barbettes were 14 inches ( 356 mm ) thick , but reduced to six inches at the level of the lower deck . The armour of the barbette hoods had a thickness of 8 – 10 inches ( 203 – 254 mm ) . The casemates protecting the secondary armament were 2 – 6 inches ( 51 – 152 mm ) thick and the deck armour was 2 – 3 inches ( 51 – 76 mm ) in thickness . The forward conning tower was protected by 14 inches of armour , but the aft conning tower only had four inches of armour . 
 Mikasa , like all the other Japanese battleships of the time , was fitted with four Barr & Stroud <unk> coincidence rangefinders that had an effective range of 7 @,@ 300 metres ( 8 @,@ 000 yd ) . In addition the ships were also fitted with 24 @-@ power magnification telescopic gunsights . 
 = = Career = = 
 Mikasa , named after Mount Mikasa , was laid down by Vickers at their Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness shipyard on 24 January 1899 . She was launched on 8 November 1900 and completed on 1 March 1902 . After a visit to Devonport , she left Plymouth on 13 March 1902 , bound for Yokohama , under the command of Captain <unk> . 
 At the start of the Russo @-@ Japanese War , Mikasa , commanded by Captain <unk> <unk> , was assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Fleet . She participated in the Battle of Port Arthur on 9 February 1904 when Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō led the 1st Fleet in an attack on the Russian ships of the Pacific Squadron anchored just outside Port Arthur . Tōgō had expected his surprise night attack on the Russians by his destroyers to be much more successful than it actually was and expected to find them badly disorganized and weakened , but the Russians had recovered from their surprise and were ready for his attack . The Japanese ships were spotted by the cruiser Boyarin which was patrolling offshore and alerted the Russian defences . Tōgō chose to attack the Russian coastal defences with his main armament and engage the Russian ships with his secondary guns . Splitting his fire proved to be a bad idea as the Japanese 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) and six @-@ inch guns inflicted very little significant damage on the Russian ships who concentrated all their fire on the Japanese ships with some effect . Although a large number of ships on both sides were hit , Russian casualties numbered only 17 while the Japanese suffered 60 killed and wounded before Tōgō disengaged . Mikasa was hit by two ten @-@ inch shells during the engagement that wounded seven crewmen . 
 The ship participated in the action of 13 April when Tōgō successfully lured out a portion of the Pacific Squadron , including Vice Admiral Stepan Makarov 's flagship , the battleship Petropavlovsk . When Makarov spotted the five battleships of the 1st Division , he turned back for Port Arthur and Petropavlovsk struck a minefield laid by the Japanese the previous night . The Russian battleship sank in less than two minutes after one of her magazines exploded , Makarov one of the 677 killed . Emboldened by his success , Tōgō resumed long @-@ range bombardment missions , which prompted the Russians to lay more minefields which sank two Japanese battleships the following month . 
 During the Battle of the Yellow Sea on 10 August , Mikasa was at the head of the column of Japanese battleships and was one of the primary targets of the Russian ships . She was hit twenty times , two of which knocked out her aft 12 @-@ inch gun turret , and suffered 125 casualties among her crew . In turn , she concentrated most of her fire upon the battleships Poltava and Tsesarevich although both ships were only lightly damaged by the Japanese shells which generally failed to penetrate any armour and detonated on impact . 
 = = = Battle of Tsushima = = = 
 At the Battle of Tsushima on 27 May 1905 , Mikasa again led the 1st Fleet into combat , this time against the Second and Third Pacific Squadrons detached from the Baltic Fleet . The ship opened fire at the battleship Knyaz Suvorov , the Russian flagship , at 14 : 10 , and was joined by the battleship Asahi and the armoured cruiser Azuma shortly afterwards . Within an hour the Japanese ships had started a serious fire aboard the Russian ship , badly wounded the fleet commander , Vice Admiral Zinovy Rozhestvensky , knocked out her rear twelve @-@ inch gun turret , and jammed Knyaz Suvorov 's steering so that she fell out of formation . During this time , Mikasa was the focus of the Russian fire as the leading ship in the Japanese column and was hit by 6 twelve @-@ inch and 19 six @-@ inch shells . They did very little damage and Tōgō was able to cross the T of the Russian squadrons . Knyaz Suvorov 's steering was later repaired , but she blundered between the Japanese and Russian fleets several times later in the battle and Mikasa fired three torpedoes at her to no avail . Later in the battle , the ship appears to have fired mostly on the battleship Borodino although Fuji fired the shots that caused the Russian ship 's magazines to explode and sink her . At 18 : 04 , a twelve @-@ inch shell detonated prematurely in the barrel of the right gun of the forward turret , disabling the gun and knocking out the left gun until 18 : 40 . Another twelve @-@ inch shell had exploded in that same barrel almost two hours earlier , but had not damaged the gun . One six @-@ inch gun jammed after firing 19 rounds , but the only other damage to any of the ship 's guns was one six @-@ inch gun that was disabled by a Russian shell of the same size that entered through the gunport . She fired 124 twelve @-@ inch shells during the battle , more than any other ship except Asahi 's 142 . In total , Mikasa was hit more than 40 times during the battle , including 10 twelve @-@ inch and 22 six @-@ inch shells , but none of them seriously damaged her . While Mikasa 's casualties are not precisely known , the entire Japanese force combined only lost 110 men killed and 590 wounded to all causes during the battle . 
 Six days after the Treaty of Portsmouth that ended the war was signed , Mikasa sank at her moorings after a fire and magazine explosion at Sasebo on the night of 11 / 12 September 1905 that killed 251 crewmen . She was refloated on 7 August 1906 , reconstructed and repaired at Sasebo Naval Arsenal . The navy took the opportunity to upgrade her existing armament with more powerful 45 @-@ calibre twelve @-@ inch and six @-@ inch guns during the two years it took to repair the ship . Mikasa was restored to active service on 24 August 1908 . During World War I , she served on coast @-@ defence duties , based at Maizuru , during 1914 – 15 and was then assigned to the Second and Fifth Squadrons , in that order , for the rest of the war . The ship supported the Japanese intervention in Siberia during the Russian Civil War during 1921 and was reclassified on 1 September 1921 as a first @-@ class coast @-@ defence ship . On 17 September , Mikasa ran aground near Askold Island off Vladivostok , but was not seriously damaged . 
 = = = Preservation = = = 
 The ship was decommissioned on 23 September 1923 following the Washington Naval Treaty of 1922 and scheduled for destruction . However , at the request of the Japanese government , each of the signatory countries to the treaty agreed that Mikasa could be preserved as a memorial ship with her hull encased in concrete . On 12 November 1926 , Mikasa was opened for display in Yokosuka in the presence of the Crown Prince , Prince Hirohito and Tōgō . Following the surrender of Japan in 1945 , the ship deteriorated under control of the occupation forces , but was restored after another campaign led by the Japan Times and Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz that allowed the ship to reopen in 1961 . On 5 August 2009 , Mikasa was repainted by sailors from USS Nimitz . 
 Mikasa is remembered in Barrow @-@ in @-@ Furness , the town of its construction , by Mikasa Street on Walney Island . 
 = Akshardham ( Delhi ) = 
 Akshardham or Swaminarayan Akshardham complex is a Hindu mandir , and a spiritual @-@ cultural campus in New Delhi , India . Also referred to as Delhi Akshardham or Swaminarayan Akshardham , the complex displays millennia of traditional Hindu and Indian culture , spirituality , and architecture . 
 The temple , which attracts approximately 70 percent of all tourists who visit Delhi , was officially opened on 6 November 2005 by Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam . It sits near the banks of the Yamuna adjacent to the 2010 Commonwealth Games village in eastern New Delhi . The temple , at the centre of the complex , was built according to the Vastu shastra and Pancharatra shastra . 
 The complex features an <unk> Mandap , <unk> Anand water show , a thematic garden and three exhibitions namely Sahajanand Darshan ( Hall of Values ) , Neelkanth Darshan ( an IMAX film on the early life of Swaminarayan as the teenage yogi , Neelkanth ) , and <unk> Darshan ( cultural boat ride ) . According to Swaminarayan Hinduism , the word Akshardham means the abode of God and believed by followers as a temporal home of God on earth . 
 = = Features = = 
 = = = Akshardham Mandir = = = 
 The main attraction of the Swaminarayan Akshardham complex is the Akshardham Mandir . It rises 141 @-@ foot ( 43 m ) high , spans 316 @-@ foot ( 96 m ) wide , and extends 356 @-@ foot ( 109 m ) long . It is intricately carved with flora , fauna , dancers , musicians , and deities . 
 Designed in accordance with the standards of Maharishi Vastu Architecture , it features a blend of architectural styles across India . It is entirely constructed from Rajasthani pink sandstone and Italian Carrara marble . Based on traditional Hindu architectural guidelines ( Shilpa shastras ) on maximum temple life span , it makes no use of ferrous metal . Thus , it has no support from steel or concrete . 
 The mandir also consists of 234 ornately carved pillars , nine domes , and 20 @,@ 000 murtis of sadhus , devotees , and acharyas . The mandir also features the Gajendra <unk> at its base , a plinth paying tribute to the elephant for its importance in Hindu culture and India 's history . It contains 148 life sized elephants in total weighing a total of 3000 tons . 
 Under the temple 's central dome lies the 11 @-@ foot ( <unk> ) high murti of Swaminarayan seated in <unk> to whom the temple is dedicated . Swaminarayan is surrounded by images of the faith 's lineage of Gurus depicted either in a devotional posture or in a posture of service . Each murti is made of <unk> <unk> or five metals in accordance to Hindu tradition . The temple also houses the murtis of Sita Ram , Radha Krishna , Shiv Parvati , and Lakshmi Narayan . 
 = = = Exhibits = = = 
 = = = = Sahajanand Darshan [ Hall of Values ] = = = = 
 The Hall of Values features lifelike robotics and dioramas which display incidents from Swaminarayan 's life , portraying his message about the importance of peace , harmony , humility , service to others and devotion to God . Set in 18th century India , the audience experiences eternal messages gleaned from ancient Hindu culture such as non ‐ violence , vegetarianism , perseverance , prayers , morality , and family harmony through 15 3 @-@ D dioramas which make use of state of the art robotics , fibre optics , light and sound effects , dialogues , and music . The hall also features the world 's smallest animatronic robot in the form of Ghanshyam Maharaj , the child form of Swaminarayan . 
 = = = = Nilkanth Darshan [ Theatre ] = = = = 
 The theatre houses Delhi 's first and only large format screen , measuring 85 @-@ foot ( 26 m ) by 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) . The theatre shows a 40 @-@ minute film specially commissioned for the complex , Neelkanth Yatra , to recount a seven @-@ year pilgrimage made by Swaminarayan made during his teenage years throughout India . Mystic India , an international version of the film produced by BAPS Charities , was released in 2005 at IMAX theatres and giant screen cinemas worldwide . A 27 @-@ foot ( 8 @.@ 2 m ) tall bronze murti of Neelkanth Varni is located outside the theatre . 
 = = = = <unk> Vihar [ Boat Ride ] = = = = 
 The Boat Ride is a 15 @-@ minute journey through 10 @,@ 000 years glorious heritage , using life size figures and robotics to depict life in Vedic India , from family life to bazaars and teaching . It also shows the contributions of Vedic Indians to various fields such as science , astronomy , arts , literature , yoga , mathematics , etc. by eminent persons like mathematician @-@ astronomers Aryabhata and <unk> , grammarian Pāṇini , contributors to the ancient art and science of Ayurveda like Sushruta and Charaka , Classical Sanskrit writer Kālidāsa , philosopher , economist and royal advisor <unk> , among others . It shows the world 's first university , <unk> and the subjects taught there such as horse riding and warfare . It moves on to the Middle Ages to Sufi saints like Kabir and saints from the Bhakti movement such as Meera and Ramananda and then to recent times highlighting the contributions of modern Indian mathematicians such as Jagadish Chandra Bose , Srinivasa Ramanujan , C. V. Raman and Satyendra Nath Bose and philosophers like Swami Vivekananda . 
 = = = = Musical fountain = = = = 
 Musical fountain , also Known as the <unk> Kund , is India 's largest step well . It features a very large series of steps down to a traditional ' yagna kund ' . During the day , these steps provide rest for the visitors to the complex and at night , a musical fountain show representing the circle of life is played to an audience which is seated on the same steps . The fountain is named after the founder of the Hindu organisation , <unk> Maharaj . The fountain measures 300 feet ( 91 m ) by 300 feet ( 91 m ) with 2 @,@ 870 steps and 108 small shrines . In its centre lies an eight @-@ petaled lotus shaped yagna kund designed according to the <unk> Samhita of the <unk> shastra . 
 = = = = Garden of India = = = = 
 Also known as the Bharat <unk> , this garden has lush manicured lawns , trees , and shrubs . The garden is lined with bronze sculptures of contributors to India 's culture and history . These sculptures include children , women , national figures , freedom fighters , and warriors of India , including notable figures such as Mahatma Gandhi . 
 = = = Additional features = = = 
 = = = = Yogi <unk> Kamal = = = = 
 A sunken garden , shaped like a lotus when viewed from above , features large stones engraved with quotes from world luminaries ranging from Shakespeare and Martin Luther King to Swami Vivekananda and Swaminarayan . 
 = = = = Nilkanth Abhishek = = = = 
 Devotees offer <unk> , a ritual of pouring water on to the murti of Nilkanth Varni , and express their reverence and prayers for spiritual upliftment and fulfilment of wishes . 
 = = = = Narayan Sarovar = = = = 
 The Narayan Sarovar is a lake that surrounds the main monument . The lake contains holy waters from 151 rivers and lakes that are believed to have been sanctified by Swaminarayan , including Mansarovar . Surrounding the Narayan Sarovar are 108 <unk> , symbolising <unk> <unk> or the 108 names for god , from which holy water issues forth . 
 = = = = Premvati <unk> = = = = 
 The <unk> <unk> or the Premvati Food Court is a vegetarian restaurant modelled on the Ajanta and Ellora caves in Maharashtra , India and an Ayurvedic bazaar . The restaurant caters a variety of traditional dishes . 
 = = = = AARSH Centre = = = = 
 The Akshardham Centre for Applied Research in Social Harmony or the AARSH Centre is a centre within the complex that applies research of social harmony and related topics . Scholars and students may conduct practical research through AARSH . Researchers have the ability to carry out their research projects and affiliate their papers with AARSH . Studies on education , medicare , tribal and rural welfare , ecology , and culture are conducted within the centre . 
 = = Planning and development = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The building had been planned since 1968 as a vision of Yogiji Maharaj . Yogiji Maharaj , the spiritual head of the BAPS Swaminarayan Sanstha at the time , expressed his desire for wanting a grand temple built on the banks of the Yamuna river to two or three devotee families of Swaminarayan that resided in New Delhi at the time . Attempts were made to start the project , however little progress was made . In 1971 , Yogiji Maharaj died . 
 In 1982 , Pramukh Swami Maharaj , Yogiji Maharaj 's successor as the spiritual head of BAPS , started to continue fulfilling the dream of his guru Yogiji Maharaj and prompted devotees to look into the possibility of building the temple in Delhi . A request for the plan was put forward to the Delhi Development Authority ( DDA ) , and several different places were suggested , including Ghaziabad , Gurgaon , and Faridabad . Pramukh Swami Maharaj stood firm in following the wishes of Yogiji Maharaj to build a temple on the Yamuna . 
 In April 2000 , after 18 years , the Delhi Development Authority offered 60 acres ( 240 @,@ 000 m2 ) of land , and the Uttar Pradesh Government offered 30 acres ( 120 @,@ 000 m2 ) for the project . Upon receiving the land , Pramukh Swami Maharaj performed puja on the site for success in the project . Construction on the temple began on 8 November 2000 and Akshardham was officially opened on 6 November 2005 , with the building being completed in two days short of five years . 
 = = = Environmental Clearance = = = 
 An amendment to the Government of India 's Environment Impact Assessment Notification of 1994 was made in 2004 , which required that environmental clearance be granted to any parcel of land that falls under the Yamuna floodplain before beginning any construction activities . Since Akshardham commenced construction activities in 2000 , prior to the enactment of this amendment , it did not apply to Akshardham . However certain NGOs and activists felt that the temple was constructed without obtaining the necessary environmental clearances . On January 2005 , the U.P. Employees Federation presented their case before the Supreme Court of India that the temple had not obtained necessary environmental clearances and that it would be harmful to the environment . After hearing the case , the Supreme Court observed that in the construction of Akshardham , all the Land Use Plans had been adhered to and clearance of expert bodies like the Central Water Commission and the National Environment Engineering Research Institute has been obtained . Thus , the Supreme Court ruled that the Akshardham construction was lawful and did not violate environmental norms . Despite this ruling , some activists and politicians continued to assert that the Akshardham construction was illegal and posed a threat to the Yamuna River floodplains . In a 2009 ruling on a related issue , the Supreme Court further clarified that it rejected as false the assertions that Akshardham did not have environmental permissions and was harmful to the Yamuna riverbed . It reiterated its earlier 2005 Ruling that Akshardham had received all necessary environmental permissions from Central Water Commission and <unk> , which is an autonomous body , and that the Akshardham site was not located on the Yamuna “ riverbed ” or “ floodplain ” , but 1700 meters away from the Yamuna River bank . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 A team of eight sadhus were assigned to oversee the Akshardham project . The majority of the team had gained experience from work on the Akshardham in Gandhinagar , Gujarat , Delhi Akshardham 's sister complex . During development , Pramukh Swami Maharaj was consulted in many aspects of the monument 's construction . 
 Around 1997 and 1998 , the idea to start development on the temple , by beginning the stone carving , had been requested . However , this idea was denied by Pramukh Swami Maharaj who believed that the construction should only start after the land was acquired . The initial work done on the site was on the foundation . Due to the soft river bank , the site wasn 't considered ideal for construction . As a result , a deep foundation was imperative . To construct a stable foundation , 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) of rocks and sand were entwined with wire mesh and topped by five feet of concrete . Five million fired bricks raised the foundation another 21 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 6 m ) . These bricks were then topped by three more feet of concrete to form the main support under the monument . 
 On 2 July 2001 , the first sculpted stone was laid . The team of eight sadhus consisted of scholars in the field of the Pancharatra Shastra , a Hindu scripture on architecture and deity carving . The sadhus watched over stone work as well as the research on carvings on Indian craftsmanship from between eighth and twelfth century . This research was done at various sites such as Angkor Wat , as well as Jodhpur , Jagannath Puri , Konark & temples of Bhubaneswar of Odisha and other temples in South India . 
 Seven thousand carvers and three thousand volunteers were put to work for the construction Akshardham . With over 6 @,@ 000 tons of pink sandstone coming from Rajasthan , workshop sites were set up around places within the state . Amongst the carvers were local farmers and fifteen hundred tribal women who had suffered from a drought and received economic gain due to this work . The initial stone cutting was done by machine , while the detailed carvings were done by hand . Every night , over one hundred trucks were sent to Akshardham , where four thousand workers and volunteers operated on the construction site . 
 = = = Opening Ceremony = = = 
 Akshardham was consecrated on 6 November 2005 by Pramukh Swami Maharaj and ceremoniously dedicated to the nation by the President of India , Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam , the Prime Minister , Manmohan Singh , and the Leader of the Opposition in the Indian Parliament , Lal Krishna Advani , with the presence of 25 @,@ 000 guests . After touring the central monument , president Kalam then gave a speech on where Akshardham fits with society , and finished by saying , 
 " Pramukh Swamiji Maharaj has inspired thousands of people across the country and abroad and brought together the best of the minds for creating a beautiful cultural complex . It has become a place of education , experience and enlightenment . It creatively blends the traditional stone art and architecture , Indian culture and civilisation , ancient values and wisdom and the best of modern media and technology . Multiple layers of this complex expresses the strength of the mind , willpower of the human being , indomitable spirit , flowering kindness , fusion of scientific and medical talent , myriad colors of varied cultures and ultimately the power of knowledge . In essence , it is a dynamic complex with lively images . 
 ... Akshardham has happened at the dawn of 21st century with the commitment and dedication of one million volunteers . What has happened today at Akshardham inspires me and gives me the confidence that we can do it ? The realisation of developed India is certainly possible before 2020 with the millions of ignited minds like you . " 
 Prime Minister Singh followed by hoping that this would usher in religious tolerance and praised the architecture of the complex . He made note of it becoming a future landmark of India while L. K. Advani called it " the most unique monument of the world . " Pramukh Swami Maharaj ended the night 's speeches and expressed the wish that , " In this Akshardham , may one and all find inspiration to mould their lives and may their lives become divine . Such is my prayer to God . " 
 = = = <unk> renovation and other events = = = 
 On 13 July 2010 , a newly designed <unk> , or inner sanctum , was inaugurated by Pramukh Swami Maharaj in the main monument within the Akshardham complex . The new <unk> includes a decorated , canopied <unk> , upon which the murti of Swaminarayan rests and features intricate carvings and gold @-@ leafed designs . 
 Akshardham served as a featured attraction during the 2010 Commonwealth Games held in Delhi . Through the duration of the Games , hundreds of athletes , teams , and enthusiasts from around the world visited the complex . On 14 November 2010 , the Swaminarayan Research Institute at Akshardham was inaugurated through an event organised by the women 's faction of the organisation , highlighting the value of <unk> , or socially beneficial volunteer efforts , in society through <unk> , churches , mosques , and other places of worship . 
 = = Guinness world record = = 
 On 17 December 2007 , Michael Whitty , an official world record adjudicator for Guinness World Record , travelled to Ahmedabad , India to present a new world record to Pramukh Swami Maharaj , the spiritual leader of BAPS Swaminarayan Sanstha , for the Akshardham complex . 
 The record was presented for Akshardham as the World 's Largest Comprehensive Hindu Temple ( certificate ) . 
 The certificate states , 
 " BAPS Swaminarayan Akshardham in New Delhi , India , is the world 's largest comprehensive Hindu temple . It measures 356 ft ( 109 m ) . long , 316 ft ( 96 m ) . wide and 141 ft ( 43 m ) . high , covering an area of 86 @,@ 342 sq ft ( 8 @,@ 021 @.@ 4 m2 ) . The grand , ancient @-@ style , ornately hand @-@ carved stone temple has been built without structural steel within five years by 11 @,@ 000 artisans and volunteers . Pramukh Swami , revered spiritual leader of BAPS , consecrated the temple on 6 November 2005 . Akshardham showcases the essence of India 's ageless art , borderless culture and timeless values . 
 Upon presentation of the award , Michael Whitty stated , " It took us three months of research , poring over the extensive architectural plans of the Akshardham and also those of other temples of comparable size , visiting and inspecting the site , before we were convinced that Akshardham deserved the title ... " 
 = = = Disputes = = = 
 Three temples , the Meenakshi Amman Temple in Madurai , the Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple in Srirangam , and the Annamalaiyar Temple in Thiruvannamalai , all located in Tamil Nadu , India , are claimed to be larger than Akshardham . The trustees of these temples have reportedly disputed the Guinness World Record . 
 The Meenakshi temple in Madurai has the length of 850 feet ( 260 m ) and width of 800 feet ( 240 m ) . The entire area of this temple is 17 acres ( 0 @.@ 069 km2 ) , while the Sri Ranganathaswamy temple in Srirangam covers 15 @.@ 6 acres ( 0 @.@ 063 km2 ) and the <unk> Temple in Thiruvannamalai is 24 acres ( 0 @.@ 097 km2 ) . Authorities at the Meenakshi temple have argued that construction area of the actual temple is more important than the land area . 
 Authorities at the Meenakshi temple have also argued that temples are places for worship and therefore additional features and exhibitions are not components of a temple . According to <unk> , use of modern and most sophisticated technology is characteristic of BAPS . In Modern Transmission of Hindu Traditions in India and Abroad , a former Leicester professor in the Religion Department , Douglas <unk> , points out BAPS ' concern to transmit comprehensive Hindu tradition in the twentieth @-@ century . He observes that the teachings are indeed transmitted , but the transmission mode " has to be sensitive to the needs of the times " . 
 = 2002 FA Cup Final = 
 The 2002 FA Cup Final was a football match between Arsenal and Chelsea on 4 May 2002 at the Millennium Stadium , Cardiff . It was the final match of the 2001 – 02 FA Cup , the 120th season of the world 's oldest football knockout competition , the FA Cup . Arsenal were appearing in their fifteenth final to Chelsea 's seventh . 
 As both teams were in the highest tier of English football , the Premier League , they entered the competition in the third round . Matches up to the semi @-@ final were contested on a one @-@ off basis , with a replay taking place if the match ended in a draw . Arsenal 's progress was relatively comfortable ; they knocked out the holders Liverpool in the fourth round , but needed a replay to beat Newcastle United . After overcoming replays in the first two rounds and a difficult tie against Preston North End , Chelsea recorded an impressive win against Tottenham Hotspur . Both teams won their semi @-@ final match by a single goal . 
 Graeme Le Saux and Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink were passed fit for Chelsea , but John Terry was omitted from the starting lineup , having woken up ill on the morning of the final . For Arsenal , goalkeeper David Seaman came in place of Richard Wright , who deputised for him in the earlier rounds of the competition . Chelsea were led onto the field by Roberto Di Matteo , who had been forced to retire from football earlier in the season due to a serious injury . After an uneventful first half , Chelsea settled much the quicker of the two and created several chances to score . Arsenal withstood the pressure and took the lead in the 70th minute , when Ray Parlour scored from 25 yards . They made sure of victory after Fredrik Ljungberg scored from a similar distance . 
 The final took place with one week remaining in the Premier League calendar . Arsenal beat Manchester United a few days later to regain the league title and complete their second league and cup double under manager Arsène Wenger . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 The FA Cup is English football 's primary cup competition . Clubs in the Premier League enter the FA Cup in the third round and are drawn randomly out of a hat with the remaining clubs . If a match is drawn , a replay comes into force , ordinarily at the ground of the team who were away for the first game . As with league fixtures , FA Cup matches are subject to change in the event of games being selected for television coverage and this often can be influenced by clashes with other competitions . 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 Arsenal entered the competition in the third round and was drawn to play Watford of the First Division . They took the lead in the eighth minute , where good play by Nwankwo Kanu allowed Thierry Henry to round goalkeeper Alec Chamberlain and tap the ball into the empty goal . The lead was doubled two minutes later : Kanu again found Henry , who " unselfishly squared the ball to midfielder Fredrik Ljungberg for another tap @-@ in . " Gifton Noel @-@ Williams moments later halved the scoreline , heading the ball in from a Gary <unk> cross . After squandering numerous chances to increase their lead , Arsenal added a late third and fourth goal from Kanu and Dennis Bergkamp , before Marcus Gayle scored what was a mere consolation for Watford in stoppage time . 
 Arsenal faced cup holders Liverpool at home in the following round . A solitary goal scored by Bergkamp in the 27th minute saw the home side progress in a match layered with controversy : Martin Keown , Bergkamp and Liverpool 's Jamie Carragher were all sent off in the space of ten minutes , the latter for hurling back a coin at the crowd . Against Gillingham in the fifth round , Arsenal twice had their lead cancelled out , before Tony Adams scored the winning goal of the match . 
 Arsenal played Newcastle United in the sixth round on 9 March 2002 . It was the second meeting between both teams in a week , and in spite of Arsenal winning the first fixture and scoring the opener in the cup tie , Newcastle held them to a 1 – 1 draw . A replay was scheduled two weeks later at noon . Arsenal won by three goals to nil , but during the match lost Robert Pirès to injury ; he was ruled out for the remainder of the season with medial knee ligament damage . An own goal by Middlesbrough 's Gianluca Festa , from an Henry free @-@ kick , was enough for Arsenal to win the semi @-@ final . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 Chelsea 's route to the final began in the third round , with a trip to Carrow Road to face Norwich City . An uneventful tie , with Carlo Cudicini making a series of saves to deny Norwich finished goalless and was replayed at Stamford Bridge . Goals from Mario Stanić and Frank Lampard put Chelsea in a commanding lead and Gianfranco Zola scored the team 's third with a unique piece of skill . From a corner , the Italian made a near @-@ post run and flicked the ball airborne . Chelsea finished the match 4 – 0 winners and were drawn to face West Ham United in the next round . Frédéric <unk> 's late goal cancelled out Jimmy Floyd Hasselbaink 's opener for Chelsea and the tie was replayed at Upton Park the following Wednesday night . West Ham went a goal up when Jermain Defoe scored for West Ham , but their lead was short @-@ lived as Hasselbaink directly from a free @-@ kick . Defoe restored the home side 's advantage in the 50th minute , though substitute Mikael Forssell came on to equalise for Chelsea and in stoppage time John Terry headed @-@ in goalwards from a corner to complete the visitors comeback . 
 In the fifth round Chelsea played Preston North End at home . The visitors started well and took the lead in the sixth minute through Richard Cresswell . Cudicini 's timely save denied Jon Macken from extending Preston 's lead soon after and Chelsea responded to the setback with an equaliser , scored by Eiður Guðjohnsen . Chelsea led after 26 minutes , but came close to conceding late on when Macken was denied once again by Cudicini . Forssell then scored Chelsea 's third to settle the home side 's nerves . 
 Chelsea travelled to White Hart Lane to face Tottenham Hotspur in the sixth round . The team finished the tie as comfortable 4 – 0 winners , never looking as though they would crumble once William Gallas scored inside 12 minutes . The one negative from their performance was the dismissal of Graeme Le Saux for a second bookable offence in the second half . Local rivals Fulham were Chelsea 's semi @-@ final opponents . A scrappy match , which saw Fulham dominate much of the play but creating little , was settled in Chelsea 's favour . Terry scored just before half time , heading the ball through the legs of Louis Saha standing in Fulham 's goal . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 Arsenal were appearing in the final of the FA Cup for the fifteenth time , and for the second consecutive year . They had won the cup seven times previously ( in 1930 , 1936 , 1950 , 1971 , 1979 , 1993 and 1998 ) and were beaten in the final seven times , the most recent in last season 's showpiece event . By comparison , Chelsea were making their seventh appearance in a FA Cup final . The club won the cup three times ( 1970 , 1997 and 2000 ) and lost the same number of finals ( 1915 , 1967 and 1994 ) . Arsenal and Chelsea had previously met fourteen times in the FA Cup , including four replays . Arsenal had a slender advantage in those meetings , winning five times to Chelsea 's four , and defeated their London rivals a season ago in the fifth round of the competition . 
 The most recent meeting between the two teams was in the Premier League on Boxing Day , when Arsenal came from behind to beat Chelsea . Arsenal were unbeaten domestically since December 2001 and on course to complete their first league and cup double in four years . Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger was buoyant his team would complete the task on hand : " We have been facing cup games in the league every week for a long time and this is just another . Chelsea will be a difficult team to beat if they are at their best on Saturday , but such is the confidence in this squad , we just feel we can win every game . " When asked what he made of Sir Alex Ferguson 's comments that Manchester United played the best football in England , Wenger retorted : " What do you want me to say ? Everybody thinks he has the prettiest wife . " The Arsenal manager was undecided whether to drop Richard Wright who started in every round of the FA Cup for David Seaman and to recall Sol Campbell who recovered from a hamstring injury . 
 Chelsea manager Claudio Ranieri felt his team 's participation in the cup final showed " ... we are building something . It gives the young players confidence . " He noted their defence conceded fewer goals than the previous season , and targeted an improvement to their away record for the next campaign . Ranieri described the match against Arsenal as evenly balanced , adding : " Winning the FA Cup would make up for missing out on the Champions League . If the team can win , they will believe in themselves , but if they don 't , it won 't be the worst setback to the building process . " Le Saux resumed training having been absent with a calf injury , but Hasselbaink was a doubt for the final with a similar problem . 
 The semi @-@ finals at Villa Park and Old Trafford presented traffic problems and lengthy delays for supporters going to and from the grounds . The Mayor of London , Ken Livingstone had written to the FA , expressing his concern about the possible travel chaos and urging to be kept briefed on the arrangements . Train tickets were sold out since the semi @-@ final round , despite the addition of services to accommodate 7 @,@ 000 extra passengers . Both clubs laid on six planes to take its supporters directly to Cardiff at £ 135 each . Although the M4 was busy on the day of the final , there was little traffic with no major delays . A spokesman for South Wales Police reported : " The motorways are clear , despite the predictions . People seem to have taken our advice and left early . " 
 As with last season 's event , the final was scheduled before the end of the domestic season . This was partly because the Premier League chose to end its campaign a week later , but with the World Cup starting on 31 May , the FA wanted to give players considerable time to prepare for the finals . This season 's staging of the competition offered a greater financial incentive to clubs , given the BBC and Sky Sports signed a joint @-@ deal with the FA , worth £ 400 million to broadcast matches . Finalists stood to receive £ 1 million in prize money ; the winners would pocket an extra million with additional TV revenues . The BBC spent a million promoting the FA Cup , and as part of their pre @-@ match coverage included a sketch featuring Ricky Gervais . Seat prices for the final exceeded £ 70 , with some ticket touts charging as much as £ 600 outside the stadium . 
 For their pre @-@ match walkabout , the Arsenal players wore Hugo Boss suits , whereas the Chelsea players were suited in Armani . Chelsea were allocated the south dressing room after a coin @-@ toss ; it was considered a " jinx " given the last nine football teams to use it had failed to win . The teams emerged from the tunnel once the traditional pre @-@ match anthem " Abide with Me " was performed and Chelsea were led by midfielder Roberto Di Matteo , who retired earlier in the season through injury . As the national anthem was sung by sextet Tenors and Divas , the Arsenal players and Wenger shuffled together and linked arms in a show of unity . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 On the day of the final Terry woke up with a virus which affected his balance . Although he passed a fitness test in the morning , Ranieri decided to start him on the bench , to which the defender later reflected : " It was a tough decision but he did what he felt was right . It seems like somebody up there doesn 't like me . " The teamsheets showed Gallas partnering Marcel Desailly in central defence , and Hasselbaink starting up front for Chelsea . Wright was named on the bench for Arsenal and Ray Parlour was positioned alongside Vieira in central midfield . Both teams lined up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation : a four @-@ man defence ( comprising two centre @-@ backs and left and right full @-@ backs ) , four midfielders ( two in the centre , and one on each wing ) and two centre @-@ forwards . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Within a minute of Chelsea kicking off the match , Le Saux was booked for a challenge on Lauren . Arsenal was awarded the first corner of the game in the eight minutes later , but nothing came out of it as Adams fouled Mario Melchiot in the penalty box . The opening half @-@ hour was mostly event @-@ free , with neither side dominating and few goalscoring opportunities fashioned . Chelsea adopted a tactic of narrowing the pitch and using little width , which sedated Arsenal 's typically fluent football . Guðjohnsen tested the Arsenal defence by making dangerous runs , but one in the 12th minute was ruled as a foul . Arsenal 's first chance came a minute later when Henry used his pace to run towards the Chelsea goal . He set up Sylvain Wiltord , whose shot was blocked by Desailly . Vieira struggled to match the energetic performance of his opponent Frank Lampard and in the 17th minute Vieira 's careless pass was intercepted by the England midfielder . Lampard decided to take a shot , forcing a save from Seaman . Four minutes later Vieira started a move which almost gave Arsenal the lead . A ball over the top found Bergkamp in the Chelsea area , but he guided his header just wide . In the 26th minute Vieira was awarded the final 's first yellow card for a foul on Guðjohnsen . A confrontation between Melchiot and Fredrik Ljungberg occurred in the 33rd minute , but referee Mike Riley decided not to brandish a card , instead choosing to have a few words with the players . Campbell 's failed clearance a minute later presented Guðjohnsen with goal @-@ scoring opportunity , but he hit his shot directly at Seaman . As the match drew nearer to half @-@ time , Arsenal started to find their rhythm and played their usual passing game . They created the best chance of the first half , when a cross from Wiltord found Lauren , who headed the ball just over the crossbar . Hasselbaink , largely ineffective as he was blighted with injury , combined with Guðjohnsen to split open the Arsenal defence , but the move was halted as Riley called offside . 
 Celestine <unk> , who had been struggling with an injury , played no further part in the final and was substituted before the second half commenced . Terry came on in his place to partner Desailly , which meant Gallas moved to left @-@ back . Arsenal resumed play and a shot by Henry was kept out by Cudicini . The scare brought Chelsea to life and resulted in the team enjoying their best spell of the match . Guðjohnsen 's effort in the 57th minute forced a save from Seaman , who tipped the ball over the bar . Jesper <unk> then roamed forward and played the ball to Le Saux , but the defender 's shot went well over . Chelsea continued to pile pressure on Arsenal ; <unk> 's pass intended for Hasselbaink in the 61st minute was intercepted just in time by Adams and Melchiot 's header unsettled Seaman in goal . Wiltord then collected the ball from midfield and played a one @-@ two with Henry , but directed his shot wide from the left flank . Chelsea made their second change in the 67th minute , bringing on Zola for Hasselbaink . The substitution did not have the desired effect as Arsenal went a goal ahead . Adams cleared the Chelsea danger and Wiltord 's reverse pass found Parlour with acres of space to manoeuvre . The midfielder advanced as the Chelsea defence backed off and looked up before curling the ball from 25 yards . His effort went over a diving Cudicini , into the top right @-@ hand corner of the Chelsea goal . 
 Wenger made a defensive @-@ minded change almost immediately , taking Bergkamp off for Edu . A clash between Henry and Terry in the 75th minute resulted in both players receiving a yellow card for unsporting behaviour . Winger Boudewijn Zenden replaced Melchiot a minute later ; the attacking change altered Chelsea 's positioning . With 10 minutes of normal time remaining Arsenal extended their lead , when Ljungberg scored . A similarly executed goal to Parlour 's , the Swede ran forward , evaded the challenge of Terry before curling the ball past Cudicini from the edge of the penalty area . Ljungberg was serenaded by the Arsenal crowd , who chanted " We love you Freddie , ' cos you 've got red hair . " Chelsea struggled to find a response ; Guðjohnsen 's foul on Parlour late on highlighted the team 's frustrations . Riley blew for full @-@ time after normal and stoppage time and the on @-@ pitch interviews commenced . Once Arsenal received their medals , Adams was given the cup and he shared the honour of lifting it with Vieira , his stand @-@ in captain . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Wenger praised his team 's character and told reporters : " We were very frustrated last year . We have shown a lot of strength to come back here – beating Liverpool and Newcastle on the way . " He was adamant Arsenal would win the league the following Wednesday : " This team knows how to win . I said three or four months ago that we will win the championship and the FA Cup . They really want to do it . And we will do it . " The goalscorers Parlour and Ljungberg both agreed winning at any cost was most important on the day , after the misery of the 2001 final . Ranieri described the first half as tactical , but admitted once Arsenal had scored , Chelsea struggled to make a comeback . He justified his decision to include Hasselbaink , saying " He is a great striker and a danger to the opposition . " Lampard credited Arsenal 's mental strength : " They can win when they are not playing particularly well . We need to find that consistency and if we can do that , I believe we will be up there with them soon . " He was pleased with his own performance against Vieira and hoped he did enough to be included in England 's World Cup squad . 
 Journalists and pundits reviewing the final unanimously agreed with the outcome of the match . Matt Dickinson wrote in The Times of 6 May 2002 : " The force is with Arsenal , but it is not some ethereal presence , rather a brutish will to win derived from both triumphs and disappointments . " The Daily Telegraph football correspondent Henry Winter was strongly critical of Ranieri 's selection @-@ making and suggested Chelsea 's failure was partly down to Hasselbaink 's lack of fitness , as there was no attacking threat . In contrast he commended Wenger 's tactics – " The decision by Arsenal 's intelligent manager to deploy Parlour through the middle was a spectacular success , " and praised their players ' mental strength and resilience . The Guardian 's David Lacey also lauded Parlour 's show in midfield , ranking his goal as one of the best in Cup final history . Although he agreed with the media consensus that the final was a drab affair and Arsenal 's performance was not to their standard , he picked out several high @-@ quality moments that the losing finalists failed to match , one in particular a timed @-@ ball from Vieira . Glenn Moore of The Independent observed how Wenger turned his team of also @-@ <unk> into winners , noting the manager 's decision to play Adams " bore fruit " as the defence dealt with Chelsea 's increasing second @-@ half pressure . Football pundit Alan Hansen called Arsenal his team of the season and believed their win was built on the experience of Adams and Seaman ; of the former he wrote : " Adams was also able to operate with the confidence that his goalkeeper was never going to make any mistakes . " 
 The match was broadcast live in the United Kingdom by both the BBC and Sky Sports , with BBC One providing the free @-@ to @-@ air coverage and Sky Sports 2 being the pay @-@ TV alternative . BBC One held the majority of the viewership , with an overnight peak audience of 7 @.@ 4 million viewers – it received a final rating of 8 @.@ 3 million . The match itself was watched by 6 @.@ 3 million viewers ( 52 % viewing share ) and coverage of the final averaged at 4 @.@ 1 million ( 44 @.@ 4 % ) . By comparison ITV 's coverage of the 2002 UEFA Champions League Final averaged 6 @.@ 8 million viewers , though with a lower viewing share ( 33 @.@ 3 % ) . The cup final ratings , a record low , were defended by the FA spokesman Paul Newman : " We are very pleased because the final peaked at <unk> which is pretty good for a hot Saturday in the middle of a bank holiday weekend . " A list compiled by the London Evening Standard showed the 2002 final came bottom in the season 's top 10 viewed football matches . 
 Four days later Arsenal defeated Manchester United to complete their third double in the club 's history . Arsenal paraded both trophies on an open @-@ top bus once the season drew to a close ; Dixon at Islington Town Hall addressed the crowd and personally thanked his staff , teammates and the club supporters . Chelsea 's season ended with defeat to Aston Villa in the league . They moved down a place to sixth as a result of Leeds United 's win against Middlesbrough . 
 = Hurricane Earl ( 1998 ) = 
 Hurricane Earl was an atypical , short @-@ lived Category 2 hurricane that caused moderate damage throughout the Southeast United States . It formed out of a poorly organized tropical disturbance over the southwest Gulf of Mexico late on August 31 , 1998 . Tracking towards the northeast , the storm quickly intensified into a hurricane on September 2 and made landfall early the next day near Panama City , Florida . Rapidly tracking towards Atlantic Canada , the extratropical remnants of Earl significantly intensified before passing over Newfoundland on September 6 . The remnants were absorbed by former Hurricane Danielle two days later . 
 Moderate beach erosion occurred along the coasts of Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , and Florida as waves reached 20 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Throughout Florida , nearly 2 @,@ 000 homes were damaged and a few were destroyed . Severe flooding caused by storm surge and heavy rains was the main cause of damage in the state . Offshore , two men drowned after their boat capsized during the storm . A minor tornado outbreak took place in relation to Earl in Florida , Georgia , South Carolina , and North Carolina . A tornado in South Carolina killed one person after completely destroying the occupants home . In all , three people were killed by Earl and damages were $ 79 million ( 1998 USD ; $ 104 @.@ 4 million 2009 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Earl originated out of a strong tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on August 17 . By August 23 , a weak area of low pressure developed within the wave and well @-@ developed convective activity was present as it tracked through the Lesser Antilles . Once in the Caribbean Sea , strong wind shear produced by the outflow of Hurricane Bonnie inhibited further development of the system . As it remained well @-@ defined , satellites easily followed the low pressure into the Gulf of Mexico . By August 31 , the storm had become sufficiently organized for the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) to classify it as Tropical Depression Five . At this time , the depression was located roughly halfway between Merida and Tampico , Mexico . 
 Operationally , the NHC immediately classified the system as Tropical Storm Earl based on a Hurricane Hunter Reconnaissance mission that found flight @-@ level winds of 49 mph ( 79 km / h ) , corresponding to surface winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Due to the existence of multiple circulation centers , the initial movement of the storm was uncertain , but forecasters anticipated a general northward movement . In post @-@ season analysis , it was determined that the system intensified into Tropical Storm Earl while located about 575 miles ( 925 km ) south @-@ southwest of New Orleans . Initial advisories on Earl relocated the center of circulation several times before focusing on the true circulation center . 
 By September 1 , the storm began to consolidate , with reconnaissance flights finding an elongated center and surface winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . Moderate wind shear inhibited convective development in the western portion ; however , outflow in other areas of the storm improved , leading to further development . A northwest track , fully identified by this time as a mid @-@ tropospheric ridge located over Florida , strengthened . Remaining disorganized , Earl continued to intensify as the center of circulation was located close to deep convection . The NHC stated in their fifth advisory on the storm that Earl did not appear to be fully tropical due to the lack of organization . Around 1200 UTC on September 2 , Earl intensified into a hurricane despite having an atypical structure ; the wind field of the storm was asymmetric and the strongest winds were located well to the southeast of the center . 
 Several hours after becoming a hurricane , Earl further intensified into a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ; this observation was based on a flight @-@ level winds of 119 mph ( 192 km / h ) , which corresponded to surface winds of 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) . The storm did not feature an eye or partial eyewall . The central barometric pressure continued to fall despite the fact that the storm was beginning to weaken . Around 0000 UTC on September 3 , the central pressure decreased to 985 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 09 inHg ) ; however , winds also decreased to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . As Earl neared landfall , cloud tops significantly warmed , indicating weakening , and the overall structure of the storm became less organized . 
 Around 0600 UTC ( 1 : 00 am EDT ) on September 3 , Hurricane Earl made landfall near Panama City , Florida with winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Shortly after landfall , the storm weakened to a tropical storm and rapidly accelerated as it quickly underwent an extratropical transition . By this time the NHC issued their final advisory on Earl . Several hours later , Earl finished its transition and continued to rapidly track through the Southeast United States . After entering the Atlantic Ocean , the remnants of Earl began re @-@ intensify due to the effects of a baroclinic zone . Relatively cool sea surface temperatures near Atlantic Canada prevented tropical development ; however , during a 36 @-@ hour span , Earl rapidly intensified , as the central barometric pressure decreased by 40 mbar ( hPa ; 1 @.@ 18 inHg ) to 957 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 26 inHg ) . By the time the system made landfall over eastern Newfoundland , sustained winds had intensified to 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) . On September 8 , the remnants of Earl significantly weakened and were soon absorbed by a larger extratropical cyclone associated with the remnants of Hurricane Danielle . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 As Earl tracked towards the northeastern Gulf of Mexico on September 1 , a hurricane warning was issued for coastal areas between Pascagoula , Mississippi and Cameron , Louisiana . Additionally , hurricane watches extended out to Destin , Florida and High Island , Texas from the edges of the warning respectively . Early the next day , a tropical storm warning was issued for areas between Pascagoula , Mississippi and Destin , Florida . In response to the eastward movement of the hurricane , the hurricane watch and warning was discontinued for areas west of Morgan City , Louisiana . Additionally , the hurricane warning was extended eastward to Destin , Florida , a tropical storm warning was issued east of Destin to Apalachicola , Florida , and a tropical storm watch was declared for areas between Morgan City and Cameron , Louisiana . Several hours later , the hurricane warning was again extended eastward to the mouth of the Suwannee River . All watches and warnings were discontinued for areas west of Pascagoula , Mississippi and due to the asymmetrical structure of Hurricane Earl , a tropical storm warning was issued as far south as the Florida Keys . Continuing uncertainty in the track of Earl prompted the issuance of a hurricane watch and tropical storm warning for areas between Pascagoula , Mississippi and Grand Isle , Louisiana , including the city of New Orleans . After Earl made landfall in Florida , all watches and warnings were discontinued in relation to the storm . 
 Offshore , several oil and natural gas rigs were evacuated due to the proximity of Earl . An estimated 10 @,@ 000 workers were evacuated from both onshore and offshore rigs . The storm forced many Florida residences to evacuate , especially people living in the barrier islands along the Florida Gulf Coast . About 30 Air Force jets from Eglin Air Force Base were sent to Oklahoma to protect them from the storm . A mandatory evacuation was issued for 20 @,@ 000 residents in Leon County as well as all barrier islands along the Florida coast due to the risk of substantial flooding . Franklin County was briefly under a mandatory evacuation order on September 2 , the reasons for the lifting of the order are unknown . State parks along the Florida Panhandle were also closed and highways became congested with thousands of residents and tourists evacuating the barrier islands . 
 Along the Louisiana coastline , voluntary evacuation orders were given out . A state of emergency was declared for portions of southeast Louisiana as tides in relation to the storm were forecast to reach 7 to 10 ft ( 2 @.@ 1 to 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Emergency shelters were opened throughout Plaquemines Parish , schools were closed in many areas , and the floodgates around New Orleans were shut . An estimated 5 @,@ 000 people evacuated to inland areas throughout Louisiana . In Nueces County , Texas , work crews worked quickly to clear garbage along the streets and picked up trash cans to avoid possible problems with clogged drains . Throughout the Alabama and Mississippi coasts , schools were closed due to the storm . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout the Southeast United States , Hurricane Earl killed three people and caused $ 79 million ( 1998 USD ; $ 104 @.@ 4 million 2009 USD ) in damages . 
 = = = Florida = = = 
 Ahead of Hurricane Earl 's landfall in Florida , several tornadoes were spawned along the outer bands of the storm . The first tornado to touch down was a brief F0 that caused no known damage . The second tornado , rated F1 , caused moderate damage to three homes and two buildings that were under @-@ construction along its 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) path . During a 15 @-@ minute span , three brief F0 tornadoes touched down in unpopulated areas , causing minor tree damage . Several hours later , a strong F1 tornado touched down in Port Canaveral . The tornado damaged 14 cars , eight condominiums , four businesses , a mobile home , and a fire station . In all , the tornado caused $ 6 million in damages and injured one person . On St. George Island , an F1 tornado damaged six homes , leaving $ 150 @,@ 000 in damages . High waves , estimated at 16 to 20 ft ( 4 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 1 m ) caused a boat to capsize off the coast of Panama City , drowning both occupants . 
 Upon making landfall in Florida early on September 3 , Earl produced a storm surge up to 12 ft ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in the Big Bend , inundating coastal communities . Torrential rains , peaking at 16 @.@ 36 in ( 416 mm ) around Panama City , fell throughout the Florida Panhandle . Significant beach erosion was recorded in Walton County , Carrabelle Beach and Alligator Point . The most extensive damage occurred in Bay County where 1 @,@ 112 structures damaged by flooding and three were destroyed . In Panama City , upwards of 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of water flooded homes . An estimated 7 @,@ 100 residents in Bay County lost power during the storm . Florida officials temporarily shut down numerous major roadways , including State Road 77 due to high water . Portions of two roads in coastal Liberty County were destroyed due to beach erosion . In Gulf County , 300 homes were damaged by high winds and floodwaters . An estimated 8 @,@ 700 people lost power in the county during the storm . At Port St. Joe , Earl 's storm surge inundated 14 businesses and caused a water main break in the Lighthouse Utilities facility . In Franklin County , storm surge damaged 136 homes and 15 businesses and led to a temporary closure of the St. George Causeway . A lighthouse on St. George Island was also destroyed by the storm . 
 At least 50 people were stranded in Alligator Point after floodwaters washed out the main access route to the town . In Wakulla County , 216 homes and businesses were damaged by high winds and flooding . Severe flooding in coastal Taylor County caused significant damage in nine communities . County officials reported that 66 structures were damaged by Earl . Five homes were destroyed and 39 others were damaged by flooding in Dixie County . In Highlands County , one person was injured after being struck by lightning . On September 3 , the strongest tornado spawned by Earl in Florida touched down in Citrus County . Rated F2 , the tornado tracked for 5 mi ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , destroying eight homes and damaging 24 others . Several trees and power lines were also downed . Two people were injured in one of the destroyed homes and damages from the tornado amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 . In all , Hurricane Earl killed two people and caused $ 73 million ( 1998 USD ; $ 96 @.@ 5 million 2009 USD ) in Florida . 
 = = = Southeastern U.S. = = = 
 In Louisiana , moderate beach erosion occurred as tides reached 3 @.@ 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) above mean sea level . Rainfall was relatively light , peaking around 2 in ( 51 mm ) in Morgan City , as only the outer bands of Earl affected the state . The highest winds occurred along the coast , with sustained winds reaching 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) and gusts reaching 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) in Venice , Louisiana . Only minimal damage resulted from the storm in Louisiana , with monetary losses amounting to $ 32 @,@ 000 . However , losses due to the large @-@ scale evacuation of oil and natural gas rigs was estimated to be several million dollars . Earl had limited impacts in Mississippi , with only areas along the immediate coast recording tropical storm @-@ force wind gusts . In Alabama , Earl produced moderate rainfall , with areas along the Georgia state line receiving more than 5 in ( 130 mm ) . Despite the center of Earl passing close to the state , winds were only recorded up to 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) , resulting in scattered power outages and downed trees . Portions of Alabama State Route 28 were temporarily shut down due to debris covering the road . In all , damages in the state amounted to $ 120 @,@ 000 . 
 Ahead of Earl , an onshore flow related to the storm produced 6 to 8 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) swells along the Georgia coast , causing significant damage to marinas . The Mar Lin Marina sustained the most damage from this event ; all the docks were destroyed , 30 boats were damaged and six were destroyed . Damages to the marina and boats amounted to $ 1 @.@ 3 million . Heavy rains fell throughout central areas of the state , with the highest amounts nearing 10 in ( 250 mm ) . Because Earl rapidly weakened upon landfall , the highest winds in Georgia only reached 54 mph ( 87 km / h ) . Numerous trees and power lines were downed , resulting in scattered power outages . Throughout Georgia , an estimated 10 @,@ 400 people lost power due to Earl . Several streets were flooded due to the rains , resulting in traffic accidents . One tornado was spawned by Earl in Georgia ; rated F2 on the Fujita scale , the tornado tracked for 8 mi ( 13 km ) in <unk> County . Estimated at 350 yd ( 320 m ) in width , the tornado destroyed five mobile homes and a business , severely damaged 15 additional mobile homes and caused some damage to five others . Seven people were injured by the tornado and damages amounted to $ 435 @,@ 000 . Several major highways were temporarily closed due to high water or debris covering the road . Numerous homes sustained damage from fallen trees in several counties . In all , damages from Earl amounted to $ 2 @.@ 3 million in Georgia . 
 The extratropical remnants continued through the Southern United States , tracking through the Carolinas late on September 3 . Sustained winds in South Carolina reached 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) and gusted up to 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . Widespread rainfall , generally amounting between 2 and 4 in ( 51 and 102 mm ) , fell in areas previously saturated by Hurricane Bonnie , this triggered minor flooding along roads . Inland , isolated amounts of 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rain fell . The first tornado related to Earl touched down in <unk> , located in Georgetown County . The tornado was rated F0 and was only briefly on the ground before it dissipated . The second tornado to touch down in the state was also the strongest in relation to Earl . Rated F2 , the tornado tracked for 18 mi ( 29 km ) through Beaufort and Colleton Counties , destroying 13 homes and damaging 13 others . One mobile home was flipped in the air and was completely destroyed once it hit the ground , instantly killing the occupant of the home . Numerous trees were uprooted and snapped along its path . In all , the tornado killed one person , injured four others and caused $ 360 @,@ 000 in damages . A brief F1 tornado touched down several hours later , damaging the roof of a barn and uprooting several trees before dissipating . The most damaging tornado spawned by Earl was a 430 yd ( 390 m ) wide , F2 tornado that struck the Fairlawn subdivision near Moncks Corner . Along the tornado 's 7 mi ( 11 km ) track , 21 homes were destroyed and 73 others were damaged . Nine people sustained injuries due to the tornado and damages amounted to $ 2 @.@ 8 million . 
 Still recovering from Hurricane Bonnie , the remnants of Earl produced widespread rain over North Carolina , triggering flooding . Upwards of 6 in ( 150 mm ) fell in localized areas , causing small streams to overflow their banks . In Union County , up to 15 roads were shut down due to flooding , a few cars were also washed off roads at the height of the floods . In Charlotte , several roads were flooded . The Carteret Community College , which was severely damaged by Bonnie , was again damaged by Earl . High winds from the storm damaged temporary protective measures , allowing rain to flood the interior of the building , causing water damage to the structure and materials inside . In front of the Crystal Coast Civic Center , <unk> , installed to stabilize the beach , was damaged by the storm , resulting in significant beach erosion . Two short lived tornadoes touched down in North Carolina from Earl . The first , an F0 , damaged at least 15 mobile homes , overturned sheds , destroyed a porch and two campers . No injuries resulted from the tornado and damage amounted to $ 50 @,@ 000 . The second and stronger of the two tornadoes , rated F1 , only touched down for a few seconds ; however , it destroyed one home and severely damaged a neighboring home . According to eye @-@ witness reports , the tornado lifted the home 20 to 25 ft ( 6 @.@ 1 to 7 @.@ 6 m ) off the ground before the home broke apart and fell to the ground . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 The initial tropical disturbance passed through the Yucatán Peninsula on August 29 and inflow bands to the south of Earl continued rainfall across southeast Mexico until early September 2 . The highest rainfall total was reported from <unk> Dominguez / Moto , where 12 @.@ 94 in ( 329 mm ) of precipitation fell . 
 The extratropical remnants of Earl produced strong winds and heavy rains throughout Newfoundland and Nova Scotia on September 6 . Sustained winds were recorded up to 56 mph ( 90 km / h ) and rains totaled between 2 and 4 in ( 51 and 102 mm ) throughout Newfoundland . On Nova Scotia , rainfall peaked at 4 @.@ 62 in ( 117 mm ) on Cape Breton Island . The highest recorded total on Newfoundland reached 3 @.@ 54 in ( 90 mm ) in northwestern areas of the island . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On September 4 , President Bill Clinton approved disaster declarations for six counties in Florida . Bay , Dixie , Franklin , Gulf , Taylor , and Wakulla counties were approved for Individual Assistance . Residents in the designated counties were eligible to receive federal funding for three months following the storm . By September 8 , State Farm had received 200 auto and 720 homeowners claims from the affected region , most of which were partial damage claims . Allstate had received 80 auto and 587 homeowners claims from Florida and 540 claims from Georgia . Additionally , Nationwide reported that up to 1 @,@ 000 claims had been filed from Florida . 
 Following the impacts of Hurricane Opal in 1995 , Earl and later Hurricane Georges , the state of Florida undertook a recovery project to restore the eroded beaches along the Panhandle coast . In October United States Department of Transportation provided $ 2 million in funds to repair damaged and destroyed roads in Florida . On December 3 , an additional $ 1 @.@ 7 million was provided to repair funds . The United States Military allocated $ 2 @.@ 2 million to repair damage from Hurricane Earl to training academies and naval ports . The Florida Senate provided $ 25 @,@ 740 in emergency funds to Hurricane Earl victims . By the end of the disaster declaration , the Federal Emergency Management Agency provided $ 1 million in public assistance and $ 600 @,@ 000 in disaster mitigation . 
 = Oregon Ducks track and field = 
 The Oregon Ducks Track and Field program is the intercollegiate track and field team for the University of Oregon located in the U.S. state of Oregon . The team competes at the NCAA Division I level and is a member of the Pac @-@ 12 Conference . The team participates in indoor and outdoor track and field as well as cross country . Known as the Ducks , Oregon 's first track and field team was fielded in 1895 . The team holds its home meets at Hayward Field in Eugene , Oregon . Robert Johnson is the current head coach and since the program 's inception in 1895 , there have only been seven permanent head coaches . The Ducks claim 28 NCAA National Championships among the three disciplines . 
 Due to its rich heritage , the home of the Ducks is popularly dubbed as <unk> , USA . Four of the head coaches in Oregon 's history have been inducted into the <unk> Hall of Fame . Several people involved with the program have developed innovative coaching strategies and helped restructure amateur athletics . Alumni of the program have continued to the Olympics and professional ranks while some others have founded athletic corporations like Nike and <unk> . 
 Oregon 's track and field history has been documented in two major motion films Without Limits and Prefontaine as well as the books Bowerman and the Men of Oregon and Pre : The Story of America 's Greatest Running Legend . Former coaches and alumni have also written a number of books on running instruction for both top end athletes and hobbyists . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The first track team was established in 1895 with head coach Joseph Wetherbee . The coach remained for only one year and the following four coaches , William O <unk> , J.C. Higgins , C.A. Redmond , and William Ray , also remained for extremely short durations . With such sporadic coaching changes , the Oregon track and field team struggled with inconsistencies , although the university did win six of seven meets in 1895 . 
 = = = Under Coach Bill Hayward = = = 
 In 1903 , Bill Hayward coached Albany College 's track team . Following Oregon 's defeat at the hands of Albany College , Oregon hired Bill Hayward as the track and field head coach for the following season . Hayward 's career at Oregon was long and illustrious , lasting 44 years as head coach . His athletes included nine Olympians and produced five world records . In 1919 , a new stadium was constructed for football and named Hayward Field for him . Two years following construction , a track was added and track schedules were transferred there from nearby Kincaid Field . 
 = = = Under Coach Bill Bowerman = = = 
 Bill Bowerman 's involvement with the university started before he became the track and field head coach in 1949 . He attended the University of Oregon and played football . Coach Bill Hayward , who Bowerman credits with teaching him how to run , convinced Bowerman to run track . Bowerman graduated from Oregon in 1934 with a degree in Business . 
 After his service in World War II , Bowerman was hired by Oregon to replace the retiring Hayward after John Warren 's single year as interim head coach . Though Bowerman 's title was head coach , he considered himself more of a teacher than a coach . He stressed schoolwork over athletics and urged his pupils to apply the values they learned participating in track and field to everyday life . During his time at Oregon , he brought four NCAA team championships to the university and coached 33 Olympians as well as 24 individual NCAA champions . He coached some of the world 's best distance runners including Steve Prefontaine 
 Bowerman retired from coaching in 1972 . While at Oregon , he also coached the USA Track and Field team and helped bring the U.S. Olympic Trials to Hayward Field for the first time . 
 = = = = Steve Prefontaine = = = = 
 Steve Prefontaine arrived on campus in 1969 and immediately , head coach Bowerman and assistant coach Bill Dellinger had their hands full to rein in the rebellious new athlete . The bold running style of Prefontaine , front @-@ running , was a strategy that altered the pace of the sport . At one point , Prefontaine held every American distance record above the 2 @,@ 000 meters and was thought of by many to be one of the greatest American runners in history . Prefontaine had never lost a race longer than a mile during his collegiate career and won a total of seven NCAA championships in track and field and cross country . He raced in the 5000m at the 1972 Olympics in Munich , placing fourth in the race . He died in an automobile accident in Eugene in 1975 , at the peak of his career . 
 His accomplishments were not confined to the track . He was deeply resentful toward the treatment given toward amateur athletes . He had frequently butted heads with the Amateur Athletic Union , calling the AAU a corrupt organization . His opinions played a major role in the passing of the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 , legislation providing legal protection to amateur athletes . 
 Prefontaine , coupled with Frank Shorter 's success running the marathon , is often credited with playing a role in the running boom in America in the 1970s . His legacy lives on in two movies documenting his life , Without Limits and Prefontaine , as well as the Prefontaine Classic , an annual track meet held at Hayward Field in his honor . 
 = = = = Nike = = = = 
 Another one of Bowerman 's pupils , Phil Knight , partnered with Bowerman and revolutionized the sport with the formation of the shoe company giant , Nike . Knight graduated from the University of Oregon in 1959 and went on to Stanford University for graduate school . There , he developed the idea to import Japanese running shoes to the American market . After earning his MBA from Stanford , he returned to the University of Oregon where he and Bowerman struck a handshake deal in 1964 , each with a $ 500 investment into a company called Blue Ribbon Sports to import Japanese running shoes . In the late 1960s , Bowerman 's pursuit of lighter shoes for his athletes led him to develop a sole by pouring rubber into his wife 's waffle iron , inventing the modern running shoe . After Knight decided to rename the company Nike and develop its own shoes , Bowerman 's invention became the prototype for the company . The shoe made its debut in the 1972 Olympic Trials at Hayward Field with Steve Prefontaine as one of the early endorsers . Although Bowerman retired from coaching in 1972 , he remained on Nike 's board until 1999 . In that time , Nike exploded into a multibillion @-@ dollar company . 
 = = = Under Coaches Bill Dellinger and Tom Heinonen = = = 
 Like his predecessor , Bill Dellinger 's involvement with the University of Oregon began before his coaching career . He lettered in track at the university , graduating in 1956 and won a Bronze medal in the 1964 Summer Olympics . After his athletic career , he joined Bowerman 's staff in 1967 as an assistant coach where he helped coach Steve Prefontaine . He took over as head coach in 1973 after Bowerman 's retirement . With Dellinger at the helm , Oregon 's Cross Country team brought home four NCAA national championships and the track and field team brought home one NCAA national championship . He retired in 1998 . The Bill Dellinger Invitational is an annual race held at Hayward Field in honor of the coach . 
 One of Dellinger 's assistants , hired in 1975 , Tom Heinonen , was promoted to the head coach for the women 's cross country and track and field team in 1977 . Prior to Heinonen , no other full @-@ time head coach at Oregon had exclusively coached the women 's disciplines . He was a strong advocate for women 's sports and was a force in making the Oregon Twilight Meet a co @-@ ed event . Women 's cross country and track and field blossomed under Heinonen 's leadership . He led the women 's team to win its first three NCAA team championships and coached 14 NCAA individual champions . He produced 134 All @-@ Americans and his athletes made 17 appearances in the Olympics . He retired in 2003 , after which the University of Oregon Athletic Department decided to combine the men 's and women 's programs under one head coach . 
 = = = Under Coach Vin Lananna = = = 
 In 2005 , Vin Lananna was hired to become the track and field head coach , replacing Martin Smith who resigned after the previous season . Lananna was already a decorated head coach from Stanford with five NCAA national championships under his belt . At Oregon , he led seven teams to win NCAA national championships , including the first indoor national championships in school history . He also attracted the Olympic Trials , the NCAA Track and Field Championships , and the USA Track and Field Championships to Eugene for multiple years . Just prior to the 2012 season , Robert Johnson was promoted to the head coaching position as Lananna moved to an administrative position with the program . In Johnson 's first year , the women 's team produced a national championship in both cross country and indoor track and field . 
 = = Impact on running = = 
 The people involved in the Oregon track and field program have led changes that benefited professional athletes and coaches , as well as running enthusiasts . Bill Bowerman experimented with many coaching techniques during his time as a head coach at the University of Oregon and instilled many of his principles from his days as a Major in the US Army . For example , Bowerman pioneered in using film as a method of teaching technique to his athletes . With Bowerman 's meticulous attention to details , he made other discoveries with regards to coaching track . The training schedules he developed for his athletes ran counter to many other coaches ' principles at the time . He believed that each individual athlete was different and tailored different workout routines to different athletes . He also scaled his workouts up and down , giving some of his athletes rest on certain days for recovery time . This attention to detail also led him to become obsessed with experimentation of reducing the weight of his athletes ' apparel and increasing the traction of their shoes which eventually led to the creation of the apparel company Nike . Moreover , Bowerman considered himself more of a teacher than a coach and stressed schoolwork as well as mentoring his athletes with regards to life . Tom Heinonen , the former head coach of the Oregon women 's track and field program was a strong advocate of female athletics at a time when female athletics were largely an afterthought . Steve Prefontaine was vehemently outspoken against the Amateur Athletic Union . Kenny Moore , a former University of Oregon student who ran track under Bowerman , was one of the speakers at the President 's Commission on Olympic Sports , a series of hearings regarding amateur sports . These efforts along with those from other amateur athletes eventually culminated in the passage of the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 . 
 Bowerman and his athletes ' philosophy and stories were documented by Kenny Moore . Moore wrote the book Bowerman and the Men of Oregon and practiced journalism , most notably for Sports Illustrated . He also was the screenwriter with Robert Towne for Without Limits , a movie that told the story of Prefontaine and Bowerman . In addition , he was also an actor in Personal Best , a movie with track and field as one of the central themes . Bowerman himself wrote several books on the sport of running including High Performance Training for Track and Field which details coaching instruction for high level competition . He also wrote a book with a cardiologist called <unk> , which detailed the medical benefits of jogging , to which many credited its exploding popularity . Bowerman 's successor , Bill Dellinger , also authored a number of books regarding running , including Competitive Runner 's Training Book , The Running Experience and Winning Running . 
 The program 's coaching extended beyond just within the program itself . Bowerman had his athletes mentor the community and continued to be active in the sport after his retirement . He was also a coach for the US Olympic team in 1972 and an assistant coach in 1968 US Olympic Team . Bill Dellinger coached the distance runners in the 1984 Olympic Games . After Dellinger retired from the University of Oregon , he continued to coach running on a consulting basis despite suffering through a stroke . Tom Heinonen remained a running coach after his retirement at the volunteer level for the University of Oregon Running Club . Alumnus Alberto Salazar became a noted marathon coach after his running days under the employ of Nike . Salazar used controversial coaching tactics like tweaking runners ' natural running form , but had coached many athletes to the apex of their careers . He launched an experimental training program called the Oregon Project financed by Nike with the purpose of integrating African runners ' training conditions into American training mixed with modern technology . He also discovered similarities in running posture between sprinters and top level distance runners , two disciplines previously thought to be exceedingly different . <unk> some of these methods into American runners , he was able to coach Kara Goucher to a third @-@ place finish in the Boston Marathon in 2009 , an event that East Africans typically dominate . Mo Farah and alumnus Galen Rupp were training partners under Salazar and finished first and second respectively in the 2012 Summer Olympics in the 10k . Rupp was the first American to medal in the 10k since Billy Mills in 1964 and the first medalist not born in Africa since 1988 . Similar to his collegiate coaches , Salazar wrote a pair of books about distance running . Matt <unk> , another University of Oregon alumnus , took the American University track and field program to prominence since the rebirth of the program in 1999 . 
 = = Venues = = 
 The early teams ran at Kincaid Field , constructed in 1902 as an athletic field . In 1919 , Hayward Field was constructed for football events and two years later , a track was installed around the field as the track and field team moved in . Kincaid field was torn down in 1922 . 
 Autzen Stadium was opened in 1967 and the football team moved out of Hayward Field . At that point , Hayward Field became exclusively a track and field stadium . The venue had undergone significant upgrades since then including the Bowerman Building in 1992 , the Powell Plaza in 2005 , an indoor facilities upgrade in 2006 , and new equipment in 2007 . 
 Hayward Field has been host to numerous national track and field events such as the U.S. Olympic Trials , NCAA Championships , and the USA Track and Field Championships . No other venue has hosted more NCAA Championships and no other venue had held three consecutive U.S. Olympic Trials . Many have attested to the magical aura of Hayward field , citing many personal bests run at the venue . Credit often goes to the regular attendance of knowledgeable track and field fans for the phenomenon . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 The traditional rival of the Oregon Ducks is the Oregon State Beavers , called the Civil War . This fierce rivalry extended to the track and field programs , where for a period , they met twice a year . However , due to budgetary concerns , Oregon State University dropped the track and field program in 1988 and the rivalry ended . Plans are underway to reinstate the program by 2014 , at which point the rivalry may continue . 
 The UCLA Bruins became an Oregon rival in track and field as the two powerhouse programs battled each other in a series of dual meets . Oregon 's program was ranked in the top 3 nationally in dual meets by Track & Field News thirteen times between 1970 and 1996 and was ranked No. 1 three times . The UCLA squad achieved a No. 1 ranking from the same publication eleven times within the same time frame . In 1966 , the two programs met head to head for the first time . The Bruins displayed their dominance at the dual meet and won nine straight against the Ducks . Oregon head coach Bill Bowerman in 1971 called the Bruins team the best dual meet team in the country . It wasn 't until 1978 that Oregon earned its first victory in the series , which ended UCLA 's 34 dual meet winning streak . Oregon won the next three meets and the series ended in 1985 with a UCLA win . The dual meet event was fading out of favor in collegiate track and field and the Oregon @-@ UCLA dual meet was discontinued with UCLA holding the advantage over the Ducks 10 – 4 . In 1994 , the Pepsi Team Invitational which included Oregon , UCLA and Washington was scored as a dual meet , which UCLA won . In 2008 , the dual meet series between the two schools restarted and Oregon won the first three meets . Although the location of the meet had alternated between Eugene and Los Angeles between 1966 and 1976 , subsequent meets have been held at Hayward Field in Oregon until 2011 where the two teams battled to a tie at UCLA . 
 = = Head coaches = = 
 Prior to Bill Hayward in 1904 , four coaches led the Oregon track and field teams for just one year including Joseph W. Wetherbee ( 1895 ) , J.C. Higgins ( 1897 ) , C.A. Redmond ( 1902 ) , and William Ray ( 1903 ) . John Warren was the interim head coach in 1948 before Bill Bowerman took over for Bill Hayward . In a similar fashion to the men 's team , three head coaches led the women 's team on a part @-@ time basis including Lois <unk> ( 1972 ) , Ron <unk> ( 1973 – 1974 ) , and Rob Ritson ( 1975 – 1976 ) before Tom Heinonen arrived to provide consistency at the helm . The following coaches are a chronology of Oregon track and field head coaches that served for terms greater than two years : 
 Notes : 
 Also coached on the US Olympic Team 
 Only coached the women 's track and field and cross country team 
 Member of the <unk> Hall of Fame 
 = = Notable athletes = = 
 The track and field program over the years has created dozens of NCAA individual champions and hundreds of All Americans . Alumni have gone on to medal in the Olympics , win big city marathons , and win national championships at the professional level . 
 Some of the most famed players from the program emerged from distance running . Steve Prefontaine held numerous American distance running records and never lost a collegiate distance running match . Alberto Salazar won three consecutive New York Marathons and added a Boston Marathon victory to the list . 
 Alumni have also had illustrious coaching careers . Bill Bowerman and Bill Dellinger both became Oregon coaches . Alberto Salazar and Terrance Mahon became distance running coaches after their running days . Others have found success related to track and field but not directly in the sport . Bill Bowerman and Phil Knight both co @-@ founded Nike . Tinker Hatfield ran track at Oregon while studying architecture and later became a famous shoe designer for Nike . Rudy Chapa , a successful distance runner in his own right , founded <unk> , an athletic equipment company . 
 There have been several members of the track and field team that lettered in other sports , particularly football . Mel Renfro is primarily known for being inducted into the Professional Football Hall of Fame but he also achieved a world record in the 440 yard relay in 1962 while running in the track and field program for Oregon . Jordan Kent , a former professional football player , was a rare three sport letterman in track , basketball , and football . The 2010 Doak Walker Award winner , LaMichael James , ran track during the football offseason . One of the first multi @-@ sport athletes with the Oregon Ducks was the former head coach Bill Bowerman , who played football and ran track under Bill Hayward in both sports . 
 = = = Olympians = = = 
 Since Oregon 's first Olympian , Dan Kelly , who finished second place in the broad jump of the 1908 Summer Olympics , at least one athlete from the University of Oregon has participated in each of the Summer Olympics since . This includes the 1980 Summer Olympics which the United States boycotted , when Chris Braithwaite competed for Trinidad , his native country . 
 Out of the scores of Olympians that claim the University of Oregon as their alma mater , the following have received medals : 
 = = = World record holders = = = 
 The following athletes from Oregon have achieved world records : 
 = = = Other athletes = = = 
 = Never Too Far / Hero Medley = 
 " Never Too Far / Hero Medley " is a medley recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Mariah Carey , first released as a charity single on December 11 , 2001 through Virgin Records America and serving as the lead single for Carey 's second compilation album , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) . The medley combines the first verse of " Never Too Far " , co @-@ written and co @-@ produced by Carey and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , with a re @-@ recorded version of the first verse and bridge of " Hero " , written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff . As the latter did not receive co @-@ production credits due to the change in instrumentation , Randy Jackson was named as producer alongside Carey instead . The single was meant to express a message of unity and love in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks . 
 Though Carey did not promote Glitter ( 2001 ) , due to her hospitalization , she embarked on a short promotional tour for the single , and attended several charitable events . Carey performed the medley live at the 2001 Radio Music Awards , British music program Top of the Pops , the United We Stand : What More Can I Give concert benefit , and her own special titled , At Home For The Holidays With Mariah Carey . Following the singles release , the song managed to attain a peak position of number eighty @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 , in light of all of Carey 's live appearances . Though promoted throughout Europe , the single was never given an official release outside the United States , therefore failing to chart in any other significant global music market . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the weak commercial success of Glitter ( 2001 ) , her debut release under Virgin Records , Carey suffered an emotional and physical breakdown , followed by an extended hospitalization . During this period , Carey 's older label , Columbia records , planned to release a compilation album of her biggest hits , titled Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) . As they had one more album to release from Carey under her old contract , they began assembling content for its release . Though still signed to Virgin , Carey composed a charity single in which all proceeds would go towards helping rebuild America , following the terrorist attacks . Consequently , she re @-@ recorded her 1993 song " Hero " , and made a medley of it with a single from Glitter , " Never Too Far " . The song features a different instrumental introduction , and begins with the first verse and chorus of " Never Too Far " , and blends into the bridge of " Hero " . Several writers for the medley are credited , with Carey having written " Never Too Far " with Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis , and the latter with Walter Afanasieff . Aside from Jam and Lewis , Randy Jackson assisted Carey in the song 's production . In an interview with MTV , Carey described the single and its conception : 
 " I started doing different charity events where I did a combination of ' Never Too Far ' and ' Hero ' . We made it into a medley and put them in the same key and made it work . People responded really well to it . It 's been interesting for me , since the events of September 11 , the way people have been playing ' Hero ' and really even talking to me about ' Never Too Far ' , ' cause that song is also about loss . I figured that it would be a nice thing to do , to put them both out for Christmas . There 's also an unreleased track on the B @-@ side , which is called ' There for Me ' which kind of has the same sentiment . The proceeds from ' Never Too Far ' and ' Hero ' and ' There for Me ' are going to go to the Heroes Fund , and it 's going to benefit police officers ' families , relief workers ' families . " 
 = = = " There For Me " = = = 
 The song 's B @-@ side , titled " There For Me " , was a leftover track from Carey 's Rainbow ( 1999 ) , which she wrote alongside David Foster and Diane Warren . After Carey abandoned work with longtime collaborator Walter Afanasieff , she began working with Foster throughout Rainbow . During their many creative meetings , Foster introduced Carey to Warren , a song @-@ writer in which he had collaborated several times in the past . Throughout the process of writing and producing the song , the female pair did not work well with each other , as Carey accused Warren of repeating lyrical phrases too often , while Warren did not agree with some of Carey 's production choices . After they completed the song , Carey wrote two other ballads with Warren for Rainbow , entitled " After Tonight " and " Can 't Take That Away ( Mariah 's Theme ) " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Never Too Far / Hero " is a mid @-@ tempo ballad , drawing influence from pop and R & B music genres . The song was written and produced by Carey and Walter Afanasieff , Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis and Randy Jackson , and was released as the lead single from her second compilation album , Greatest Hits ( 2001 ) . It incorporates music from several musical instruments , including the piano , guitar and organ . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Alfred Music Publishing , the song is set in common time with a moderate tempo of 62 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Carey 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of D ♯ 3 to the high @-@ note of Ab5 . The song 's chorus has a basic chord progression of Gsus2 – G – G / F ♯ – Em7 – G / D – C @-@ G / B – Am7 . In an interview with Fred Bronson , Carey described her original feelings towards the song , prior to its release as a single : 
 One person could say that ' hero ' is a schmaltzy piece of garbage , but another person can write to me a letter and say , ' I 've considered committing suicide everyday of my life for the last ten years until I heard that song and I realized after all I can be my own hero . ' And that , that 's an unexplainable feeling , like I 've done something with my life , y 'know ? ... It meant something to someone . 
 While " Hero " describes the hidden power inside each individual , " Never Too Far " encourages those who are doubtful over their very existence , and how through perseverance , one can see that nothing is ever ' too far away ' . Together combined , the single gives over a supportive message , for those who are either looking for meaning in life , or just doubting their own worth and ability . During a show on Carey 's The Adventures of Mimi Tour , she described the meaning " Hero " had to her and her fans : 
 " I wrote a song a while back even before " One Sweet Day " and it was not my favorite song in the world , but I wrote it . Someone asked me to write a song and they told me the story , and you know it was kind of a moving concept or whatever . And I did it , and I was like you know it ’ s not necessarily what I like per se , but after doing the song over and over again and having people coming up to and saying , thank you for writing ‘ Hero ’ because it saved my life or it saved my father ’ s life or my brothers or sisters life , or something of that nature , I said I always have to sing that song when I ’ m performing because if I don ’ t , you never know who I ’ m leaving out and you know what , in times of my life I ’ ve had to turn to that song lyrically and flip it onto my own life and sing it to myself . So its from the ‘ Music Box ’ album , and it ’ s called ‘ Hero ' , this is for you . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Elysa Gardner from USA Today called " Never Too Far / Hero " a " refreshing medley " and felt it would easily be accepted among Carey 's other popular and heartfelt inspirational ballads . The medley was only given a commercial release in the United States . Though " Hero " ( a single from Carey 's album Music Box ) had gone to number @-@ one on the US Billboard Hot 100 , " Never Too Far " ( a single from Glitter ) had failed to chart . " Never Too Far / Hero Medley " performed marginally better , peaking at number eighty @-@ one and remaining on the chart for three weeks , however still not delivering the kind of success Carey was accustomed to prior to Glitter . The charity single was released to help victims of the September 11 attacks , with all proceeds from the sales of the single going towards the Heroes Fund , a charity benefit for victims of the attacks and their families , police officers , and relief workers . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Though having not promoted Glitter during the time of its release , due to her breakdown and subsequent hospitalization , Carey embarked on a short promotional campaign for the single , as well as charity benefits for the September 11 attacks victims . At the 2001 Radio Music Awards , Carey made her second public appearance following her breakdown , the first being a performance of " Hero " at the America : A Tribute to Heroes telethon on September 21 , 2001 . Entering the stage in a long black evening gown , Carey performed the medley live , followed by a standing ovation from the audience . On October 21 , 2001 , a benefit titled United We Stand : What More Can I Give was held at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in Washington , D.C. , accompanied by the charity single " What More Can I Give " , in which Carey participated . Carey donned a black open @-@ back dress with a plunging neckline , and performed " Never Too Far / Hero " , followed by a live rendition of " What More Can I Give " . 
 On November 16 , 2001 , Carey taped a special titled A Home For The Holidays With Mariah Carey , which aired on December 21 of that same year . The special featured additional performances by Destiny 's Child , Josh Groban , Enrique Iglesias and Mandy Moore . Carey opened the special , with a performance of " Never Too Far / Hero " while wearing a form @-@ fitting red evening gown . Aside from the single , Carey performed " I 'll Be There " and " Reflections ( Care Enough ) " , a single from Glitter . Following stateside promotion of the charity single , Carey performed it alongside Westlife on the British music chart program , Top of the Pops . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 US CD single 
 " Never Too Far / Hero Medley " 
 " There for Me " 
 " Never Too Far " Hero Remixes ( European CD Maxi Single ) 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Extended Mix " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Radio Mix " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Radio Mix With Intro " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Al B. Rich Inspiration Mix – Radio Edit " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Al B. Rich Inspiration Mix – X @-@ <unk> Mix " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Mike Rizzo Extended Club Recall Mix " 
 " Never Too Far / Hero – Mike Rizzo Radio Recall Mix " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Mariah Carey – co @-@ production , songwriting , vocals 
 Walter Afanasieff – songwriting 
 James Harris – songwriting , co @-@ production 
 Terry Lewis – songwriting , co @-@ production 
 Randy Jackson – co @-@ production 
 Credits adapted from the Greatest Hits liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Long Way to Go ( Gwen Stefani and André 3000 song ) = 
 " Long Way to Go " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Gwen Stefani with American rapper André 3000 . The song appears as the closing track on Stefani 's debut studio album , Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ( 2004 ) . It was released on November 23 , 2004 , along with the rest of Love . Angel . Music . Baby. by Interscope Records . The track was written by both Stefani and 3000 , while 3000 was the sole producer of the track . 
 Although the song was scrapped from 3000 's critically acclaimed OutKast studio album , The Love Below ( 2003 ) , Stefani and 3000 finalized a reworked version of the song to be included on Stefani 's album . The song prominently features a sample from Martin Luther King , Jr . ' s " I Have a Dream " speech in its closing outro . King is not credited for contributed lyrics to the song . Musically , " Long Way to Go " is influenced by electronic music and alternative hip hop , with partial influence from both dance music and soul music . 
 After its release , " Long Way to Go " received scrutiny for its sample of " I Have a Dream " . The song also was received negatively for its outdated metaphors on interracial relationships . However , the track did receive positive attention for being a " standout " on Love . Angel . Music . Baby. and also for its electronic production , particularly the closing of the track . Stefani performed the track during her 2005 Harajuku Lovers Tour , accompanied by the Harajuku Girls . 
 = = Background = = 
 Production for " Long Way to Go " initially started in 2003 during recording sessions for both of Stefani and 3000 's then upcoming studio albums . The original collaboration had Stefani as a featured artist , although 3000 intended for a different version of the song to make it on his album , The Love Below . The pair worked together on a slightly different version of the track , where it was then finalized and placed on Love . Angel . Music . Baby .. The original demo of the song has never been officially released to the public . 
 Lyrically , the song discusses prejudices against interracial dating and the beauty of love . This meaning is made clear in the lyric , " Beauty is beauty / Whether it 's black or white " . The line , " When snow hits the asphalt / Cold looks and bad talk come " is used as a metaphor for the backlash that may occur when dating someone of the opposite race . The song also jokes that this problematic situation is " beyond Martin Luther " . Throughout the closing of the track , prominent samples of Martin Luther King , Jr . ' s " I Have a Dream " speech can be heard , set to " unsynchronized M.I.A. like beats " created by a <unk> <unk> synthesizer . Vibe described MLK 's speech as having " made its mark on music artists " , with some artists like Stefani having " lifted his word for their own tracks " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon release , " Long Way to Go " received polarized reviews from critics . Some music critics heavily criticized the track for its sampling of the " I Have a Dream " speech , while others found it to be an interesting song . Jason Damas of PopMatters unfavorably compared the song to OutKast 's " Spread " and claimed that Stefani " awkwardly comment [ ed ] on race relations and as such it 's a bit of a buzzkill " . Krissi Murison of the British magazine , NME , also was negative with her review , claiming that the track is a " bar the knuckle @-@ bitingly bad duet " , further adding that every song on Love . Angel . Music . Baby. sounds like a future hit , minus " Long Way to Go " . Nick Sylvester of Pitchfork Media remained indifferent of the song as he thought that the song 's lyrics " feel out of place on an otherwise carefree album " and preferred Stefani and 3000 's other collaboration , " Bubble Pop Electric " . 
 However , Ryan Book of Music Times , was less critical with his review : " [ Stefani ] took a break from colorful music videos to make a statement of racial relations ... the song uses a less clear sample than the other tracks , but interpolates his words into the electronic breakdown at the end of the song " . Marc <unk> of Thought Catalog felt that " Long Way to Go " is " one of the most interesting out of any on Love . Angel . Music . Baby . " , further adding that the outro of the song resembles the work of M.I.A .. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic was mixed with his review , stating that the song " is a jarring buzz kill – and that 's what 's appealing about L.A.M.B. , even if it such a shallow celebration of fleeting style and outdated bling @-@ bling culture , it can grate " . A review from <unk> described " Long Way to Go " as " a plea for interracial love – or the tolerant embrace of it – the central contention that " beauty " can be " black or white / yellow or green " " . In an extremely positive review of the track , Mike Usinger writing for The Georgia Straight , claimed that " [ with ] a surprisingly soulful duet with Andre 3000 , Stefani has come up with the kind of solo album that gets singers thinking that maybe they don 't need a backing band at all , " referencing Stefani 's time spent with No Doubt . 
 = = Live performance = = 
 Stefani included the song on the setlist for her 2005 concert tour entitled Harajuku Lovers Tour . " Long Way to Go " was performed alongside the Harajuku Girls , a Japanese dance troupe ; the Girls performed minimal dance moves due to the intentional intimacy of the song . During the performance , the lyrics of " Long Way to Go " occasionally flashed on the screens above Stefani ; due to the topic of interracial dating prevalent in the song , Stefani was surrounded by individuals of different races throughout the performance . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 US Digital download 
 " Long Way to Go " ( with André 3000 ) – 4 : 34 
 Interscope Records Sampler 
 A1 " Rich Girl " ( featuring Eve ) – 3 : 56 
 A2 " Hollaback Girl " – 3 : 19 
 A3 " Bubble Pop Electric " ( featuring Johnny Vulture ) – 3 : 42 
 B1 " Long Way to Go " ( with André 3000 ) – 4 : 34 
 B2 " Harajuku Girls " – 4 : 51 
 B3 " Cool " – 3 : 09 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Management 
 Recorded at Stankonia Recording , Atlanta ; Larabee Sound Studio East , Los Angeles ; and <unk> Studios , Los Angeles . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Love . Angel . Music . Baby . 
 = Mississippi Highway 366 ( Prentiss County ) = 
 Mississippi Highway 366 ( MS 366 ) is a highway in Prentiss County , Mississippi . It starts at MS 370 at the Lee – Prentiss county line in the west . The route intersects many county routes as it travels eastward to MS 371 , its eastern terminus . The route was designated in 1957 , and became fully paved by 1971 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MS 366 starts at MS 370 on the Lee – Prentiss county line . The route curves northward after intersecting County Route 5011 ( CO 5011 ) . At CO <unk> , the road begins a series of turns through the forest . MS 366 soon reaches CO <unk> and dips southeastward . It temporarily heads eastward at CO <unk> , before turning south at CO 5345 . The route travels east again at CO <unk> , around a small area of farmland . MS 366 crosses over Casey Creek after intersecting CO <unk> . The road shifts upward as it enters Marietta , and MS 366 ends at MS 371 . The road continues on as CO <unk> . 
 In 2013 , Mississippi Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) calculated as many as 760 vehicles traveling west of CO 5311 , and as few as 650 vehicles traveling east of CO <unk> . MS 366 is not included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways identified as being most important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . It is legally defined in Mississippi Code § 65 @-@ 3 @-@ 3 . All of MS 366 is maintained by MDOT . 
 = = History = = 
 MS 366 was designated in 1957 , as a gravel road from MS 370 to MS 363 . By 1965 , MS 363 and MS 371 were rerouted , causing MS 366 's eastern terminus to change to MS 371 . All of MS 366 was paved by 1971 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Lexington @-@ Concord Sesquicentennial half dollar = 
 The Lexington @-@ Concord Sesquicentennial half dollar , sometimes the Lexington @-@ Concord half dollar or Patriot half dollar , was a commemorative coin struck by the United States Bureau of the Mint in 1925 in honor of the 150th anniversary of the Battles of Lexington and Concord . It was designed by Chester Beach . 
