 Members of the Massachusetts congressional delegation introduced legislation in 1924 which would provide for a commemorative half dollar for the anniversary . The bill passed both houses of Congress and was signed by President Calvin Coolidge . Beach had to satisfy committees from both Lexington and Concord , and the Commission of Fine Arts passed the design only reluctantly , feeling Beach had been given poor materials to work with . 
 The coins were sold for $ 1 , and were vended at the anniversary celebrations in Lexington and in Concord ; they were sold at banks across New England . Although just over half of the authorized mintage of 300 @,@ 000 was struck , almost all of the coins that were minted were sold . Depending on condition , they are catalogued in the hundreds of dollars . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Battles of Lexington and Concord took place in those neighboring Massachusetts towns on April 19 , 1775 . The enmity between the British government and the American colonials that preceded the Revolutionary War had led , by early 1775 , to militia groups , hostile to the British , being formed in the Boston area . These groups , under the control of Massachusetts leader John Hancock 's Committee of Safety , were often dubbed minutemen for their readiness to assemble to fight at a moment 's notice . <unk> of munitions were stored at various towns for their use , including at Concord . 
 The Secretary of State for the Colonies , Lord Dartmouth , instructed the British commander in Boston , General Thomas Gage , to stamp out this resistance . On April 18 , 1775 , Gage secretly ordered Lieutenant Colonel Francis Smith to go with 700 men to Concord and destroy the munitions there . It is uncertain how the Americans came to hear of the plan : Gage 's wife Margaret was born in New Jersey and may have been a spy . Another local leader , Joseph Warren , informed Paul Revere and William Dawes , and the two men went by separate roads to Lexington to alert leaders there and to assemble the militia . Both got to Lexington , where they met with Hancock and Samuel Adams . The supplies in Concord were moved . 
 British troops began their march at 2 am on April 19 , and Smith sent troops ahead under Major John Pitcairn . When Pitcairn and his men found a company of armed colonials at Lexington , he ordered them to disperse . In the confusion , a shot was fired from an unknown source , which brought several volleys from the British troops . Eight of the local men were killed and one British soldier was wounded . The British burned or otherwise destroyed what supplies they could find in Concord , and a second confrontation took place at the North Bridge . The bridge was held by the British , and by then about 400 minutemen had assembled . Seeing the smoke from Concord , the colonials believed the town was being burned , and attempted to cross the bridge to succor it . The British fired on them but the colonials returned fire and defeated them . The British , who had gotten reinforcements once they realized the countryside was roused against them , began their march to Boston harassed by at least 2 @,@ 000 militiamen who inflicted a steady toll by gunfire until the British gained the protection of the cannon near Boston . The encounters at Lexington and Concord were the first battles of what became the Revolutionary War . 
 = = Legislation = = 
 Identical joint resolutions to establish a United States Lexington @-@ Concord Sesquicentennial Commission and to authorize federal participation in the celebrations surrounding the 150th anniversary of the battles were introduced into the House of Representatives by Massachusetts congressmen John Jacob Rogers and Frederick Dallinger on May 5 , 1924 . Robert Luce , also of that state , introduced an identical copy . Rogers represented Concord 's district in Congress , while the townsfolk of Lexington were among Dallinger 's constituents . All three bills were referred to the Committee on the Library , presided over by Luce . Hearings were held on May 8 , 1924 , with both Rogers and Dallinger present . Rogers spoke of the 1875 celebrations of the Lexington and Concord <unk> , which President Ulysses S. Grant , Vice President Henry Wilson , Speaker of the House James G. Blaine and other notables had attended . These celebrations were not jointly held by Lexington and Concord ; instead , there were two separate programs , though there was full cooperation between the two towns . They intended to follow this pattern for the 150th anniversary in 1925 : although there would be considerable coordination , each town would have its own committee and its own events . 
 Rogers outlined the request for the establishment of the commission , with four members to be appointed by each house of Congress and three by President Calvin Coolidge . Rodgers and Dallinger wanted $ 10 @,@ 000 for the commission , and for Congress to authorize the issuance of commemorative coins and stamps . Rogers told the committee that the language for the legislative provisions for the coin had been borrowed from the bill for the Pilgrim Tercentenary half dollar ( 1920 – 1921 ) , and reminded them of other commemorative coins that had been issued . At the time , commemorative coins were not sold by the government — Congress , in authorizing legislation , designated an organization which had the exclusive right to purchase the coins at face value and vend them to the public at a premium . A maximum of 300 @,@ 000 coins were requested . Dallinger noted that the government would incur no cost from the commemorative half dollars : it would profit from the seignorage and would never be called upon to redeem them , as they would be retained by collectors . After the two congressmen appeared , Chairman Luce introduced a letter from the Senate Majority Leader , Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts , indicating his support for the bill . Luce reported his own version of the resolution the following day , with his committee 's recommendation that it pass . 
 The resolution was brought to the House floor on June 7 , 1924 , when Luce asked that the House pass the legislation . He had alluded in his report to the well @-@ known Ralph Waldo Emerson poem " Concord Hymn " by including the phrase " embattled farmers " , a reference which Arkansas 's Otis Wingo used as an excuse to deliver a lengthy speech on tariffs , accusing the Republican majority of harming the farmer . Once Wingo had finished to applause from the Democratic side , the House passed the bill without a recorded vote , with Rogers presiding over the House in the absence of the Speaker . The resolution was transmitted to the Senate the same day and was referred to the Senate Appropriations Committee . On January 5 , 1925 , the resolution was reported back to the Senate by Wyoming 's Francis Warren , unamended , with the recommendation that it pass . Senator Joseph T. Robinson of Arkansas asked for the amount of the appropriation being made in the bill , and when told it was $ 15 @,@ 000 , had no additional questions . The bill passed without opposition , and was enacted with the signature of President Coolidge on January 14 , 1925 . 
 = = Preparation = = 
 In 1923 , the committee from Lexington and the one from Concord each had considered pressing for a commemorative coin , and each , unbeknownst to the other , had contacted Chester Beach , credited with the design for the Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar . Beach got them to combine their efforts and each agreed to pay half of his fee of $ 1 @,@ 250 . Each town would decide the design for one side of the half dollar . 
 Judge Prescott Keyes , who led the Concord committee , sent Beach the proposed design for the obverse ( the Concord side ) on February 2 , 1925 , letting him know the Lexington design for the reverse , or Lexington side , would soon follow . The following day , Edward Stone , attorney for the Lexington committee , sent Beach a letter formalizing the contract . Beach would not be paid unless the Commission of Fine Arts approved the plaster models . Beach replied to Stone on the 4th , relating that he had spoken to James Earle Fraser , designer of the Buffalo nickel and sculptor member of the commission , and had been informed that the commission had just had its monthly meeting , but that a quorum could be assembled to approve the coin . Beach noted that the Mint would take three or four weeks to begin striking coins once final approval was given ; he had discussed this with Chief Engraver George T. Morgan in 1924 . Morgan had recently died , but Beach did not expect the new chief engraver , John R. Sinnock , to cause any additional delays . 
 On February 4 , Concord artist Philip Holden sent Beach improved sketches for both sides . Beach had been under the impression that the year must appear on the coin by itself , in addition to the anniversary dates 1775 — 1925 ; on February 5 Keyes wrote to Beach that he had viewed the Pilgrim Tercentenary half dollar and the Huguenot @-@ Walloon half dollar . Both bore their dates only as part of anniversaries . Keyes noted that the two coins had the words " <unk> " and " HUGUENOT " respectively before " HALF DOLLAR " , and proposed that the word " PATRIOT " appear in the same place on the new coin . Keyes noted that April 19 , the anniversary of both battles , is Patriot Day in Massachusetts . He insisted that the words " THE CONCORD <unk> MAN " appear even if it was illegible , " the public in these two towns are sometimes pretty sensitive about petty matters and so Mr. Stone and I have been very particular to come to an agreement as to all details . " 
 Beach agreed to the wording changes , subject to approval by the authorities in Washington . On February 12 , 1925 , Keyes wrote again to tell him that Harry B. Little , architect of the National Cathedral , had looked at the designs and had suggestions , including moving the words " E PLURIBUS UNUM " from the lower part of the Concord side to the left of the minuteman . He also proposed putting " April 19 " on the coin ; Beach did not do so , though he adopted other suggestions from Keyes . The Commission of Fine Arts felt that French 's statue , due to its narrowness , was not suitable for a coin . Nevertheless , it approved the design , with Moore writing to Mint Director Robert J. Grant on March 5 that " a designer should be permitted to use symbols as he best knows how to use them in filling the spaces of a coin or medal . " 
 By March 27 , trial strikes had been made of the new coin at the Philadelphia Mint . Stone ordered an initial quantity of 100 @,@ 000 half dollars on March 31 . 
 = = Design = = 
 The obverse reproduces Daniel Chester French 's statue The Minute Man that stands in Concord . Commemorating the minutemen , volunteer militia who fought the British in 1775 , it depicts a farmer , rifle in hand . His coat is draped over his plow , and he is ready to respond to the signal to assemble , presumably to be given by the bell in the Old Belfry at Lexington , the subject of the reverse of the coin . The minuteman 's head obscures part of the name of the country he helped to establish , and he is flanked on the left by the words " CONCORD <unk> @-@ MAN " and on the right by " IN GOD WE TRUST " . French meant to represent militia captain Isaac Davis , who was killed at Concord . Not shown on the coin , but on the base of the statue in Concord , is the first stanza of Ralph Waldo Emerson 's poem , " Concord Hymn " , verses dutifully memorized by generations of American schoolchildren . 
 The reverse depicts the Old Belfry , located in Lexington , where a bell was sounded to assemble the local militia . The belfry was not then old , having been built following the donation of a bell weighing 463 pounds ( 210 kg ) by Isaac Stone to the town of Lexington in 1761 . The bell was sounded after Revere and Dawes arrived , but when no British soldiers appeared , Captain John Parker sent his men home , with instructions to remain ready . It was sounded again at 5 : 30 am , when word came the British were not far away . 
 Numismatist John F. Jones , in his 1937 survey of commemoratives , felt the statue and belfry highly appropriate subjects for the coin , but regretted that it lacked the clear , sharp lines of earlier special issues . Art historian Cornelius Vermeule , in his book on U.S. coins and medals , stated that the Lexington @-@ Concord half dollar " is almost reduced to the artistic level of a photograph , for little is left that is original on the part of Beach " . Vermeule deprecated the many inscriptions , though admitting they were forced on Beach , and especially disliked the placement of " In God We Trust " : " nothing is more out of place than the religious motto . " Vermeule opined that " although less irritating than his half @-@ dollar for the Monroe Doctrine Centennial , this coin does no credit to Beach 's stature as a first @-@ class artist . What the coin exudes in patriotism , it lacks in art . " 
 = = Production , distribution , and collecting = = 
 A total of 162 @,@ 099 Lexington @-@ Concord Sesquicentennial half dollars were struck at the Philadelphia Mint in April and May , 1925 , with 99 pieces set aside for inspection and testing by the 1926 Assay Commission . The coins were made from blanks , or planchets , that had been intended for mintage into 1924 Stone Mountain Memorial half dollars , but had not been used . 
 The first coin struck was presented to President Coolidge . The half dollars were sold at the anniversary celebrations in Lexington and at those in Concord , both held April 18 – 20 , 1925 , with 39 @,@ 000 sold in Lexington and 21 @,@ 000 in Concord . Distribution was handled by the Lexington Trust Company and the Concord National Bank , which sold them in wooden boxes decorated with images of the statue and belfry . They were sold by banks throughout New England , and to some extent elsewhere in the country . Only 86 coins were returned to the Mint , likely representing damaged pieces . Most were sold to the general public , not to collectors . The asking price was $ 1 . The edition of R.S. Yeoman 's A Guide Book of United States Coins published in 2015 lists the half dollar at between $ 100 and $ 975 depending on condition . An exceptional specimen sold at auction in 2014 for $ 11 @,@ 880 . 
 = Fur @-@ bearing trout = 
 The fur @-@ bearing trout ( or furry trout ) is a fictional creature purportedly found in North America and Iceland . According to tales , the trout has created a thick coat of fur to maintain its body heat . Tales of furry fish date to the 17th @-@ century and later the " shaggy trout " of Iceland . The earliest known American publication dates from a 1929 Montana Wildlife magazine article by J.H. Hicken . A taxidermy furry trout produced by Ross C. Jobe is a specimen at the Royal Museum of Scotland ; it is a trout with white rabbit fur " ingeniously " attached . 
 There are no real examples of any fur @-@ bearing trout species , but two examples of hair @-@ like growths on fish are known . The " cotton mold " , Saprolegnia , can infect fish , which can result in the appearance of fish covered in the white " fur " . A real fish , <unk> <unk> , also known as the " Hairy Fish " , has hair @-@ like outgrowths and wings . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Fur @-@ bearing trout are fictional creatures that are purportedly found in Arkansas , northern North America , and Iceland . The basic claim ( or tall tale ) is that the waters of lakes and rivers in the area are so cold that they evolved a thick coat of fur to maintain their body heat . Another theory says that it is due to four jugs - or two bottles - of hair tonic being spilled into the Arkansas River . 
 The origins vary , but one of the earlier claims date to a 17th @-@ century Scottish immigrant 's letter to his relatives referring to " <unk> animals and fish " being plentiful in the New World . It was followed by a request to procure a specimen of these " <unk> fish " and one was sent one home . A publication in 1900 recounts the Icelandic Lodsilungur , another haired trout , as being a common folklore . The earliest known American publication dates from a 1929 Montana Wildlife magazine article by J.H. Hicken . 
 The " cotton mold " Saprolegnia will sometimes infect fish , causing tufts of fur @-@ like growth to appear on the body . A heavy infection will result in the death of the fish , and as the fungus continues to grow afterwards , dead fish that are largely covered in the white " fur " can occasionally be found washed ashore . A real fish , <unk> <unk> known as the " Hairy Fish " , has hair @-@ like outgrowths and wings . It was discovered in the Azores in 1956 . 
 = = Icelandic Lodsilungur = = 
 According to Icelandic legend , the Lodsilungur is a furry trout that is the creation of demons and giants . The Lodsilungur are described as inedible fish that overwhelm rivers and are a form of punishment for human wickedness . In 1900 , The Scottish Review featured an account of the Lodsilungur as a poisonous " Shaggy trout " of northern Iceland . In 1854 , a shaggy trout was " cast on shore at <unk> @-@ <unk> " and featured in an 1855 illustration in <unk> , a newspaper . It was described as having a reddish hair on its lower jaw and neck , sides and fins , but the writer of the <unk> article did not specifically identify it by name . Sjón , a popular Icelandic writer , became obsessed with the folk tale when he was nine . Sjón recounted that if a man were to eat the furry trout he would become pregnant and that his scrotum would have to be cut open to deliver the baby . Sjón noted that the story " might explain why I was later propelled towards surrealism . " 
 = = United States Furry <unk> = = 
 An account of a furry trout appeared in 1929 in Montana Wildlife magazine and was first noted by J.H. Hicken . Hicken 's account states that when the fish is caught " the change of temperature from this water to atmosphere is so great that the fish explodes upon being taken from the water , and fur and skin come off in one perfect piece , making it available for commercial purposes , and leaving the body of the fish for refrigerator purposes or eating , as desired . " 
 Another fur @-@ bearing trout story originated with Wilbur Foshay , secretary of the Chamber of Commerce . Foshay promoted the story so convincingly that it was picked up by the Salida Record newspaper . According to its Foshay , the trout grew fur due to the cold temperatures of the Arkansas River and shed the fur as the water temperatures warmed in the summer . In November 1938 , a story in the Puebloan <unk> recounted the hairy trout history and stated that " [ o ] ld @-@ timers living along the Arkansas River near Salida have told tales for many years of the fur @-@ bearing trout indigenous to the waters of the Arkansas near there . " In 2014 , Mysteries at the Museum visited the Salida Museum and is expected to be part of a segment in late 2014 . 
 A tall tale was recounted by S.E. Schlosser , it states that hairy trout were the result of two bottles or four jugs of spilled hair tonic . To catch hairy trout , fisherman would act as barbers and lure fish from the waters with the offer of a free trim or shave . An intentionally fantastical story in Maine and claimed hairy trout were under catch and release policy that was enforced by wardens ' carrying Brannock Devices . If a fish was caught , the warden would measure it against the fisher 's foot . If the fish 's length matched the fisher 's foot size , the fish could be eaten and the <unk> made into furry slippers . 
 = = Canada = = 
 The Canadian Fur @-@ bearing trout is another example of the furry trout hoax . According to the story , a trout with white fur was caught in Lake Superior off Gros Cap in Sault Ste . Marie , Ontario , Algoma District , Canada , and its taxidermist was Ross C. Jobe of Sault Ste . Marie . The purchaser of the fish learned of the hoax after presenting it to the Royal Museum of Scotland . The white fur of a rabbit was described as being " ingeniously " attached to the fish . A fictional description of the Canadian " Hairy " Trout was published by Takeshi Yamada . 
 = Here We Go Again ( Ray Charles song ) = 
 " Here We Go Again " is a country music standard written by Don Lanier and Red Steagall that first became notable as a rhythm and blues single by Ray Charles from his 1967 album Ray Charles Invites You to Listen . It was produced by Joe Adams for ABC Records / Tangerine Records . To date , this version of the song has been the biggest commercial success , spending twelve consecutive weeks on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart , peaking at number 15 . 
 The most notable cover version is a rhythm and blues duet by Charles and Norah Jones , which appeared on the 2004 album Genius Loves Company . This version has been the biggest critical success . When Genius Loves Company was released , " Here We Go Again " earned Grammy Awards for Record of the Year and Best Pop Collaboration at the 47th Grammy Awards posthumously for Charles who died in 2004 . Another notable version by Nancy Sinatra charted for five weeks in 1969 . Johnny Duncan charted the song on Billboard 's Hot Country Songs chart for five weeks in 1972 , while Roy Clark did so for seven weeks in 1982 . 
 The song has been covered in a wide variety of musical genres . In total , five different versions have been listed on the music charts . Although its two most successful versions have been rhythm and blues recordings , many of its other notable covers were featured on country music albums . " Here We Go Again " was first covered in an instrumental jazz format , and many of the more recent covers have been sung as duets , such as one with Willie Nelson and Norah Jones with Wynton Marsalis accompanying . The song was released on their 2011 tribute album Here We Go Again : Celebrating the Genius of Ray Charles . The song lent its name to Red Steagall 's 2007 album as well . Cover versions have appeared on compilation albums by a number of artists , even some who did not release " Here We Go Again " as a single . 
 = = Original version = = 
 In November 1959 , after twelve years as a professional musician , Ray Charles signed with ABC Records , following the expiration of his Atlantic Records contract . According to Will Friedwald in A Biographical Guide to the Great Jazz and Pop Singers , " His first four ABC albums were all primarily devoted to standards ... " In the 1960s , he experienced crossover success with both rhythm and blues and country music . Because Charles was signed to ABC as a rhythm and blues singer , he decided to wait until his contract was up for its three @-@ year renewal before experimenting with country music , although he wanted to do so sooner . With the assistance of ABC executive Sid Feller , he gathered a set of country songs to record , despite the wishes of ABC . The release of his 1962 country albums , Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music and its follow @-@ up Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music , Vol . 2 , broadened the appeal of his music to the mainstream . At this point , Charles began to appeal more to a white audience . In 1962 , he founded his own record label , Tangerine Records , which ABC @-@ Paramount promoted and distributed . 
 " Here We Go Again " was recorded during a phase in Charles ' career when he was focused on performing country music . Thus , " Here We Go Again " was a country music song released by the Tangerine label ABC @-@ Paramount , but performed in Charles ' rhythm and blues style . However , his works did not bear the Tangerine label until 1968 . Feller left ABC in 1965 , but he returned to arrange Charles ' 1967 album , Ray Charles Invites You to Listen . Joe Adams produced and engineered the album , which included " Here We Go Again " . 
 First released by Charles in 1967 , " Here We Go Again " was written by Lanier and Steagall and published by the Dirk Music Company . Charles recorded it at RPM International Studios , Los Angeles , and the song was listed as the sixth of ten tracks on Ray Charles Invites You to Listen . Starting in 1987 , it was included in numerous greatest hits and compilation albums . When Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music was reissued in 1988 , the song was added as a bonus track . It was also included on the 1988 album Ray Charles Anthology . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Steagall endured polio as a teen and learned how to play the guitar and mandolin during his recuperation . This activity helped him regain the use of his left arm and hand . When he enrolled at West Texas State University , he formed his first country band . Don Lanier formed a group by the name of The Rhythm Orchids along with Buddy Knox and Jimmy Bowen . He was hired as a soil chemist but played weekends at country dances . After he quit his professional role , he formed a band that became popular in the Rocky Mountain ski @-@ resort clubs . He moved to Los Angeles in 1965 and embarked on folk club performing and songwriting . He wrote for two music publishers , Tree and Combine , before signing with Capitol Records . Eventually , Steagall joined Lanier and Bowen . Steagall and Lanier co @-@ wrote " Here We Go Again " . Steagall 's first break came when Charles covered " Here We Go Again " . Steagall says that the song " came about in a very unusual manner and very quickly " . One source even claims that Steagall did not come to Hollywood until after Charles recorded the song . 
 According to the sheet music published by Dirk Music , " Here We Go Again " is set in 12 / 8 time with a slow shuffle tempo of sixty @-@ nine beats per minute . The song is written in the key of B ♭ major . It is primarily a country song , but it contains gospel influences . According to Matthew Greenwald of Allmusic , " ' Here We Go Again ' is a soulful ballad in the Southern blues tradition . Lyrically , it has a resignation and pain that makes the blues , simply , what it is . The recording has a simple and sterling gospel arrangement and , in retrospect , is one of Charles ' finer attempts in the studio from the 1960s . " 
 = = = Performance history = = = 
 The playlist of the 1967 tour promoting Ray Charles Invites You to Listen is not readily available , but " Here We Go Again " was the best @-@ charting song on the album ( and likely on the playlist ) . Charles ' tour began with a benefit concert on the USS Constellation , which was preparing to depart for the Vietnam War from San Diego Harbor . The tour , Charles ' first since 1964 , continued to Europe in mid @-@ April where it visited the Royal Festival Hall , London and Salle Pleyel , Paris , as well as Vienna . In May , the band played back in the United States at New York City 's Carnegie Hall before returning to California . The tour received bad reviews from publications such as Jazz Journal , Jazz Magazine and New York Post . Later that summer , the band played Constitution Hall , Washington , D.C. In the fall , Charles had his first lucrative Nevada casino performances , which started with a three @-@ week run at Harrah 's Reno that was praised in Variety . The tour also had an extended fall run at the Copacabana nightclub . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Greenwald described the original version of " Here We Go Again " as " Another excellent example of how Ray Charles was able to fuse blues and country " . In a review for the single , a writer for Billboard magazine wrote that the song could easily be a " blockbuster " for Charles . 
 The original version debuted at number 79 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in the May 20 , 1967 , issue and number 48 on the US Billboard Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles top 50 chart on June 10 , 1967 . For the weeks ending July 15 , July 22 and July 29 , the song spent three weeks at its peak position of number 15 on the Hot 100 chart . It spent July 22 and July 29 at its peak position of number 5 on the Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles chart . By August 12 , it fell out the Hot 100 chart , ending a 12 @-@ week run . It remained on the Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles chart for 13 weeks ending on September 2 . " Here We Go Again " was Charles ' last single to enter the top twenty of the Hot 100 . For the year 1967 the song finished at number 80 on the US Billboard Year @-@ End Hot 100 chart and 33 on the Year @-@ End Hot Rhythm & Blues Singles chart . 
 Abroad , it debuted on the UK Singles Chart top 40 at number 38 on July 8 , 1967 , which would be its peak . It totalled 3 non @-@ consecutive weeks on the chart . In the Netherlands , " Here We Go Again " appeared on the singles chart at number 10 on July 15 , 1967 , and later peaked at number three . 
 According to Will Friedwald , this song is an example of Charles vocalizing in what would ordinarily be an generally extraneous manner for dramatic effect by using a different voice than he had ever previously exhibited . He sang " ... not just using the squeak — using a whole new kind of squeak , in fact — for additional coloring on the sidelines , but making it the heart of the matter , literally squeaking out the words and notes in harmony with the Raelettes " ( his background singers ) . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 7 @-@ inch single 
 " Here We Go Again " – 3 : 14 
 " Somebody Ought to Write a Book About It " – 3 : 02 
 According to Allmusic , the solo version is listed at lengths between 3 : 14 and 3 : 20 on various albums . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 Charles is credited as vocalist and pianist with unknown accompaniment . Feller is credited for having arranged and conducted the recording . This is one of two songs on the album ( " Yesterday " being the other ) that in addition to being listed as ABC @-@ Par <unk> is credited as Dunhill <unk> [ CD ] . The individual song had a label number ABC / <unk> <unk> . " In the Heat of the Night " also had a Dunhill credit but a different number for both Dunhill and ABC . 
 = = Nancy Sinatra version = = 
 Nancy Sinatra recorded a cover of the song for her 1969 album Nancy , which was her first album after ending her business relationship with producer Lee Hazlewood . The cover , which according to programming guides had an easy listening and country music appeal , was produced by Billy Strange . The B @-@ side to the single , " Memories " , was written by Strange along with Mac Davis . Billboard magazine staff reviewed the song favorably , stating that the cover was a " smooth sing @-@ a @-@ long pop style " . They also commended Sinatra 's singing , calling it a " fine " performance , noting that it would likely return her to the Billboard charts . Sinatra 's version was later remastered and reissued in 1996 . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 Although CD Universe describes the song as a country music song , it never charted on country music charts . For the week ending May 17 , 1969 , the song was listed among US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 106 and debuted on the US Billboard Easy Listening Top 40 chart at number 30 . The following week it debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 98 , its apex for its two @-@ week stay . The song then spent a total of two weeks on the Hot 100 . For the week ending June 7 , the song spent a second consecutive week at its peak position of number 19 on the Easy Listening chart . The song remained on the chart for five weeks until June 14 , 1969 . In Canada " Here We Go Again " debuted at number 38 on the RPM Adult Contemporary chart ( previously Young Adult Chart ) on June 2 , 1969 . It peaked at number 21 for the week of June 16 , 1969 . The song spent a total of five weeks on the chart . According to Allmusic databases , 1969 was the final year in her career that Sinatra reached the Hot 100 chart ( with " Here We Go Again " , " God Knows I Love You " and " Drummer Man " ) . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 7 @-@ inch vinyl single 
 " Here We Go Again " – 3 : 07 
 " Memories " – 3 : 40 
 According to Allmusic the original track was 3 : 09 , but when it appeared on the 2006 compilation album Essential Nancy Sinatra , it was 3 : 11 . The single was initially released through Reprise Records . In a non @-@ exclusive licensing agreement , Reprise ( part of Warner Music ) gave RCA Records the rights to distribute the records of some of their artists including Sinatra and Dean Martin . In 1971 , Sinatra and Reprise parted ways , so she signed a long term contract with RCA Records . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 The following musicians performed on this track : 
 B.J. Baker Singers ( backup vocals ) 
 The Blossoms ( backup vocals ) 
 The following musicians performed on this album : 
 = = Norah Jones and Ray Charles duet version = = 
 In 2004 , Charles re @-@ recorded " Here We Go Again " as a duet with American singer @-@ songwriter Norah Jones , who grew up listening to his music . During Jones ' Billboard interview for her 2010 collaboration album ... Featuring , which included her " Here We Go Again " duet , she said " I got a call from Ray asking if I 'd be interested in singing on this duets record . I got on the next plane and I brought my mom . We went to his studio and did it live with the band . I sang it right next to Ray , watching his mouth for the phrasing . He was very sweet and put me at ease , which was great because I was petrified walking in there . " She noted in one ... Featuring interview that the only part that was not done live was a piano overlay that she added afterwards to complement Charles ' keyboard . In the same interview , she noted that she had been given the opportunity to select a song from Charles ' songbook to perform as a duet and felt that this one provided the best opportunity to harmonize rather than alternate vocal verses . On the record , the two singers ' vocalize , accompanied by Billy Preston on Hammond organ , who had at one time been the regular organist in Charles ' band . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 As part of Charles ' Grammy Award for Album of the Year winning Genius Loves Company , the song proved to be the most popular and critically acclaimed on the album . Although the song had its early detractors , it received mostly favorable reviews . Several reviewers noted the complementarity of Jones and Charles . The Daily Vault 's Jason Warburg described the song as a " jazzy , slinky pas de deux " in which Charles matches Jones note for note . " JazzTimes ' Christopher Loudon said Charles " blends seamlessly with Jones on a velvet @-@ and @-@ <unk> " performance . The song was described by the Orlando Sentinel 's Jim Abbott as a recreation of one of the gems from Charles ' country music phase of the 1960s that produced the perfect " combination of voices and instruments " with Preston 's accompanying role on Hammond B3 . As opposed to other tracks on the album , when Charles ' voice was understated , this song was said to represent his " indomitable spirit " , while Jones performed as " an empathetic foil , [ with ] her warm , lazy vocals meshing <unk> with his over a spare but funky arrangement " . Author Mike Evans wrote that " there 's a mutual warmth of purpose in every breath [ Charles and Jones ] take " on the song . Music Week staff noted the timeliness of the release with Ray in theaters and described the song as soulful , that finely combines Charles ' " deep , honeyed growl with Jones 's lighter timber " , while noting Preston for his " sweeping " organ work . 
 The song received other specific forms of praise . Robert Christgau notes that Jones carried the vocal burden as did many of his duet partners on the album . USA Today 's Steve Jones said the song " strikes an easy groove " . PopMatters ' Kevin <unk> says " Jones nicely compliments Charles on this beautiful opening track " . Preston 's performance was favorably described by The Washington Post 's Richard Harrington as " smoky " . Critic Randy Lewis from the Chicago Tribune noted that the song 's " countrified ache " represented that part of Charles ' career . 
 When the song was included on Jones ' ... Featuring , which included three of her collaborations from Albums of the Year and several from albums that were nominees , the song did not stand out . Few of the reviews at Metacritic had substantive comments on the duet when included among her group of collaborations . While reviewing ... Featuring , Jonathan Keefe of Slant Magazine wrote that the duet was a " more staid and less compelling recording " on the album . However , Allmusic staff noted that she worked comfortably with Charles and Chris <unk> of Soul Tracks said the track was more than just filler . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 In December 2004 , the Jones – Charles version of the song was nominated in two categories at the 47th Grammy Awards . At the February 13 , 2005 awards ceremony , the duet earned the award for Record of the Year and Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals . It was the second Record of the Year winner not to make the Hot 100 ( following " Walk On " in 2001 by U2 ) . The song won Record of the Year , but not Song of the Year . Record of the Year is awarded to the artist ( s ) , producer ( s ) , recording engineer ( s ) and / or mixer ( s ) , if other than artist for newly recorded material . Song of the Year is awarded to the songwriter ( s ) of a new song or a song first achieving prominence during the eligibility year . Steagall and Lanier are credited as the writers of this song from their work on its original version in 1967 . Thus , the song was not a new song . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 For the week ending September 18 , 2004 , Genius Loves Company sold 202 @,@ 000 copies , ranking second on the US Billboard 200 chart and becoming Charles ' highest @-@ charting album in over 40 years . Digital singles sales saw 12 of the 13 tracks on the album make the US Billboard Hot Digital Tracks Top 50 chart . " Here We Go Again " was the download sales leader among the album 's songs that totaled 52 @,@ 000 digital downloads . During the week the album was released , the song debuted on the US Billboard Hot Digital Tracks chart at number 26 . " Here We Go Again " fell out of the top 50 two weeks later . It was released as a single for digital download on January 31 , 2005 . 
 After the album earned eight Grammy Awards and the song won Record of the Year , sales picked up and the album was re @-@ promoted . " Here We Go Again " entered the US Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart at number five in the issue dated ( for the week ending ) February 26 , 2005 . The song charted for a week on both the US Billboard Hot Digital Songs top 75 at number 73 and the US Billboard Pop 100 at number 74 for the week ending March 5 , 2005 , but still did not make the Hot 100 , ranking 113th before falling out of the chart . However , it ascended to its Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart peak position of number two for the week ending March 5 , 2005 . A Compact Disc single of the song was released on April 19 , 2005 . 
 In Austria , the duet debuted on the Ö3 Austria Top 40 chart at number 53 on March 6 , 2005 , and peaked the following week at number 52 . It logged six weeks on the chart . " Here We Go Again " entered the French Singles Chart at number 54 on April 2 , 2005 and peaked one week later at number 51 . It lasted 10 weeks on the top 100 chart . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 CD single 
 " Here We Go Again " ( Ray Charles and Norah Jones ) – 3 : 59 
 " Mary Ann " ( <unk> Sanchez featuring Ray Charles ) – 5 : 05 
 " Interview With Norah Jones " – 1 : 35 
 According to Allmusic , the duet version was between 3 : 56 and 3 : 59 on various albums . 
 = = = Credits = = = 
 The song was recorded at RPM International Studio ( Los Angeles ) , mixed at Capitol Studios and mastered at the Mastering Lab . 
 = = Country chart versions = = 
 Johnny Duncan charted a version of the song for Columbia Records that missed the Hot 100 chart . It debuted on the Hot Country Songs chart on September 30 , 1972 , peaking at number 66 and spending a total of five weeks on the chart . The song also spent five weeks on the Cashbox Country Singles Chart , debuting on October 7 , 1972 , and peaking at number 61 three weeks later . 
 In 1982 , Roy Clark produced a version of the song on his Turned Loose album for Churchill Records that he performed on the November 6 , 1982 ( season 15 , episode 9 ) episode of Hee Haw . It missed the Hot 100 chart , but it entered the Hot Country Songs chart in the October 30 , 1982 week at 88 . The song was one of only two mentioned in the October 30 , 1982 Billboard album review and was described as " a solid country number " . The song peaked at number 65 in the week ending November 27 and remained in the chart for two more weeks , making the total run seven weeks . The song also spent seven weeks on the Cashbox Country Singles Chart , debuting on November 6 , 1982 , and peaking at number 61 for two weeks ( December 4 and December 11 ) . 
 = = Other versions and uses = = 
 Billy Vaughn covered " Here We Go Again " on his 1967 Ode to Billy Joe instrumental jazz album , as did Dean Martin on his 1970 album My Woman , My Woman , My Wife . Glen Campbell 's version appeared on his 1971 album The Last Time I Saw Her , Eddy Arnold 's on his 1972 album Lonely People , and George Strait 's on his 1992 album Holding My Own . Steagall performed it with Reba McEntire on his 2007 Here We Go Again album , but she did not include it on her 2007 duets album Reba : Duets , which was released four weeks later . Their collaboration was favorably reviewed , and McEntire was said to reinvigorate this country standard by Nathalie <unk> of <unk> Journal . Martin 's version was 3 : 07 , and it later appeared on compilation albums , starting with the 1996 Dean Martin Gold , Vol . 2 . It has appeared on a handful of other Martin compilation albums . Campbell 's version was only 2 : 26 . Strait 's version is 2 : 53 and appears later on his 2004 Greatest Collection at a 2 : 55 length . Steagall 's version with McEntire ( who Steagall discovered at a 1974 county fair ) is 3 : 10 . American R & B and boogie @-@ woogie pianist and singer Little Willie Littlefield recorded a version for his 1997 album The Red One . 
 Willie Nelson and Wynton Marsalis , along with Norah Jones , performed two concerts at Lincoln Center 's Rose Theatre , on February 9 and February 10 , 2009 . A 2011 live tribute album by Nelson and Marsalis featuring Jones entitled Here We Go Again : Celebrating the Genius of Ray Charles was recorded on these two live dates . The album , which was released on March 29 , 2011 , included a track entitled " Here We Go Again " . The vocals on " Here We Go Again " were performed by Jones and Nelson , while instrumental support was provided by Marsalis ( trumpet ) , Dan Nimmer ( piano ) , Mickey Raphael ( harmonica ) , Walter Blanding ( tenor saxophone ) , Carlos Henriquez ( bass ) and Ali Jackson ( drums and percussion ) . The song , which had a length of 5 : 10 , was arranged by Andy Farber and performed in a rhythm and blues 12 / 8 shuffle . BBC music reviewer Bill <unk> noted that Jones added her usual " style and panache " to this performance . At one concert performance , The New York Times critic Nate Chinen felt the song sounded unrehearsed . Although critique of this track is sparse , Pop Matters ′ Will Layman notes that the album reveals " how decisive and strong Jones sounds while singing with a truly legitimate jazz group " and how Nelson predictably " breezes through his tunes with cavalier grace " . Meanwhile , he praises the professional mastery of Marsalis ' quintet . <unk> also notes that on the album Marsalis ' band " compensates quite adequately for occasional lacklustre vocals . " 
 George Strait 's country music version was performed with the instrumental support of Joe <unk> ( bass guitar ) , Floyd Domino ( piano ) , Buddy Emmons ( steel guitar ) , Steve Gibson ( acoustic guitar ) , Johnny <unk> ( fiddle ) , Jim Horn ( saxophone , alto flute ) , Larrie Londin ( drums ) , Liana Manis ( background vocals ) , Curtis Young ( background vocals ) , and Reggie Young ( electric guitar ) . The album was produced by Jimmy Bowen and Strait . In 1992 Entertainment Weekly 's Alanna Nash regarded the album as Strait 's " most hard @-@ core country album " up to that point in his career . Allmusic staff noted that the album held its own at the time of release against most of its competitors and has aged better than most country music albums . Ralph Novak , Lisa Shea , Eric Levin , and Craig Tomashoff of People said the album represents the most straightforward style of singing . The iTunes Store describes the album as the result of a transition in eras of country music . 
 The song plays during the opening credit dance by Franz ( Harry Baer ) and Margarethe ( Margarethe von <unk> ) in Rainer Werner Fassbinder 's 1970 film Gods of the Plague . However , the song was on neither the eponymous soundtrack for the 2004 film Ray nor the limited edition additional soundtrack album More Music From Ray . 
 = Format of Sesame Street = 
 Sesame Street is an American children 's television program that is known for its use of format and structure to convey educational concepts to its preschool audience , and to help them prepare for school . It utilizes the conventions of television such as music , humor , sustained action , and a strong visual style , and combines Jim Henson 's Muppets , animation , short films , humor , and cultural references . The show , which premiered in 1969 , was the first to base its contents , format , and production values on laboratory and formative research . According to researchers , it was also the first to include a curriculum " detailed or stated in terms of measurable outcomes " . 
 The format of Sesame Street consisted of a combination of commercial television production elements and educational techniques . It was the first time a more realistic setting , an inner city street and neighborhood , was used for a children 's program . At first , each episode was structured like a magazine , but in 1998 , as a result of changes in their audience and its viewing habits , the producers researched the reasons for its lower ratings , and changed the show 's structure to a more narrative format . The popular , fifteen @-@ minute long segment , " Elmo 's World " , hosted by the Muppet Elmo , was added in 1998 to make the show more accessible to a younger audience . The producers of Sesame Street expanded the new format to the entire show in 2002 . 
 = = Original format = = 
 The producers of Sesame Street , which premiered in 1969 , used elements of commercial television such as music , humor , sustained action , and a strong visual style , in structuring the format of the show . They also used animation and live @-@ action short films . The show 's staff produced segments filmed in @-@ studio with their human and Muppet cast and they contracted out the animations and short films to independent producers . Co @-@ creator Joan Ganz Cooney was the first to suggest that they use commercial @-@ like 12 – 90 @-@ second shorts that consistently repeated several key concepts throughout an episode . The studio segments were written to concentrate on the African @-@ American child , a key component of the show 's audience . 
 The show 's producers and writers decided to build the new show around a brownstone on an inner @-@ city street , a choice writer Michael Davis called " unprecedented " . They reproduced their viewers ' neighborhoods — as writer Cary O 'Dell described it , " a realistic city street , complete with peeling paint , alleys , front stoops , and metal trash cans along the sidewalk " . Director Jon Stone was convinced that in order for inner @-@ city children to relate to Sesame Street , the show had to be set in a familiar place . Despite its urban setting , the producers depicted the world in a positive way — both realistically and as it could be . They attempted to present " an idealized world of learning and play " , and from a child 's perspective . Director Jim Martin called Sesame Street " an urban show kids could relate to " and " a reality show with a sprinkling of fantasy " . 
 When Sesame Street was developed , most researchers assumed that young children did not have long attention spans , so the new show 's producers were concerned that an hour @-@ long show would not hold their audience 's attention . As a result , each episode was structured like a magazine , which made it possible for the producers to create a mixture of styles , paces , and characters . The structure allowed them to have flexibility , meaning that segments were dropped , modified , or added without affecting the rest of the show . As Lesser stated , " It is unlikely that any other approach would have provided enough room to present material on the wide range of goals we had selected " . Producers found that if the show 's segments were sufficiently varied in character , content , style , pace , and mood , children 's attention was able to be sustained throughout each episode . The show 's magazine format accommodated both the curriculum and its demanding production schedule . 
 = = = " Street scenes " = = = 
 At first , the show 's " street scenes " , which referred to the action taking place on the brownstone set , were not story @-@ based . Instead , they consisted of individual segments connected to the curriculum and interrupted by inserts , or puppet skits , short films , and animations . By 1990 , research had shown that children were able to follow a story , so the street scenes were changed to depict storylines . The writers presented a story , separated by several inserts , dispersed throughout the hour @-@ long show . Although the stories were usually about 10 – 12 minutes in length , it would take 45 minutes to tell them . According to writer Tony Geiss , the addition of storylines changed the nature of the show . 
 During Sesame Street 's development in 1968 , the producers followed the recommendation of child psychologists , who advised them to not allow the direct interaction of the human actors and Muppets because the experts were concerned it would confuse and mislead young children . Shortly before the show 's premiere , the producers created five one @-@ hour episodes so that they could test if children found them comprehensible and appealing . They were never intended for broadcast , but were presented to preschoolers in 60 homes throughout Philadelphia in July 1969 . The producers found that the results were " generally very positive " . However , children attended to the shows during the Muppet segments , but their interest was lost during the street scenes , which featured only humans and were considered " the glue " that " pulled the show together " . The appeal of the test episodes was lower than they preferred , so the producers re @-@ shot the street segments . Henson and his team created Muppets that could interact with the human actors ; specifically , as the show 's researchers put it , " two of Sesame Street 's most enduring Muppets : Oscar the Grouch and Big Bird " . The test episodes were responsible for what writer Malcolm Gladwell called " the essence of Sesame Street — the artful blend of fluffy monsters and earnest adults " . CTW researcher Gerald Lesser called the producers ' decision to defy the recommendations of their advisers " a turning point in the history of Sesame Street " . 
 = = = Animation and films = = = 
 Animation was another important aspect of the structure of Sesame Street . Lesser stated that one of the purposes of animation was to create incongruity , or what he called " illogical surprises " . The first piece of animation commissioned by the CTW for Sesame Street was " the J commercial " , in 1968 , which they used in a study about its effectiveness in daycare centers in New York City . The CTW found that it was an effective tool in teaching children letters and numbers and that it effectively attracted children 's attention . It also provided evidence , as writer Robert W. Morrow reported , that children were able to " endure enormous amounts of repetition " . According to Morrow , the CTW 's generalization from this study , which was later supported by outside studies , was that although repetition was an effective teaching method , repeated exposure " determined instructional effectiveness " . " The J commercial " was a part of CTW 's promotional film about Sesame Street and was used to demonstrate its teaching style to the press . 
 Sesame Street 's animations and live @-@ action films were usually commissioned to outside studios . For example , <unk> Studio in Florence , Italy provided animations for the show for its entire run . Many animations , as well as the show 's live @-@ action films and longer segments like Elmo 's World were created to accompany specific episodes , and became part of its library of shorts available for use in later episodes . Other films and animations were created as regular , recurring , and stand @-@ alone segments . Gikow reported , " Virtually all animators and filmmakers supplying the show cite the enormous freedom given by producers , calling it a liberating force that let creativity explode on screen " . 
 CTW 's first producer responsible for the show 's animation and live @-@ action shorts was Lu Horne . His successor , Edith <unk> , was interested in what Gikow called " emerging talent " , and as a result , the show worked with , as Gikow also stated , " animators and filmmakers on the cusp of fame " . Animators who created pieces for Sesame Street included Bud Luckey , Jeffrey Hale , Ernie <unk> , and others who went on to work at Pixar . Jim Henson was one of the many producers who created short films for the show . 
 As Gikow stated , " The expansion of the Sesame Street brand into films , videos , and television specials was a natural " . There have been two full @-@ length films produced : Sesame Street Presents Follow That Bird ( 1985 ) and The Adventures of Elmo in Grouchland ( 1999 ) . On June 18 , 2012 , 20th Century Fox announced that a third Sesame Street film will be going into production with animator Joey Mazzarino working on the screenplay . Starting in 1978 with Christmas Eve on Sesame Street , there have been several television specials , and the Sesame Street Muppets have made several appearances on other programs throughout the years . Home videos , which emphasized specific curriculum goals , began to be produced in 1985 . 
 = = Format changes after the 1990s = = 
 Sesame Street 's format remained intact until the show 's later decades . By the 1990s , its dominance was challenged by other programs such as Blue 's Clues , and its ratings declined . New research , the growth of the children 's home video industry , and the increase of 30 @-@ minute children 's shows on cable demonstrated that the traditional magazine @-@ format was not necessarily the most effective way to hold young viewers ' attention . For Sesame Street 's 30th anniversary in 1999 , its producers researched the reasons for the show 's lower ratings . For the first time since the show debuted , the producers and a team of researchers analyzed Sesame Street 's content and structure during a series of two @-@ week @-@ long workshops . They also studied how children 's viewing habits had changed and become more sophisticated in thirty years . They found that although the show was produced for 3 @-@ to @-@ 5 @-@ year @-@ olds , children began watching it at a younger age . As a result , the target age for Sesame Street shifted downward , from 4 years to 3 years . 
 In 1998 , a new 15 @-@ minute long segment , created and developed by writers Judy Freudberg and Tony Geiss , that targeted the show 's younger viewers and had a different format than the rest of the show , began to be shown at the end of each episode . The segment , called " Elmo 's World " , used traditional elements ( animation , Muppets , music , and live @-@ action film ) , but had a more sustained narrative , followed the same structure each episode , and depended heavily on repetition . Unlike the realism of the rest of the show , " Elmo 's World " took place in a stylized crayon @-@ drawn universe as conceived by its host . Elmo , who represented the younger audience , was chosen as the host of the closing segment because younger toddlers identified with him and because he had always tested well with them . 
 In 2002 , Sesame Street 's producers went further in changing the show to reflect its younger audience and the increase in their viewers ' sophistication . They expanded the " Elmo 's World " concept by , as San Francisco Chronicle TV critic Tim Goodman called it , " deconstructing " the show . They changed the structure of the entire show to a more narrative format , which made the show easier for young children to navigate . Arlene Sherman , a co @-@ executive producer for 25 years , called the show 's new look " startlingly different " . 
 " Elmo 's World " stopped production in 2009 , when the producers of Sesame Street began taking steps to increase the age of their viewers and to increase the show 's ratings , and because the show 's curriculum was not designed for a younger audience . They were successful ; by the end of the show 's 40th anniversary in 2009 , 3 @-@ year @-@ old viewers had increased by 41 percent , 4 @-@ year @-@ olds by 4 percent , and 5 @-@ year @-@ olds by 21 percent . In 2012 , " Elmo 's World " was replaced by " Elmo the Musical " ; even though it was designed for older viewers , the producers hoped that younger children would still enjoy it . " Elmo 's World " segments continued to appear in repeats , DVDs , and on the show 's website . 
 = Destination X ( 2005 ) = 
 Destination X ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion , which took place on March 13 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the first event under the Destination X chronology . Nine matches and two preshow matches were featured on the event 's card . 
 The main event was a Ringside Revenge match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between the champion , Jeff Jarrett , and the challenger , Diamond Dallas Page ( DDP ) , in which Jarrett retained the title . Another featured match was an Ultimate X Challenge for the TNA X Division Championship involving A.J. Styles , Christopher Daniels , Ron Killings , and Elix Skipper . Daniels was declared the winner of the contest , thus winning the championship from Styles . The Outlaw versus Kevin Nash in a Taped Fist First Blood match and Abyss versus Jeff Hardy in a Falls Count Anywhere match were two matches also featured on the card . The Outlaw and Hardy won their respective encounters . 
 This event is the only time the Ultimate X Challenge variation of the Ultimate X match has been used . Chris Sokol of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website felt the event was a " tremendous PPV " . The event was down by 10 @,@ 000 from previous TNA PPV events . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Destination X was announced in early 2005 to be taking place on March 13 , with the location unknown but anticipated to be the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . On January 24 , 2005 a TNA press release confirmed that the event would be held in Orlando . Sometime prior to the event , TNA released a promotional poster for the event featuring Diamond Dallas Page . An idea considered during the planning stages of the PPV , was to host a one @-@ night X Division tournament similar to the Super J @-@ Cup held by New Japan Pro Wrestling . Holding an Ultimate X match was also planned . After TNA 's previous PPV event , Against All Odds , TNA created a section about Destination X on their official website . In early @-@ March 2005 TNA announced they would be holding a 30 @-@ minute pre @-@ show prior to the event featuring two matches : Chris Candido and Andy Douglas versus Lex Lovett and Buck Quartermain ; Kid Kash and Lance Hoyt versus Cassidy Riley and Jerrelle Clark . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Destination X featured nine professional wrestling matches and two pre @-@ show matches that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches 
 The main event was a Ringside Revenge match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between the champion , Jeff Jarrett , and the challenger , Diamond Dallas Page ( DDP ) . On February 4 , Fox Sports Net 's The Best Damn Sports Show Period held a special episode named " The Best Darn Super Bowl Road Show Period " . During the broadcast , TNA wrestlers DDP , Kevin Nash , Monty Brown , and Jarrett were involved in a segment where they debated over who would win at Super Bowl XXXIX between the New England Patriots and the Philadelphia Eagles . The segment concluded with Jarrett attempting to bash an acoustic guitar over Nash 's head , due to the two being involved in a match at the Against All Odds PPV event on February 13 . DDP , however , thrust Nash out of the way and was struck by the guitar instead . On the February 18 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! , Director of Authority Dusty Rhodes announced that Jarrett 's next title defense would be against DDP at Destination X. On the March 4 episode of Impact ! , Rhodes announced the match would be held under a stipulation — the ringside would be occupied by wrestlers who had previously been attacked by Jarrett . 
 TNA play @-@ by @-@ play commentator Mike Tenay announced on the February 11 episode of Impact ! that TNA were planning to host an Ultimate X match at their March PPV event . On the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Tenay announced that the Ultimate X match at Destination X would be contested for the TNA X Division Championship , TNA would be hosting qualifying matches to fill the remaining spots leading up to the event , and that the match would be contested under special rules : The match would follow a series of stages ; stage one being a tag team match until a pinfall or submission eliminates a competitor ; stage two being a Three Way match until another pinfall or submission eliminates a competitor ; and in stage three the match would fall to standard Ultimate X match rules , with the two remaining wrestlers having to climb the structure to retrieve the championship belt which hung above the ring . On the March 4 episode of Impact ! , Styles defeated Kid Kash to retain the X Division Championship and earn his spot in the Ultimate X match . On the March 11 episode of Impact ! , it was announced that Ron Killings and Elix Skipper were slated to participate . Christopher Daniels earned the final spot by defeating Chris Sabin later in the same episode . 
 Several matches on the undercard were promoted for the event . Build to Jeff Hardy versus Abyss in a Falls Count Anywhere match began at TNA 's Final Resolution PPV event on January 16 , where Abyss attacked Hardy after his match with Scott Hall . This led to a match at Against All Odds , in which Abyss defeated Hardy in a Full Metal Mayhem match . On the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Rhodes announced their match at Destination X. Set @-@ up for the bout between Nash and The New Age Outlaw ( NAO ) started at Against All Odds , where Nash faced Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . During the contest the debuting NAO interfered aiding Jarrett . On the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Nash and NAO was involved in a small brawl . Later in the episode , Tenay announced that Nash and NAO would face in a No Disqualification match at Destination X. Another encounter promoted prior to the event was the Bullrope match between Raven and Dustin Rhodes . The pair previously met in a match at Against All Odds , which Raven won . On the February 18 episode of Impact ! , Dustin announced a rematch for Destination X in a Bullrope match . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to the event 's commencement , two matches were held during the 30 minute pre @-@ show . The first match pitted the teams of Chris Candido and Andy Douglas against Lex Lovett and Buck Quartermain . It lasted 7 minutes and 58 seconds , which Candido and Douglas won after Candido performed a diving headbutt from the top of a padded turnbuckle onto Buck and covered for the pinfall . 
 The second lasted 8 minutes and 45 seconds , pitting the team of Kid Kash and Lance Hoyt against the team of Cassidy Riley and Jerrelle Clark . Kash and Hoyt came out the victors in the contest following Kash gaining the pinfall after slamming Clark into the mat by performing his signature maneuver the Money Maker . 
 = = = On @-@ air employees = = = 
 The event featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay and Don West were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Earl Hebner , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Besides employees appearing in a wrestling role , Coach D 'Amore , Johnny Devine , Andy Douglas , Chris Candido , Traci , Trinity , Dusty Rhodes , Larry <unk> , Dirk Diggler , Jonny Fairplay , Shocker , Buck Quartermain , and Lex Lovett all appeared on camera , either in backstage or ringside segments . Jimmy Hart was reported to have been backstage during the show . It was reported following the event , that TNA wrestler Petey Williams performed with an injury during the eight man tag team match which he had sustained the night before . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The opening contest was an eight @-@ man tag team match pitting the teams of the 3Live Kru ( B.G. James and Konnan ) and America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ) against Alex Jerrell , Bobby Roode , Eric Young , and Petey Williams , who were accompanied by Coach D 'Amore and Johnny Devine , collectively known as Team Canada . The match lasted 8 minutes and 52 seconds before concluding following Roode hitting the back of Konnan 's head with his forearm then covering for the pinfall . 
 Chris Sabin fought Chase Stevens , who was accompanied by Andy Douglas and Chris Candido , in the following match . The duration of the bout was 6 minutes and 18 seconds . Sabin won the contest after countering a roll @-@ up pin attempt by Stevens , into one of his own for the three count . After the bout , Stevens , Douglas , and Candido proceeded to attack Sabin until Shocker made his TNA debut , coming to the aid of Sabin . 
 A bullrope match was held between Dustin Rhodes and Raven , which lasted 6 minutes and 10 seconds . In a bullrope match , both competitors are tied together during the duration of the match by a bullrope with the only way to win being pinfall or submission . Dustin won the encounter following slamming Raven face @-@ first into a steel chair and covering him for the pinfall . 
 Don and Ron Harris , known as The Disciples of Destruction and representatives of Traci , were pitted against Phi Delta Slam ( Bruno Sassi and Big Tilly ) , representatives of Trinity , in a tag team match . The pre @-@ match stipulation for the contest was that whoever the winning team represented would become the personal assistant of Director of Authority Dusty Rhodes . The two teams fought for 10 minutes and 18 seconds before a pinfall occurred , as a result of Ron kicking Big Tilly in the face . 
 The fifth encounter was Monty Brown versus Trytan ; its duration was 5 minutes and 26 seconds . Near the end of the bout , the lights went off in the building . When they came back on Trytan had left the ring , replaced by an unknown masked man . After a few seconds , Brown gained the <unk> and performed his signature maneuver the Pounce then covered the masked man for the pin , as the referee began to count . After the bout , Trytan was shown standing on the entrance ramp watching Brown , leaving the match with an unknown outcome . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Abyss fought Jeff Hardy in a Falls Count Anywhere match next , lasting 15 minutes and 48 seconds . Mid @-@ way through the match , Hardy placed Abyss on two wooden tables , climbed up to the rafters ten feet above , then performed a somersault onto Abyss through both tables . Hardy claimed victory in the contest after slamming Abyss into a ladder by using his signature maneuver the Twist of Fate . After the contest , Abyss attacked Hardy , covered the ring in thumbtacks , and used his signature maneuver the Black Hole Slam to drive Hardy into the tacks back first . Reported after the event , Abyss sustained an injury during this match , in which he dislocated a finger . 
 Kevin Nash faced The New Age Outlaw , now simply The Outlaw , in a Taped Fist First Blood match , originally advertised as a No Disqualification match . A First Blood match is fought until one of the competitors bleeds . The match lasted 11 minutes and 20 seconds . The Outlaw was the first to bleed after Nash dropped him face first into an exposed turnbuckle , however the referee had been knocked unconscious , in storyline terms , and did not see this occur . As Nash tried to revive the referee , Jeff Jarrett ran down to ringside and bashed Nash in the face with the NWA World Heavyweight Championship belt , causing him to bleed . When the referee awoke , he saw Nash was bleeding and gave the victory to The Outlaw , who had been aided by Jarrett 's lawyer Dirk Diggler and a doctor in wiping away the blood on his face . 
 An Ultimate X match was held , promoted as an Ultimate X Challenge match , for the TNA X Division Championship , in which then @-@ champion A.J. Styles defended the title against Christopher Daniels , Elix Skipper , and Ron Killings . It lasted 25 minutes and 19 seconds . The match began with the tag team match stage , in which the team of Styles and Skipper faced the team of Killings and Daniels . Killings was the first eliminated , as a result of Skipper using his signature maneuver the Sudden Death to slam Killings into the mat . The second stage was a Three Way match between the remaining participants . During this stage , Daniels climbed up the Ultimate X structure and performed a backflip off the center onto both Skipper and Styles . Skipper was later eliminated by Daniels using a roll @-@ up pin . Due to this elimination , stage three began with the match falling to standard Ultimate X rules . Near the end of the bout , Styles and Daniels fell from the structure and crashed into the referee , causing him to be knocked unconscious in the storyline . Afterwards , Styles climbed and retrieved the belt . With the referee down , Daniels attacked Styles and performed his signature maneuver the Angel 's Wings . Then grabbed the title belt , fell to the ground , and draped it over his chest as the referee came too . The referee then awarded Daniels ' the victory upon seeing him with the title belt . 
 The main event was a Ringside Revenge match for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship between defending champion Jeff Jarrett and the challenger Diamond Dallas Page . The wrestlers who appeared at ringside were Konnan , Ron Killings , Monty Brown , B.G. , Larry <unk> , Dirk Diggler , Chris Candido , Andy Douglas , and Chase Stevens . The bout lasted 21 minutes and 40 seconds , ending when Brown interfered and <unk> DDP , then pulled an unconscious Jarrett over DDP for the pinfall . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 775 people attended the event , however , TNA were forced to turn away 600 people . It was said that the buyrate was down by 10 @,@ 000 from previous PPV events . Canadian Online Explorer writer Chris Sokol felt the event was a " tremendous PPV " . Going on to conclude that it was the " best one of the year thus far " . Regrading the main event , Sokol felt it " was a given that Jarrett would retain " , however felt it was " still very exciting " . James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch stated in his review that he felt the Ultimate X Challenge match was " absolutely amazing " . He also felt it had " plenty of psychologically sound factors mixed in with the high spots " . <unk> referred to Daniels ' <unk> from the Ultimate X structure represented " what athleticism and amazing pro wrestling is all about " . Caldwell stated in his review that he felt that Abyss ' attack on Hardy after their encounter was " amazing " . As for the match , Caldwell believed it was a " great match " . Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch rated the Ultimate X Challenge 4 and a fourth stars out of 5 , while the main event 2 and three @-@ quarter stars out of 5 . The Falls Count Anywhere match was given 3 and a fourth stars out of 5 , 1 and a half stars more than the Taped Fist First Blood match . His lowest rated match during his review was the encounter between The Disciples of Destruction and Phi Delta Slam , which he gave three @-@ quarters of a star . The event was released on DVD on November 15 , 2005 by TNA Home Video . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 TNA 's next PPV after Destination X was Lockdown held on April 24 . All matches held at Lockdown were conducted inside a six sided steel structure known as the Six Sides of Steel . 
 Following Destination X , Jeff Jarrett teamed with The Outlaw and Monty Brown under the name Team Jarrett to face Team Nash ( DDP , Sean Waltman , and B.G. James ) in a Lethal Lockdown match at Lockdown . The match was announced on the March 25 episode of Impact ! by Director of Authority Dusty Rhodes by request of Kevin Nash . Nash was originally slated to be in the match but was removed due to an injury and replaced by B.G. James . Team Nash ended up winning the contest . 
 A.J. Styles fought Abyss at Lockdown in the main event . The match was announced on the April 1 episode of Impact ! with the stipulation being the winner got a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship . On the April 8 episode of Impact ! Rhodes announced that the winner would get their title match at TNA 's May PPV event Hard Justice . Styles was the winner of the encounter at Lockdown . Styles went on to Hard Justice to defeat then @-@ champion Jarrett to win the title . 
 Christopher Daniels went on to defend the TNA X Division Championship against Elix Skipper at Lockdown . Skipper won a four way elimination match to become the number one contender on the April 1 episode of Impact ! . Daniels successfully retained the title against Skipper at the event . 
 A Six Sides of Steel Tables match was held at Lockdown between Raven and Jeff Hardy . It was announced on the April 8 episode of Impact ! . Raven ended up on the losing end of the bout . 
 Destination X later became an annual event , with the second installment taking place on March 12 , 2006 in Orlando , Florida at the TNA Impact ! Zone . The main matches promoted for the event were Christian Cage defending the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Monty Brown and Samoa Joe defending the TNA X Division Championship against Christopher Daniels and A.J. Styles in an Ultimate X match . 
 = = Results = = 
 = MS West Honaker = 
 MS West Honaker was a diesel @-@ powered cargo ship of the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) that was part of the " Corncob Fleet " of old ships sunk as part of the " gooseberry " breakwater off Utah Beach during the Normandy invasion . The ship was originally built as SS West Honaker , a steam @-@ powered cargo ship built for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , a predecessor of the USMC . At the time of her completion in 1920 , the ship was inspected by the United States Navy for possible use as USS West Honaker ( ID @-@ 4455 ) but was neither taken into the Navy nor ever commissioned under that name . 
 West Honaker was built in 1920 for the USSB , as a part of the West boats , a series of steel @-@ hulled cargo ships built on the West Coast of the United States for the World War I war effort , and was the 28th ship built at Los Angeles Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company in San Pedro , California . In 1926 , West Honaker was outfitted with diesel engines that replaced her original steam engines as part of a pilot program by the USSB . After her conversion , she sailed on a New York – Australia route . On her second trip to Australia , from August 1927 to March 1928 , she became the first diesel ship to circumnavigate the globe . In 1929 , she began sailing for an around @-@ the @-@ world cargo service from the Pacific coast to South Africa 
 By the late 1930s , she had been laid up , but was reactivated for merchant service prior to World War II . She sailed to Australia and New Zealand until after the United States ' entry into World War II , and in transatlantic service to the United Kingdom for most of the time after that . In March 1944 , she sailed from the United States for the final time , and was incorporated into the Corncob Fleet of old ships scuttled in June to make the " gooseberry " breakwater off Utah Beach during the Normandy invasion . This last voyage earned the West Honaker a battle star . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 The West ships were cargo ships of similar size and design built by several shipyards on the West Coast of the United States for the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) for emergency use during World War I. All were given names that began with the word West , like West Honaker , the one of some 40 West ships built by the Los Angeles Shipbuilding & Dry Dock Company of Los Angeles . West Honaker ( Los Angeles Shipbuilding yard number 28 ) was completed in December 1920 . 
 West Honaker was 5 @,@ 376 gross register tons ( GRT ) , and was 410 feet 1 inch ( 124 @.@ 99 m ) long ( between perpendiculars ) and 54 feet 2 inches ( 16 @.@ 51 m ) abeam . She had a steel hull and a deadweight tonnage of 8 @,@ 006 DWT . Sources do not give West Honaker 's other hull characteristics , but West Grama , a sister ship also built at Los Angeles Shipbuilding had a displacement of 12 @,@ 225 t with a mean draft of 24 feet 2 inches ( 7 @.@ 37 m ) , and a hold 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) deep . West Honaker 's power plant was a single triple @-@ expansion steam engine that drove a single screw propeller , which moved the ship at up to 11 @.@ 5 knots ( 21 @.@ 3 km / h ) . 
 = = Early career = = 
 West Honaker was inspected by the United States Navy after completion for possible use as service collier and was assigned the identification number of 4455 . Had she been commissioned , she would have been known as USS West Honaker ( ID @-@ 4455 ) , but the Navy neither took over the ship nor commissioned her . 
 Destinations and cargo during West Honaker 's first six years of service are largely unreported in sources . In 1926 , however , she was the first ship in a USSB pilot program to replace steam engines of seven USSB @-@ owned ships with diesel engines . West Honaker 's 3 @,@ 000 @-@ horsepower ( 2 @,@ 200 kW ) engine , reported by The Washington Post as the largest American @-@ made diesel equipment to that time , was built by McIntosh & Seymour and installed at the Fore River Shipyard near Boston . An Associated Press news item reported that the ship 's $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 conversion , which extended the ship 's cruising radius from 7 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 13 @,@ 500 km ) to 17 @,@ 600 nautical miles ( 32 @,@ 600 km ) , would lower her cost of operation by 15 % annually . After her sea trials were complete , West Honaker sailed to Savannah , Georgia , where she began carrying cotton from that port to Bremen . 
 In January 1927 , the USSB established the Atlantic Australian Line , an all @-@ diesel New York – Australia service , and assigned West Honaker to the company . The eight ships in the service — operated by the Roosevelt Steamship Company in conjunction with another USSB @-@ line , the American India Line — sailed east from New York via the Suez Canal through the Indian Ocean and on to Australia and back via the same route . On 15 February , West Honaker sailed on her maiden voyage for the new service for Sydney , where she arrived on 5 April . 
 On 26 August , she began her second voyage to Sydney , but instead of retracing her route on the return , she continued eastward around the world , becoming — according to The New York Times — the first diesel ship to circumnavigate the globe . Upon her return to New York on 2 March 1928 , a reception was held at the Tompkinsville , Staten Island , pier where she had docked . The Roosevelt Steamship Company announced plans for West Honaker to continue in around @-@ the @-@ world service , making two voyages per year . 
 = = South African service = = 
 In February 1929 , West Honaker was bareboat chartered by the USSB for the new Pacific – South Africa Line , an around @-@ the @-@ world venture under the management of J. J. Moore & Company . The Pacific – South Africa Line service — the world 's only all @-@ diesel around @-@ the @-@ world service , as described by the Los Angeles Times — sailed from Los Angeles to South Africa via the Straits of Magellan , across the Indian Ocean to Japan and China , across the Pacific to San Francisco , and back to Los Angeles . West Honaker 's first voyage in the South African service was planned for November , but upon her arrival from New York to begin the service , it was discovered that she had cracks in her engine mountings and her cylinder head . West Honaker made her way to San Francisco , where parts were fabricated for the $ 100 @,@ 000 repair . This kept her out of service until March 1930 . 
 West Honaker departed on her long @-@ delayed maiden voyage for the Pacific – South Africa Line in mid March , and began a second voyage for the line in late October . West Honaker 's service continued uneventfully until early 1932 . On 2 March of that year , West Honaker collided with steamer Ernest H. Meyer in a snowstorm on the lower Columbia River , near Astoria , Oregon . Both ships suffered damage , but neither needed assistance to reach Portland . West Honaker had just finished undergoing general repairs in drydock in Portland prior to the collision , which caused about $ 30 @,@ 000 in damages . The USSB filed suit against the Portland Steamship Company for the cost of repairs , which were completed by mid March . 
 In mid @-@ June , the bareboat charters of the three USSB vessels still sailing for Pacific – South Africa — West Honaker , West <unk> , and Crown City — were cancelled . At the end of each ship 's voyage in progress , the ships were returned to the USSB . At the time of the announcement , West Honaker was in South African waters . The Los Angeles Times reported that preferential tariffs for British @-@ flagged ships for lumber from British Columbia — a major cargo carried by the line — were responsible for the termination . It 's not known when West Honaker completed her final trip , but in late June she was still shown in South Africa by a notice in The New York Times . After this mention , West Honaker disappears from contemporary news accounts . By 1939 , West Honaker had been laid up in a reserve fleet in the James River . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In June 1940 , the United States Maritime Commission ( USMC ) opened bidding for the reconditioning of ten laid up cargo ships , which included West Honaker . According to the Los Angeles Times , the USMC , a successor to the USSB , was forced to act because of a " critical shortage " of U.S. Navy auxiliary ships . The Maryland Drydock Company of Baltimore was the low bidder for West Honaker , offering to recondition her for $ 77 @,@ 777 . 
 On 3 November , with her reconditioning complete , West Honaker sailed from New York . After transiting the Panama Canal a week after her departure , she headed for Brisbane , Australia , where she arrived on 13 December . After then calling at Sydney , Melbourne , Port Pirie , and Adelaide through 8 January 1941 , West Honaker called at Melbourne and Sydney before departing for the United States on 18 January . Loaded with a cargo of wool intended for uniforms , blankets , and overcoats for the military , West Honaker arrived at New Bedford , Massachusetts , on 3 March . 
 From late March to mid August , West Honaker made another , almost identical Australian circuit , adding a stop in Fremantle to her Australian itinerary . Almost immediately after her return to Boston , she began a third trip to Australia . After she arrived in Brisbane on 29 October , she made stops in Sydney and Melbourne . From Sydney she made a round trip to Nouméa , New Caledonia , and sailed from there to Wellington , New Zealand , where she arrived on 11 December , four days after the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor that propelled the United States into World War II . 
 West Honaker departed Wellington on 13 December and arrived at Boston on 28 February 1942 . From Boston , she sailed to New York via Philadelphia . After sailing from New York on 29 April , West Honaker experienced some unspecified trouble , and was towed into Baltimore on 4 June . After spending almost three weeks in that port , she headed for Cape Town via Trinidad . She departed Cape Town on 24 August and sailed to Bushire , Abadan , Bandar Abbas , and Colombo over the next three months . After making a round trip to Calcutta from late November to late December , West Honaker arrived at Wellington on 26 January , sailing for New York via the Panama Canal three days later . 
 West Honaker took on a load of grain and then proceeded in convoy from Boston to Halifax in early May , and on to Belfast Lough . After making a circuit to Avonmouth and Milford Haven , West Honaker sailed from Belfast Lough for New York on 25 June . She made one additional transatlantic roundtrip beginning in late August , carrying a cargo of explosives on her outbound trip , and returning in late October . West Honaker sailed 28 November from New York for <unk> , Cuba , and returned via Key West , Florida , in late December . Sailing again for the Caribbean on 6 February , she visited Guantánamo Bay and <unk> before her 28 February 1944 return to New York . At some point within the next month , West Honaker arrived at Boston . 
 = = Final voyage = = 
 Though her crew did not know it at the time , West Honaker had been selected to be one of the blockships for the Allied invasion of France , then in the planning stages . Blockships dispatched from Boston , like West Honaker , were loaded with " tons of sand and cement " before their final U.S. departures . West Honaker sailed from Boston on 25 March 1944 as a part of Convoy BX @-@ 101 to Halifax and , from there , Convoy SC @-@ 156 to Cardiff . In his book Beyond the Palisades , Cesar Poropat , West Honaker 's chief engineer , reports that after the ship 's cargo was discharged , the ship was suddenly boarded by shipyard workers who cut holes in " strategic places " and positioned " mysterious packs " around the hull . The crew suspected , correctly , that these packs were explosives and that the ship was being prepared for sinking . Though there is no specific mention of this occurring on West Honaker , other blockships selected for the Normandy beachhead had their existing antiaircraft weapons moved higher on the ship and supplemented by additional guns . 
 Poropat recounts that after the shipyard workers departed , the crew were told to pack all their personal belongings — except for toiletries and one change of clothes — to be sent ashore . Each crewman was issued a backpack with K @-@ rations , a special life preserver , and survival equipment . West Honaker departed Cardiff on 24 April for Oban where she arrived on 5 May . She was now a part of the " Corncob Fleet , " the group of ships to be sunk to form the " gooseberries , " shallow @-@ water artificial harbors for landing craft . Once at Oban , Poropat reports that the ship 's crew was told of their mission , but to preserve secrecy , they were not permitted to leave the ships . 
 After spending five weeks at Oban — Poropat called it " the longest and most tedious five weeks " of his life — West Honaker finally moved out , sailing south through the Irish Sea to Poole . West Honaker was a part of the third " Corncob " convoy , which sailed from Poole on the night on 7 June , the day after the D @-@ Day landings , and consisted of what one author called the " dregs of the North Atlantic shipping pool . " Poropat relates that the Corncob ships crossed the English Channel under cover of darkness and , stripped of all unnecessary equipment , carried no radios , having only a signal lamp ( with a spare bulb ) for communication . 
 Around midnight 7 / 8 June , during the slow voyage across the Channel , a German airplane hit West Honaker with two skip bombs . Because the ship , already prepared for a fast sinking for the blockship duties , began taking on water , a large portion of the crew , including Chief Engineer Poropat , abandoned ship . After drifting in the Channel for most of the rest of the moonless night , they were picked up in the morning by a British trawler and returned to the UK . In the meantime , the master of the ship was able to keep West Honaker in the convoy headed to Utah beach . 
 Once at the designated location , the ships were positioned and scuttled over the next days , under heavy German artillery fire . Naval Armed Guardsmen manned the guns on all the gooseberry ships to protect against frequent German air attacks . All the while , harbor pilots — about half of the New York Bar Pilots Association , according to one source — carefully positioned the ships . West Honaker was sunk on 10 June about 400 yards ( 370 m ) off the beach , but continued to serve as an antiaircraft platform manned by Navy gun crews until 14 June , and by Army crews after that date . West Honaker 's naval gunners were awarded a battle star for participation in the Normandy Landings . 
 = McCarran International Airport = 
 McCarran International Airport ( IATA : LAS , ICAO : <unk> , FAA LID : LAS ) is the primary commercial airport serving the Las Vegas Valley , a major metropolitan area in the U.S. state of Nevada . It is located in Paradise , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south of downtown Las Vegas . The airport is owned by Clark County and operated by the Clark County Department of Aviation . It is named after Pat McCarran , a former Nevada senator who contributed to the development of aviation both in Las Vegas and on a national scale . 
 The airport was built in 1942 and opened to commercial flights in 1948 . It has undergone significant expansion since then and has employed various innovative technologies , such as common @-@ use facilities . The airport consists of four runways and two passenger terminals : Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 . Terminal 1 is composed of four concourses , namely the A , B , C , and D Gates ; Terminal 3 contains the E Gates . A people mover system is in place between the pre @-@ security area of Terminal 1 and the C and D Gates , as well as between the D Gates and Terminal 3 . East of the passenger terminals is the Marnell Air Cargo Center , and on the west side of the airports are facilities for fixed @-@ base operators and helicopter companies . 
 McCarran received over 45 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 passengers in 2015 , a 5 @.@ 8 % increase over the previous year but still below pre @-@ recession levels . It is the 26th busiest airport in the world by passenger traffic and the 8th busiest by aircraft movements . The airport has nonstop air service to destinations in North America , Europe , and Asia . It is an operating base for Allegiant Air , as well as a crew and maintenance base for Southwest Airlines and Spirit Airlines . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins ( 1920 – 48 ) = = = 
 Anderson Field was the first airport to serve Las Vegas , opening in November 1920 . Purchased by the Rockwell brothers in 1925 , the airfield was renamed Rockwell Field , and Western Air Express ( WAE ) introduced commercial air service in April 1926 . When the brothers sold Rockwell Field and the new owner canceled WAE 's lease , the airline had to look for another airport . Local businessman P. A. Simon had built an airfield northeast of the city , to which WAE relocated in November 1929 . 
 Despite rising traffic to Las Vegas , WAE reduced service to the city amid the Great Depression . Once its financial situation improved , the airline bought the airfield and established a monopoly on flights to it . When the city attempted to purchase the field and build a more modern terminal , WAE refused . With the advent of World War II , however , WAE was pressured to sell the airfield . Nevadan Senator Pat McCarran helped obtain federal funding for the city to buy the field and construct a new terminal . He also helped establish a gunnery school by the United States Army Air Corps at the field . For the senator 's contributions , the airport was named McCarran Field in 1941 . 
 The gunnery school was closed in 1945 after the end of World War II . However , the Army later wanted to reopen its base , provided commercial air traffic was moved to another airport . Aviator George Crockett agreed to sell his airfield , Alamo Field , to the county . The field had been established in 1942 and had grown into a major general aviation facility . Alamo Field also took Senator McCarran 's name , becoming McCarran Field on December 19 , 1948 . The opening of this new airfield broke Western Air Express ' monopoly on flights to Las Vegas , allowing other airlines to serve the market . Meanwhile , the Army reopened its base at the original McCarran Field in 1949 and named it Nellis Air Force Base in 1950 . 
 = = = Early expansion ( 1949 – 96 ) = = = 
 In its first year of operation , McCarran Field served over 35 @,@ 000 passengers . As Las Vegas ' casino industry grew and air travel became more popular during the 1950s , passenger traffic to the airfield rose significantly , with 959 @,@ 603 passengers transiting through it in 1959 . To cope with the increase , airport officials began planning a new passenger terminal . While the original terminal was located on Las Vegas Boulevard , the new terminal was built on Paradise Road . The terminal , whose design was inspired by the TWA Flight Center in New York City , opened on March 15 , 1963 . 
 The airport was officially renamed McCarran International Airport in September 1968 . Further expansion took place between 1970 and 1974 with the construction of the A and B gates . After the airline industry was deregulated in 1978 , the number of airlines serving McCarran doubled from seven to fourteen in only two years . In response , the county launched an expansion plan named McCarran 2000 , detailing expansion projects to be undertaken into the year 2000 . Expanded baggage claim facilities , an esplanade , and a parking garage were inaugurated in 1985 . The C Gates and the first line of the people mover system followed in 1987 . 
 Further expansion took place during the 1990s . The Charter / International Terminal , later renamed Terminal 2 , was opened in December 1991 to handle rising international traffic to Las Vegas . An additional , nine @-@ story parking garage and an underground tunnel linking the Las Vegas Beltway to the airport were constructed as well . In June 1998 , the southwest and southeast wings of the D Gates were opened . 
 During the late 1990s , the airport focused on attracting foreign airlines . In 1994 , Condor <unk> began charter flights from Germany , launching scheduled service from Cologne and Frankfurt in 1997 . Northwest Airlines and Japan Airlines introduced flights from Tokyo in 1998 , and Virgin Atlantic began flying from London – Gatwick in 2000 . 
 = = = Innovation and D Gates completion ( 1997 – 2011 ) = = = 
 In 1997 , the airport introduced Common Use Terminal Equipment ( CUTE ) , becoming the first airport in the country to do so . With multiple airlines serving McCarran , it became inefficient to have separate facilities for each airline . CUTE allows for shared use of ticket counters and gates ; an airline can overflow to inactive facilities during peak times . 
 McCarran furthered its common use strategy in 2003 with the <unk> system , introducing Common @-@ Use Self @-@ Service ( <unk> ) kiosks . The kiosks allow passengers to check @-@ in and print boarding passes for any one of multiple airlines . Previously , airlines had been installing their own check @-@ in kiosks , defeating the use of CUTE and increasing congestion at the ticket counters . <unk> kiosks have been installed at the Las Vegas Convention Center as well . 
 In January 2005 , McCarran began offering complimentary Wi @-@ Fi throughout its passenger terminals . The service initially covered 1 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 square feet ( 160 @,@ 000 m2 ) , making it the largest free Wi @-@ Fi zone among U.S. airports at the time . The northeast wing of the D Gates opened in April 2005 , along with a 160 feet ( 49 m ) air traffic control tower at the center of the concourse . The expansion had been postponed following the September 11 attacks but resumed amid high growth in passenger traffic . Later in the year , the airport started a baggage @-@ tracking system using radio @-@ frequency identification ( RFID ) tags . Small RFID transmitters are inserted into baggage tags to improve bag identification , thereby lowering the risk for lost or misplaced luggage . McCarran became one of the first airports worldwide to conduct RFID tagging on a large scale . 
 On August 19 , 2008 , US Airways closed its night @-@ flight hub at McCarran Airport , which had been established by predecessor America West Airlines in the 1990s . In order to maximize the use of its fleet , US Airways had been operating two banks of flights to and from McCarran in the middle of the night . The operation had made US Airways the second @-@ busiest carrier at McCarran , providing over 100 daily round @-@ trip flights . However , amid rising oil prices and continued demand for low fares , the airline decided to close the hub . In 2011 , US Airways reduced flights to Las Vegas by an additional 40 % . 
 In September 2008 , the northwest wing of the D Gates was completed . This marked the completion of the concourse , which has a total of 44 gates . 
 In May 2011 , construction began on a new air traffic control tower for McCarran Airport . The tower stands 352 feet ( 107 m ) high and replaces a shorter tower that opened in 1983 . However , in January 2014 , it was discovered that a chemical coating to prevent the growth of a toxic fungus was added improperly . The problem was corrected by the following June , and the tower is scheduled to open on August 28 , 2016 . The shorter tower will be closed and demolished . 
 = = = Terminal 3 and later developments ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 Terminal 3 opened on June 27 , 2012 . The project was announced in January 2001 as a way to accommodate rapid growth in passenger traffic , including international traffic . It came into question amid the 2008 recession and decreased tourism to Las Vegas , but the county decided to proceed with the project , anticipating eventual economic recovery and a rebound in passenger numbers . Terminal 3 cost $ 2 @.@ 4 billion to build and is one of the largest public works projects in Nevada . It replaced Terminal 2 , providing more international gates and a larger U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility . With its seven domestic gates , the terminal also eases congestion at Terminal 1 . 
 In August 2015 , the airport announced plans to convert seven gates in the D Gates to international gates . A fourth line of the people mover system is under construction between those gates and the international arrivals facility in Terminal 3 . The total cost of the project is $ 51 million . 
 = = Runways = = 
 McCarran Airport has four runways : 
 Runway 1L / 19R : 8 @,@ 988 by 150 feet ( 2 @,@ 740 m × 46 m ) , ILS equipped in the 1 direction . 
 Runway 1R / <unk> : 9 @,@ 771 by 150 feet ( 2 @,@ 978 m × 46 m ) . 
 Runway 7L / 25R : 14 @,@ 512 by 150 feet ( 4 @,@ 423 m × 46 m ) , ILS equipped in the 25 direction . 
 Runway 7R / 25L : 10 @,@ 525 by 150 feet ( 3 @,@ 208 m × 46 m ) , ILS equipped in the 25 direction . 
 All runways have been resurfaced with concrete , a more durable material than the previous asphalt . In April 2016 , 7L / 25R became the last runway to be resurfaced . This runway is also the longest at McCarran and typically serves one @-@ third of the airport 's annual traffic . Parallel to it is runway 7R / 25L , which opened in 1991 . On the western side of the airport are runways 1L / 19R and 1R / <unk> . 1L / 19R was originally a short runway suited for light aircraft before it was significantly widened and lengthened in 1997 . Between the two sets of parallel runways was runway 14 / 32 , which has been decommissioned . 
 = = Terminals = = 
 = = = Terminal 1 = = = 
 Terminal 1 has four concourses , each of which is connected to a central pre @-@ security area . Ticketing and baggage claim are located on Level 1 of this area . Level 2 houses the three security checkpoints , an esplanade with several retail outlets , and a USO lounge for military service members . West of the pre @-@ security area are the A Gates and the B Gates , two Y @-@ shaped concourses with circular ends . To the south are the C Gates , which can be accessed by the Green Line of the tram system . The satellite D Gates concourse lies to the east and contains three lounges : the Centurion lounge for American Express card holders ; the Club at LAS , which is available to all passengers at a fee ; and the United Club . The Blue Line of the tram system links the D Gates with the pre @-@ security area . 
 The concourses and their gates are as follows : 
 A Gates : A3 , A5 , A7 , A8 , A10 – 12 , A14 , A15 , A17 – 23 
 B Gates : B1 , B2 , B6 , B9 – 12 , <unk> , <unk> , B17 , <unk> – 25 
 C Gates : C1 – 5 , C7 – 9 , C11 , C12 , C14 , C16 , C19 , C21 – 25 
 D Gates : D1 , D3 – 12 , <unk> , <unk> – 26 , <unk> – 43 , <unk> – 59 
 = = = Terminal 3 = = = 
 Terminal 3 handles all international and some domestic flights to McCarran Airport . Level 0 of the terminal contains customs , baggage claim , and another USO lounge . Check @-@ in , security , a second Club at LAS , and all gates are located on Level 2 . The terminal has a total of fourteen gates , seven of which are domestic ( E8 – E12 , E14 – E15 ) and the other seven international ( E1 – E7 ) . Four of the international gates have two jetways each to allow for quicker handling of widebody aircraft . 
 = = = Former Terminal 2 = = = 
 Terminal 2 opened in December 1991 as the Charter / International Terminal , serving all international flights and some domestic flights to the airport . It was located at the site of two previous terminals , one for PSA Airlines and the other for American Airlines . The PSA terminal was converted to an international terminal before both terminals were demolished to make room for a single Terminal 2 . It had two stories and eight gates ( T2 @-@ 1 through T2 @-@ 8 ) , four of which could receive international flights . Terminal 2 closed upon the opening of Terminal 3 , and it was demolished in early 2016 . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = = = Passenger = = = 
 = = = Cargo = = = 
 The following cargo airlines serve McCarran Airport : 
 Aloha Air Cargo 
 FedEx Express 
 UPS Airlines 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Annual passenger traffic = = = 
 = = = Top airlines by international passengers = = = 
 = = = Top domestic destinations = = = 
 = = Howard W. Cannon Aviation Museum = = 
 The main exhibits of the Howard W. Cannon Aviation Museum on Level 2 of Terminal 1 , above baggage claim . There are additional exhibits throughout the airport and at other airports in the city . Display items chronicle the early history of aviation in Southern Nevada . The museum is named after former Nevada Senator Howard Cannon , who contributed to the development of aviation in the county . Its administrator is Mark Hall @-@ Patton , who has appeared on the reality television show Pawn Stars . 
 = = Other facilities = = 
 = = = Fixed @-@ base operators = = = 
 Atlantic Aviation and Signature Flight Support are the two fixed @-@ base operators ( <unk> ) at the airport , providing various services to private aircraft . 
 = = = Helicopter terminals = = = 
 Maverick Helicopters , Sundance Helicopters , and Papillon Grand Canyon Helicopters each operate their own terminal at McCarran Airport . The Maverick terminal covers 6 @,@ 000 square feet ( 560 m2 ) , while the Sundance terminal occupies 13 @,@ 000 square feet ( 1 @,@ 200 m2 ) . The Papillon terminal was established in 1997 . The companies provide helicopter tours over the Las Vegas Strip , Grand Canyon , and other tourist attractions . 
 = = = Janet terminal = = = 
 Janet flights depart from a private terminal located on the west side of the airport . The airline , which is owned by the U.S. Air Force and operated by AECOM , transports employees and contractors to airports within the Nevada National Security Site . 
 = = = Marnell Air Cargo Center = = = 
 The Marnell Air Cargo Center covers 200 @,@ 928 square feet ( 18 @,@ 666 @.@ 8 m2 ) and can handle 100 @,@ 000 short tons ( 91 @,@ 000 t ) of cargo . The $ 29 million facility opened in October 2010 , replacing a smaller facility that existed at the site of Terminal 3 . The center consists of two buildings , one of which is leased by FedEx and the other by multiple other companies , including UPS and Southwest Airlines . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On September 8 , 2015 , British Airways Flight 2276 aborted takeoff from McCarran due to engine failure . While preparing to takeoff from runway 7L for London Gatwick Airport , the Boeing 777 @-@ 200ER suffered failure of its left ( # 1 ) engine , and a fire erupted . 14 passengers suffered injuries during the evacuation , and the runway was closed for eight hours . The aircraft suffered major damage , but it was repaired and returned to service in March 2016 . 
 = = Access = = 
 = = = Car = = = 
 Road access to McCarran Airport is provided by Paradise Road to the north and by the McCarran Airport Connector to the south , which connects to the Las Vegas Beltway . 
 Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 have their own parking garages . Each also has its own economy lot , which provides lower parking rates , and a separate lot for oversize vehicles . Complimentary shuttle transportation is provided between the terminals and the remote Terminal 1 economy and oversize vehicle lots . In March 2016 , the airport opened a cellphone lot , which provides free parking to people waiting for passengers . 
 A consolidated rental car facility opened in April 2007 , located about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) from the airport . The facility , which sits on 68 acres ( 28 ha ) of land , houses multiple rental car companies with 5 @,@ 000 parking spaces on multiple levels . Courtesy shuttles transport passengers between the airport and the facility . 
 For transportation between Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 , McCarran Airport provides a free shuttle service , which leaves from Level 0 of both terminals . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 RTC Transit provides bus transportation to and from various parts of the Las Vegas Valley . Route 108 , Route 109 , the Westcliff Airport Express and the Centennial Express provide direct access to the airport . Buses depart from Level 0 of Terminal 1 and Level 2 of Terminal 3 . 
 = = Future plans = = 
 = = = Elevated expressway = = = 
 In January 2016 , the county announced plans to build a four @-@ lane , largely elevated expressway to McCarran Airport , passing over Paradise Road , Koval Lane , and Tropicana Avenue . The estimated $ 200 million project is expected to reduce travel time between the Strip and the Las Vegas Convention Center . However , critics have called the plan a " 20th @-@ century solution to 21st @-@ century traffic issues . " They propose the construction of a light rail system , which the county disapproves of given its higher cost and longer completion time . 
 Previously , there had been plans to extend the monorail system to the airport . In December 2006 , Clark County approved plans for the extension , although funding was not specified . In its presentation to the Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee in early 2016 , Las Vegas Monorail expressed its continued interest in the extension . However , the project is largely no longer under consideration due to its high cost . 
 = = = Ivanpah Valley Airport = = = 
 In the late 1990s , the county decided to build a second airport for Las Vegas , to be located 30 miles ( 48 km ) from the city in the Ivanpah Valley . Passenger traffic at McCarran had been rising steadily , and the county predicted that the airport would reach its capacity of 55 millions passengers per year by 2008 . The county began the process of acquiring federal land for the airport , and it started funding an EIS . However , the advent of an economic recession in 2007 and the resulting decline in passenger numbers called the Ivanpah Valley Airport project into question . In June 2010 , the project was indefinitely suspended . However , the county continues to monitor the site of the planned airport , and it will reconsider the project once McCarran Airport reaches its capacity . 
 = Corpse Bride = 
 Corpse Bride , often referred to as Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride , is a 2005 British @-@ American stop @-@ motion @-@ animated musical fantasy film directed by Mike Johnson and Tim Burton with a screenplay by John August , Caroline Thompson and Pamela <unk> based on characters created by Burton and Carlos <unk> . The plot is set in a fictional Victorian era village in Europe . Johnny Depp led a cast as the voice of Victor , while Helena Bonham Carter voiced Emily , the title character . Corpse Bride is the third stop @-@ motion feature film produced by Burton and the first directed by him ( the previous two films , The Nightmare Before Christmas and James and the Giant Peach , were directed by Henry Selick ) . This is also the first stop @-@ motion feature from Burton that was distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures . It was dedicated to executive producer Joe Ranft , who died during production . 
 The film , a critical and commercial success , was nominated for the 78th Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature , but lost to Wallace & Gromit : The Curse of the Were @-@ Rabbit , which also starred Bonham Carter . It was shot with Canon EOS @-@ 1D Mark II digital <unk> , rather than the 35mm film cameras used for Burton 's previous stop @-@ motion film The Nightmare Before Christmas . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In an unspecified Victorian @-@ era village somewhere in Europe , Victor Van Dort ( Johnny Depp ) , the son of nouveau riche fish merchants , and Victoria <unk> ( Emily Watson ) , the neglected daughter of hateful aristocrats , are preparing for their arranged marriage , which will simultaneously raise the social class of Victor 's parents and restore the wealth of Victoria 's penniless family . Both have concerns about marrying someone they do not know , but upon meeting for the first time , they fall for each other . After the shy Victor ruins the wedding rehearsal by forgetting his vows and is scolded by Pastor <unk> ( Christopher Lee ) , he flees and practices his wedding vows in the nearby forest , placing the wedding ring on a nearby upturned tree root . 
 The root turns out to be the finger of a murdered woman in a tattered bridal gown , who rises from the grave claiming that she is now Victor 's wife . After fainting , Victor wakes up and finds out he was spirited away to the surprisingly festive Land of the Dead . The bewildered Victor learns the story of how Emily ( Helena Bonham Carter ) , his new bride , was murdered years ago by an unknown criminal on the night of her secret elopement . Emily , as a wedding gift , reunites Victor with his long @-@ dead dog , Scraps . Meanwhile , Victoria 's parents hear that Victor has been seen in another woman 's arms , and become suspicious . 
 Wanting to reunite with Victoria , Victor tricks Emily into taking him back to the Land of the Living by pretending he wants her to meet his parents . She agrees to this and takes him to see Elder <unk> ( Michael Gough ) , the kindly ruler of the underworld , to send him and Emily temporarily to the Land of the Living . Once back home , Victor asks Emily to wait in the forest while he rushes off to see Victoria and confess his wish to marry her as soon as possible , to which she gladly returns his feelings . Just as they are about to share a kiss , Emily arrives and sees the two of them together and , feeling betrayed and hurt , angrily drags Victor back to the Land of the Dead . Victoria tells her parents that Victor has been forcibly wed to a dead woman , but they believe she has lost her mind and lock her up in her bedroom . She escapes her room by window and rushes to <unk> to find a way to help Victor , but fails . With Victor gone , Victoria 's parents decide to marry her off to a presumably wealthy newcomer in town named Lord Barkis Bittern ( Richard E. Grant ) , who appeared at the wedding rehearsal , against her will . 
 Emily is heartbroken by Victor 's deception . Victor , however , apologizes for lying to her , and the two reconcile while playing the piano together . Shortly after , Victor 's recently deceased family coachman appears in the afterlife and informs Victor of Victoria 's impending marriage to Barkis . In order for their marriage to become valid , Victor must repeat his vows in the Land of the Living and willingly drink the Wine of Ages , a poison - thus joining her in death . Overhearing this , and fretting about having lost Victoria to another man , Victor agrees to die for Emily . All of the dead go " upstairs " to the Land of the Living to perform the wedding ceremony for Victor and Emily . Upon their arrival , the town erupts into a temporary panic until every living person recognizes each other 's loved ones from the dead and they have a joyous reunion under the bizarre circumstances . 
 After a quarrel with Barkis ( and realizing he was only after her supposed money ) , Victoria follows the procession of dead to the church . Emily notices Victoria and realizes that she is denying Victoria her chance at happiness the same way it was stolen from her . As Victor prepares to drink the cup of poison to kill himself , Emily stops him and reunites him with Victoria . Barkis interrupts them , and Emily recognizes him as her former fiance - who is revealed to be the one who murdered her for her dowry . Barkis tries to kidnap Victoria at sword point , but Victor stops him and the two men duel . The dead townspeople are unable to interfere with the affairs of the living . Emily intercedes to save Victor and Barkis mockingly proposes a toast to Emily , claiming she was " always the bridesmaid , never the bride . " He unknowingly drinks the cup of poison . The dead , now able to intercede , happily drag the " new arrival " back to the Land of the Dead for retribution for his crimes . Victoria , now a widow , is once again able to marry Victor . 
 Emily sets Victor free of his vow to marry her , giving the wedding ring back to Victor and her wedding bouquet to Victoria before exiting the church . As she steps into the moonlight , she transforms into hundreds of butterflies , presumably finding peace , as Victor and Victoria look on wrapped in each other 's embrace . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The film is based on a 19th @-@ century Russian folktale , which Joe Ranft introduced to Burton while they were finishing The Nightmare Before Christmas . The film began production in November 2003 , while Burton was completing Big Fish . He continued with production on his next live @-@ action feature , Charlie and the Chocolate Factory , which was produced simultaneously with the film . Co @-@ director Mike Johnson spoke about how they took a more organic approach to directing the film , saying : " In a co @-@ directing situation , one director usually handles one sequence while the other handles another . Our approach was more organic . Tim knew where he wanted the film to go as far as the emotional tone and story points to hit . My job was to work with the crew on a daily basis and get the footage as close as possible to how I thought he wanted it . " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was originally supposed to have been shot on film , though a last @-@ minute change by the studio helped introduce a different technology . In 1997 , during pre @-@ production on Henry Selick 's feature , <unk> , the film 's cinematographer Pete Kozachik was looking for a type of filming that would streamline the process of integrating stop @-@ motion characters with pre @-@ filmed live actors . After finishing <unk> , Kozachik continued to test cameras for a practical means of shooting feature animation digitally . In early 2003 , the production unit was not interested in digital capture for stop motion ; the team was instead prepping the movie for a film shoot . Two weeks before filming was to begin , Kozachik and visual effects consultant Chris Watts came up with a solution using digital still cameras that was deemed viable by Warner Bros. senior vice president of physical production and visual effects Chris <unk> . The production then became digital . After testing a dozen different models , Kozachik opted for a basic digital still camera , the Canon EOS @-@ 1D Mark II , an off @-@ the @-@ shelf model that was outfitted with adapters to allow the use of Nikon prime lenses ( 14mm @-@ 105mm ) . Kozachik spoke about why he chose the camera , saying : " One reason I went with this particular camera is that its image chip is just about the same size as Super 35 film negative , so we could use Nikon lenses and treat them like regular 35mm cine lenses and get the same effect — the same depth of field and angle of coverage . I knew that we were going to be fighting to make this look like a ' real ' movie because we weren 't shooting on film , so I wanted to at least have the optics look like movie optics . " 
 Animation took place at 3 Mills Studios in East London . A dozen animators / puppeteers were put to work when production began , but that number had tripled by the end of production . The initial group spent time developing each puppet 's unique characteristics . The puppets themselves , built by Mackinnon and Saunders , were typically about 17 inches tall and animated on sets built three to four feet off the ground with trap doors that allowed animators access to the sets ' surfaces to manipulate the puppets . The three primary characters — Victor , Victoria and Corpse Bride — were fitted with heads the size of golf balls that contained special gearing to allow the animators to manipulate individual parts of the puppets ' faces . The animators ' work was spread over 25 to 35 individual setups / stages , each having its own Canon digital camera . A total of 32 cameras were used on the film . Each camera was outfitted with a " grabber " system that enabled the animators to capture frames and download them into a computer to assemble a short " reel " of the shot being produced to check their work . 
 The film 's images were stored on a 1GB image card that was capable of holding approximately 100 frames of animation . Eight roving camera teams — each team including a lighting cameraman , an assistant , a lighting electrician and a set dresser to deal with any art department issues — worked with the animators to set up shots . Each camera team had a " lighting station " workstation — comprising an Apple G4 computer and a monitor to assist in checking lighting and framing — to view TIFF file versions of the camera 's images . Once a shot was approved , the computer was removed and the animators were left to shoot the scene using their still camera and " grabber " computer / camera system to check their work . The film 's story department head Jeffrey Lynch explained that the scenes were developed initially from storyboards created by a team , saying : " We shot as close to a 1 : 1 film ratio [ one take per shot ] as we could because there was no time for reshoots . We did most of our experimentation in the storyboard process — as many ways as needed — to get the scene how we wanted it . There was no coverage , as there would be for a live @-@ action film . " 
 Co @-@ director Johnson would go over each scene with the animators , sometimes acting out the scene , if necessary . The animators would create a " dope sheet " — in which a shot was broken down , frame by frame — to account for key " hits " . The animators would then shoot tests of the scene , often shooting on " 2s " or " 4s " ( meaning shooting just every second or fourth frame of what would appear in the final animation ) . Johnson explained : " The next day , when they 'd finish their test / rehearsal , we 'd cut it in and see how it played in the reel and fine @-@ tune from there . We might do some lighting tweaks , performance tweaks or have the art department get in and touch anything that needed it . Then we 'd close the curtain and let the animator animate the shot . " The animators would sometimes make use of the voice and / or video recordings of the actors , a practice also common in cel animation . Once photographed , the frames were manipulated by a team of " data <unk> . " Using a workflow developed by Chris Watts , the frames were downloaded from the camera image cards as RAW files , converted to <unk> files and processed through a " color cube . " Cinematographer Pete Kozachik explained : " The color cube is a 3D lookup table created by <unk> Ltd. that forces the image data into behaving like a particular Eastman Kodak film stock — in this case , <unk> , one of my favorites . With this film emulation , we could actually rate our cameras at ASA 100 , then take our light meters and spot meters and , with great confidence , shoot as if we were using <unk> . Sure enough , the footage would come back and look just like it . " The frames could be processed further to generate a TIFF file for viewing on the lighting station computer monitors so lighting , composition and color could be previewed . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 Visual effects were delivered by London 's Moving Picture Company ( MPC ) , and were applied to the 1 @,@ 000 or so shots in the film , though most of the effects simply painted out puppet supports and similar set equipment . Some visual effects elements — groups of birds and butterflies , were created completely in CG , though others were composited as visual effects from real @-@ life elements . Pete Kozachik explained that the trick for shooting the characters by themselves was obtaining visually interesting shots that would dependably support the director 's storytelling , saying : " The challenge is keeping the action clear and simple with lighting and composition . There 's a discipline to clear storytelling with these puppets . You want to be abstract , but one can easily go overboard with these critters because they aren 't as familiar to the audience as real humans . The characters don 't necessarily translate the same as if you 're shooting a real person . You have to consciously balance arty atmosphere and graphic clarity so as to not confuse the audience about what it is they 're looking at . " 
 In a 2005 , interview with About.com , Burton spoke about the differences between directing Corpse Bride and The Nightmare Before Christmas , saying : " The difference on that was that one I had designed completely . It was a very completed package in my mind . I felt like it was there . I felt more comfortable with it . With this , it was a bit more organic . It was based on an old folk tale . We kept kind of changing it but , you know , I had a great co @-@ director with Mike Johnson . I feel like we complemented each other quite well . It was just a different movie , a different process . " He also spoke about casting Johnny Depp as Victor , saying : " It was weird because we were doing both at the same time . He was Willy Wonka by day and Victor by night so it might have been a little schizophrenic for him . But he ’ s great . It 's the first animated movie he 's done and he 's always into a challenge . We just treat it like fun and a creative process . Again , that ’ s the joy of working with him . He 's kind of up for anything . He just always adds something to it . The amazing thing is all the actors never worked [ together ] . They were never in a room together , so they were all doing their voices , except for Albert [ Finney ] and Joanna [ Lumley ] did a few scenes together , everybody else was separate . They were all kind of working in a vacuum , which was interesting . That ’ s the thing that I felt ended up so beautifully , that their performances really meshed together . So he was very canny , as they all were , about trying to find the right tone and making it work while not being in the same room with each other . " 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack was produced by Danny Elfman with the help of John August and released on September 20 , 2005 . It contains all of the music from the film including score music and four songs with lyrics sung by voice actors . 
 All songs written and composed by Danny Elfman and John August . All scores written by Elfman . 
 = = Release = = 
 Corpse Bride premiered on September 7 , 2005 at the Venice International Film Festival . The film was released on September 23 , 2005 in United States and on October 13 , 2005 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Corpse Bride grossed $ 53 @,@ 359 @,@ 111 in North America , and $ 63 @,@ 835 @,@ 950 in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 117 @,@ 195 @,@ 061 . 
 In North America , the film opened to number two in its first weekend , with $ 19 @,@ 145 @,@ 480 , behind Flightplan . In its second weekend , the film dropped to number three , grossing an additional $ 10 @,@ 033 @,@ 257 . In its third weekend , the film dropped to number six , grossing $ 6 @,@ 511 @,@ 336 . In its fourth weekend , the film dropped to number nine , grossing $ 3 @,@ 577 @,@ 465 . 
 The biggest market in other territories being France , UK and Japan where the film grossed $ 8 @.@ 88 million , $ 8 @.@ 57 million and $ 7 @.@ 1 million respectively . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Corpse Bride received positive reviews from critics . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 83 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 based on 187 reviews . The site 's consensus reads : " As can be expected from a Tim Burton movie , Corpse Bride is whimsically macabre , visually imaginative , and emotionally bittersweet . " Another review aggregator , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated a score of 83 based on 35 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " . The film was nominated for AFI 's 10 Top 10 in the " Animation " genre . The film was nominated for the 78th Academy Awards for Best Animated Feature , but lost to Wallace & Gromit : The Curse of the Were @-@ Rabbit . 
 Justin Chang of Variety gave the film a positive review , saying " This macabre musical about a young bridegroom who mistakenly weds a girl from beyond the grave is an endearingly schizoid Frankenstein of a movie , by turns relentlessly high @-@ spirited and darkly poignant . " Kirk Honeycutt of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a positive review , calling it " A wondrous flight of fancy , a stop @-@ motion @-@ animated treat brimming with imaginative characters , evocative sets , sly humor , inspired songs and a genuine whimsy that seldom finds its way into today 's movies . " Michael Atkinson of The Village Voice gave the film a positive review , saying " The variety of its cadaverous style is never less than inspired ; never has the human skull 's natural grin been redeployed so exhaustively for yuks . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B , saying " As an achievement in macabre visual wizardry , Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride has to be reckoned some sort of marvel . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times gave the film four out of five stars , saying " Cinema 's reinvigorated fixation with the living dead suggests that we are in the grip of an impossible longing , or perhaps it 's just another movie cycle running its course . Whatever the case , there is something heartening about Mr. Burton 's love for bones and rot here , if only because it suggests , despite some recent evidence , that he is not yet ready to abandon his own dark kingdom . " Moira MacDonald of The Seattle Times gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " What makes Corpse Bride sing , ultimately , is the breadth of imagination that it demonstrates ; creating a cluttered , textured and mysteriously beautiful world that we 're loathe to leave at the end . " 
 Liam Lacey of The Globe and Mail gave the film three out of four stars , saying " <unk> and innocence walk hand @-@ in @-@ hand in Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride , a movie that digs into Hollywood 's past to resurrect the antique art of stop @-@ motion animation and create a fabulous bauble of a movie . " Jack Mathews of the New York Daily News gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Stop @-@ motion animation may be the hardest and most tedious job in Hollywood , but the makers of Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride deserve a couple of years in Tahiti celebrating their effort . " Lou Lumenick of the New York Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride is an instant classic . " Lisa Rose of the Newark Star @-@ Ledger gave the film three out of five stars , saying " Corpse Bride offers unclassifiable enchantment . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews gave the film three out of four stars , saying " As animated films go , this is easily the best of a weak year . " Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film four out of four stars , saying " If his The Nightmare Before Christmas from a dozen years back was a treat for the eyes and mind , Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride goes double or nothing by being a delight for the ears and also the heart . " Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch gave the film a B + , saying " Beneath the bone pile of allusions , Corpse Bride is a darkly enchanting fable in its own right . " 
 Andrew Sarris of The New York Observer gave the film a negative review , saying " Corpse Bride turns out to be a ponderous mixture of puppetry and animation that is far too technologically complex and laborious for this hopelessly Luddite reviewer . " Roger Ebert gave the film three out of four stars , calling it " A sweet and visually lovely tale of love lost . " Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel gave the film four out of five stars , saying " The sweetness , the visual flourishes and inspired pieces of casting carry the Corpse Bride , if not all the way down the primrose path , then at least across the threshold . " Robert K. Elder of the Chicago Tribune gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " If Nightmare Before Christmas was a jazzy pop number , Corpse Bride is a <unk> elegant , deadly funny bit of macabre matrimony . " Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times gave the film two out of five stars , saying " The film does have a fairy @-@ tale aspect , but , like many of its characters , it is more dead and buried than fully alive . " Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Corpse Bride is an unexpectedly touching celebration of love told in a quirky and inventive style . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film three and a half stars out of five , saying " In the guise of a family film , Burton evokes a darkly erotic obsession that recalls Edgar Allan Poe and Hitchcock 's Vertigo . It would be a test for any filmmaker , and Burton aces it . " 
 Steven Rea of The Philadelphia Inquirer gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride is easily the best stop @-@ motion animated necrophiliac musical romantic comedy of all time . It is also just simply , wonderful : a morbid , merry tale of true love that dazzles the eyes and delights the soul . " Bill Muller of The Arizona Republic gave the film four out of five stars , saying " Corpse Bride is a delightful mix of strange goings @-@ on and imaginatively crafted puppetry , a wild ride through Burton 's chaotic , splendidly original world . " Michael Booth of The Denver Post gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Corpse Bride will win your heart , if it doesn 't rip it out of your chest first . " Terry Lawson of the Detroit Free Press gave the film three out of four stars , saying " There 's a happy Halloween in store even for children who aren 't allowed to trick or treat , and it 's courtesy of Tim Burton 's animated Corpse Bride . " Bruce Westbrook of The Houston Chronicle gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " Amazingly fluid and drop @-@ dead gorgeous , Tim Burton 's Corpse Bride is the best @-@ looking , stop @-@ motion animation film ever . " Rene Rodriguez of the Miami Herald gave the film two and a half stars out of four , saying " Corpse Bride suffers from the same problem that has plagued Burton 's recent live @-@ action films : for all its formidable razzle @-@ dazzle , it doesn 't engage the heart . " Colin Covert of the Star Tribune gave the film three and a half stars out of four , saying " This vibrantly imaginative mix of horror and humor puts the f @-@ u @-@ n in funeral . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Corpse Bride was released on DVD and HD DVD on January 16 , 2006 . It was released on Blu @-@ ray on September 26 , 2006 . As of February 3 , 2015 , the film has sold 2 @,@ 777 @,@ 736 DVDs and 40 @,@ 411 Blu @-@ ray Discs totaling a gross of $ 53 @,@ 359 @,@ 111 and $ 61 @,@ 411 @,@ 543 respectively for a total gross of $ 114 @,@ 770 @,@ 654 in North America . 
 = Lysgårdsbakken = 
 Lysgårdsbakken , officially known as Lysgårdsbakkene Ski Jumping Arena ( Norwegian : Lysgårdsbakkene <unk> ) , is a ski jumping hill in Lillehammer , Norway . It consists of a large hill , with a K @-@ point of 123 and a hill size of 138 , and a small hill with a K @-@ point of 90 and a hill size of 100 . It opened in 1993 for the 1994 Winter Olympics , where it hosted the ski jumping and Nordic combined events , as well as the opening and closing ceremonies . After the Olympics , ownership was transferred to the municipal Lillehammer Olympiapark and it has since been used for several FIS Ski Jumping World Cup and FIS Nordic Combined World Cup tournaments , including hosting the Nordic Tournament . It has a capacity for 35 @,@ 000 spectators and is one of three national ski jumping hills in Norway . In 2007 , the large hill was rebuilt to a larger profile , and received a new plastic lining . The venue sees 80 @,@ 000 annual jumps in the winter and 20 @,@ 000 in the summer season . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The plans which were approved when Lillehammer were awarded the 1994 Winter Olympics , involved using the existing Balbergbakken in Fåberg , north of Lillehammer . However , the venue was rejected by the broadcasting planners , and instead it was decided that an all @-@ new venue would be built at Lysgård . Financing of the venue was given through a grant issued by the Parliament of Norway on 1 August 1990 . Architects were <unk> Arkitekter , with Martin M. Bakken as the main contractor . Construction had already stated earlier in 1990 , and it was completed by December 1992 . The seating area was made with pre @-@ fabricated concrete elements with metal bars . Temporary buildings and facilities for the opening ceremonies were installed in December 1993 , and removed after the Olympics . This included 70 commentator boxes , a media center , and offices for technical personnel . The original construction included plastic on the outrun and porcelain tracks on the small hill , allowing jumping during summer . The venue was placed deep in the terrain to shield the jumpers from the wind while minimizing the venue 's impact in the surroundings . The National Association of Norwegian Architects awarded the hill the 1993 Betongtavlen . In 2007 , the large hill was renovated . The profile was expanded , increasing the K @-@ point from 120 to 123 . In addition , plastic way was laid , allowing both hills to be used during summer . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The hill has a capacity for 35 @,@ 000 spectators , of which 7 @,@ 500 can be seated . In addition , up to 25 @,@ 000 people can follow events from free areas around the venue . Auxiliary structures include a start house , a judges tower — which includes office space for organizers and judges — a media building , and a technical room below the stands , as well as a first aid room and restrooms . It also features a high @-@ pressure snow production facility with outtakes all along the approach and outrun . Transport to the tower of the large hill is accessible via a chair lift . During the Olympics , transport to the venues was mostly by railway . Spectators discharged at Lillehammer Station on the Dovre Line and would then walk to the stadium . 
 The small hill has a K @-@ point of 90 and a hill size of 100 . It has a 36 degree slope for the outrun and an 11 degree slope for the approach . The height difference is 112 meters ( 367 ft ) and the approach is 82 meters ( 269 ft ) long . Prior to 2007 , the large hill had a K @-@ point of 123 , a 27 @.@ 5 degree slope for the outrun and an 11 @.@ 5 degree slope for the approach . The height difference was 137 meters ( 449 ft ) , while the approach is 96 @.@ 6 meters ( 317 ft ) long . After 2007 , the hill size was increased to 138 and the K @-@ point to 123 . 
 = = Events = = 
 During the 1994 Winter Olympics , the venue hosted three ski jumping and two Nordic combined events , in addition to the opening and closing ceremonies . Competition evens consisted of individual normal hill , individual large hill , and team large hill in ski jumping , and individual and team small hill for Nordic combined . 
 Lysgårdsbakken is a regular site for FIS Ski Jumping World Cup and FIS Nordic Combined World Cup tournaments . FIS Ski Jumping World Cup has been hosted nearly every year since 1993 . Since 2004 , with the exception of 2007 and 2010 , Lysgårdsbakken is a co @-@ host of the Nordic Tournament . The FIS Nordic Combined World Cup has been hosted nine times , in 1993 , 1998 , 2000 , 2001 , 2003 , 2005 , 2006 , 2009 , and 2010 . All tournaments have been held in December ; nine of the ten have had the cross @-@ country skiing part held at nearby Birkebeineren Ski Stadium , while in 2001 the cross @-@ country skiing was held at <unk> . Lillehammer is scheduled to host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics , where Lysgårdsbakken would be used for ski jumping and Nordic combined . 
 The hill record for the large hill is 146 meters ( 479 ft ) , set by Simon Amman in 2009 . The summer record for the large hill is 140 @.@ 5 meters ( 461 ft ) , set by Thomas <unk> in 2007 . The winter record for the small hill is 104 meters ( 341 ft ) , set by Espen Bredesen during the 1994 Olympics . The summer small hill record is 106 @.@ 5 meters ( 349 ft ) , set by Daniela <unk> in 2010 . The hill is one of three national ski jumping hills in Norway , with the other two being Holmenkollbakken in Oslo and Granåsen in Trondheim . Lysgårdsbakken is regularly used as a training venue , and sees 80 @,@ 000 winter jumps and 20 @,@ 000 summer jumps per year . 
 In 2005 , the hills were the eleventh @-@ most visited tourist attraction in Norway . The hill has a souvenir shop and visitors are permitted to take the elevator to the top of the hill . Alternatively , tourists can walk the 954 steps to the top . In 2006 , the BBC One television show Top Gear 's episode " Winter Olympics Special " , was filmed at various Olympic venues around Lillehammer . It included a successful attempt at a ski jump using an unoccupied rocket @-@ powered British Leyland Mk V Mini . KT Tunstall shot the majority of the video for her 2008 single " If Only " at Lysgårdsbakken . 
 = 1909 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1909 Giro d 'Italia was the inaugural running of the Giro d 'Italia , a cycling race organized and sponsored by the newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport . The event began in Milan on 13 May with a 397 km ( 247 mi ) first stage to Bologna , finishing back in Milan on 30 May after a final stage of 206 km ( 128 mi ) and a total distance covered of 2 @,@ 447 @.@ 9 km ( 1 @,@ 521 mi ) . The race was won by the Italian rider Luigi Ganna of the Atala team , with fellow Italians Carlo Galetti and Giovanni Rossignoli coming in second and third respectively . 
 Conceived by La Gazzetta to boost its circulation at the expense of its rival Corriere della Sera , the 1909 Giro was the first stage road race . Its eight stages , although relatively few compared to modern Grand Tours , were each much longer than those raced today . 
 The event began with a long primarily flat stage that was won by Dario Beni . He lost the lead after the next stage to the eventual winner Luigi Ganna , who in turn lost it to Carlo Galetti after the mountainous third stage . Ganna regained the lead after the fourth stage and successfully defended it all the way to the finish in Milan , winning three stages en route . Atala won the team classification . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The idea of holding a bicycle race around Italy was first suggested in a telegram sent by <unk> <unk> , editor of La Gazzetta dello Sport , to the paper 's owner Emilio <unk> and cycling editor Armando Cougnet . La Gazzetta 's rival , Corriere della Sera was planning to hold a bicycle race of its own , flushed with the success of its automobile race . Morgagni decided to try and hold the race before Corriere della Sera could hold theirs , and following La Gazzetta 's success in creating the Giro di Lombardia and Milan – San Remo , <unk> decided to back the idea . The inaugural Giro d 'Italia bicycle race was announced on 7 August 1908 in the first page of that day 's edition of La Gazzetta , to be held in May 1909 . The idea of the race was influenced by the success of the French magazine L 'Auto 's organization of the Tour de France . 
 Since the newspaper lacked the necessary 25 @,@ 000 lire to sponsor the race , the organizers consulted Primo <unk> , a sympathetic accountant at the bank <unk> di <unk> . He proceeded to solicit donations from all over Italy , and succeeded in raising sufficient money to cover the operating costs . The prize money came from a casino in San Remo after Francesco <unk> , a former Gazzetta employee , encouraged them to contribute to the race . Even Corriere , La Gazzetta 's rival , donated 3 @,@ 000 lire . 
 = = Rules and course = = 
 Both teams and individual riders were allowed to enter the race , which was run in eight stages with two to three rest days between each stage . Compared to modern races the stages were extraordinarily long , with an average distance of more than 300 km ( 190 mi ) , compared to the 165 km ( 103 mi ) average stage length in the 2012 Giro d 'Italia . 
 The route was primarily flat , although it did contain a few major ascents . The third stage contained ascents to <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and <unk> . The Giro 's sixth stage contained only one pass , the Passo Bracco . The seventh stage was the last to contain any major ascents : the climbs of the Colle di Nava and the ascent to San Bartolomeo . 
 Riders were required to sign in at checkpoints during each stage to minimize the opportunities for cheating ; they were also photographed at the beginning and end of each stage , and the images compared by the judges . Riders could receive assistance when repairing their bicycles , but were not allowed to replace their machines if they became damaged during the course of the stage . 
 The inaugural Giro used a points system to determine the race winner . The organizers chose to have a points system over a system based around elapsed time after the scandal that engulfed the 1904 Tour de France . Another factor in the organizer 's decision was that it would be cheaper to count the placings of the riders rather than clocking their times during each stage . The race leader was determined by adding up each rider 's placing in each stage . Thus if a rider placed second in the first stage and third in the second stage he would have a total of five points , and whoever had the lowest points total was the leader . Under this system Luigi Ganna was declared the winner , but had the Giro been a time @-@ based event he would have lost to the third @-@ place finisher Giovanni Rossignoli by 37 minutes . 
 The winner of the general classification received a grand prize of 5 @,@ 325 lire . Every rider who finished the race with more than 100 points without winning any prizes in any of the stages was given 100 lire . 
 = = Participants = = 
 A total of 166 riders signed up to participate in the event . Twenty of the riders who entered were non @-@ Italians : fifteen were French , two were German , one was Argentinian , one was Belgian , and one was from Trieste , which at the time was not a part of Italy . Only 127 riders started the first stage of the race , all but five of Italian descent , of whom only 49 reached the finish in Milan on 30 May . Riders were allowed to enter the race as independents or as a member of a team . 
 The two best @-@ known Italians taking part in the race were Luigi Ganna and Giovanni Gerbi . Gerbi was the more successful of the two , having won the Giro di Lombardia , the Milano – Torino , and several other one @-@ day races . Ganna had won Milan – San Remo earlier the same year – notably the first Italian winner of the race . The peloton also featured two Tour de France winners , Louis Trousselier and Lucien Petit @-@ Breton , as well as two future Giro d 'Italia winners : Carlo Galetti and Carlo Oriani . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The inaugural Giro d 'Italia 's first stage , 397 km ( 247 mi ) from Milan to Bologna , began on 13 May 1909 at 2 : 53 am in front of a large crowd . 127 riders set off from the starting line outside La Gazzetta 's headquarters in the Piazzale Loreto . The stage was marred by mechanical issues and crashes owing to bad weather , the first mass crash occurring before dawn less than 2 km ( 1 mi ) from the start . Luigi Ganna , leading after the first real climb near Lake Garda , was delayed by a puncture with about 70 km ( 43 mi ) to go and the other racers attacked , but he caught them again after they were stopped by a train crossing . The leading riders then made their way into Bologna , where Dario Beni won the stage . The second stage , 378 @.@ 5 km ( 235 mi ) long , saw the first uphill finish , into Chieti , where Giovanni <unk> edged out Ganna for the stage win . Ganna 's second place was nevertheless high enough to make him the new race leader . 
 The third stage , to Naples , was 242 @.@ 8 km ( 151 mi ) . Before the start , three riders were disqualified and subsequently removed from the race for taking a train during the second stage . They were caught after failing to pass through an unexpected checkpoint set up by the organizers . The start of the third stage was moved downhill after the opening descent was found to be too dangerous for the participants ' brakes . The stage featured three major climbs . After the mountains Giovanni Rossignoli pursued the leader , Carlo Galetti , eventually catching him and going on to win the stage , while Galetti took the race lead away from Ganna . On the fourth stage , 228 @.@ 1 km ( 142 mi ) from Naples to the Italian capital Rome , French rider Louis Trousselier was doing well until he ran over tacks strewn on the road by spectators , and the other riders left him behind . Galetti and Ganna formed a group at the front and Ganna went on to win the stage in front of thousands of spectators , retaking the race lead by a single point . 
 The fifth stage was 346 @.@ 5 km ( 215 mi ) to Florence . Like the fourth , it was plagued by punctures . Luigi Ganna led until he had a flat tyre with about 10 km ( 6 mi ) to go . A few riders passed him as he repaired it but he chased them down and won the stage . On the sixth stage , 294 @.@ 4 km ( 183 mi ) from Florence to Genoa , Carlo Galetti and Giovanni Rossignoli broke away from the leading group of seven as they neared the downhill finish , with Rossignoli winning the stage in front of a large crowd . Race leader Ganna had suffered more punctures but managed to fight his way back to finish third . 
 The seventh stage , 357 km ( 222 mi ) , was scheduled to run from Genoa to Turin . Massive crowds at the start led Armando Cougnet to introduce a rule forbidding riders to attack over the first few kilometers until the peloton was outside the city and the race proper could begin . There was also rumored to be close to 50 @,@ 000 spectators and a bakers ' strike in Turin , so Cougnet switched the finish to the city of <unk> , about 6 km ( 4 mi ) short of Turin . Ganna and Rossignoli led for most of the stage until about 6 km ( 4 mi ) before the finish , when Ganna attacked and Rossignoli could not counter . Ganna 's win extended his race lead over Carlo Galetti . 
 The eighth and final stage started in Turin , covered 206 km ( 128 mi ) , and finished in Milan in front of a crowd of more than 30 @,@ 000 . Ganna was amongst the leading group until he suffered a flat tyre . He managed to fight his way back until , with the leaders in sight , he had another puncture . The leading group pulled away until the race directors stopped them to let Ganna catch up . Escorted by mounted police , the riders then made their way into Milan 's Arena <unk> stadium for the finish . As the racers geared up for the sprint finish a police horse fell , causing a few riders to crash . Dario Beni avoided the incident and edged out Galetti for the stage win , with Ganna coming in third . Thus Ganna became the first winner of the Giro d 'Italia . He and his team , Atala , also won the team classification . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Stage results = = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 Forty @-@ nine cyclists completed all eight stages . The points each received from their stage placings were added up for the general classification , and the winner was the rider with the fewest accumulated points . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The first Giro d 'Italia was a great success , prompting organizers to arrange a second one for 1910 . The race substantially increased La Gazzetta 's circulation , and the starts and finishes were attended by large audiences . Ganna 's prize money helped him start his own bike factory in 1912 . The newspaper ran the event through 1988 , when the RCS <unk> <unk> company was created to run it . 
 = Turning Point ( 2005 wrestling ) = 
 Turning Point ( 2005 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) promotion that took place on December 11 , 2005 at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . It was the second event under the Turning Point name and the twelfth and final event of the 2005 TNA PPV schedule . Nine professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match were featured on the event 's card , two of which featured championships . 
 The main event at Turning Point was for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Jeff Jarrett was pitted against the challenger Rhino . Jarrett won the match to retain the title . A.J. Styles defended the TNA X Division Championship against Samoa Joe at the event . Joe defeated Styles to become the new champion . Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) fought America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) in a Tag Team Elimination Tables match at the event , which Team 3D won . TNA held the first @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre at Turning Point between Abyss and Sabu . Sabu was the victor in the contest . Christian Cage defeated Monty Brown also at the event . 
 Turning Point is remembered for the first @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre , the announcement of TNA 's signing of the wrestler Sting , and Samoa Joe 's title win which was ranked by TNA as the 34th greatest moment in the company 's history . Bob Kapur of the professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer rated the show a 7 out of 10 , as he had for the 2004 installment . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The second installment in the TNA Turning Point chronology was announced in September 2005 . The date for the show was revealed in late @-@ September on TNA 's official website as December 11 , with it to be held at the TNA Impact ! Zone in Orlando , Florida . A promotional poster for the event was released by TNA featuring Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) . A thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show was slotted to take place prior to the telecast featuring one wrestling match . TNA advertised that a major announcement would take place at Turning Point that would " change the face of TNA in 2006 " . 
 = = = Storylines = = = 
 Turning Point featured nine professional wrestling matches and one pre @-@ show match that involved different wrestlers from pre @-@ existing scripted feuds and storylines . Wrestlers portrayed villains , heroes , or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . 
 The main event at Turning Point was for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Jeff Jarrett defended against the challenger Rhino . The storyline behind this match began at TNA 's Bound for Glory PPV event on October 23 , 2005 , where Jarrett was to defend the title against Kevin Nash . However , Nash was rushed to the hospital the night before and was not cleared to wrestle . Rhino took Nash 's place in the match , where he defeated Jarrett to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Later , Jarrett reclaimed the title on the November 3 , 2005 episode of TNA 's television program TNA Impact ! . This led to a Six @-@ Man Tag Team match pitting the team of Rhino and Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) against the team of Jarrett and America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) at TNA 's Genesis PPV event on November 13 , 2005 . Rhino and Team 3D were the victors of the encounter . A rematch between Rhino and Jarrett for the title was announced on the November 19 , 2005 episode of Impact ! for Turning Point . TNA aired a series of video packages focusing on Rhino and his title match heading into the show . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was also defended at Turning Point , with then @-@ champion A.J. Styles facing Samoa Joe . This rivalry started at TNA 's Sacrifice PPV event held on August 14 , 2005 , where Joe defeated Styles in the final round of the 2005 TNA Super X Cup Tournament . By winning the tournament , Joe was entitled to a TNA X Division Championship match against then @-@ champion Christopher Daniels . Daniels had interfered in the match , leading to Joe 's victory . As a result , Styles was added to Joe 's title match with Daniels , making it a Three Way match at TNA 's Unbreakable PPV event held on September 11 , 2005 . Styles won the bout at Unbreakable becoming the new champion , thus leading to a defense against Daniels at Bound for Glory in a Thirty @-@ Minute Iron Man match which Styles also won . 
 Styles went on to defend the championship against Petey Williams , while Daniels and Joe competed in a Four @-@ on @-@ Four Tag Team Elimination X match at Genesis . Styles retained the title at the event , while Daniels and Joe 's team were the victors in their contest . After Daniels and Joe won their match , Joe assaulted Daniels by bashing him over the head with a steel chair and slamming him on a steel chair back @-@ first . Daniels was sidelined with an injury in the storyline as a result of these action . Thereafter , Joe proceeded to carry around a blood stained towel from the attack . Joe 's action at Genesis angered Styles in the storyline , as Styles accused Joe of violating the unwritten code of the TNA X Division . Styles followed by challenging Joe to a match at Turning Point for the TNA X Division Championship on the November 19 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , which Joe accepted . On the December 3 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , Joe attacked Styles , claiming he did not care about the X Division code . 
 Team 3D fought AMW in a Tag Team Elimination Tables match at Turning Point . The storyline behind this match began on the October 8 , 2005 episode of Impact ! where AMW and Jeff Jarrett violently assaulted Team 3D leaving them covered with blood . Afterwards , Team 3D were not seen due to a scripted injury , with Jarrett , AMW , and Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 , Bobby Roode , Eric Young , Petey Williams , and Coach Scott D 'Amore ) hosting a segment where they buried Team 3D 's careers on the October 15 , 2005 episode of Impact ! . Team 3D made their return from injury at Bound for Glory , attacking Jarrett and AMW . At Genesis , Team 3D teamed with Rhino to defeat AMW and Jarrett in a Six @-@ Man Tag Team match . A Tables match between Team 3D and AMW was announced on the November 19 , 2005 episode of Impact ! to take place at the show . 
 The number @-@ one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship was determined at Turning Point , with Christian Cage being pitted against Monty Brown . At Genesis , Brown defeated Jeff Hardy to become number @-@ one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . Also at Genesis , Christian Cage made his debut in the company , proclaiming he came to TNA to win the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . On the November 19 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , Cage reiterated his statement from Genesis , which angered Brown in the storyline . Brown said that Cage would have to go through him in order to get a title shot before the segment resulted in a fight between the two . Cage requested the match against Brown from NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko on the November 26 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , which he was granted . 
 TNA held the first @-@ ever Barbed Wire Massacre at Turning Point between Abyss and Sabu . This match was the result of a long @-@ standing rivalry between the two that began at Unbreakable . There , Abyss defeated Sabu in a No Disqualification match . Abyss and Sabu competed in a Monster 's Ball match at Bound for Glory alongside Jeff Hardy and Rhino , which Rhino won . At Genesis , Abyss defeated Sabu in another No Disqualification match . TNA advertised the Barbed Wire Massacre between Abyss and Sabu on the November 19 , 2005 episode of Impact ! . The reasoning behind the match stipulation had to do with Abyss fearing barbed wire in the storyline . Abyss challenged this fear on the December 3 episode <unk> ! , by bashing Sabu over the head with a barbed wire wrapped steel chair . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ Show = = = 
 Prior to Turning Point , TNA held a thirty @-@ minute pre @-@ show . During the broadcast , the team of Lance Hoyt and The Naturals ( Andy Douglas and Chase Stevens ) faced the team of Buck Quartermain , Jon Bolen and Joe <unk> in a Six Man Tag Team match that last 7 minutes and 11 seconds . Hoyt pinned Bolen after dropping Bolen face @-@ first with his signature <unk> . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Turning Point featured employees other than the wrestlers involved in the matches . Mike Tenay , Don West , and Bobby Heenan ( for the <unk> only ) were the commentators for the telecast . Jeremy Borash and David Penzer were the ring announcers for the event . Andrew Thomas , Rudy Charles , and Mark " Slick " Johnson participated as referees for the encounters . Shane Douglas handled the interview duties during the show . Besides employees who appeared in a wrestling role , Major League Baseball ( MLB ) outfielder Johnny Damon , James Mitchell , Traci , Larry Zbyszko , Cassidy Riley , Coach Scott D 'Amore , and MLB catcher A. J. Pierzynski all appeared on camera , either in backstage or ringside segments . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The show opened with Sabu versus Abyss in the ( first @-@ ever ) " Barbed Wire Massacre " , in which the ring ropes were replaced with barbed wire , and the only way to win was by pinfall or submission . James Mitchell accompanied Abyss to the ring . The duration of the contest was 10 minutes and 59 seconds . Early in the bout Sabu was pushed face @-@ first into the barbed wire ropes as a result of Abyss kicking out of a pin attempt . Later , Abyss lifted up and dropped Sabu face @-@ first into the barbed wire ropes . After this Sabu used a sharp weapon , which he had hidden under his belt , to stab Abyss in the arm repeatedly . Abyss was next to fall into the barbed wire after Sabu tripped him as he ran . A barbed wire wrapped steel was introduced in the match , which Sabu used to bash Abyss over the head . A barbed wire covered board was pushed into the ring after this by Sabu , which Abyss used to lift up and drop Sabu on . Another barbed wire covered board was introduced following this , with Sabu causing Abyss to run into it . He then pushed Abyss onto the other one and covered him for the pin to win the encounter . 
 The team of Austin Aries and Matt Bentley fought the team of Alex Shelley and Roderick Strong in the next match , spanning 8 minutes and 4 seconds . Bentley was accompanied by Traci to the ring . Bentley won the match for his team by pinning Shelley after kicking him in the face . 
 The third match of the show was between Raven and Chris K. This match occurred because Raven refused to quit the company , which was something NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zbyszko had requested in the storyline . Raven pinned Chris K after slamming Chris K 's head into the mat with his signature Raven Effect DDT maneuver at 5 minutes and 45 seconds in . 
 Next , Team Canada ( A @-@ 1 , Bobby Roode , Eric Young , and Petey Williams ) were pitted against the 4Live Kru ( B.G. James , Kip James , Konnan , and Ron Killings ) in an Eight @-@ Man Tag Team match . Coach Scott D 'Amore accompanied Team Canada to the ring . The duration of the encounter was 7 minutes and 18 seconds . Despite the match being contested under disqualifications and count @-@ outs , Konnan used his shoe as a weapon during the match . Roode won the bout for his team by pinning Kip after Konnan betrayed his teammates and bashed Kip over the head with a steel chair . After the match , Konnan also bashed B.G. over the head with the chair before leaving the ring . 
 TNA held a Six Man Tag Team match in which the team of Chris Sabin , Sonjay Dutt , and Dale Torborg faced The Diamonds in the Rough ( David Young , Elix Skipper , and Simon Diamond ) . This was promoted as a " <unk> " , since Torborg was a baseball coach and MLB catcher . A. J. Pierzynski accompanied Sabin , Dutt , and Torborg to the ring . Near the end of the match , Pierzynski pulled the referee out of the ring as he was counting a pin for Diamond . This led to announcer Bobby Heenan characterizing Pierzynski 's actions to the referee as ignorance , while Johnny Damon handed Pierzynski a home plate . Pierzynski then entered the ring and bashed Diamond over the head with it . Sabin then slammed Diamond neck @-@ first into the mat with his signature Cradle Shock maneuver , while Dutt followed by performing his signature Hindu Press aerial maneuver against Diamond . Dutt then pinned Diamond at 7 minutes and 57 seconds in , to win the bout for his team . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 Christian Cage fought Monty Brown next to determine the number @-@ one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . This bout lasted 12 minutes and 32 seconds . In the beginning the two fought at ringside , until Cage jumped from the top of a padded turnbuckle onto Brown with an aerial splash . After this , Cage removed the padding from one of the turnbuckles . Brown gained a two @-@ count on Cage after slamming him against the mat with his signature Alpha Bomb maneuver and covered for the pin , but the referee had a delayed reaction . Later , Cage caused Brown to run into the exposed turnbuckle , he then followed by forcing Brown 's face into the mat with his signature Unprettier maneuver . He then pinned Brown to become the number @-@ one contender to the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . 
 The seventh match of the event was a Tag Team Elimination Tables match between Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) and America 's Most Wanted ( Chris Harris and James Storm ; AMW ) . In this type of match , there are no disqualifications and no count @-@ outs , with the only way to win being to eliminate both members of the other team by forcing them through a table . Storm was the first eliminated , with Team 3D using AMW 's signature Death Sentence tag team maneuver to drive him through a table back @-@ first . Harris was the next eliminated , with Team 3D performing their signature 3D tag team maneuver on the entrance ramp , forcing Harris through the table face @-@ first . With Harris eliminated at 9 minutes and 40 seconds , Team 3D were named the victors of the encounter . 
 The TNA X Division Championship was defended by A.J. Styles against Samoa Joe next . Styles ' mouth was busted open during the bout . The two wrestlers fought at ringside during the opening minutes before entering the ring . Back in the ring Joe and Styles fought back and forth with each trading near @-@ falls . Finally , Styles slammed Joe face @-@ first into the mat with his signature Styles Clash maneuver . Joe kicked out of the following pin , leading to an exchange which allowed Joe to place Styles in his signature Coquina Clutch submission hold . After a brief period of time , Styles passed out and the referee awarded Joe the victory and thus became the new TNA X Division Champion at 18 minutes and 58 seconds in . After the match , Joe bashed Styles in the face with the TNA X Division Championship belt and then set up to slam him on a steel chair in the ring but was <unk> by Christopher Daniels coming to Styles ' defense . A brawl ensued between Joe and Daniels , leading to security breaking it up . 
 The main event was for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship , in which then @-@ champion Jeff Jarrett defended against the challenger Rhino . The duration of the match was 17 minutes and 30 seconds . Jarrett was busted open during the contest . Despite this being a standard wrestling match , Jarrett and Rhino used weapons throughout and primarily fought outside of the ring . Jarrett hit Rhino with a chair while the two stood on a scaffolding , causing Rhino to fall off and crash through a table . Rhino attempted to tackle Jarrett through a table set up on the entrance ramp . He succeeded , but the table did not break . Team Canada interfered afterwards , trying to stop Rhino from getting to the ring before the referee counted both Rhino and Jarrett out . They failed as Rhino came rushing back into the ring before the count finished . Jarrett pinned Rhino after slamming Rhino face @-@ first with his signature Stroke maneuver onto several steel chairs . As such , Jarrett retained the NWA World Heavyweight Championship . After the title match , the lights went off with the logo of the wrestler Sting appearing on the screens in the arena , thus being the major announcement advertised for the show . 
 = = Reception = = 
 A total of 900 people attended Turning Point . Canadian Online Explorer writer Bob Kapur rated the entire event a 7 out of 10 , which was the same rating he had given to the 2004 installment . It was higher than the 6 @.@ 5 out of ten the 2006 event was given by Chris Sokol . The Turning Point ranking was lower than Genesis ' rating , which received an 8 out of 10 from Corey David Lacroix . TNA 's next PPV event , Final Resolution , was ranked lower than Turning Point ; it received a rating of 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 from Kapur . Compared to rival World Wrestling Entertainment 's ( WWE ) Armageddon PPV event , Turning Point was ranked higher as Armageddon was given a 6 @.@ 5 out of 10 by Chris Sokol . 
 The highest rating given by Kapur went to the TNA X Division Championship bout , with a 9 out of 10 . The Barbed Wire Massacre received an 8 out of 10 , while the Christian Cage versus Monty Brown and the Tables match were both rated 7 out of 10 . The lowest rating assessed was a 6 out of 10 , given to the main event and several other matches on the card . 
 James Caldwell of the Pro Wrestling Torch Newsletter reviewed the same and stated he felt the main event involved the " usual shortcuts , " the " usual outside interference , " the " usual illogical finish , " and the " usual compromise of rules . " Though Caldwell commented that he could not say the " match wasn 't exciting , because it was . " When discussing the Cage versus Brown bout , Caldwell said it " never reached a second gear . " Caldwell said the Barbed Wire Massacre was " well developed " but was " below expectations . " Regarding the Tables match , Caldwell believed that Team 3D were not " mentally prepared for the match . " He also said that TNA should " demand a better return on investment when Team 3D can ’ t show up to the PPV in a decent shape to wrestle . " He also discussed the TNA X Division Championship bout , commenting that it was " state of the art " and that " the two men saved a downer PPV with an outstanding performance . " He praised Joe 's performance saying that " Joe is the most dynamic wrestler the company has , " and that his character was " TNA ’ s ticket to success . " 
 TNA released a DVD counting down the top 50 moments in their history in 2007 , with Joe 's X Division Champion victory ranking at number 34 on the compilation . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Several wrestlers were injured at the show . Abyss suffered several serious cuts to his left arm , while Sabu had cuts on his arms , legs , and face . Both wrestlers required several stitches after their match . A.J. Styles busted his lip during his title defense , requiring stitches , while Samoa Joe dislocated his jaw . Raven busted his lip but no stitches were required . Jeff Jarrett suffered a bad cut to his forehead during the main event . Lastly , James Storm was diagnosed with a neck stinger . 
 The <unk> bout at Turning Point was featured on a variety of news outlets after the show , including ESPN 's SportsCenter . 
 Sting made his TNA wrestling debut at Final Resolution on January 15 , 2006 , teaming with Christian Cage to face Jeff Jarrett and Monty Brown . This match was announced on the December 31 , 2005 episode of Impact ! . The team of Cage and Sting won the match at the event . This led to Cage facing Jarrett for the NWA World Heavyweight Championship at TNA 's Against All Odds PPV event on February 12 , 2006 . Cage won the encounter to become the new champion . 
 Samoa Joe defended his TNA X Division Championship against Christopher Daniels at Final Resolution . TNA promoted this match for Final Resolution on the January 7 , 2006 episode of Impact ! . Joe won the contest after A.J. Styles threw in the towel for Daniels due to Joe beating Daniels senseless in the storyline . The rivalry continued at Against All Odds , where Daniels , Joe , and Styles competed in a Three Way match for the TNA X Division Championship ; Joe gained the pinfall to retain the title . The three competed again at TNA 's Destination X PPV event on March 12 , 2006 , but this time in a Three Way Ultimate X match for the championship . Daniels won the bout , thus becoming the new TNA X Division Champion . The rivalry ended on the April 13 , 2006 episode of Impact ! when Joe defeated Daniels to win back the championship . 
 Team 3D continued their feud with AMW at Final Resolution . Due to their victory at Turning Point Team 3D were number @-@ one contenders to the NWA World Tag Team Championship , thus earning a championship match . TNA advertised Team 3D versus AMW for the tag team championship to take place at Final Resolution . AMW defeated Team 3D to retain the championship at the show . 
 Abyss started a rivalry with Rhino after the event . This started on the December 31 , 2005 episode of Impact ! when Abyss attacked Rhino after Rhino defeated A @-@ 1 in a match . Afterwards , TNA promoted a match between the two at Final Resolution . At the event , Rhino pinned Abyss to win the encounter . 
 Raven and NWA Championship Committee member Larry Zybysko continued their feud after Turning Point . On the December 17 , 2005 episode of Impact ! , Zybysko announced that at Final Resolution he would choose a new opponent to challenge Raven . He added a stipulation that if Raven won he gained a future NWA World Heavyweight Championship match , but if Raven lost , he would be fired from TNA . Raven faced Sean Waltman at the show in a Raven 's Rules match . Raven lost the match after interference from Zybysko . Due to the stipulation attached , Raven was fired in the storyline . 
 The 4Live Kru broke up as a result of Konnan 's actions at Turning Point . This led to B.G. James and Kip James forming The James Gang tag team and Konnan creating The Latin American Exchange alliance with Homicide and Apolo . The two teams fought at Against All Odds , which The James Gang won . Ron Killings chose not to be involved in the rivalry in the storyline , instead facing Bobby Roode at Final Resolution in a losing effort . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Kimberella = 
 Kimberella is a monospecific genus of bilaterian known only from rocks of the Ediacaran period . The slug @-@ like organism fed by scratching the microbial surface on which it dwelt in a manner similar to the molluscs , although its affinity with this group is contentious . 
 Specimens were first found in Australia 's Ediacara Hills , but recent research has concentrated on the numerous finds near the White Sea in Russia , which cover an interval of time from 555 to 558 million years ago . As with many fossils from this time , its evolutionary relationships to other organisms are hotly debated . Paleontologists initially classified Kimberella as a type of jellyfish , but since 1997 features of its anatomy and its association with scratch marks resembling those made by a radula have been interpreted as signs that it may have been a mollusc . Although some paleontologists dispute its classification as a mollusc , it is generally accepted as being at least a bilaterian . 
 The classification of Kimberella is important for scientific understanding of the Cambrian explosion : if it was a mollusc or at least a protostome , the protostome and deuterostome lineages must have diverged significantly before 555 million years ago . Even if it was a bilaterian but not a mollusc , its age would indicate that animals were diversifying well before the start of the Cambrian . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The genus is named after Mr. John Kimber , student , teacher , and collector who lost his life during an expedition to Central Australia in 1964 . Originally it was described with the name Kimberia . Dr. N. H. Ludbrook drew attention to the fact that the name Kimberia is preoccupied by Kimberia Cotton and Woods , a turtle subgenus . Accordingly , the new name Kimberella was proposed by Mary Wade in 1972 . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 Kimberella has been found both in the Ediacara Hills of South Australia and in the <unk> ’ <unk> Formation in the White Sea region of Russia . The White Sea fossils are often associated with the Ediacaran " animals " <unk> and Dickinsonia ; meandering trace fossil trails , possibly made by Kimberella ; and algae . Beds in the White Sea succession have been dated to 555 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 3 million years ago and 558 million years ago by radiometric dating , using uranium @-@ lead ratios in zircons found in volcanic ash layers that are sandwiched between layers that contain Kimberella fossils . Kimberella fossils are also known from beds older and younger than this precisely dated range . The fossils from the Ediacara Hills have not been dated precisely . 
 = = Description = = 
 Over 1000 specimens , representing organisms of all stages of maturity , have now been found in the White Sea area at the bottom of fine @-@ grained sandstone layers . The large number of specimens , the small grain @-@ size of the sediments and the variety of circumstances in which specimens were preserved provide detailed information about Kimberella ′ s external form , internal anatomy , locomotion and feeding style . 
 All of the fossils are oval in outline . Elongated specimens illustrate that the organism was capable of stretching in an anterior @-@ posterior direction , perhaps by as much as a factor of two . The only type of symmetry visible in the White Sea specimens is bilateral ; there is no sign of any of the kinds of radial symmetry that are normal in the Cnidaria , the group that includes jellyfish , sea anemones and hydras . The Australian fossils were originally described as a type of jellyfish , but this is inconsistent with the bilateral symmetry in the fossils . The White Sea fossils and the surrounding sediments also show that Kimberella lived on the surface of the sea @-@ floor . 
 Kimberella had a dorsal integument that has been described as a non @-@ mineralized " shell " ; in the larger specimens this reached up to 15 cm in length , 5 to 7 cm in width , and was 3 to 4 cm high ; the smallest specimens are only about 2 – 3 mm long . The shell was stiff but flexible , and appears to have been non @-@ mineralized , becoming tougher as it grew larger ( and presumably thicker ) in more mature specimens . The deformation observed in elongated and folded specimens illustrates that the shell was highly malleable ; perhaps , rather than a single integument , it consisted of an aggregation of ( mineralized ? ) sclerites . At its highest point was a hood @-@ like structure , forming what is thought to be the front . In some specimens , the inner surface of the shell bears stripes spanning the width of the creature ; these may represent the attachment sites of muscles . Similar stripes around the edge of the shell may have been connected to muscles involved in retracting the muscular foot into the shell . 
 The long axis of the organism is marked by a raised ridge ; the middle axis is slightly humped . Kimberella ′ s body had no visible segmentation but had a series of repeated " modules " . Each module included a well @-@ developed band of dorso @-@ ventral muscles running from the top to the single , broad , muscular " foot " , and smaller transverse ventral muscles from side to side on the underside of the body . The combination of the bands of dorso @-@ ventral and transverse ventral muscles enabled Kimberella to move by making the foot ripple . 
 The body also had a frilled fringe that may have been part of the animal 's respiratory system , performing a function similar to that of gills . The fact that the fringe extended well beyond the shell may indicate that Kimberella ′ s " gills " were inefficient and needed a large area , or that there were no effective predators on Kimberella and the shell 's main function was to provide a platform for the muscles . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Kimberella dwelt in shallow waters ( up to tens of meters in depth ) , sharing the calm , well @-@ oxygenated sea floor with photosynthetic organisms and microbial mats . Assemblages bearing Kimberella often also bear fossils of <unk> , Dickinsonia , <unk> and <unk> , suggesting that it lived alongside these organisms . 
 Kimberella probably grazed on microbial mats , but a selective predatory habit cannot be ruled out . Fedonkin reckons that as it ate , it moved " backwards " ; the trail thus created was destroyed by the subsequent grazing activity . Conversely , <unk> et al. claim that it moved ' forwards ' . Fans of grooves are often found radiating from the " head " end of the organism ; these indicate that the organism stayed in one place , and raked the surface of the microbial mat towards it by extension of its head , which bore two " teeth " . <unk> et al. reconstruct Kimberella as having a long neck that operated like the arm of a digger , rotating about an axis perpendicular to the sea floor in order to produce the sweep of the fan , and rotating towards and away from the animal to scrape food from the substrate to the mouth . 
 The lack of evidence to the contrary suggests that the organisms reproduced sexually . 
 The waters in which Kimberella dwelt were occasionally disturbed by sandy currents , caused when sediments were whipped up by storms or meltwater discharge , and washed over the creatures . In response to this stress , the organisms appear to have retracted their soft parts into their shells ; apparently they could not move fast enough to outrun the currents . Some organisms survived the current , and attempted to burrow out of the sand that had been deposited above them ; some unsuccessful attempts can be seen where juveniles were fossilised at the end of a burrow a few centimetres long . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Kimberella fossils are generally preserved on top of a clay @-@ rich bed and beneath a sandy bed . All fossils are preserved as depressions in the bases of beds , implying that the organism , although not mineralised , was firm enough to resist being crushed as sediment accumulated above it ; as the soft parts of the organism decayed , the soft muds underneath would be squeezed up into the shell , preserving the shape of the organism . 
 Preservation of most specimens was made possible by the fast sedimentation that quickly cut the organism off from seawater ; it may also have been enhanced by the decay products of the rotting organism , which could have helped the overlying sediment to <unk> and harden . It has been suggested that a mucus trail produced by the organism may have assisted its preservation , but experiments suggest that mucus disintegrates too easily to play a role in binding sediment together . 
 = = Classification = = 
 All the Kimberella fossils found so far are assigned to one species , K. quadrata . The first specimens were discovered in Australia in 1959 . They were originally classified as jellyfish by Martin Glaessner and Mary Wade in 1966 , and then as box jellyfish by Wade in 1972 , a view that remained popular until the fossils of the White sea region were discovered ; these prompted a reinterpretation . Research on these specimens by Mikhail A. Fedonkin , initially with Benjamin M. Waggoner in 1997 , led to Kimberella being recognised as the oldest well @-@ documented triploblastic bilaterian organism — not a jellyfish at all . 
 So far Kimberella fossils show no sign of a radula , the toothed chitinous " tongue " that is the diagnostic feature of modern molluscs , excluding bivalves . Since radulae are very rarely preserved in fossil molluscs , its absence does not necessarily mean that K. quadrata did not have one . The rocks in the immediate vicinity of Kimberella fossils bear scratch marks that have been compared to those made by the radulae of molluscs as they graze on microbial mats . These traces , named <unk> and <unk> , have been interpreted as circumstantial evidence for the presence of a radula . In conjunction with the <unk> shell , this has been taken to indicate Kimberella was a mollusc or very closely related to molluscs . In 2001 and 2007 Fedonkin suggested that the feeding mechanism might be a retractable proboscis with hook @-@ like organs at its end . Kimberella ′ s feeding apparatus appears to differ significantly from the typical mollusc radula , and this demonstrates that Kimberella is at best a stem @-@ group mollusc . Notably , the scratch marks indicate that the ' teeth ' were dragged towards the organism , not pushed away as in molluscs , and that the maximum impact on the sediment was when the mouthpart was furthest from the organism . The direction of grazing is also backwards , as opposed to forwards as in molluscs . Furthermore , the constant width of grooves implies <unk> – a trait that is very derived in molluscs . It has been argued that the shape of the feeding traces is incompatible with a radula , and that despite the molluscan body form , the lack of a radula places Kimberella well outside the molluscan crown group . Butterfield points out that plenty of other groups of organisms bear structures capable of making similar marks . 
 Taken together , sceptics doubt that the available evidence is enough to reliably identify Kimberella as a mollusc or near @-@ mollusc , and suggest that it is presumptuous to call it anything more than a " possible " mollusc , or even just a " probable bilaterian " . 
 = = Theoretical importance = = 
 The Cambrian explosion is an apparently rapid increase in the variety of basic body structures of animals in the Early Cambrian period , starting after 543 million years ago and finishing before 518 million years ago . A few of the Early Cambrian fossils were already known in the mid @-@ 19th century , and Charles Darwin saw the apparently sudden appearance and diversification of animals as one of the main objections that could be made against his theory of evolution by natural selection . 
 The majority of animals more complex than jellyfish and other Cnidarians are split into two groups , the protostomes and deuterostomes . The mollusc @-@ like features of Kimberella strongly suggest that it was a member of the protostomes . If so , this means that the protostome and deuterostome lineages must have split some time before Kimberella appeared — at least 558 million years ago , and hence well before the start of the Cambrian 541 million years ago . Even if it is not a protostome , it is widely accepted as a member of the more inclusive bilaterian clade . Since fossils of rather modern @-@ looking Cnidarians have been found in the Doushantuo lagerstätte , the <unk> and bilaterian lineages would have diverged well over 580 million years ago . 
 = Poison ( Final Fight ) = 
 Poison ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a fictional character in the Final Fight and Street Fighter series of video games . Created by Akira Yasuda for Capcom , Poison first appeared in the original Final Fight alongside a similar character , Roxy , later appearing in Capcom @-@ produced games , media and merchandise related to the Street Fighter franchise . She is voiced by Atsuko Tanaka since the Street Fighter III series and Masae Yumi in SNK vs. Capcom : SVC Chaos . 
 Originally conceived as a female thug in Final Fight and part of the game 's antagonist group , Mad Gear , concerns during the game 's development about reactions from North American audiences to fighting women , resulted in the character being re @-@ imagined as a trans woman . However , that was not considered satisfactory and both Poison and her palette swap Roxy were replaced by the male characters " Billy " and " Sid " , and have been for every subsequent North American port of the title on Nintendo consoles and handhelds . After the Final Fight series , she later appeared alongside wrestler Hugo , acting as his manager , with her schemes revolving around finding a tag team partner for him or developing their own wrestling organization . Poison was also to appear in both Capcom Fighting All @-@ Stars and Final Fight : Streetwise ; however , the former was canceled , and she was omitted from the latter as development progressed . Following those aborted attempts , she ended up appearing as a playable character on Street Fighter X Tekken . She was also added as a playable character to Ultra Street Fighter IV . 
 The character 's status as potentially a trans woman , consciously left ambiguous by the developers , has remained a topic of frequent debate by both fans and media alike . 
 = = Conception and history = = 
 Poison 's first appearance in Final Fight featured her and a palette swap character named Roxy as recurring minor enemies for the player to fight . Named after the band by an unnamed female employee at Capcom , she was designed by Akira Yasuda to contrast against the bigger characters in the game and move about randomly . According to the book All About Capcom Head to Head Fighting Games and Final Fight director Akira Nishitani , the characters were originally planned to be cisgender females , but were changed to " <unk> " ( a Japanese term for pre @-@ op trans individuals ) after the game 's release , due to the suggestion that " hitting women was considered rude " in America and the concern that feminist groups would sue . However , concept artwork included in the 2005 compilation Capcom Classics Collection of the pair specifically uses the kana for ' <unk> ' ( <unk> ) , contradicting the statement the change occurred post @-@ release . 
 A later appearance by Poison as a playable character in Final Fight Revenge , an American @-@ produced 3D fighting game spinoff of Final Fight , portrayed the character in a highly feminine manner and had her romantically interested in Final Fight hero Cody . Commentary about her ending in the game in All About Capcom suggested that the character may have received sex reassignment surgery . The Final Fight @-@ related character profiles featured in Capcom Classics Collection instead allude to her being a cross @-@ dresser , while addressing Roxy as a " she " who dislikes Poison 's cross @-@ dressing . 
 The discrepancies regarding Poison have been addressed more than once in interviews with former and current Capcom employees . Nishitani stated that he supposed the character " could be male " , but added it was up to the viewer to decide . He later clarified in a discussion on Twitter that in his personal view Poison was a woman . Street Fighter IV 's producer Yoshinori Ono , when asked in an interview about the matter , stated : " Let 's set the record straight : In North America , Poison is officially a post @-@ op transsexual woman . But in Japan , she simply tucks her business away to look female . " He later emphasized it again when asked about what female characters could be included in the game Street Fighter IV , stating that it would be too confusing to include her due to the region @-@ specific gender . However , in a 2011 interview with Electronic Gaming Monthly at the Tokyo Game Show , he stated that Capcom " doesn 't have a stance technically " , and while they wouldn 't give an official answer , felt it was up to the viewer to decide . He added that his intent was to please all fans and that the mystery behind her gender was the core of the character . During the same interview , a Capcom representative further added that they worked closely with GLAAD , an organization concerned with the portrayal of LGBT people in media , to ensure " anything that might be offensive has been very tailored to not be " for Poison 's portrayal in Street Fighter X Tekken . 
 = = = Designs = = = 
 Poison is shown to be a female with long , rugged , pink hair . She wears a black cap , a choker , cutoff , blue jean @-@ shorts , red high @-@ heels , and a <unk> cut just below her breasts . In Final Fight Revenge and some artworks , her hair is shown to be purple instead . She wears several armbands around her right arm and has chains and a pair of handcuffs suspended off her shorts . Final Fight Revenge features her also possessing a whip used in attacks , though the character has not been shown with one in other titles or artwork ( other than Street Fighter X Tekken and Ultra Street Fighter IV ) . Poison stands about 5 feet 9 inches ( 175 cm ) tall and has three sizes of 34 @-@ 25 @-@ 35 " ( 88 @-@ 66 @-@ 89 cm ) . 
 Poison was given a secondary outfit for Capcom Fighting All @-@ Stars alongside her primary classic attire . Made of shiny , silvery material it consisted of boots that extended halfway up her thighs and a combined sleeveless shirt / short skirt with a plunging neckline . Gloves and a small <unk> were also added , as well as a belt , with the handcuffs hanging off of it . Her arm straps were removed , though the strap around her neck remained . 
 The concept art section of the promotional comic for Final Fight : Streetwise showcased concept art by designer Trent <unk> for the game , including a reimagined Poison . The design features red hair , a red micro skirt showing a hint of underwear , a jacket , a button @-@ up white shirt showing some of her abdomen , black high @-@ heeled boots , a gold belt , and a wool cap . In August 2006 , <unk> revealed three additional alternate designs on <unk> 's internet forum ; one being the classic look ; another being a white button @-@ up shirt with red pants , high @-@ heels , and short hair ; and the third keeping the high @-@ heels and pants , but adding shades , returning her hair to full length and swapping the shirt for a jacket with deep cleavage . All four designs use the same color scheme , belt , and handcuffs . 
 = = In video games = = 
 Introduced in the original Final Fight , Poison is an orphan from Los Angeles . She enjoys fighting and uses it as a means to stay in shape , making use of her ties with the original Mad Gear Gang to keep herself out of prison . In Final Fight Revenge , her behavior was represented as womanly and sultry , ranging from flirtatious comments to pole dancing . She frames Cody for her assault crimes and gets him arrested by Edi . E , though she later visits him in jail having developed romantic feelings for him . In the Street Fighter III series , she reappears working as a wrestling manager for her friend Hugo , who could not find a tag team partner due to his immense strength . From here their plots would focus on the two searching for a tag partner or starting their own wrestling association , echoed in their SNK vs. Capcom : SVC Chaos appearance . Poison later appeared as a playable character alongside Hugo in Street Fighter X Tekken with similar goals , and in Ultra Street Fighter IV , in which she combined the concept with a rock band theme in her character ending . 
 Poison was also planned to appear both in Capcom Fighting All @-@ Stars and Final Fight Streetwise , though the first game was canceled and she was cut from the second . In Mighty Final Fight , a super deformed parody of the character named " Poison Kiss " appears as a generic enemy , a corrupt cop and characterized as her younger sister . Poison has also appeared based on her role as Hugo 's manager on cards for SNK vs. Capcom : Card Fighters Clash and the game 's Nintendo DS sequel , as well as the related printed trading card game . Poison appears as one of the spectators in the Metro City stage in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds . 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 In the original Final Fight , Poison and Roxy both utilized standing and acrobatic flip kicks to attack the player . As one of the fighters in Final Fight Revenge , her moveset was expanded heavily , and she was armed with a whip . The whip is used primarily in her Cat Claw and Thunder Whip attacks ( which are comparable to Shoryuken / <unk> styled attacks , respectively ) , and can be used to steal a weapon from the opponent . Additionally , her handcuffs can be thrown as a horizontal projectile move to immobilize the opponent for a short time . 
 One particular attack , Poison Kiss , has her blow a large heart @-@ shaped kiss at the opponent that travels in a sine wave path . If it connects , a quick peep show of Poison in several erotic poses is displayed , and afterwards the opponent is shown stunned with hearts dancing over their head . Defeating an opponent with this attack results in Poison doing a pole dance for her win pose , with her whip serving as the pole . Though not playable in the beta test of Capcom Fighting All Stars , promotional material released by Capcom for the title show that this move would have been retained for her gameplay . However , in Ultra Street Fighter IV , her Poison Kiss follows up with several slaps and a groin kick when it hits the opponent , similar to her Cross Art move from Street Fighter X Tekken . 
 As for the Street Fighter series , starting from Street Fighter X Tekken , Poison has a unique moveset of her own that mixes agile Pro Wrestling techniques and her own <unk> abilities . Poison 's standard throws include a multi @-@ hitting slap and a Frankensteiner , Aeolus Edge and Kissed by a Goddess which are the names of her Fireball and Shoryuken @-@ like moves , and Whip of Love which is a multi @-@ hitting whip attack and is done in a similar fashion to Fei Long 's <unk> . Her famous flip kick from the original Final Fight games appears as a special called Love Me Tender . After the flipping axe kick , Poison can follow this move up with a reverse Frankensteiner ( Poison @-@ Rana ) . In addition , Poison 's Super Art is called Love Storm , and starts with her charging a large version of Aeolus Edge . Once it hits , she flips into the air and lands with a hard hitting axe kick that stuns the opponent in a prone position . Afterwards , she repeatedly smacks the opponent with her horse whip and delivers a final blow that knocks them into the air . Poison also retained her signature backflip from the original game . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 When Final Fight was ported to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System , an American playtester working for Capcom reviewed the content during the localization process with one of the Japanese designers and objected to the protagonist hitting females . While Akira Yasuda pointed out that the characters had already been made into trans women , believing this to be an acceptable compromise , Poison and Roxy were replaced with regular male punks named " Billy " and " Sid " in the English localization despite his objections . This change has been repeated with every English port to Nintendo consoles , including the Game Boy Advance version Final Fight One and the Wii 's Virtual Console . English versions of the Sega CD port censored the characters in a different manner , redrawing both of them with longer shirts and shorts , and covering the under @-@ cleavage shown when the characters were struck . 
 = = Promotion and reception = = 
 Poison has been featured in various promotional Street Fighter related artworks , as early as Street Fighter II . Additionally she has been used as a cameo character three times in the Street Fighter Alpha series . In terms of merchandise , an immovable model was being made for the 2008 Capcom Girls Collection line of figurines by Mitsumasa Yoshizawa , using her Final Fight attire and at 1 / 6 height , standing nearly 11 inches tall . A similar model was released later on , identical to the previous figurine except with her giving a thumbs down gesture and darker colors . A version with blonde hair was later released as well . In Capcom 's press kit for the 2010 release of Final Fight : Double Impact , a pink hair spray was included in tribute to the character , with the text describing it as " For men , women , and everything in between . " Capcom later featured her as one of the characters for their Capcom Girls 2011 calendar . 
 In February 1991 , Gamest magazine named her one of the top fifty characters in video games of 1990 , placing her twenty @-@ sixth on their list . UGO.com ranked her thirtieth on their " Top 50 Videogame Hotties " list , citing her as " one of the most controversial video game characters to date . " Former Tips & Tricks executive editor Wataru Maruyama cited her design as an example of how an outfit is worn compared to its complexity can make a character memorable and stand out , stating " to use a phrase I don ’ t particularly like to use , she totally worked it . " She has also been a subject drawn by non @-@ Capcom artists , such as Falcoon . GameDaily ranked her twenty @-@ third on their " Top 25 " list of their favorite Capcom characters , stating of the characters in Final Fight " The Mad Gear gang is a feisty bunch , and we could 've picked anyone from the list ... Instead , we selected Poison " . GamesRadar named her one of twelve Street Fighter related characters they wished to see in Super Street Fighter IV , arguing that her status should not be an issue against her inclusion and that the character deserved another stand @-@ alone appearance of her own . Later , GamesRadar included her in the list of " The 30 best Capcom characters of the last 30 years " . Joystiq named her their favorite character of the Final Fight series , stating that her " hypersexualized appearance and random flipping " made the character memorable , and that the controversy over her gender made the character even more so . 
 As the exact nature of Poison 's status as gender @-@ variant has been left deliberately ambiguous by Capcom , the topic has remained a popular subject for debate among fans and gaming media alike . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Eric L. Patterson described her as being a significant character to the trans community , and a perfect example of how it is " so awkward when it comes to knowing how to deal with characters who aren 't white , male , and heterosexual " in video games . Complex pointed her out as an example of stereotypical depiction of trans hookers , listing Poison among The 15 Most <unk> Characters in Video Games . GamesRadar commented " Poison holds a distinction as one of gaming ’ s first trans characters , which began as a strange choice in localization but has become a part of the character that she wears with pride . If you take issue with it , that ’ s your problem , not hers . It 's that kind of confidence that makes her so appealing . " 
 = A Song of Ice and Fire = 
 A Song of Ice and Fire is a series of epic fantasy novels by the American novelist and screenwriter George R. R. Martin . The first volume of the series , A Game of Thrones , was begun in 1991 and first published in 1996 . Martin , who initially envisioned the series as a trilogy , has published five out of a planned seven volumes . The fifth and most recent volume of the series published in 2011 , A Dance with Dragons , took Martin five years to write . The sixth novel , The Winds of Winter , is still being written . 
 A Song of Ice and Fire takes place on the fictional continents Westeros and Essos . The point of view of each chapter in the story is a limited perspective of a range of characters growing from nine , in the first novel , to thirty @-@ one by the fifth . Three main stories interweave a dynastic war among several families for control of Westeros , the rising threat of the supernatural Others in the northernmost reaches of Westeros , and the ambition of Daenerys Targaryen , the deposed king 's exiled daughter , to assume the Iron Throne . 
 Martin 's inspirations included the Wars of the Roses and the French historical novels The Accursed Kings by Maurice Druon . A Song of Ice and Fire received praise for its diverse portrayal of women and religion , as well as its realism . An assortment of disparate and subjective points of view confronts the reader , and the success or survival of point of view characters is never assured . Within the often morally ambiguous world of A Song of Ice and Fire , questions concerning loyalty , pride , human sexuality , piety , and the morality of violence frequently arise . 
 As of April 2015 , the books have sold more than 60 million copies worldwide and have been translated into at least 45 languages . The fourth and fifth volumes reached the top of The New York Times Best Seller lists upon their releases . Among the many derived works are several prequel novellas , a TV series , a comic book adaptation , and several card , board , and video games . 
 = = Plot synopsis = = 
 A Song of Ice and Fire takes place in a fictional world in which seasons last for years and end unpredictably . Centuries before the events of the first novel ( see backstory ) , the Seven Kingdoms of Westeros were united under the first Lord of the Seven Kingdoms and founder of the Targaryen dynasty , Aegon I. At the beginning of A Game of Thrones , 15 years have passed since the rebellion led by Robert Baratheon deposed and killed the last Targaryen ruler , King Aerys II , and proclaimed Robert king and Lord of the Seven Kingdoms . 
 The principal story chronicles the power struggle for the Iron Throne between the great Houses of Westeros following the death of King Robert in A Game of Thrones . Robert 's eldest son , Joffrey , is immediately proclaimed king through the machinations of his mother , Cersei Lannister . When Lord Eddard " Ned " Stark , King Robert 's " Hand " ( chief advisor ) , discovers that Joffrey and his siblings are the product of incest between Cersei and her twin Jaime , Eddard is executed for treason . In response , Robert 's brothers Stannis and Renly both lay separate claims to the throne . During this period of instability , several regions of Westeros attempt self @-@ rule : Ned 's eldest son Robb is proclaimed King in the North , while <unk> Greyjoy re @-@ establishes an independent kingdom in his region , the Iron Islands . The so @-@ called ' War of the Five Kings ' is in full progress by the middle of the second book , A Clash of Kings . 
 The second story takes place in the far north of Westeros , where an 8 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old wall of ice defends the Seven Kingdoms from the Others . The Wall 's sentinels , the Sworn Brotherhood of the Night 's Watch , also protect the realm from the incursions of the " <unk> " or " Free Folk " , who are humans living north of the Wall . The Night 's Watch story is told primarily through the point of view of Jon Snow , the bastard son of Eddard Stark . Jon follows the footsteps of his uncle Benjen Stark and joins the Watch at a young age , rising quickly through the ranks . In the third volume , A Storm of Swords , the Night 's Watch storyline becomes increasingly entangled with the War of the Five Kings . 
 The third story follows Daenerys Targaryen , daughter of the last Targaryen ruler of the Seven Kingdoms , and is set on the continent of Essos , which is located directly east of Westeros across the Narrow Sea . Daenerys ' storyline is isolated from the others until A Dance with Dragons . On Essos , Daenerys is married off by her elder brother to a powerful warlord but slowly becomes an independent and intelligent ruler in her own right . Her rise to power is aided by the historic birth of three dragons , hatched from eggs given to her as wedding gifts . The three dragons soon become not only a symbol of her bloodline and legitimate claim to the Iron Throne , but devastating weapons of war . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Books in the Ice and Fire series are first published in hardcover and are later re @-@ released as paperback editions . In the UK , Harper Voyager publishes special slipcased editions . The series has also been translated into more than 30 languages . All page totals given below are for the US first editions . 
 = = = First three novels ( 1991 – 2000 ) = = = 
 George R. R. Martin was already a successful fantasy and sci @-@ fi author and TV writer before writing his A Song of Ice and Fire book series . Martin had published his first short story in 1971 and his first novel in 1977 . By the mid @-@ 1990s , he had won three Hugo Awards , two Nebula Awards , and other awards for his short fiction . Although his early books were well received within the fantasy fiction community , his readership remained relatively small and Martin took on jobs as a writer in Hollywood in the mid @-@ 1980s . He principally worked on the revival of The Twilight Zone throughout 1986 and on Beauty and the Beast until 1990 , but he also developed his own TV pilots and wrote feature film scripts . He grew frustrated that his pilots and screenplays were not getting made and that TV @-@ related production limitations like budgets and episode lengths were forcing him to cut characters and trim battle scenes . This pushed Martin back towards writing books , where he did not have to worry about compromising the size of his imagination . Admiring the works of J. R. R. Tolkien in his childhood , he wanted to write an epic fantasy , though he did not have any specific ideas . 
 When Martin was between Hollywood projects in the summer of 1991 , he started writing a new science fiction novel called Avalon . After three chapters , he had a vivid idea of a boy seeing a man 's beheading and finding direwolves in the snow , which would eventually become the first non @-@ prologue chapter of A Game of Thrones . Putting Avalon aside , Martin finished this chapter in a few days and grew certain that it was part of a longer story . After a few more chapters , Martin perceived his new book as a fantasy story and started making maps and genealogies . However , the writing of this book was interrupted for a few years when Martin returned to Hollywood to produce his TV series <unk> that ABC had ordered but ultimately never aired . 
 In 1994 , Martin gave to his agent , Kirby McCauley , the first 200 pages and a two @-@ page story projection as part of a planned trilogy with the novels A Dance with Dragons and The Winds of Winter intended to follow . When Martin had still not reached the novel 's end at 1400 manuscript pages , he felt that the series needed to be four and eventually six books long , which he imagined as two linked trilogies of one long story . Martin chose A Song of Ice And Fire as the overall series title : Martin saw the struggle of the cold Others and the fiery dragons as one possible meaning for " Ice and Fire " , whereas the word " song " had previously appeared in Martin 's book titles A Song for <unk> and Songs the Dead Men Sing , stemming from his obsessions with songs . Martin also named Robert Frost 's 1920 poem " Fire and Ice " and cultural associations such as passion versus betrayal as possible influences for the series ' title . 
 The revised finished manuscript for A Game of Thrones was 1088 pages long ( without the appendices ) , with the publication following in August 1996 . Wheel of Time author Robert Jordan had written a short endorsement for the cover that was influential in ensuring the book 's and hence series ' early success with fantasy readers . Blood of the Dragon , a pre @-@ release sample novella drawn from Daenerys 's chapters , went on to win the 1997 Hugo Award for Best Novella . 
 The 300 pages removed from the A Game of Thrones manuscript served as the opening of the second book , entitled A Clash of Kings . It was released in February 1999 in the United States , with a manuscript length ( without appendices ) of 1184 pages . A Clash of Kings was the first book of the Ice and Fire series to make the best @-@ seller lists , reaching 13 on the The New York Times Best Seller list in 1999 . After the success of the The Lord of the Rings films , Martin received his first inquiries to the rights of the Ice and Fire series from various producers and filmmakers . 
 Martin was several months late turning in the third book , A Storm of Swords . The last chapter he had written was about the " Red Wedding " , a pivotal scene notable for its violence ( see Themes : Violence and death ) . A Storm of Swords was 1521 pages in manuscript ( without appendices ) , causing problems for many of Martin 's publishers around the world . Bantam Books published A Storm of Swords in a single volume in the United States in November 2000 , whereas some other @-@ language editions were divided into two , three , or even four volumes . A Storm of Swords debuted at number 12 in the New York Times bestseller list . 
 = = = Bridging the timeline gap ( 2000 – 2011 ) = = = 
 After A Game of Thrones , A Clash of Kings , and A Storm of Swords , Martin originally intended to write three more books . The fourth book , tentatively titled A Dance with Dragons , was to focus on Daenerys Targaryen 's return to Westeros and the associated conflicts . Martin wanted to set this story five years after A Storm of Swords so that the younger characters could grow older and the dragons grow larger . Agreeing with his publishers early on that the new book should be shorter than A Storm of Swords , Martin set out to write the novel closer in length to A Clash of Kings . A long prologue was to establish what had happened in the meantime , initially just as one chapter of Aeron <unk> on the Iron Islands at the <unk> . Since the events on the Iron Islands were to have an impact in the book and could not be told with existing POV characters , Martin eventually introduced three new viewpoints . 
 In 2001 , Martin was still optimistic that the fourth installment might be released in the last quarter of 2002 . However , the five @-@ year gap did not work for all characters during writing . On one hand , Martin was unsatisfied with covering the events during the gap solely through flashbacks and internal retrospection . On the other hand , it was implausible to have nothing happen for five years . After working on the book for about a year , Martin realized he needed an additional interim book , which he called A Feast for Crows . The book would pick up the story immediately after the third book , and Martin scrapped the idea of a five @-@ year gap . The material of the written 250 @-@ page prologue was mixed in as new viewpoint characters from Dorne and the Iron Islands . These expanded storylines and the resulting story interactions complicated the plot for Martin . 
 The manuscript length of A Feast For Crows eventually surpassed A Storm of Swords . Martin was reluctant to make the necessary deep cuts to get the book down to publishable length , as that would have compromised the story he had in mind . Printing the book in " <unk> on onion skin paper and giving each reader a magnifying glass " was also not an option for him . On the other hand , Martin rejected the publishers ' idea of splitting the narrative chronologically into A Feast for Crows , Parts One and Two . Being already late with the book , Martin had not even started writing all characters ' stories and also objected to ending the first book without any resolution for its many viewpoint characters as in previous books . 
 With the characters spread out across the world , a friend suggested that Martin divide the story geographically into two volumes , of which A Feast for Crows would be the first . This approach would give Martin the room to complete his commenced story arcs as he had originally intended , which he still felt was the best approach years later . Martin moved the unfinished characters ' stories set in the east ( Essos ) and north ( Winterfell and the Wall ) into the next book , A Dance with Dragons , and left A Feast for Crows to cover the events on Westeros , King 's Landing , the Riverlands , Dorne , and the Iron Islands . Both books begin immediately after the end of A Storm of Swords , running in parallel instead of sequentially , and involve different casts of characters with only little overlap . Martin split Arya 's chapters into both books after having already moved the three other most popular characters ( Jon Snow , Tyrion , and Daenerys ) into A Dance with Dragons . 
 Upon its release in October 2005 in the UK and November 2005 in the US , A Feast for Crows went straight to the top of the New York Times bestseller list . Among the positive reviewers was Lev Grossman of Time , who dubbed Martin " the American Tolkien " . However , fans and critics alike were disappointed with the story split that left the fates of several popular characters unresolved after A Storm of Swords ' cliffhanger ending . With A Dance with Dragons said to be half @-@ finished , Martin mentioned in the epilogue of A Feast for Crows that the next volume would be released by the next year . However , planned release dates were repeatedly pushed back . Meanwhile , HBO acquired the rights to turn Ice and Fire into a dramatic series in 2007 and aired the first of ten episodes covering A Game of Thrones in April 2011 . 
 With around 1600 pages in manuscript length , A Dance with Dragons was eventually published in July 2011 after six years of writing , longer in page count and writing time than any of the preceding four novels . The story of A Dance with Dragons catches up and goes beyond A Feast for Crows around two @-@ thirds into the book , but nevertheless covers less story than Martin had intended , omitting at least one planned large battle sequence and leaving several character threads ending in cliff @-@ hangers . Martin attributed the delay mainly to his untangling " the <unk> knot " , which the interviewer understood as " making the chronology and characters mesh up as various threads converged on [ Daenerys ] " . Martin also acknowledged spending too much time on rewriting and perfecting the story , but soundly rejected the theories of his more extravagant critics that he had lost interest in the series or would bide his time to make more money . 
 = = = Planned novels and future = = = 
 Martin believes the last two volumes of the series will be big books of 1500 manuscript pages each . The sixth book will be called The Winds of Winter , taking the title of the last book of the originally planned trilogy . Displeased with the provisional title A Time for Wolves for the final volume , Martin ultimately announced A Dream of Spring as the title for the seventh book in 2006 . Martin said in March 2012 that the final two novels will take readers farther north than any of the previous books , and that the Others will appear in the book . 
 = = = = The Winds of Winter = = = = 
 The Winds of Winter will resolve the Dance with Dragons cliffhangers early on and " will open with the two big battles that [ the fifth book ] was building up to , the battle in the ice and the battle [ ... ] of <unk> 's Bay . And then take it from there . " By the middle of 2010 , Martin had already finished five chapters of The Winds of Winter from the viewpoints of Sansa Stark , Arya Stark , Arianne Martell , and Aeron <unk> , accumulating to around 100 completed pages . After the publication of A Dance with Dragons in 2011 , Martin announced he would return to writing in January 2012 . He spent the meantime on book tours , conventions , and continued working on his The World of Ice & Fire companion guide and a new Tales of Dunk and Egg novella . 
 In December 2011 , Martin posted a chapter from The Winds of Winter from the viewpoint of Theon Greyjoy ; several other chapters have been made public since . Four hundred pages of the sixth novel have been written as of October 2012 , although Martin considers only 200 as " really finished " ; the rest needs revising . In 2011 , Martin gave three years as a realistic estimate for finishing the sixth book at a good pace , but said ultimately the book " will be done when it 's done " , acknowledging that his publication estimates had been too optimistic in the past . Martin did not intend to separate the characters geographically again . 
 In 2015 there were indications that the book would be published before sixth season of the HBO show but in early January 2016 Martin confirmed that he had not met an end @-@ of @-@ year deadline that he had established with his publisher for release of the book before the sixth season . He added that there was " a lot still left to write " and that completion of the book was " months away still ... if the writing goes well . " Martin also revealed there had been a previous deadline of October 2015 that he had considered achievable in May 2015 , and that in September 2015 he had still considered the end @-@ of @-@ year deadline achievable . He further confirmed that some of the plot of the book might be revealed in the upcoming season of Game of Thrones . In February 2016 , Martin stated that he dropped all his editing projects except for Wild Cards , and that he would not be writing any teleplays , screenplays , short stories , introductions or forewords before delivering The Winds of Winter . 
 = = = = A Dream of Spring = = = = 
 Martin is firm about ending the series with the seventh novel " until I decide not to be firm " . With his stated goal to tell the story from beginning to end , he will not truncate the story to fit into an arbitrary number of volumes . He knows the ending in broad strokes as well as the future of the main characters , and will finish the series with bittersweet elements where not everyone will live happily ever after . Martin hopes to write an ending similar to The Lord of the Rings that he felt gave the story a satisfying depth and resonance . On the other hand , Martin noted the challenge to avoid a situation like the finale of the TV series Lost , which left some fans disappointed by deviating too far from their own theories and desires . In 2015 , Martin said that he was not writing A Dream of Spring together with The Winds of Winter , and in early 2016 , he said he did not believe A Dream of Spring would be published before the last season of the HBO show . 
 = = = = TV series and other writings = = = = 
 Early during the development of the TV series , Martin told major plot points to producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss in case he should die . ( The New York Times reported in 2011 that , at age 62 , Martin was by all accounts in robust health . ) Martin was confident he would have published at least The Winds of Winter before the TV series overtook him . Nevertheless , there was general concern about whether Martin would be able to stay ahead of the show . As a result , head writers Benioff and Weiss learned more future plot points from Martin in 2013 to help them set up the show 's new possible seasons . This included the end stories for all the core characters . Deviations from the books ' storylines are also being considered , but a two @-@ year show hiatus to wait for new books is not an option for them as the child actors continue to grow and the show 's popularity would wane . Martin indicated he would not permit another writer to finish the book series . On January 2nd , 2016 , Martin confirmed that the sixth volume would not be published before the start of the sixth season of the HBO series . 
 Regarding A Song of Ice and Fire as his magnum opus , Martin is certain never to write anything on this scale again and would only return to this fictional universe in the context of stand @-@ alone novels . He prefers to write stories about characters from other Ice and Fire periods of history such as his Tales of Dunk and Egg project , instead of continuing the series directly . A possible future side project is a prequel set during Aegon 's conquest of Westeros . Martin said he would love to return to writing short stories , novellas , novelettes , and stand @-@ alone novels from diverse genres such as science fiction , horror , fantasy , or even a murder mystery . However , he will see if his audience follows him after publishing his next project . 
 = = Inspiration and writing = = 
 = = = Genre = = = 
 George R. R. Martin believes the most profound influences to be the ones experienced in childhood . Having read H. P. Lovecraft , Robert E. Howard , Robert A. Heinlein , Eric Frank Russell , Andre Norton , Isaac Asimov , Fritz Leiber , and Mervyn Peake in his youth , Martin never categorized these authors ' literature into science fiction , fantasy , or horror and will write from any genre as a result . Martin classified A Song of Ice and Fire as " epic fantasy " , and specifically named Tad Williams as very influential for the writing of the series . One of his favorite authors is Jack Vance , although Martin considered the series not particularly <unk> . 
 The medieval setting has been the traditional background for epic fantasy . However , where historical fiction leaves versed readers knowing the historical outcome , original characters may increase suspense and empathy for the readers . Yet Martin felt historical fiction , particularly when set during the Middle Ages , had an excitement , grittiness , and a realness to it that was absent in fantasy with a similar backdrop . Thus , he wanted to combine the realism of historical fiction with the magic appeal of the best fantasies , subduing magic in favor of battles and political intrigue . He also decided to avoid the conventional good versus evil setting typical for the genre , using the fight between Achilles and Hector in Homer 's Iliad , where no one stands out as either a hero or a villain , as an example of what he wants to achieve with his books . 
 Martin is widely credited with broadening the fantasy fiction genre for adult content , including incest , paedophilia , and adultery . For The Washington Post 's Writing for The Atlantic , Amber Taylor assessed the novels as hard fantasy with vulnerable characters to which readers become emotionally attached . CNN found in 2000 that Martin 's mature descriptions were " far more frank than those found in the works of other fantasy authors " , although Martin assessed the fantasy genre to have become rougher @-@ edged a decade later and that some writers ' work was going beyond the mature themes of his novels . Adam Roberts called Martin 's series the most successful and popular example of the emerging subgenre of <unk> fantasy , influencing other writers associated with that style , such as Joe Abercrombie . 
 = = = Writing process = = = 
 Setting out to write something on an epic scale , Martin projected to write three books of 800 manuscript pages in the very early stages of the series . His original 1990s contract specified one @-@ year deadlines for his previous literary works , but Martin only realized later that his new books were longer and hence required more writing time . In 2000 , Martin planned to take 18 months to two years for each volume and projected the last of the planned six books to be released five or six years later . However , with the Ice and Fire series evolving into the biggest and most ambitious story he has ever attempted writing , he still has two more books to write as of 2016 . Martin said he needed to be in his own office in Santa Fe , New Mexico to immerse himself in the fictional world and write . Martin still types his fiction on a DOS computer with WordStar 4 @.@ 0 software . He begins each day at 10 am with rewriting and polishing the previous day 's work , and may write all day or struggle to write anything . <unk> material and previous old versions are saved to be possibly re @-@ inserted at a later time . 
 Martin set the Ice and Fire story in a secondary world inspired by Tolkien 's writing . Unlike Tolkien , who created entire languages , mythologies , and histories for Middle @-@ earth long before writing The Lord of the Rings , Martin usually starts with a rough sketch of an imaginary world that he improvises into a workable fictional setting along the way . He described his writing as coming from a subconscious level in " almost a daydreaming process " , and his stories , which have a mythic rather than a scientific core , draw from emotion instead of rationality . Martin employs maps and a cast list topping 60 pages in the fourth volume , but keeps most information in his mind . His imagined backstory remains subject to change until published , and only the novels count as canon . Martin does not intend to publish his private notes after the series is finished . 
 Martin drew much inspiration from actual history for the series , having several bookcases filled with medieval history for research and visiting historic European landmarks . For an American who speaks only English , the history of England proved the easiest source of medieval history for him , giving the series a British rather than a German or Spanish historic flavor . For example , Ned and Robb Stark resemble Richard , 3rd Duke of York and his son Edward IV , and Queen Cersei resembles both Margaret of Anjou and Elizabeth Woodville . Martin immersed himself in many diverse medieval topics such as clothing , food , feasting , and tournaments , to have the facts at hand if needed during writing . The series was in particular influenced by the Hundred Years ' War , the Crusades , the Albigensian Crusade , and the Wars of the Roses , although Martin refrained from making any direct adaptations . Martin was also inspired by the French historical novels The Accursed Kings by Maurice Druon , which are about the French monarchy in the 13th and 14th centuries . 
 The story is written to follow principal landmarks with an ultimate destination , but leaves Martin room for improvisation . On occasion , improvised details significantly affected the planned story . By the fourth book , Martin kept more private notes than ever before to keep track of the many subplots , which became so detailed and sprawling by the fifth book as to be unwieldy . Martin 's editors , copy editors , and fans watch out for accidental mistakes , although some errors have slipped into publication , such as changed eye colors or a switched horse gender . 
 = = = Narrative structure = = = 
 The books are divided into chapters , each one narrated in the third person limited through the eyes of a point of view character , an approach Martin learned himself as a young journalism student . Each POV character may act from different locations . Beginning with nine POV characters in A Game of Thrones , the number of POV characters grows to a total of 31 in A Dance with Dragons ( see table ) . The short @-@ lived one @-@ time POV characters are mostly restricted to the prologue and epilogue . David Orr of The New York Times noted the story importance of " the Starks ( good guys ) , the Targaryens ( at least one good guy , or girl ) , the Lannisters ( conniving ) , the <unk> ( mostly conniving ) , the <unk> ( mixed bag ) , the <unk> ( unclear ) and the <unk> ( ditto ) , most of whom are feverishly endeavoring to advance their ambitions and ruin their enemies , preferably unto death " . However , as Time 's Lev Grossman noted , readers " experience the struggle for Westeros from all sides at once " , such that " every fight is both triumph and tragedy [ ... ] and everybody is both hero and villain at the same time " . 
 Modeled on The Lord of the Rings , the Ice and Fire story begins with a tight focus on a small group ( with everyone in Winterfell , except Daenerys ) and then splits into separate stories . The storylines are to converge again , but finding the turning point in this complex series has been difficult for Martin and has slowed down his writing . Depending on the interview , Martin is said to have reached the turning point in A Dance with Dragons , or to not quite have reached it yet in the books . The series ' structure of multiple <unk> and interwoven storylines was inspired by Wild Cards , a multi @-@ authored shared universe book series edited by Martin since 1985 . As the sole author , Martin begins each new book with an outline of the chapter order and may write a few successive chapters from a single character 's viewpoint instead of working chronologically . The chapters are later rearranged to optimize character intercutting , chronology , and suspense . 
 Influenced by his television and film scripting background , Martin tries to keep readers engrossed by ending each Ice and Fire chapter with a tense or <unk> moment , a twist or a cliffhanger , similar to a TV act break . <unk> has also taught him the technique of " cutting out the fat and leaving the muscle " , which is the final stage of completing a book , a technique that brought the page count in A Dance with Dragons down almost eighty pages . Dividing the continuous Ice and Fire story into books is much harder for Martin . Each book shall represent a phase of the journey that ends in closure for most characters . A smaller portion of characters is left with clear @-@ cut cliffhangers to make sure readers come back for the next installment , although A Dance with Dragons had more cliffhangers than Martin originally intended . Both one @-@ time and regular POV characters are designed to have full character arcs ending in tragedy or triumph , and are written to hold the readers ' interest and not be skipped in reading . Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not rely on the hero to come through unscathed and will instead feel the character 's fear with each page turn . 
 The unresolved larger narrative arc encourages speculation about future story events . According to Martin , much of the key to Ice and Fire 's future lies over a dozen years in the fictional past , of which each volume reveals more . Events planned from the beginning are foreshadowed , although Martin is careful not to make the story predictable . The viewpoint characters , who serve as unreliable narrators , may clarify or provide different perspectives on past events . Therefore , what the readers believe to be true may not necessarily be true . 
 = = = Character development = = = 
 Regarding the characters as the heart of the story , Martin planned the epic Ice and Fire fantasy to have a large cast of characters and many different settings from the beginning . A Feast for Crows has a 63 @-@ page list of characters , with many of the thousands of characters mentioned only in passing or disappearing from view for long stretches . When Martin adds a new family to the ever @-@ growing number of genealogies in the appendices , he devises a secret about the personality or fate of the family members . However , their backstory remains subject to change until written down in the story . Martin drew most character inspiration from history ( without directly translating historical figures ) and his own experiences , but also from the manners of his friends , acquaintances , and people of public interest . Martin aims to " make my characters real and to make them human , characters who have good and bad , noble and selfish well @-@ mixed in their natures " . Jeff <unk> of the Los Angeles Times remarked that " Martin 's devotion to fully inhabiting his characters , for better or worse , creates the unstoppable momentum in his novels and contains an implied criticism of Tolkien 's moral simplicity " ( see Themes : Moral ambiguity ) . 
 Martin deliberately ignored the writing rules to never give two characters a name starting with the same letter . Instead , character names reflect the naming systems in various European family histories , where particular names were associated with specific royal houses and where even the secondary families assigned the same names repeatedly . The Ice and Fire story therefore has children called " Robert " in obeisance to King Robert of House Baratheon , a " Brandon " in every other generation of the Starks in commemoration of Brandon the Builder ( of the Wall ) , and the syllable " Ty " commonly occurring in given names of House Lannister . Confident that readers would pay attention , Martin then used techniques as in modern times to discern people with identical given names , such as adding numbers or locations to their given name ( e.g. Henry V of England ) . The family names were designed in association with ethnic groups ( see backstory ) : the First Men in the North of Westeros had very simply descriptive names like Stark and Strong , whereas the descendants of the Andal invaders in the South have more elaborate , <unk> house names like Lannister or Arryn , and the Targaryens and <unk> from the Eastern continent have the most exotic names with the letter Y. 
 All characters are designed to speak with their own internal voice to capture their views of the world . The Atlantic pondered whether Martin ultimately intended the readers to sympathize with characters on both sides of the Lannister – Stark feud long before plot developments force them to make their emotional choices . Contrary to most conventional epic fantasies , the Ice and Fire characters are vulnerable so that , according to The Atlantic , the reader " cannot be sure that good shall triumph , which makes those instances where it does all the more exulting . " Martin gets emotionally involved in the characters ' lives during writing , which makes the chapters with dreadful events sometimes very difficult to write . Seeing the world through the characters ' eyes requires a certain amount of empathy with them , including the villains , all of whom he has said he loves as if they were his own children . Martin found that some characters had a mind of their own and took his writing in different directions . He returns to the intended story if it does not work out , but these detours sometimes prove more rewarding for him . 
 Arya Stark , Tyrion Lannister , Jon Snow , and Daenerys Targaryen generate the most feedback from readers . Martin has stated that Tyrion is his personal favorite , as the <unk> of the gray characters , with his cunning and wit making him the most fun to write . Martin has also said that Bran Stark is the hardest character to write . As the character most deeply involved in magic , Bran 's story needs to be handled carefully within the supernatural aspects of the books . Bran is also the youngest viewpoint character , and has to deal with the series ' adult themes like grief , loneliness , and anger . Martin set out to have the young characters grow up faster between chapters , but , as it was implausible for a character to take two months to respond , a finished book represents very little time passed . Martin hoped the planned five @-@ year break would ease the situation and age the children to almost adults in terms of the Seven Kingdoms , but he later dropped the five @-@ year gap ( see section Bridging the timeline gap ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although modern fantasy may often embrace strangeness , the Ice and Fire series is generally praised for what is perceived as a sort of medieval realism . Believing that magic should be used moderately in the epic fantasy genre , Martin set out to make the story feel more like historical fiction than contemporary fantasy , with less emphasis on magic and sorcery and more on battles , political intrigue , and the characters . Though the amount of magic has gradually increased throughout the story , the series is still to end with less overt magic than most contemporary fantasies . In Martin 's eyes , literary effective magic needs to represent strange and dangerous forces beyond human comprehension , not advanced alien technologies or formulaic spells . As such , the characters understand only the natural aspects of their world , but not the magical elements like the Others . 
 Since Martin drew on historical sources to build the Ice and Fire world , Damien G. Walter of The Guardian saw a strong resemblance between Westeros and England in the period of the Wars of the Roses . The Atlantic 's Adam <unk> regarded A Song of Ice and Fire as " more a story of politics than one of heroism , a story about humanity wrestling with its baser obsessions than fulfilling its glorious potential " , where the emergent power struggle stems from the feudal system 's repression and not from the fight between good and evil . Martin not only wanted to reflect the frictions of the medieval class structures in the novels , but also explore the consequences of the leaders ' decisions , as general goodness does not automatically make competent leaders and vice versa . 
 A common theme in the fantasy genre is the battle between good and evil , which Martin rejects for not mirroring the real world . Attracted to gray characters instead of orcs and angels , Martin instead endorses Nobel Prize laureate William Faulkner 's view that only the human heart in conflict with itself was worth writing about . Just like people 's capacity for good and for evil in real life , Martin explores the questions of redemption and character change in the Ice and Fire series . The multiple viewpoint structure allows characters to be explored from many sides , such that , unlike in many other fantasies , the supposed villains can provide their viewpoint . The reader may then decide about good and evil through the novels ' actions and politics . 
 Although fantasy comes from an imaginative realm , Martin sees an honest necessity to reflect the real world where people die sometimes ugly deaths , even beloved people . Main characters are killed off so that the reader will not expect the supposed hero to survive , and instead will feel the same tension and fear that the characters might . The novels also reflect the substantial death rates in war . The deaths of supernumerary extras or orcs have no major effect on readers , whereas a friend 's death has much more emotional impact . Martin prefers a hero 's sacrifice to say something profound about human nature . 
 According to Martin , the fantasy genre rarely focuses on sex and sexuality as much as the Ice and Fire books do , instead often treating sexuality in a juvenile way or neglecting it completely . Martin , however , considers sexuality an important driving force in human life that should not be excluded from the narrative . Providing sensory detail for an immersive experience is more important than plot advancement for Martin , who aims to let the readers experience the novels ' sex scenes , " whether it 's a great transcendent , exciting , mind blowing sex , or whether it 's disturbing , twisted , dark sex , or disappointing perfunctory sex . " Martin was fascinated by medieval contrasts where knights venerated their ladies with poems and wore their favors in tournaments while their armies mindlessly raped women in wartime . The non @-@ existent concept of adolescence in the Middle Ages served as a model for Daenerys ' sexual activity at the age of 13 in the books . The novels also allude to the incestuous practices in the Ptolemaic dynasty of Ancient Egypt to keep their bloodlines pure . 
 Martin provides a variety of female characters to explore some of the ramifications of the novels being set in a patriarchal society . Writing all characters as human beings with the same basic needs , dreams , and influences , his female characters are to cover the same wide spectrum of human traits as the males . Martin can identify with all point @-@ of @-@ view characters in the writing process despite significant differences to him , be it gender or age . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Science Fiction Weekly stated in 2000 that " few would dispute that Martin 's most monumental achievement to date has been the groundbreaking A Song of Ice and Fire historical fantasy series " , for which reviews have been " orders of magnitude better " than for his previous works , as Martin described to The New Yorker . In 2007 , Weird Tales magazine described the series as a " superb fantasy saga " that " raised Martin to a whole new level of success " . Shortly before the release of A Dance with Dragons in 2011 , Bill Sheehan of The Washington Post was sure that " no work of fantasy has generated such anticipation since Harry Potter 's final duel with Voldemort " , and Ethan Sacks of Daily News saw the series turning Martin into a darling of literary critics as well as mainstream readers , which was " rare for a fantasy genre that 's often dismissed as garbage not fit to line the bottom of a dragon 's cage " . Salon.com 's Andrew Leonard stated : 
 The success is all the more remarkable because [ the series debuted ] without mass market publicity or any kind of buzz in the fantasy / SF scene . George R. R. Martin earned his following the hard way , by word of mouth , by hooking his characters into the psyche of his readers to an extent that most writers of fantasy only dream of . 
 Publishers Weekly noted in 2000 that " Martin may not rival Tolkien or Robert Jordan , but he ranks with such accomplished medievalists of fantasy as Poul Anderson and Gordon Dickson . " After the fourth volume came out in 2005 , Time 's Lev Grossman considered Martin a " major force for evolution in fantasy " and proclaimed him " the American Tolkien " , explaining that , although Martin was " [ not ] the best known of America 's straight @-@ up fantasy writers " at the time and would " never win a Pulitzer or a National Book Award ... his skill as a <unk> of narrative exceeds that of almost any literary novelist writing today " . As Grossman said in 2011 , the phrase American Tolkien " has stuck to [ Martin ] , as it was meant to " , being picked up by the media including The New York Times ( " He 's much better than that " ) , the New Yorker , Entertainment Weekly ( " an acclaim that borders on fantasy blasphemy " ) , The Globe and Mail , and USA Today . Time magazine named Martin one of the 100 most influential people in the world in 2011 , and USA Today named George R.R. Martin their Author of the Year 2011 . 
 According to The Globe and Mail 's John Barber , Martin manages simultaneously to master and transcend the genre so that " Critics applaud the depth of his characterizations and lack of cliché in books that are nonetheless replete with dwarves and dragons " . Publishers Weekly gave favorable reviews to the first three Ice and Fire novels at their points of release , saying that A Game of Thrones had " superbly developed characters , accomplished prose and sheer bloody @-@ mindedness " , that A Clash of Kings was " notable particularly for the lived @-@ in quality of [ their fictional world and ] for the comparatively modest role of magic " , and that A Storm of Swords was one " of the more rewarding examples of gigantism in contemporary fantasy " . However , they found that A Feast For Crows as the fourth installment " sorely misses its other half . The slim pickings here are tasty , but in no way satisfying . " Their review for A Dance with Dragons repeated points of criticism for the fourth volume , and said that , although " The new volume has a similar feel to Feast " , " Martin keeps it fresh by focusing on popular characters [ who were ] notably absent from the previous book . " 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , " Martin 's brilliance in evoking atmosphere through description is an enduring hallmark of his fiction , the settings much more than just props on a painted stage " , and the novels captivate readers with " complex storylines , fascinating characters , great dialogue , perfect pacing , and the willingness to kill off even his major characters " . CNN remarked that " the story weaves through differing points of view in a skillful mix of observation , narration and well @-@ crafted dialogue that illuminates both character and plot with fascinating style " , and David Orr of The New York Times found that " All of his hundreds of characters have grace notes of history and personality that advance a plot line . Every town has an elaborately recalled series of triumphs and troubles . " Salon.com 's Andrew Leonard " couldn 't stop reading Martin because my desire to know what was going to happen combined with my absolute inability to guess what would happen and left me helpless before his sorcery . At the end , I felt shaken and exhausted . " The Christian Science Monitor advised reading the novels with an A Song of Ice and Fire encyclopedia at hand to " catch all the layered , subtle hints and details that [ Martin ] leaves throughout his books . If you pay attention , you will be rewarded and questions will be answered . " 
 Among the most critical voices were Sam Jordison and Michael Hann , both of The Guardian . Jordison detailed his misgivings about A Game of Thrones in a 2009 review and summarized " It 's daft . It 's unsophisticated . It 's cartoonish . And yet , I couldn 't stop reading .... Archaic absurdity aside , Martin 's writing is excellent . His dialogue is snappy and frequently funny . His descriptive prose is immediate and atmospheric , especially when it comes to building a sense of deliciously dark foreboding [ of the long impending winter ] . " Hann did not consider the novels to stand out from the general fantasy genre , despite Martin 's alterations to fantasy convention , although he rediscovered his childhood 's views : 
 That when things are , on the whole , pretty crappy [ in the real world ] , it 's a deep joy to dive headfirst into something so completely immersive , something from which there is no need to surface from hours at a time . And if that immersion involves dragons , magic , wraiths from beyond death , shapeshifting wolves and banished princes , so be it . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The reported overall sales figures of the A Song of Ice and Fire series vary . The New Yorker said in April 2011 ( before the publication of A Dance with Dragons ) that more than 15 million Ice and Fire books had been sold worldwide , a figure repeated by The Globe and Mail in July 2011 . Reuters reported in September 2013 that the books including print , digital and audio versions have sold more than 24 million copies in North America . The Wall Street Journal reported more than six million sold copies in North America by May 2011 . USA Today reported 8 @.@ 5 million copies in print and digital overall in July 2011 , and over 12 million sold copies in print in December 2011 . The series has been translated into more than 20 languages ; USA Today reported the fifth book to be translated into over 40 languages . Forbes estimated that Martin was the 12th highest @-@ earning author worldwide in 2011 at $ 15 million . 
 Martin 's publishers initially expected A Game of Thrones to be a best @-@ seller , but the first installment did not even reach any lower positions in bestseller list . This left Martin unsurprised , as it is " a fool 's game to think anything is going to be successful or to count on it " . However , the book slowly won the passionate advocacy of independent booksellers and the book 's popularity grew by word of mouth . The series ' popularity skyrocketed in subsequent volumes , with the second and third volume making the The New York Times Best Seller lists in 1999 and 2000 , respectively . The series gained Martin 's old writings new attention , and Martin 's American publisher Bantam Spectra was to reprint his out @-@ of @-@ print solo novels . 
 The fourth installment , A Feast for Crows , was an immediate best @-@ seller at its 2005 release , hitting number one on " The New York Times " hardcover fiction bestseller list November 27 , 2005 , which for a fantasy novel suggested that Martin 's books were attracting mainstream readers . The paperback edition of A Game of Thrones reached its 34th printing in 2010 , surpassing the one million mark . Before it even premiered , the TV series had boosted sales of the book series , with Ice and Fire approaching triple @-@ digit growth in year @-@ on @-@ year sales . Bantam was looking forward to seeing the tie @-@ ins boost sales further , and Martin 's British publisher Harper Voyager expected readers to rediscover their other epic fantasy literature . With a reported 4 @.@ 5 million copies of the first four volumes in print in early 2011 , the four volumes re @-@ appeared on the paperback fiction bestseller lists in the second quarter of 2011 . 
 At its point of publication in July 2011 , A Dance with Dragons was in its sixth print with more than 650 @,@ 000 <unk> in print . It also had the highest single and first @-@ day sales of any new fiction title published in 2011 at that point , with 170 @,@ 000 hardcovers , 110 @,@ 000 e @-@ books , and 18 @,@ 000 audio books reportedly sold on the first day . A Dance with Dragons reached the top of The New York Times bestseller list on July 31 , 2011 . Unlike most other big titles , the fifth volume sold more physical than digital copies early on , but nevertheless , Martin became the tenth author to sell 1 million Amazon Kindle e @-@ books . All five volumes and the four @-@ volume boxed set were among the top 100 best @-@ selling books in the United States in 2011 and 2012 . 
 The TV series has contributed significantly boosting sales of both the books and collectibles like box @-@ sets , merchandise , and other items . The TV series also contributed in increasing the geographic coverage of the books , introducing new customers in emerging countries like India and Brazil to the book series . All this has significantly increased the overall book sales . 
 = = = Fandom = = = 
 During the 1980s and early 1990s , Martin 's novels had slowly earned him a reputation in science fiction circles , although he said to only have received a few fans ' letters a year in the pre @-@ internet days . The publication of A Game of Thrones caused Martin 's following to grow , with fan sites springing up and a Trekkie @-@ like society of followers evolving that meet regularly . <unk> , one of the main Ice and Fire fansites with about seventeen thousand registered members as of 2011 , was established in 1999 by a Swedish @-@ based fan of Cuban @-@ American descent , Elio M. García , Jr . , and his girlfriend ; their involvement with Martin 's work has now become semi @-@ professional . The Brotherhood Without Banners , an unofficial fan club operating globally , was formed in 2001 . Their founders and other longtime members are among Martin 's good friends . 
 Martin runs an official website and administers a lively blog with the assistance of Ty Franck . He also interacts with fandom by answering emails and letters , although he stated in 2005 that their sheer numbers might leave them unanswered for years . Since there are different types of conventions nowadays , he tends to go to three or four science @-@ fiction conventions a year simply to go back to his roots and meet friends . He does not read message boards anymore , so that his writing will not be influenced by fans foreseeing twists and interpreting characters differently from what he intended . 
 While Martin calls the majority of his fans " great " , and enjoys interacting with them , some of them turned against him because of the six years it took to release A Dance with Dragons . A movement of disaffected fans called <unk> formed in 2009 , creating sites such as Finish the Book , George and Is Winter Coming ? . When fans ' vocal impatience for A Dance with Dragons peaked shortly after , Martin issued a statement called " To My Detractors " on his blog that received media attention . The New York Times noted that it was not uncommon for Martin to be mobbed at book signings either . The New Yorker called this " an astonishing amount of effort to devote to denouncing the author of books one professes to love . Few contemporary authors can claim to have inspired such passion . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 A Game of Thrones ( 1996 ) – Locus Award winner , World Fantasy Award and Nebula Award nominee , 1997 
 A Clash of Kings ( 1998 ) – Locus Award winner , Nebula Award nominee , 1999 
 A Storm of Swords ( 2000 ) – Locus Award winner , Hugo Award and Nebula Awards nominee , 2001 
 A Feast for Crows ( 2005 ) – Hugo , Locus , and British Fantasy Awards nominee , 2006 
 A Dance with Dragons ( 2011 ) – Locus Award winner , Hugo Award and World Fantasy Award nominee , 2012 
 = = Derived works = = 
 = = = Novellas = = = 
 Martin has written several prequel novellas . The Tales of Dunk and Egg series , three novellas set ninety years before the events of the novel series , feature the adventures of Ser Duncan the Tall and his squire " Egg " , the later King Aegon V Targaryen . The stories have no direct connection to the plot of A Song of Ice and Fire , although both characters are mentioned in A Storm of Swords and A Feast For Crows , respectively . The first installment , The Hedge Knight , was published in the 1998 anthology Legends . The Sworn Sword followed in 2003 , published in Legends II . Both were later adapted into graphic novels . The third novella , titled The Mystery Knight , was first published in the 2010 anthology Warriors , and is planned to be adapted as a graphic novel as well . Martin planned to release the first three novellas as one collection in 2014 . Up to eight further Dunk and Egg installments are planned . 
 The novella The Princess and the Queen or , the Blacks and the Greens appeared in Tor Books 's 2013 anthology Dangerous Women , and explains some of the Targaryen backstory two centuries before the events of the novels . The Rogue Prince , or , the King 's Brother , published in the 2014 anthology Rogues , is itself a prequel to the events of The Princess and the Queen . 
 Chapter sets from the novels were also compiled into three novellas that were released between 1996 and 2003 by Asimov 's Science Fiction and Dragon : 
 Blood of the Dragon ( July 1996 ) , taken from the Daenerys chapters in A Game of Thrones . 
 Path of the Dragon ( December 2000 ) , taken from the Daenerys chapters in A Storm of Swords . 
 Arms of the Kraken ( March 2003 ) , based on the Iron Islands chapters from A Feast for Crows . 
 = = = TV series = = = 
 With the popularity of the series growing , HBO optioned A Song of Ice and Fire for a television adaptation in 2007 . A pilot episode was produced in late 2009 , and a series commitment for nine further episodes was made in March 2010 . The series , titled Game of Thrones , premiered in April 2011 to great acclaim and ratings ( see Game of Thrones : Reception ) . The network picked up the show for a second season covering A Clash of Kings two days later . Shortly after the conclusion of the first season , the show received 13 Emmy Award nominations , including Outstanding Drama Series , winning Outstanding Main Title Design and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Peter Dinklage 's portrayal of Tyrion Lannister . HBO announced a renewal for a third season in April 2012 , ten days after the season 2 premiere . Due to the length of the corresponding book , the third season only covered roughly the first half of A Storm of Swords . Shortly after the season 3 premiere in March 2013 , the network announced that Game of Thrones would be returning for a fourth season , which would cover the second half of A Storm of Swords along with the beginnings of A Feast for Crows and A Dance With Dragons . Game of Thrones was nominated for 15 Emmy Awards for season 3 . Two days after the fourth season premiered in April 2014 , HBO renewed Game of Thrones for a fifth and sixth season . Season 5 premiered on April 12 , 2015 and was watched by 8 million viewers , setting a record number for the series . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 A Song of Ice and Fire spawned an industry of spin @-@ off products . Fantasy Flight Games released a collectible card game , a board game , and two collections of artwork inspired by the Ice and Fire series . Various roleplaying game products were released by Guardians of Order and Green Ronin . Dynamite Entertainment adapted A Game of Thrones into a same @-@ titled monthly comic in 2011 . Several video games are available or in production , including A Game of Thrones : Genesis ( 2011 ) and Game of Thrones ( 2012 ) by Cyanide ; both received mediocre ratings from critics . A social network game titled Game of Thrones Ascent ( 2013 ) by Disruptor Beam allows players to live the life of a noble during the series ' period setting . Random House released an official map book called The Lands of Ice and Fire , which includes old and new maps of the Ice and Fire world . The companion book The World of Ice & Fire by Martin and the <unk> owners Elio M. García Jr. and Linda <unk> was published in October 2014 . Other licensed products include full @-@ sized weapon reproductions , a range of collectable figures , Westeros coinage reproductions , and a large number of gift and collectible items based on the HBO television series . The popularity of the HBO series has made its version of the Iron Throne an icon of the entire media franchise . 
 = British Birds Rarities Committee = 
 The British Birds Rarities Committee ( BBRC ) , established in 1959 , is the national bird rarities committee for Britain . It assesses claimed sightings of bird species that are rarely seen in Britain , based on descriptions , photographs and video recordings submitted by observers . Its findings are published in an annual report in the journal British Birds . 
 The BBRC covers around 280 species whose annually recorded sightings in Britain fall below a threshold deemed to signify rarity . Since the establishment of the committee , some previously included species have become more common — or at least better recorded ; this has resulted in their removal from the committee 's list and their reclassification as " scarce migrants " . 
 The committee has a chairman , a secretary , and ten voting members , and is supported by others who serve in an advisory capacity . Since its inception , a total of 69 people have served on the committee as assessors . In addition to assessing annual records of rare birds , the committee conducts regular reviews of batches of previously accepted records on a species @-@ by @-@ species basis , to ensure that only those consistent with advances in knowledge of bird identification are retained , and to determine the subspecies of accepted records . Several species have been problematic for assessment , and extreme examples have taken more than 20 years from initial observation to acceptance . The committee has been criticised for its approach to assessing records where only one observer was present , for not publishing reasons for rejecting the validity of records , and for placing undue weight on descriptive detail when assessing record submissions . Seabird identification has proved particularly difficult , leading some observers to suggest that the committee sets too high a standard . 
 = = Role and status = = 
 The " Rarity Records Committee " ( as it was originally known ) was established in 1959 by the editors of the journal British Birds . Its original purpose was to provide a means whereby uniform assessment standards could be applied to all rare bird records across Britain . Prior to the establishment of the committee , records were assessed by local bird recording organisations using varying standards . The most recent statement of the British Birds Rarities Committee 's role is given in Bradshaw , Harvey and Steele ( 2004 ) : 
 BBRC aims to maintain an accurate database of the occurrence of rare taxa in Britain , in order to enable individuals or organisations to assess the current status of , and any changes in , the patterns of occurrence and distribution of these taxa in Britain . 
 Contradictory information has been published on the exact nature of the committee 's status . On its website , BBRC describes itself as the " official adjudicator of rare bird records in Britain " ( although it does not say on what basis it has this status ) . In Birders : Tales of a Tribe , author Mark Cocker erroneously describes the committee as a " statutory vetting body " ( i.e. one established by an Act of Parliament ) . BBRC 's constitution states that it " has no automatic or legal expectation that birders submit records " . 
 The committee does not assess records of birds from Ireland ; that task is carried out by the Irish Rare Birds Committee , which publishes its decisions in Irish Birds . Records of <unk> @-@ assessed rarities were included in BBRC annual reports for many years , although this ceased in 2002 at the request of <unk> . Although the British Ornithologists ' Union Records Committee does not regard records from the Isle of Man as contributing towards their British list , BBRC does include records from there in its totals . BBRC has had an ongoing sponsor in the German optical equipment manufacturer Carl Zeiss since 1983 . 
 = = Species covered = = 
 Over 580 bird species have been recorded in Britain ; some 250 have regular breeding or wintering populations , or are common migrants , and a further 50 are " scarce migrants " . The BBRC assesses the remaining species . A list of the species the committee assesses ( known as " British Birds rarities " , or " BB rarities " for short ) is on its website , although the list has not been updated to account for the most recent changes . The committee generally considers only the records of species rare enough to meet its criteria for inclusion on the BBRC rarities list , based on a numerical threshold . In addition to considering full species , records of some rare subspecies are considered and , in a few cases , the committee considers indeterminate records ( birds that belong to a pair or group of rare species that are particularly difficult to separate , such as frigatebirds or <unk> ) . 
 The committee keeps the list of species it considers under review and , from time to time , makes changes . These are usually because species have increased in frequency and no longer meet the numerical criteria for inclusion . A species is removed if it has more than 150 records in the preceding ten years , with ten or more in at least eight of those years . Different criteria were used in a review in 2006 ( see below ) . There have been three major " purges " of species since the committee 's formation . The first was soon after the committee 's formation , in 1963 , when 16 species were removed : red @-@ crested pochard , snow goose , pectoral sandpiper , Mediterranean gull , Sabine 's gull , melodious warbler , <unk> warbler , yellow @-@ browed warbler , northern goshawk , golden eagle , red kite , Kentish plover , crested tit , bearded tit , marsh warbler and Dartford warbler . Records of the last eight species had been considered only outside their " normal " British range ( e.g. crested tits outside Scotland , and red kites outside Wales ) . The second was in 1982 , when ten further species were removed : Cory 's shearwater , purple heron , white stork , buff @-@ breasted sandpiper , Richard 's pipit , tawny pipit , Savi 's warbler , aquatic warbler , <unk> and common <unk> . Savi 's warbler was re @-@ admitted to the committee 's list in 1998 , due to declining numbers of occurrences . Thirdly , in 2006 , a further 17 species were dropped from the list : ferruginous duck , Wilson ’ s petrel , great white egret , black kite , red @-@ footed falcon , American golden plover , white @-@ rumped sandpiper , white @-@ winged black tern , alpine swift , red @-@ rumped swallow , red @-@ throated pipit , subalpine warbler , greenish warbler , dusky warbler , Radde 's warbler , Arctic redpoll and rustic bunting . Their selection was based on different criteria from those previously used : more than 200 records in Britain ever , and more than 100 occasions in the last decade . 
 Many other species and subspecies have been removed over the years : Cetti 's warbler ( in 1976 ) ; long @-@ tailed skua ( in 1979 ) ; common crane and ring @-@ billed gull ( in 1987 ) ; surf <unk> , little egret , European bee @-@ eater , Pallas 's warbler and woodchat shrike ( in 1990 ) ; green @-@ winged teal ( in 1992 ) ; ring @-@ necked duck , short @-@ toed lark and little bunting ( in 1993 ) ; white @-@ tailed eagle and <unk> 's gull ( in 1998 ) ; American wigeon , black @-@ crowned night heron and rose @-@ coloured starling ( in 2001 ) ; and black brant ( in 2005 ) . 
 Until 2009 , the parrot crossbill was an anomaly , in that it was on the committee 's list of species , even though a breeding population existed in Scotland . In 2009 , this species was removed , along with white @-@ billed diver and cattle egret . 
 Once removed , a species is classed as a " scarce migrant " : British Birds publishes a separate annual report summarising the occurrence of these species , and the data is also presented on the Scarce Migrants website . In addition to parrot crossbill , four species , Cetti 's warbler , little egret , long @-@ tailed skua and Mediterranean gull , have become so common that they no longer qualify even as scarce migrants . 
 = = Structure and personnel = = 
 The committee has ten voting members , a chairman ( who may be one of the ten , or may be another , non @-@ voting individual ) and a non @-@ voting secretary . BBRC was assisted in its assessment of seabird records by a Seabirds Advisory Panel from 1987 to 1996 . In 1999 , the BBRC set up the " RIACT " ( Racial Identification Amongst Changing Taxonomy ) group to advise on how records of rare subspecies should be treated . RIACT published its first report in 2006 , setting out the subspecies it believed were sufficiently diagnosable , and that occurred infrequently enough to justify being assessed by the rarities committee . Prior to this , a partial selection of rare subspecies had been routinely included in BBRC reports ; the RIACT report aimed to bring consistency to the selection for future years . When a record is of a species not previously recorded in Britain in a wild state , BBRC deals with assessment of the bird 's identification , then passes the record to the British Ornithologists ' Union Records Committee , which decides whether the species should be included on the <unk> 's British Bird list . 
 The committee has two permanent posts , a Chairman and a Secretary : they are appointed by the board of British Birds . There had been no fixed term for these appointments before 2008 , however , a three @-@ year fixed term , with a limit of ten years , was introduced with the change of chairman in that year . The current chairman , the committee 's seventh , is Adam Rowlands ; the six previous chairmen were Philip <unk> ( 1959 – 72 ) , Ian Wallace ( 1972 – 76 ) , Peter J. Grant ( 1976 – 86 ) , Peter Lansdown ( 1986 – 93 ) , Rob Hume ( 1993 – 97 ) and Colin Bradshaw ( 1997 – 2008 ) . The committee 's secretary is Nigel Hudson , appointed in 2007 . Its previous secretaries were G. A. <unk> ( 1959 – 61 ) , Christopher M. Swaine ( 1961 – 63 ) , Denzil D. Harber ( 1963 – 66 ) , F. R. Smith ( 1966 – 75 ) , J. N. Dymond ( 1975 – 77 ) , J. O 'Sullivan ( 1977 – 78 ) and Mike Rogers ( 1978 – 2006 ) . 
 At least one ( usually the longest @-@ serving ) record @-@ assessing member retires every year , to balance experience with " new blood " . The committee usually nominates its own replacement candidate , but also invites nominations from others , and if any are received , holds an election among county bird recorders and the bird observatory network . A set of criteria for membership has been developed — currently , these are " a widely acknowledged expertise in identification , proven reliability in the field , a track record of high quality submissions of descriptions of scarce and rare birds to county records committees and BBRC , considerable experience of record assessment , the capacity to handle the considerable volume of work involved in assessing upwards of 1 @,@ 000 records per year and the capacity to work quickly and efficiently " . The following 69 individuals have served on BBRC in a records assessment capacity : 
 A number of other individuals have served as the committee 's statisticians , museum consultants , archivists and <unk> consultants , or on the Seabirds Advisory Panel or RIACT . 
 The committee has stated that it has a desire to be made up of members of " all age ranges and both sexes " ; however , all BBRC members to date have been male , a fact reflected in the nickname " the ten rare men " . Measures exist to ensure that the committee has a geographic balance amongst its membership — BBRC 's constitution states that it " should attempt to provide a reasonable geographical spread with members having a detailed knowledge of each of the following areas : Wales , Scotland , Northern England , the Midlands , the Southwest and the Southeast of England " . 
 Documentation of records , including the members ' deliberations , are kept in the committee ’ s archives , which are deposited with the British Trust for Ornithology . Some older data is missing , as the committee 's files were originally held by the editors of British Birds , and they were not transferred to the new owners of the magazine when it was sold in the 1960s . 
 = = Annual report and other publications = = 
 The committee publishes an annual report on the rare birds occurring each year , in British Birds . This has usually been in the issue published in November of the following year , although the 2007 Report appeared in the October 2008 issue , and the committee has said that it plans to keep to this new timescale in future years . 
 The report typically begins with an introduction , summarising the most significant birds occurring during the year , and discussing any current issues relating to the committee 's work . This is followed by a list of accepted records in taxonomic sequence . Records for each taxon are listed by county , followed by comments about its occurrence during the year . Late @-@ accepted records and decisions to reject a previously identified record are included . This section of the report contains painted illustrations and photographs of some of the birds . The report lists records that have not been accepted , often noting the most significant that remain under consideration . 
 The committee also publishes frequent " Rarities Committee news " items ( previously called " Rarities Committee news and announcements " ) in British Birds . 
 = = Record reviews = = 
 BBRC reviews 1200 to 1500 records each year ( when it was first set up , the figure was around 200 per year ) . Of these , approximately 85 % are accepted : this acceptance rate has remained steady for many years . Species that have caused particular problems include black kite , great snipe , gyrfalcon , gull @-@ billed tern , and North Atlantic little shearwater . Peter Grant estimated that , during his tenure as chairman , approximately 2 % of accepted records are incorrectly accepted , and 5 % are incorrectly rejected . 
 Wallace ( 1973 ) addressed a number of criticisms of the committee including that it provides too little information on the reasons for rarity rejection . Alan Vittery and Sara McMahon have both argued that the committee should inform observers whose records are rejected of the committee 's reasons for doing so . This view also has the support of the editor of Birdwatch , Dominic Mitchell , who has made this the topic of editorials on a number of occasions . 
 BBRC has from time to time published material illustrating its assessment process in an attempt to explain to a wider audience how it arrives at its decisions . Much of these have appeared in a series called " From the Rarities Committees files " in British Birds magazine . Another short series was published in Birdwatch magazine : entitled " You : The Jury " , it featured six fictitious rarity accounts , with , in the subsequent issue , accounts from two rarities committee members stating how they would vote . 
 = = = Re @-@ reviews = = = 
 From time to time , BBRC has re @-@ reviewed records that it previously accepted , to ensure they are acceptable in the light of improved knowledge of the species in question . These reviews are carried out on a species @-@ by @-@ species basis . Old World warblers have proved particularly in need of re @-@ review . A review of greenish warbler records was initiated in 1983 . The purpose of this review was to establish whether records , particular those in late autumn and winter , of drab grey Phylloscopus warblers , which had previously been accepted as greenish warbler , were in fact this species , or were common chiffchaffs of the Siberian race tristis . 48 records between 1958 and 1970 were examined . Of these , 20 were rejected . A review of Arctic warbler records was begun in 1991 , with the aim of determining whether any greenish warblers had been mistakenly accepted as <unk> . The review was completed in 1994 , although as of 2009 , the results had not been published . 
 A review of spectacled warbler records was initiated in 1984 . This review resulted in the species being removed from the British list ; of the three accepted records , one , at Spurn , Yorkshire in 1968 , was re @-@ identified as a first @-@ year female subalpine warbler , while descriptions of the other two , at Porthgwarra , Cornwall in October 1969 and on Fair Isle in June 1979 , were not considered sufficiently watertight to permit their continued acceptance . Spectacled warbler has since been re @-@ added to the British list following an individual at Filey , Yorkshire in 1992 , and there have been further subsequent records . In the late 1990s , BBRC reviewed some of the accepted records of moustached warbler , and concluded that one , from Sussex in 1979 , was unacceptable , but that one other , from Buckinghamshire in 1965 , should stand . Two further records , from Hampshire in 1951 and Kent in 1952 , were reviewed as part of the 1950 – 1957 review ( see below ) , and found to be unacceptable . Following these rejections , the Buckinghamshire record , and the remaining record , a breeding pair in Cambridgeshire in 1946 , previously accepted as Britain 's first , were scrutinised by the BOURC and found to be unacceptable , leading to the removal of moustached warbler from the British list ; it has not re @-@ occurred . 
 A review of olivaceous warbler records commenced in 1986 , and continued through the 1990s . The results of this review were published in 1999 : six of the previously accepted records were rejected as not meeting modern identification standards . In 2003 , following the split of olivaceous warbler into two species , the accepted records were all reviewed again to ascertain which of the two they were — all nine proved to be eastern olivaceous warblers . Following the split of Bonelli 's warbler into two species , the committee reviewed all the 121 accepted records , and concluded that 51 were western and two were eastern ; for the remainder , not enough evidence was available to make a firm decision . The committee had previously stated that it would regard as western Bonelli 's warbler all except proven eastern Bonelli 's warblers , however , this announcement rescinded that decision . In 2003 – 04 , all desert warbler records were reviewed , and it was concluded that all were referable to the newly split Asian desert warbler , rather than African desert warbler . 
 A review of American and Pacific golden plover records was begun in 1991 , with the purpose of evaluating whether any individuals previously accepted as " either American or Pacific " could now be definitely assigned to one species or the other ( and vice versa ) . The results ( a small decrease in the number of accepted American golden plovers , and a small increase in the number of accepted Pacifics ) were published in the committee 's report for 1996 , with a comment that a detailed paper on the subject was being prepared , although as of 2009 , this has not been published . A review of isabelline shrike records commenced in 1986 . This review , the results of which were published in 1989 , established a racial identification for a number of adult isabelline shrikes previously accepted to species level . A further review , with the same aim , was begun in the late 1990s . A preliminary set of results of this review was published in 2003 ; four previously accepted individuals were rejected , including one , in Cambridgeshire in 1978 , which is now thought have been a hybrid with red @-@ backed shrike . The full results of this second review were published in 2007 ; some of the previous racial attributions were withdrawn , but the committee felt able to confidently assign a race for a number of more recent individuals , although it stressed that this could only be done with adult birds ( the committee 's 2005 report mentions that a further article is in preparation ) . A review of black @-@ eared wheatears was conducted in 2002 – 04 , with the aim of assigning individuals to the eastern and western races where possible ; this was possible with nine records ; both western hispanica and eastern melanoleuca were shown to have occurred . 
 A review of semipalmated sandpiper records took place in the 1970s , resulting in seven of the twelve records being rejected . A review of black @-@ headed wagtail records was initiated in 1983 . The results were published in 1994 and 1995 , and nine previously accepted records were judged to be unsound , due to possible confusion with grey @-@ headed wagtail . A review of rufous turtle dove records took place in 1994 , and concluded that three of the eight accepted records should no longer stand . A review of lesser kestrel records , begun in 1994 , and completed in 1995 , concluded that six accepted records of this species should no longer be regarded as acceptable . Five of the six were from autumn , whereas the overwhelming majority of records the committee continued to accept are from the spring / summer period . All 24 spring records of Siberian stonechat were reconsidered in 2002 – 04 , in the light of new information on the variability in appearance of European <unk> in spring ; the committee decided that all but five should remain accepted . In 2003 , the committee revised its assessment criteria for male pine buntings , redefining some birds previously considered hybrids as acceptable , but requiring an overall greater level of precision in descriptions , and reviewed past records in the light of these changes . 
 As of 2007 , the following reviews are underway : a review of past records of Macaronesian shearwaters , reviews of all redhead and royal tern records , a review of great white egrets to establish if any are of the Nearctic race , a review of <unk> , a review of records of the eastern race of redstart , a review of <unk> warbler records aimed at determining the race of each , and a review of subalpine warblers to determine which individuals are <unk> to the race <unk> . It has also been suggested that reviews should be conducted of records of great snipe , as older records show a very different temporal occurrence pattern than more recent birds , the large numbers of gull @-@ billed tern records from the English south coast from the 1960s , and desert wheatears , to establish racial identifications . 
 = = = Problematic records = = = 
 Most records received by the committee are processed within a year and published in its annual report in British Birds . Some records prove problematic , and for some species , it has taken the committee many years to come to a decision . This has particularly been the case where the species or subspecies in question was new to Britain — examples include northern harrier ( Britain 's first , in Scilly in 1982 , accepted in 2007 ) , long @-@ toed stint ( Britain 's first , in Cornwall in 1970 , accepted in 1994 ) , least tern ( Britain 's first , and to date only record , accepted in 2005 , after first occurring in 1983 ) , black lark ( Britain 's first , from Spurn , Yorkshire in 1984 , accepted in 2004 after a second set of notes came to light ) , Sykes 's warbler ( the first three records , from 1959 , 1977 , and 1993 , accepted in 2003 ) , Iberian chiffchaff ( the first two records , from 1972 and 1992 , accepted in 2000 ) , and Hume 's leaf warbler ( the first 27 records , the earliest from 1966 , accepted in 1998 ) . Occasionally , decisions have been delayed due to non @-@ ornithological factors , perhaps most notably with the loss by the Royal Mail of a file on Britain 's first lesser short @-@ toed lark . 
 The first three field records of Blyth 's pipit , including an atypical pale individual on the Isles of Scilly , proved difficult , but following the occurrence of trapped individuals , on Fair Isle in 1993 and Suffolk in 1994 , these were accepted . Some records of citrine wagtail and short @-@ toed treecreeper were accepted only after prolonged consideration . Prior to the publication in 1984 of Jonsson and Grant 's stint identification paper , a number of stints ( Calidris ) proved difficult to assess ; a paper covering four such cases was published in 1986 . It included accounts of a bird on Fair Isle , originally thought Britain 's first red @-@ necked stint that turned out to be a sanderling ; and a bird in Suffolk , The " Felixstowe stint " , which most observers at the time believed was a western sandpiper , but was in fact a semipalmated sandpiper . A previous paper details four early claims of red @-@ necked stint , none of which were acceptable . 
 As of 2007 , records of Wilson 's snipe ( from 1985 and 1998 ) , elegant terns ( from 2002 ) , a number of eastern whitethroats and lesser whitethroats , and several apparent North African common chaffinches , are still under consideration . 
 = = = = Problematic seabird records = = = = 
 BBRC has had particular problems with a number of rare seabirds . The " Chalice petrel " , a dark @-@ rumped storm petrel seen and photographed in the Southwest Approaches in 1988 , and believed by its observers to be a Matsudaira 's storm petrel , was eventually rejected as other similar species could not be ruled out . Martin Garner and Killian <unk> subsequently wrote a critical review of this decision , arguing that the evidence points to the bird having been a Swinhoe 's storm petrel , the only dark @-@ rumped storm petrel species otherwise recorded in the North Atlantic . They argued that the Seabirds Advisory Panel 's assessment of the record was at fault , and a critical reappraisal of the evidence should have been prompted by the ( then relatively recent ) discovery in the North Atlantic of Swinhoe 's storm petrel , and that the committee was instead too heavily swayed by the views of a single expert . 
 A petrel seen from Dungeness , Kent and believed by its observers to be Britain 's first herald petrel was rejected , although the committee noted that the bird was clearly " an amazing seabird " . This decision sparked a number of letters to British Birds questioning whether the committee 's stance is too strict . Fea 's petrel is now officially accepted as having occurred , but for many years , the identification of these birds was accepted only as Fea 's / Zino 's / soft @-@ plumaged petrel , followed by a period where they were referred to Fea 's or Zino 's ; however , following BOURC acceptance of two birds in Scilly waters as Fea 's petrels , BBRC published a paper arguing that all birds are likely to have been Fea 's . 
 The occurrence in Britain of southern ( i.e. south polar / brown ) skuas is also unresolved . A series of reports of south polar skua , from 1982 to 1993 , were all eventually rejected after being assessed for several years . Two other birds ( from the Isles of Scilly in 2001 , and Glamorgan in 2002 have been accepted ( by the BOURC ) as belonging to one or other of these two species , while a bird from Dorset in 1996 remains under consideration . 
 = = = = Criticisms of level of detail required and approach to single @-@ observer records = = = = 
 In 1996 , Alan Vittery raised the question of whether the level of detail required by the committee for a description to be acceptable was too high . Similar points were made by Keith Vinicombe and Mike Pennington in 2001 . In the light of the rejection of a record of Blyth 's reed warbler on Shetland in 1997 , Vinicombe and Pennington wrote to British Birds to question the decision . They suggested that the committee was becoming too focussed on minutiae in assessing bird descriptions , ignoring more obvious evidence , Vinicombe saying that " the Committee has prevaricated to the point where it ' cannot see the wood for the trees ' " . David Walker and Owen Leyshon , David Ferguson , and Andrew Duff have criticised the committee on similar grounds in relation to its approach to the assessment of rare seabirds , citing the Dungeness herald petrel claim as an example . Vittery , and Moss Taylor both expressed concern that BBRC was adopting too strict an approach for records of birds seen only by their finder . 
 In 1998 , BBRC explained its approach to the assessment of single @-@ observer records . The committee explained that while it understood that geographical and social circumstances make it likely that some people are more likely to find rare birds on their own , it is " very cautious about observers with a high proportion of single @-@ observer records " and that its policy is to watch patterns closely and review those observers ' past records on a regular basis . This approach has attracted criticism . Former BBRC chairman Ian Wallace and others have written about the subject in Birdwatch magazine . Wallace believes that the committee has a blacklist of observers , from whom it automatically rejects records unless there are other observers able to corroborate the sighting . He mentions two specific observers , both of whom live in remote parts of northern Scotland . Ken Shaw , a former BBRC member , has claimed that BBRC would not accept a single @-@ observer record of a species new to Britain without photographic evidence , regardless of the track record of the observer . Graham Bell , another former member , writing in response to Shaw 's article , has accused the committee of adopted unfounded suspicions , arguing that just because a competent observer moves to an <unk> part of the country , their abilities do not change . One of the observers who Wallace claimed was blacklisted , Alan Vittery , also contributed to the debate , stating that he had been informed by the BBRC that they would not consider any single @-@ observer record he submitted , unless supported by a photograph . Vittery contrasted the BBRC 's attitude with that of other national rarities committees , arguing that the result of the approach is to distort rarity statistics . Vittery invited the BBRC to reply in public , but this request was declined . 
 = = = The <unk> Bay curlew = = = 
 The BBRC conducted a detailed review into the controversial identification of a curlew seen at <unk> Bay in Northumberland in 1998 , coming to the conclusion that it was , as had been believed by many observers , a first @-@ summer slender @-@ billed curlew . This identification was accepted by the British Ornithologists Union 's Records Committee , leading to the addition of this species to the British List . The record is currently being reviewed again by BBRC to establish whether this earlier decision should be upheld . 
 = = = Review of 1950 – 57 records including an Ascension frigatebird sighting = = = 
 A subcommittee was set up in 1997 to undertake a review of rare bird records from the years immediately prior to BBRC 's establishment . The purpose of the review was to ensure that all records from 1950 onwards ( the cut @-@ off date for Category A of the <unk> British List of birds ) have been subjected to a similar level of scrutiny . Not all of the 1 @,@ 100 records of species considered to be rarities at that time were assessed , but only those related to species not recorded more than 100 times by 1997 , as well as a few records of less rare species under particularly unusual circumstances , which were termed " sore thumbs " . Much of the original documentation was unavailable for the review , as it had been lost , and so for many records , the review was based solely on published accounts of the birds . The most notable outcome of this review was the <unk> of a frigatebird record from Tiree in 1953 . Previously identified as a magnificent frigatebird , the BBRC review concluded that the bird was in fact an Ascension frigatebird , the only individual of this species ever identified in Europe ( Walbridge , Small & McGowan 2003 ) . The full results of the review were published in 2006 . Of the 126 records reviewed , 37 were rejected as unacceptable . These included a claimed white @-@ tailed eagle , which broke into a chicken @-@ run in a garden and stole a chicken , three little crakes , three European scops owls , the only late December record of tawny pipit , three black @-@ eared wheatears , a record of two White 's thrushes together in April , a spring <unk> warbler , two moustached warblers and a pine grosbeak . Furthermore , issues were found with the identification of Britain 's first western sandpiper , on Fair Isle in 1956 , and these led the BOURC to reject this record . The western sandpiper has been recorded several times subsequently in Britain however , and remains on the national list . The subcommittee 's final report also hints at the prospect that some records from immediately prior to 1950 may be incorrect ; because these fell outside the timeframes of the review they were not reassessed . 
 = = = The Chipping Ongar hermit thrush = = = 
 Only a single known case of fraud involving a record submitted to BBRC has become public . In autumn 1994 , Nigel Pepper , a birdwatcher from Essex , claimed to have recorded a hermit thrush in a garden in Chipping Ongar . Doubts about the record were raised in Birdwatch and BBRC reviewed the record in 2002 , but decided that it should stand . In 2009 , Pepper revealed in Birdwatch magazine ( Birdwatch 204 : 46 @-@ 47 ) that the record was a deception , made in protest at perceived secrecy surrounding rare birds in the county . 
 = = = Principal works = = = 
 = = = Annual reports = = = 
 = Between You and Me = 
 " Between You and Me " is a song by the American contemporary Christian music group DC Talk . Released in 1996 , it was the second radio and commercial single released from the group 's fourth album , Jesus Freak . 
 Lyrically , “ Between You and Me ” stresses the importance of seeking forgiveness from a friend . In contrast to many of the DC Talk 's other singles , the Christian message of " Between You and Me " – the importance of forgiveness and confession – is heavily implied , although it is not blatantly stated in terms of any specific religion . The music video for the song features the band members – Michael Tait , Kevin Max , and Toby McKeehan – performing the song in a laundromat . Interspersed is footage of a man carrying a package while running from two other men . 
 After the unexpected success of the grunge rock single " Jesus Freak , " " Between You and Me " helped to bring DC Talk to a new level of success and solidify them as mainstream artists . The song later earned DC Talk a GMA Dove Award and is the only DC Talk single to have charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . The single was also a Christian radio success and peaked at number one on both the Christian Adult Contemporary and Christian Contemporary Hit Radio CCM Magazine charts . 
 = = Meaning and composition = = 
 Lyrically , “ Between You and Me ” stresses the importance of seeking forgiveness from a friend . In addition , the bridge of the song addresses the need for confessing one 's sins to God . DC Talk member Toby McKeehan , co @-@ writer of the song , said that the lyrics simply describe the way relationships work . McKeehan later elaborated in an interview that the song came from his relationship with fellow band members Michael Tait and Kevin Max . 
 In contrast to many of the DC Talk 's other singles , the Christian message of " Between You and Me " – the importance of forgiveness and confession – is heavily implied , although it is not blatantly stated in terms of any specific religion . The only mention of God is featured during the breakdown of the song , which is absent in the radio edit . This removal of God from the song caused some fans of the band to wonder if the group 's record label made a " conscious effort to remove any overt Christian content from the song . " 
 " Between You and Me " is built around acoustic strumming and synthesized drums , courtesy of Scott Williamson . The song begins with acoustic strumming in the key of G major . The song then moves into the key of E major during the verses . " Between You and Me " features a chorus that is in the key of G major ; in addition , the chorus is composed of " boyish lead vocals " , " sweet harmonies " , and " whirling organs " . During the verses , Michael Tait , Kevin Max , and Toby McKeehan take turns singing lead . The second chorus is followed by a melodic breakdown featuring minimalistic guitar and whispered vocals . The song then repeats the line " It 's my way to freedom " and " I 've got something to say " until the end . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for the song features Michael Tait , Kevin Max , and Toby McKeehan performing the song in a laundromat . Interspersed is footage of a man carrying a package while running from two other men . Near the end , he runs into the laundromat where DC Talk are singing and deposits the box in a trash can before leaving . Tait , Max , and McKeehan then reach into the trash can to investigate the contents of the box . Just as the box is opened , the video ends . 
 The video for " Between You and Me " received regular airtime on MTV and VH1 . While the video was popular , however , the band found it more and more difficult to get airplay on MTV for what they perceived as a bias against the Christian music scene . McKeehan explained that with " Between You and Me " , the group was able to " sneak one past the goalie " , but afterwards the DJs realized that " this group 's from the Christian market " . 
 = = Release and acclaim = = 
 The song was released as the second single for Jesus Freak in 1996 . Due to its wide appeal , however , the song was extensively played on many non @-@ Christian stations , leading the single to become a major crossover hit . The song 's surprising rise on the Billboard 's charts was a result of the partnership with Virgin Records . Phil <unk> , then @-@ CEO of Virgin Records said that " Between You and Me " was " identified early in the game as a very radio @-@ friendly cut . " In addition to " Jesus Freak " and " Colored People , " " Between You and Me " was considered instrumental in breaking DC Talk into the mainstream . 
 Commercially , the song was a smash hit . The song remains DC Talk 's highest @-@ charting single on mainstream radio , peaking at number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100 single chart . The single was also a Christian radio success . It peaked at number one on both the Christian Adult Contemporary and Christian Contemporary Hit Radio CCM Magazine charts . The fact that the band was able to achieve success impressed many fans and individuals in the music industry . Jay R. Howard and John M. <unk> , in their book Apostles of Rock : The <unk> World of Contemporary Christian Music , called it " a significant validation of the music " . 
 Critically , the song was also a success . Billboard magazine gave the single an extremely positive review and noted that the song and band were helping to shatter the myth that " Christian pop has to be heavy @-@ handed or steeping power @-@ ballad syrup " . The magazine also praised the song for " lyrics [ that ] remain subtle but forthright in the song 's positive message " . Michael Mehle of the Rocky Mountain News positively noted that the song possessed " Seal @-@ like R & B " qualities . Allmusic awarded the single two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars our of five . " Between You and Me " was successful when it came to the GMA Dove Awards . In 1997 , the song won an award for the best Pop / Contemporary Recorded Song of the Year . 
 = = Other releases = = 
