 Lil ' Kim responded on the original version of her song " Big Momma Thang " , which was aimed at Biggie 's wife , Faith Evans , and Shakur . Junior M.A.F.I.A. recorded a music video for the song " Get Money " , which has been regarded as a diss to Shakur . Biggie denies these claims , stating : " It 's just a video ; ain 't nobody got no time to make no diss on nobody . " Lil ' Cease said after the release that Biggie still had love for Shakur , and even respected him . The attack on Mobb Deep came as a response for their involvement on the song " L.A L.A " by Capone @-@ N @-@ Noreaga , which was a retaliation to Snoop Dogg and Tha Dogg Pound 's song " New York , New York " music video in which members of Tha Dogg Pound and Death Row are seen knocking down buildings in New York City . Mobb Deep responded to Shakur with the track " Drop a Gem on ' em " . It was first released as a promotional single , and later appeared on their album Hell on Earth . Lyrically , it did not specifically name Shakur , but it did allude to the shooting incident . It has also been noted for erroneously stating the cost of the assets Shakur had taken from him during the shooting incident . Bronx rapper King Sun also responded to Shakur with " New York Love ( All Eyez On Sun ) " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 " Hit ' Em Up " was originally featured as a B @-@ side on Shakur 's single " How Do U Want It " . In 1998 , it was released on Shakur 's first compilation album , Greatest Hits . A remix of the song was featured on Nu @-@ <unk> <unk> ( 2003 ) , where the intro lyrics from the originally explicit version and the main lyrics from the edited radio version . A live version of the song was included on the 2005 release of Tupac : Live at the House of Blues . " Hit ' Em Up " was first released on Death Row Greatest Hits , and was again released as a live recording on the 2004 album 2Pac Live . 
 In the second half of Eminem 's song " <unk> " , the rapper attempts to remake " Hit ' Em Up " and in itself is a diss track aimed towards Everlast . Eminem has support from D12 on his version like the Outlawz supported Shakur on the original . Khia used the song 's beat and part of the hook in her song " Hit ' Em Up " , which is a diss to female rappers Trina and Jacki @-@ O. " What I Think About You " by Bow Wow uses a <unk> of " Hit ' Em Up " and is a diss song to fellow rapper Soulja Boy Tell ' em . 
 = Maryland Route 413 = 
 Maryland Route 413 ( also known as MD 413 or Route 413 ) is a 14 @.@ 61 @-@ mile ( 23 @.@ 51 km ) state highway in Somerset County in the U.S. state of Maryland . The route runs from a dead end at Crisfield 's city dock , which is located on the Tangier Sound , northeast to U.S. Route 13 ( US 13 ) in Westover . It is the main highway leading into Crisfield , and is known as Crisfield Highway for much of its length . The highway travels through mostly rural areas of farms and woods as well as the communities of Hopewell , Marion Station , and Kingston . It is a two @-@ lane undivided road for most of its length ; a portion of the road in Crisfield is a four @-@ lane road that follows a one @-@ way pair . MD 413 is part of two scenic routes : Blue Crab Scenic Byway and the Beach to Bay Indian Trail , both are Maryland Scenic Byways . 
 The Crisfield – Westover Road was one of the original state roads marked for improvement by the Maryland State Roads Commission . The highway was paved in the 1910s and designated MD 413 in 1927 . MD 413 was relocated starting in the late 1930s to a new alignment parallel to the Eastern Shore Railroad line that made Crisfield the " Seafood Capital of the World . " The relocation began in Crisfield and was completed to Westover in 1950 . The old alignment of MD 413 was designated MD 667 . The state highway was expanded to a divided highway in the mid @-@ 1950s in Crisfield . The railroad track was abandoned in 1976 and later removed , but traces of the railroad remain along MD 413 's modern alignment . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 413 begins at the city dock on the waterfront in Crisfield at the intersection with Dock Street , heading to the northeast . It begins on a four @-@ lane boulevard with a median , and is known as West Main Street , fronting local businesses in the downtown area . After Seventh Street , Main Street leaves MD 413 , and the boulevard 's two carriageways become known as Richardson Avenue northbound and Maryland Avenue southbound . At this point the road begins to front mostly homes on Maryland Avenue , while on Richardson Avenue it runs past and homes and businesses , such as gas stations and restaurants . On a gentle curve , Chesapeake Avenue intersects the northbound carriageway , providing access to the southern beginning of MD 667 . 
 Before leaving the city , the route intersects MD 460 , also known as Hall Highway , immediately accessible only from the southbound carriageway . MD 460 provides a direct link to McCready Memorial Hospital . Access to that route from northbound MD 413 is given by <unk> Avenue , which the road intersects farther south . Very soon after , it intersects MD 358 ( Jacksonville Road ) , which heads north , and Somerset Avenue , which heads south . Past the MD 358 intersection , the road narrows to two travel lanes with the median becoming a left turn lane as many businesses and side streets front the road . The route becomes the Crisfield Highway , which it is known as for the remainder of its journey . After intersecting Silver Lane , the left turn lane closes , and MD 413 becomes a rural , two @-@ lane highway with full shoulders , exiting Crisfield 's corporate limits just north of the Sherwin – Williams ( former <unk> ) entrance and continuing past the old site of Carvel Hall Cutlery . 
 Upon leaving Crisfield , MD 413 passes through a mix of woodland and farmland . In Hopewell , MD 667 intersects the highway , and after clearing some modest wooded development up to and slightly beyond the Holland Crossing Road intersection , the route enters heavy woodland . It passes a man @-@ made pond before intersecting MD 667 again . Both routes parallel each other on the way into the community of Marion Station , straddling the old railroad bed . Both routes are intersected by Davis Road and <unk> Corner Road / Charles Cannon Road , after which MD 667 turns almost due east , with MD 413 heading through a small neighborhood outside the center of Marion . 
 Past Marion , the route resumes northeast through woods and farms with some residences along the route . Approaching Kingston , MD 413 intersects Lovers Lane . After this , a long curve to the north @-@ northeast begins , which ends just south of Kingston Lane and the center of Kingston . Beyond Kingston , the route crosses the Big <unk> River and travels past a tree farm . After passing through a forest , two side roads lead to the Somerset County Health Department and the Somerset Intermediate School , with the pavement 's striping reconfigured to accommodate left turns at the two close intersections . 
 As the road nears Westover , it passes by the Great Hope Golf Course and shortly after intersects MD 361 ( Fairmount Road ) . Here , the road meets Old Westover @-@ Marion Road , a former routing of the highway . Passing through the development of Westover , MD 413 intersects MD 673 ( Sam Barnes Road ) , a short connector route to US 13 southbound to Pocomoke City . From US 13 northbound , MD 673 serves as the connection to MD 413 southbound . Past MD 673 , the highway passes through farmland . MD 413 heads through some woods and crosses the Back Creek of the Manokin River before coming to end at an intersection with US 13 . 
 MD 413 is part of the Blue Crab Scenic Byway , which consists of various roads in the lower Eastern Shore of Maryland . It is also part of the Beach to Bay Indian Trail , a Maryland Scenic Byway that connects Ocean City on the Atlantic Ocean to Smith Island in the Chesapeake Bay and is noted by signs along the route . 
 = = History = = 
 Crisfield grew to prominence as the " Seafood Capital of the World " and became the second largest city in Maryland by 1904 thanks to an extension of the Eastern Shore Railroad to the city in 1866 instigated by the city 's namesake , John W. Crisfield . The city 's importance led to the Crisfield – Westover Road being designated one of the original state roads nominated for improvement by the Maryland State Roads Commission in 1909 . The state road was paved from the eastern city limits of Crisfield ( the present western terminus of MD 667 ) to Hopewell and from Westover to Kingston in 1913 . The segment between Kingston and Marion was completed in 1915 . The state road was completed when the final section was completed between Hopewell and Marion by 1920 . MD 413 received its number in the original assignment of state route numbers in 1927 . Within the city of Crisfield , Maryland Avenue was constructed between Main Street and Somerset Avenue , Chesapeake Avenue was brought into the state highway system within the city limits , and Main Street was improved and brought into the state highway system between the city pier and Maryland Avenue around 1935 . 
 Starting in the mid @-@ 1930s , MD 413 was relocated to an alignment paralleling the Crisfield Secondary Branch of the Pennsylvania Railroad . The first portion of MD 413 was relocated in 1935 in conjunction with the relocation of US 13 between Princess Anne and Westover . MD 413 was moved from Sam Barnes Road and Sign Post Road to its present alignment between US 13 and Old Westover – Marion Road in Westover . The first section of the present straight highway between Crisfield and Westover was constructed in 1938 and 1939 from the eastern city limits of Crisfield ( near the intersection with MD 358 ) to Hopewell . The bypassed portion of MD 413 and subsequent bypassed segments were designated MD 667 . The section of the new alignment between Hopewell and Marion was completed in 1942 . The Marion – Westover portion of the realignment was completed in 1950 . 
 MD 413 was expanded to a four @-@ lane divided highway between the city pier and the eastern city limits of Crisfield in 1956 . Between the city pier and Maryland Avenue , the divided highway replaced the path of the railroad ; the railroad 's terminus was moved to a new pier to the north . North of the Main Street portion of the divided highway , the railroad track separated the two directions of MD 413 : Maryland Avenue formed the northbound lanes while Richardson Avenue was brought into the state highway system to comprise the southbound lanes . The two directions of MD 413 were divided by an operating railroad track until the Crisfield Secondary Branch was abandoned with the formation of Conrail in 1976 . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in Somerset County . 
 = Miniopterus aelleni = 
 Miniopterus aelleni is a bat in the genus Miniopterus that occurs on Anjouan in the Comoros and in northern and western Madagascar . 
 It is a small brown bat ; its forearm length is 35 to 41 mm ( 1 @.@ 4 to 1 @.@ 6 in ) . The long tragus ( a projection in the outer ear ) has a broad base and a blunt or rounded tip . The uropatagium ( tail membrane ) is sparsely haired . The palate is flat , and there are distinct diastemata ( gaps ) between the upper canines and premolars . 
 Populations of this species have historically been included in Miniopterus manavi , but evidence published in 2008 and 2009 indicates that M. manavi is a complex of five separate species , including the newly described M. aelleni . M. aelleni has been found in forests and caves in karstic areas . Its distribution overlaps that of M. griveaudi , also formerly included in M. manavi . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In a 1995 contribution to Faune de Madagascar on Malagasy bats , Randolph Peterson and colleagues listed four species of Miniopterus on Madagascar and the nearby Comoros , including the small Miniopterus manavi with a broad distribution on both Madagascar and the Comoros . However , during the first decade of the 21st century , molecular studies have revealed that Miniopterus , a widespread genus in the Old World , is much more species @-@ rich than previously thought . A 2008 study comparing sequences of the mitochondrial cytochrome b and D @-@ loop markers found two distinct , unrelated groups within the supposed M. manavi from the Comoros ; both groups were also found on Madagascar . The next year , Steven Goodman and colleagues revisited the group with more extensive sampling on Madagascar . They separated three species within the former " M. manavi " : M. manavi itself in the Central Highlands , M. griveaudi ( previously a subspecies of M. manavi ) on Anjouan , Grande Comore , and northern and western Madagascar , and the newly described Miniopterus aelleni on Anjouan and northern and western Madagascar . The specific name aelleni honors Prof. Villy <unk> of the Natural History Museum of Geneva , who has done much research on African bats . Within M. aelleni , Goodman and colleagues found some differentiation ( 3 @.@ 4 % sequence divergence in cytochrome b sequences ) between individuals from Montagne d 'Ambre in northern Madagascar and those from Anjouan and Ankarana , near Montagne d 'Ambre ; the cytochrome b divergence between M. aelleni and other Malagasy Miniopterus is 7 to 10 % . 
 Later in 2009 , Goodman and colleagues described two more species of M. manavi @-@ like Malagasy Miniopterus : M. brachytragos from northern Madagascar and M. mahafaliensis from the southwest . On the basis of cytochrome b sequences , they found that M. aelleni was most closely related to a clade of M. brachytragos , M. manavi , and another recently described Malagasy species , M. petersoni . The five recognized species of M. manavi @-@ like bats are not each other 's closest relatives , but apparently acquired their similarities through convergent evolution . At some places ( for example , Namoroka ) four cryptic species of M. manavi @-@ like bats , including M. aelleni , occur together . 
 = = Description = = 
 Miniopterus aelleni is a small , brown Miniopterus species . The head may be slightly lighter in color than the body . Some hairs on the underparts have buff tips . Miniopterus griveaudi is similar in color , but M. manavi is darker and M. brachytragos and M. mahafaliensis are lighter . The tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the outer ear ) is long and has a broad base with a crest at the side , and ends in a blunt to slightly rounded tip . In M. manavi and M. griveaudi , in contrast , the base is narrower , in M. mahafaliensis , the sides of the tragus are parallel , and M. <unk> has a short , blunt tragus sparsely covered with hair . The wing membrane is also brown , but the uropatagium is lighter . The wing membrane and uropatagium are attached to the upper leg at the same level , above the ankle . The uropatagium is sparsely covered with thin , but clearly visible hairs . In contrast , M. manavi , M. mahafaliensis , and M. brachytragos have densely covered uropatagia and that of M. griveaudi is almost naked . Individuals from Anjouan have significantly shorter hindfeet than those from Madagascar , but otherwise the two populations cannot be distinguished on the basis of external characteristics . 
 In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is short and line @-@ shaped , but longer than in other manavi @-@ like species . The central groove in the nasal depression is relatively narrow . The frontal bones are rounded and bear a well @-@ developed sagittal crest . Further back on the braincase , the lambdoid crest is also prominent . The middle part of the palate is flat , as in M. manavi but unlike in M. brachytragos , M. griveaudi , and M. mahafaliensis , which have a curved palate . At the palate 's back margin is a long , thin posterior palatal spine . Miniopterus aelleni has 36 teeth in the dental formula 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 ( two incisors , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in both upper toothrows and three incisors , one canine , three premolars , and three molars in the lower toothrows ) . As is characteristic of Miniopterus , the first upper premolar ( P2 ; P1 and P3 are missing ) is smaller and more simplified than the second ( P4 ) . There are clear diastemata ( gaps ) between the upper canine ( C1 ) and P2 and between P2 and P4 , which are weaker or absent in M. griveaudi and M. manavi . Behind C1 , the toothrows are about parallel , not divergent as in M. manavi . The third upper molar ( M3 ) is more compressed than in M. manavi and M. griveaudi . In some measurements of the skull and teeth , Anjouan specimens are larger than those from Madagascar . 
 The animal has a karyotype of 46 chromosomes , with a total of 50 major arms on the autosomes ( non @-@ sex chromosomes ) . The karyotype is conserved among species of Miniopterus ; the number of chromosomes and arms is identical in M. aelleni , the Malagasy M. griveaudi and M. <unk> , and even the Asian M. fuliginosus . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Miniopterus aelleni is known to live from 4 to 225 m ( 13 to 738 ft ) above sea level in northern and western Madagascar , at 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 600 ft ) on Montagne d 'Ambre , northern Madagascar , and from 220 to 690 m ( 720 to 2 @,@ 260 ft ) on Anjouan in the nearby Comoros . On Madagascar , it has been recorded in forest and caves in karst areas ; its distribution broadly overlaps that of M. griveaudi and the two have been found in the same roost sites on several occasions . On Anjouan , M. aelleni is less common than M. griveaudi ; there , it is known from four specimens only , all collected in 2006 . These come from two nearby sites : a rocky area near a river and a disturbed forest . These animals , collected in late November , were in reproductive condition , with two females pregnant and a third lactating . M. griveaudi were reproductively active at the same time , suggesting that the reproductive seasons of the two do not differ significantly . Although some ecological and behavioral data has been published on Miniopterus manavi , the recognition of several cryptic species within this group , more than one of which may occur in any given locality , renders the association of these data with any of the individual species uncertain ; however , species of Miniopterus generally feed on insects . Because M. aelleni is widespread and occurs in many protected areas on Madagascar , Goodman and colleagues inferred that its conservation status is secure . 
 = Not Your Kind of People = 
 Not Your Kind of People is the fifth studio album by American @-@ Scottish alternative rock band Garbage . It was released on May 11 , 2012 through the band 's own record label , <unk> . The album marks the return of the band after a seven @-@ year " hiatus " that started with previous album Bleed Like Me . Guitarist Duke Erikson said at the launch of the record that " working with Garbage again was very instinctual . Like getting on a bicycle ... with three other people . " The band emphasized that they did not want to reinvent themselves , but embrace their sonic identity , reflecting their classic sound whilst updating it for 2012 . Although Shirley Manson 's morose dispositions have a presence on the record , many of the songs share a more optimistic outlook on life , influenced by some of Manson 's personal experiences during their hiatus . 
 Recorded mostly at various recording studios in California , Not Your Kind of People was produced by Garbage , and was engineered and mixed by Billy Bush . The album contains bass guitar parts recorded by Justin Meldal @-@ Johnsen while Finnish actress Irina <unk> performs the musical saw on one track . Both daughters of band @-@ members Steve Marker and Butch Vig laid down vocals on the album 's title track . Photos for the album package were shot by Autumn de Wilde at the Paramour Mansion in Silver Lake , Los Angeles . 
 Not Your Kind of People was preceded by the release of " Blood for Poppies " as the lead single internationally , while in the United Kingdom , " Battle in Me " was marketed as the album 's lead single . The album also spawned three more singles , " Automatic Systematic Habit " , " Big Bright World " , and " Control " . Not Your Kind of People received a generally positive reception from critics . It debuted at number 17 on the Billboard 200 , at number 10 on the UK albums chart , peaked at number three on Billboard 's Independent Albums chart and topped the Alternative Albums chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Garbage decided to take a hiatus in 2005 , following the troubled production of their fourth studio album Bleed Like Me and cutting short the album 's promotional tour . Aside from a reunion in 2007 to compose new tracks for the compilation Absolute Garbage , the band members found themselves involved in various projects , with Butch Vig producing Green Day , Foo Fighters , and Muse , while singer Shirley Manson recorded an unreleased solo album and made her professional acting debut as a series regular on Terminator : The Sarah Connor Chronicles . 
 In 2009 , Vig and Manson met at the funeral of Pablo <unk> , the six @-@ year @-@ old son of Dangerbird Records founder Jeff <unk> , and had a conversation where , according to Vig , " we felt like we had some unfinished business , and we realized how precious life is and how important music has been in our lives . " Manson suggested calling guitarists Duke Erikson and Steve Marker to get together and write some songs . One week later , the group informally convened in Los Angeles , where they laughed , drank , and reminisced of the old days , leaving behind the tensions among them and general weariness that was partly responsible for their 2005 breakup ; they set up their equipment and " started fucking around . " " We were all pleased to notice on the first day there just didn 't seem to be any personal tensions , " Vig recalled . " Enough time had passed that any sort of weirdness or tension that had risen between us all had dissipated . So it was easy . There was no one telling us what to do . We weren 't signed to a label . We were between managers . So we made this on our own terms . " In that session , the group wrote the song " Battle In Me " . 
 In mid @-@ 2010 , the entire group were in Los Angeles for a birthday , where Manson suggested they book a studio and spend time writing . Along with Garbage 's long time engineer and Manson 's husband Billy Bush , the band , as Bush described , " hung out for a couple weeks , drank some wine and played a bunch of music ” . Three or four song ideas came together during this time . " But we didn 't go right into making @-@ a @-@ record mode " , Erikson recalled . " It took a bit of time for us to realize that we were going to make an album . " Erikson described reconvening as a piecemeal process , saying that it informally began with the first phone conversations among them since their hiatus , as they discussed playing together again . After convening , and composing and performing song ideas together through multiple sessions , they then decided to move forward with the band and embark on a full @-@ length album . The project took off in February 2011 , when Manson called Vig proposing to reunite the band and try making a new record . Manson convoked the group out of an eagerness " to make loud music again " . " I 'm a loud person " , she proclaimed ; " I love noise and aggression . I crave contact . I needed to make that connection again . I think we all did . To get something back up when there was absolutely no momentum took a Herculean effort on everybody 's part . It 's like pulling yourself out of mud . Even to stand back up and say ' we 're going to take another swing at this ' was a scary feeling , and I 'm proud of us for trying . It 's much easier to stay at home . ” 
 The band members stated that following the troublesome final years signed to Geffen Records , being an independent act again helped improve their mood and approach , with Vig remarking , " There were no expectations ; no one even knew we were recording . So it was all under the radar and pretty casual and we all felt inspired after having that amount of time off ... when we started writing songs , they came fast and furious . We probably wrote 24 , 25 songs over the course of a couple of months . Marker commented that " the business stuff ends up taking over some of that fun . We got really bogged down in people 's expectations of what we were supposed to be doing , being on bigger record labels and stuff . With all that behind us , it was suddenly exciting again and it felt a lot like it did when we first formed , which was really just sort of a fun idea that we had . " Manson added , " People at record companies live in fear of being wrong . Music cannot thrive in that environment . It is an unruly art form . You can 't keep treating it like sausage meat . You have to let it morph and move and breathe . " 
 Manson stated that eliminating the corporate pressure and indifference , as well as the band having a relaxed approach to the making of the record was pivotal for a healthy regroup , writing and recording process . " We didn 't put any pressure on ourselves to finish an album ... We just took our time and got together in two @-@ week blocks of time - any longer than that I 'm sure we would have started getting on each others ' nerves . So we did two weeks and then we 'd take some time off and then when everybody felt ready we 'd get back in [ the studio ] again . As a result , I think everybody really enjoyed our time together and really plugged in " , she remarked . Never much enjoying being in a studio , Manson relished the record @-@ making process this time around . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Unlike the previous albums , which were done at Vig 's Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin , Not Your Kind of People was mostly recorded in Los Angeles , where both Vig and Manson live . Smart was only used for some of Erikson 's parts , as he was the only bandmember still in Wisconsin . The working process was also different ; while the previous records had the band gathering for an entire year at Smart Studios , the band would instead work two weeks per month in Los Angeles , with Erikson and Marker flying in from Wisconsin and Colorado , respectively , then spend another two weeks in their home studios while e @-@ mailing ideas back and forth to develop songs . Manson would also visit Vig 's GrungeIsDead studio to experiment with vocals . Then they would get back together in the studio , which according to Marker " would be fun again because we hadn 't seen these people for a couple of weeks . " 
 The first recordings were done in two weeks of jam sessions at The Pass in Studio City . The band then moved to Bush 's studio Red Razor Sounds at Atwater Village , where the engineer did a rough mix of the tracks . Vig declared that the album 's mood emerged from the combination of the " trashy and lo @-@ tech " studio which he compared to a small clubhouse with the band 's ProTools and samplers . The band had a looser approach to recording and mixing compared to the " nano @-@ editing " of Version 2 @.@ 0 . 
 The band worked on <unk> " 25 or 26 songs " during the album sessions ; While a few were still " bits and pieces " , Vig stated they might finish them as further bonus tracks , B @-@ sides , or as part of an EP at a later point . Erikson said that the bonus tracks of the deluxe edition are songs that were not ready in time to join the regular track list . He also said that while most songs were new compositions , some were old ideas , such as the " 10 years old or something " track " Show Me " . Throughout the recording sessions for the album , the band mentioned several song titles via Facebook and Twitter ; these included : " Alone " , " Animal " , " Choose Your Weapon " , " Time Will Destroy Everything " and " <unk> " . Manson confirmed on Twitter that " Animal " became " The One " , a song from the deluxe version , while " Time Will Destroy Everything " was released as the b @-@ side to the band 's 2014 Record Store Day single , " Girls Talk " . 
 = = Composition and style = = 
 According to Vig , Not Your Kind of People evokes ambient vibes of Garbage 's first two albums , Garbage and Version 2 @.@ 0 : " There 's lots of elements of things we 've always loved : noisy guitars , big electronic beats , atmospheric film moments " , adding that the band " wanted to make a record sound like something that we want to hear when we 're driving the car . " While the record was reminiscent " vibe @-@ wise " of the band 's early work , the production aimed for a rawer sound , instead of cleaning up the sound through computers , to " capture a performance " and " sound kind of trashy and for the songs to blow out a little bit . " Vig said , " we tried to leave a lot of the performance raw on this album . A lot of the songs , we sort of throw paint at the wall and some of it sticks and some of it drips off . " He explained that the group avoided reinventing themselves : " We wanted to just embrace exactly who we are and what we like to do and just sort of update it sonically for 2012 . For better or worse , when we approach a song , it 's going to end up sounding like Garbage . I think we have a strong sonic identity , and I think that 's an asset these days . " Manson similarly noted that what mattered most was the record sounding authentic to who they are as a band . Manson considered that while the record recalled the band 's classic sound " it fits in with radio programming right now " ; She said that they are interested in also reaching a new generation and , regarding their distinct sound , " We don 't sound like anyone else on the radio . Much to our surprise there hasn 't been another band like ours since we came off the road . " 
 Like the band 's earlier releases , the album features a variety of guitar configurations as well as electronic synths . Erikson said that initially they gather with the standard guitar @-@ bass @-@ drum and keyboard gear , and as they pass around different ideas and implement them the songs take form in any which way a session takes them . " Once we started on the album proper , it became a Garbage record , which is any number of approaches to writing a recording . There were no rules , certainly " , he explained . A song like " Automatic Systematic Habit " features more electronics than guitars , and " Big Bright World " , a guitar @-@ heavy song , involves configurations that make some of the guitars sound like synths . Guitar parts are normally <unk> between guitarists Marker and Erikson . Erikson said it comes down to " Whoever comes up with what at any given time . There 's no job description as far as lead guitar / rhythm guitar . It 's just whoever has an idea as a articular [ sic ] moment . It 's usually about 50 / 50 " . Erikson and Marker used a variety of guitars and pedals , old , new , and defective . 
 Vig recalled that the title " Not Your Kind of People " came to him when he was stuck in a traffic jam in Los Angeles ; he texted Manson the idea for a title and she loved it . Manson wrote all the lyrics that night , and the next day the four of them gathered with acoustic guitars and wrote the music to the song in about half an hour . Manson explained that the album title Not Your Kind of People was " a call to arms in a way to anyone who feels like we do about the world " , saying that " it can be great to be outsider . " She felt that this applied to them as the band " never fit into a music scene " and that " in my life I 've never been an insider . " Manson also described the title as " a two @-@ fingered salute to people who reject or criticize us " , stating the band was " only really interested in people who share our outlook " as she considered that their fans were " the people who connect with what you 're saying and how you say it . " 
 Most of the lyrics were written by Manson as she included and filtered some of her bandmates ' ideas on songwriting . " It was a very do @-@ it @-@ yourself , homemade thing when it comes down to it " , Erikson explained ; " We all pitch in . Shirley had just as many comments on the guitar parts or the sound of the guitars as anybody else , and likewise , if we don 't like a lyric , we say it right away . " Many songs have a more optimistic view in life , inspired by Manson overcoming a desire to quit music after the death of her mother and realizing how important her work is to her . Darker themes still appear as Manson described herself as " enthusiastic and passionate , but I do see death marching toward me . " " Blood for Poppies " came " from a lot of things " , Manson said ; " It 's really an analogy for a story I read about Afghanistan and the opium wars over there ... it 's from a few stories , one about a platoon of soldiers in Afghanistan and the other about the opium wars . I use that as a backdrop for a story about maintaining sanity in an out @-@ of @-@ control place . " " [ It 's about ] remaining sane , when faced with insanity " , she added . " I Hate Love " criticized " the commercialized idea of love and what pain that puts us through " along with " knowing that there will be no more torture in your life than really , truly loving somebody who doesn 't love you back . " Manson also incorporated some self @-@ confidence and knowledge of her personality achieved during acting classes , in which she accepted that " was never going to be the cheerleader or the beautiful , conventional girl who fits in everywhere . " 
 " Big Bright World " contains a lyrical sample from the poem " Do not go gentle into that good night " by Dylan Thomas . Both daughters of Steve Marker and Butch Vig laid down vocals on the album 's title track . Finnish actress Irina <unk> performs the musical saw on " Sugar " . " Beloved Freak " includes a sample of Klaus Nomi , as the group felt the artist fit Manson 's lyrics about " people being an outsider , feeling like a freak , and not fitting in and trying to come to terms with that it 's okay to feel like you 're an outsider . " 
 KROQ @-@ FM and MTV Buzzworthy described the sound of the album as electronic rock ; The Huffington Post noted " the band has maintained their signature dark , driving , trip @-@ hoppy sound " , while Jason Heller of The A.V. Club wrote that " the group 's shoegaze influences are more in vogue now than they were 15 years ago . " 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 A post on Garbage 's Facebook page on January 23 , 2012 announced that the band launched their own record label , <unk> , to self @-@ release their new studio album , distributed in the United States by Fontana . Overseas distribution deals were made with Cooperative Music , Liberator Music , Sony Music Japan and Universal Canada . On March 7 , 2012 , Garbage confirmed the album track listing via YouTube . Four further tracks recorded for the deluxe edition were confirmed later in a press release issued through the band 's own label . In the United Kingdom , 250 copies of the deluxe edition were signed by Garbage and issued as part of the Record Store Day campaign . The album had a worldwide release date of May 14 , 2012 . At the launch of the record , guitarist Duke Erikson said that " working with Garbage again was very instinctual . Like getting on a bicycle ... with three other people " ; Erikson added , " We haven 't felt this good about a Garbage record since the last one . " Los Angeles @-@ based studio <unk> Design handled the album 's artwork and creative campaign , featuring band photographs by Autumn de Wilde . According to Duke Erikson , for the cover " there was some art that we wanted to do but we didn 't want to spend what the artist wanted us to " , so instead of " a very colorful and complex cover " they opted to go the other way and be simplistic , with only a lowercase " g " . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Blood for Poppies " was confirmed as the lead single to launch the album . The song was made available for free digital download from the group 's website after it leaked online early . A digital single was confirmed for release in Australia ; while a limited edition 7 " single , backed with an exclusive remix by Butch Vig , was distributed to independent record stores across North America to mark Record Store Day on April 21 , 2012 . " Battle In Me " was confirmed as the lead @-@ single exclusively for the United Kingdom . A limited edition 7 " vinyl was issued on April 21 to mark Record Store Day , while a proper commercial release followed on May 7 , 2012 . To promote the album , " Automatic Systematic Habit " was released as a free download through iTunes in the US on May 8 , 2012 . " Big Bright World " was released as the album 's second single in Australia on June 1 , 2012 . On July 8 , Manson announced that " Control " was the band 's next US single . 
 = = = Songs in other media = = = 
 In the same year of release , " Blood for Poppies " appeared in an episode of True Blood titled " Whatever I Am , You Made Me " , while " Control " was used in the 2012 video game The Amazing Spider @-@ Man and featured in the launch trailer of the game . The song also appeared in the season 4 episode of The Vampire Diaries " Bring It On " . " Sugar " appeared in an episode of The Following , and the title track " Not Your Kind of People " was later featured in its entirety in the trailer and soundtrack for Metal Gear Solid V : The Phantom Pain . 
 = = World tour = = 
 In late 2011 , Garbage announced their return to touring upon the release of Not Your Kind of People , marking the band 's first live performances since 2007 , and their first tour since 2005 . " Thinking about going back on the road is both thrilling and terrifying in equal measure , " Manson stated , " ... but we 've always enjoyed a little pain mixed in with our pleasure . " Manson considered that self @-@ reflection helped change the way the group approached touring , and , as a result , " we 're playing the best shows of our career . " Eric Avery , who performed with the band during their Bleed Like Me tour , rejoined them as the tour bassist . The band played concerts throughout North and South America , Europe , Oceania and Asia . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Not Your Kind of People received generally positive reviews from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , it received a weighted average score of 63 based on 28 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . In his review for The Guardian , Dave Simpson gave the album four out of five stars , stating that it " returns to the blueprint of their first two , best albums " while lessening the electronics and augmenting the crunchy guitars , with a contemporary production . He praised the title track , deeming it a " surprise " and a " beautiful , otherworldly cross between a John Barry Bond theme and a David Bowie outsider anthem . " Cameron Adams of The Courier @-@ Mail wrote that " musically , they still find that sweet spot between Motown and Nirvana , via the Pretenders and Prodigy " , and considered it " refreshing " that the band is " still pushing pop music to its darkest limits . " 
 AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine said that unlike their previous two albums , " there is no grappling with new sounds and styles , only an embrace of the thick aural onslaught of " Stupid Girl " and " Vow " . He complimented Manson 's " keenly aware lyrics " and said that their hooks are efficiently delivered while " no flab in either the composition or production " is evident . He summarized the album " as a simultaneous testament and revival of their strengths " , but " what once was futuristic now sounds nostalgic . " Tim Grierson wrote in The About Group that out of the many ' 90s bands that reunited in the last few years , " none have done it with as much gusto as Garbage " as they " return with their sexy , edgy vibe intact " and Manson " sounds as ferocious and bruised as ever . " 
 The Bangkok Post noted that the band " stick [ s ] firmly to their ' 90s alt @-@ rock guns . " Their " fuzzy @-@ guitar / catchy @-@ hook formula continues to dominate the album " and amidst the fuzz and electronics , " the title @-@ track , Sugar and Beloved Freak do offer moments of ( relatively ) quiet bliss " — songs that " refreshingly showcase the essence of Manson 's voice " . It is proposed however that , apart from older , devoted 90 's fans , the album probably won 't connect with contemporary audiences . In his review for Time , Adam Kivel likewise stated that the album is most likely to resonate with fans of 90 's alternative fusion , characterizing it as " an anomaly " in the current musical climate and not likely to gain significant radio @-@ play . Lindsay Zoladz of Pitchfork Media summarized the album as " a statement from a band that 's stuck , <unk> , to its guns . The times have changed but Garbage haven 't , and now , for better and for worse , they 've at last become alternative to everything . " 
 NME writer Rick Martin , despite hearing " flashes of their previous class " proving " they haven 't completely lost their confrontational electro @-@ rock streak " , considered too much of it " pedestrian , anodyne and utterly unremarkable " , and wondered " why they ever ditched the near @-@ perfect mid- ' 90s FM rock of " Stupid Girl " . " BBC Music writer Tom <unk> felt that the band 's relocation to L.A. made " no discernible difference to the band 's sound " but that " despite occasional lapses into overproduced mess , the surprise here is their enthusiasm . " Similarly , Jamie Carson of Clash disapproved of the production , calling it " <unk> " and " annoying " , and Mark Davison of No Ripcord remarked that " for all the interesting noises that the band have come up with ... the production really doesn 't do them any favours , cramming them into a fairly narrow space and stripping them almost entirely of any sense of atmosphere " , concluding that the album is nonetheless " enjoyable , and will probably go down better than their last two releases . " 
 Not Your Kind of People was listed at number 44 on Rolling Stone 's list of the top 50 albums of 2012 . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States , Not Your Kind of People was released exclusively through iTunes during its first week , and debuted at number 17 on the Billboard 200 with 19 @,@ 000 digital copies sold in its first week . In its second week , the album rose to number 13 with sales of over 22 @,@ 000 copies . As of June 2016 , the album has sold 98 @,@ 000 copies in the US . In the United Kingdom , it became the band 's fifth top @-@ 10 studio album when it entered the UK Albums Chart at number 10 with first @-@ week sales of 8 @,@ 310 copies . The album also debuted at number 33 on the Japanese Oricon chart , selling 1 @,@ 983 copies . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Garbage . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of the deluxe edition of Not Your Kind of People . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Playtex = 
 Playtex is an American brand name for undergarments , baby products , gloves , feminine products and sunscreen . It was founded in 1947 , when International Latex Corporation ( ILC ) created a division named Playtex to produce and sell latex products . Playtex was the first to advertise undergarments on national television in 1955 and the first to show a woman wearing only a bra from the waist @-@ up in a commercial in 1977 . 
 Playtex @-@ branded tampons were introduced in the 1960s and became the primary competition to incumbent Tampax . Playtex invented the plastic tampon applicator in 1973 . It was one of the tampon manufacturers that were sued for aggressively advertising over @-@ absorbent tampons , which led to toxic shock syndrome . 
 Playtex was acquired by Esmark in 1975 , and then by Beatrice Foods in 1985 . A year later it was acquired for $ 1 @.@ 25 billion and its cosmetics brands were sold to Revlon . In 1988 , Playtex split into two companies , Playtex Apparel Inc. and Playtex Products LLC . Playtex Apparel was sold to Sara Lee in 1991 , and to HanesBrands in 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Abram Nathaniel <unk> founded Playtex 's predecessor , the International Latex Corporation ( ILC ) , in 1932 to produce latex products , like bathing caps , swimwear and baby pants . ILC moved to Dover , Delaware , in 1939 , making it the first large , non @-@ agricultural business in the city . 
 ILC did not produce apparel for adults until the introduction of the Living Girdle in 1940 , after patenting a method of manufacturing latex girdles that would not tear at the seams if they had a small tear or hole . The Living Girdle was advertised with images of mobility and comfort , such as women playing tennis or leaping while wearing it , though the solid rubber girdle was actually very uncomfortable . 
 During World War II , the bombing of Pearl Harbor and the Japanese invasion of Malaysia cut off Allied manufacturers from their largest sources of latex . As supplies ran out and demand for consumer products fell , ILC halted production ; sales would not resume until 1946 . The company almost went out of business during the war , so it created an industrial division to find government and military applications for latex . Playtex was founded in 1947 as one of four divisions ILC re @-@ organized into . Its name was a portmanteau of " play " and " latex " , reflecting its focus on latex products . Playtex 's marketing in the post @-@ war era was influential in creating the shift from custom @-@ tailored undergarments to manufactured sizes . For example , the company introduced large floor displays with fitting charts , so women could find the right size without a custom fitting . 
 In 1954 , ILC was sold to Stanley Warner Corporation for $ 15 million ( $ 132 million in modern dollars ) . The following year , it was the first to advertise under @-@ garments on network television . In 1962 , the industrial division of Playtex was awarded a contract to develop space suits for the Apollo mission to the moon . Two years prior to the 1969 moon landing that used its latex suits , Playtex 's industrial division was spun off , eventually becoming ILC Dover . 
 Playtex created a consumer products subsidiary , Playtex Products Inc . , in 1960 , which produced baby products , tampons and other consumer goods . It introduced and patented the first plastic tampon applicator in 1973 . By 1975 , the five largest tampon manufacturers began competing with multimillion @-@ dollar advertising budgets and Playtex became the primary competitor to market @-@ leader Tampax . Playtex introduced a scented tampon that was advertised with the slogan , " When you 're wearing a tampon you don 't worry about odor . But should you ? " It added a warning label saying that some women may experience irritation from the chemicals after complaints were raised by Planned Parenthood . Tampon manufacturers , including Playtex , were sued for aggressively advertising and competing over absorbency , when some studies found that excessive absorbency leads to toxic shock syndrome . In 1985 , a judge offered to reduce an $ 11 million verdict against Playtex , if they admitted their super @-@ plus tampons were killing women and recalled them . 
 = = = Joel Smilow era = = = 
 Joel Smilow became chief executive officer ( CEO ) of Playtex in 1969 and was associated with the company through five owners . The company was acquired by Esmark in 1975 for $ 210 million ( $ 924 million in modern dollars ) . 
 By the early 1980s , Playtex controlled 25 percent of the market for bras , giving it the largest market @-@ share in the industry . In 1982 Playtex acquired the skin and hair products brand , <unk> Enterprises Inc . , for $ 28 @.@ 3 million . ( $ 69 @.@ 4 million in modern dollars ) . Three years later Esmark sold Playtex to Beatrice Foods . Four years later an investor group led by Smilow bought Playtex for $ 1 @.@ 25 billion ( $ 2 @.@ 7 billion in modern dollars ) . To help fund the acquisition , the company 's cosmetics brands , Max Factor , <unk> and <unk> , were sold to Revlon for $ 345 million . ( $ 690 million in modern dollars ) . 
 The following year , the National Association of Broadcasters ( NAB ) relaxed rules regarding partial nudity on television , which previously forced undergarment manufacturers to use mannequins in their commercials , despite bathing suits and equally revealing swimwear being allowed . Playtex was the first to advertise with a live model wearing only a bra from the waist up . This attracted criticisms from members of the American Family Association and the Eagle Forum . The New York Times called the ads , " totally inoffensive " and CBS 's spokesman said they were " well done , tasteful and not exploitative . " 
 Ownership of the remaining apparel and consumer products divisions were split among the company 's leadership ( 28 percent ) , BCI Holdings ( 20 percent ) , Drexel Burnham ( 19 percent ) and institutional investors ( 33 percent ) . The following year the company attempted to sell the Family Products division to Johnson and Johnson but the deal fell through . 
 In 1988 Playtex split into two companies , Playtex Apparel and Playtex Family Products , in a series of financial transactions totaling $ 1 @.@ 3 billion . The transactions allowed Smilow to buy out other Playtex shareholders and put ownership of the brand into two separate investment groups that were owned by Smilow and other Playtex executives . In 1990 Playtex Products acquired cosmetics brand Maybelline for $ 300 million . ( $ 543 million in modern dollars ) . The next year Smilow sold Playtex Apparel to the Sara Lee Corporation , transferring the Bali , Hanes , and Cross Your Heart brands for $ 571 million , ( $ 992 million in modern dollars ) but keeping the Playtex Family Products Corporation . 
 In November of that year , Sara Lee also bought a 25 percent stake in Playtex Family Products for $ 62 @.@ 5 million . ( $ 109 million in modern dollars ) . Playtex Products Inc. went public in 1994 . In 1995 , another 40 percent of Playtex Products Inc. was sold to Haas Wheat & Harrison Investment Partners for $ 180 million ( $ 280 million in modern dollars ) . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 Playtex Products continued to erode Tampax 's ' market share throughout the late 20th century . The two companies had divided the market almost evenly by the late 1990s . Both makers increased profits primarily by reducing the tampon count per box , and prepared to enter emerging markets , particularly in Asia , where many women still used homemade pads . In 1997 Procter & Gamble ( P & G ) , makers of Always sanitary napkins and <unk> , bought <unk> for $ 1 @.@ 25 billion , its largest acquisition up to that point , returning to the tampon sector almost two decades after pulling Rely from the market over Toxic Shock Syndrome concerns . 
 Due to its strong advantage among younger women , and baby boomers reaching menopause , Playtex continued to gain market share on Tampax . After extensive market research , Tampax reversed that trend with the 2002 introduction of Pearl , with an applicator designed to be as visually appealing as it was functional , and making the brand once again appealing to teens . 
 Playtex responded by litigating . In one suit , it alleged patent infringement over Pearl 's applicator design . It also alleged that advertising claiming Tampax Pearl had better leakage protection and comfort than Gentle Glide was false . Playtex won a verdict prohibiting Tampax from making claims of superiority , until the decision was reversed in 2007 , when Tampax made improvements in materials and manufacturing . 
 In 2006 , Sara Lee spun off its clothing sector into HanesBrands Inc . , which now runs the Playtex apparel business . The next year Playtex Products acquired the Hawaiian Tropic sunscreen company for $ 83 million . Later that year Playtex Products was acquired by Energizer Holdings for $ 1 @.@ 16 billion . Playtex Products was sued in 2008 , when a mother accused the company of not adequately disclosing their baby bottles contained bisphenol A. After Canada considered banning the chemical , the company took it out of their bottles the following year . In 2008 , Playtex Products was acquired by Energizer Holdings . 
 In 2013 , the Playtex intimate apparel brand launched a $ 10 million integrated marketing campaign called " Be Uniquely You . " This 360 rebranding included new bra styles and packaging and a strong presence in social media and national TV ads . The new campaign was created by <unk> NYC , their primary advertising agency since 2002 . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The Playtex trademark is owned by Playtex Marketing Corp. in the United States and Canada . They license the trademark to HBI Branded Apparel Enterprise ( a subsidiary of Hanesbrands ) for Playtex @-@ branded apparel and Playtex Products Inc ( a subsidiary of Energizer Holdings ) for baby products , gloves and feminine products . Hanesbrands and Energizer Holdings each own a fifty percent interest in Playtex Marketing Corp. Hanesbrands also owns the rights to the brand name for use with apparel internationally , except in Europe and South Africa , where <unk> Apparel ( itself acquired by Hanes in 2014 ) sells Playtex @-@ branded apparel products . Playtex Products LLC is managed under the Personal Care Division of Energizer Holdings . 
 = = Products = = 
 According to Energizer Holdings ' 2012 annual report , Playtex Products LLC is the largest producer of household gloves , hand wipes and sunscreen , as well as the second largest producer of tampons in the US . The best @-@ selling Playtex tampon is the Gentle Glide brand , which was first introduced in 1973 . It also manufactures the Playtex Sport tampon , which targets young athletes . Both brands are sold in regular , super and super @-@ plus absorbency . Playtex had a 29 percent share of a $ 550 million market for tampons in 1994 and a 30 percent share of a $ 780 million market by 2000 . 
 Historically baby products were a small portion of Playtex Products ' revenues , but by 2000 they made up 38 percent of the company 's revenues . As of that year it had a 60 percent share of the market for " <unk> cups " and an 84 percent share of the market for disposable baby @-@ bottle liners . Other baby products include <unk> Baby <unk> , Baby Magic toiletries ( until 2007 ) , and Diaper Genie . Playtex Products also manufactures the Banana Boat and Hawaiian Tropic sunscreen brands , household gloves , diaper pails , cleansing cloths and the <unk> @-@ Pro and Binky pacifiers . 
 Playtex @-@ branded apparel products sold by Hanesbrands include bras , panties and shapewear . According to Hanesbrands , Playtex is the fourth largest brand by revenue in its portfolio . The brand has the strongest loyalty among customers who prioritize fit . As of 2002 , Playtex was the second most popular brand of bras . In addition to panties and shapewear , Playtex bra brands include : 
 Cross Your Heart 
 Eighteen @-@ hour bra 
 Playtex Secrets 
 Full support 
 Everyday basics 
 The company has been producing and marketing the Cross Your Heart bra since 1954 under the slogan that it " lifts and separates , " a phrase that is now well known in popular culture . The Eighteen Hour bra has been marketed on the premise of comfort since the 1970s . 
 = Solo ( Boyd novel ) = 
 Solo is a James Bond continuation novel written by William Boyd . It was published in the UK by Jonathan Cape on 26 September 2013 in hardback , e @-@ book and audio editions , and in the US by HarperCollins on 8 October 2013 . 
 The plot centres on Bond 's mission to the civil war in the fictional country of Zanzarim — a thinly veiled version of Biafra during the Nigerian Civil War — where he meets the local MI6 contact , Efua Blessing Ogilvy @-@ Grant , and a Rhodesian mercenary , Kobus Breed . After being shot by Ogilvy @-@ Grant , Bond tracks both people to Washington on a revenge mission , finally establishing that Breed is drug trafficking heroin into the US . 
 Boyd closely based his version of the Bond character on Fleming 's , and eschewed any of the film versions . The novel is set in 1969 — six years after Fleming 's last work was set — and Bond is 45 years old . Boyd was raised in Nigeria and used his experiences during the civil war to provide the location for the novel . He has been a Bond fan since his youth and , in preparation for writing the novel he read all the Bond stories in chronological order . It took 18 months to write the novel , with some friction between Boyd and the Fleming estate over the portrayal of Bond . 
 Solo received mixed reviews , with a number of critics pointing to the convoluted and <unk> plot . Other critics saw the book as being equal with , or superior to , Fleming 's stronger novels . The book sold well , appearing in the top ten @-@ selling book lists in the UK . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After celebrating his 45th birthday alone at The Dorchester , Bond is sent to Zanzarim to bring a speedy end to the civil war in the country which has seen the delta region of the country split to form the Democratic Republic of <unk> . Before leaving for Africa , Bond visits Gabriel Adeka — the rebel leader 's brother — who runs AfriKIN , a London @-@ based charity who send aid to <unk> children ; Gabriel tells Bond that he is not in contact with his brother Solomon , as the pair have fallen out . 
 On his arrival in Zanzarim , Bond is aided by a local agent who introduces herself as Efua Blessing Ogilvy @-@ Grant . The two travel from the capital city to the rebel enclave , but are attacked shortly before reaching their destination and taken captive by Kobus Breed , a mercenary assisting the rebels . The group are attacked on their return journey and Ogilvy @-@ Grant goes missing in the confusion , while Bond escapes . 
 Bond proceeds to the enclave , where he is met by Breed , who accepts Bond 's cover as a journalist . Bond meets Solomon Adeka and realises that the leader will shortly die of cancer : his mission to kill Adeka is needless . Bond sees supply flights of arms and equipment coming into the country , all funded by billionaire Hulbert Linck ; the aeroplanes all show the AfriKIN name on the fuselage . When Adeka dies a few days later , Bond tries to leave the country on one of the supply flights , but is confronted by Breed and Blessing , who both shoot him and leave him to die . 
 Bond is saved by a journalist he befriended and returns to the UK , where he spends time in a military hospital . After discharging himself , he decides to go on a revenge mission against Breed and Ogilvy @-@ Grant . Discovering AfriKIN has relocated to Washington DC , Bond travels to the US and tracks down both of them at the AfriKIN offices . While conducting surveillance against the company , Bond is briefly detained by Brigham Leiter — nephew of Felix — of the CIA , who explains Ogilvy @-@ Grant also works for the CIA . 
 Bond meets Ogilvy @-@ Grant , who assures him that she shot to wound him in order that Breed would not shoot them both . The following day Bond watches a mercy flight bringing in maimed and injured <unk> children ; he dines alone and returns to his hotel to find that Breed has killed Ogilvy @-@ Grant . 
 Bond attacks the house where Breed is staying with the children , and incapacitates the mercenary , leaving him for dead . He establishes that the children are being used as drug mules to smuggle raw heroin into the country and locates Solomon Adeka , who had not been killed in Africa , but been turned into a heroin addict in order to control him . Adeka 's older brother had been killed in London , ensuring Solomon became chief of the tribe whose lands held massive amounts of oil : as he was an addict , these rights were signed away in favour of Hulbert Linck . Linck was killed by the CIA during the raid on the house . 
 = = Characters and themes = = 
 The central character of the novel is James Bond , the fictional MI6 agent created by Ian Fleming . The author , William Boyd modelled his version of the character on Fleming 's version , which Boyd identified as being very different from the version seen in the films . Solo is set in 1969 — six years after Fleming 's last work was set — and the novel begins with Bond celebrating his 45th birthday . Boyd altered aspects of the character , making him " an older , wiser Bond " ' ; while having coffee on the King 's Road , Bond 's " advancing age lends an undertone of poignancy to his almost detached observation of the bra @-@ less , mini @-@ skirted cavalcade " . Boyd 's version of Bond is " more impulsive , less emotionally guarded , and also more sadistic " than Fleming 's , and he has the facility for extreme violence : Bond 's " casual sexism has gone , to be replaced by a flaring lust that teeters on the edge of being out of control , and has to be reined in " . 
 The primary antagonist of the novel is Kobus Breed , a mercenary with a disfigured face and a permanently weeping eye who had previously served with the Rhodesian Light Infantry in Matabeleland ; Olen Steinhauer , writing in The New York Times thinks the scarred villain to be " an obligatory nod toward the requirements of the Bond formula " . Some writers are unimpressed with Breed ; Robert Crampton of The Sunday Times thinks that the character " feels more like a henchman than a proper power @-@ crazed villain . He has menace , but no ambition . You wait for the evil genius to turn up — but he never does " , while David Sexton in the London Evening Standard thinks the character " lacks charisma " , and David Connett in the Sunday Express considers him " a colourless character in comparison with factual and fictional counterparts " . The journalist Geoffrey Wansell in the Daily Mail disagreed and Breed , along with a second villain , millionaire Hulbert Linck , were as strong as some of Fleming 's villains ; Steinhauer also thought that the novel 's villains were realistic , " motivated by simple greed yet clever enough to be legitimately dangerous " . There are two main female characters in Solo — a horror film actress , Bryce Fitzjohn and the local MI6 contact Efua Blessing Ogilvy @-@ Grant ; rather like many of Fleming 's female characters , both are " determined females who are not to be patronised by Bond " . 
 The main theme of the novel is revenge . Bond is stopped from leaving Zanzarim by Breed and subsequently shot and badly wounded by Ogilvy @-@ Grant ; he tracks down the pair to Washington and attempts to get his revenge from the pair . According to the Sunday Business Post , " this is where the author comes into his own , along with our hero , and it 's all taken up a notch . " Associated with the revenge is treachery : it is a subject that recurred through Fleming 's works , and Boyd uses it to provide a motive for Bond 's mission of revenge . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 31 March 2012 Boyd announced at the Oxford Literary Festival that he was working on a novel set in Africa . Boyd had lived in Nigeria — " where his mother was a teacher and his father a doctor " — during the Nigerian Civil War , which " had a profound effect on him . " On 11 April 2012 the Fleming estate announced that Boyd would write a Bond novel to follow Jeffery Deaver 's 2011 novel Carte Blanche . The civil war , over the attempted secession by Biafra from Nigeria , was the location for Solo , although Boyd renamed this as the fictional Zanzarim . 
 On 15 April 2013 Boyd announced the book 's title at the London Book Fair . The announcement was part of the " Author of the Day " event at the English Pen Literary Café . Selected press were invited to the event and were given a brief opportunity to question Boyd about the book 's title . Boyd believes the short title is " strikingly apt " for the novel . He remarked that " titles are very important " to him , and that as soon as he " wrote down Solo on a sheet of paper I saw its potential . Not only did it fit the theme of the novel perfectly , it 's also a great punchy word , instantly and internationally comprehensible , graphically alluring and , as an extra bonus , it 's strangely Bondian in the sense that we might be subliminally aware of the ' 00 ' of ' 007 ' lurking just behind those juxtaposed O 's of SOLO " . 
 For background Boyd read all the Bond stories in chronological order ; and had researched Fleming and the literary Bond 's background . Boyd was a child when his father introduced him to Fleming 's works . As a result , Boyd found himself also becoming fascinated with Ian Fleming . He told reporters that he was interested in Bond as a human being . " Bond is not just a superhero . He has flaws , he has weaknesses , he makes mistakes . ... That was Fleming 's genius . " The novel is set in 1969 when Bond is 45 ; Boyd intentionally picked the year , further adding that " there are no gimmicks , it 's a real spy story . " Boyd criticised how the filmmakers have portrayed Bond onscreen as a " cartoon character " ; he also believes that Bond should be " troubled and a massive boozer . " The novel reflects Boyd 's view , where Bond " drinks enough to float a boat . He drinks so much you wonder that he ever has the time or inclination to do anything else " . 
 The writing process took 18 months and Boyd was required to run synopses and drafts through the Fleming estate , a process he described as " benevolent surveillance " . The process was not always smooth , and the author had a number of arguments with the estate over the portrayal of Bond : " they were concerned about Bond being seen as an assassin , but I would argue Bond is sent on an assassination mission in at least four Fleming books " , with further issues over Bond 's relationship with M. 
 Boyd described writing the book as " tremendous fun " and a " once in a lifetime challenge " , but admitted that he had to take it " really , really seriously . " After completing the writing process , Boyd commented that he did not " attempt to write as pastiche Fleming novel ... it 's my own voice ; I 'm dealing with things and subjects I am interested in ... it is very much my novel ; it just features these characters invented by Fleming . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Solo was launched on 25 September 2013 at the Dorchester Hotel . Seven copies of the book were signed by Boyd , were collected by seven Jensen Interceptors and were then flown by British Airways to Amsterdam , Edinburgh , Zurich , Los Angeles , Delhi , Cape Town and Sydney . The book was released into the shops on 26 September 2013 ; the hardcover book was published by Jonathan Cape and was 336 pages long and cost £ 18 @.@ 99 . An e @-@ book edition was also released , as was an audio book , narrated by Dominic West . The hardcover edition was released in the US by HarperCollins on 8 October 2013 for $ 26 @.@ 99 . 
 The jacket was designed by Suzanne Dean , the creative director at Random House . The book 's dust jacket featured die @-@ cut bullet holes , while the hardcover binding featured " burn marks " under the holes . Dean commented that she took inspiration from the 1960s in her design , and was influenced by the graphic designers Saul Bass , Paul Rand and Alvin Lustig . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The novel sold nearly 9 @,@ 000 copies in its first week , although that was 48 % down on Deaver 's 2011 novel Carte Blanche , and even further behind Sebastian Faulks 's 2008 book Devil May Care . By 10 October the London Evening Standard listed the books as number one on the London 's Bestsellers list , and in the two weeks of 5 and 12 October 2013 was shown as number 3 in the UK fiction best sellers list , dropping to fourth place on 19 October 2013 . 
 Solo received mixed reviews . A number of reviewers , including Robert McCrum in The Guardian , David Mills in The Sunday Times and Olen Steinhauer in The New York Times , all considered the book to be equal with , or superior to , Fleming 's stronger novels . Steinhauer considered that it was Boyd 's description of the Zanzarim civil war that gave the novel its " greatest power " , but he also thought there was a " neat metafictional trick " by connecting Bond 's wartime experiences with 30 Assault Unit — a British Commando unit developed by Fleming . The connection was also picked up by Geoffrey Wansell , reviewing for the Daily Mail , who saw the tribute paid to Fleming as a " masterstroke " , in a novel that he thought " brings back the real Bond , triumphantly " . Writing in The Guardian , Richard Williams saw Boyd using some similar phrasing of Fleming 's , while also including " gestures of independence " with his own ideas . The result , Williams considers , is a story that " entertains far more than it exasperates " . 
 Much of the criticism about the novel focuses on the plot ; Jon Stock , writing in The Daily Telegraph , thought that although Boyd used details in the same way Fleming did that would appeal to Bond aficionados , the book was based on " a curiously <unk> plot " , which was also " convoluted " . The National 's Nick Leech also noted the use of details , but considered that this led to " a pedantic , meandering narrative " which led to " an underwhelming finale " . Writing in the London Evening Standard , David Sexton agreed , calling the book a " rather inattentive novel " , that was a " lame outing " in the Bond canon . David Connett was another who saw flaws in the novel , calling it " anaemic stuff " , although it was " far superior to the last effort to breathe life into a Bond novel by Jeffery Deaver " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 On 30 September 2013 Solo was the chosen work for Book at Bedtime on BBC Radio 4 . The work was read by Paterson Joseph ; the book was adapted by Libby Spurrier and was broadcast in ten episodes . 
 = Middlesbrough F.C. = 
 Middlesbrough Football Club ( / <unk> / ) is a professional association football club based in Middlesbrough , North Yorkshire , England . Formed in 1876 , they have played at the Riverside Stadium since 1995 , their second ground since turning professional in 1889 . They played at Ayresome Park for ninety @-@ two years , from 1903 to 1995 . 
 They were one of the founding members of the Premier League in 1992 . The club 's main rivals are Sunderland and Newcastle United . There is also a rivalry with Yorkshire club Leeds United . 
 The club 's highest league finish to date was third in the 1913 – 14 season and they have only spent two seasons outside of the Football League 's top two divisions . The club came close to folding in 1986 after experiencing severe financial difficulties before it was saved by a consortium led by then board member and later chairman Steve Gibson . Middlesbrough were deducted three points for failing to fulfil a fixture against Blackburn Rovers in the 1996 – 97 Premier League season and subsequently relegated . They were promoted the following season and spent eleven seasons in the top division before being relegated again in 2009 . 
 Middlesbrough won the League Cup in 2004 , the club 's first and only major trophy . They reached the 2006 UEFA Cup Final , but were beaten by Spanish side Sevilla . After seven years in the Championship , Middlesbrough secured promotion to the Premier League in 2016 after finishing in second place . 
 The club 's traditional kit is red with white detailing . The various crests throughout the club 's history , the most recent of which was adopted in 2007 , incorporate a lion rampant . 
 = = History = = 
 They won the FA Amateur Cup in 1895 and again in 1898 . The club turned professional in 1889 , but reverted to amateur status in 1892 . They turned professional permanently in 1899 . After three seasons , they won promotion to the First Division , where they would remain for the next 22 years . 
 In 1903 , the club moved to Ayresome Park , their home for the next 92 years . In 1905 , the club sanctioned the transfer of Alf Common for £ 1 @,@ 000 , a record fee . Over the next few years , their form fluctuated greatly , rising to sixth in 1907 – 08 before dropping to 17th two seasons later . The club rose to their highest league finish to date , third , in 1913 – 14 . The First World War soon intervened and football was suspended . Before league football resumed , Middlesbrough won the Northern Victory League , but the team were unable to maintain their previous form and finished the 1919 – 20 season in mid @-@ table . They remained in the First Division for the next few seasons , but were relegated in 1923 – 24 after finishing bottom , 10 points adrift of their nearest rivals . Three seasons later , they won the Division Two title . During that season , debutant George <unk> , who had signed from Third Division North side Durham City the previous season , finished with a record 59 league goals , which included nine hat tricks . He would continue as top scorer for each of the next ten seasons . Their tenure back in the top flight lasted only one season , and the club were relegated . They were promoted at the first attempt in 1928 – 29 , winning another Second Division title . The club remained in the First Division until 1954 . 
 The decade before the war saw the emergence of Wilf Mannion and George Hardwick , both of whom would go on to become England internationals in the years ahead . Middlesbrough climbed to fourth in the last full season before the Second World War and were expected to challenge for the title next season , but the war intervened . After the war , the club was unable to recover the form of the previous seasons and hovered around mid @-@ table and exited in the early rounds of the FA Cup . Soon afterwards the team began to falter , eventually suffering relegation in 1953 – 54 . This was the start of a 20 @-@ year spell outside the top division , but saw the emergence of one of the club 's top goalscorers , Brian Clough , who scored 204 goals in 222 games , before he left for Sunderland . Over that period , Middlesbrough maintained reasonable progress in the Second Division but were never serious contenders for promotion . After a fourth @-@ place finish in 1962 – 63 , the club endured a steady decline and were relegated to the Third Division for the first time in their history in 1966 . 
 New manager Stan Anderson returned the club to the second flight at the first attempt . Middlesbrough would not finish below ninth during the next eight seasons . By 1974 , Jack Charlton had taken over as manager and guided the team back to the top flight . They ensured promotion as early as 23 March , and with eight games of the season left , they became runaway champions , finishing with a record 65 points . Middlesbrough won their first silverware as a professional side in the 1975 – 76 season , lifting the Anglo @-@ Scottish Cup in its inaugural season after a two @-@ legged final win over Fulham . 
 The club experienced severe financial difficulties during the mid @-@ 1980s . Middlesbrough were dropping down the table , and finished 19th in the 1984 – 85 season . In April 1986 the club had to borrow £ 30 @,@ 000 from the PFA to pay wages . The final game of the season saw Middlesbrough relegated to the Third Division again . That summer , the club called in the Provisional Liquidator and shortly afterwards , the club was wound up and the gates to Ayresome Park were padlocked . Without the £ 350 @,@ 000 capital required for Football League registration , a new rule , it seemed inevitable that the club would fold permanently . However , Steve Gibson , a member of the board at the time , brought together a consortium and with 10 minutes to spare before the deadline , they completed their registration with the Football League for the 1986 – 87 season . Following the registration came both a change of club crest and a change of the official company name to Middlesbrough Football and Athletic Club ( 1986 ) Ltd . 
 Over the next two seasons , Middlesbrough gained successive promotions into Division Two and then into Division One . The next season though , they came straight back down to Division Two , and with it came the then British transfer record move of Gary Pallister to Manchester United for £ 2 @.@ 3 million . Despite constant promotion and relegation , Middlesbrough were founding members of the FA Premier League for the 1992 – 93 season . 
 Player @-@ manager Bryan Robson , from Manchester United , took charge in 1994 and Middlesbrough were brought back into national attention . Following promotion to the Premier League and high @-@ profile purchases like diminutive Brazilian Juninho , many considered Middlesbrough were on the way up . However , a difficult 1996 – 97 season was compounded by a deduction of three points imposed just after Christmas , as punishment for the club 's failure to fulfil a fixture against Blackburn , which ultimately resulted in relegation . Without the points deduction , the club would have had enough points to avoid the drop . At the same time , the club managed to reach both the League and FA Cup finals for the first time , but lost out in both . Despite being in the second tier they were again runners up in the League Cup final the next year . 
 Despite losing high profile players Fabrizio Ravanelli and Juninho due to relegation , Middlesbrough were promoted back to the Premiership at the first attempt in 1998 . The following season saw them settle well and they enjoyed a 12 @-@ game unbeaten run midway through 1998 – 99 , including a 3 – 2 win at Old Trafford in January during which they took a 3 – 0 lead . It was United 's only home defeat during their treble winning season . Middlesbrough continued to stay secure in mid @-@ table the following season , thanks mainly to the goals of Hamilton Ricard and the signings of big name players such as Paul Ince and Christian <unk> . In 2000 – 01 they had a brief relegation scare that was solved with the arrival of Terry Venables as co @-@ manager , and a 3 – 0 win away at Arsenal in April was the team 's best result . The trend of buying European stars continued with the acquisitions of Christian <unk> and Alen <unk> . 
 Bryan Robson left the club before the start of 2001 – 02 season , having served as manager for seven years , and was replaced by Manchester United assistant coach Steve McClaren . The following seasons saw Premiership security maintained as Middlesbrough slowly improved and were seen as a tough side to beat when playing at the Riverside Stadium . During McClaren 's reign , Middlesbrough achieved their highest Premier league placing of 7th in the 2004 – 05 season . 
 The 2003 – 04 season was the most successful in the club 's history as they finally won a major trophy after beating Bolton 2 – 1 in the League Cup final under manager Steve McClaren . This success also ensured that Middlesbrough would qualify for Europe – the UEFA Cup – for the first time , in which they reached the last 16 . UEFA Cup qualification was achieved for the second consecutive year after a dramatic 1 – 1 away draw with Manchester City thanks to a late penalty save from Mark Schwarzer in the last game of the season . 
 Middlesbrough reached the 2006 UEFA Cup Final in Eindhoven , following two comebacks from 3 – 0 down in the rounds preceding it , but lost 4 – 0 to Sevilla . Following the cup final , McClaren left to head up the England team , and captain Gareth Southgate took over . Despite not having the coaching qualifications , he was allowed to continue after receiving special dispensation . During the 2007 – 08 season , Southgate broke Middlesbrough 's record transfer fee , paying £ 13 @.@ 6 million for Brazilian striker Afonso Alves . Southgate 's first two seasons saw the club finish in 12th and 13th places . He oversaw the club reaching the quarter finals of the FA Cup for three seasons , but the club was relegated to the Football League Championship on the last day of the 2008 – 09 season . Southgate was sacked in October 2009 , and replaced by Gordon Strachan . At the time of Southgate 's dismissal , Boro were fourth in the Championship and only one point away from the automatic promotion spot , but their form under Strachan was significantly worse and they finished mid @-@ table . 
 Despite starting the 2010 – 11 campaign as promotion favourites , the club endured a disappointing start to the season securing only one point in five away games . Having slipped to 20th in the Championship following a home defeat to rivals Leeds , Strachan resigned on 18 October . A week later , Tony Mowbray was confirmed as the new manager . Having staved off the threat of relegation , Mowbray successfully transformed Boro 's fortunes , eventually guiding them to a top @-@ half finish . Boro ended the season top of the form table after four consecutive league wins , the first such run since 1998 . However , despite a magnificent first half of the season , Boro failed to capitalise , and finished seventh in the league , missing out on the play @-@ offs by five points and one position . 
 Following a poor run of form of two wins in 12 games in the 2013 – 14 campaign , on 21 October 2013 , nearly three years after his arrival , Tony Mowbray left the club with immediate effect . <unk> <unk> , a former Spanish defender and assistant coach at Real Madrid to José Mourinho became the new Middlesbrough manager on 13 November 2013 , signing a two @-@ year contract . He became the first non @-@ British manager at the club , which finished the season 12th in the final league standings . 
 In his first full season in charge Middlesbrough finished fourth and thus qualified for the 2015 Football League play @-@ offs . After seeing off Brentford 5 – 1 on aggregate in the semi @-@ final , the club lost 0 – 2 to Norwich City at the Wembley Stadium in the final . Under <unk> 's tutelage Patrick Bamford , on loan from Chelsea , won the Championship Player of the Year award for the 2014 – 15 Football League Championship . Middlesbrough were promoted back to the Premier League after finishing second in the Championship in the 2015 / 16 season , drawing 1 @-@ 1 with Brighton & Hove Albion on the final day of the season . 
 = = = Overall = = = 
 Seasons spent at Level 1 of the football league system : 60 
 Seasons spent at Level 2 of the football league system : 44 
 Seasons spent at Level 3 of the football league system : 2 
 Seasons spent at Level 4 of the football league system : 0 
 As of season 2015 / 16 . 
 = = Colours and crest = = 
 Middlesbrough 's original home kit upon election to the Football League in 1899 was a white home shirt with blue shorts and they did not adopt their colours of red and white until later that season . Previous kits included a white shirt with a blue and white polka dotted collar from around 1889 . The Middlesbrough kit has remained broadly the same over the years with a red shirt and socks and either red or white shorts . The distinctive broad white stripe across the chest was introduced by Jack Charlton in 1973 ( following an attempt to change the home shirt to a Leeds United @-@ style white shirt ) and brought back for a one @-@ off in 1997 – 98 and then again for the 2000 – 01 and 2004 – 05 seasons due to popular demand . The club subsequently announced in December 2007 that the club would allow the fans to decide via an online and text vote whether the white band should return for the following season . On 8 January 2008 the club announced that the white band was to return , with 77 @.@ 4 % of voters voting in its favour , with the fans to choose the final shirt design from a selection of three designs , of which the winner was announced on 7 May 2008 . 
 The Middlesbrough crest has gone through four changes since the formation of the club . Initially , the badge was simply the town of Middlesbrough 's crest with a red lion instead of a blue lion in order to fit in with the club 's colours . Following the adoption of the white band on the shirts in 1973 , only the red lion remained with the letters " <unk> " underneath in red . This was further adapted following the reformation of the club in 1986 to a circular crest with the lion in the middle and the words " Middlesbrough Football Club 1986 " around the circle in order to reflect this new era . In 2007 , Middlesbrough changed their crest again , this time with the lion inside a shield and the words " Middlesbrough Football Club 1876 " underneath . The club stated that this was to reflect the club 's long history and not just their post @-@ liquidation status . 
 = = Kit information = = 
 = = Stadium = = 
 After formation in 1876 , and with the club still amateurs , Middlesbrough 's first two years of football were played at Albert Park in Middlesbrough . After seeing the damage being caused by players and supporters , the Park Committee ordered the club to find an alternate venue . The club moved to <unk> Hill , behind the former Middlesbrough College <unk> site , after agreeing to rent the land from its owner . However , two years later in 1880 , the owner increased the rent and the club decided to move . They moved into the <unk> Road Ground in 1882 , home at the time of Middlesbrough Cricket Club . The cricket club departed in 1893 – 94 to move to the <unk> Hill field , and Middlesbrough Football Club became sole users of the ground . 
 With the club 's growing size , and entry to the Football League , they had to move to a new ground in 1903 , Ayresome Park . It was designed by Archibald Leitch and would be the club 's home for the next 92 years . Following the Taylor Report in 1990 , the ground either needed modernising or the club needed a new stadium . The club decided on the latter , and moved out at the end of the 1994 – 95 season . It was used as a training ground during 1995 – 96 , before it was demolished in 1997 and a housing estate built in its place . The club now trains at a £ 7 million complex at <unk> Park , in Hurworth , on the outskirts of Darlington . 
 The Riverside Stadium , named by the supporters of the club after a vote , became the club 's home in 1995 . It was the first stadium to be built in line with the Taylor Report 's recommendations on all @-@ seater stadia for clubs in the top two divisions of the English football league system . It was originally a 30 @,@ 000 seater stadium , constructed at a cost of £ 16 million , before it was expanded in 1998 to a capacity of 35 @,@ 100 for an extra £ 5 million . 
 Since then , several reorganisations of the Riverside Stadium have taken place . At the start of the 2013 – 14 season , away fans were moved from behind the goal in the South stand to the South East corner , whilst home fans are now situated behind both goals to help create a better atmosphere inside the stadium . A giant TV screen was also installed at the back of the South @-@ East corner , replacing the older style scoreboards attached to the North and South stand roofs . For the start of the 2016 @-@ 17 season ( and return to the Premier League ) the club had to improve the stadium 's broadcasting facilities and floodlighting in order to meet current Premier League requirements . As a result of these changes , the current stadium capacity has been reduced to 33 @,@ 746 . The club also took the opportunity to move the main camera gantry to the back of the East stand where it will now face the main West stand . 
 Average attendances at Middlesbrough matches have fluctuated over the past several years , moving from a 2004 – 05 high average of 32 @,@ 012 to a low of 26 @,@ 092 in 2006 – 07 , then up again to 28 @,@ 428 in 2008 – 09 . Following relegation to the Championship attendances have dipped , although the crowd of 23 @,@ 451 which saw Middlesbrough 's first Championship game against Sheffield United represents far higher gates than is usual for the division , and indeed larger than those of some Premier League clubs . The club attracted an average of 24 @,@ 627 for their 2015 / 16 promotion season from the Championship to the Premier league . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Traditionally supporters come from Middlesbrough itself and towns in the immediate area . Middlesbrough have one of the highest proportions in Britain of locally born season ticket holders at 80 % , and one of the highest proportions of female fans at 20 % . A survey at the start of the 2007 – 08 season found Middlesbrough supporters were the seventh loudest set of fans in the Premier League . 
 Middlesbrough Official Supporters Club , which features its own team in the local football league , has links with supporters ' clubs across the globe . The largest supporters ' clubs include the Official Supporters ' Club , the Middlesbrough Disabled Supporters ' Association , Yarm Reds , Red Faction and Middlesbrough Supporters South . 
 Middlesbrough supporters ' main rivals are Sunderland ( with whom they contest the Tees – Wear derby ) , Newcastle United ( with whom they contest the Tyne – Tees derby ) , and Leeds United , a fact confirmed by <unk> 's 2004 survey , . Carlisle United see Middlesbrough as their biggest rivals , but Middlesbrough supporters have not reciprocated , as they do not see Carlisle as a top three rival . 
 The nickname <unk> was first used as a derogatory term by opposing supporters ; it relates to the industrial air pollution ( smog ) that used to hang over the town , but it was later used by Middlesbrough fans in a somewhat self @-@ deprecating manner before finally being adopted as a badge of pride by supporters of the club . An example of this can be seen on the banners carried to away games stating " <unk> on Tour " . Middlesbrough fans were notably praised by UEFA Chief Executive Lars @-@ Christer Olsson after their behaviour during the 2005 – 06 UEFA Cup campaign . He commended that : 
 You have the satisfaction of knowing that , although your team did not win the game , your supporters present in Eindhoven proved to the world that football fans can turn a match into a friendly , violence @-@ free celebration . 
 Middlesbrough fans had also been praised by Cleveland Police for their behaviour in previous rounds , particularly in the light of aggravation prior to and during the match at Roma . 
 = = Media relations = = 
 Middlesbrough were the first football club in the world to launch its own TV channel – Boro TV . The first broadcasts were tied to the club 's first ever major cup final appearance in 1997 , a full year ahead of Manchester United 's MUTV , which still claims to be the first in the world . The channel was the brainchild of then NTL marketing director , Peter Wilcock . The programme became synonymous with former Middlesbrough star Bernie Slaven and radio commentator Alastair Brownlee who <unk> to be as popular on TV as they were on radio . Its programmes were not live initially but were pre @-@ recorded and hosted by local radio / TV broadcaster & Boro fan , Dave Roberts . Boro TV went on to claim another first when in August 2001 it become the first English football club to broadcast time @-@ delayed full @-@ match footage of their league games on their own channel . Boro TV ran through NTL cable television until July 2005 . The club now show match highlights through a subscription @-@ based scheme on their official website . 
 Middlesbrough 's official matchday programme , <unk> , was Programme Monthly 's 2006 – 07 Programme of the Year . There are numerous other fanzines available , most notably Fly Me to the Moon , formed in September 1988 following Bruce Rioch 's quote to Tony Mowbray , stating " If I had to go to the moon I 'd want him by my side " . 
 = = Community = = 
 Middlesbrough Football Club in the Community ( <unk> ) was founded in 1995 by club chairman Steve Gibson and is one of the largest community @-@ based football schemes in the United Kingdom . It is run separately from the football club but receives support from both the club in terms of providing players , staff , stadium facilities and PR in the matchday programme and other publications , as well as support from other local organisations . 
 Since 2002 , the club and <unk> have also run the Middlesbrough Enterprise Academy , a scheme which helps local children improve their entrepreneurial skills and increase their awareness of business planning and finance . In March 2008 , plans were announced by the Premier League to roll out the scheme nationally amongst all Premier League clubs . 
 It was announced in December 2007 that Middlesbrough football club had carried out more community work during 2006 – 07 than any other Premier League club , rising from second place the previous year , with the club making 318 appearances – almost twice the Premier League average of 162 . They were in the top two for community appearances again in 2007 – 08 , with 374 – a 17 % increase on the previous season . 
 Middlesbrough 's mascot is Roary the Lion . The club runs Roary 's Children 's Charity Fund which purchases items for local children 's charities . 
 In 2009 , steel producer Corus Group announced the possibility that it would mothball its Teesside plant , with up to 4 @,@ 000 employees and contractors facing redundancy , after a consortium of steel magnates walked away from a 10 @-@ year deal . Middlesbrough Football Club helped with the " Save Our Steel " campaign by hosting dozens of steel workers and their families as they marched around the ground , promoted the campaign via the stadium 's PA system , scoreboards and in match day programmes , while players wore T @-@ shirts during warm @-@ ups promoting the campaign . Chairman Steve Gibson said : 
 " Middlesbrough Football Club exists for the community , for the people of Teesside — and the closure of the steel plants threatens to rip the heart out of our community . We cannot stand by and allow that to happen . We want the steelworkers and their families to know that we are behind them and will help their campaign in any way we can ... We like to think that the football club is the flagship of Teesside . Well this is our town and these are our people and we have to do what we can to help them . " 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Domestic = = = 
 = = = = League = = = = 
 Second Division / Division One / Championship : 
 Winners ( 4 ) : 1926 – 27 , 1928 – 29 , 1973 – 74 , 1994 – 95 
 Runners @-@ up ( 4 ) : 1901 – 02 , 1991 – 92 , 1997 – 98 , 2015 – 16 
 Play @-@ off winners ( 1 ) : 1987 – 88 
 Football League Third Division : 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1966 – 67 , 1986 – 87 
 Northern League : 
 Winners ( 3 ) : 1893 – 94 , 1894 – 95 , 1896 – 97 
 Runners @-@ up ( 3 ) : 1890 – 91 , 1891 – 92 , 1897 – 98 
 = = = = Cup = = = = 
 League Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2003 – 04 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1996 – 97 , 1997 – 98 
 FA Cup 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1996 – 97 
 FA Amateur Cup 
 Winners ( 2 ) : 1895 , 1898 
 Full Members Cup 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1990 
 FA Youth Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 2004 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1990 , 2003 
 = = = International = = = 
 UEFA Cup 
 Runners @-@ up ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 Anglo @-@ Scottish Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1976 
 Kirin Cup 
 Winners ( 1 ) : 1980 
 = = Club staff = = 
 As of 20 July 2016 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = = Out on loan = = = = 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Reserves and Academy = = = 
 = = Notable players = = 
 = = = Middlesbrough Legends = = = 
 These 10 players were voted for by fans as part of a campaign with the Evening Gazette . 
 = = = Top appearances = = = 
 These players made more than 430 appearances during their time at the club . The number in brackets indicates the number of appearances in all competitions . 
 = = = Top goalscorers = = = 
 These players scored more than 140 goals during their time with the club . The number in brackets indicates the number of goals scored in all competitions . 
 = = = Player of the Year award winners = = = 
 = = = Football League 100 Legends = = = 
 The Football League 100 Legends is a list of 100 legendary football players produced by The Football League in 1998 , to celebrate the 100th season of League football . 
 = = = English Football Hall of Fame = = = 
 The English Football Hall of Fame is housed at The National Football Museum in Preston , England . The Hall aims to celebrate and highlight the achievements of top English Footballers and Footballers who have played in England . These players appeared for or managed Middlesbrough at some point in their careers . 
 = = = Scottish Football Hall of Fame = = = 
 The following former Middlesbrough players and managers have been inducted into the Scottish Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Managers = = 
 The following are all the full @-@ time Middlesbrough managers since the club turned professional in 1899 . 
 = Government of the Han dynasty = 
 The Han dynasty ( 202 BC – 220 AD ) of ancient China was the second imperial dynasty of China , following the Qin dynasty ( 221 – 206 BC ) . It was divided into the periods of Former Han ( 202 BC – 9 AD ) and Later Han ( 25 – 220 AD ) , briefly interrupted by the Xin dynasty ( 9 – 23 AD ) of Wang Mang . The capital of Western Han was Chang 'an , and the capital of Eastern Han was Luoyang . The emperor headed the government , promulgating all written laws , serving as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces , and presiding as the chief executive official . He appointed all government officials who earned a salary of 600 bushels of grain or more ( though these salaries were largely paid in coin cash ) with the help of advisors who reviewed each nominee . The empress dowager could either be the emperor 's actual or symbolic mother , and was in practice more powerful than the emperor , as she could override his decisions . The emperor 's executive powers could also be practiced by any official upon whom he bestowed the Staff of Authority . These powers included the right to execute criminals without the imperial court 's permission . 
 Near the beginning of the dynasty , semi @-@ autonomous regional kings rivaled the emperor 's authority . This autonomy was greatly diminished when the imperial court enacted reforms following the threats to central control like the Rebellion of the Seven States . The End of the Han dynasty came about during a time of civil , military and religious upheaval , which resulted in the period of Three Kingdoms . 
 The highest officials in the central bureaucracy , who provided advisory , censorial , executive , and judicial roles in governing the empire , consisted of cabinet members known as the Excellencies , heads of large specialized ministries known as the Nine Ministers , and various metropolitan officials of the capital region . Distinguished salary @-@ ranks were granted to officials in the bureaucracy , nobles of the imperial family , concubines of the harem , and military officers of the armed forces . 
 Local government divisions , in descending order by size , were the province , commandery , county , and district . Local fiefs of the nobility included the kingdom , which was modeled largely upon the regular commandery , as well as the marquessate , modelled largely upon the regular county . Although the central government 's monopolies on salt , iron , and liquor eventually failed and were relinquished back to private production , the government successfully nationalized the issuing of coin currency through its imperial mint , which lasted from 113 BC until the end of the dynasty . The conscription system for commoners as non @-@ professional soldiers was reduced in size in favor of a volunteer army and a substitution tax by Eastern Han . A small professional standing army existed throughout Western and Eastern Han . During times of crisis , the volunteer army increased in size , but large militias were raised and certain officer titles were revived for temporary use . 
 = = Salaries = = 
 During the Han dynasty , the power a government official exercised was determined by his annual salary @-@ rank , measured in grain units known as dan ( <unk> , a unit of volume , approximately 35 litres ( 0 @.@ 99 US <unk> ) ) . However , approximately half an official 's salary in grain was made in payments of cash coins , the standard of which , after 119 BC , was the wushu ( 五銖 ) coin measuring 3 @.@ 2 g ( 0 @.@ 11 oz ) . The other half of an official 's salary consisted of unhusked grain and husked grain measured in hu ( <unk> , approximately 20 L / 676 oz ) ; since one hu of unhusked grain was equal to 100 coins and one hu of husked grain was equal to 160 coins , the conversion ratio for unhusked grain to husked grain was 10 to 6 ( see table below ) . The most senior officials in central government earned a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ dan salary . The officials who oversaw nine specialized ministries each earned the Fully 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan rank , while the magistrate of a county earned a 600 @-@ dan rank . Occasionally , emperors bestowed luxurious gifts of wine , foodstuffs , and silk clothes upon high officials . These gifts , in some generous cases , could equal as much as half the value of the officials ' standard annual salary . Aged officials were often retired from service and given a pension . Below is a table outlining salaries measured in coin cash , unhusked grain , and husked grain for the highest to lowest @-@ paid officials in Han officialdom : 
 = = Central government = = 
 = = = Emperor = = = 
 = = = = Qin 's imperial model = = = = 
 Qin Shi Huang , the first ruler of the Qin dynasty , established China 's imperial system of government in 221 BC after unifying the Seven Warring States through conquest , bringing to an end the Warring States period . For a time , the rulers of the warring states claimed nominal allegiance to an overlord king of the Zhou dynasty ( c . 1050 – 256 BC ) , yet the Zhou kings ' political power and prestige was less than that of later Chinese emperors . The imperial system fell apart after the fall of Qin in 206 BC . However , following Han 's victory over Chu , the King of Han reestablished the imperial system and is known posthumously as Emperor Gaozu ( r . 202 – 195 BC ) . 
 The Han system of imperial government borrowed many of its core features from the regime established by the Qin dynasty . For example , Gaozu 's Chancellor Xiao He ( d . 193 BC ) integrated much of the statutes of the Qin law code into the newly compiled Han law code . Yet Gaozu 's establishment of central control over only a third of the empire — the other two @-@ thirds of territory was controlled by semi @-@ autonomous kingdoms — strayed from Qin 's imperial model which gave the emperor direct control over all of China . However , a series of reforms eventually stripped away any vestiges of the kingdoms ' independence . Han emperors thereafter enjoyed full and direct control over China , as had the first Qin emperor . The Han court 's gradual move towards reestablishing central control can also be seen in its monetary policy . While the Qin regime installed a nationwide standard currency , the early Western Han regime oscillated between abolishing and legalizing private mints , commandery @-@ level mints , and kingdom @-@ level mints issuing various coins . In 113 BC the Han court finally established the central government 's monopoly control over the issuance of a standard , nationwide currency . 
 = = = = Roles , rights , and responsibilities = = = = 
 The emperor , who enjoyed paramount social status , was the head of the government administration . His rule was virtually absolute , although civil officials , representing the competing interests of different state organs , scrutinized his decisions . Although the Grand Commandant had a nominal role as commander @-@ in @-@ chief , the emperor served as the commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the armed forces . The emperor had the sole right to appoint central government officials whose salary @-@ rank was 600 @-@ dan or higher . The emperor also appointed the leading officials at the provincial , commandery , and county levels of government . Appointees to office were usually recommended men from the commanderies , family relatives of high officials , or student graduates of the Imperial University . This institution was established in 124 BC , and provided a Confucian @-@ based education for those entering civil service . 
 The emperor had the exclusive right to modify the law code and issue new laws in the form of imperial edicts ( <unk> <unk> ) and decrees ( ling 令 ) . However , he often accepted the decisions and reforms suggested by his chief judicial minister , the Commandant of Justice . The emperor also acted as the supreme judge . Any lawsuits which a county administration , then commandery administration , and then Minister of Justice could not resolve were deferred to the emperor . 
 The emperor 's role as supreme judge could be temporarily duplicated by any official he designated in times of emergency or in distant borderlands where central government had little influence . This entailed a symbolic conferral of power , which was embodied in the Staff of Authority ( <unk> <unk> ) . Roughly 2 m ( 6 ft ) in height and decorated with ribbons , the Staff of Authority was often granted to an official with a specific errand , such as acting on behalf of the emperor as ambassador to a foreign country , appointing civilians to office , or immediately promoting a deserving military officer on the field of battle . Moreover , it granted its bearer the authority to sentence criminals and political rebels with execution without notifying the court first . 
 During the Qin dynasty , the first Qin emperor 's legitimacy to rule was ultimately decided by his ability to conquer others . However , by the time of Wang Mang 's ( r . 9 – 23 AD ) reign , the Mandate of Heaven was considered the only legitimate source of imperial authority . This concept was given greater prominence after the state officially sponsored the worship of Heaven over that of the Five Powers in 31 BC . Moreover , the philosophy of the scholar Dong Zhongshu ( 179 – 104 BC ) , which held that a dynasty 's rule on earth was bound to greater cosmological cycles in the universe , was officially sponsored by the Han court from Emperor Wu 's ( r . 141 – 87 BC ) reign onward . The emperor was expected to behave according to proper ritual , ethics , and morals , lest he incur the wrath of Heaven and bring an end to his reign . He became the highest priest in the land . By performing certain religious rites and rituals , the emperor acted as a sacred link between Heaven and Earth . 
 = = = = Court conferences = = = = 
 Although the emperor held supreme power , he more often sought the advice of his cabinet and other ministers before making decisions and when revoking them . He often assembled leading officials for debates or discussions on policy , known as court conferences ( tingyi 廷議 ) . Various issues were debated at these gatherings , such as installment of new emperors , enfeoffment of nobles , the establishment of new ancestral temples , reforms to the state religion , the monetary or tax systems , management of government monopolies on salt and iron ( when they existed during Western Han ) , the introduction of new laws or the repeal of old ones , complex lawsuits , or whether or not to declare war on a foreign country or accept peaceful negotiation . Although the emperor could reject the decisions reached by his court conference , he did so at the risk of alienating his leading ministers . More often than not , he was forced to accept the majority consensus of his ministers , whose individual opinions were equally tallied regardless of their standing or salary @-@ rank . 
 = = = Empress dowager = = = 
 When the emperor died without officially appointing a successor , his widow , the empress dowager , had the sole right to appoint one of the late emperor 's surviving sons or relatives to the position . Most often the successor chosen in this fashion was a minor , thus the empress dowager served as regent over the government . A high @-@ status male relative , usually a father or brother , would assume control of the Imperial Secretariat . Even when an emperor reached his majority and became an active ruler , he often sought the advice and acceptance of the empress dowager on policy decisions ; she also had the right to override his decisions . The empress dowager was protected by the Minister of the Guards , yet if her faction — the consort clan — was removed from power , he was then responsible for keeping her under house arrest . 
 = = = Grand Tutor = = = 
 The post of Grand Tutor ( <unk> <unk> ) , although given the highest civil status below the emperor , was not regularly occupied . The role was considered an honorary rather than substantive office . In Western Han , a Grand Tutor was supposedly appointed at the beginning of each emperor 's reign , and was not replaced until that emperor 's death . However , only four Grand Tutors were appointed between 202 BC – 6 AD . In contrast , during Eastern Han , a new Grand Tutor was appointed when every emperor except Emperor Huan of Han ( r . 146 – 168 AD ) had a Grand Tutor installed at the beginning of their reigns . The Grand Tutor 's salary @-@ rank was unspecified in literary sources , although it was likely higher than the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ dan rank . The Grand Tutor was nominally in charge of providing a young emperor with moral guidance , but it is doubtful that this role was ever taken seriously or formally conducted . The post often served to deliberately block someone from obtaining a more important post , such as one of the Excellencies , while Grand Tutors were usually elder statesmen chosen for their age rather than merits ( so they would die off quickly after being appointed ) . 
 = = = Excellencies = = = 
 = = = = Title variations = = = = 
 The Excellencies ( gong , literally translated as " dukes " ) were the foremost officials in central government who formed the cabinet during both Western and Eastern Han . For most of Western Han , the Excellencies were the Chancellor ( <unk> <unk> ) , the Imperial Counselor ( Yushi <unk> <unk> ) , and the Grand Commandant ( <unk> <unk> ) . The Great Commandant 's post was irregularly filled , and it was retitled to Grand Marshal ( Da sima <unk> ) in 119 BC . In 8 BC , the post of Imperial Counselor was abolished in favor of a Grand Excellency of Works ( da <unk> <unk> ) , and by 1 BC the Chancellor 's post was abolished and replaced by the Grand Excellency Over the Masses ( da situ <unk> ) . On 8 June , 51 AD the prefix " Grand " ( <unk> ) was removed from the titles of the Excellency over the Masses and Excellency of Works , while the Grand Marshal was reinstated with the original title of Grand Commandant , and would remain so for the rest of Eastern Han . The exact salary figures for the Excellencies before 8 BC are unknown , although from that year forward they were given a 10 @,@ 000 @-@ dan salary @-@ rank , in addition to periodic gifts which further boosted their incomes . 
 = = = = Chancellor = = = = 
 During Western Han , the Chancellor was the chief civil official . The duties of the chancellery were divided between a Right Chancellor ( <unk> ) and Left Chancellor ( <unk> ) between 196 and 180 BC . After 180 BC , the Left Chancellor 's post was merely titular and its incumbent had no real authority . The Western Han Chancellor oversaw state finances , logistics for military campaigns , registers for land and population , maps of the empire 's territories , annual provincial reports , high @-@ profile lawsuits , and drafted the government budget . The Chancellor could directly appoint officials who were ranked 600 @-@ dan or below , while he was also able to recommend nominees to the emperor for recruitment to the senior roles in central government . The Chancellor was held responsible for the actions of officials he recommended and appointed , yet he could also punish inadequate officials without the emperor 's consent . 
 Whenever the emperor was absent from a court conference but sought its advice , he relied on the chancellor to direct it and inform him of the resulting majority opinion . If the attending ministers were split into opposing factions of roughly equal size , the chancellor would listen to the positions of both sides and count the exact number of ministers who supported either opposing opinion . 
 The Palace Writers ( Zhongshu <unk> ) were originally palace eunuch secretaries ( Zhongshu guan <unk> ) from Emperor Wu 's reign until 29 BC , when they were staffed by regular officials . They usurped much of the Chancellor 's powers by the end of the Western Han . The position of Chancellor was abolished for much of Eastern Han and replaced by the Excellency over the Masses . However , in 208 AD the Excellency of Works Cao Cao ( 155 – 220 AD ) assumed the revived post of Chancellor while acting as the de facto ruler over the court of Emperor Xian ( r . 189 – 220 AD ) . Cao Cao also abolished the Grand Commandant and Excellency of Works while reinstating the Imperial Counselor . 
 = = = = Imperial Counselor = = = = 
 During Western Han the Imperial Counselor , also known as the Grandee Secretary and Imperial Secretary , was considered the second @-@ ranking official below the Chancellor . Like the Chancellor , he exercised censorial powers over provincial officials who also sent him annual reports . His primary duty was to uphold disciplinary procedures for officials ; he could investigate even those attached to the chancellery and the imperial palace . Since one of his main functions was to prevent abuse of authority , his jurisdiction over officialdom tended to overlap with that of the Chancellor 's . His subordinates included the Imperial Clerks ( <unk> <unk> ; also known as Attending Secretaries ) , led by the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk ( Yushi <unk> <unk> ; also known as the Palace Assistant Secretary ) . They were often sent out into the provinces to investigate possible wrongdoing on the part of local officials . 
 The Imperial Counselor transmitted and received imperial edicts to and from the chancellery and also presented officials ' memorials to the throne . During Western Han , the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk 's office was located within the walls of the palace . He had the authority to investigate attendants and eunuchs of the palace and to reject improperly written memorials before submission to the Imperial Counselor . The Masters of Writing under the Minister Steward then processed these memorials before they were sent to the throne . The Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk 's proximity to the emperor during Eastern Han allowed him to surpass the authority of his nominal superior , the Excellency of Works , yet his Western @-@ Han @-@ era power to inspect local provincial authorities was removed . The Minister Steward — who was supervised by the Imperial Counselor ( and later Excellency of Works ) — became the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk 's new superior by early Eastern Han . The Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk also managed the Imperial Library in both Western and Eastern Han , this duty being transferred to a subordinate of the Minister of Ceremonies in 159 AD . 
 = = = = Grand Commandant = = = = 
 The Grand Commandant ( also known as the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief ) was the head commander of the military in Western Han , yet his office was irregularly filled ( from 205 – 202 BC , from 196 – 195 BC , from 189 – 177 BC , from 154 – 150 BC , and in 140 BC ) . After 119 BC , the generals Huo Qubing ( d . 117 BC ) and Wei Qing ( d . 106 BC ) simultaneously held the title until their deaths , but when the post was revived in 87 BC it became politicized when conferred as a regent 's title for Huo Guang ( d . 68 BC ) . The regent was thus considered one of the Three Excellencies , although he was not technically part of the cabinet . 
 The Grand Commandant 's office witnessed significant changes during the Eastern Han . Wang Mang separated the regent 's role from the Grand Commandant 's post during the Xin dynasty ( 9 – 23 AD ) , since he did not want an active regent for his regime . This was retained by Eastern Han , while the third Grand Commandant of Eastern Han appointed in 51 AD transformed his ministry into a primarily civilian one . Although the Eastern @-@ Han Grand Commandant shared the same salary @-@ rank as the other two Excellencies who were nominally considered his equals , he was nonetheless given de facto privilege as the most senior civil official . However , his censorial jurisdiction now overlapped with the other two Excellencies ( i.e. he was able to investigate the same officials in central and local government ) , who shared an advisory role to the emperor ( policy suggestions could be submitted independently or jointly by all three cabinet members ) . His various bureaus handled appointment , promotion , and demotion of officials , population registers and agriculture , the upkeep of transportation facilities , post offices , and couriers , civil law cases , granary storage , and military affairs . He was also given formal powers to supervise three of the Nine Ministers : the Minister of Ceremonies , Minister of the Household , and Minister of the Guards . 
 = = = = Excellency over the Masses = = = = 
 The Excellency over the Masses ( also known as the Minister over the Masses ) shared the same censorial and advisory roles as the other two Excellencies , the Excellency of Works and Grand Commandant . Like his previous counterpart , the Chancellor , he must have been responsible for drawing up the annual budget , although contemporary sources fail to mention this point . Aside from the court conference , the Great Conference of leading officials across the empire was conducted by his ministry . The Chancellor 's bureaus were also retained by the Excellency over the Masses , and were nearly identical to that of the new Eastern @-@ Han Grand Commandant 's bureaus . He was given formal powers to supervise three of the Nine Ministers : the Minister Coachman , Minister of Justice , and Minister Herald . 
 = = = = Excellency of Works = = = = 
 The Excellency of Works , also known as the Minister of Works , was less powerful than his previous counterpart , the Imperial Counselor . This official 's advisory and censorial responsibilities coincided with those of two other Excellencies , forming a tripartite cabinet arrangement . Unlike the abolished Imperial Counselor , he was given the specialized role of overseeing public works projects throughout the empire . The Excellency of Works was responsible for the construction of city walls , towns , canals , irrigation ditches , dykes and dams , and other structural engineering projects . The Court Architect supervised only imperial building projects . The Excellency of Works made annual reports to the throne about the progress of local administrations ' conduct of construction projects . He was given formal powers to supervise three of the Nine Ministers : the Minister of the Imperial Clan , Minister of Finance , and Minister Steward . 
 = = = Nine Ministers = = = 
 The Nine Ministers , who were supervised by the Three Excellencies but not direct subordinates of the cabinet , each headed a specialized government ministry and held a salary @-@ rank of Fully 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . Along with the tripartite cabinet members , these ministers usually attended court conferences . 
 = = = = Minister of Ceremonies = = = = 
 The Minister of Ceremonies ( <unk> <unk> ) also known as Grand Master of Ceremonies , was the chief official in charge of religious rites , rituals , prayers , and the maintenance of ancestral temples and altars . The role 's title was changed to <unk> of Ceremonies ( <unk> <unk> ) from 195 to 144 BC before reverting to the original title . Although his main concern was to link the emperor with the supernatural world and Heaven , he was also given the task of setting educational standards for the Imperial University ( est . 124 BC ) and the academic chairs ( boshi 博士 ) who specialized in the Five Classics , the canon of Confucianism . 
 One of the Minister of Ceremonies ' many subordinates was the Court Astronomer ( <unk> ling <unk> ; also known as the Prefect Grand Astrologer ) , who made astronomical observations and drafted the annual lunisolar calendar . The Court Astronomer also upheld a literacy test of 9 @,@ 000 characters for nominees aspiring to become subordinate officials for either the Minister Steward or Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk . These nominees were often recommended subordinates of commandery @-@ level Administrators . Other subordinates of the Minister of Ceremonies reported illegal acts at ancestral temples , prepared sacrificial offerings of food and wine at shrines and temples , and arranged for the music and dancing that accompanied ceremonies . 
 = = = = Minister of the Household = = = = 
 The Minister of the Household ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as Superintendent of the Household and Supervisor of Attendants , was originally titled the Prefect of the Gentlemen of the Palace ( Lang <unk> <unk> ) before 104 BC . He was responsible for the emperor 's security within the palace grounds , external imperial parks , and wherever the emperor made an outing by chariot . However , to ensure that the emperor 's entire safety was not entrusted to a single officer , the subordinates of the Minister of the Guards were given sole right to patrol the palaces ' entrances and walls while the eunuchs guarded the emperor 's private apartments and harem . Three of the five cadet corps commanded by the Minister of the Household were actually armed civilian nominees serving a period of probation before appointment to a government office ; the other two corps were composed of imperial bodyguards who were never appointed to civilian offices . The former were often recommended by commandery @-@ level Administrators as Filial and Incorrupt , while others could be relatives of high officials in central government . The Minister of the Household oversaw subordinate court advisors ( Yi Lang <unk> / <unk> ） who advised the emperor and engaged in scholarly debates . They were allowed to openly criticize the emperor , participate in provincial inspections , and conduct mourning ceremonies for recently deceased kings and marquesses while installing their successors . <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , led by a Supervisor of the <unk> ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , were subordinates of the Minister of the Household who participated in state ceremonies , condoled on behalf of the emperor for recently deceased officials , inspected public works and military camps along the frontiers , and acted as diplomats to the semi @-@ autonomous fiefs and non @-@ Han @-@ Chinese peoples along the borders . 
 = = = = Minister of the Guards = = = = 
 The Minister of the Guards ( Weiwei <unk> ) was also known as Commandant of the Guards ) , and briefly as the Prefect of the Palace Grandees ( Zhong da <unk> <unk> ) during Emperor Jing of Han 's reign ( r . 157 – 141 BC ) before reverting to the original title . This Minister was responsible for securing and patrolling the walls , towers , and gates of the imperial palaces . The duties of his ministry were carried out by prefects , one of whom controlled the gates where nominees for office were received and officials sent memorials to the throne . To control and monitor the flow of traffic through the palace gates , the prefects used a complex passport system involving wooden and metal tallies . During an emergency , the tallies were collected and no @-@ one was allowed to enter unless they breached the gates by force . The guards were conscripted peasants who served for a year 's term as soldiers and were invited to attend a celebratory feast hosted by the emperor before demobilization . 
 = = = = Minister Coachman = = = = 
 The Minister Coachman ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Grand Coachman , was responsible for the maintenance of imperial stables , horses , carriages and <unk> for the emperor and his palace attendants , and for the supply of horses for the armed forces . His latter duty entailed the supervising of large breeding grounds of frontier pastures , tended by tens of thousands of government slaves . By the reign of Emperor Wu of Han ( r . 141 – 87 BC ) these contained 300 @,@ 000 warhorses intended for use in campaigns against the nomadic Xiongnu Confederation . Some of the Minister Coachman 's subordinates managed stables outside the capital city . These stables housed Ferghana horses that were imported or gathered as tribute from Central Asian countries . 
 In Eastern Han — possibly due to the Coachman 's influence over the transport of arms — a prefect in charge of manufacturing bows , crossbows , swords , and armor for the military was transferred from the Minister Steward 's ministry to that of the Minister Coachman . 
 = = = = Minister of Justice = = = = 
 The Minister of Justice ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Commandant of Justice , and was known as the Grand Judge ( Dali <unk> ) between 144 BC and 137 BC and again between 1 BC and c . 25 AD . He was the chief official in charge of upholding , administering , and interpreting the law . Only the emperor , in his role as judge , was superior to this minister . The Minister of Justice was the supreme civil @-@ appointed judge for cases deferred to the capital from provincial lawsuits . His judicial powers , however , were similar to those of the Chancellor . He could recommend changes to the law code and the granting of general amnesties to those charged with crimes . His ministry was responsible for maintaining the Imperial Prison , where trials were conducted , and carrying out executions . It is unknown whether he oversaw all of the twenty @-@ six prisons in Western Han Chang 'an , which were built to house convicted ex @-@ officials . However , during Eastern Han , the Imperial Prison in Luoyang was the only prison managed by the Minister of Justice . 
 = = = = Minister Herald = = = = 
 The Minister Herald ( <unk> <unk> ) was also known as the Grand Herald ; he was also called the Director of Guests ( <unk> <unk> ) between 202 BC and 144 BC and Prefect Grand Usher ( <unk> <unk> ) between 144 BC and 104 BC . He was the chief official in charge of receiving honored guests , such as nobles and foreign ambassadors , at the imperial court . Alongside the Minister of the Imperial Clan , his ministry oversaw the inheritance of titles and fiefs by condoling on behalf of the emperor at kings ' funerals and memorializing the posthumous names of kings and marquises . The Minister Herald 's office received the annual reports from the commanderies and kingdoms when they arrived in the capital at the beginning of the year , before passing them on to the Excellencies . His subordinates acted as seating guides and ushers for officials , nobles , and foreign delegates at imperial ceremonies and sacrifices . One of his subordinates maintained living quarters for officials in the commanderies and kingdoms who were traveling to the capital . While the Minister Herald had always conducted the formal reception of foreign envoys and enlisted the aid of interpreters , his powers in matters of foreign affairs were expanded further when the post of Director of Dependent States was abolished in 28 BC . However , by Eastern Han his duties involving the affairs of Dependent States were transferred to local administrations along the borders . 
 = = = = Minister of the Imperial Clan = = = = 
 While eight of the Nine Ministers could be of commoner origin , the post of Minister of the Imperial Clan ( Zongzheng <unk> ) , also known as the Director of the Imperial Clan , was always occupied by a member of the imperial family . He oversaw the imperial court 's interactions with the empire 's nobility and extended imperial family , such as granting fiefs and titles . His ministry was responsible for record @-@ keeping of all nobles , a register being updated at the beginning of each year . When a serious infraction was committed by a member of the imperial family , the Minister of the Imperial Clan was the first high official to be notified before the emperor , who made the ultimate decision about any possible legal action . This minister 's subordinates heard grievances of imperial family members and informed them about new ordinances . Unlike kings and marquesses , who were not responsible to any of the Nine Ministers , imperial princesses and their fiefs were kept under surveillance by the Minister of the Imperial Clan . 
 = = = = Minister of Finance = = = = 
 The Minister of Finance ( Da <unk> <unk> ) was also called the Grand Minister of Agriculture , and before 144 BC , was known as Clerk of the Capital for Grain ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . This minister was the central government 's treasurer for the official bureaucracy and the armed forces . While the Chancellor drafted the state budget , the Minister of Finance was responsible for funding it . He was in charge of storing the poll taxes , which were gathered in coin cash , and land tax , which was gathered as a proportion of farmers ' annual crop yields . He was also responsible for setting the standards for units of measurement . In addition to reviewing tax collections , he could implement policies for price control exacted on certain commercial commodities . 
 During Western Han , the Minister of Finance 's powers were limited to the public treasury , the Minister Steward being responsible for the emperor 's private wealth . However , in Eastern Han , the responsibilities for the public treasury and the emperor 's private wealth were amalgamated and entrusted solely to the Minister of Finance , which later proved disastrous when handled by irresponsible emperors such as Ling ( r . 168 – 189 AD ) . During Western Han , the Minister of Finance managed the government 's monopolized salt and iron agencies , which were abolished during Eastern Han and transferred to local administrations and private entrepreneurship . He also managed the government 's brief monopoly over liquor from 98 – 81 BC , before it was returned to private production . Although the Minister Steward and then the Superintendent of Waterways and Parks managed the imperial mint for issuing standard coins during Western Han , in Eastern Han the imperial mint was transferred to the office of the Minister of Finance . 
 = = = = Minister Steward = = = = 
 The Minister Steward ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Privy Treasurer and Small Treasurer , served the emperor exclusively , providing him with entertainment and amusements , proper food and clothing , medicine and physical care , valuables and equipment . For this purpose he was given responsibility for the emperor 's personal finances during Western Han , yet this responsibility was transferred to the Minister of Finance during Eastern Han . Although he was not a castrated eunuch , many of his subordinates were , since his ministry managed the imperial harem housing concubines . His secretaries were headed by a Prefect of the Masters of Writing ( <unk> ling <unk> ) . The secretaries were responsible for relaying all written messages to the emperor , official correspondence with Excellencies , senior ministers , provincial authorities , common people who submitted memorials to the throne , and non @-@ Han @-@ Chinese peoples within and outside the empire . Since the Masters of Writing were not eunuchs , and thus not allowed into the imperial harem , Emperor Wu established an all @-@ eunuch office of secretaries for the inner palace , which was abolished in 29 BC . 
 The Minister Steward had many subordinates , including the Court Physician ( <unk> ling <unk> ) , also known as the Prefect Grand Physician , who checked the emperor 's health every morning and accompanied him on imperial hunting trips . The Court Provisioner ( <unk> ling <unk> ) , also known as the Prefect Grand Provisioner , was responsible for managing the kitchen , its cooks , and supplying food for the emperor . Other subordinates managed the weaving houses which supplied the clothes for the emperor , the workshops which produced wares , utensils , and funerary items for the emperor , and the imperial parks and gardens where the emperor could hunt and attend outings . The Bureau of Music ( <unk> <unk> ) was overseen by the Minister Steward and was in charge of musical performances at imperial ceremonies and entertaining the emperor with folk songs gathered from throughout the empire ; it was disbanded in 7 BC and its musicians transferred to the Minister of Ceremonies . 
 = = = Staffs of the heir apparent , empress , and harems = = = 
 When a Liu @-@ family relative of an emperor — usually a princely son — was designated as his heir apparent , he was provided living quarters within the palace and a personal staff which was not disbanded until he became the next emperor . During Western Han , the staff had two divisions : one was led by educators of the heir apparent , known as the Grand Tutor of the Heir Apparent ( ranked 2000 – dan ) and Junior Tutor of the Heir Apparent ( ranked 2000 – dan ) , the other led by a Supervisor of the Household ( ranked 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan ) . During Eastern Han , the Grand Tutor of the Heir Apparent lost his administrative role but remained the chief educator and was promoted in rank to Fully 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan ; the Junior Tutor remained an administrator with a salary @-@ rank of 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . The post of Supervisor of the Household was abolished . Other Western Han staff offices of the heir apparent were abolished during Eastern Han , such as the Chief of the Kitchen and the Household Prison of the Heir Apparent . If he reached adulthood , the heir apparent could be married to a principal wife who led a harem of his concubines . 
 The empress , the legal wife of the emperor , also had an area of the palace separate from that of the emperor 's private apartments , where the empress was expected to spend every fifth night with the emperor . Both the empress and the heir apparent received an income from the taxes of forty counties . She also had a Supervisor of the Household ( ranked 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan ) , and many other subordinates , either male eunuchs or female maids , who took care of domestic needs . The concubines of the harem were subordinates of the empress and were ranked below her in fourteen grades by the reign of Emperor Yuan of Han ( r . 49 – 33 ) . However , the founder of Eastern Han abolished the fourteen salary @-@ ranks in favor of three ranks with no definite salary ; instead , the concubines were irregularly granted gifts . The chief concubine of Western Han , the Brilliant Companion , shared the same salary @-@ rank as the Chancellor , while the concubine ranked just below her , the Favorite Beauty , shared the same salary @-@ rank as any one of the Nine Ministers . 
 = = = Metropolitan offices = = = 
 The metropolitan areas of both Western Han Chang 'an and Eastern Han Luoyang were governed and secured by several officials and officers . The county and municipal divisions of the capital cities were governed by a Prefect ( Ling 令 ) . The Prefect was also responsible for a prison and could arrest officials of high rank . The Colonel of the City Gates ( <unk> xiaowei <unk> ) commanded the garrisons at the twelve city gates , each guarded by a captain , in both Western Han Chang 'an and Eastern Han Luoyang . 
 = = = = Bearer of the Mace = = = = 
 The Bearer of the Mace ( Zhi <unk> <unk> ) was also known as the Bearer of the Gilded Mace . This official , whose title had been Commandant of the Capital ( <unk> <unk> ) before 104 BC , maintained law and order in the capital city — excluding the imperial palaces — in both Western Han Chang 'an and Eastern Han Luoyang . During Western Han , his salary @-@ rank was Fully 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , thus his prestige was similar to that of the Nine Ministers . However , during Eastern Han his salary @-@ rank was reduced from Fully 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan to Equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . 
 While his subordinates were on constant patrol , the Bearer of the Mace personally inspected the city three times each month . He was responsible for the military arsenal as well as disaster relief efforts during floods and fires . The Bearer of the Mace had a large staff of subordinates during Western Han , whose posts were abolished or transferred elsewhere during Eastern Han . This included the abolition of the Captains of the Standard Bearers , and the emperor 's entourage became responsible for clearing the roadways when the emperor left the palace and hoisting colored standards to signal his return . 
 = = = = Court Architect = = = = 
 The Court Architect ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was in charge of the construction , maintenance , and repair of imperial palace halls , government halls , temples , grave tumuli , buildings in funerary parks , roads leading out of the capital , and flood control works . His salary @-@ rank was 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . He directed the efforts of conscripted corvée laborers until this duty was transferred to the ministry of the newly created Excellency of Works in 8 BC . The Court Architect 's subordinates were responsible for gathering timber for carpenters and stone for masons . Although his office existed at the establishment of Eastern Han , it was abolished in 57 AD and his duties were transferred to an <unk> in the Ministry of the Household . However , the post was reinstated in 76 AD with the original salary @-@ rank , yet many of his subordinates remained abolished . Since most buildings were constructed from wood , with ceramic roof tiles , a large workforce was needed to maintain buildings that fell into disrepair . The restoration of the Imperial University during Emperor Shun 's ( r . 125 – 144 AD ) reign required 100 @,@ 000 laborers to work for a year under the supervision of the Court Architect . 
 = = = = Colonel Director of Retainers = = = = 
 The Colonel Director of Retainers ( <unk> xiaowei <unk> ) , also known as Colonel of Censure and Colonel Director of Convict @-@ Laborers , was originally called the Director of Retainers ( <unk> <unk> ) . His task was to supervise 1 @,@ 200 convicts in their construction of roads and canals . In 91 BC , an unsuccessful five @-@ day rebellion in Chang 'an was instigated by Crown Prince Liu Ju ( d . 91 BC ) and his mother Empress Wei Zifu ( d . 91 BC ) , who had been accused of witchcraft and black magic . For this event , Emperor Wu prefixed " colonel " to the Director of Retainers ' title in 89 BC , promoting him to the salary @-@ rank 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , and granted him the Staff of Authority , allowing him to arrest and punish those allegedly practicing witchcraft . 
 Following the crisis , the Colonel Director of Retainers retained his privileged possession of the Staff of Authority and was granted the same investigative and censorial powers as the Chancellor and Imperial Counselor over officialdom . He routinely inspected the conduct of officials in the capital region and seven nearby commanderies . His investigative powers matched those of a provincial Inspector , although his Staff of Authority made him more powerful than the latter . The Colonel Director of Retainers was a personal servant of the emperor , answering only to him , allowing the emperor to greatly enhance his control over the bureaucracy . However , the Staff of Authority was removed from the Colonel in 45 BC , limiting his powers to inspection , investigation , and impeachment and he was distinguished from a provincial Inspector only by a higher salary @-@ rank . The office of Colonel Director of Retainers was abolished in 9 BC , and reinstated once more as the Director of Retainers in 7 BC . He was now a subordinate of the new Excellency of Works and supervised convicts in public works projects , like his early Western Han counterpart . In Eastern Han , the Colonel Director of Retainers was reappointed without the Staff of Authority , with powers to inspect the capital region , but his salary @-@ rank was reduced from 2000 – dan to Equivalent to 2000 – dan . 
 = = = = Superintendent of Waterways and Parks = = = = 
 The Superintendent of Waterways and Parks ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was also known as the Chief Commandant of Waterways and Parks , and was once a subordinate of the Minister Steward until 115 BC , when he , and other former subordinates of that ministry , became independent officers . His salary @-@ rank was equivalent to 2000 – dan . The Superintendent of Waterways and Parks managed a large imperial hunting park located outside Chang 'an , including its palaces , rest stops , granaries , and cultivated patches of fruit and vegetable gardens , which , along with game meat , provided food for the emperor 's household . He also collected taxes from commoners using the park 's grounds and transmitted these funds to the Minister Steward , who managed the emperor 's finances . One of the Superintendent 's subordinates supervised convicted criminals in their care of the park 's hunting dogs . 
 In 115 BC the central government 's mint was transferred from the Minister Steward 's ministry to the park managed by the Superintendent of Waterways and Parks . In 113 BC the central government closed all commandery @-@ level mints ; private minting had previously been outlawed in 144 BC . The Superintendent 's imperial mint in the park outside Chang 'an had the sole right to issue coinage throughout the empire . However , Emperor Guangwu of Han ( r . 25 – 57 AD ) abolished the Superintendent of Waterways and Parks and revived his post annually during autumn to conduct a ritual sacrifice . The imperial mint became the responsibility of the Minister of Finance and the imperial park located outside Eastern @-@ Han Luoyang was administered by a prefect . 
 = = = = Director of Dependent States = = = = 
 The Director of Dependent States ( Dian <unk> <unk> ) , whose salary @-@ rank was 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , was responsible for embassies to foreign countries and nomadic peoples along Han 's borders and the annual exchange of hostages — usually foreign princes — submitted to the Han court . Dependent States ( <unk> <unk> ) were first established in 121 BC and composed mostly non @-@ Han @-@ Chinese nomadic tribes and confederations who surrendered after negotiation or armed conflict and accepted Han suzerainty . They served as a buffer between Han territory and hostile tribes , such as the Xiongnu , and as a means to quell tribes in the Ordos Desert . The Han court appointed a Commandant ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as Chief Commandant , ranked Equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , to govern the non @-@ Han @-@ Chinese populations of each Dependent State . The Director of Dependent States ' title was abolished in 28 BC ; his duties and his subordinates , the Commandants , became the responsibilities of the Minister Herald . The Protectorate of the Western Regions , established in 60 BC , which conducted foreign affairs with the oasis city @-@ states in the Tarim Basin of Central Asia , was not the responsibility of the Director of Dependent States . 
 = = Local government = = 
 = = = Provincial authorities = = = 
 The Han Empire was divided by hierarchical political divisions in the following descending order : provinces ( zhou ) , commanderies ( jun ) , and counties ( xian ) . This model of local government was adopted from the previous government structure of the Qin dynasty . 
 A Han province consisted of a group of commanderies , the administrations of which were subject to scrutiny and inspection by centrally appointed officials . These were the Inspectors ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as the Circuit Inspector , who were first appointed in 106 BC at a salary @-@ rank of 600 @-@ dan . In Western Han they were supervised by the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk and were subordinates of the Imperial Counselor . Aside from the province @-@ sized capital region which was entrusted to the Colonel Director of Retainers from 89 – 9 BC , there were thirteen provinces during Western Han . Eventually , the title of Inspector was changed to Governor ( Mu <unk> ; literally " Shepherd " ) , a post with a considerably higher salary @-@ rank of 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . From 5 – 1 BC , this post was reverted to Inspector , but was once again re @-@ titled Governor , who was now responsible to all Three Excellencies . 
 During early Eastern Han , the loss of Han 's control over the Ordos Desert prompted the Han court to reduce the provinces to twelve — excluding the capital region — in 35 AD . In that year , the Inspectors @-@ cum @-@ Governors were still appointed by the central government , but their staffs were recruited from local administrations where they were transferred . By 42 AD , the title Governor once more became Inspector , who remained the head of provincial authorities until 188 AD . In 188 AD , at the urging of the official Liu Yan , Emperor Ling reinstated the office of Governor , yet some of the provinces were still administered by Inspectors ; this arrangement remained in place until the end of the Han dynasty in 220 AD . A key difference between the roles was that an Inspector had no executive powers and only an advisory role , whereas a Governor could execute decisions on his own behalf . There were exceptions to this rule . If banditry or rebellion simultaneously arose in several commanderies under his jurisdiction at once , the Inspector was authorized to raise troops throughout all commanderies under his watch and lead this united force as commander to quell the disruption . 
 Both the Inspector and Governor were responsible for inspecting commandery @-@ level Administrators and their staffs , as well as the semi @-@ autonomous kingdoms and their staffs . They evaluated officials on criteria of competence , honesty , obedience to the imperial court , adherence to the law , their treatment of convicts , and any signs of extortion , nepotism , or factionalism . These reports were submitted to the Palace Assistant Imperial Clerk and Imperial Counselor during Western Han , but by Eastern Han these reports were submitted to each of the Three Excellencies . The reports were then used to promote , demote , dismiss , or prosecute local officials . 
 = = = Commandery administration = = = 
 There were thirteen commanderies , including the capital region , and ten kingdoms at the beginning of Western Han . Many kingdoms were reduced in size and the empire 's territory expanded through conquest . By 2 AD there were eighty @-@ three commanderies and twenty kingdoms containing an aggregate total of approximately 58 million people according to the census . A commandery consisted of a group of counties and was governed by an Administrator ( <unk> <unk> ) , also known as Grand Administrator , who was appointed by the central government and earned a 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan salary @-@ rank . The Administrator was the civil and military leader of the commandery . He was not allowed to govern over his native commandery . 
 An Administrator was assisted by one or several Commandants ( <unk> <unk> ) also known as Chief Commandant , who handled all local military affairs such as raising militias , suppressing bandit groups , and building beacon towers . The Commandants ' salary @-@ rank was Equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . After 30 AD , all Commandants who were not located in distant frontier commanderies were abolished , yet if the commandery was located along borders where raids and armed incursions by hostile nomadic groups were frequent , he was still appointed . A Commandant in an interior commandery could only be appointed temporarily to deal with crises as they arose . Each commandery also had secretaries , a treasurer , and an Official in Charge of Accounts who submitted annual reports to the imperial court on the Administrator 's performance . 
 Many of the Administrators ' duties were seasonal , such as inspections of counties every spring to check on agriculture and maintain roads , bridges , dikes and other public works . In the fall he sent subordinates into the counties to report whether local criminal lawsuits had been conducted fairly . He was responsible for recommending worthy nominees , known as Filial and Incorrupt , to the capital at the end each year during winter ; the nominees would then be considered for an appointment to a central or local government office . This followed a system of quotas for each of the commanderies that was first established during Emperor Wu 's reign , when two Filial and Incorrupt men from each commandery were sent to the capital . This was changed in 92 AD to one man for every 200 @,@ 000 households in a commandery . After the Commandants of interior commanderies were abolished , the Administrators assumed their duties , yet they were still not allowed to raise militias , mobilize troops , or send troops outside their commandery without permission frm the central government . 
 = = = County administration = = = 
 The nationwide census conducted in 2 AD , listed 1 @,@ 587 counties . The Han county was the smallest political division containing a centrally appointed official . In larger counties of about 10 @,@ 000 households he was known as the Prefect ( Ling 令 ) ; in smaller counties he was known as the Chief ( Zhang <unk> ) . Depending on the size of the county , the Prefect 's salary @-@ rank was 600 @-@ dan or 1 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , while a Chief was ranked at 300 @-@ dan or 500 @-@ dan . Due to their judicial role , historian Rafe de Crespigny does not differentiate between Prefects and Chiefs , referring to both as magistrate . The county 's head civil servants , usually respected scholars or elders in their local communities , were appointed directly by the Magistrate . 
 A county Magistrate was in charge of maintaining law and order , storing grain in case of famine , registering the populace for taxation , mobilizing conscripted commoners for corvée labor projects , supervising public works , renovating schools , and performing rituals . They were also given the duty to act as judge for all lawsuits brought to the county court . The judicial jurisdictions of the commandery Administrator and county Magistrate overlapped , so it was generally agreed that whoever arrested a criminal first would try him or her . Under Emperor Wu , commanderies and kingdoms operated public schools , and although counties could operate their own public schools , not all of them did . 
 The county was further divided into districts , each consisting of at least several hamlets grouped together ; typically a community of approximately one hundred families . A chief of police was assigned to each district by the county Magistrate . A county Magistrate heavily relied on the cooperation of local elders and leaders at the district level ; these carried out much of the day @-@ to @-@ day affairs of arbitrating disputes in their communities , collecting taxes , and fighting crime . 
 = = = Kingdoms , <unk> , and fiefs of princesses = = = 
 A Han kingdom was much like a commandery in size and administration , except it was officially , and after 145 BC , nominally , the fief of a relative to the emperor , including brothers , uncles , nephews , and sons — excluding the heir apparent . The policy of awarding kingdoms only to imperial relatives was gradually adopted by the founder Emperor Gaozu of Han ( r . 202 – 195 BC ) , as many of the early kings were non @-@ relatives who were leading officers during the Chu @-@ Han contention ( 206 – 202 BC ) . Kingdoms were usually inherited by the king 's eldest son born to his queen . 
 The number of kingdoms fluctuated between Western and Eastern Han , but there were never fewer than eight nor greater than twenty @-@ five . In the early Western Han , the kingdoms accounted for approximately two @-@ thirds of the empire . The imperial court ruled over the commanderies located in the western third of the empire , while kings ruled their fiefs with little or no central government intervention . The administrative staffs of each kingdom paralleled the model of central government , as each kingdom had a Grand Tutor ( ranked 2000 – dan ) , Chancellor ( 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan ) , and Imperial Secretary ( 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan ) . No kingdom was allowed to have a Grand Commandant , since they were not allowed to initiate war campaigns on their own behalf . Although the kingdoms ' Chancellors were appointed by the imperial court , the king had the right to appoint all other officials in his fief . 
 The power of the kings declined after the Rebellion of the Seven States in 154 BC ; the number of kingdoms and their sizes were reduced . An imperial edict in 145 BC removed the kings ' rights to appoint officials above the salary @-@ rank of 400 @-@ dan , and all officials ranked higher than this were appointed directly by the central government . Excluding the kingdom @-@ level Minister Coachman , the kingdoms ' Nine Ministers and Imperial Counselors were abolished . The Chancellor , now the equivalent of a commandery Administrator , was retained , although he was still appointed by the central government . After these reforms , the kings were no longer administrative heads and merely took a portion of the taxes collected by the government in their kingdoms as personal income . Charles Hucker notes that after this transformation of kingdoms and marquessates into virtual commanderies and counties , respectively , a " ... fully centralized government was achieved " for the first time since the Qin dynasty . 
 Han society below the level of kings was divided into twenty ranks , which awarded certain privileges such as exemption from certain laws , the nineteenth being a marquess and the twentieth being a full marquess — the difference being the former was only given a pension while the latter was given a marquessate ( <unk> <unk> ) — typically the size of a county . If the kings ' sons were grandsons of the emperor , they were made full marquesses ; if not , they were considered commoners . However , this rule was changed in 127 BC so that all the kings ' sons were made full marquesses . It is unknown whether early Western @-@ Han marquessates enjoyed the same level of autonomy as early Western @-@ Han kingdoms ; by 145 BC , all marquessates ' staff were appointed by the central government . The marquess had no administrative role over his marquessate ; he merely collected a portion of the tax revenues . His Chancellor was the equivalent of a county Prefect . 
 The emperor 's sisters and daughters were made either senior princesses , who shared the same rank as kings , or princesses , who shared the same rank as full marquesses ; a princess 's fief was typically the size of a county . The husband of a princess was ranked as a marquess . The daughters of kings were also princesses , but their fiefs were typically the smaller size of county districts , and could not be inherited by sons . Unlike the fiefs of kings and marquesses , the staffs of the princesses ' fiefs answered directly to one of the Nine Ministers : the Minister of the Imperial Clan . 
 = = Military = = 
 = = = Conscripted soldiers and militias = = = 
 Upon reaching the age of twenty @-@ three , male commoners became eligible for conscription into the armed forces ( zhengzu 正卒 ) for one year of training and one year of service ; the year of service could be served until the age of fifty @-@ six . Conscripts were trained , and would serve in one of three branches of the military : infantry , cavalry , or naval marine . The year of service could take the form of soldiering at frontier garrisons protecting the borders against nomadic enemies , serving as guards in the courts of kings or as guards under the Minister of the Guards in the capital . By 155 BC , the minimum age for conscription was lowered to twenty . During Emperor Zhao of Han 's ( r . 87 – 74 BC ) reign , the minimum age was raised to twenty @-@ three , but after his reign it was once again reduced to twenty . 
 Although this system of conscription survived into Eastern Han , conscription could be avoided upon payment of a commutable tax . 
 The government also exempted those who presented authorities with a slave , a horse , or grain . In the system of twenty ranks bestowed on commoners and nobles alike , those of the ninth rank and above were exempt from military service . To compensate for the loss of manpower , the Eastern Han government favored the recruitment of a largely volunteer army . Many other soldiers in Eastern Han were convicted criminals who commuted their sentences by joining the army . Mercenaries eventually comprised much of the capital guard , while foreign nomadic tribes were often employed to guard the frontiers . 
 After their year of active service , Western Han @-@ era soldiers were demobilized and sent home , where they were obligated to join the local militia that convened every eighth month of the year . This obligation was intended to curb local and regional <unk> that nonetheless became prevalent by the end of Han . Militias dismissed members who reached the age of fifty @-@ six . By Eastern Han , the obligation upon retired soldiers to join local militias was removed . 
 = = = Standing army and army reserves = = = 
 The non @-@ professional conscripted soldiers who served a one @-@ year term under the Minister of the Guards belonged to the Southern Army ( Nanjun 南軍 ) . Non @-@ conscripted , professional soldiers belonged to a standing army known as the Northern Army ( Beijun 北軍 ) . The Northern Army 's main purpose was to defend the capital , but it was sometimes required to repel foreign invasions . The Northern Army is first mentioned in Han records in about 180 BC , yet little is known of its command structure at that time . Several decades later , Emperor Wu reformed the Northern Army 's officer corps so that its command was shared by five Colonels ( Xiaowei <unk> ) who each ranked 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan and commanded a regiment . Emperor Wu also appointed three other Colonels , ranked 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , whose forces were considered an extension of the Northern Army yet were stationed far outside the capital at strategic passes . Each of the eight Colonels was assisted by a Major ( Sima <unk> ) who was ranked at 1 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . Professional soldiers could also be found in agricultural garrisons established in the Western Regions , such as those led by the Wu and Ji Colonels ( <unk> xiaowei <unk> ) , who were ranked Equivalent to 600 @-@ dan and were based at the Turpan oasis . 
 During Eastern Han , the conscripted army largely gave way to a volunteer army . The conscripted army under the Minister of the Guards was no longer referred to as the Southern Army . The Northern Army was retained , although it was reformed so that there were five Colonels instead of eight . The Eastern Han @-@ era Colonels of the Northern Army were also demoted to the rank of Equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan . 
 According to Eastern Han @-@ era sources , the Northern Army was a relatively small fighting force of between 3 @,@ 500 and 4 @,@ 200 professional soldiers , each regiment consisting of approximately 750 soldiers and 150 junior officers . To aid this force , Emperor Guangwu established a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ soldier unit of army reserves in <unk> County along the Yellow River in 43 AD , while two other reserve units were created in 110 AD ; these were headed by a Commandant ( the same title used for the commandery @-@ level military officer ) . The main purpose of these reserve units was to position Han troops at strategic passes to guard the lower Wei River against Xiongnu , Wuhuan , and Tibetan tribes . 
 = = = Wartime militia and officers = = = 
 During peacetime and war , the command structure of the Northern Army remained the same . However , during times of great conflict and crisis , the raising of large militias required the appointment of many new officers with various titles , which were often bestowed as honorary titles to officials during times of peace . Large divisions were led by a General ( <unk> <unk> ) whose rank depended on status ; divisions were divided into a number of regiments commanded by a Colonel , and sometimes by a Major . Regiments were divided into companies and led by Captains , who ranked Equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 @-@ dan , while companies were further divided into platoons . 
 = Subtropical cyclone = 
 A subtropical cyclone is a weather system that has some characteristics of a tropical and an extratropical cyclone . 
 As early as the 1950s , meteorologists were unclear whether they should be characterized as tropical or extratropical cyclones . They were officially recognized by the National Hurricane Center in 1972 . Subtropical cyclones began to receive names from the official tropical cyclone lists in the North Atlantic , South @-@ west Indian Ocean and South Atlantic basins . 
 There are two definitions currently used for subtropical cyclones . Across the north Atlantic and southwest Indian ocean , they require central convection fairly near the center and a warming core in the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere . Across the eastern half of the northern Pacific , they require a mid @-@ tropospheric cyclone to cut off from the main belt of the westerlies and only a weak surface circulation . Subtropical cyclones have broad wind patterns with maximum sustained winds located farther from the center than typical tropical cyclones , and have no weather fronts linked into their center . 
 Since they form from initially extratropical cyclones which have colder temperatures aloft than normally found in the tropics , the sea surface temperatures required for their formation are lower than the tropical cyclone threshold by 3 ° C ( 5 ° F ) , lying around 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . This also means that subtropical cyclones are more likely to form outside the traditional bounds of the North Atlantic hurricane season . Subtropical cyclones are also observed to form in the South Atlantic ; South Atlantic subtropical cyclones are observed in all months . 
 = = History of term = = 
 Throughout the 1950s and 1960s , the term semi @-@ tropical and quasi @-@ tropical were used for what would become known as subtropical cyclones . The term subtropical cyclone merely referred to any cyclone located in the subtropical belt near and just north of the horse latitudes . Intense debate ensued in the late 1960s , after a number of hybrid cyclones formed in the Atlantic Basin . In 1972 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) finally designated these storms as subtropical cyclones in real @-@ time , and updated the hurricane database to include subtropical cyclones from 1968 through 1971 . The term " neutercane " began to be used for small subtropical cyclones which formed from mesoscale features , and the NHC began issuing public statements during the 1972 Atlantic hurricane season employing that classification . This name was not noted as controversial in contemporary news reports , but it was dropped less than a year later . Recent articles , published after the year 2000 , have suggested that the name " neutercane " was considered sexist in the 1970s , but there do not appear to be any published reports from that period making this claim . 
 = = Naming = = 
 In the North Atlantic basin , subtropical cyclones were initially named from the NATO phonetic alphabet list in the early to mid @-@ 1970s . In the intervening years of 1975 – 2001 , subtropical storms were either named from the traditional list and considered tropical in real @-@ time , or used a separate numbering system . Between 1992 and 2001 , two different numbers were given to subtropical depressions or subtropical storms , one for public use , the other one for NRL and NHC reference . For example , Hurricane Karen in 2001 was initially known as Subtropical Storm One as well as <unk> ( or <unk> for short ) . In 2002 , the NHC began giving numbers to subtropical depressions and names to subtropical storms from the same sequence as tropical cyclones . From 2002 onwards , Subtropical Depression <unk> would be known as Subtropical Depression Thirteen instead . Hurricane Gustav of 2002 was the first Subtropical Storm to receive a name but became tropical shortly after naming . Subtropical Storm Nicole , from the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season was the first subtropical storm that did not become tropical since the policy change . A subtropical storm from the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season also did not become tropical , but was not named since it was not recognized until post @-@ season analysis . In the southern Indian ocean , subtropical cyclones are also named once winds reach tropical storm , or gale , force . Since 2011 , subtropical storms in the South Atlantic Ocean are named by the Brazilian Navy Hydrographic Center . 
 = = Formation = = 
 Subtropical cyclones form in a wide band of latitude , mainly south of the 50th parallel in the northern hemisphere . Due to the increased frequency of cyclones which cut off from the main belt of the westerlies during the summer and fall , subtropical cyclones are significantly more frequent across the North Atlantic than the northwestern Pacific ocean . In the eastern half of the north Pacific ocean and north Indian ocean , the older subtropical cyclone definition term is still used , which requires a weak circulation forming underneath a mid to upper @-@ tropospheric low which has cut off from the main belt of the westerlies during the cold season ( winter ) . In the case of the north Indian ocean , the formation of this type of vortex leads to the onset of monsoon rains during the wet season . In the southern hemisphere , subtropical cyclones are regularly observed across southern portions of the Mozambique Channel . 
 Most subtropical cyclones form when a deep cold @-@ core extratropical cyclone drops down into the subtropics . The system becomes blocked by a high latitude ridge , and eventually sheds its frontal boundaries as its source of cool and dry air from the high latitudes diverts away from the system . Temperature differences between the 500 hPa pressure level , or 5 @,@ 900 meters ( 19 @,@ 400 ft ) above ground level , and the sea surface temperatures initially exceed the dry adiabatic lapse rate , which causes an initial round of thunderstorms to form at a distance east of the center . Due to the initial cold temperatures aloft , sea surface temperatures usually need to reach at least 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) for this initial round of thunderstorms . The initial thunderstorm activity moistens up the environment around the low , which destabilizes the atmosphere by reducing the lapse rate needed for convection . When the next shortwave or upper level jet streak ( wind maximum within the jet stream ) moves nearby , convection reignites closer to the center and the system develops into a true subtropical cyclone . The average sea surface temperature that helps lead to subtropical cyclogenesis is 24 ° C ( 75 ° F ) . If the thunderstorm activity becomes deep and persistent , allowing its initial low level warm core to deepen , tropical cyclogenesis is possible . The locus of formation for North Atlantic subtropical cyclones is out in the open ocean ; the island of Bermuda is regularly impacted by these systems . 
 The South Atlantic environment for formation of subtropical cyclones has both stronger vertical wind shear and lower sea surface temperatures , yet subtropical cyclogenesis is regularly observed in the open ocean in the South Atlantic . A second mechanism for formation has been diagnosed for South Atlantic subtropical cyclones : lee cyclogenesis in the region of the Brazil Current . 
 = = = Transition from extratropical = = = 
 By gaining tropical characteristics , an extratropical low may transit into a subtropical depression or storm . A subtropical depression / storm may further gain tropical characteristics to become a pure tropical depression or storm , which may eventually develop into a hurricane , and there are at least three cases of tropical storms transforming into a subtropical storm ( Hurricane Klaus in 1984 , Tropical Storm Allison in 2001 and Tropical Storm Lee in 2011 ) . Generally , a tropical storm or tropical depression is not called subtropical while it is becoming extratropical , after hitting either land or colder waters . This transition normally requires significant instability through the atmosphere , with temperature differences between the underlying ocean and the mid @-@ levels of the troposphere requiring over 20 ° C , or 72 ° F , of contrast in this roughly 5 @,@ 900 meters ( 19 @,@ 400 ft ) layer of the lower atmosphere . The mode of the sea surface temperatures that subtropical cyclones form over is 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) . Transition from subtropical cyclones into tropical cyclones occurs only in very rare cases over the South Atlantic Ocean , such as Hurricane Catarina in 2004 . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 These storms can have maximum winds extending farther from the center than in a purely tropical cyclone and have no weather fronts linking directly to the center of circulation . The maximum recorded wind speed for a subtropical storm is 33 m / s ( 119 km / h , 65 knots , or 74 mph ) , also the minimum for a hurricane . In the Atlantic Basin , the United States NOAA classifies subtropical cyclones similarly to their tropical cousins , based on maximum sustained surface winds . Those with winds below 18 m / s , 65 km / h , 35 knots , or 39 mph are called subtropical depressions , while those at or above this speed are referred to as subtropical storms . 
 Subtropical cyclones are also more likely than tropical cyclones to form outside of a region 's designated hurricane season . North Atlantic examples include Subtropical Storm Alex ( which became Hurricane Alex ) in mid @-@ January of the 2016 Atlantic hurricane season , Subtropical Storm Ana ( which became Tropical Storm Ana ) in late April of the 2003 hurricane season , Subtropical Storm Andrea in early May and Subtropical Storm Olga ( which became Tropical Storm Olga ) in mid @-@ December of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season , and Subtropical Storm Beryl ( which became Tropical Storm Beryl ) in late May of the 2012 hurricane season . Diagrams which depict a cyclone 's phase depict subtropical cyclones with a shallow warm core and as asymmetric systems , similar to tropical cyclones which have begun the transition to an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = Types = = 
 = = = Upper @-@ level low = = = 
 The most common type of subtropical storm is an upper @-@ level cold low with circulation extending to the surface layer and maximum sustained winds generally occurring at a radius of about 160 kilometers ( 99 mi ) or more from the center . In comparison to tropical cyclones , such systems have a relatively broad zone of maximum winds that is located farther from the center , and typically have a less symmetric wind field and distribution of convection . 
 = = = Mesoscale low = = = 
 A second type of subtropical cyclone is a mesoscale low originating in or near a <unk> zone of horizontal wind shear , also known as a dying frontal zone , with radius of maximum sustained winds generally less than 50 kilometers ( 31 mi ) . The entire circulation may initially have a diameter of less than 160 kilometers ( 99 mi ) . These generally short @-@ lived systems may be either cold core or warm core , and in 1972 this type of subtropical cyclone was referred to as a " neutercane " . 
 = = Kona storm = = 
 Kona storms ( or Kona lows ) are deep cyclones that form during the cool season of the central Pacific ocean . A definition change in the term during the early 1970s makes categorization of the systems more complex , as many kona lows are extratropical cyclones , complete with their own weather fronts . Those across the northeast Pacific ocean consider them subtropical cyclones as long as a weak surface circulation is present . Kona is a Hawaiian term for leeward , which explains the change in wind direction for the Hawaiian Islands from easterly to southerly when this type of cyclone is present . 
 = = Australian East Coast Lows = = 
 Australian east coast lows ( known locally as east coast lows and sometimes as east coast cyclones ) are extratropical cyclones , the most intense of these systems have many of the characteristics of subtropical cyclones . They develop between 25 ˚ south and 40 ˚ south and within 5 ˚ of the Australian coastline , typically during the winter months . Each year there are about ten " significant impact " maritime lows . Explosive cyclogenesis is seen on average just once per year , but these storms cause significant wind and flood damage when they occur . Australian east coast cyclones vary in size from mesoscale ( approximately 10 km to 100 km ) to synoptic scale ( approximately 100 km to 1 @,@ 000 km ) . These storms which mostly affect the south east coast should not be confused with Australian region tropical cyclones which typically affect the northern half of the continent . 
 = The Orb = 
 The Orb are an English electronic music group known for spawning the genre of ambient house . Founded in 1988 by Alex Paterson and KLF member Jimmy Cauty , the Orb began as ambient and dub DJs in London . Their early performances were inspired by ambient and electronic artists of the 1970s and 1980s , most notably Brian Eno and Kraftwerk . Because of their trippy sound , the Orb developed a cult following among clubbers " coming down " from drug @-@ induced highs . The Orb has maintained their drug @-@ related and science fiction themes despite personnel changes , including the departure of Cauty and other Orb members Kris Weston , Andy Falconer , Simon Phillips , Nick Burton and Andy Hughes . Paterson has been the only permanent member , continuing to work as the Orb with the Swiss @-@ German producer Thomas Fehlmann and , later , with Killing Joke 's Martin " Youth " Glover and Tim Bran of Dreadzone . 
 Alex Paterson prides the Orb on manipulating obscure samples beyond recognition on their albums and concerts ; his unauthorised use of other artists ' works has led to disputes with musicians , most notably with Rickie Lee Jones . During their live shows of the 1990s , the Orb performed using digital audio tape machines optimised for live mixing and sampling before switching to laptops and digital media . Despite changes in performance method , the Orb maintained their colourful light shows and psychedelic imagery in concert . These visually intense performances prompted critics to compare the group to Pink Floyd . 
 The Orb 's critical and commercial success in the United Kingdom peaked in the early 1990s with the albums The Orb 's Adventures Beyond The Ultraworld and U.F.Orb , the latter of which reached # 1 on the British album charts in 1992 . This success led to its infamous appearance on Top of the Pops , where the group showcased their quirky style by playing chess ( an interest of Paterson 's since his early youth ) while the group 's single " Blue Room " ran in the background . The Orb 's mid @-@ 1990s albums were met with mixed reactions from British critics ; their work received praise from American publications such as Rolling Stone . The group experimented with vocalists on the next two albums , which critics generally described as bland and uninspired . The Orb then shifted gears to a minimal techno style spearheaded by member Thomas Fehlmann , releasing their new material on the record label Kompakt . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1988 – 1990 : Paterson & Cauty = = = 
 Alex Paterson began his music career in the early 1980s as a roadie for the post @-@ punk rock band Killing Joke , for whom his childhood friend Martin " Youth " Glover played bass . After leaving Killing Joke in 1986 , Paterson met future KLF member Jimmy Cauty and the duo began DJ @-@ ing and producing music together under the name The Orb . Paterson and Cauty 's first release was a 1988 acid house anthem track , " Tripping on Sunshine " , released on the German record compilation Eternity Project One . The following year , the Orb released the Kiss EP , a four @-@ track EP based on samples from New York City 's KISS FM . It was released on Paterson and Glover 's new record label WAU ! Mr. Modo Records , which they created out of a desire to maintain financial independence from larger record labels . After spending a weekend of making what Paterson described as " really shit drum sounds " , the duo decided to abandon beat @-@ heavy music and instead work on music for after @-@ hours listening by removing the percussion tracks . Paterson and Cauty began DJ @-@ ing in London and landed a deal for the Orb to play the chill out room at London nightclub Heaven . Resident DJ Paul Oakenfold brought in the duo as ambient DJs for his " The Land of Oz " event at Heaven . Though the Orb 's Monday night performances had only several hardcore followers initially , their chill @-@ out room act grew popular over the course of their six @-@ month stay to the point that the room was often packed with around 100 people . The Orb 's performances became most popular among weary DJs and clubbers seeking solace from the loud , rhythmic music of the dancefloor . The Orb built up melodies using multitrack recordings linked to multiple record decks and a mixer . The group incorporated many CDs , cassettes , and BBC sound effects into the act , often accompanied with pieces of popular dance tracks such as " Sueño Latino . " Though the group used a variety of samples , they avoided heavy rhythm and drums so that the intended ambient atmosphere was not disrupted . Most often , the group played dub and other chill @-@ out music , which it described as ambient house for the E generation . 
 Throughout 1989 the Orb , along with Martin Glover , developed a music production style that incorporated ambient music with a diverse array of samples and recordings . The British music press later labelled the music ambient house . The culmination of the group 's musical work came toward the end of the same year when they recorded a session for John Peel on BBC Radio 1 . The track , then known as " Loving You , " was largely improvisational and featured a wealth of sound effects and samples from science fiction radio plays , nature sounds , and Minnie Riperton 's " Lovin ' You . " For its release as a single on the record label Big Life , the Orb changed the title to " A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld . " Upon the single 's release , Riperton 's management forced Big Life to remove the unlicensed Riperton sample , ensuring that only the initial first @-@ week release of the single contained the original vocals of Minnie Riperton ; subsequent pressings used vocals from a sound @-@ alike . Despite its running time of 22 minutes , the sample @-@ laden single reached # 78 on the British singles charts . Soon thereafter , the Orb were commissioned by Dave Stewart to remix his top @-@ 20 single " Lily Was Here . " The group obliged and were soon offered several more remix jobs from artists including Erasure and System 7 . 
 In 1990 , Paterson and Cauty held several recording sessions at Cauty 's studio , Trancentral . When offered an album deal by Big Life , the Orb found themselves at a crossroads : Cauty preferred that the Orb release their music through his KLF Communications label , whereas Paterson wanted to ensure that the group did not become a side @-@ project of the KLF . Because of these issues , Cauty and Paterson split in April 1990 , with Paterson keeping the name the Orb . As a result of the break @-@ up , Cauty removed Paterson 's contributions from the in @-@ progress recordings and released the album as Space on KLF Communications . Also out of these sessions came the KLF album Chill Out , on which Paterson appeared in an uncredited role . 
 Following the split , Paterson began working with Youth on the track " Little Fluffy Clouds " . The group incorporated samples from Steve Reich 's Electric Counterpoint . The signature of the piece centres around the repeated phrases sampled from the voice of singer / songwriter Rickie Lee Jones , her spaced @-@ out childlike ramble taken from a promotional CD released by Geffen records for her 1989 Flying Cowboys CD . In it she muses on the picturesque images of clouds from her Arizona childhood . 
 = = = 1991 – 1994 : Paterson & Weston = = = 
 In 1991 , Paterson invited freelance studio engineer Andy Falconer to join the Orb . He was closely followed by studio engineer Kris " Thrash " Weston . Steve Hillage , who Paterson had met while DJ @-@ ing in London , also joined as a guitarist . Along with producer Thomas Fehlmann , the Orb completed several additional tracks for their first album , The Orb 's Adventures Beyond The Ultraworld . At least six studios and twenty outside musicians were used during the three weeks of recording . Falconer 's and Weston 's technical abilities and Hillage 's guitar work allowed the group to craft panoramic sounds portraying aspects of space travel , including the launch of Apollo 11 . Adventures sold well in the United Kingdom and received praise for its balance of ambient music , house music , and sampling . Retrospectively , Adventures is considered ground @-@ breaking for changing the way musicians view sampling and as a vital work for the genres of ambient and dance music . The completion of Adventures saw the departure of Andy Falconer , whose last contribution was to one of the Orb 's Peel Sessions . To promote the release of an edited single @-@ disc version for an American release on Mercury Records , the Orb embarked on their first tour of the United States beginning in Phoenix , Arizona , in October 1991 . 
 In late 1991 and early 1992 , Paterson and Weston wrote their next single , " Blue Room " . Assisting with the recording was bassist Jah Wobble , keyboardist Miquette <unk> , and guitarist Hillage . Despite its playing time of almost 40 minutes , " Blue Room " entered the British charts at # 12 and peaked at # 8 , making it the longest track to reach the charts . The Orb promoted this single with a " legendary avant @-@ garde " performance on Top of the Pops where Patterson and Weston played a game of chess in space suits while footage of dolphins and an edited version of " Blue Room " ran in the background . In July 1992 , U.F.Orb was released featuring " Blue Room " and , in the US release , the Orb 's next single , " Assassin " . Weston integrated his technical and creative expertise with Paterson 's Eno @-@ influenced ambience on U.F.Orb , combining " drum and bass rhythms " with " velvet keyboards " and " rippling synth lines " . U.F.Orb reached # 1 on the British album charts to the shock of critics , who were surprised that fans had embraced what journalists considered to be progressive rock . Despite the Orb 's success , Paterson and Weston preferred to avoid personal publicity and instead allow their music to be the focus of attention . Because of this partial anonymity and the Orb 's rotating membership , they are often recognised as more of a musical collective than a " band " . 
 Over the next year and a half , Paterson and Weston continued to produce new material , but releases stalled when Paterson began to feel that Big Life was trying to dictate the direction of the Orb 's music . This led to intense disagreements with Big Life and the Orb soon left the label to sign a deal with Island Records . Their first release on Island Records was the live album Live 93 , which gathered highlights from their recent performances in Europe and Asia . It featured the live crew of Paterson , Weston , producers Nick Burton and Simon Phillips , as well as audio engineer Andy Hughes , who had stepped in previously when Weston had decided to stop touring . The Orb 's first studio production on Island Records was Pomme Fritz , a chaotic EP noted for its heavy use of strange samples and its lack of conventional harmonies . Though Pomme Fritz reached # 6 on the British charts , critics panned it as " doodling " . Island Records " hated it " and " didn 't understand it at all " , according to Paterson . Soon after production finished on Pomme Fritz , Paterson , Weston , and Orb contributor Thomas Fehlmann joined with Robert Fripp to form the group FFWD as a side project . FFWD released a single self @-@ titled album on Paterson 's Inter @-@ Modo label , which Fehlmann later described as " an Orb track which became so long that it became a whole album ! " . Due to this aimlessness , FFWD lacked an artistic goal and disbanded after a single release . Soon after the release of FFWD in August 1994 , Weston suddenly left the Orb . Paterson claimed that Weston 's departure was due to his desire to have more control in the Orb . In an interview with i @-@ D , Weston attributed the split to Paterson , saying that Paterson " didn 't do his 50 per cent of the work . " Paterson reaffirmed the status of the Orb saying , " The Orb is the Orb , and nothing can change that " , and continued work with Hughes and Fehlmann . 
 = = = 1995 – 2001 : Paterson , Fehlmann & Hughes = = = 
 Following Weston 's departure from the Orb , Thomas Fehlmann joined as a full @-@ time studio member , but did not always participate in live performances . Paterson , Hughes , and Fehlmann then finished producing the album Orbus Terrarum , on which Paterson and Weston had been working . Orbus Terrarum , released in 1995 , featured more " earthbound " and " organic " sounds than their previous trippy science @-@ fiction @-@ themed music . Orbus Terrarum suffered , as Paterson described it , " a good kicking " at the hands of the British press , who described it as " generic " and a low point for Paterson 's creativity . Orbus Terrarum alienated many of the group 's fans , and only reached # 20 on the British charts . American critics gave it great acclaim , including Rolling Stone who made it their album of the month , citing its symphonic flow coupled with the Orb 's " uniquely British wit " . After a long world tour , the Orb , with Andy Hughes and Steve Hillage , settled down to produce their next album , Orblivion — the process of which saw a return to their spacey sounds . Though Orblivion was recorded in May 1996 , it was not released until almost a year later , due to Island Records ' desire to promote it as a follow up to U2 's techno @-@ rock album Pop . Orblivion sold well in Europe as well as the United States , where it reached the Billboard Top 200 . The first Orblivion single , " Toxygene " , was the highest charting single by the Orb , reaching # 4 in the United Kingdom on 8 February 1997 . Despite high sales , Orblivion received a lukewarm reception from the British press . As with Orbus Terrarum , Orblivion was better received by American critics , including Rolling Stone , who praised its " contrast of chaos and euphony " . Meanwhile , the stresses of touring sat heavily on Paterson ; he considered retiring the Orb , but continued touring and producing . In 1997 the band sold their studio Joe 's Garage to the Godfrey brothers of Morcheeba . 
 Paterson and Fehlmann , along with usual collaborators Hughes , Nick Burton , and Phillips , wrote and produced Cydonia for a planned 1999 release . Featured on the album were appearances from Robert Fripp , John Roome ( <unk> ) , and Fil Le <unk> , one of the Orb 's live performers . Singers Nina Walsh and Aki Omori appeared on two tracks each , providing vocals and co @-@ writing lyrics with Paterson . Paterson felt that this new direction of songwriting for the Orb was more similar to the experimental work of Orbus Terrarum than to the techno @-@ pop of Orblivion . Island Records was in a period of restructuring due to its recent purchase by Universal Music Group , and Cydonia was not released until 2001 . Upon release , critics noted that Cydonia merged pop , trance , and ambient @-@ dub music , which they felt to be a conglomeration of bland vocals and uninventive ambience that lacked the appeal of the Orb 's earlier work . NME harshly described it as " a stillborn relic , flawed throughout by chronically stunted ambitions " and describing its only appropriate audience to be " old ravers " seeking nostalgia . The Orb were generally regarded by the British press as past their prime and an " ambient dinosaur " out of place in the current dance music environment . After the release of Cydonia , Hughes left the group for undisclosed reasons , becoming " another acrimonious departure from the Orb " according to The Guardian . 
 = = = 2001 – 2004 : Paterson , Fehlmann & Phillips = = = 
 In 2001 , Alex Paterson formed the record label Badorb.com as an outlet for Orb members ' side projects . To promote both Badorb.com and Cydonia , the Orb toured internationally , including their first visit to the United States in four years . NME described the Orb 's tour as " charming " and that they were " freed from the <unk> pretensions that dogged the band throughout the mid- ' 90s . " 
 The Orb , now composed of Paterson , Phillips , and Fehlmann , with guest John Roome , accepted an invitation to join the Area : One concert tour with Moby , Paul Oakenfold , New Order and other alternative and electronic artists . Though the Orb were paired with more mainstream artists during the tour such as Incubus , Paterson and Fehlmann made their next releases a series of several low @-@ key EPs for German label Kompakt in 2002 . The Orb found critical success on Kompakt ; but Badorb.com collapsed soon after releasing the compilation Bless You . Badorb.com had released fourteen records over the course of fourteen months from artists including Guy Pratt ( Conduit ) , Ayumi Hamasaki , and Takayuki Shiraishi , as well as the Orb 's three @-@ track <unk> of <unk> EP . Though Badorb.com was an internet @-@ based record label , they only sold vinyl releases ( with one exception , the Orb EP ) , which Paterson later remarked was a poor idea because " not many people ... have record players " . 
 Though their musical style had changed somewhat since the 1990s , the Orb continued to use their odd synthetic sounds on 2004 's Bicycles & Tricycles , to mixed reviews . The Daily Telegraph praised Bicycles & Tricycles as being " inclusive , exploratory , and an enjoyable journey " ; other publications dismissed it as " stoner dub " and irrelevant to current electronic music . Like Cydonia , Bicycles & Tricycles featured vocals , including female rapper MC Soom @-@ T who added a hip hop contribution to the album . The Orb left Island Records and released the album on Cooking Vinyl and Sanctuary Records . To promote the album , the band began a UK tour with dub artist Mad Professor . Though the Orb still pulled in large crowds , The Guardian noted that they lacked the intensity found in their earlier performances . 
 = = = 2004 – 2007 : Paterson & Fehlmann , The Transit Kings = = = 
 After two more EPs on Kompakt , the Orb ( now composed of only Paterson and Fehlmann ) released Okie Dokie It 's The Orb on Kompakt , which featured new material in addition to tweaked versions of their previous Kompakt output . By this stage , Allmusic observed , Thomas Fehlmann had become the primary creative figure in the Orb , " inhibiting Alex Paterson 's whimsical impulses " . Because of this , Okie Dokie was considerably more focused and less " goofy " than Cydonia and Bicycles & Tricycles . Fehlmann 's trademark hypnotic loops and delays made him the centre of Okie Dokie production and , according to Pitchfork Media , made it " difficult to say where [ Paterson ] is in the picture " . The Orb 's releases with Kompakt gained them back much of their musical credibility with the press and showed that they could " age gracefully " . 
 In August 2006 , the founders of the Orb - Paterson and Cauty - released Living in a Giant Candle Winking at God , their debut album as the Transit Kings with Guy Pratt and Pratt 's associate , Dom Beken . The album featured appearances from Smiths ' guitarist Johnny Marr and comedian Simon Day . Beken described Living in a Giant Candle Winking at God as " self @-@ consciously musically written and less sample @-@ based " compared to the members ' previous work . Living had been in production since 2001 , but due to members ' other obligations , it was delayed for several years . The album received mixed critical reactions , with reviewers such as The Sun comparing the album favourably to the music of DJ Shadow and Röyksopp while other publications , such as The Times , called it " Orb @-@ lite " and proclaimed it to be " Deep Forest @-@ style sludge " . Soon after the album 's release , Cauty left the Transit Kings on " extended leave " , leaving the project in indefinite limbo . Paterson and Beken reunited in 2008 as High Frequency Bandwidth , an ambient hip hop group on the Malicious Damage label . 
 = = = 2007 – present = = = 
 The Orb 's next studio album , The Dream , was released in Japan in 2007 and the following year in the United States and United Kingdom . Fehlmann is absent on The Dream and Paterson was instead reunited with Martin Glover and joined by Tim Bran of Dreadzone . The album saw a return to the Orb 's sounds of the early 1990s , with peculiar vocals and playful samples . The Orb also brought in jazz and house music singer Juliet Roberts and guitarist Steve Hillage . 
 After July 2006 re @-@ release of The Orb 's Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld 3 @-@ CD Deluxe Edition , 2007 and 2008 saw releases of expanded 2 @-@ CD editions of the band 's subsequent regular studio records : U.F.Orb , Pomme Fritz EP , Orbus Terrarum , Orblivion and Cydonia . In late 2008 a double @-@ cd compilation of BBC Radio 1 sessions called The Orb : Complete BBC Sessions 1989 @-@ 2001 was released . 
 In May 2009 , the British Malicious Damage Records ( run by the members of Killing Joke ) announced the release of the Orb 's ninth regular studio album Baghdad Batteries ( Orbsessions Volume III ) on 11 September 2009 . A reunification of Paterson and long @-@ term collaborator Thomas Fehlmann who last worked together on Okie Dokie It 's the Orb on Kompakt , the album was promoted with a launch party with Paterson and Fehlmann performing the whole album live at The @-@ Situation Modern in Clapham , England on 10 September . A track " Chocolate Fingers " was uploaded onto the label 's MySpace profile . The 11 @-@ track album is said to be the third in the Orbsessions series , although unlike the first two outtakes parts composed of brand new material , recorded at Fehlmann 's Berlin studio . 
 In March 2010 Internet station Dandelion Radio broadcast a seventeen and a half minute long Orb session track by Patterson and Fehlmann on the Andrew Morrison show . This new track was titled " Battersea <unk> " and was a remixed version of the soundtrack to a short movie of the same title by Mike Coles and Alex Patterson - a film installation to be seen at London ’ s Battersea Power Station on 1 June 2010 as part of an evening of art and music . The film and its soundtrack ( together with remixes ) were later released as the CD / DVD album C Batter C on 11 November 2011 . 
 In mid @-@ 2010 Alex Paterson teamed up with Youth aka Martin Glover to compile a retrospective compilation album of tracks from the WAU ! Mr Modo label . The album titled Impossible Oddities is set to be released on CD and double Vinyl on 25 October 2010 via Year Zero records . 
 The Orb released the Metallic Spheres album in October 2010 , featuring David Gilmour of Pink Floyd . It was released by Columbia Records . 
 In 2011 Alex Paterson teamed up with electronic producer Gaudi and vocalist Chester for the creation of their experimental and ongoing collaborative project SCREEN , releasing the album " We are Screen " by Malicious Damage Records . 
 In 2012 the Orb worked with dub musician Lee " Scratch " Perry to produce a reggae @-@ infused album titled The Observer In The Star House , which was recorded in Berlin over a period of several months and features the single " Golden Clouds " . The title song was based on an earlier version of Little Fluffy Clouds , with the lyrics rewritten by Perry reflecting his childhood in Jamaica and the property Golden Clouds near his home . 
 In 2013 the Orb performed with the <unk> drummers of Ghana on the West Holts stage at Glastonbury Festival . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 = = = Inspiration = = = 
 The Orb 's members have drawn from an assortment of influences in their music . The Orb 's central figure , Alex Paterson , had early musical tastes and influences which included King Tubby , Alice Cooper , Prince , Kraftwerk , and <unk> Among these , Paterson cites Kraftwerk as one of the most important , claiming they created the foundation from which all modern dance music has been built . While in Brixton with Martin Glover as a teenager , Paterson was also exposed to a large amount of reggae music , such as The Mighty Diamonds , The Abyssinians , and Bob Marley . The reggae influence on Paterson and the Orb can readily be heard in tracks such as the single " Perpetual Dawn " and U.F.Orb 's " Towers of Dub " . The earliest ambient influences of the Orb came in 1979 during Paterson 's roadie days with Killing Joke . While with the band in Neuss , Paterson listened to Brian Eno 's Music for Films while on LSD and watched " the Ruhr steel works explode in the distance " , noting that " [ t ] he scene seemed to be taking place in the music as well " . The same night , Paterson was also inspired while listening to Cluster 's <unk> Wasser and found that the steel works ' " huge metal arms were crushing molten rocks in time to the music " , which was something he 'd " never seen , or heard , anything like it before " . Along with Cluster and Kraftwerk , Paterson was also influenced by other German experimental music from Can and composer Karlheinz Stockhausen . <unk> calls Paterson 's music a " maximal " version of Brian Eno 's " minimal " ambience , though according to Paterson , Eno resents Paterson 's use of his music as an influence . 
 The Orb have often been described as " The Pink Floyd of the Nineties " , but Paterson has stated that their music is more influenced by experimental electronic music than progressive rock of the 1970s . He has noted though that the Pink Floyd album Meddle was influential to him as a child in the 1970s . The psychedelic prog @-@ rock similarities have led critics to describe the Orb as hippie revivalists ; Paterson has strongly rejected the tag , claiming that even as a youth , he was " one of those punks who hated hippies " . 
 During production of Cydonia and Bicycles & Tricycles , Paterson 's biggest influences were drum and bass and trip hop music , as seen on the tracks " <unk> " , " Thursday 's Keeper " , and " Aftermath " . The Orb 's more recent influences consist largely of German techno producers , such as <unk> , who were inspired by the Orb 's earlier work . Paterson cites the music of Kompakt as one of his primary modern influences and claims it to be among the best modern ambient music . 
 = = = Imagery = = = 
 Imagery has always been an important part of the Orb 's persona . This is most prominent during live performances , where they often project surreal images against onstage screens . Common images include morphing faces , futuristic cityscapes , and aliens . They have long associated their act with absurd symbology with images such as floating pigs . This has carried over to their music videos , most of which are spacy , brightly coloured montages of surreal images including astronauts , clouds , and neon dolphins . Because of their use of psychedelic images at shows , the Orb 's shows are frequently compared to those of Pink Floyd , who also used in @-@ show imagery and films . Paterson cites Godfrey Reggio 's and Philip Glass 's film Koyaanisqatsi as a primary influence to their concert imagery . 
 The Orb 's album art features much of the same imagery as their live act . Graphic design group The Designers Republic created the cover art for the earlier work , including Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld , U.F.Orb , and the singles from those two albums . For their next album , the Orb poked fun at their Pink Floyd comparisons with the cover of Live 93 featuring a floating stuffed sheep over the Battersea Power Station , which had appeared on the cover of Pink Floyd 's Animals . The artwork found in Badorb.com releases was similar to the Orb 's odd artwork of the mid @-@ 1990s , as it was stylistically similar and contained little writing . Paterson has also dabbled in the creation of cover art himself , designing the cover of Okie Dokie It 's The Orb on Kompakt . 
 = = = Science fiction and space = = = 
 Some of the more prominent motifs in the Orb 's work are outer space and science fiction , including alien visitations , space flight , and mind control . These have included the use of samples from serious sources such as NASA transmissions to comedic clips from films like Woody Allen 's Sleeper . U.F.Orb especially expressed a fascination with alien life with its bizarre sound samples and in the album 's title itself . The title of its most popular single , " Blue Room " , is a reference to the supposed Blue Room of Wright @-@ Patterson Air Force Base , which was investigated as a possible UFO evidence holding room . Their 2001 album is named after the Cydonia <unk> region of Mars . Due to Paterson 's focus on science fiction and astronomical phenomena , The Guardian described Paterson as " pop [ music ] ' s primary spokesperson on aliens " . 
 = = Techniques , technology , live performances = = 
 In the Orb 's early DJ events in the 1980s , Paterson and Cauty performed with three record decks , a cassette player , and a CD player all of which were mixed through an Akai 12 @-@ track mixer . They used their equipment to harmonise recorded music and sound effect samples into an " endless sound continuum " for audiences of worn out dancers . Even after the Orb began producing original material , they kept the same sample @-@ heavy model for live acts by spontaneously integrating obscure samples into their pre @-@ recorded tracks . During promotional tours for Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld and U.F.Orb , they performed using a digital audio tape machine and experimented with other media sources such as <unk> . The tape machines held individual chords , rhythms , and basslines for each composition , allowing the Orb to reprocess them and mimic the act of DJ @-@ ing . Members could then easily improvise with these samples and manipulate them using sound effect racks . Often , the Orb had a live musician accompanying them , such as Steve Hillage on guitar . Their shows in the early 1990s would often be three hours of semi @-@ improvised , continuous music featuring a wealth of triggered samples , voices , and pre @-@ recorded tracks which were barely identifiable as the original piece . 
 The Orb began performing regularly at the Brixton Academy in the early 1990s , where they used the high ceilings and large space for their " well @-@ suited amorphous sound " , frequently performing their newest and more experimental pieces there . Andy Hughes took Weston 's place at live performances after the 1993 tour , though Weston did reappear for the Orb 's concert at the rainy Woodstock ' 94 . The Orb played for late night raves on the first two nights of Woodstock ' 94 in addition to artists including Aphex Twin , Orbital , and <unk> @-@ Lite . The next year , the Orb 's touring group consisted of Paterson , Hughes , Nick Burton on percussion , and Simon Phillips on bass . This ensemble of live performers and electronic music created a " cacophony " of " gigantic , swarming sounds " . Though the Orb 's performances use much onstage equipment and many props , Paterson prefers to present them as " a non @-@ centralised figure of amusement on stage " . 
 The Orb used ADAT recorders for performances from 1993 to 2001 and utilised large 48 @-@ track decks , which Paterson described as being a " studio onstage " . They hooked synthesisers , such as the ARP 2600 , to MIDI interfaces to recreate specific sounds that appeared on their albums . The Orb 's methods of studio music creation changed as well . For more recent albums such as Cydonia , they used inexpensive equipment such as Korg 's <unk> products , which Paterson described as employing more of a " bedroom techno " approach . Despite their use of laptops during performances and in @-@ studio computers , Paterson says that he still cherishes vinyl and does not find purchasing CDs or downloading music to be nearly as satisfying . 
 = = = Sampling and remixing = = = 
 One of the Orb 's most notable contributions to electronic music is their idea of blurring the distinction between sampling and remixing . Albums such as Pomme Fritz , though released as a piece of original work , consist largely of manipulated samples . Conversely , the Orb 's remixes typically use only small sections of the original track , most notably in the case of their single " Toxygene " . " Toxygene " was originally commissioned as a remix of Jean Michel Jarre 's " Oxygene 8 " from Oxygene 7 @-@ 13 . The Orb " obliterated it " and reassembled only a few fragments for their remix , much to the chagrin of Jarre , who reportedly refused to release it ; The Orb released the track themselves under the name " Toxygene " , which further irritated Jarre , to whom Paterson retorted " The French are always five years behind us , anyway . " In statements made after the release of " Toxygene " , Jarre denied that he rejected the original remix because of disliking it . 
 Other artists have become agitated due to the Orb sampling their work , though Paterson jokingly suggests that " [ t ] hey don 't know the half of it . " Paterson says that he finds a " beauty " and a " cleverness " with slipping unlicensed samples into compositions without anyone recognizing it . Even though fans often try to guess the origins of many of the samples , Paterson states that they are rarely correct and that they would " die " if they discovered , for example , where the drums on " Little Fluffy Clouds " originated from . He has said that record labels have cautioned him , " Don 't tell anyone where you got your samples until we get them cleared ! " . 
 The Orb have used a wide variety of audio clips from sources ranging from McCarthy era speeches to prank phone calls by Victor Lewis @-@ Smith to David Thewlis ' apocalypse @-@ driven rant from the film Naked . Paterson obtains many samples from recording TV and radio for hours at a time and picking out his favourite clips . He and other members of the Orb record nature sounds for use on albums , especially FFWD and Orbus Terrarum . The Orb 's combination of ambient music and sampling from lower fidelity audio sources often creates a " fuzzy texture " in the sound quality , <unk> the Orb 's music . The Orb are lauded for their " Monty Python @-@ esque levity " in their use of audio samples , though NME asserts that Paterson " sabotage [ s ] his majestic soundscapes " with " irritatingly zany " sounds . 
 The Orb has been a prolific remixing team , having completed over 80 commissioned remixes since 1989 . Even during periods of label conflict and contractual limbo , the Orb found steady work remixing for artists including Depeche Mode , Lisa Stansfield , and Front 242 . The Orb 's remixes from the early and mid @-@ 1990s feature a large number of comical samples , Progressive @-@ Sounds describe them as " ahead of their time " and NME notes them as " not entirely incompatible with contemporary chilling . " Some pieces , such as their Bee Gees cover collaboration with Robbie Williams , received criticism for being " beyond a joke " for their use of strange noises . The Orb 's remix of Nine Inch Nails ' " The Perfect Drug " , too , was described as " silly " , as they made it sound like Trent Reznor was " drowning in his bathtub " . Though Paterson maintains that much of the Orb 's remix work is done to support other artists , he admits some of their remixes for major artists were performed so that they could " pay the bills " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 The Orb 's Adventures Beyond The Ultraworld ( 1991 ) 
 U.F.Orb ( 1992 ) 
 Pomme Fritz ( 1994 ) 
 Orbus Terrarum ( 1995 ) 
 Orblivion ( 1997 ) 
 Cydonia ( 2001 ) 
 Bicycles & Tricycles ( 2004 ) 
 Okie Dokie It 's the Orb on Kompakt ( 2005 ) 
 The Dream ( 2007 ) 
 Baghdad Batteries ( Orbsessions Volume III ) ( 2009 ) 
 Metallic Spheres ( 2010 ) 
 C Batter C ( 2011 ) 
 The <unk> in the Star House ( 2012 ) 
 More Tales from the <unk> ( 2013 ) 
 <unk> <unk> AD ( 2015 ) 
 = The Boat Race 1948 = 
 The 94th Boat Race took place on 27 March 1948 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by the former rower Claude Taylor , Cambridge won by five lengths in a record time of 17 minutes and 50 seconds , beating the existing record set in the 1934 race . The victory , their second in a row , took the overall record in the race to 50 – 43 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 miles ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1947 race by ten lengths , and led overall with 50 victories to Oxford 's 43 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were R. E. Eason ( who rowed for the Dark Blues in the 1924 race ) , J. H. Page and D. T. Raikes ( who represented Oxford in the 1920 , 1921 and 1922 races ) . Cambridge were coached by F. E. Hellyer ( who rowed for the Light Blues in the 1910 and 1911 races ) , Kenneth Payne ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races ) , Harold Rickett ( a Light Blue three times between 1930 and 1932 ) and Peter Haig @-@ Thomas ( a four @-@ time Light Blue between 1902 and 1905 ) . The umpire for the race was the former Cambridge rower Claude Taylor who had represented the Light Blues in the 1901 , 1902 and 1903 races . 
 The rowing correspondent for The Manchester Guardian anticipated a close race : " the prospects of Oxford and Cambridge for this year 's University Boat @-@ race on Saturday have now become much more even " . His counterpart at The Times was in agreement : " it really seems that whichever crew gets off best in the first two minutes will probably win the race . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 9 @.@ 375 lb ( 80 @.@ 3 kg ) , 1 @.@ 375 pounds ( 0 @.@ 62 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw three rowers return to the crew with Boat Race experience , including their stroke A. P. Mellows . Oxford 's boat also contained three former Blues , J. R. W. Gleave , P. N. Brodie and A. J. R. <unk> , all of whom were making their third appearances . Three of the participants were registered as non @-@ British : Oxford 's G. C. Fisk and W. W. Woodward , and Cambridge 's Brian Harrison were all from Australia . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race was started at 3 : 30 p.m. by Taylor . The Light Blues out @-@ rated their opponents from the start but soon after their number six , Paul Bircher " caught a crab " , allowing Oxford to take a half @-@ length lead which they extended to three @-@ quarters of a length by Craven Steps . Despite having stopped to allow Bircher to recover his oar , Cambridge drew level and were over a quarter of a length ahead by the time the crews passed the Mile Post , yet nine seconds off record pace and rowing into a head wind . Cambridge were a length ahead at Harrods Furniture Depository and drew clear as the boats passed below Hammersmith Bridge . 
 As the crews passed the HMS Stork training ship , Cambridge began to draw away and were two lengths ahead by Chiswick Steps . With a strong tailwind along Corney Reach , the Light Blues continued to pull ahead and passed below Barnes Bridge four lengths ahead , and six seconds ahead of the course record . Cambridge passed the finishing post five lengths ahead in a time of 17 minutes 50 seconds . The victory , Cambridge 's second in a row , and third in the last four races , took the overall record in the race to 50 – 43 in their favour . The special correspondent writing in The Observer called it " the maddest Boat Race for years " . The Times 's rowing correspondent suggested it was " a great triumph for the Cambridge coaches , who so often seem able to produce something out of the bag which has not been apparent in practice . " Writing in The Manchester Guardian , the rowing correspondent noted that it was " strange that Cambridge had never shown anything like this form in practice " . 
 = Bobby Pulido = 
 Jose Roberto Pulido Jr . ( born April 25 , 1971 ) , known professionally as Bobby Pulido , is an American singer , songwriter , guitarist , and actor . He is credited for introducing Tejano music to a youthful crowd and became a teen idol and one of the most influential Tejano recording artists among Mexican American teenagers . 
 Pulido debuted on the music scene in 1995 as the lead vocalist of his eponymous band . That same year he signed a recording contract with EMI Latin and released his debut album , Desvelado . The album peaked at number nine on the United States Billboard Top Latin Albums chart and at number three on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units . The title track of Desvelado launched Pulido as a popular Tejano musician , but he was criticized by veteran musicians , who believed he was successful in the genre because of his father Roberto Pulido 's established music career . 
 Enséñame ( 1996 ) , which peaked at number two on the Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart , earned Pulido a nomination for the Tejano Music Award for Male Entertainer of the Year and the Lo Nuestro Award for Regional Mexican New Artist of the Year . In 1998 , he performed to a sold @-@ out Auditorio Coca @-@ Cola in Monterrey , becoming the first Tejano musician to do so . He also became the youngest recipient to be awarded the Orgullo de la Frontera by the Fiestas Mexicanas in February 1999 . By 2000 , the popularity of Tejano music was declining , resulting in Pulido 's subsequent albums to not chart anywhere . Despite this , in 1998 he won Male Entertainer of the Year , which he won three consecutive times . 
 In 2003 , Pulido made his acting debut by starring in the made @-@ for @-@ television film La <unk> <unk> . He also appeared in the telenovelas Fuego en La Sangre and Qué pobres tan <unk> . His album <unk> de Amor ( 2007 ) was commercially unsuccessful , and he took a three @-@ year hiatus . Pulido returned to music in March 2010 and released an album titled Dias de Ayer ; he also returned to acting and guest @-@ starred in the film Noches Con <unk> . Aside from music and film , Pulido married Eliza Anzaldua in July 1996 . Pulido filed for divorce in September 2013 , after having fathered three sons with Anzaldua . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1971 – 94 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Jose Roberto Pulido Jr. was born on April 25 , 1971 , in Edinburg , Texas . He is the youngest child of Roberto Pulido , an award winning Tejano music singer ; and Diana Montes , daughter of Tejano musician Mario Montes . Known as Bobby Pulido , he attended Edinburg High School and joined the school 's mariachi group before joining his father 's band Los <unk> as their saxophonist and backup vocalist . In 1994 , EMI Latin released a compilation album titled Branding Icons , which featured Pulido with his father on the song " Contigo " . Pulido was accepted at St. Mary 's University , where he studied business management as his major . After the album 's release in 1994 , he decided to leave college and pursue a singing career in the Tejano market , during what is now known as the genre 's golden age . 
 = = = 1995 – 99 : Debut album and commercial success = = = 
 Pulido started his own band with guitarist Gilbert Trejo , bassist Mike Fox , drummer and cousin Jimmy Montes , keyboardist Rey Gutierrez , and Frank Caballero serving as the band 's accordionist . Initially , Pulido received criticism from veteran Tejano musicians , who believed the singer was " riding on the hard @-@ earned reputation " of his father 's established music career . In May 1995 , Pulido signed a recording contract with EMI Latin and released his debut album Desvelado that September . Then @-@ president of EMI Latin Jose Behar told Billboard the company had " high hopes " for the singer in the country music market . His debut single " No Se Por Que " peaked at number 33 on the United States Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart in December 1995 . Desvelado debuted at number 44 on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums chart , the title track was second single released and debuted at number 21 on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart in the week of February 3 , 1996 , and Pulido became a popular Tejano recording artist . In April 1996 , the album peaked at number nine on the Top Latin Albums chart and number three on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart . John Lannert of Billboard magazine called Pulido 's chart position " impressive " and called the singer a " fast @-@ rising artist " . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) the same year , signifying shipments of 100 @,@ 000 units in the U.S. Pulido ended 1996 as the eighth best @-@ selling regional Mexican artist and Desvelado ended the year as the eleventh best @-@ selling regional Mexican album . The album reached sales of 100 @,@ 000 units by the end of 1999 . At the 1996 Tejano Music Awards , Pulido tied first place with Eddie Gonzales for Best New Rising Male Tejano Artists . 
 In July 1996 , Pulido married Eliza Anzaldua and took a short career hiatus . He continued promoting his second studio album Enséñame , which was released a month after his marriage . Billboard called Enséñame a " rousing " ranchera and " infectious " cumbia @-@ flavored recording , and said it believed Pulido was aiming to follow Emilio Navaira , who wanted to crossover and become a country music artist . Ramiro Burr of the San Antonio Express @-@ News said Pulido 's vocals were " much improved " over his previous work . Enséñame peaked at number ten on the U.S. Billboard Top Latin Albums and number two on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart . It also produced three top @-@ twenty Regional Mexican Airplay tracks ; " Enséñame " , " Se Murió De Amor " , and " La Rosa " . The album earned Pulido a nomination for the Tejano Music Award for Male Entertainer of the Year and the Lo Nuestro Award for Regional Mexican New Artist of the Year . Pulido along with Mexican singer Graciela Beltrán , American urban quintets the Barrio Boyzz , Tejano musicians Emilio Navaira , Pete Astudillo , and Jennifer Peña recorded " <unk> Selena " for the 1997 soundtrack to the biopic film about Selena , who was called the Queen of Tejano music and was killed in March 1995 . By 1997 , Pulido was being credited for introducing Tejano music to a much younger audience in the U.S. , among other Tejano <unk> . 
 In 1998 , Pulido released his third studio album Llegaste a Mi Vida , which peaked at number two on the Regional Mexican Albums chart and at number eleven on the Top Latin Albums chart . The only single to appear on the Latin singles chart , " <unk> " , peaked at number 28 on the Hot Latin Tracks chart . Pulido 's album won five of twelve nominations at the 1998 Tejano Music Awards ; winning Male Vocalist of the Year , Male Entertainer of the Year , Tejano Crossover Song of the Year for " ¿ Dónde Estás ? " , and Tejano Album of the Year . The same year , Desvelado and Llegaste a Mi Vida , each sold 100 @,@ 000 units in Mexico — an unprecedented milestone for the singer . In September 1998 , Pulido released his first live album En Vivo : Desde Monterrey Mexico , which was recorded on April 24 , 1998 , The album became the singer 's fourth top @-@ ten U.S. recording and peaked at number 21 on the Top Latin Albums chart. in a sold @-@ out concert at the Auditorio Coca @-@ Cola in Monterrey , becoming the first Tejano <unk> musician to do so . In March 1999 , he released his fourth studio album El Cazador , which produced the top @-@ thirty Regional Mexican Airplay single " <unk> a Ella " . Pulido became the youngest recipient to be awarded the Orgullo de la Frontera from the Fiestas Mexicanas in February 1999 . In an April 1999 interview , Pulido expressed interest in recording a Latin pop album and said he was not interested in crossing over and recording English @-@ language albums . 
 = = = 2000 – 09 : Decline in popularity , acting debut , and hiatus = = = 
 By 2000 , Tejano music 's dwindling popularity was thought to have recovered but it failed to do so ; music critics believed veteran Tejano artists such as Emilio Navaira , Selena , <unk> , Michael Salgado , and Pulido dominated the airwaves in the U.S. and that old @-@ school singers were not able to compete . That year , Pulido became a teen idol among Mexican American teenage girls and one of the most influential Tejano recording artists to the same demographic . In March 2000 , he released Zona de Peligro , which was less successful than his previous albums , peaking at number 48 on the Top Latin Albums chart . None of its singles were commercially successful , but Pulido won the Tejano Music Award for Male Entertainer of the Year — his third consecutive win . According to musicologist Guadalupe San Miguel , Tejano musicians beginning in the late 20th century and into the early 21st century were indistinguishable from each other . Pulido released his sixth studio album Siempre <unk> En Ti in March 2001 ; it fared less well commercially , peaking at number 50 on the Top Latin Albums chart . The album became Pulido 's last recording to impact a music chart on Billboard . In 2002 , Pulido organized the Celebrity Golf Classic , a benefit charity that raised US $ 50 @,@ 000 for the Easter Seals program . McAllen mayor Leo Montalvo announced at the event that November 2 , 2002 , would be " Bobby Pulido Day " . 
 That June , Pulido released an eponymous album titled Bobby , which spawned the top 40 U.S. single " <unk> " that failed to appear on any music chart and was his final single . He recorded a cover version of Mexican singer Juan Gabriel 's 1999 single " Se Me <unk> Otra Vez " , which was included on Bobby . His next albums , <unk> ( 2003 ) and Vive ( 2005 ) , failed to chart , ending his eight @-@ year presence on Billboard . In 2003 , Pulido made his acting debut in the telenovela television movie La <unk> <unk> , in which he played himself . Two years later , he appeared as a guest on the reality television show Big Brother México . Pulido performed and recorded " Ya Ves " for the live televised tribute concert Selena ¡ VIVE ! in April 2005 . His next album , <unk> de Amor , was released in August 2007 . AllMusic editor Evan Gutierrez complimented Pulido 's use of mixing genres without " [ pushing ] the envelope very far " , and said the album " sound [ s ] fresh rather than repetitive " . He called the title track " waltzing " , " Una Más " a roots rock recording , and " Desvelado <unk> " a " sophisticated acoustic " Latin pop track . However , Gutierrez said the album was lacking and its production quality was " not quite top @-@ notch " . After the album 's release , Pulido guest @-@ starred in three episodes of the telenovela series Fuego en La Sangre as himself . 
 = = = 2010 – present : Return to music and acting = = = 
 Pulido returned to recording music in 2010 and released Dias de Ayer in March that year . The album earned Pulido a nomination for the Tejano Music Award for Male Vocalist of the Year ; the first time since 2003 . Two years later , he released Lo Mio , his first album on Apodaca Records . In 2013 , Pulido recorded with former Aventura vocalist Henry Santos on Santos ' song " No Sé Vivir Sin <unk> " . The same year , Pulido returned to acting and guest @-@ starred as himself in two episodes of the telenovela Noches Con <unk> ( 2013 – 15 ) . In 2014 , he landed a regular , minor role as himself in the telenovela Qué pobres tan <unk> . In November 2015 , Pulido released " No Es Como Tú " , a track from his twelfth studio album , Hoy . The album is Pulido 's first as sole songwriter for any of his albums . Pulido told Mexican newspaper <unk> that Hoy will be released as a strategic plan to " help fight the war " on physical music consumption ; he is against the digital age of downloading and music streaming in the popular market . The album was expected to be released only through Pulido 's social networking sites to combat piracy . In a May 2016 concert , Pulido performed " Si No Te Hubiera Conocido " , a song he recorded with Miguel Luna that was shelved and forgotten during his career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pulido married Eliza Anzaldua in July 1996 . They had three sons ; Remy Pulido ( born 1996 ) , Darian Pulido ( born 1998 ) , and Trey Pulido ( born 2005 ) . However , Pulido filed for divorce in September 2013 , after 17 years of being married and four months of separation . He currently resides in Miami , Florida and enjoys working out , eating healthily , and playing golf ; his favorite pastime is playing guitar and he finds composing songs therapeutic . 
 During his musical career , Pulido 's fans questioned his sexuality ; he said he is not homosexual but rumors that he had slept with men continue to circulate . Pulido spoke to a Mexican television news program in 2013 , and told viewers he is heterosexual and that he has gay fans , which he said did not concern him . In April 2010 , media outlets questioned Pulido after he released a music video in which he plays a stereotypical gay male ; the singer said he wanted to " try something different [ in his music videos ] " and defended his gay followers , saying he nothing against the LGBT community . After American Latin pop singer Ricky Martin publicly announced his homosexuality , Pulido defended Martin 's choice , saying " he is living his dreams " . 
 Pulido has been an outspoken opponent of the 2016 U.S. presidential candidate and Republican presumptive nominee Donald Trump . On his Instagram account , Pulido uploaded a picture of himself " urinating " on Trump 's star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Siege of Port Royal ( 1707 ) = 
 The Siege of Port Royal in 1707 was two separate attempts by English colonists from New England to conquer Acadia ( roughly the present @-@ day Canadian provinces of Nova Scotia and New Brunswick ) by capturing its capital Port Royal ( now Annapolis Royal ) during Queen Anne 's War . Both attempts were made by colonial militia , and were led by men inexperienced in siege warfare . Led by Acadian Governor Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase , the French troops at Port Royal easily withstood both attempts , assisted by irregular Acadians and the Wabanaki Confederacy outside the fort . 
 The first siege began on June 6 , 1707 , and lasted 11 days . The English colonel , John March , was able to establish positions near Port Royal 's fort , but his engineer claimed the necessary cannons could not be landed , and the force withdrew amid disagreements in the war council . The second siege began August 22 , and was never able to establish secure camps , owing to spirited defensive sorties organized by Acadian Governor Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase . 
 The siege attempts were viewed as a debacle in Boston , and the expedition 's leaders were jeered upon their return . Port Royal was captured in 1710 by a larger force that included British Army troops ; that capture marked the end of French rule in peninsular Acadia . 
 = = Background = = 
 Port Royal was the capital of the French colony of Acadia almost since the French first began settling the area in 1604 . It consequently became a focal point for conflict between English and French colonists in the next century . It was destroyed in 1613 by English raiders led by Samuel Argall , but eventually rebuilt . In 1690 it was captured by forces from the Province of Massachusetts Bay , although it was restored to France by the 1697 Treaty of Ryswick . 
 = = = French preparations = = = 
 With the outbreak of the War of the Spanish Succession in 1702 , colonists on both sides again prepared for conflict . Acadia 's governor , Jacques @-@ François de Monbeton de Brouillan , had , in anticipation of war , already begun construction of a stone and earth fort in 1701 , which was largely completed by 1704 . Following a French raid on Deerfield on the Massachusetts frontier in February 1704 , the English in Boston organized a raid against Acadia the following May . Led by Benjamin Church , they raided Grand Pré and other Acadian communities . English and French accounts differ on whether Church 's expedition mounted an attack on Port Royal . Church 's account indicates that they anchored in the harbour and considered making an attack , but ultimately decided against the idea ; French accounts claim that a minor attack was made . 
 When Daniel d 'Auger de Subercase became governor of Acadia in 1706 , he went on the offensive , encouraging Indian raids against English targets in New England . He also encouraged privateering from Port Royal against English colonial shipping . The privateers were highly effective ; the English fishing fleet on the Grand Banks was reduced by 80 percent between 1702 and 1707 , and some English coastal communities were raided . 
 = = = New England preparations = = = 
 English merchants in Boston had long traded with Port Royal , and some of this activity had continued even after the war began . Some of these merchants , notably Samuel Vetch , were closely associated with Massachusetts Bay 's Governor Joseph Dudley , and by 1706 outrage began growing in the colonial assembly over the matter . Vetch chose to deal with these allegations by going to London to press a case for a military expedition against New France , while Dudley , who had previously requested such support without response , chose to demonstrate his anti @-@ French sentiment by organizing an expedition against Port Royal using mostly colonial resources . In March 1707 he revived an idea he had first developed in 1702 that called for provincial militia to man an expedition supported by resources of the Royal Navy that were locally available . His proposal was approved by the assembly on 21 March . Colonial popular opinion was divided on the need for the expedition : some ministers argued in its favour from the pulpit , while Cotton Mather " Pray 'd God not to carry his people hence . " 
 Massachusetts raised two full regiments , totalling nearly 1 @,@ 000 men ; New Hampshire provided 60 men , Rhode Island provided 80 , and a company of Indians from Cape Cod was also recruited . Recruiting was difficult in Massachusetts due to the lack of enthusiasm for the endeavour , and authorities were forced to draft men to fill the ranks . Connecticut was also asked to contribute to the expedition , but declined , citing bad feelings over the return of Port Royal by treaty after its capture in 1690 . The force , which was placed under the command of Massachusetts Colonel John March , totalled 1 @,@ 150 soldiers and 450 sailors , and was carried by a fleet of 24 ships , including the 50 gun man of war Deptford under the command of Captain Charles Stuckley , and the 24 gun colonial Province Galley of Cyprian Southack . ( March took a former prisoner of the Maliseet , John Gyles as his translator . ) 
 = = First siege = = 
 The English fleet arrived outside the channel of the Port Royal harbour on June 6 , and troops were landed the next day . Governor Subercase 's defence force at the time consisted of 100 troupes de la marine that had fortuitously been reinforced by the recent arrival of another 60 who were due to take command of a recently built frigate . Just hours before the English arrival he had also welcomed about 100 Abenaki Indians led by the young Bernard @-@ Anselme d 'Abbadie de Saint @-@ Castin . As soon as the English ships were spotted , Subercase also called out the local militia , mustering about 60 men . 
 Colonel March landed with about 700 men to the north of the fort , and another 300 to its south under the command of Colonel Samuel Appleton , with the goal of establishing a siege line around the fort . Both forces were landed too far from the fort and spent the rest of the day marching toward it . Subercase sent a small force to the south on the morning of the 8th , who were driven back toward the fort by Appleton . Subercase himself led a larger contingent to the north , where he established an ambush at a river March 's force would have to cross . After a sharp battle in which Subercase 's horse was shot out from under him , the defenders were pushed back into the fort . 
 The New Englanders established camps about 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the fort . Subercase sent parties out of the fort to harass English foraging parties , giving rise to rumors that additional militia forces were en route from northern Acadia . The English managed to advance their lines closer to the fort , but their engineer , Colonel John Redknap , did not believe the expedition 's heavy cannons could be landed safely , because they " must pass within command of the fort " . This led to disagreements between March , Redknap , and Stuckley which spelled the end of the expedition . After a final assault on June 16 , which French accounts describe as a failed attempt to take the fort , and English accounts say was merely an attempt to destroy some buildings outside the fort , the expedition embarked on its ships and sailed off on the 17th . March directed the fleet to sail for Casco Bay ( near present @-@ day Portland , Maine ) . 
 = = Interlude = = 
 From Casco Bay Colonel March sent a letter to Boston , in which he laid the blame for the expedition 's failure on Stuckley and Redknap . News of the failure preceded his messengers , and they were met upon their arrival by a jeering crowd of women and children . Colonel Redknap , one of the messengers , was able to convince Governor Dudley that he had acted within his orders , and blame was generally attached to March for the failure . Dudley issued orders to March that the fleet should stay put , with all men remaining aboard under penalty of death , while his council considered the next step . Dudley eventually sent reinforcements and a three @-@ man commission ( including two militia colonels and John Leverett , a lawyer with no military experience ) to oversee affairs , and ordered the expedition to make a second attack . Despite the orders , desertion from the fleet was high , and the forces was reduced to about 850 when it sailed for Port Royal in late August . Colonel March resigned the expedition command and was replaced by Colonel Francis Wainwright . 
 Governor Subercase was forewarned of the second attempt , and had erected additional defenses to impede the attackers ' approaches . He was also reinforced by the fortuitous arrival of the <unk> , a French frigate under the command of Pierre <unk> . His crew was added to the defences , and captured prize ships he brought with him provided needed provisions for the fort . 
 = = Second siege = = 
 The English fleet arrived near Port Royal on August 21 , and Wainwright landed his troops about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) below ( south of ) the fort the next day and marched them to a position about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) north of the fort . This area , where March had previously camped , was one of the areas near which Subercase had thrown up additional defensive earthworks . On August 23 Wainwright sent a detachment of 300 to clear a path for the heavy cannon ; this attempt was repulsed by forces sent out by Subercase to harass them . Using guerrilla @-@ style tactics and fire from the fort 's cannons , they forced the English to retreat to their camp . This defeat apparently had a significant effect on English morale ; Wainwright wrote that his camp was " surrounded with enemies and judging it unsafe to proceed on any service without a company of at least one hundred men . " In what was probably the most serious clash , an English party cutting brush was ambushed by a French and Indian force , and nine of the party were killed . The situation got so bad in the English camp that on the 27th they withdrew to a camp protected by their ships ' guns . The camp was not properly fortified , and the Englishmen were constantly subjected to sniping and attacks from swarming French and Indians . When Wainwright made a second landing at another point on August 31 , Subercase himself led 120 soldiers out of the fort . About 70 men engaged the New Englanders in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , which was fought with axes and musket butts . Saint @-@ Castin and almost 20 of his men were wounded while five others were killed . The next day , September 1 , the English reembarked on their ships , and sailed back to Boston . The French in their reports claimed to have killed as many as 200 men , but English sources claim only about 16 killed and 16 wounded in the siege . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The expedition 's return to Boston was also met with jeers . Dudley 's commissioners were sarcastically called " the three Port Royal worthies " and " the three champions " . Dudley 's reports of the affair minimized its failings , pointing out that many plantations around Port Royal had been destroyed during the two sieges . Dudley also refused to make inquiries into the expedition 's failure , fearing the blame would be placed on him . 
 Subercase , concerned that the British might return the following year , worked to strengthen the fortifications at Port Royal . He also built a small warship to assist in the colony 's defenses , and convinced <unk> to raid New England shipping . The privateer was so successful that by the end of 1708 Port Royal was overcrowded with prisoners from the captured prizes . 
 None of this ultimately helped save Port Royal from the next attack , since France failed to send any significant support , while the British mobilized larger and better @-@ organized forces . Samuel Vetch , with support from Dudley , Boston merchants , and the New England fishing community , successfully lobbied Queen Anne for military support for an expedition to conquer all of New France in 1709 . This prompted the colonists to mobilize in the expectation that troops would arrive from England ; their efforts were aborted when the promised military support failed to materialize . Vetch and Francis Nicholson returned to England in its aftermath , and again secured promises of military support for an attempt on Port Royal in 1710 . In the summer of 1710 a fleet arrived in Boston carrying 400 marines . Augmented by colonial regiments , this force successfully captured Port Royal after a third siege in 1710 . 
 = Survivor Series ( 2007 ) = 
 Survivor Series ( 2007 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on November 18 , 2007 , at the American Airlines Arena in Miami , Florida . It was presented by THQ 's WWE SmackDown vs. Raw 2008 . It was the 21st annual Survivor Series and starred wrestlers from the Raw , SmackDown ! , and ECW brands . 
 The show 's seven matches showcased prominent WWE wrestlers , who acted out the franchise 's stories in and out of the ring . The main event featured SmackDown wrestlers in a Hell in a Cell match , in which the ring was surrounded by a roofed steel structure . In this match , World Heavyweight Champion Batista defeated The Undertaker to retain his title . In Raw 's main match , Randy Orton defeated Shawn Michaels in a singles match , while in ECW 's prime match , ECW Champion CM Punk defeated John Morrison and The Miz in a Triple Threat match to retain the title . Two matches were on the undercard . The first was a singles match , in which The Great Khali defeated Hornswoggle . The other featured Team Triple H ( Triple H , Jeff Hardy , Rey Mysterio and Kane ) defeating Team Umaga ( Umaga , Mr. Kennedy , Montel Vontavious Porter , Finlay and Big Daddy V ) in an inter @-@ brand five @-@ on @-@ four Survivor Series elimination tag team match . 
 Survivor Series helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 1 @.@ 2 million , through ticket sales and pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . It received mixed critical reviews by various independent sources , including Canadian Online Explorer and the Pro Wrestling Torch . After its release on DVD , the event peaked at number five on Billboard 's Video Sales chart , before it fell off the chart after ten weeks . 
 = = Background = = 
 Survivor Series was the culmination of various scripted plots and storylines . For three months before the event , several professional wrestling matches and scripted plots were played out on WWE programming ( Raw , Friday Night SmackDown ! , and ECW on Sci Fi ) to create feuds between various wrestlers , casting them as villains and heroes . Raw , SmackDown ! , and ECW were also the names of WWE 's televised brands – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a specific program , thus each brand promoted distinct matches . 
 The main narrative for Survivor Series from the SmackDown brand continues the events that unfolded at WrestleMania 23 , WWE 's April pay @-@ per @-@ view , in which The Undertaker defeated Batista for the World Heavyweight Championship . Over the course of several months , the two wrestlers fought in various matches over the title , which eventually involved Edge . The Undertaker was billed as having been injured in one of these matches in May , in which Edge had won the title . During The Undertaker 's absence , Edge was legitimately injured , and The Great Khali won the championship in a Battle Royal , in which wrestlers were eliminated until one remained as the winner . At Unforgiven , WWE 's September pay @-@ per @-@ view event , The Undertaker returned to WWE , while Batista won the World Heavyweight Title from The Great Khali . Afterwards , the original feud between the two wrestlers was restarted and culminated into a standard wrestling match , known in professional wrestling as a singles match , at WWE 's October pay @-@ per @-@ view event Cyber Sunday ; Batista won this match and retained his title . On the November 2 , 2007 episode of Friday Night SmackDown ! , a rematch was advertised in a Hell in a Cell match , in which both wrestlers would fight in a ring surrounded by a roofed steel structure at Survivor Series . 
 The prime rivalry scripted from the Raw brand continued a storyline that extended from Cyber Sunday , between WWE Champion Randy Orton and Shawn Michaels over Orton 's title . At Cyber Sunday , Michaels was chosen by the WWE fans , via online voting , to face Orton for the title , though , Orton retained his title via disqualification . A rematch was promoted for Survivor Series on the October 29 , 2007 edition of Raw , in which Michaels would face Orton for his title . Afterwards , Michaels and Orton fought in different match types over the weeks leading to Survivor Series . On the episode of Raw before Survivor Series , Michaels and Orton met " Face to Face " in a scripted confrontation , in which Orton attacked Michaels . 
 The prime storyline on the ECW brand featured ECW Champion CM Punk , John Morrison , and The Miz . Morrison and Punk 's rivalry revolved over the outcome of their match at Vengeance : Night of Champions , WWE 's June pay @-@ per @-@ view event , in which Morrison defeated Punk to win the ECW Title . Punk sought revenge , but Morrison defeated Punk in two championship matches ; however , Punk won the title from Morrison on the September 4 , 2007 episode of ECW on Sci fi . At Cyber Sunday , The Miz was voted online by fans to challenge Punk for the ECW Title , though , Punk defeated Miz to retain his title . A Triple Threat match was announced for Survivor Series on the November 13 , 2007 episode of ECW on Sci @-@ Fi , in which Punk would defend his title against Morrison and Miz , and the first wrestler to gain a pinfall or submission would win the match and the title . 
 In a narrative extending to the September 10 , 2007 episode of Raw , in which Hornswoggle , a dwarf , was announced as Vince McMahon 's illegitimate son . In this storyline , McMahon did not like the fact that Hornswoggle was his son , and as a result , he promoted matches in which Hornswoggle faced much larger opponents . As part of this storyline , McMahon announced that The Great Khali , who was billed as standing at 7 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 24 m ) , would face Hornswoggle at Survivor Series . In a promotional in @-@ ring segment on the episode of Friday Night SmackDown ! before the pay @-@ per @-@ view event , Khali and Hornswoggle weighed in for their match , in which Khali weighed double the weight of Hornswoggle ; this was a segment created by McMahon to humiliate his son . As a Survivor Series tradition , every event features an inter @-@ brand 5 @-@ on @-@ 5 Survivor Series elimination tag team match . Announced via WWE.com , WWE 's official website , Team Triple H ( Triple H , The Hardy Boyz ( Matt and Jeff ) , Rey Mysterio , and Kane would face Team Umaga ( Umaga , Montel Vontavious Porter ( MVP ) , Finlay , Big Daddy V , and Mr. Kennedy ) . 
 = = Event = = 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The pay @-@ per @-@ view began with the ECW Championship Triple Threat match , in which CM Punk defended his title against John Morrison and The Miz . Throughout the match , The Miz and Morrison double @-@ teamed Punk , however , Miz turned his back on Morrison by attacking him . After Miz tossed Morrison over the top ring ropes onto ringside , Punk lifted Miz onto his shoulders and hit the Go To Sleep . He then pinned Miz to retain his ECW Title . The next scheduled match was an inter @-@ brand 10 @-@ Diva tag team match , in which the team of Kelly Kelly , Torrie Wilson , Mickie James , Maria , and Michelle McCool faced Victoria , Beth Phoenix , Melina , Layla , and Jillian Hall . Phoenix 's team had the advantage over James ' team , until James was tagged into the match . She attacked Melina with her forearm and kissed her before kicking her in the head . James then pinned her to earn the victory for her team . Next was a tag team match for the World Tag Team Championship , in which the champions , Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch defended against Hardcore Holly and Cody Rhodes . At one point , Holly hit Cade with his forearm , and sent Cade and himself onto ringside . In the ring , Murdoch flipped over Rhodes ' back and pulled him down to the mat to perform the " Ace of Spades " . Successfully pinning Rhodes , Murdoch retained the World Tag Team Championship for his team . 
 The fourth match was the five @-@ on @-@ five Survivor Series Elimination Tag team match between Team Triple H and Team Umaga . Before the event , it was announced that Matt Hardy would be unable to compete in the match due to a scripted injury . Kane was the first wrestler eliminated off of Team Triple H , after a Big Daddy V elbow drop . Umaga then pinned Rey Mysterio after the " Samoan Spike " . Only Jeff and Triple H remained for their team , while MVP was Team Umaga 's first elimination ; Jeff Hardy eliminated him after a " Twist of Fate " . Team Umaga 's second elimination occurred after Big Daddy V accidentally dropped an elbow on Mr. Kennedy , which led to a pinfall by Triple H. Big Daddy V was Team Umaga 's third elimination , which occurred after Hardy and Triple H hit a Double DDT . Finlay and Umaga were then eliminated via pinfall , after a " Pedigree " to Finlay , and a " Swanton " to Umaga . As a result , Team Triple H won . The Great Khali versus Hornswoggle was the next scheduled match . At one point , Hornswoggle tried to hit Khali with a shillelagh , but Khali slapped Hornswoggle down to the mat . The match ended via disqualification , after Finlay , Hornswoggle original caretaker , entered the ring and hit Khali in the head with his own shillelagh . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The sixth match was Raw 's main match , in which Randy Orton faced Shawn Michaels for Orton 's WWE Championship . In this stipulated match , Michaels was banned from using his signature move , " Sweet Chin Music " , while Orton was unable to get disqualified , and if either man broke those stipulations he would have lost the WWE Championship match . Because Michaels was banned from using the superkick , his signature maneuver , Michaels attempted various submission moves , such as the Sharpshooter , Crossface , and ankle lock . Eventually , Michaels , attempted to perform his superkick , but to prevent himself from losing the match , he stopped , which then allowed Orton to hit an RKO . Successfully pinning Michaels , Orton retained his WWE Title . 
 The main event from SmackDown was the event 's final match , in which World Heavyweight Champion Batista defended his title against The Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match . At one point , Batista hit the The Undertaker with a Batista Bomb through a table . Batista then attempted to pin The Undertaker but he only got a two count . The Undertaker then hit Batista with a Tombstone Piledriver . He pinned Batista but Batista kicked out at two . The Undertaker then hit another Tombstone Piledriver on top of the steel ring steps . The Undertaker pinned Batista , and as the referee counted the pin , Edge , dressed as a cameraman , pulled the referee out of the ring , and hit The Undertaker with the camera he was holding and then positioned Undertaker 's head on top of the steel steps . Edge then slammed a folding chair across the back of The Undertaker 's head . While the referee re @-@ entered the ring , Edge dragged Batista onto The Undertaker , and as a result , Batista pinned The Undertaker and retained his World Heavyweight Title . After the match Edge came back into the ring and struck The Undertaker in the head as he was sitting up . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Survivor Series , Randy Orton was scripted into a feud with Chris Jericho , who made his return to WWE after a two @-@ year hiatus . The following night on Raw , the evolving feud culminated into a match being promoted for Armageddon , WWE 's December pay @-@ per @-@ view . At Armageddon , Orton retained his WWE Title . After Batista retained his World Heavyweight Championship , Edge was scripted into a rivalry with him over his title . Eventually , The Undertaker was also placed in feud , which led to the advertising of a Triple Threat match at Armageddon for the title . At Armageddon , Edge won the World Heavyweight Championship . Due to the events that occurred at Survivor Series , a match was announced between Finlay and The Great Khali for Armageddon . Finlay prevailed at Armageddon via pinning The Great Khali . After surviving their Elimination tag team match , Triple H and Jeff Hardy were promoted into a match for Armageddon , in which the winner would win the opportunity to challenge for the WWE Championship . At Armageddon , Hardy defeated Triple H. Because Beth Phoenix and Mickie James were the leaders of their teams at Survivor Series , a feud evolved from this , which culminated into a match at Armageddon over Phoenix 's WWE Women 's Championship . Phoenix retained her title at Armageddon . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The American Airlines Arena usually has a capacity of 19 @,@ 600 , which was reduced for Survivor Series due to production purposes . From an approximate attendance of 12 @,@ 000 and 341 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , Survivor Series helped WWE earn $ 19 @.@ 9 million in pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue versus $ 18 @.@ 7 million the previous year ; this was confirmed by WWE in its 2007 fourth quarter financial report . Although Survivor Series helped WWE 's revenue , it earned 42 @,@ 000 less buys than the previous year 's Survivor Series . 
 In addition , the pay @-@ per @-@ view received mixed reviews . Dale Plummer and Nick Tylwalk of Canadian Online Explorer 's SLAM ! Sports – Wrestling rated the entire event 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 points . They also rated Raw and SmackDown 's main event an 8 out of 10 points . J.D. Dunn of 411Mania stated that the event was " The best WWE PPV since Backlash . " Wade Keller of the Pro Wrestling Torch , a professional wrestling newsletter operated since 1987 , reported that the main event was " disappointing " and that " WWE set expectations too high for the Cell . " He rated the Raw main event 3 out of 5 points , while rating the SmackDown main event 2 @.@ 25 out of 5 points . Survivor Series was released on DVD on December 26 , 2007 by WWE Home Video , and it was distributed by Genius Products . The DVD debuted on Billboard 's Video Sales chart on January 19 , 2008 at number five . It spent nine more weeks on the chart , before it fell off the chart at number 20 . 
 = = Results = = 
 Survivor Series elimination match 
 = More Demi Moore = 
 More Demi Moore or the August 1991 Vanity Fair cover was a controversial <unk> nude photograph of the then seven @-@ months pregnant Demi Moore taken by Annie Leibovitz for the August 1991 cover of Vanity Fair to accompany a cover story about Moore . 
 The cover has had a lasting societal impact . Since the cover was released , several celebrities have posed for photographs in advanced stages of pregnancy , although not necessarily as naked as Moore . This trend has made pregnancy photos fashionable and created a booming business . The photograph is one of the most highly regarded magazine covers of all time , and it is one of Leibovitz 's best known works . 
 The picture has been parodied several times , including for advertising Naked Gun 33 ⅓ : The Final Insult ( 1994 ) . This led to the 1998 Second Circuit fair use case Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp. In addition to being satirically parodied and popularizing pregnancy photographs , there was also backlash . Critics rated it grotesque and obscene , and it was also seriously considered when Internet decency standards were first being legislated and adjudicated . Others thought it was a powerful artistic statement . 
 In each of the subsequent two years , Moore made follow @-@ up cover appearances on Vanity Fair , the first of which propelled Joanne Gair to prominence as a trompe @-@ l 'œil body painter . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1991 , Demi Moore was a budding A @-@ list film star who had been married to Bruce Willis since 1987 . The couple had had their first child Rumer Willis in 1988 , and they had hired three photographers for an audience of six friends for the delivery . In 1990 , she had starred in that year 's highest @-@ grossing film , Ghost , for which she was paid $ 350 @,@ 000 , and she had earned $ 2 million for 1991 roles in The Butcher 's Wife , Mortal Thoughts and Nothing But Trouble . Following the photo , she would earn $ 3 million for her 1992 role in A Few Good Men and $ 5 million apiece for roles in The Scarlet Letter ( 1995 ) and Disclosure ( 1994 ) . 
 Annie Leibovitz had been chief photographer at Rolling Stone from 1973 until 1983 , when she moved to Vanity Fair . In 1991 , she had the first mid @-@ career show , Annie Leibovitz Photographs 1970 @-@ 1990 , ever given a photographer by the National Portrait Gallery in Washington , D.C. , with a similarly titled accompanying book . The show traveled to New York City at the International Center of Photography for a showing that would run until December 1 , 1991 . 
 = = Details = = 
 The photograph was one of several taken by Leibovitz of seven @-@ months pregnant 28 @-@ year @-@ old Moore , then carrying the couple 's second daughter , Scout LaRue . The photographs ranged from Moore in lacy underwear and spiked high heels , to a revealing <unk> . The final selection had Moore wearing only a diamond ring . Joanne Gair worked on make @-@ up for the shoot . Samuel Irving Newhouse , Jr . , chairman of Conde Nast Publications , was very supportive of the chosen cover despite the potential for lost sales . Tina Brown , Vanity Fair editor , quickly realized that there would be harsh backlash for regular distribution of the magazine ; the issue had to be wrapped in a white envelope with only Moore 's eyes visible . Some editions had a brown wrapper that implied naughtiness . However , Brown viewed the image as a chance to make a statement about the decade of the 1990s after a decade dominated by power suits . Approximately 100 million people saw the cover . 
 The use of a pregnant sex symbol was in a sense an attempt to combat the pop culture representations of the anathema of the awkward , uncomfortable , and grotesquely excessive female form in a culture that values thinness . Leibovitz ' candid portrayal drew a wide spectrum of responses from television , radio and newspaper personalities and the public at large ranging from complaints of sexual objectification to celebrations of the photograph as a symbol of empowerment . One of the judges in Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp. stated that the image evoked Botticelli 's Birth of Venus . The contemporary retrospective view of some is that this photograph is " high art " . The intent of the photograph was to portray pregnancy with a celebrity in a way that was bold , proud and understated in a " anti @-@ Hollywood , anti @-@ glitz " manner . It was successful in some regards as many perceived it as a statement of beauty and pride . However , many took offense and the cover drew unusually intense controversy for Vanity Fair in the form of ninety @-@ five television spots , sixty @-@ four radio shows , 1 @,@ 500 newspaper articles and a dozen cartoons . Some stores and newsstands refused to carry the August issue , while others modestly concealed it in the wrapper evocative of porn magazines . 
 The photo is not only considered one of Leibovitz 's most famous , but also an almost mythical representation . It is considered emblematic of Si Newhouse 's reputation for " <unk> features and provocative photos . " It is the first photo mentioned in the New York Times review of Leibovitz 's exhibition Annie Leibovitz : A Photographer 's Life , 1990 @-@ 2005 at the Brooklyn Museum and it is contrasted with another of her female pregnancy photographs ( of Melania Trump ) . 
 A year later , Moore still did not understand the controversy that caused photos of a naked , pregnant woman to be viewed as morally objectionable . Moore stated that , " I did feel glamorous , beautiful and more free about my body . I don 't know how much more family oriented I could possibly have gotten . " She considered the cover to be a healthy " feminist statement . " In 2007 , Moore stated that the picture was not originally intended for publication . She had posed in a personal photo session , not a cover shoot . Leibovitz has had personal photo sessions of Moore and all of her daughters . 
 = = = Cover story = = = 
 One journalist 's professional account of the cover story describes it as " relentlessly long " , and a second journalist 's description is that it is a " very long profile " . The article discussed the then three @-@ year @-@ old Rumer Willis and husband Bruce Willis . Willis and Moore discuss each other in the article . The article also spends three pages recounting her life . The article spent little time on her next film , The Butcher 's Wife or the baby inside her , Scout LaRue Willis . 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 = = = Naked Gun 33 ⅓ = = = 
 The photograph was parodied on several occasions , including the computer @-@ generated Spy magazine version , which placed Willis ' head on Moore 's body . In Leibovitz v. Paramount Pictures Corp. , Leibovitz sued over one parody featuring Leslie Nielsen , made to promote the 1994 film Naked Gun 33 ⅓ : The Final Insult . In the parody , the model 's body was used and " the guilty and smirking face of Mr. Nielsen appeared above " . The teaser said " Due this March " . The case was dismissed in 1996 because the parody relied " for its comic effect on the contrast between the original " . 
 In a parody ruling the court must determine whether a work is transformative in a way that gives a new expression , meaning or message to the original work . In this case , the court ruled that the " ad may reasonably be perceived , as commenting on the seriousness and even pretentiousness of the original . " It also ruled that the ad differed from the original " in a way that may , reasonably , be perceived as commenting , through ridicule on what a viewer might reasonably think is the undue self @-@ importance conveyed by the subject of the Leibovitz photograph . " 
 = = = Other issues = = = 
 When the Internet arose as a popular and important medium and the United States Supreme Court issued a ruling on the Communications Decency Act of 1996 ( CDA ) , Moore 's image was described as a sort of litmus test to determine if the law could be reasonably applied in the current environment by the trial court . When John Paul Stevens ' rendered an opinion over a year later , the image was still on the minds of legal scholars . 
 Fifteen years later the photo continued to be parodied . In 2006 , graffiti artist Banksy used a Simpsons @-@ like character to replace Moore 's head for a promotion in Los Angeles , California . He illegally posted the parody around Los Angeles to promote his website and his exhibition . 
 = = Follow @-@ ups = = 
 In the Demi 's Birthday Suit August 1992 issue of Vanity Fair , Moore was shown on the cover in the body painting photo by Joanne Gair . The painting is a memorable example of modern body painting artwork . It made Gair an immediate pop culture star as the most prominent body paint artist , which prompted consideration for an Absolut Vodka Absolut Gair ad campaign . The 1992 cover , which required a thirteen @-@ hour sitting for Gair and her team of make @-@ up artists , was a commemoration of the August 1991 photo . Leibovitz could not decide where to shoot , and reserved two mobile homes , four hotel rooms and five houses . 
 In December 1993 , Moore was again on the cover of Vanity Fair , but this time she was dressed in two straps and a large red bow and was sitting on David Letterman 's lap while he was dressed up as Santa Claus . 
 Other celebrities have since posed nude or semi @-@ nude while in advanced pregnancy , including Christina Aguilera and Britney Spears whose billboard advertisements led to great controversy . Newsweek referred to the pose more than a decade later , and The New York Times coined " <unk> " for the nude pregnant <unk> pose . Eventually , Vogue and Harper 's Bazaar included pregnant cover models , and Star included a pregnant foursome of Katie Holmes , Gwen Stefani , Gwyneth Paltrow and Angelina Jolie . They also had a " Bump Brigade " of Jennie Garth , Maggie Gyllenhaal and Sofia Coppola . Vogue had a very pregnant 37 @-@ year @-@ old Brooke Shields on the cover of its April 2003 issue . By the time Linda Evangelista appeared pregnant ( and clothed ) on the August 2006 cover of Vogue , pregnancy was not the emphasis of the story . However , even at the end of 2007 appearing bare @-@ bellied and pregnant on the cover of a magazine , as Aguilera did for Marie Claire , was still considered a derivative of Moore 's original . When Melania Trump appeared in American Vogue , she held in esteem as a model of maternity fashion by Anna Wintour . A commemoration of the photo was a self @-@ portrait by Leibovitz in which she appeared in profile and pregnant for her A Photographer 's Life exhibition . Myleene Klass posed for a similar nude pregnant photo for Glamour magazine in 2007 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The photo has had long cultural and social impact in the U.S. Many women feel that the rush of celebrities taking pregnant photos has made taking such photos glamorous for pregnant mothers . As the photos have become more common on magazine covers the business of documenting pregnancies photographically has boomed . Furthermore , the photo is critically acclaimed . Almost fifteen years after its publication the American Society of Magazine Editors listed it as the second best magazine cover of the last forty years . 
 = Big Girls Don 't Cry ( book ) = 
 Big Girls Don 't Cry : The Election that Changed Everything for American Women is a 2010 non @-@ fiction book written by American journalist Rebecca Traister and published by Free Press . The book discusses women 's contributions to and experiences of the 2008 United States presidential election . Traister places particular focus on four main political figures — Hillary Clinton , Sarah Palin , Michelle Obama and Elizabeth Edwards — as well as women in the media , including Katie Couric , Rachel Maddow , Tina Fey and Amy Poehler . She also describes her personal experience of the electoral campaign and her shift from supporting John Edwards to Hillary Clinton . 
 Traister began writing about the presidential election while working as a political columnist for Salon ; her coverage for Salon provided much of the book 's content . She aimed to write an account of the election from a feminist perspective , focusing on events that she felt were otherwise underreported in the media . The book was generally well received by critics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Rebecca Traister described the 2008 presidential election as " a completely gripping narrative " during which " everything in America was busted open " , but was disappointed by the way it was covered in the mainstream media . She felt that some " big stories " — such as Hillary Clinton becoming the first woman to win an American presidential primary — had been underreported , and that many misogynistic and racist remarks made by commentators had gone unnoticed . By writing the book , she wanted to defend the feminist perspective of the election against its Democrat and <unk> critics " who continue to write off concern with these issues " . Asked about what she intended for readers to [ take away from ] the book , Traister said : 
 I want those people who lived through the 2008 election — and in many cases suffered through it , on one end or the other — to think about the history that we all made and we all witnessed . I really want those of us who were pained by it or who were exhausted by it to understand the way that living through that election changed our country . Because I believe it did . 
 Traister chose the title Big Girls Don 't Cry when it was suggested by a friend , before she began writing the book ; she thought it was " the perfect ironic reference to Hillary [ Clinton ] ' s ( non- ) crying moment in New Hampshire " , as well as a reference to her own response of " gulp [ ing ] out sobs " when Clinton lost the Democratic primary . She said that , after interviewing women who described crying at various moments during the election , " I realized that the title was more prophetic than I knew " . Some of Traister 's political views expressed in the book contradict those she expressed when writing for Salon , such as her support for Clinton and her defense of Michelle Obama in the book ; throughout the book she describes the transformations of her opinions . 
 = = Content = = 
 Big Girls Don 't Cry is divided into twelve chapters , telling a roughly chronological recount of the 2008 election , interwoven with Traister 's own experiences and perspectives as well as analysis from other political commentators . She focuses on four key women involved in the election : Hillary Clinton , Sarah Palin , Michelle Obama and Elizabeth Edwards . 
 In 2008 Clinton , a Senator and candidate for the Democratic Party presidential nomination , became the first American woman to win a presidential primary . Traister discusses Clinton 's political campaign , which did not focus on her gender , and the misogynistic reactions she received from the media and political opponents . She argues that the Democratic Party 's lack of response to the sexism of Clinton 's opponents led a large number of liberal female voters to abandon the party , and blames Mark Penn for advising Clinton not to advertise herself as a feminist . Although she originally supported John Edwards ' candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination , she became a strong supporter of Clinton . 
 Palin was the Republican Party nominee for Vice President and then @-@ Governor of Alaska . Traister criticises Palin 's " faux feminism " , as she claimed to be a feminist despite running under a party whose policies did not align with feminist ideals , and claims that her strong conservatism led Clinton supporters to back Barack Obama rather than John McCain after Clinton 's withdrawal from the race . Despite this , Palin was celebrated by Republican women voters ; Traister argues that this inspired a wave of feminism which focused on political empowerment but neglected other values such as reproductive rights . 
 Traister also discusses the wives of men involved in politics : Michelle Obama , the wife of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama , and Elizabeth Edwards , the wife of John Edwards , another candidate for the Democratic presidential nomination . Traister contrasts the Obamas ' relationship with that of Hillary and ex @-@ President Bill Clinton . She argues that Michelle Obama 's candidness led many women voters to feel they had more in common with her than Hillary Clinton . She compares Elizabeth Edwards ' public image to that of Michelle Obama and Hillary Clinton , and criticizes her for " <unk> [ ing ] her husband 's deception " about his extramarital affair . 
 In addition to female political figures , Traister also discusses women in the media who played influential roles in the election coverage . These include Rachel Maddow , whose political commentary led to a surge in her popularity ; television journalist Katie Couric , who led a critical interview with Sarah Palin ; and Tina Fey and Amy Poehler , who parodied Palin and Clinton , respectively , in several Saturday Night Live skits . 
 The book is written from a feminist perspective ; Traister recounts her own experiences with the women 's liberation movement , identifying with neither second @-@ wave nor third @-@ wave feminism . She notes the various responses to the election and candidates from different generations of feminists , and argues that for older feminists the main priority was the election of a female President , while younger women were less inclined to automatically vote for a female candidate . She concludes that the 2008 election marked the year that " the women 's liberation movement found thrilling new life " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Big Girls Don 't Cry was deemed a New York Times Notable Book of 2010 and the winner of the <unk> Drinker Ballard Book Prize . 
 It also received positive reviews from critics . In a review for Foreign Affairs , Walter Russell Mead described Traister as " one of the most powerful voices in a new generation of American feminist writers " , while Liesl Schillinger of The New York Times called the book " a passionate , visionary and very personal account " of the 2008 election . Maureen Corrigan of NPR praised the " superb " book , and concluded that " Girls , these days , can not only run for president ; they can brilliantly analyze presidential campaigns , too . " The Washington Post critic Connie Schultz felt that at times Traister 's writing at times seemed to " alienate every female reader over 40 " , but wrote that the book was " in its best parts ... a raw and brave memoir " . A writer for Kirkus Reviews praised Traister 's arguments and summarized the book as " nuanced look at how the recent election shaped — and was shaped by — gender " . Lynda Obst wrote for The Atlantic that the book served as a satisfying explanation to " mystified " Obama supporters " what the hell all the crying was about " after Clinton conceded from the Democratic primary . Slate reviewer Hanna Rosin questioned the relevance of some chapters but overall concluded that " Traister can be clever , caustic , wickedly funny , and as cynical as the next blogger , but it 's always clear that in her heart she cares . " 
 = Sabre Wulf = 
 Sabre Wulf a 1984 action @-@ adventure game by Ultimate Play the Game and the first game of the Sabreman series . The player , as Sabreman , navigates a 2D jungle flip @-@ screen maze aiming to reconstruct an amulet and escape . The maze is divided into 256 edge @-@ to @-@ edge screens filled with colourful flora and enemies that spawn randomly . Ultimate released the game for the ZX Spectrum in 1984 at an above @-@ average price to combat piracy . The game 's premium packaging became a company standard . Ultimate , a developer known for its secrecy , had finished Sabre Wulf 's sequels in advance of its release , but withheld them for marketing purposes . They were swiftly released the same year . Ultimate hired outside developers to make Sabre Wulf ports for the BBC Micro , Commodore 64 , and Amstrad CPC platforms , and the game was subsequently included in multiple compilation releases , including the 2015 Ultimate and Rare retrospective Rare Replay . 
 Reviewers lauded the game 's graphics and found its gameplay similar to Ultimate 's previous release , Atic Atac , though preferred Sabre Wulf . Reviewers also noted the game 's difficulty . It was recommended in several gaming publications and won " Best Maze Game " in the 1984 Crash Reader Awards . Sabre Wulf was a financial success and reached the top of the format charts . It was listed in multiple lists of top Spectrum games . It introduced the Sabreman character , who has recurred throughout Ultimate and Rare intellectual properties , and the Sabreman game series . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player , as the adventurer Sabreman , must fight their way through a 2D jungle and reconstruct an amulet in order to leave . After collecting four pieces of the ACG Amulet ( Ashby Computers & Graphics , the developer 's former name ) , the player can bypass the gatekeeper guarding the cave exit , which leads to the game 's sequel , Underwurlde . Sabre Wulf is presented as a flip @-@ screen maze with paths bordered by tropical flora . The player only views a single small and static area of the maze at any time . When the player character reaches the edge of the screen , the next section of the maze loads . There are 256 screens in the maze . The player does not receive any explicit guidance on how to play and is left to decipher the game 's objectives through trial and error . Sabre Wulf 's graphics fill the full screen with no interface , inventory , or damage indicators apart from a high score meter in the top corner . Sabreman can eat orchid power @-@ ups , which bloom for only a few seconds . He turns the colour of the orchid and receives one of five abilities : some are helpful , like invulnerability or faster walking speed , and others impair him , such as slower walking speed , or reversed controls . Sabreman also collects treasure and extra lives scattered throughout the maze . 
 The Sabre Wulf map is drawn in a 16 by 16 grid populated by attacking enemies and bordered by landforms . The player swings Sabreman 's sabre with the push of the joystick 's fire button to defeat enemies that spawn in random locations on @-@ screen . Enemies include spiders , scorpions , snakes , bats , indigenous people , sleeping hippos , and a fast wolf ( the titular Sabre Wulf ) . Some enemies , such as the hippos , flee when hit . The sword does not affect the wolf or cave guardians . An indestructible bushfire appears and pursues the player who idles for too long in the same screen . Apart from the jungle , the game 's settings include mountains and lakes . 
 The game begins with an electronic rendition of classical music composed by Bach . The Spectrum and Commodore 64 versions have an optional two @-@ player mode in which players take turns controlling Sabreman . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ultimate Play the Game , the developer of Sabre Wulf , was known for its secrecy , distance from game development circles , and reticence to reveal details about their development practices and upcoming games . Little is known about their process apart from that they used Sage IV computers . They also preferred to develop for the ZX Spectrum 's Z80 microprocessor and chose to outsource development for other platforms , such as those that ran 6502 microprocessors . After releasing Atic Atac at the end of 1983 , Ultimate went silent until it ran teaser advertisements for Sabre Wulf in April 1984 . ( The company rarely depicted actual gameplay in their advertisements . ) They had already prepared Knight Lore , the third game in the Sabreman series , before the character 's introduction in Sabre Wulf . Ultimate founders Tim and Chris Stamper withheld Knight Lore for about a year because they felt Sabre Wulf would not have sold as well once players saw the former 's graphical advancements . ( Knight Lore became known as a seminal work in British gaming history and an iconic game of the 1980s for its popularization of the isometric platformer format . ) 
 Ultimate released Sabre Wulf for the ZX Spectrum in 1984 and the other Sabreman titles soon followed . Sabre Wulf was Ultimate 's first game to use what would become the company 's standard price and mysterious , unadorned packaging . Ultimate nearly doubled its usual retail price in what they saw as a " bold step " to combat piracy . They expected legal owners to be more protective over letting friends copy their more expensive copies . Ultimate had seen competitor prices slowly increasing and felt that their full price was fair for their time invested . The game retailed in a high @-@ quality , big cardboard box with a glossy instruction manual , which were both upgrades over regular game packaging . It became Ultimate 's standard packaging for new games . The company 's game packaging was nondescript and showed no screenshots of the in @-@ game world . Ultimate 's games did not display internal credits , and they hired outside developers to complete Sabre Wulf ports for other consoles . Paul Proctor wrote the BBC Micro conversion , and in 1985 , Greg Duddle wrote the Commodore 64 conversion , which was licensed under Firebird . Sabre Wulf later appeared in the 1985 compilation They Sold a Million , a collection of Spectrum games that had together sold a million units . When the compilation was released for the Amstrad CPC , Sabre Wulf was converted for the platform and eventually released in a standalone edition . Sabre Wulf also appeared alongside Underwurlde , its sequel , in a Commodore 64 pack , and in the August 2015 Xbox One compilation of 30 Ultimate and Rare titles , Rare Replay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviewers appreciated the game 's graphics and found its gameplay similar to Ultimate 's previous game , Atic Atac — particularly in its opening sequence and maze format — though reviewers preferred Sabre Wulf . Critics also noted the game 's difficulty and above @-@ average pricing . Sabre Wulf was a selected recommendation in Crash ( July 1984 ) , Personal Computer Games ( August 1984 ) , and Popular Computing Weekly ( June 1984 ) . The game was named " Best Maze Game " in the 1984 Crash Readers Awards . Retro Gamer reported that Ultimate 's new pricing strategy was a success and that Sabre Wulf broke the company 's sales records and reached the top of the format charts , though Computer and Video Games ( CVG ) reported in December 1984 that Sabre Wulf had sold only 30 @,@ 000 copies — not as many as the company 's prior games . Eurogamer reported that 350 @,@ 000 units were sold in total . 
 Crash confirmed rumors that the game was similar to Atic Atac , but declared Sabre Wulf the better of the two , and predicted that they would have similar legacies . Crash wrote that their inability to <unk> Sabreman 's current inventory or resistance to damage added to the game 's mystique , and that Ultimate was particularly skilled at not giving hints but leaving sufficient clues through the game 's design . Personal Computer Games found one such tip : that the indigenous enemies will play a sound when they align both horizontally and vertically with a piece of the amulet . In a similar experience , Popular Computing Weekly slowly learned to use rather than avoid the orchids . CVG described the game 's instructions as " cryptic " . Crash had high praise for the colourful and detailed graphics and animations , as well as the sound . One of their staff called it " a Software Masterpiece " . The magazine 's chief complaints were of a bug in two @-@ player mode and of the game 's high price , nearly double the average . They predicted that the cost may lead to more piracy . A year later , in 1985 , Crash repeated that Sabre Wulf was among the top games available for the Spectrum . They added that the game did not feel antiquated and that comparisons to Atic Atac at its launch were unfair , similar to calling any two text adventures identical . They received more mail in praise of Sabre Wulf in 1984 than for any other game . 
 CVG wrote that Sabre Wulf carried Ultimate 's momentum from Jetpac and Atic Atac . In their opinion , Sabre Wulf had the best graphics on the Spectrum , with graphical detail that surpassed what previous reviewers thought was possible . In describing the game 's difficulty , CVG mentioned the narrow window in which sword swings register as enemy hits . Their Commodore 64 review two years later approved of the port and said that the game remained a classic . They recommended drawing a map of the maze , without which it was easy to get lost . Personal Computer Games found that many of Sabre Wulf 's 256 screens were repeated from elsewhere in the game world . Sinclair User liked how the hippo enemies forced the player to vary their hack @-@ and @-@ slash gameplay style . They thought that the game 's price was too high and noted that while Sabre Wulf had some flicker issues , it altogether met Ultimate 's high quality benchmarks . 
 A retrospective review from Retro Gamer said that Sabre Wulf was " essentially an interactive maze " packed with colour and hack @-@ and @-@ slash gameplay . They likened the game 's colour choice and setting to what the magazine considered Ultimate 's best arcade game , Dingo ( 1983 ) . Retro Gamer disliked Sabreman 's inability to hit enemies above or below him . Eurogamer 's Peter Parrish found the game 's collision detection imprecise as well . In The Routledge Companion to Video Game Studies , Simon <unk> used Sabre Wulf as an example of games that maximized the limited colour palette of 8 @-@ bit computers . He described its colours as pure , with a glow like stained glass and a strong figure – ground contrast against the Spectrum 's black background . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Spectrum release was included in multiple lists of top games for the platform . Parrish ( Eurogamer ) wrote that the game was " much @-@ beloved " in a retrospective review . Sabre Wulf was the first of four titles in the Sabreman series for the ZX Spectrum . Retro Gamer wrote that the Sabreman character was memorable both in name and appearance , and fit the " 8 @-@ bit hero " archetype : an ordinary human with a hat and exaggerated nose . The last , unreleased game in the Spectrum Sabreman series , Mire Mare , was planned to have been similar to Sabre Wulf in gameplay . Rare , the successor to Ultimate , later released the side @-@ scrolling platformer Sabre Wulf for the Game Boy Advance in 2004 that had Sabreman enlist jungle animals to solve the Sabre Wulf 's puzzles . It was not received well by fans . Elements from the original Sabre Wulf appear in other games , including Rare 's Jet Force Gemini . Retro Gamer considered Sabreman 's recurrence to be proof that Rare was interested in the character and series . 
 = Fasci Siciliani = 
 The Fasci Siciliani [ <unk> <unk> ] , short for Fasci Siciliani dei Lavoratori ( Sicilian Workers Leagues ) , were a popular movement of democratic and socialist inspiration , which arose in Sicily in the years between 1889 and 1894 . The Fasci gained the support of the poorest and most exploited classes of the island by channeling their frustration and discontent into a coherent programme based on the establishment of new rights . Consisting of a jumble of traditionalist sentiment , religiosity , and socialist consciousness , the movement reached its apex in the summer of 1893 , when new conditions were presented to the landowners and mine owners of Sicily concerning the renewal of share cropping and rental contracts . 
 Upon the rejection of these conditions , there was an outburst of strikes that rapidly spread throughout the island , and was marked by violent social conflict , almost rising to the point of insurrection . The leaders of the movement were not able to keep the situation from getting out of control . The proprietors and landowners asked the government to intervene , and Prime Minister Francesco Crispi declared a state of emergency in January 1894 , dissolving the organizations , arresting its leaders and restoring order through the use of extreme force . Some reforms followed , including workmen 's compensation and pension schemes . The suppression of the strikes also led to an increase in emigration . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Fasci movement was made up of a federation of scores of associations that developed among farm workers , tenant farmers , and small sharecroppers as well as artisans , intellectuals , and industrial workers . The immediate demands of the movement were fair land rents , higher wages , lower local taxes and distribution of misappropriated common land . Between 1889 and 1893 some 170 Fasci were established in Sicily . According to some sources the movement reached a membership of more than 300 @,@ 000 by the end of 1893 . The Fasci constituted autonomous organizations with their own insignia ( red rosettes ) , uniforms and sometimes even musical bands , and their own local halls for reunions and congresses . They were called Fasci ( Fascio literally means bundle ) because everyone can break a single stick , but no one can break a bundle of sticks . 
 While many of the leaders were of socialist or anarchist leanings , few of their supporters were true revolutionaries . Nevertheless , the peasants who assembled into the Fasci were eager for social justice and convinced that a new world was about to be born . A crucifix hung beside the red flag in many of their meeting @-@ places , and portraits of the King beside those of the revolutionaries Garibaldi , Mazzini and Marx . Cheers for the King were often heard in their marches that almost resembled quasi @-@ religious processions . Many of the Fasci were part of the Italian Workers ' Party ( Partito dei Lavoratori Italiani , the initial name of the Italian Socialist Party ) that had been founded at a conference in Genoa on August 14 , 1892 . 
 The rural Fasci in particular were a curious phenomenon : both ancient and modern . They combined millenarian aspirations with urban intellectual leadership often in contact with workers ’ organizations and ideas in the more industrialized Northern Italy . According to the Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm , the Fasci were millenarian insofar as the socialism preached by the movement was seen by the Sicilian peasantry as a new religion , the true religion of Christ – betrayed by the priests , who were on the side of the rich – that foretold the dawn of a new world , without poverty , hunger and cold , in accordance with God ’ s will . The Fasci , which included many women , were encouraged by the messianic belief that the start of a new reign of justice was looming and the movement spread like an epidemic . 
 = = Foundation and rapid growth = = 
 The Fasci were the result of the revolt of the Sicilian peasants against the introduction of capitalist relationships into the rural economy aggravated by the world depression in agriculture of the 1880s . The agrarian crisis between 1888 and 1892 led to a steep decrease in wheat prices . The island ’ s main sources of wealth – wine , fruit and sulphur – suffered a heavy blow . The dominant landowning class channeled most of the economic burden on to the peasantry , in the form of higher rents and discriminatory local taxation . As social tension rose , a handful of young and hitherto quite unknown socialist intellectuals – many of them recent graduates of Palermo University – seized their opportunity . The movement grew under the first government of Prime minister Francesco Crispi ( 1887 @-@ 1891 ) and coincided with unpopular tax increases and ratification of a series of laws curtailing personal freedom . The Italian economy had been sliding into a deep recession since the late 1880s . New protective tariffs had been introduced in 1887 on agricultural and industrial goods , followed by a trade war with France , which badly damaged Italian commerce and affecting Italy ’ s agricultural exports , the only potentially dynamic economic sector of southern Italy . Many farmers suffered severely . 
