 = = Calendar = = 
 The Maya calendrical system , in common with other Mesoamerican calendars , had its origins in the Preclassic period . However , it was the Maya that developed the calendar to its maximum sophistication , recording lunar and solar cycles , eclipses and movements of planets with great accuracy . In some cases , the Maya calculations were more accurate than equivalent calculations in the Old World ; for example , the Maya solar year was calculated to greater accuracy than the Julian year . The Maya calendar was intrinsically tied to Maya ritual , and it was central to Maya religious practices . The calendar combined a non @-@ repeating Long Count with three interlocking cycles , each measuring a progressively larger period . These were the 260 @-@ day tzolk 'in , the 365 @-@ day haab ' , and the 52 @-@ year Calendar Round , resulting from the combination of the tzolk 'in with the haab ' . There were also additional calendric cycles , such as an 819 @-@ day cycle associated with the four quadrants of Maya cosmology , governed by four different aspects of the god K 'awiil . 
 The basic unit in the Maya calendar was one day , or k 'in , and 20 k 'in grouped to form a <unk> . The next unit , instead of being multiplied by 20 , as called for by the vigesimal system , was multiplied by 18 in order to provide a rough approximation of the solar year ( hence producing 360 days ) . This 360 @-@ day year was called a tun . Each succeeding level of multiplication followed the vigesimal system . 
 The 260 @-@ day tzolk 'in provided the basic cycle of Maya ceremony , and the foundations of Maya prophecy . No astronomical basis for this count has been proved , and it may be that the 260 @-@ day count is based on the human gestation period . This is reinforced by the use of the tzolk 'in to record dates of birth , and provide corresponding prophecy . The 260 @-@ day cycle repeated a series of 20 @-@ day @-@ names , with a number from 1 to 13 prefixed to indicated where in the cycle a particular day occurred . 
 The 365 @-@ day haab was produced by a cycle of eighteen named 20 @-@ day <unk> , completed by the addition of 5 @-@ day period called the wayeb . The wayeb was considered to be a dangerous time , when the barriers between the mortal and supernatural realms were broken , allowing malignant deities to cross over and interfere in human concerns . In a similar way to the tz 'olkin , the named <unk> would be prefixed by a number ( from 0 to 19 ) , in the case of the shorter wayeb period , the prefix numbers ran 0 to 4 . Since each day in the tz 'olkin had a name and number ( e.g. 8 Ajaw ) , this would interlock with the haab , producing an additional number and name , to give any day a more complete designation , for example 8 Ajaw 13 Keh . Such a day name could only recur once every 52 years , and this period is referred to by Mayanists as the Calendar Round . In most Mesoamerican cultures , the Calendar Round was the largest unit for measuring time . 
 As with any non @-@ repeating calendar , the Maya measured time from a fixed start point . The Maya set the beginning of their calendar as the end of a previous cycle of bak 'tuns , equivalent to a day in 3114 BC . This was believed by the Maya to be the day of the creation of the world in its current form . The Maya used the Long Count Calendar to fix any given day of the Calendar Round within their current great <unk> cycle consisting of either 20 bak 'tuns . There was some variation in the calendar , specifically texts in Palenque demonstrate that the <unk> cycle that ended in 3114 BC had only 13 bak 'tuns , and other inscriptions seem to have used an exceptional cycle of 13 + 20 bak 'tun in the current <unk> . Additionally , there may have been some regional variation in how these exceptional cycles were managed . 
 A full long count date consisted of an introductory glyph followed by five glyphs counting off the number of bak 'tuns , kat <unk> , tuns , <unk> , and k <unk> since the start of the current creation . This would be followed by the tz 'olkin portion of the Calendar Round date , and after a number of intervening glyphs , the Long Count date would end with the <unk> portion of the Calendar Round date . 
 = = = Correlation of the Long Count calendar = = = 
 Although the Calendar Round is still in use today , the Maya started using an abbreviated Short Count during the Late Classic period . The Short Count is a count of 13 k 'atuns . For this reason , there is no direct correlation between the Long Count and the European calendar . The most generally accepted correlation is the Goodman @-@ Martínez @-@ Thompson , or GMT , correlation . This equates the Long Count date 11 @.@ 16 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 @.@ 0 13 Ajaw 8 Xul with the Gregorian date of 12 November 1539 . <unk> Simon Martin and Nikolai Grube argue for a two @-@ day shift from the standard GMT correlation . The Spinden Correlation would shift the Long Count dates back by 260 years ; it also accords with the documentary evidence , and is better suited to the archaeology of the Yucatán Peninsula , but presents problems with the rest of the Maya region . The George Vaillant Correlation would shift all Maya dates 260 years later , and would greatly shorten the Postclassic period . Radiocarbon dating of dated wooden lintels at Tikal supports the GMT correlation . 
 = = Astronomy = = 
 The famous astrologer John Dee used an Aztec obsidian mirror to see into the future . We may look down our noses at his ideas , but one may be sure that in outlook he was far closer to a Maya priest astronomer than is an astronomer of our century . 
 The Maya made meticulous observations of celestial bodies , patiently recording astronomical data on the movements of the sun , moon , Venus , and the stars . This information was used for divination , so Maya astronomy was essentially for astrological purposes . Maya astronomy did not serve to study the universe for scientific reasons , nor was it used to measure the seasons in order to calculate crop planting . It was rather used by the priesthood to comprehend past cycles of time , and project them into the future to produce prophecy . The priesthood refined observations and recorded eclipses of the sun and moon , and movements of Venus and the stars ; these were measured against dated events in the past , on the assumption that similar events would occur in the future when the same astronomical conditions prevailed . Illustrations in the codices show that priests made astronomical observations using the naked eye , assisted by crossed sticks as a sighting device . Analysis of the few remaining Postclassic codices has revealed that , at the time of European contact , the Maya had recorded eclipse tables , calendars , and astronomical knowledge that was more accurate at that time than comparable knowledge in Europe . 
 The Maya measured the 584 @-@ day Venus cycle with an error of just two hours . Five cycles of Venus equated to eight 365 @-@ day haab calendrical cycles , and this period was recorded in the codices . The Maya also followed the movements of Jupiter , Mars and Mercury . When Venus rose as the Morning Star , this was associated with the rebirth of the Maya Hero Twins . For the Maya , the heliacal rising of Venus was associated with destruction and upheaval . Venus was closely associated with warfare , and the hieroglyph meaning " war " incorporated the glyph @-@ element symbolising the planet . Sight @-@ lines through the windows of the Caracol building at Chichen Itza align with the northernmost and southernmost extremes of Venus ' path . Maya rulers launched military campaigns to coincide with the heliacal or <unk> rising of Venus , and would also sacrifice important captives to coincide with such conjunctions . 
 Solar and lunar eclipses were considered to be especially dangerous events that could bring catastrophe upon the world . In the Dresden Codex , a solar eclipse is represented by a serpent devouring the k 'in ( " day " ) hieroglyph . Eclipses were interpreted as the sun or moon being bitten , and lunar tables were recorded in order that the Maya might be able to predict them , and perform the appropriate ceremonies to ward off disaster . 
 = = Religion and mythology = = 
 In common with the rest of Mesoamerica , the Maya believed in a supernatural realm inhabited by an array of powerful deities . These deities needed to be placated with ceremonial offerings and ritual practices . At the core of Maya religious practice was the worship of deceased ancestors , who would act as go @-@ betweens for their living descendants in dealings with the denizens of the supernatural realm . The earliest intermediaries between humans and the supernatural realm were shamans . As the Maya civilization developed , the ruling elite codified the general concepts held by Maya society , and developed them into religious cults that justified their right to rule . In the Late Preclassic , the pinnacle of this process was the combination of ultimate political and religious power in the divine king , the k 'uhul ajaw . Although it is difficult to reconstruct the belief system through archaeology , some indicators of ritual practice do leave physical traces . These include dedicatory caches and other ritual deposits , shrines , and burials and their associated funerary offerings . In addition , Maya art , architecture , and writing all assist in the reconstruction of ancient Maya beliefs ; these can be combined with ethnographic sources , including records of Maya religious practices made by the Spanish during the conquest . 
 The Maya viewed the cosmos as highly structured ; there were thirteen levels in the heavens , and nine levels in the underworld ; the mortal world occupied a position between the heavens and the underworld . Each level had four cardinal directions associated with a different colour . Major deities had aspects associated with these directions and colours ; north was white , east was red , south was yellow , and west was black . 
 Maya households interred their dead underneath the floors of their houses , with offerings appropriate to the social status of the family . There the dead could act as protective ancestors . Maya lineages were patrilineal , so the worship of a prominent male ancestor would be emphasized , often with a household shrine . As Maya society developed , and the elite became more powerful , Maya royalty developed their household shrines into the great pyramids that held the tombs of their ancestors . 
 Supernatural forces pervaded Maya life , and influenced every aspect of it from the simplest day @-@ to @-@ day activities such as food preparation , to trade , politics , and elite activities . Maya deities governed all aspects of the world , both visible and invisible . The Maya priesthood was a closed group , drawing its members from the established elite ; by the Early Classic they were recording increasingly complex ritual information in their hieroglyphic books , including astronomical observations , calendrical cycles , history and mythology . The priests performed public ceremonies that incorporated feasting , bloodletting , incense burning , music , ritual dance , and , on certain occasions , human sacrifice . During the Classic period , the Maya ruler was the high priest , and the direct conduit between mortals and the gods . It is highly likely that , among commoners , shamanism continued in parallel to state religion . By the Postclassic , religious emphasis had changed ; there was an increase in worship of the images of deities , and more frequent recourse to human sacrifice . 
 = = = Human sacrifice = = = 
 Blood was viewed as a potent source of nourishment for the Maya deities , and the sacrifice of a living creature was a powerful blood offering . By extension , the sacrifice of a human life was the ultimate offering of blood to the gods , and the most important Maya rituals culminated in human sacrifice . Generally only high status prisoners of war were sacrificed , with lower status captives being used for labour . 
 Important rituals such as the dedication of major building projects or the enthronement of a new ruler required a human offering . The sacrifice of an enemy king was the most prized offering , and such a sacrifice involved decapitation of the captive ruler in a ritual reenactment of the decapitation of the Maya maize god by the Maya death gods . In AD 738 , the vassal king K 'ak ' Tiliw Chan Yopaat of Quiriguá captured his overlord , Uaxaclajuun Ub 'aah K 'awiil of Copán and a few days later he ritually decapitated him ; The decapitation of an enemy king may have been performed as part of a ritual ballgame reenacting the victory of the Maya Hero Twins over the gods of the underworld . Sacrifice by decapitation is depicted in Classic period Maya art , and sometimes took place after the victim was tortured , being variously beaten , scalped , burnt or disembowelled . The Hero Twins myth recounted in the Popol Vuh relates how one of each pair of twins was decapitated by their ballgame opponents . 
 During the Postclassic period , the most common form of human sacrifice was heart extraction , influenced by the method used by the Aztecs in the Valley of Mexico ; this usually took place in the courtyard of a temple , or upon the summit of the pyramid . Depending upon the exact ritual , sometimes the corpse would be skinned by assistant priests , except for the hands and feet . The officiating priest would then remove his ritual attire and dress himself in the skin of the sacrificial victim before performing a ritual dance that symbolised the rebirth of life . Archaeological investigations indicate that heart sacrifice was practised as early as the Classic period . 
 = = = Deities = = = 
 The Maya world was populated by a great variety of deities , supernatural entities and sacred forces . The Maya had such a broad interpretation of what was sacred that identifying distinct deities with specific functions is inaccurate . The Maya interpretation of deities was intrinsically tied to the calendar , astronomy , and their cosmovision . The importance of a deity , its characteristics , and its associations varied according to the movement of celestial bodies . The priestly interpretation of astronomical records and books was therefore crucial , since the priest would understand which deity required ritual propitiation , when the correct ceremonies should be performed , and what would be an appropriate offering . Each deity had four manifestations , associated with the cardinal directions , each identified with a different colour . They also had a dual day @-@ night / life @-@ death aspect . 
 Itzamna was the creator god , but he also embodied the cosmos , and was simultaneously a sun god ; K 'inich Ahau , the day sun , was one of his aspects . Maya kings frequently identified themselves with K 'inich Ahau . Itzamna also had a night sun aspect , the Night Jaguar , representing the sun in its journey through the underworld . The four <unk> supported the corners of the mortal realm ; in the heavens , the <unk> performed the same function . As well as their four main aspects , the <unk> had dozens of other aspects that are not well understood . The four <unk> were storm gods , controlling thunder , lightning , and the rains . The nine lords of the night each governed one of the underworld realms . Other important deities included the moon goddess , the maize god , and the Hero Twins . 
 The Popol Vuh was written in the Latin script in early colonial times , and was probably transcribed from a hieroglyphic book by an unknown K 'iche ' Maya nobleman . It is one of the most outstanding works of indigenous literature in the Americas . The Popul Vuh recounts the mythical creation of the world , the legend of the Hero Twins , and the history of the Postclassic K 'iche ' kingdom . Deities recorded in the Popul Vuh include Hun <unk> , the K 'iche ' maize god , and a triad of deities led by the K 'iche ' patron Tohil , and also including the moon goddess Awilix , and the mountain god <unk> . 
 In common with other Mesoamerican cultures , the Maya worshipped feathered serpent deities . Such worship was rare during the Classic period , but by the Postclassic the feathered serpent had spread to both the Yucatán Peninsula and the Guatemalan Highlands . In Yucatán , the feathered serpent deity was Kukulkan , among the K 'iche ' it was Q 'uq 'umatz . Kukulkan had his origins in the Classic period War Serpent , <unk> <unk> Kan , and has also been identified as the Postclassic version of the Vision Serpent of Classic Maya art . Although the cult of Kukulkan had its origins in these earlier Maya traditions , the worship of Kukulkan was heavily influenced by the Quetzalcoatl cult of central Mexico . Likewise , Q 'uq 'umatz had a composite origin , combining the attributes of Mexican Quetzalcoatl with aspects of the Classic period Itzamna . 
 = = Agriculture = = 
 The ancient Maya had diverse and sophisticated methods of food production . It was believed that shifting cultivation ( swidden ) agriculture provided most of their food , but it is now thought that permanent raised fields , terracing , intensive gardening , forest gardens , and managed <unk> were also crucial to supporting the large populations of the Classic period in some areas . Indeed , evidence of these different agricultural systems persist today : raised fields connected by canals can be seen on aerial photographs . Contemporary rainforest species composition has significantly higher abundance of species of economic value to ancient Maya in areas that were densely populated in pre @-@ Columbian times , and pollen records in lake sediments suggest that maize , manioc , sunflower seeds , cotton , and other crops have been cultivated in association with deforestation in Mesoamerica since at least 2500 BC . 
 The basic staples of the Maya diet were maize , beans , and squashes . These were supplemented with a wide variety of other plants either cultivated in gardens or gathered in the forest . At Joya de <unk> , a volcanic eruption preserved a record of foodstuffs stored in Maya homes , among them were chilies and tomatoes . Cotton seeds were in the process of being ground , perhaps to produce cooking oil . In addition to basic foodstuffs , the Maya also cultivated prestige crops such as cotton , cacao and vanilla . Cacao was especially prized by the elite , who consumed chocolate beverages . Cotton was spun , dyed , and woven into valuable textiles in order to be traded . 
 The Maya had few domestic animals ; dogs were domesticated by 3000 BC , and the Muscovy duck by the Late Postclassic . Ocellated turkeys were unsuitable for domestication , but were rounded up in the wild and penned for fattening . All of these were used as food animals ; dogs were additionally used for hunting . It is possible that deer were also penned and fattened . 
 = = Maya sites = = 
 There are hundreds of Maya sites spread across five countries : Belize , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras and Mexico . The six sites with particularly outstanding architecture or sculpture are Chichen Itza , Palenque , Uxmal , and Yaxchilan in Mexico , Tikal in Guatemala and Copán in Honduras . Other important , but difficult to reach , sites include Calakmul and El Mirador . The principal sites in the Puuc region , after Uxmal , are <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . In the east of the Yucatán Peninsula are Coba and the small site of Tulum . The Río Bec sites of the base of the peninsula include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . The most noteworthy sites in Chiapas , other than Palenque and Yaxchilan , are <unk> and Toniná . In the Guatemalan Highlands are Iximche , Kaminaljuyu , Mixco Viejo , and Q 'umarkaj ( also known as Utatlán ) . In the northern Petén lowlands of Guatemala there are many sites , though apart from Tikal access is generally difficult . Some of the Petén sites are Dos Pilas , Seibal , and Uaxactún . Important sites in Belize include <unk> Ha , Caracol , and <unk> . 
 = = Museum collections = = 
 There are a great many museums across the world with Maya artefacts in their collections . The Foundation for the Advancement of Mesoamerican Studies lists over 250 museums in its Maya Museum database , and the European Association of Mayanists lists just under 50 museums in Europe alone . 
 = The Legacy ( professional wrestling ) = 
 The Legacy was a villainous alliance in the professional wrestling promotion World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , that competed on its Raw brand from 2008 to 2010 . Originally , The Legacy was a group led by Randy Orton that contained the tag team of Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase . Two other wrestlers , Manu and Sim Snuka , were affiliated with the faction prior to its official formation . The concept behind the group was that each member was a multi @-@ generational wrestler . The name The Legacy was a reference to their extensive family histories in wrestling . 
 In June 2008 , Rhodes and DiBiase first formed an alliance after winning the World Tag Team Championship at Night of Champions , when Rhodes betrayed his original partner , Hardcore Holly , to align with DiBiase . Soon after , the pair tried to earn Orton 's respect , which they eventually did . Together , the team helped Orton win the 2009 Royal Rumble match , giving Orton an opportunity to compete in the main event at WrestleMania XXV . The team also wrestled together in a tag team match to win the WWE Championship for Orton at Backlash . The team helped Orton win the championship three times over the course of 2009 despite a tumultuous relationship which saw Orton often physically attacking his two students . This led to Orton splitting from the group in early 2010 . Rhodes and DiBiase eventually turned on each other in their match with Orton at WrestleMania XXVI . 
 The only member of the stable who is still currently employed by the WWE is Randy Orton , who is inactive due to an injury . 
 = = Concept = = 
 The concept behind the group was that each member is a multi @-@ generational wrestler . The name of the faction , The Legacy , referred to their extensive family histories in wrestling . Randy Orton 's father ( Bob Orton , Jr . ) , uncle ( Barry Orton ) and grandfather ( Bob Orton , Sr. ) were all professional wrestlers . Ted DiBiase , meanwhile , takes his name from his father , ( Ted DiBiase ) who wrestled before him along with both his grandparents ( adoptive grandfather , Mike DiBiase and grandmother Helen Hild ) . Cody Rhodes followed in the footsteps of his father ( Dusty Rhodes ) and his two uncles ( Jerry Sags and Fred Ottman ) , who preceded him in the business . Due to their status as multi @-@ generation wrestlers , all the members of The Legacy believed themselves to be superior to the other wrestlers in WWE , in storyline . 
 In an interview , Orton said the point of The Legacy was to create " future opponents " for himself and the others who would be wrestling in main events in WWE over the next decade . The Legacy has been compared to the former WWE faction Evolution of which Orton was a member , but Rhodes and DiBiase have said that they see the comparison as an opportunity to prove themselves and show their potential . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2008 ) = = = 
 Cody Rhodes was a World Tag Team Champion throughout the beginning of 2008 alongside Hardcore Holly , who was acting as a mentor to him . Ted DiBiase made his first WWE appearance on the May 26 episode of Raw , in which he claimed that he and a mystery partner would take the World Tag Team Championship from Rhodes and Holly . At the Night of Champions pay @-@ per @-@ view event in June , DiBiase revealed his partner was running late and started the match without him , however Rhodes quickly betrayed Hardcore Holly by attacking him . This turned Rhodes into a villainous character and meant that he and DiBiase won the championship . 
 In September , Randy Orton , who at the time was injured , made an appearance on Raw , where he criticized all the champions , mocking Rhodes and DiBiase for allowing their title belts to be stolen by Cryme Tyme ( Shad Gaspard and JTG ) . The two responded by assaulting Cryme Tyme and introducing Manu ( son of Afa the Wild Samoan ) as their new member at Unforgiven . This did little to impress Orton , so later that evening Rhodes , DiBiase , and Manu assaulted World Heavyweight Champion CM Punk as Orton confronted him backstage . This allowed Orton to punt Punk in the head , removing him from his championship match , and gaining Orton 's respect . 
 When Orton was well enough to wrestle , Punk demanded a match with him , which he won via disqualification when DiBiase interfered . As a result , Orton punted DiBiase in the head , putting him out of action ; this storyline was put in place in order for DiBiase to take time off to film The Marine 2 . Orton then invited Rhodes and Manu to form a group with him called The Legacy , and used them to help in his rivalry with Batista leading to a three @-@ on @-@ two handicap match where Batista was put out of action for four months . 
 After Sim Snuka , the son of Jimmy Snuka , also expressed interest in joining the group , Orton made them qualify through a series of tests which Manu failed the first week . On the January 5 episode of Raw , Snuka and Rhodes won a tag team match against Cryme Tyme . Before the match , Orton informed them that they had to win the match in order to be part of the group . After the match , Orton explained that since Snuka did not pick up the pinfall , he was out of the group . The following week , Manu and Snuka informed Rhodes that they were intending to assault Orton and had brought someone to help them do so , giving Rhodes an ultimatum to choose a side . When Rhodes refused to side with them , Manu and Snuka brought out a returning Ted DiBiase to aid them , and tried to assault Rhodes and Orton . Instead DiBiase joined The Legacy , attacking Manu and Snuka , and forgiving Orton for attacking him . 
 = = = Feud with the McMahon family ( 2009 ) = = = 
 With The Legacy finally formed , Manu and Snuka still wanted revenge on Orton . Fearing they would try to convince Raw general manager Stephanie McMahon to fire him , Orton went to speak to her himself but their conversation ended in an argument . When Vince McMahon , Stephanie 's father , made his return that night Orton maintained he was owed an apology . His brashness angered McMahon who responded by trying to fire Orton , but before he could finish his sentence Orton slapped McMahon and gave him a running punt which left him hospitalized in the storyline . During the 30 @-@ man Royal Rumble match that Sunday the group worked as a team , making them three of the last four contestants in the ring with Triple H as the other . Ultimately , in throwing out Rhodes and DiBiase , Triple H was distracted enough to allow Orton to throw him over the top rope and win the match . The next evening on Raw , The Legacy came to the ring accompanied by lawyers and doctors , with Orton explaining his outburst against McMahon was a result of intermittent explosive disorder ( IED ) and threatened to sue the company and cancel WrestleMania XXV if he was fired , as winning the Rumble guaranteed him a championship match at WrestleMania . Instead he was booked for a no holds barred match with Vince 's son , Shane , at No Way Out in February , which Orton won . The night after the event , they fought again until Orton punted Shane unconscious . Stephanie McMahon came to the ring to oversee her brother being carried away by the paramedics and shouted at Orton until he performed an RKO , his finishing move , to <unk> H ran to the ring and chased away the group , standing over the body of Stephanie <unk> next week , Orton and The Legacy attacked Triple <unk> Stephanie came out to stop The Legacy , Orton attacked and made out with her before hitting Triple H with a sledgehammer . 
 In an interview on SmackDown that week , Triple H revealed his real life marriage to Stephanie ( even though they had divorced on @-@ screen in 2002 prior to their actual marriage ) . Originally , Orton announced he did not have intentions of facing Triple H , who at the time was the WWE Champion , but instead planned to face the World Heavyweight Champion . Triple H , however , goaded Orton into " avenging " his first World Championship loss and ousting from their previous stable , Evolution , and Orton changed his mind , leading to their match being booked for WrestleMania XXV . Orton revealed that he had targeted the McMahon family in order to avenge his unceremonious departure from Evolution in 2004 . Due to the intensity of the rivalry , the decision was made that the WWE Championship could change hands at WrestleMania due to a countout or disqualification ; despite this , Triple H won the match after hitting Orton with a sledgehammer while the referee was knocked down . 
 The night after WrestleMania , Orton demanded a rematch , threatening Linda McMahon ( Vince 's wife ) as well as their grandchildren . McMahon did not grant him the rematch but scheduled a six @-@ man tag team match for the pay @-@ per @-@ view Backlash between Triple H and Shane and Vince McMahon and The Legacy , with a preview that evening between Vince and Orton . However , Raw 's general manager at that time , Vickie Guerrero , made their six @-@ man tag team match a WWE Championship match . The stipulation was that if Triple H 's team won , he retained the championship , while if The Legacy won , Orton would win the title . As the singles match progressed , Shane and Triple H came to Vince 's aid , causing both Rhodes and DiBiase to interfere until a returning Batista appeared and cleared the ring ; McMahon then announced that Batista was to replace him in the match at Backlash . At the event , Orton won by pinning Triple H after an RKO and a running punt , leaving Triple H hospitalized according to the storyline . In spite of Triple H 's absence , Shane McMahon continued his feud with the group , leading to another match between him and Orton on Raw . After the original match ended in a no contest due to interference , Rhodes and DiBiase won singles matches to be entered into a handicap match with all of The Legacy facing Shane later that night . This match was used to write him out of the storyline , as The Legacy members used the steel ring steps to shatter his ankle . 
 = = = Orton as WWE Champion ( 2009 ) = = = 
 Batista was left on his own as a result of The Legacy attacking Shane McMahon , but continued to challenge Orton for the WWE Championship . Orton and Batista had a match at Judgment Day , but it ended with Orton intentionally slapping the referee to cause a disqualification , which meant that the championship did not change hands . In their rematch , however , which was held inside a steel cage at the Extreme Rules pay @-@ per @-@ view , Batista won the championship . 
 The following night on Raw , during Batista 's celebratory speech , The Legacy attacked Batista , and injured him in storyline . This storyline was used to cover a real injury Batista had sustained . Orton 's rematch that night , intended to be used despite Batista 's absence , The following week , a match was held to determine the new WWE Champion between Orton , Triple H , John Cena and The Big Show , which Orton won . At The Bash pay @-@ per @-@ view , signs of dissention between DiBiase and Orton appeared when DiBiase argued with Orton backstage . Despite this , DiBiase and Rhodes both helped Orton retain his WWE Championship later that night against Triple H. This tension was later expanded upon when DiBiase 's father booked Orton and DiBiase in a match on Raw while he was in charge ; Orton won the match but the team showed solidarity later in the same evening by interfering in a WWE Championship contender match between Triple H and Cena , leading to it being ruled a no contest . This made the subsequent match at Night of Champions a triple threat contest . Similar tensions arose briefly in the group late in August when Rhodes ' father , Dusty , booked Orton and Rhodes in a match on Raw . It quickly turned out to be a ruse with Dusty 's intention to allow The Legacy to attack Cena , who was special guest referee . Despite the four standing tall together , Orton quickly gave an RKO to Dusty which angered Rhodes though he would fall in line . 
 After Orton retained the championship in July 's Night of Champions , the team worked together again to prevent Triple H from receiving a rematch against Orton by slowing his Beat The Clock Challenge match , so that he did not have the quickest time and did not receive a championship match . As a result , Triple H refocused his attention on Rhodes and DiBiase , losing to them in a handicap match , and reforming D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) with Shawn Michaels . Rhodes and DiBiase faced DX at SummerSlam , but lost the match , although they later defeated DX in a Submissions Count Anywhere match at the Breaking Point pay @-@ per @-@ view , using a combined figure @-@ four leg lock and Million Dollar Dream on Shawn Michaels . The following month DX defeated DiBiase and Rhodes at the Hell in a Cell pay @-@ per @-@ view by locking DiBiase out of the cell and double @-@ teaming Rhodes , just as the team had done to Michaels earlier in the match . Meanwhile , Orton retained the title against Cena at SummerSlam after the match was restarted a number of times to prevent Orton sneaking a win through disqualification and count out , with an unknown fan , later revealed to be Ted 's brother Brett , eventually coming in from the crowd to attack the referee and cause a distraction which helped Orton retain . At Breaking Point , Orton lost the WWE Championship to John Cena in an " I Quit " match only to win it the next month in a Hell in a Cell match at the eponymous event . At Bragging Rights , Orton lost the championship to Cena in a 60 @-@ minute Iron Man match with the stipulation that it would be the last championship match between the two . Earlier in the evening Rhodes appeared on Team Raw in a match that pitted Raw against SmackDown in a tag team match . He was seen backstage blaming Kofi Kingston for the loss and in retaliation Kingston ran out to chase away Rhodes and DiBiase when they interfered in the Iron Man match . 
 Kingston won a return match against Chris Jericho the following night , who had pinned him at Bragging Rights , but after the match Orton attacked him . Kingston retaliated by vandalising a NASCAR that Rhodes and DiBiase bought him to cheer him up after his title loss . The rivalry continued when , at Madison Square Garden , Orton attacked Hall of Famer Roddy Piper , but just before he could deliver a punt Kingston came out and attacked Orton , making him bleed and leg dropping him through a table . Kofi headed a team at November 's Survivor Series against Orton 's team of The Legacy , William Regal and CM Punk which ended with Kingston eliminating Punk and then Orton in quick succession to become the sole survivor while Christian eliminated Rhodes and DiBiase earlier . The next night on Raw Jesse Ventura announced the contender for the WWE Championship would be determined by a series of matches contested for by wrestlers who had never held the title before . Despite this Orton managed to persuade Ventura to allow him into the tournament by defeating Evan Bourne while Rhodes and DiBiase defeated Cryme Tyme to make it through but in the Battle Royal final were eliminated by Mark Henry while Orton was pulled over by Kingston , who held on to the ropes after Orton had thrown him out . Orton defeated Kingston the following week on November 30 's Raw after he was attacked from behind by both Rhodes and DiBiase separately , while Kingston took a return win the following week after guest referee Mark Cuban made a fast count leading to a rubber match at the TLC : Tables , Ladders and Chairs pay @-@ per @-@ view , which Orton won . 
 = = = Split from Orton and dissolution ( 2010 ) = = = 
 On the January 11 , 2010 episode of Raw , guest host Mike Tyson announced that the winner of a triple threat match later that night between Orton , Kingston , and John Cena would challenge Sheamus for the WWE Championship at the Royal Rumble . Orton ultimately won with the help of The Legacy , who attacked Cena and Kingston . At the Royal Rumble , Orton failed to win the championship when he was disqualified when Rhodes tried to interfere . After the match , Orton attacked Rhodes and DiBiase , who attempted to aid Rhodes . On the February 15 episode of Raw , Orton took on Sheamus in a non @-@ title rematch , but was again disqualified after Rhodes and DiBiase interfered . During the WWE Championship Elimination Chamber match at the Elimination Chamber pay @-@ per @-@ view , in which both Orton and DiBiase participated , Rhodes passed a pipe to DiBiase . DiBiase hit Orton with it , and eliminated him . The next night on Raw , The Legacy participated in a six @-@ man tag team match against Kingston , Yoshi Tatsu , and Evan Bourne , designed to show their unity , but Orton attacked Rhodes and DiBiase and the following week on Raw , Rhodes and DiBiase attacked Orton in retaliation , although Orton was able to fight them off . Orton 's split from the group was cemented when he lost a handicap match against both Rhodes and DiBiase on Raw and showed increasing signs of becoming a fan favorite . This led to a Triple Threat Match between all three members at WrestleMania XXVI , where Rhodes and DiBiase proclaimed neither minded not winning so long as Orton was pinned , but in the match Orton pinned DiBiase . DiBiase and Rhodes attacked each other during the match , ending the duo , and Rhodes was punted by Orton and taken out of action for approximately a month . The split was confirmed when Rhodes moved to SmackDown brand during the 2010 WWE Supplemental Draft . 
 = = = Rhodes and DiBiase short reunion and split ( 2011 ) = = = 
 Cody Rhodes reformed his alliance with Ted DiBiase on the May 20 episode of SmackDown , and the duo went on to feud with Sin Cara and Daniel Bryan . In August , Rhodes attacked DiBiase after DiBiase lost a match to Orton , ending their alliance . On the September 16 episode of SmackDown , DiBiase disguised himself as a member of the audience by wearing a paper bag – part of Rhodes 's gimmick – to allow him to attack Rhodes . This led to DiBiase unsuccessfully challenging Rhodes for Rhodes 's Intercontinental Championship at Night of Champions . Rhodes and Orton spent much of the latter part of 2011 feuding with each other . Following his match with Rhodes , DiBiase introduced a new gimmick in 2011 ; known as the " DiBiase Posse " , DiBiase held tailgating parties with fans prior to the start of WWE events . In August 2013 , DiBiase announced his departure from WWE after opting not to re @-@ sign . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Orton 's finishing moves 
 RKO ( Jumping cutter ) 
 Running punt to an opponent 's head 
 Rhodes 's finishing moves 
 Cross Rhodes ( Rolling cutter ) 
 Silver Spoon DDT ( Flowing DDT ) 
 DiBiase 's finishing moves 
 Cobra clutch legsweep 
 Dream Street ( Cobra clutch slam ) 
 Entrance themes 
 " Voices " by Rich Luzzi and Jim Johnston 
 " Priceless ( remix ) " by Jim Johnston ( Rhodes and DiBiase ) 
 " It 's a New Day " by Adelitas Way ( Rhodes and DiBiase ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Championship ( 3 times ) – Randy Orton 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – Ted DiBiase and Cody Rhodes 
 Royal Rumble ( 2009 ) – Randy Orton 
 = Balch Creek = 
 Balch Creek is a 3 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) tributary of the Willamette River in the U.S. state of Oregon . Beginning at the crest of the Tualatin Mountains ( West Hills ) , the creek flows generally east down a canyon along Northwest Cornell Road in unincorporated Multnomah County and through the Macleay Park section of Forest Park , a large municipal park in Portland . At the lower end of the park , the stream enters a pipe and remains underground until reaching the river . Danford Balch , after whom the creek is named , settled a land claim along the creek in the mid @-@ 19th century . After murdering his son @-@ in @-@ law , he became the first person legally hanged in Oregon . 
 Basalt , mostly covered by silt in the uplands and sediment in the lowlands , underlies the Balch Creek watershed . The upper part of the watershed includes private residential land , the Audubon Society of Portland nature sanctuary , and part of Forest Park . Mixed conifer forest of Coast Douglas @-@ fir , western redcedar , and western hemlock with a well @-@ developed understory of shrubs and flowering plants is the natural vegetation . Sixty @-@ two species of mammals and more than 112 species of birds use Forest Park . A small population of coastal cutthroat trout resides in the stream , which in 2005 was the only major water body in Portland that met state standards for bacteria , temperature , and dissolved oxygen . 
 Although nature reserves cover much of the upper and middle parts of the watershed , industrial sites dominate the lower part . Historic Guild 's Lake occupied part of the lower watershed through the 19th century , and in 1905 city officials held the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition there on an artificial island . After the exposition , developers converted the lake and its surrounds to industrial use , and in 2001 the Portland City Council declared the site to be an " industrial sanctuary " . 
 = = Course = = 
 Balch Creek begins in the Forest Park neighborhood in unincorporated Multnomah County near the intersection of Northwest Skyline Boulevard and Northwest Thompson Road at the crest of the West Hills . It flows generally east about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) to its confluence with the Willamette River , a major tributary of the Columbia River . The creek drops from 1 @,@ 116 feet ( 340 m ) above sea level at its source to 46 feet ( 14 m ) at its mouth , a total of 1 @,@ 070 feet ( 330 m ) . Most of this occurs in the first 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) . In the hills , the stream gradient ( slope ) generally ranges from 15 to 30 percent interspersed with sections of less than 15 percent along the middle reaches . 
 From its source , the creek runs east on private property near Forest Park , a large municipal park in Portland , before turning briefly south about 3 miles ( 5 km ) from the mouth . Soon thereafter , the stream receives an unnamed tributary on the right bank and turns southeast on private property along Northwest Cornell Road . It enters the city and the Audubon Society of Portland simultaneously about 2 miles ( 3 km ) from the mouth , receives two more unnamed tributaries on the right , and flows northeast , entering the part of Forest Park known as Macleay Park . 
 For about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) the creek parallels Wildwood Trail , the main hiking trail in Forest Park , until reaching a former public restroom known as the Stone House . From here Balch Creek runs beside the Lower Macleay Trail , another hiking trail , for about 0 @.@ 8 miles ( 1 @.@ 3 km ) . Near Northwest Thurman Street , roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the mouth , the creek flows through a trash rack into an 84 @-@ inch ( 210 cm ) diameter storm sewer . City workers first diverted the creek into a pipe in the early 20th century . The water empties into the Willamette River in the city 's Northwest Industrial neighborhood at Outfall 17 . About 10 miles ( 16 km ) below this outfall , the Willamette enters the Columbia River . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The Bureau of Environmental Services ( BES ) of the city of Portland monitored the flow of Balch Creek from June 1996 through September 2002 at a site , Node <unk> , where the stream leaves the surface and enters a storm sewer in Macleay Park . BES reported an average summer flow of 0 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 0057 m3 / s ) , a maximum of 60 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 7 m3 / s ) , and a minimum of 0 . The average flow in winter was 1 @.@ 9 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 054 m3 / s ) , with a maximum of 73 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 1 m3 / s ) and a minimum of 0 . 
 Measurements taken during an individual spring , from mid @-@ May to mid @-@ July 2002 , showed the flow starting at about 2 @.@ 5 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 071 m3 / s ) and dwindling to 0 by early June . The flow through June depended partly on the weather ; the highest flow , 4 @.@ 5 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 13 m3 / s ) , occurred after a rain . Measurements taken during an individual autumn , late August to late December 2001 , were close to zero until November . The largest flows during that season , 19 @.@ 2 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 54 m3 / s ) , occurred after many days of rain . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Solidified lava from Grande Ronde members of the Columbia River Basalt Group underlies the Balch Creek watershed . About 16 million years ago during the Middle Miocene , the Columbia River ran through a lowland south of its modern channel . Eruptions from linear vents in eastern Oregon and Washington flowed down this channel through what later became the Willamette Valley . These flows , some of which reached the Pacific Ocean , occurred between 16 @.@ 5 and 15 @.@ 6 million years ago and covered almost 60 @,@ 000 square miles ( 160 @,@ 000 km2 ) . Geologists have identified several basalt flows in the West Hills , where they underlie the steepest slopes of Forest Park and form the columned rocks visible in parts of Balch Creek Canyon . Wind @-@ deposited silts , unstable when wet , later covered most of the lava . Stream bank instability and siltation are common , and the threat of landslides has discouraged urban development in the hills . 
 Between 19 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 years ago , cataclysmic ice age events known as the Missoula Floods or Bretz Floods originating in the Clark Fork region of northern Idaho inundated the Columbia River basin many times . These floods deposited huge amounts of debris and sediment and created new floodplains in the Willamette Valley . From then until the 19th century , the lower Balch Creek watershed consisted of swampy marshlands and shallow semi @-@ permanent lakes such as historic Guild 's Lake . The final 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) or so of historic Balch Creek flowed across this floodplain . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Names = = = 
 Multnomah County is named for Native Americans who lived in the area before settlement by non @-@ indigenous people in the 19th century . Members of the Multnomah tribe of the Chinookan people lived on Sauvie Island in the Willamette River and on the mainland across from the island , downstream from the mouth of Balch Creek . Much of the area near the lower creek was swampy , and was not favored by the Multnomah . By the 1830s , diseases carried by white explorers and traders reduced the native population by up to 90 percent in the lower Columbia basin . 
 Historic Guild 's Lake , in the lower Balch Creek watershed near the Willamette River , was named for Peter Guild ( pronounced guile ) , one of the first European American settlers in the area . In 1847 , he acquired nearly 600 acres ( 2 @.@ 4 km2 ) of the watershed through a donation land claim . Although variations in the spelling of Guild 's Lake occur in historic newspapers , maps , and other documents , Guild 's Lake has been the preferred form since the beginning of the 20th century . 
 The creek is named for Danford Balch , who settled a 346 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 40 km2 ) donation land claim upstream of the Guild property in 1850 . After a man from a neighboring family eloped with a Balch daughter , Balch killed him with a shotgun . On October 17 , 1859 , at a public gallows he became the first person to be hanged by the State of Oregon . 
 Macleay Park takes its name from Donald Macleay , a Portland merchant and real @-@ estate developer who acquired what had been the Balch property . In 1897 , he donated the land for a park on condition that the city provide transport to the park for hospital patients and build paths wide enough for wheelchairs . 
 = = = Early water supply = = = 
 Balch Creek was one of Portland 's sources of drinking water in the mid @-@ 19th century . Stephen Coffin and <unk> Caruthers , two early Portland entrepreneurs , established the first public water supply for the city in 1857 by piping water from Caruthers Creek in southwest Portland through round fir logs with 2 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 6 @.@ 4 cm ) holes bored in them . In the 1860s , the Portland Water Company , which had acquired the existing business , added water from Balch Creek to the system . It was piped to a wooden reservoir at Alder and Pacific streets . Water shortages and pollution led to a shift in the water supply from sources within the city to the Bull Run River in the Cascade Range . It began supplying most of Portland 's drinking water in 1895 . 
 = = = Industry = = = 
 One of the first industries in the Guild 's Lake area was a sawmill built in the 1880s . Although large parts of the land remained undeveloped until the early 20th century , lumber mills , grain storage structures , railroads , and docks appeared along the waterfront . The Guild 's Lake Rail Yard , built by the Northern Pacific Railway in the 1880s , became an important switching yard for trains . 
 In 1905 , the Lewis and Clark Centennial Exposition , held on an artificial island in Guild 's Lake , helped spur growth in the area . After the exposition ended , developers filled the lake and its surrounds with soil sluiced from parts of the Balch Creek watershed in the West Hills above the floodplain or dredged from the Willamette River . Civic leaders promoted the Guild 's Lake area as a good place for industry , and by the mid @-@ 1920s the lake was gone . The USGS places historic Guild 's Lake at coordinates 45 @.@ <unk> ° N 122 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / 45 @.@ <unk> ; <unk> at an elevation of 33 feet ( 10 m ) above sea level between what later became Northwest Saint Helens Road and Northwest Yeon Street , slightly west of Northwest 35th Avenue in the Northwest Industrial district of Portland . 
 Between the 1890s and the 1930s , channel @-@ deepening in the Willamette River improved the city 's status as a deep @-@ water seaport , as did completion in 1914 of a port terminal . Guild 's Lake , close to highways as well as marine and rail terminals , became the most important industrial area in Portland . After World War II , chemical and petroleum processing and storage , metals manufacturing , and other large industries expanded in the area . In 2001 , the Portland City Council adopted the Guild 's Lake Industrial Sanctuary Plan aimed at protecting the area 's " long @-@ term economic viability as an industrial district . " 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The Balch Creek watershed consists of 2 @,@ 248 acres ( 910 ha ) , equal to 3 @.@ 5 square miles ( 9 @.@ 1 km2 ) . About 27 percent is zoned for parks and other open space , and about 20 percent is zoned for heavy industry near the Willamette River . Multnomah County has jurisdiction over 586 acres ( 237 ha ) , about a quarter of the watershed . Lands zoned for residential farms and forests occupy about 13 percent of the total , mostly along the watershed 's western edge . A mixture of residential , commercial , and other designations make up smaller segments . About 1 @,@ 600 people lived in the Balch Creek watershed in 2000 , and about 6 @,@ 700 people worked there . Nearby watersheds include those of other small streams flowing directly into the Willamette along the east flank of the West Hills . The city refers to these as the Johnson @-@ Nicolai subwatershed to the southeast , and the Kittredge and Salzman subwatersheds to the northwest . 
 Rainfall in the watershed from 1977 to 2002 averaged about 40 inches ( 1 @,@ 000 mm ) per year . About 30 inches ( 760 mm ) of the total fell from November through April , and about 10 inches ( 250 mm ) fell from May through October . Minor flooding has occurred near the trash rack — where the creek enters a pipe — and has caused occasional basement flooding along nearby streets . City officials are studying the rack design with a view to alterations by 2017 . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 The watershed lies partly in the Coast Range ecoregion and partly in the Willamette Valley ecoregion designated by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) . The historic lower Balch Creek watershed through the 1880s was a mixture of open water , wetlands , grassland , and forest , while above the flood plain the watershed consisted of closed canopy forest . People who settled here in the 19th century logged much of this forest and filled the wetlands . In 2002 , aerial photographs showed that buildings , parking lots , shoreline structures , and other cleared areas covered most of the lower floodplain . On the other hand , hill forests protected from major disturbance covered about 65 percent of the watershed . 
 Above the floodplain , much of the habitat in the watershed consists of mixed conifer forest . Trees and shrubs , including stands of red alder and cottonwood trees , cover about 88 percent of the middle reaches . Near the headwaters , the forests consist mainly of mixed conifers and hardwoods with a few older Douglas firs . Common species include big leaf maple , willow , western hemlock , red alder , western red cedar , and Douglas @-@ fir . Most of this forest is relatively young . In Forest Park , old @-@ growth forest , undisturbed for 250 years or more , exists mainly in isolated patches . The largest tree in the park , Heritage Tree 134 , is a Douglas @-@ fir near the Stone House . It is 242 feet ( 74 m ) high , and the trunk is 18 @.@ 6 feet ( 5 @.@ 7 m ) in circumference . 
 Forest Park and other areas of the watershed have an understory of well @-@ developed shrubs including ferns , Oregon @-@ grape , vine maple , salal , red huckleberry , Fendler 's waterleaf , Indian plum , salmonberry , and stinging nettle . Among the prominent wildflowers are wild ginger , Hooker 's fairy bells , vanilla leaf , evergreen violet , and trillium . Rare or uncommon species include old conifers , Western <unk> shrubs , and ornamental dawn redwoods . Invasive species are English ivy , European holly , clematis , morning glory , and Himalayan blackberry . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 The historic creek likely supported diverse fish species , including salmon . After people filled the wetlands and diverted the lower stretch of the creek into a pipe , fish could no longer migrate to and from the Willamette River . The industrial parts of the watershed have no remaining aquatic habitat , but above the pipe the aquatic habitat remains relatively high , and Balch Creek and its tributaries support a resident population of coastal cutthroat trout of up to about 7 inches ( 18 cm ) . In 2005 , Balch Creek was the only major water body in Portland that met state water quality standards for bacteria , temperature and dissolved oxygen . 
 Nearby tracts of habitat strongly affect the wildlife in the Balch Creek watershed . This is especially true of Forest Park , which extends into other watersheds to the northwest . Birds and animals from these watersheds and from the Tualatin River valley , the Coast Range , the Willamette River , Sauvie Island , the Columbia River , and the Vancouver , Washington , lowlands , move in and out of the park with relative ease . Sixty @-@ two mammal species , including the northern flying squirrel , black @-@ tailed deer , creeping vole , bobcat , coyote , Mazama pocket gopher , little brown bat , Roosevelt elk , and Pacific jumping mouse use Forest Park. blue grouse , great horned owl , hairy woodpecker , Bewick 's wren , orange @-@ crowned warbler , osprey , and hermit thrush are among the 112 species of birds that frequent the area . Amphibian species seen at the Audubon Society pond include rough @-@ skinned newts , Pacific tree frogs , and salamanders . 
 Pressure from habitat loss , pollution , hunting , and urban development has reduced or eliminated the large predators such as wolves , bears , and wild cats and has led to increased numbers of small predators such as weasels and raccoons . Roads through the watershed severely hamper the movement of large animals . Invasive plant species such as English ivy have made the habitat simpler and less supportive of native insects and the salamanders and other amphibians that feed on them . Citizen groups such as the No Ivy League and Friends of Forest Park have engaged in projects to remove ivy , to plant native species , and to widen and protect riparian zones . 
 = Bill Shankly = 
 William " Bill " Shankly OBE ( 2 September 1913 – 29 September 1981 ) was a Scottish footballer and manager who is best known for his time as manager of Liverpool . 
 Shankly came from a small Scottish mining community as one of five brothers who played football professionally . He played as a ball @-@ winning right @-@ half and was capped twelve times for Scotland , including seven wartime internationals . He spent one season at Carlisle United before spending the rest of his career at Preston North End , with whom he won the FA Cup in 1938 . His playing career was interrupted by his service in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War . He became a manager after he retired from playing in 1949 , returning to Carlisle United . He later managed Grimsby Town , Workington and Huddersfield Town before moving to become Liverpool manager in December 1959 . 
 Shankly took charge of Liverpool when they were in the Second Division and rebuilt the team into a major force in English and European football . He led Liverpool to the Second Division Championship to gain promotion to the top @-@ flight First Division in 1962 , before going on to win three First Division Championships , two FA Cups , four Charity Shields and one UEFA Cup . Shankly announced his surprise retirement from football a few weeks after Liverpool won the 1974 FA Cup Final , having managed the club for fifteen years , and was succeeded by his long @-@ time assistant Bob Paisley . He led the Liverpool team out for the last time at Wembley for the 1974 FA Charity Shield . He died seven years later at the age of 68 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bill Shankly was born in a small Ayrshire coal mining village , called Glenbuck , whose population in 1913 , the year of Shankly 's birth , was around 700 . People born there would often move to find work in larger coal mines . As a result , Glenbuck became largely derelict and by the time Shankly 's ghost writer John Roberts visited it in 1976 , there were only twelve houses left , including a cottage owned by Shankly 's sister , Elizabeth , whom Roberts described as " the last of the children of Glenbuck " . 
 Shankly 's parents , John and Barbara , lived in one of the <unk> Cottages with their ten children ; five boys and five girls . Shankly was the ninth child and the youngest boy . Although he was known as Bill throughout his football career , his name in the family was Willie , pronounced " <unk> " . His father was a postman who became a tailor of handmade suits but , despite the football pedigree in his family , he did not play himself . 
 All five Shankly brothers played professional football and Shankly claimed that " once , when we were all at our peaks , we could have beaten any five brothers in the world " . His brothers were Alec , known as " Sandy " by the family , who played for Ayr United and Clyde ; Jimmy ( 1902 – 1972 ) , who played for various clubs including Sheffield United and Southend United ; John ( 1903 – 1960 ) , who played for Portsmouth and Luton Town ; and Bob ( 1910 – 1982 ) , who played for Alloa Athletic and Falkirk . Bob became a successful manager , guiding Dundee to victory in the Scottish championship in 1962 and the semi @-@ finals of the European Cup the following year . Their maternal uncles , Robert and William Blyth were also professional players and both became club directors at Portsmouth and Carlisle United respectively . 
 Shankly wrote in his autobiography that times were hard during his upbringing and that hunger was a prevailing condition , especially during the winter months . He admitted that he and his friends used to steal vegetables from nearby farms ; bread , biscuits and fruit from suppliers ' wagons , and bags of coal from the pits . Shankly admitted the act was wrong but claimed it was " devilment more than badness " and the root cause was their constant hunger , but he insists that he and his friends learned from their mistakes and became better people in later years . He was at school from the age of five until he was fourteen . Discipline at both home and school was strict but Shankly said it was character @-@ building . His favourite subject was geography and he played football as often as possible , especially in the school playground , but there was no organised school team . 
 After Shankly left school in 1928 , he worked at a local mine alongside his brother Bob . He did this for two years until the pit closed and he faced unemployment . In his autobiography , he described the life of a miner at some length and mentioned many of the problems such as the sheer hard work , rats , the difficulties of eating and drinking at the coal face , but above all the filth : " We were never really clean . It was unbelievable how we survived . Going home to wash in a tub was the biggest thing . The first time I was in a bath was when I was fifteen " . 
 While Shankly was employed as a miner , he played football as often as possible and sometimes went to Glasgow to watch either Celtic or Rangers , sharing his allegiance between the two and ignoring the sectarianism that divides Glasgow . Shankly developed his skills to the point that he was unemployed for only a few months before Carlisle United signed him . He wrote that he had his football future worked out in his mind and that , even when working in the pit , he was only " killing time " . He always believed that it was only a matter of time before he became a professional player . He explained that , in football terms , he had always been an optimist with a belief in his destiny and that was the basis of his undying enthusiasm for the sport . 
 Shankly 's village team was called the Glenbuck <unk> , a name probably derived from the 11th Hussars ( the " Cherry Pickers " ) , but Shankly said : " the club was near extinction when I had a trial and I never actually played for them " . Shankly , aged 18 , then played part of the 1931 – 32 season for Cronberry Eglinton , about twelve miles from Glenbuck . He used to cycle to and from the ground . Cronberry were in the Cumnock & District League . Although Shankly had less than one full season at Cronberry , he acknowledged his debt to Scottish Junior Football as he " learnt a lot " , mainly by listening to older players and especially his brothers . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Carlisle United = = = 
 Shankly had a single season , 1932 – 33 , at Carlisle United , then relatively new to The Football League and playing in the Third Division North , their reserve side playing in the North Eastern League . Shankly was recommended by a scout called Peter Carruthers who had seen him playing for Cronberry . He was invited for a month 's trial and said it was the first time he had left Scotland . He was signed after just one trial match for Carlisle 's reserves against Middlesbrough reserves , even though Carlisle reserves lost the match 6 – 0 . A local newspaper report said that " Shankly played strenuously and might develop into a useful left back " but , in fact , he developed into a top @-@ class right @-@ half . 
 Shankly made his senior debut on 31 December 1932 in a 2 – 2 draw against Rochdale and made 16 appearances for the first team . At the end of the season , the reserves won the North Eastern League Cup , defeating Newcastle United reserves 1 – 0 in the final . In his 1976 autobiography , Shankly stated : " I 've still got the medal " . 
 At this stage of his career , Shankly was assessed as " a hard running , gritty right @-@ half " whose displays brought him much praise and credit and he was " earmarked as a key young player capable of taking Carlisle on to greater things " . He was paid four pounds ten shillings a week at Carlisle which he considered a good wage as the top rate at that time was eight pounds . Shankly was happy at Carlisle which was close to his home at Glenbuck and he had settled in well with almost a guarantee of first team football . When the opportunity came for him to move on , he was not convinced he wanted to leave . 
 = = = Preston North End = = = 
 Soon after the 1932 – 33 season ended , Shankly received a telegram from Carlisle United asking him to return as soon as possible because another club wanted to sign him . Arriving at Carlisle , he discovered that the interested club was Preston North End who had offered a transfer fee of £ 500 . The terms for Shankly personally were a fee of £ 50 plus a £ 10 signing @-@ on fee and wages of five pounds a week . Shankly 's initial reaction was that it was not enough and the deal nearly fell through . Shankly 's brother Alec pointed out to him that Preston were in the Second Division and a bigger club than Carlisle with the potential to regain First Division status . Alec convinced Bill that the opportunity was more important than what he would be paid immediately : " it 's what you 're going to get later that counts " . Shankly took his brother 's advice and signed the Preston contract in a railway carriage . 
 Shankly began his Preston career in the reserves , who played in the Central League which was a higher standard than the North Eastern League . He made his first team debut on 9 December 1933 , three months after his 20th birthday , against Hull City . Shankly created an early goal to help Preston win 5 – 0 , earning him praise in a national newspaper for his " clever passing " . With his wholehearted attitude and commitment to the team , he quickly established himself as a first @-@ team regular and became a crowd favourite . Preston fulfilled their potential and gained promotion to the First Division as runners @-@ up to Grimsby Town . It was therefore a successful debut season for Shankly who stayed with Preston until he retired in 1949 . His wage was increased to eight pounds a week with six pounds in the summer . In a summary of the 1933 – 34 season , a Preston correspondent , Walter Pilkington , wrote : " One of this season 's discoveries , Bill Shankly , played with rare tenacity and uncommonly good ideas for a lad of twenty . He is full of good football and possessed with unlimited energy ; he should go far " . 
 In his autobiography , Shankly wrote that Preston had more than held their own in the 1934 – 35 season and the club was not relegated again until the end of the 1948 – 49 season in which he left them . Shankly developed into " as tough a half back as any in the Football League " . The outstanding Northern Ireland international Peter Doherty recalled how Shankly dogged his footsteps in one match and kept muttering : " Great wee team , North End , great wee team " , subduing Doherty completely as Preston defeated Manchester City 3 – 1 . 
 In 1936 – 37 , Preston reached the FA Cup Final but were well beaten 3 – 1 by Sunderland at Wembley Stadium . Preston recovered to reach the 1938 FA Cup Final in which they defeated Huddersfield Town 1 – 0 with a penalty scored by George Mutch in the final minute of extra time . As well as winning the FA Cup , Preston finished third in the league . That season marked " the pinnacle of Shankly 's playing career " . 
 Shankly had just reached his 26th birthday when the Second World War began and the war claimed the peak years of his playing career . He joined the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and managed to play in numerous wartime league , cup and exhibition matches for Norwich City , Arsenal , Luton Town and Partick Thistle , depending on where he was stationed . On 30 May 1942 , he played a single game for Liverpool in a 4 – 1 win over Everton at Anfield . Shankly was keen on boxing and fought as a middleweight in the RAF , winning a trophy when he was stationed in Manchester . He confirmed in his autobiography that his weight as an RAF boxer was 159 pounds ( 72 kg ) and he was only 6 pounds ( 2 @.@ 7 kg ) heavier than that in 1976 . Shankly met his wife , Nessie , in the RAF ( she was in the WAAF and stationed at the same camp ) and they married in 1944 . 
 With the resumption of full League football again in the 1946 – 47 season , Shankly returned to Preston who held his registration , but he was now 33 and coming to the end of his playing days . By 1949 , he was Preston 's club captain but had lost his place in the first team , which was struggling against relegation despite having Tom Finney in the side . Shankly was a qualified masseur and had decided he wanted to become a coach so , when Carlisle United asked him to become their manager in March of that year , he retired as a player and accepted the job . Shankly 's departure from Preston was resented by some at the club and he was refused a benefit match , to which he felt entitled . He described Preston 's attitude as " the biggest let @-@ down of my life in football " . 
 Shankly had enormous admiration for Tom Finney and devotes more than three pages of his autobiography to Finney 's prowess as a footballer . In the 1970s , Shankly was asked how a current star compared to Finney and Shankly replied : " Aye , he 's as good as Tommy – but then Tommy 's nearly 60 now " . Another Preston player admired by Shankly was his Scottish international teammate Andy Beattie , with whom he would later work in management . Shankly was succeeded in the Preston team by Tommy Docherty and Shankly told Docherty that he should " just put the number 4 shirt on and let it run round , it knows where to go " . 
 = = = Scotland = = = 
 Shankly played for Scotland twelve times from 1938 to 1943 in five full and seven wartime internationals . He spoke of his " unbelievable pride " when playing for Scotland against England and how , when confronted by the " Auld Enemy " , the Scottish players would become William Wallace or Robert the Bruce for ninety minutes after pulling on the blue jersey . Shankly himself certainly had that spirit when playing for Scotland as confirmed by Alex James : " He is a real Scotland player who will fight until he drops " . 
 Shankly made his international debut on 9 April 1938 against England at Wembley ; Scotland winning the match 1 – 0 with a late goal by Tommy Walker . Nine of his Scotland appearances were against England and the others were against Northern Ireland , Wales and Hungary . Shankly was Scotland 's captain in the wartime match against England at Hampden Park , attended by 78 @,@ 000 people on 3 May 1941 , but Scotland lost that game 1 – 3 . Perhaps his most memorable international was the wartime game at Wembley on 18 April 1942 when Scotland won 5 – 4 and Shankly scored his only Scotland goal . A post @-@ match report said that Scotland 's success was inspired by " the Busby @-@ Shankly victory service " when Shankly and his future management rival Matt Busby combined to help Scotland 's cause . According to the Liverpool website , Shankly 's goal was " probably the strangest national goal ever " . He took a speculative shot goalwards from 50 yards and the ball bounced over the England goalkeeper 's head and into the net . In January 1973 , when Shankly was the subject of This Is Your Life , the goal was shown and Shankly commented that " they all count and we won " . 
 = = = Style and technique = = = 
 Shankly declared in his autobiography that he specialised in what he called " the art of tackling " , emphasising that it is an art . He claimed that he was never sent off or booked by a referee . In his view , the art of tackling is in the timing and the sole object is to win the ball . He wrote that even if the opponent is injured in the tackle , " it 's not a foul because you have timed everything right and you 've won it " . His philosophy , therefore , was to play " hard but fair " with no cheating . 
 During his playing career , Shankly said he would not argue with referees . He realised after taking the advice of his brothers that it is a waste of time . The referee , he wrote , " always wins in the end " . 
 Shankly was always noted for his dedication to football and , in his playing days , would do his own training during the summer months . The Liverpool website records that , during the summer of 1933 when he returned to Glenbuck after completing his first season as a professional , he decided to develop his throw @-@ in skills . He was an early exponent of the long throw @-@ in and , according to the site , he practiced by throwing balls over a row of houses and the small boys of the village helped by fetching them back for him . 
 = = Management career = = 
 Shankly wrote in his autobiography that he had long prepared himself for a career as a football manager . He pointed out that he had absorbed all the coaching systems with any useful qualifications and had full confidence in his ability and in himself to be a leader . For him , he had done the hard work and it was simply a question of waiting for an opportunity to present itself . Shankly summed up the essential criteria for success in football management when he said : " I could speak common sense about the game and I could spot a player " . In terms of the latter criterion , he always applied a basic formula which was that , first and foremost , the player must have both ability and courage . Other attributes were physical fitness and willingness to work , especially to struggle against the odds . 
 = = = Carlisle United = = = 
 Shankly began his managerial career at the club where his professional playing career had started . Carlisle in the 1948 – 49 season were struggling in the bottom half of the Third Division North and finding it difficult to attract southern @-@ based players because of the town 's geographic remoteness in the far north of England . Shankly 's work ethic transformed the team who finished 15th in 1948 – 49 after he had been in charge for only the last few matches . They improved to ninth in 1949 – 50 and then to third in 1950 – 51 , almost gaining promotion . 
 One of Shankly 's players at Carlisle was Geoff Twentyman , then a promising young centre half , who was later transferred to Liverpool . After he retired from playing , Twentyman became chief scout at Liverpool , working with Shankly and finding several outstandingly talented players . 
 Shankly used psychology to motivate his players , for example telling them that the opposition had had a very tiring journey and were not fit to play the match . He urged the local population to support the team and would use the public address system at matches to tell the crowd about his team changes and how his strategy was improving the team . Shankly recalled that Brunton Park was dilapidated , writing that " the main stand ( was ) falling to pieces and the terraces derelict " . He even burned all the kit . When the team was travelling to Lincoln City , he saw a sportswear shop in Doncaster and stopped the coach to buy a full set of kit in which the team played at Lincoln . 
 Season ticket sales in 1950 – 51 reached an all @-@ time high and Carlisle challenged strongly for promotion as well as achieving a draw with Arsenal at Highbury in the FA Cup . But it ended badly because Shankly accused the club 's board of reneging on a bonus promise for the players should the team finish in the top three . Shankly resigned and took up an offer from Grimsby Town . Shankly 's overall record in league football at Carlisle was 42 wins and 22 defeats from 95 matches . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 After a failed interview at Liverpool , Shankly moved to manage Grimsby Town in June 1951 . He said in his autobiography that there was greater potential at Grimsby than at Carlisle . His main problems were that Grimsby had been relegated twice in recent seasons , dropping from the First to the Third Division , and some good players had been transferred before he arrived . But Shankly believed he still had good players to work with and was able to buy some additional players on the transfer market for low fees . 
 Grimsby made a strong challenge for promotion in 1951 – 52 but finished second , three points behind Lincoln City ( only one team was promoted from Division Three North , with one from Division Three South ) . Shankly insisted in his autobiography that his Grimsby team was : " Pound for pound , and class for class , the best football team I have seen in England since the war . In the league they were in they played football nobody else could play . Everything was measured , planned and perfected and you could not wish to see more entertaining football " . Stephen Kelly quotes the " pound for pound " analysis but qualifies it as " another slight exaggeration , but he meant well " . Kelly went on : " that kind of talk could only boost morale at the club " . 
 Shankly made great use of five @-@ a @-@ side football in training at Grimsby , playing these " as if our lives were at stake " . The games would last an hour each time . Shankly also worked on set pieces such as throw @-@ ins and tried to devise a method of counter @-@ attacking from corners conceded . 
 Grimsby 's ageing team made a bright start in 1952 – 53 with five straight wins but eventually slipped and finished in fifth place . In 1953 – 54 , Shankly became disillusioned when the board could not give him money to buy new players . He was reluctant to promote some promising reserves because of loyalty to the older players ( a fault that was to resurface at Liverpool years later ) and he finally resigned in January 1954 , citing the board 's lack of ambition as his main reason . In his autobiography , he said that he and his wife were feeling homesick in Grimsby and , when an opportunity came to manage Workington , he was attracted to the challenge partly because they would be closer to Scotland . 
 Shankly 's record in league football at Grimsby was 62 wins and 35 defeats from 118 matches . 
 = = = Workington = = = 
 Although the Workington team was close to the bottom of the Third Division North , Shankly saw it as a challenge and " he attacked the job with all the enthusiasm and relish he always showed at whatever he did " . Workington rose to 18th by the end of the 1953 – 54 season and so did not have to apply for re @-@ election . In 1954 – 55 , the team finished a creditable 8th and saw a rise in attendances from 6 @,@ 000 to 8 @,@ 000 . 
 Workington operated on a shoestring and Shankly had to do much of the administration work himself , including answering the telephone and dealing with the mail by using an old typewriter to answer letters . In addition , he had the risky job of going to the bank each week to collect the payroll . One of his main problems was sharing the ground with the local rugby league club and Shankly was very concerned about the damage done to the playing surface by the rugby players . The situation led to " numerous arguments " with the club 's board which , as Kelly records , " was stacked with rugby league men whose interest in football took second place to rugby " . 
 Shankly resigned on 15 November 1955 to take up the post of assistant manager at Huddersfield Town , working with his old friend Andy Beattie . His record in league football at Workington was 35 wins and 27 defeats from 85 matches . 
 = = = Huddersfield Town = = = 
 Shankly 's initial role at Huddersfield was as reserve team coach . He found himself in charge of several promising youngsters who soon graduated to the first team after Town were relegated to the Second Division at the end of the 1955 – 56 season . Beattie resigned in the next season and , on 5 November 1956 , Shankly succeeded him as manager . On Christmas Eve , he gave a first team debut to 16 @-@ year @-@ old prospect Denis Law . Another prospect in his team was left back Ray Wilson who went on to become Huddersfield 's most capped player before joining Everton . Shankly did not gain promotion at Huddersfield , the team finishing 12th in 1956 – 57 , 9th in 1957 – 58 and 14th in 1958 – 59 . 
 Other players in Shankly 's Huddersfield team were Ken Taylor , who was also an England Test cricketer ; striker Les Massie and captain Bill McGarry . On 21 December 1957 , Huddersfield lost 7 – 6 to Charlton Athletic , who played most of the match with ten men , after Huddersfield were leading 5 – 1 with just 27 minutes remaining . Shankly described it as " one of the most amazing games I have ever seen " . But , on another occasion , Huddersfield beat Liverpool 5 – 0 with ten men and Shankly recalled " the Liverpool directors leaving the ground in single file like a funeral procession " . 
 Disillusioned by a board that wanted to sell his best players without offering money to buy replacements , Shankly felt stifled by Huddersfield 's lack of ambition and was delighted in November 1959 to receive an approach for his services by Liverpool . He recalled how Liverpool chairman Tom ( T.V. ) Williams asked him if he would like to manage the " best club in the country " , to which Shankly replied : " Why , is Matt Busby packing up ? " Shankly decided to think about the offer as he realised the great potential at Liverpool , who were also in the Second Division at that time . Rumours began and were fuelled by Liverpool 's visit to Leeds Road on 28 November . Although Huddersfield won the game 1 – 0 , Shankly accepted the Liverpool offer and resigned his position as Huddersfield manager at a board meeting on 1 December 1959 . His league record at Huddersfield was 49 wins and 47 defeats in 129 matches . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 = = = = 1959 to 1964 = = = = 
 When Shankly arrived at Anfield on Monday , 14 December 1959 , Liverpool had been in the Second Division for five years , and had been defeated by non @-@ league Worcester City in the 1958 – 59 FA Cup . Anfield itself was in disrepair with no means of watering the pitch and Shankly insisted the club spend £ 3 @,@ 000 to rectify that . Shankly described the training ground at Melwood as " a shambles " . The Liverpool squad he inherited consisted largely of average players and some promising reserves . 
 In spite of the difficulties , Shankly felt immediately at home in his new club and he believed that he shared an immediate bond with the supporters , the Liverpool history site saying they " were his kind of people " . He quickly established working relationships with the coaching staff of Bob Paisley , Joe Fagan and Reuben Bennett who shared his views about loyalty to each other and to the club . Paisley 's influence at Liverpool was " crucial " for , as Kelly puts it , Shankly was " the great motivating force behind Liverpool , but it was Paisley who was the tactician " . One aspect of the quartet 's legacy to football was the conversion of an old storage room into what became known as the " Boot Room " , which was used for tactical discussion whilst cleaning and repairing boots . Although Shankly believed he had an excellent coaching staff , the playing staff were not so impressive – indeed , Shankly said of the latter : " After only one match I knew that the team as a whole was not good enough . I made up my mind that we needed strengthening through the middle , a goalkeeper and a centre half who between them could stop goals , and somebody up front to create goals and score them " . To deal with what he saw as a below average playing squad , twenty four players were placed on the transfer list and all of these had left the club within one year . 
 Melwood was overgrown and had only an old wooden cricket pavilion . One of the pitches " looked as if bombs had been dropped on it " and Shankly asked if the Germans had " been over " in the war . He instituted a development program to cultivate the site and modernise the facilities and , in the meantime , arranged for the players to meet and change at Anfield before going to and from Melwood by bus . According to biographer Stephen Kelly , Liverpool 's eventual success was based on hard work done in the training system that Shankly , Paisley , Fagan and Bennett introduced at Melwood . Shankly deplored long distance running on roads and insisted that , apart from warm @-@ up exercises or any special exercises needed to overcome injuries , the players trained on grass using a ball . Everything was done systematically with players rotating through exercise routines in groups with the purpose of achieving set targets . Five @-@ a @-@ side games , as at all Shankly 's earlier clubs , were at the heart of the system and he insisted on these being as competitive as league matches . One particular routine designed to develop stamina , reflexes and ball skills was the " sweat box " which Shankly described as " using boards like the walls of a house with players playing the ball off one wall and on to the next ; the ball was played against the boards , you controlled it , turned around and took it again " . Shankly got the idea from a routine he had seen Tom Finney use at Preston to hone his skills . After <unk> with the routine , he set the players a limit of two minutes per session . The system was geared to Shankly 's simple philosophy of " pass and move " , which formed the basis of Liverpool 's strategy . Shankly insisted on suitable cooling @-@ off periods after training ( now called " warming down " ) before the players took a bath and had a meal . The team changed the studs in their boots to suit all playing conditions . Shankly summarised the entire strategy as : " attention to detail ; we never left anything to chance " . 
 Liverpool 's recovery depended on new players being acquired and , in his autobiography , Shankly recalled the struggles he had with the board to make them realise the club 's potential and the need to spend money on good players . He said there were times when he felt like walking out . He found a valuable ally in Eric Sawyer , of the Littlewoods pools organisation , who joined the board not long after Shankly 's appointment and shared Shankly 's vision of Liverpool as the best club in England . At one board meeting in 1961 when Shankly insisted the club make offers for two players in Scotland , the board 's initial response was that " we can 't afford them " but Sawyer stepped in and said : " We can 't afford not to buy them " . 
 The two Scottish players were centre half Ron Yeats and centre forward Ian St John from Dundee United and Motherwell respectively . With Sawyer 's help , Shankly signed them both in the spring of 1961 and challenged the Liverpool board to " sack me if they can 't play " . At a press conference when Yeats came to Liverpool , Shankly emphasised Yeats 's huge size by inviting the journalists to " go and walk round him ; he 's a colossus ! " Goalkeeper Tommy Lawrence came through the club 's junior teams , so Shankly now had his " strength through the middle " and the team building continued with the transfer of wing half Gordon Milne from Preston . Other players developed at Anfield were Jimmy Melia , Ronnie Moran , Alan A 'Court and future England internationals Gerry Byrne and Roger Hunt . Shankly said of goalscorer Hunt the first time he saw him : " Christ , this one can play ! " Liverpool had finished third in both 1959 – 60 and 1960 – 61 ( only the top two clubs were promoted ) ; but the new team gained promotion in the 1961 – 62 season by winning the Second Division championship , Hunt scoring 41 goals . 
 Liverpool consolidated in 1962 – 63 , finishing eighth in their first top flight season under <unk> 's command . Significant signings were wing half Willie Stevenson from Rangers in 1962 and left winger Peter Thompson from Preston in 1963 . Shankly described the Thompson deal as " daylight robbery " . Liverpool 's youth system produced future England internationals like Ian Callaghan , Tommy Smith and Chris Lawler . The hard work paid off in 1963 – 64 when Liverpool won their sixth League Championship title , ending the season with a 5 – 0 defeat of Arsenal at Anfield . According to Roger Hunt , the secret of Liverpool 's success was that , under Shankly , " we were the fittest team in the country " . In 1964 , Jimmy Melia was transferred to Wolverhampton Wanderers ; with Shankly buying Arsenal 's utility player Geoff Strong for £ 40 @,@ 000 but this was Liverpool 's last significant transfer activity until 1967 . 
 = = = = 1964 to 1970 = = = = 
 One of Shankly 's greatest ambitions when he joined Liverpool was to win the FA Cup and , after he signed Yeats and St John , he told the club directors that " these players will win us the FA Cup " . It was St John who scored the winning goal in May 1965 when Liverpool did win the FA Cup for the first time in the club 's history with a 2 – 1 extra time victory over Leeds United at Wembley . In his autobiography , Shankly recounted that among his many achievements , winning the 1965 FA Cup was his " greatest day " . 
 Liverpool made their European debut in 1964 – 65 , competing in the European Cup reaching the semi @-@ finals . In the second round the club was drawn against the formidable Anderlecht . Immediately before the match , Shankly decided to experiment with the Liverpool kit . Liverpool played in red shirts with white shorts and white sock with red top but Shankly and Ian St John had the idea of an all @-@ red kit that would give the impression the players were taller . Liverpool played in all @-@ red only for European matches but quickly adopted the colour permanently . Three days after winning the FA Cup , Liverpool defeated European champions Internazionale 3 – 1 at Anfield in the semi @-@ final first leg with a performance that was saluted by Inter 's coach Helenio Herrera . The second leg at the San Siro , however , was according to Shankly " a war " , which Liverpool lost 3 – 0 and so were knocked out of the competition 4 – 3 on aggregate . Eleven years later , Shankly maintained that two of Inter 's goals were illegal . Even today , the Liverpool website describes the match by saying that " ( Liverpool were ) only denied at the semi @-@ final stage due to a dishonest referee in Milan " . According to Kelly , however , video evidence shows that the two disputed goals were actually legitimate . Shankly said after the defeat in Milan that the Inter fans were going mad because they were " so pleased to have beaten Liverpool " and insisted that this proved the high standard " you ( the team ) have raised yourselves up to " . 
 In the 1964 – 65 Football League Championship , Liverpool dropped from first to seventh with thirteen fewer points than the previous season . According to the Liverpool site , this was due to the exertion of lengthy participation in the FA and European Cups . 
 In 1965 – 66 , Liverpool regained the League Championship title and reached the final of the European Cup Winner 's Cup at Hampden Park , however the team lost 2 – 1 in extra time to Borussia Dortmund . Shankly 's summary of that final , played on a wet night , was : " We didn 't play well and we gave away two silly goals " . Shankly and Paisley had learned a great deal about European football which Liverpool would eventually turn into trophies . The key strategy in two @-@ leg ties was " containment away , attack at home " . Shankly applied the principle in a preliminary round tie against Juventus when Liverpool were away in the first leg . Despite Juventus taking the lead after 81 minutes , Shankly ordered his players to ensure the deficit was only one goal . Liverpool then switched to all @-@ out attack in the second leg at Anfield and won 2 – 0 . 
 Liverpool began the 1966 – 67 season by beating neighbours Everton in the FA Charity Shield match but the team were never really in contention for major honours that season , finishing fifth in the league . Shankly recognised the potential of Blackpool teenager Emlyn Hughes , a future England captain , and signed him for £ 65 @,@ 000 in February 1967 . Liverpool 's performance in the 1966 @-@ 67 European Cup was poor and , after struggling to overcome FC Petrolul <unk> in the first round , they were well beaten in the last 16 by Ajax , inspired by 19 @-@ year @-@ old Johan Cruyff . Ajax won 7 – 3 on aggregate after defeating Liverpool 5 – 1 in Amsterdam . Several years later , in his autobiography , Shankly still complained that " the match in Amsterdam should never have started " due to fog and , although Liverpool lost 5 – 1 , he " still thought we ( would win the tie ) at Anfield " . Although Shankly claimed to have been unworried about the Ajax defeat , he acknowledged that " we were examining the team and planning ahead " . However , the Liverpool site argues that Shankly was mistaken in his decision at this time to postpone team rebuilding . 
 Liverpool improved their League performances over the next two years , finishing third in 1967 – 68 and then second in 1968 – 69 , although to Shankly himself it was " a mediocre time in the late 1960s as we prepared for the 1970s " . Shankly made two controversial signings in this period which did not turn out as he had hoped . In 1967 , he signed striker Tony Hateley from Chelsea for a club record £ 96 @,@ 000 and then felt obliged to transfer him to Coventry City only a year later . He claimed bad luck and injuries disrupted the progress of two other prospects Alf Arrowsmith and Gordon Wallace ; Shankly compared the latter to Tom Finney . In September 1968 , Shankly paid £ 100 @,@ 000 to Wolverhampton Wanderers for their teenage striker Alun Evans who thus became " football 's first £ 100 @,@ 000 teenager " . Evans started well and produced some outstanding performances during his four years at the club but Shankly eventually had to sell him to Aston Villa . Shankly recalled that Evans was scarred by a glass in a nightclub incident which , in Shankly 's opinion , had a detrimental impact on his career . 
 The only long @-@ term success that Shankly had in the transfer market in the late 1960s was his signing of Emlyn Hughes , who went on to captain Liverpool to victory in the European Cup . Otherwise , he did not significantly change the team until the 1969 – 70 season when Liverpool finished fifth in the league championship , a long way behind the winners : their local rivals Everton . Shankly was characteristically defiant whenever Everton got the better of Liverpool and , although he liked and respected everyone connected with Everton , would always talk up Liverpool at Everton 's expense . Typical of this was his view that : " This city has two great football teams – Liverpool and Liverpool reserves " . 
 In the 1969 – 70 FA Cup quarter final , Liverpool played against struggling Second Division side Watford at Vicarage Road and lost 1 – 0 after a very poor performance . The Liverpool site records that the defeat signalled the end for St John , Hunt , Byrne , Yeats and Lawrence ; the incomers included Ray Clemence , Alec Lindsay , Larry Lloyd , John Toshack , Brian Hall and Steve Heighway . Apart from Hall who graduated through the reserves , they were all signed from clubs in lower divisions or even , in the case of Heighway , from non @-@ league football . Adding the new players to Tommy Smith , Ian Callaghan , Chris Lawler and Emlyn Hughes , Shankly formed the nucleus of a second great team which went on to dominate English and European football in the 1970s . 
 Many of the new players came to Liverpool because of a new scouting system created by Shankly in 1967 and placed under the control of new chief scout Geoff Twentyman , who had played for Shankly at Carlisle and had then spent several seasons at Liverpool , retiring shortly before Shankly 's appointment . According to Stephen Kelly , hiring Twentyman as chief scout was " perhaps Shankly 's finest signing ever " . It was through Twentyman that Liverpool found the new players and , after Shankly retired , Twentyman gave sterling service to Bob Paisley and Joe Fagan by finding players like Phil Neal , Alan Hansen and Ian Rush . As always , Shankly kept things simple and Twentyman was told to look for a prospect 's basic qualities which were the abilities to pass the ball and move into position to receive a pass . Shankly also wanted Twentyman to check the player 's personality and ensure he had the right attitude for a professional footballer . Above all , said Twentyman , " he wanted to know if the lad had the heart to play for Liverpool " . Although Shankly sometimes paid large transfer fees he was loath to do so and Twentyman 's brief was " getting them young so he ( Shankly ) could mould them into what he wanted " . 
 = = = = 1970 to 1974 = = = = 
 The new team began promisingly in 1970 – 71 by retaining fifth place in the league and reaching the semi @-@ finals of the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup where they lost 0 – 1 to a very experienced Leeds United side . The highlight of Liverpool 's European campaign that season was a 4 – 1 aggregate victory in the quarter @-@ final over Bayern Munich . For the first time since winning the competition in 1965 , Liverpool reached the FA Cup Final but , as in the Fairs Cup , experience was the key factor and Shankly 's young team were beaten 2 – 1 by league champions Arsenal despite having taken the lead in extra time through a Steve Heighway goal . Watching from the sidelines was another new player whom Shankly had recently signed from Scunthorpe United for £ 35 @,@ 000 on Twentyman 's recommendation . This was Kevin Keegan and he was such an important addition to the new Liverpool team that Shankly devoted an entire chapter of his autobiography to him entitled " A Boy Called Keegan " . Shankly summarised Keegan as " the inspiration of the new team " . 
 In Keegan 's first season , 1971 – 72 , Liverpool missed out on winning the League Championship by a single point , the title going to Brian Clough 's Derby County . Shankly maintained that Liverpool were denied a definite penalty in their crucial away match against Derby and then had a good goal disallowed towards the end of their final match against Arsenal . Both decisions cost the team a vital point which would have been enough to claim first place . Shankly took encouragement from the team 's overall form , especially as they made a strong finish to the season , and he was confident of success in 1972 – 73 . 
 Shankly had always been noted for his use of psychology , both to encourage his own players and to raise doubt in the minds of opponents . One of his lasting innovations is the THIS IS <unk> plaque secured to the wall above the players ' tunnel . Coupled with the roar of the crowd , it was designed to intimidate . In the first match after it was erected , Liverpool defeated Newcastle United 5 – 0 , despite an attempt by Malcolm Macdonald to joke about the sign . Shankly would also try to boost the confidence of his own players by announcing that a key opponent was unfit . When Kevin Keegan was about to play against Bobby Moore for the first time , Shankly told him that Moore had been out at a night club and was hung over . Afterwards , Keegan having produced an outstanding performance against the equally outstanding Moore , Shankly told him that Moore had been brilliant that day and Keegan would " never play against anyone better than him " . 
 In 1972 – 73 , Liverpool won the club 's eighth league title and their third under Shankly . A massive bonus for the club was winning the UEFA Cup , the club 's first European success . In the two @-@ legged final they faced Borussia Mönchengladbach , whom Shankly rated " the best team in Europe " . The first leg at Anfield had to be played twice after an abandonment due to heavy rain which flooded the pitch . Shankly had left John Toshack out of the team but , having studied the Borussia defence , recalled him for the rematch the following night . Toshack used his height and heading ability to great effect and created two goals for Keegan as Liverpool won 3 – 0 . The second leg in Mönchengladbach was a different story as Borussia took an early 2 – 0 lead and Shankly admitted he thought the final was lost , but Liverpool held on to win the final by the aggregate score of 3 – 2 . It was the first time an English club had won both the league title and a European trophy in the same season . 
 Liverpool were well beaten by Red Star Belgrade in the second round of the 1973 – 74 European Cup and lost out to Leeds in the League Championship , finishing second . In the third round of the FA Cup , Liverpool had to score a late equaliser to draw 2 – 2 at home against lowly Doncaster Rovers but recovered to win the replay and then go all the way to the final . In what proved to be Shankly 's last competitive game in charge , Liverpool produced a superb second half performance to defeat Newcastle 3 – 0 at Wembley . 
 = = = Relationship with fans = = = 
 In his autobiography , Shankly wrote : " Right from the start as a manager ( i.e. , when he was at Carlisle ) I tried to show that the fans are the people that matter . You 've got to know how to treat them ( and ) have them on your side " . This was particularly true at Liverpool and Shankly said he was " made for Liverpool ( where ) the people that matter most are the ones who come through the turnstiles " . He added that " a manager has got to identify himself with the people ( because ) football is their whole life " . In return , he said , the support of the Liverpool fans for their team had been " incredible " . 
 In April 1973 , when Shankly and the team were showing off the League Championship trophy to the fans on the Kop , he saw a policeman fling aside a Liverpool scarf which had been thrown in Shankly 's direction . Shankly retrieved the scarf and wore it . He said to the policeman : " Don 't you do that . That 's precious " . Shankly saw the offer of the scarf as a mark of respect which deserved his respect in return . 
 Shankly emphasised the importance of communication with the supporters . At Carlisle he used to speak to them over the public address system before matches . Rather than just putting a few lines in the match programme , he preferred to speak and explain his team changes and his views about the previous match . At Workington , he would answer supporters ' letters in person , using an old typewriter . But he said he preferred to phone business people as he would put as little as possible in writing when dealing with them . He would readily obtain match tickets for fans whom he considered to be deserving cases and wrote in his autobiography that he " would give people anything within reason " . 
 Shankly formed a special bond with the Liverpool supporters and , at the end of the 1961 – 62 season when Liverpool won the Second Division championship , he told the Liverpool Echo : " In all sincerity , I can say that they are the greatest crowd of supporters in the game " . In Tommy Smith 's view , Shankly was completely in tune with the city of Liverpool ; he loved the supporters and they loved him , mainly " because they knew he understood them " . 
 = = Retirement from Liverpool = = 
 Shankly was 60 years old when Liverpool won the 1974 FA Cup and said in his autobiography that , on returning to the dressing room at the end of the match , he " felt tired from all the years " . His mind was made up and he knew he was going to retire . His wife , Nessie , had asked him to retire a year earlier but he decided that was not the right time . Tommy Smith said that Shankly 's feelings for Nessie were undoubtedly a major reason for his decision . In 1974 , he decided that he could leave Liverpool with pride in a job well done and only one regret , which was that he did not win the European Cup . 
 Shankly had proposed to resign in previous years . The Liverpool secretary Peter Robinson was initially blasé in 1974 but , when he realised Shankly was serious this time , he tried to make him change his mind . Shankly 's granddaughter , Karen Gill , said to The Observer in 2009 : " I think that perhaps it was tiredness , that football had taken its toll on him " . 
 Shankly 's retirement was officially and surprisingly announced at a press conference called by Liverpool on 12 July 1974 . The chairman , John Smith , said in his opening address : 
 " It is with great regret that I as chairman of Liverpool Football Club have to inform you that Mr Shankly has intimated that he wishes to retire from active participation in league football . And the board has with extreme reluctance accepted his decision . I would like to at this stage place on record the board 's great appreciation of Mr Shankly 's magnificent achievements over the period of his managership " . 
 But Shankly soon regretted his decision and tried to continue his involvement with the club , mainly by turning up for team training at Melwood . He said he still wanted the involvement as the club had become his life . He soon stopped going to Melwood because he felt there was some resentment and people were asking what he was doing there . He felt unwanted , but " I never resented the club after I left , as some stupid person wrote in the paper . " He still attended matches , but sat in the stand away from the directors and staff . He was especially annoyed that Liverpool did not invite him to attend away matches as the club 's guest . When , finally , he was invited to travel with them to the away leg of the 1976 UEFA Cup Final in Bruges , he was accommodated in a separate hotel and said he found that insulting . Shankly contrasted Liverpool 's attitude with what he encountered at other clubs , including Liverpool 's great rivals Everton and Manchester United , where he was received warmly . He recalled Manchester United manager Tommy Docherty 's reply to a Liverpool director : " Aye , Bill 's welcome here " . About Everton , once his greatest rivals , he wrote : " I have been received more warmly by Everton than I have by Liverpool . It is a scandal that I must write these words about the club I helped to build " . 
 From Liverpool 's point of view , the situation was that Shankly had retired and the club had to move on . Shankly did not understand that by turning up for training at Melwood , he was effectively undermining Bob Paisley , who had succeeded him as manager , even to the point of actually taking over the training . Tommy Smith recalled that Shankly as manager never ran training and would only speak to Paisley , Fagan and Bennett about what needed to be done . But , as a visitor at Melwood he began to intervene and Paisley 's initial pleasure on seeing him soon turned to polite embarrassment . Eventually , Paisley had to point out to Shankly that he didn 't work there any more , that it was now Paisley 's team and that he had things which he wanted to do with the team . 
 It is believed that Shankly wanted a seat on the Liverpool board , following the precedent of Matt Busby who joined the Manchester United board after he retired as manager in 1969 . But , again , what Shankly did not understand was that his relations with the board had often been acrimonious with several resignation threats and a statement made by Shankly that : " At a football club , there 's a holy trinity – the players , the manager and the supporters . Directors don 't come into it . They are only there to sign the cheques " . Although some club officials like secretary Peter Robinson wanted bygones to be bygones , Tommy Smith summarised the board 's view as " Right , that 's it , we 've got rid of him at last " . It should be remembered that Shankly was " an overpowering figure " who would certainly have used a position on the board to be a " back @-@ seat driver " and the board were well aware that Matt Busby 's time as a Manchester United director was disastrous , the team just having been relegated . Whilst Liverpool 's treatment of Shankly may have seemed disrespectful , they were acting in the best interests of the club and its new manager by pursuing the same relentless winning ethic that Shankly himself had instilled . In any event , their perceived ruthlessness was vindicated by the unprecedented haul of League Championship titles and European Cups won over the next decade under Bob Paisley and Joe Fagan . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Shankly was awarded the OBE in November 1974 , four months after he retired as Liverpool manager . He and Nessie went to Buckingham Palace and , according to Kelly , that was " a rare day out for them " . They continued to live in the semi @-@ detached house at West Derby , near the Everton training ground at <unk> , which they bought when they moved to Liverpool in 1959 . After Shankly 's death in 1981 , Nessie lived there alone until she died in August 2002 . 
 Shankly tried to keep busy in retirement and stay in touch with football . He worked for Radio City 96 @.@ 7 , a Liverpool station on which he presented his own chat show , once interviewing prime minister Harold Wilson , and was a pundit on its football coverage . He briefly took up advisory roles at Wrexham and then at Tranmere Rovers , helping former Liverpool captain Ron Yeats at the latter . In November 1976 , the press speculated that Shankly would make a return to management as the successor to Dave Mackay at Derby County , but the position went to Colin Murphy instead . John Toshack recalled that Shankly was a great help to him when he went into management with Swansea City in 1978 . Despite being in his sixties , Shankly kept himself fit and often took part in five @-@ a @-@ side football . If nothing else was available he would join teams of youngsters in <unk> . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 On the morning of 26 September 1981 , Bill Shankly was admitted to Broadgreen Hospital following a heart attack . His condition appeared to be stable and there was no suggestion that his life was in danger . But , on the following Monday morning , his condition suddenly deteriorated and was transferred into intensive care . At 00 : 30 on 29 September , he suffered another cardiac arrest and was certified dead , aged 68 , at 01 : 20 . He was cremated at the Anfield Crematorium on 2 October and his ashes were scattered on the Anfield pitch at the Kop end . 
 On the day of Shankly 's death , training was cancelled at both Melwood and <unk> . The Labour Party conference stood in a minute 's silence for a man who had always been a socialist . Sir Matt Busby , the former Manchester United manager , was so upset that he refused to take any telephone calls from people asking him for a reaction . Tributes poured in from the world of football , especially from the former players of all Shankly 's clubs . Liverpool chairman John Smith summed them up with a simple but fitting : " In my opinion , he was the most outstanding and dynamic manager of the century " . 
 Liverpool erected the 15 @-@ foot high cast @-@ iron Shankly Gates in front of the Anfield Road stand . Inscribed You 'll Never Walk Alone , they were opened by Nessie Shankly at a low @-@ key ceremony in August 1982 . In 1997 , a seven @-@ foot tall bronze statue of Shankly was unveiled outside the stadium . 
 A hotel and museum opened in Liverpool in August 2015 dedicated to the life and career of Bill Shankly . 
 From the mid @-@ 1990s Preston North End commenced a complete rebuilding of Deepdale to convert it into a modern all @-@ seater stadium . When the former Spion Kop end was replaced by a new stand in 1998 , it was named the Bill Shankly Kop and was designed with different coloured seats providing an image of Shankly 's head and shoulders . 
 Shankly was made an inaugural inductee of the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 , in recognition of his impact on the English game as a manager . 
 David Peace 's biographical novel Red or Dead , published in 2013 , is a fictionalised account of Shankly 's career as Liverpool manager . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Stephen Kelly , in his 1997 biography of Shankly , calls him " the ultimate obsessive " . Shankly was fanatical about Liverpool and about football in general . From coaching his players and arguing with journalists to <unk> fans in pubs , all Shankly " ever wanted to do was talk about football " and to be involved in football . As a result , he had few interests outside the game other than his family . His wife Nessie told Kelly that Shankly would spend time in the garden , mowing and weeding . She could also rely on him to " clean the cooker when Liverpool lost " . Family holidays were limited to a week in Blackpool , where they always stayed at the <unk> Hotel . One non @-@ football activity that Shankly did enjoy was playing cards and Ian St John said he " loved " it , always taking part on long coach trips to away matches . 
 Shankly was noted for his personality and his wit ; as a result , he is oft @-@ quoted . His most famous quotation is probably one that is often misquoted : 
 Kelly points out that , although it was said half @-@ jokingly , so far as Shankly was concerned there was a degree of truth in what he had said . Shankly had fully realised the importance of football to its die @-@ hard fans , himself included . It had become " too important " . Ian St John agreed that " much of Shankly 's behaviour was bizarre " , but everything was done with a purpose because " Shankly always knew what he was doing and what he was saying " . 
 In his autobiography , Shankly gave insights into his character such as his world @-@ view as a socialist , explaining that the socialism he believed in was not about politics but about collectivism , with everyone working for each other and enjoying a share of the rewards . That was the basis of his approach to football which is a team game in which everyone works together and shares the rewards . He admitted to <unk> Robert Burns , whose birthplace was only 26 miles from Glenbuck and he was inspired by many of Burns ' philosophical quotations , such as " A man 's a man for a ' that " . Shankly had no time for bigotry or prejudice , especially arising from differences of religion . He compared the cities of Glasgow and Liverpool by saying that " fortunately there is nothing like the Rangers – Celtic situation in Liverpool because the supporters of Liverpool and Everton are a mixed bunch whose religion is football " . 
 Shankly 's public persona was that of a " tough guy " with the swagger of his favourite film star James Cagney but privately he was very different . Joe Mercer described his " heart of gold " and likened him to a Border Collie who drives his sheep but could never hurt them . Liverpool 's perceived failings in the late 1960s have been attributed to Shankly 's reluctance to drop his long @-@ serving players even though they were past their best . Bob Paisley said it was Shankly 's " one failing " and it was because he was " a softie at heart " . 
 When asked by a TV interviewer how he would like to be remembered , Shankly replied : " Basically as an honest man in a game that is sometimes short on honesty . That I 've been working honestly for the people of Liverpool to try and give them entertainment " . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = As a player = = = 
 Preston North End 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 1937 – 38 
 = = = As a manager = = = 
 Liverpool 
 Football League First Division ( 3 ) : 1963 – 64 , 1965 – 66 , 1972 – 73 
 Football League Second Division ( 1 ) : 1961 – 62 
 FA Cup ( 2 ) : 1964 – 65 , 1973 – 74 
 FA Charity Shield ( 3 ) : 1964 , 1965 , 1966 
 UEFA Cup ( 1 ) : 1972 – 73 
 = = = As an individual = = = 
 Manager of the Year Award ( 1 ) : 1972 – 73 
 Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( 1 ) : 1974 
 PFA Merit Award ( 1 ) : 1978 
 Inaugural Inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame ( 1 ) : 2002 
 Inaugural Inductee to the Scottish Football Hall of Fame ( 1 ) : 2004 
 In April 2013 , Shankly was honoured by Royal Mail in the United Kingdom , as one of six people selected as subjects for the " Great Britons " commemorative postage stamp issue . 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 = Elias Abraham Rosenberg = 
 Elias Abraham Rosenberg ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> <unk> ; Hawaiian : Elia <unk> <unk> ; c . 1810 – July 10 , 1887 ) was a Jewish immigrant to the United States who , despite a questionable past , became a trusted friend and adviser of King Kalākaua of Hawaii . Regarded as eccentric , he lived in San Francisco in the 1880s and worked as a peddler selling illegal lottery tickets . In 1886 , he traveled to Hawaii and performed as a fortune @-@ teller . He came to Kalākaua 's attention , and endeared himself to the king with favorable predictions about the future of Hawaii . Rosenberg received royal appointments to several positions : kahuna @-@ <unk> ( royal soothsayer ) , customs appraiser , and guard . He was given lavish gifts by the king , but was mistrusted by other royal advisers and satirized in the Hawaiian press . 
 Rosenberg and Kalākaua often held long conversations and enjoyed drinking alcohol together ; Rosenberg told the king Bible stories and encouraged him to revive traditional Hawaiian religion , an idea that fascinated Kalākaua but angered his political rivals . In June 1887 , Rosenberg returned to California , possibly owing to poor health or fear of unrest in Hawaii ; a short time after arriving in San Francisco , he died in a local hospital . Soon after his departure from Hawaii , the June 1887 Constitution — which curtailed royal power — was forced upon Kalākaua . A Torah scroll and yad presented to the king by Rosenberg remained in the royal collection . These artifacts were later exhibited with other royal treasures and eventually donated to Temple Emanu @-@ El in Honolulu . 
 = = San Francisco = = 
 Few details are definitively known about Rosenberg 's life before he traveled to Hawaii . He is believed to have been a Russian Jew born c . 1810 , and possibly lived in Australia and England . He was married and divorced three times , and had several children . 
 By the early 1880s , Rosenberg lived in San Francisco , California , where he was a well @-@ known figure , regarded as an eccentric , an " adventurer " , and a " curio " . There he worked as a peddler and , in 1884 , served as a director for the <unk> Beth Abraham benevolent society . He illegally sold lottery tickets for a time , but ceased the practice after he attracted attention from the San Francisco Police Department . These problems might have led to his move to Hawaii . 
 = = Hawaii = = 
 Rosenberg traveled from San Francisco to Hawaii , possibly on a whaler , arriving in Oahu sometime before December 1886 . He was the first Jew known to have visited Hawaii . At that time , Hawaii was a predominantly Christian kingdom ; Christian missionaries had successfully converted a large segment of the population after traditional Hawaiian religion was suppressed by the monarchy . In the 1880s , however , King Kalākaua encouraged the revival of Hawaiian traditions , hoping to inspire nationalistic sentiment . He revived traditional Hawaiian music and dance , including hula , and observed some practices of Hawaiian religion . Kalākaua became a powerful king , unconstrained by political factors . 
 In Hawaii , Rosenberg was known for his long white beard and his personality , which was described by those who knew him as charming and witty . He cast optimistic horoscopes for anyone who asked , and soon became popular with Hawaiians . He was nicknamed " Rosey " , owing to his cheery attitude and witty remarks . After Rosenberg became well known , he came to the attention of King Kalākaua , who granted him a royal audience . Rosenberg was present at a birthday celebration for King Kalākaua at ʻIolani Palace in November 1886 . Rosenberg 's fame led to satire : he regularly appeared in a Hawaiian Gazette gossip column , which mockingly called him " Holy Moses " , and was satirized by a troupe of amateur minstrels at the Hawaii Opera House . In February 1887 , he paid for a notice to be placed in The Honolulu Advertiser , in which he claimed to have lost a letter that was sent to him by Queen Victoria . There has been speculation that the advertisement was a hoax designed by Rosenberg to lend himself prestige . 
 King Kalākaua trusted Rosenberg 's skill as a fortune teller , perhaps because the way Rosenberg chanted in Hebrew reminded him of ancient Hawaiian rites . In January 1887 , the king — who had become increasingly autocratic and was facing several scandals — granted Rosenberg a private audience at the palace . The king and Rosenberg became close , and routinely visited each other for several days at a time and held long conversations . During the audiences , Rosenberg told Bible stories and read from the Talmud . He began to teach the king basic Hebrew , and gave him an ornate Torah and yad that he had brought with him to Hawaii . He also claimed to have found references to Hawaii in ancient Hebrew texts , a statement that encouraged the king to restore aspects of Hawaiian religion . The king had previously sought instruction from several people he regarded as prophets and had established a society dedicated to the revival of native Hawaiian traditions . Finally , the king declared Rosenberg his kahuna @-@ <unk> , a royal soothsayer . 
 Rosenberg was granted a room in the palace to use for fortune telling , which the king made sure was stocked with alcohol , as they enjoyed drinking together . In late January , the king appointed Rosenberg as a customs appraiser in Honolulu , although the appointment was controversial ; by mid @-@ February he was fired by the head of customs . One month later , Rosenberg was reappointed by order of the king and the following month the head of customs resigned . Archibald Scott Cleghorn , the king 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , was appointed as the new head of customs . Between March and May 1887 , Rosenberg was paid $ 300 , ostensibly for working as a guard at the Customs Office , although it was alleged that Rosenberg 's position was a sinecure . 
 On June 1 , the king gave Rosenberg a gold medal , a silver cup , and $ 260 . The cup and the obverse of the medal were inscribed with the words " His Majesty Kalākaua I to Abraham Rosenberg " . The reverse side of the medal featured a profile of the king ; a gold crown on the rim attached the coin to a blue ribbon . The following week , the king made a payment of $ 100 to a local jeweler , but it is not known whether it was for the gifts given to Rosenberg . 
 Some royal advisers , who were angered by the trust the king placed in Rosenberg , regarded him with suspicion . For example , Walter M. Gibson , the Prime Minister of Hawaii , noted that King Kalākaua withheld most of the specific details of his conversations with Rosenberg from him . Kalākaua 's autocracy and nativism , along with allegations of his corruption , convinced a powerful group of western businessmen and children of Christian missionaries that action should be taken against the king . This led to the June 1887 Constitution , which stripped Kalākaua of much of his power and significantly weakened the Hawaiian monarchy . 
 = = Return to San Francisco and death = = 
 Rosenberg left Hawaii on June 7 , 1887 , booking steerage class passage on the steamer Australia . Some reports state that he left owing to health issues , although others suggest that Rosenberg departed the island because he was concerned about political unrest . He left three weeks before the king signed the June Constitution . Rosenberg returned to San Francisco , but was hospitalized within a month of his return , and died on July 10 , 1887 . He spoke of King Kalākaua on his deathbed , whispering the king 's name with his dying breath . He was buried at the cemetery of Congregation <unk> Israel in the San Francisco Peninsula ; brief death notices were published in <unk> and San Francisco @-@ based newspapers . 
 Rosenberg left a will in which he requested that his body be cremated using quicklime . Most of his estate was left to his children ; the will stated that his Torah and yad were to be given to his son Adolph , but this was not done as they remained in Hawaii . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 1888 , the Torah and yad Rosenberg left with King Kalākaua were included in an exhibition of royal possessions at a bazaar held by King Kalākaua 's wife , Queen <unk> . After King Kalākaua 's death in 1891 , his stepson David Kawānanakoa inherited the items . When Kawānanakoa 's wife , Abigail Campbell Kawānanakoa , inherited them after David 's death , she loaned them to members of the Hawaiian Jewish community on religious holidays . Her granddaughter , Abigail <unk> <unk> Kawānanakoa , later acquired the items . The yad was bequeathed to Temple Emanu @-@ El in 1959 , and formally dedicated for use in Torah readings the next year . The Torah was lost in the 1940s , but was recovered in 1972 when a Honolulu attorney found the scroll in the possessions of a recently deceased client and donated it to the temple . The Torah had been damaged and could not be used in services , but the temple later installed a plaque describing Rosenberg below a glass display case housing the Torah and yad . 
 Although Rosenberg 's Torah was a prized possession of the royal family , there were no recorded Jewish religious services in Hawaii until years after his death . The first Jewish temple in Hawaii was not built until 70 years after Rosenberg presented the Torah to King Kalākaua . Although Rosenberg styled himself as " Rabbi Rosenberg " — and the king promised him a plot of land for a synagogue — there is no evidence that he was a rabbi . 
 William DeWitt Alexander advanced a negative view of Rosenberg in a late 19th @-@ century history of Hawaii , characterizing him as an accomplice to what he saw as the king 's " efforts to revive heathenism " . A 2008 article in Honolulu magazine also advanced an unfavorable characterization of Rosenberg : a writer for the publication described him as a " smooth talker " and compared him to the 19th @-@ century industrialist Claus Spreckels , arguing that each was a " huckster basking in the rays of Kalākaua 's power " . A more positive description was offered in the Canadian Jewish Chronicle in 1938 by Harry Rubenstein , who compared Rosenberg to the Baal Shem Jewish mystics of the 1700s . 
 = Finale ( Smallville ) = 
 " Finale " is the title of the two @-@ episode series finale of the superhero television series Smallville . The episodes are the 21st and 22nd of the 10th season , and the 216th and 217th episodes overall . The finale originally aired on The CW in the United States on May 13 , 2011 . The first half was written by Al Septien and Turi Meyer , and directed by Kevin G. Fair , and the second half was written by Kelly Souders and Brian Peterson , and directed by Greg Beeman . 
 The series follows the adventures of the young Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) in the fictional town of Smallville , Kansas , before he becomes Superman . In the series finale , Tess Mercer ( Cassidy Freeman ) learns that the planet Apokolips is coming to destroy humanity , and that Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) is under the possession of Darkseid . Meanwhile , a parallel universe version of Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) attempts to bring a clone of his son Lex ( Michael Rosenbaum ) to life . Clark finally realizes his true destiny , just in time to stop Darkseid 's arrival on Earth . The finale episodes feature a flashforward seven years into the future , revealing Clark 's new superhero persona , " Superman " . 
 The episodes , written in advance during the fall of 2010 , were conceived to successfully bring an end to the series . Showrunners Brian Peterson and Kelly Souders attempted to preserve the intended ending envisioned by original series developers Alfred Gough and Miles Millar several years earlier . The episodes featured the return of several former actors , including John Schneider , Aaron Ashmore , Annette O 'Toole , Michael McKean ( voice only ) , and Michael Rosenbaum . The episodes also contained several overt references , homages , and connections to previous Superman franchises , such as the 1978 film Superman and the 2006 film Superman Returns . 
 Upon its premiere , the two @-@ episode finale was watched by 3 @.@ 35 million viewers . The episodes received generally positive reviews from commentators , many of whom felt that the series was successfully able to wrap up its story arcs . Rosenbaum 's return was met with critical applause ; however , the artistic decision to render Superman using computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) was met with negativity . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Seven years in the future , Chloe Sullivan ( Allison Mack ) reads a comic book entitled " Smallville " , detailing the rise of Superman , to her son . Flashing back seven years , Lois Lane ( Erica Durance ) and Clark Kent ( Tom Welling ) argue about their upcoming wedding . Lois wants to call off the wedding , believing that she is hindering Clark ’ s destiny . Chloe gives Lois a copy of Clark ’ s vows to help convince her to go through with the wedding . Meanwhile , Clark has a discussion with his mother , Martha ( Annette O 'Toole ) about letting go of the past . Clark visits Lois at their apartment , where she tells him that the wedding is on , admitting that she read his vows , and gives him hers in exchange . Clark reads her vows and tells her that he will meet her at the chapel . 
 At the Luthor Mansion , Tess Mercer ( Cassidy Freeman ) is confronted by Granny Goodness , who offers her one final chance to join Darkseid 's forces to spare her life during the coming destruction . Tess refuses , declaring that , just because she was born a Luthor , her fate is not sealed . At Watchtower , discovering that Oliver Queen ( Justin Hartley ) disabled the organization 's satellites , Tess brings up previous satellite footage revealing the planet Apokolips descending toward Earth . Before Tess can warn the team , she is ambushed by a group of armed men and taken captive . Granny , <unk> , and Gordon Godfrey meet in their lair . Oliver — possessed by the power of Darkseid — arrives and is instructed to remove Clark 's powers with a gold kryptonite wedding ring . At the wedding , Chloe realizes the ring is kryptonite and stops Oliver . Clark helps Oliver overcome Darkseid 's control just as Apokolips enters Earth 's atmosphere . 
 Tess , awakening on a table inside a laboratory , is greeted by the parallel universe version of Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) , who reveals that Lex took his imperfect clones ' best pieces and assembled them to create a perfect clone of himself . Lionel attempts to use Tess 's heart to bring Lex back to life , but she breaks free and shoots Lionel during her escape . Lionel makes a deal with Darkseid to bring his son to life in exchange for Lionel 's soul . Clark tracks Tess to the Luthor Mansion , where he is confronted by Lex . Clark apologizes for not being able to save Lex , but declares that he will always be there to stop him in the future . Oliver confronts Granny Goodness , <unk> , and Gordon Godfrey , dispatching them with three arrows . At LuthorCorp , Tess confronts Lex , who reveals that he always knew that she was his sister and that he used her . Lex embraces Tess , and stabs her in the stomach as he tells her he loves her , claiming to be saving her from becoming like him . As she lays dying , she infects Lex with a neurotoxin that erases all of his memories within 30 seconds . 
 After overhearing a government radio broadcast with disguised references to nuclear weapons , Lois sneaks on board Air Force One . She manipulates her way into the room with the Secretary of State , where she tells him that the supposed meteor is really a planet , and that the heroes they tried to destroy can save them . They agree to give the heroes a chance , but give them only five minutes . In the Kent barn , Clark is attacked by Darkseid possessing Lionel 's body . Jor @-@ El taps into Clark 's thoughts , showing him images of his trials over the past 10 years , revealing that his entire life has been one big trial leading to this moment . Harnessing the ability to fly , Clark smashes through Lionel 's body , destroying it , and makes his way to the Fortress of Solitude . There , the spirit of his father , Jonathan Kent ( John Schneider ) , presents him with the suit Martha made for him , and Clark takes to the sky , saving a crashing Air Force One , and vanquishing Darkseid by pushing Apokolips back into space . 
 Flashing forward seven years , a TV broadcast announces that Lex Luthor has just been elected the President of the United States . At the Daily Planet , Clark runs into Lois , and they finally discuss getting married after seven years . News arrives of a bomb found in an elevator uptown . Clark runs to the rooftop and rips open his shirt , revealing his new suit as " Superman " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 Following the conclusion of the seventh season finale " Arctic " , showrunners and original series developers Alfred Gough and Miles Millar left the series . This meant that they were unable to write the series finale , although Millar later noted that , in their minds , " the last moment of the show would [ have been ] him putting on the suit and flying off into his future and his destiny . " According to executive producer and showrunner Kelly Souders , she and fellow executive producer and showrunner Brian Peterson kept Gough and Millar 's original ending in mind when they began working on the finale , because the scenes that Gough and Millar had envisioned represented " real wish <unk> for fans " . However , the resultant script changed along the way , with Souders eventually calling it " a smorgasbord of what everybody wanted . " 
 The first part of the episode was written by Al Septien and Turi Meyer , whereas the second half was written by Peterson and Souders . Due to the important nature of the episode , Septien , Meyer , Peterson , and Souders began working on the script before Christmas , in the fall of 2010 after the writers had a general idea for the first part of the 10th season episodes . Souders later explained that the script had been finalized when Rosenbaum agreed to return to the series . As such , this forced the writers to redo parts of the episode to make room for his character . The work was so stressful , Souders said , that she experienced heart palpitations due to exhaustion , excitement , and the emotion of the experience . 
 The episode finally features Clark flying . Peterson and Souders had toyed with the idea of showing Clark flying in either the 200th episode , " Homecoming , " or during a different mid @-@ season episode , but they decided against it ; they argued that Clark flying was a metaphor for him finally embracing his destiny , and that adding it to another episode other than the finale would be jarring . The writers listened to both network executive and fans in order to formulate the best idea as to how to handle the situation . Peterson noted that people wanted " one big transformation " . According to Souders , the writers initially wished to include more members of the Justice League but , because of budgetary constraints , these ideas did not come to pass . Peterson , however , noted that the episode contained " 80 to 90 percent of what everyone [ wanted ] " . After the scripts were finished , they were heat @-@ marked to ensure secrecy . According to Welling , scripts could not be photocopied and , in order to read them , the actors had to sign them in and out . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The finale episodes featured several returning characters . John Schneider reprised his role as Jonathan Kent , both appearing to Clark in various visions , as well as presenting Clark with his suit near the end of the episode . Schneider 's appearance was meant to bookend the season , with his role in the episodes mirroring his appearance to Clark in the season premiere , " Lazarus " . Aaron Ashmore returned after his original character , " Henry " James Olson , was written out of the series during the eighth season episode " Doomsday " . In the finale , Ashmore portrays " Jimmy Olsen " , the younger brother of Henry James Olsen , in a sequence set seven years into the future . Michael McKean also reprised his role as Perry White , and former series regulars Annette O 'Toole and Allison Mack also were featured in the episode . 
 The airing of the finale was preceded by months of speculation as to whether actor Michael Rosenbaum would return to reprise his role as Lex Luthor . Welling stated that he was doing " everything [ he could ] to get Michael Rosenbaum back " , because Rosenbaum was the only person Welling could have seen portraying Lex Luthor on the series . Before the airing of season 10 commenced , Welling argued that , for him , Luthor 's return would have to be the inspiration for Clark to finally become Superman , because the idea of one character without the other was unthinkable . 
 At the 2010 Comic @-@ Con , Welling stated that Rosenbaum acknowledged the importance of Lex in the series and wanted to return in some degree for the show 's final season , but that he needed to finalize the details . According to Welling , the series would tease early on that Lex would return with the introduction of bodies into which Lex could tap in order to heal himself later in life . After months of speculation , the actor finally agreed to appear in the finale . Rosenbaum explained that his return was for the fans , stating , " I appreciate all of their passion , their relentlessness , and even their threats . " Had Rosenbaum not elected to return , Souders explained that Lex still would have played a part , but would have been more of " a puppeteer behind the scenes " and the fact that he was still living would have " been a reveal at the end of the show " , sans the dialogue . 
 Speculation also surrounded whether former series star Kristin Kreuk would reprise her role as Lana Lang . Prior to the episode 's broadcast , Kreuk ignited a minor controversy by noting that she would not be watching the episode when it aired , giving some fans the impression that she was avoiding the show . <unk> released a statement on her Facebook page , clarifying that , even when she was a star on Smallville , she did not watch the episodes when they aired . Kreuk stated that Peterson and Souders never approached her about being in the finale , and that she was glad that they had not , because she was fond of how Lana 's story arc ended in season eight . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Because the finale encompassed two separate episodes , each was filmed by a different director . Part one was directed by Kevin G. Fair , and the second part was directed by Greg Beeman . Beeman had been a regular director for the series during its first five years , but he had left after helping direct the fifth season episode " Reckoning " . A fan of the series himself , he was particularly pleased with the way in which the various story arcs were wrapped up , highlighting the scenes in the Fortress of Solitude , the flash forward seven years , and the reappearance of Schneider . Production for the finale started in March 2011 . The producers for the series were initially concerned that they had not filmed enough material to fill the finale 's allotted air time , so additional scenes were filmed between Granny Goodness and Godfrey concerning the Darkseid mythology . However , a rough cut of the finished episodes ended up going over time , and the scenes were cut . There was talk that these scenes would appear on the 10th season DVD , although this did not come to pass . 
 The suit that Clark dons in the series finale was originally used in the 2006 film Superman Returns , worn by Brandon Routh . The producers of Smallville had been offered the suit worn by Christopher Reeve in the original Superman films ; however , they turned the offer down . Peterson reasoned that this was because it " didn 't quite fit with our world " . The final scene was shot to be reminiscent of the similar scene in the original 1978 Superman film , where Reeve rips open his shirt to reveal the Superman suit . Beeman and the rest of the production staff reviewed the scene to make sure that they filmed the homage correctly , but Beeman later noted that the iconic scene was " <unk> " and more " out of focus " than they wanted , and that people 's memories make it seem more impressive . However , he was pleased that the recreated shot was the sequence to wrap up Smallville , noting that he " always thought that was going to be the final moment " . 
 Special effects for the finale episodes — and series as a whole — were completed by Entity FX . The company produced nearly 80 different visual effects shots for the episode , which were created in the Entity FX facilities in Vancouver , Canada , and Santa Monica , California , with addition supervision in Vancouver . Mat Beck , owner of the company , later explained that the company was in charge of " work [ ing ] this magic " on several minutes of screen time , during which hardly any photography had been filmed . The episode also made use of practical effects , such as how Lex Luthor 's bald head was created . Unlike Rosenbaum 's previous appearances , the actor decided to opt for a bald cap to cover his hair , arriving at this decision both because it had taken four months for his hair to grow back and because he was working on other projects that required him to have hair . 
 The final five minutes of the second of the finale episodes featured the musical score for the Krypton sequence in the opening credits of Superman , orchestrated by John Williams . Former series composer Mark Snow , who served from seasons one to six , had previously reworked the score in season two 's " Rosetta " — which featured a guest appearance by Christopher Reeve — as well as various moments in the season two finale , " Exodus " . 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The double @-@ episode finale earned a Nielsen rating of 1 @.@ 8 , with a 3 share in the 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ old demographic . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States . These ratings mean that the two @-@ episode finale was seen by 1 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 3 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . It was viewed by an estimated 3 @.@ 35 million viewers , and ranked second in its timeslot . For the first one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours , the episode averaged around 2 @.@ 9 million viewers ; however , during the final 30 minutes , viewership rose to 3 @.@ 39 million . The ratings for the final episode marked a 63 percent increase when compared with the previous episode , " Prophecy " . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly 's <unk> complimented the episode , writing that " the series finale of Smallville did what it needed to do : It completed the circuit on an epic coil of story that began 10 years ago . " Jensen was critical of the first half of the episode , noting that the pre @-@ marital tension between Clark and Lois did not bode well for the story . However , he felt that the last 10 minutes made up for the slow parts in the episode . He ultimately concluded that the finale was " radically cornball and <unk> <unk> , and the fanboy in me was satisfied " . Chris Carabott of IGN awarded the episode a 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 , citing an " amazing " episode . He argued that it " succeeded in delivering the moments we wanted to see " and that " this finale delivered some of the most memorable moments of the series and successfully transformed Clark Kent into Superman " . Nick McHatton of TV Fanatic awarded the episode five stars out of five , calling its resolution " breath taking " . McHatton praised the ending , noting that , " I couldn ’ t have asked for a better ending than those seven years in the future " and that the final shot was the scene he " always imagined Smallville could end with " . 
 Mike Moody of AOLTV felt that the season finale alternated between " exciting and disappointing " , with the final 15 minutes being particularly good due to the celebration of " what we love most about Clark Kent / Superman – his power to delight and inspire us " . However , Moody was critical that the substantial scenes in the episode were surrounded by " countless minutes of poorly paced padding , filler , and manufactured conflict " , and that " the bulk of this two @-@ hour finale was just painful to watch " . Phil Dyess @-@ Nugent of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " C + " and called it " a sodden mess that mostly points up how off @-@ balance the show became " . He heavily criticized the show for focusing so much of the romance between Clark and Lois , and wrote that it detracted from the " better " plot concerning Darkseid and his minions . 
 Likewise , several reviewers expressed frustration with the lack of a full @-@ body shot of Clark in the Superman suit , as well as the way in which Superman was presented as flying through the use of CGI . TV Line ranked the fact that Clark Kent " barely suits up " in the finale as one of " TV 's 20 Biggest Disappointments of 2011 " , writing that " we never quite were treated to seeing the series star clad in the full costume , in flying mode " , although they wrote that it was " a super @-@ nitpick " . Carabott called the CGI effects " a little shoddy " , but that they made up " one of the most important moments of the series " . Peterson and Souders , however , were reportedly " thrilled " by the " great debate " , noting that " what [ the producers ] wanted to do all along was show hints at where he was going , because [ Clark 's destiny as Superman ] is a whole different story that is yet to be told . " 
 Rosenbaum 's return as Lex Luthor was met with positive critical reception . Jensen felt that Rosenbaum 's cameo was too short , but that it was worth it to see him play Lex one last time . Carabott felt that the scene between Lex and Clark was " worth the wait " . Dyess @-@ Nugent praised Rosenbaum 's acting , arguing that it shook " the show awake , sending the needle hurtling rudely into the red zone " . He ultimately stated that Rosenbaum 's acting — in both the finale and the series as a whole — was " one of the great TV series performances of the past 10 years and proof once again that talent will blossom in the least expected places " . 
 = Grey Matters ( Fringe ) = 
 " Grey Matters " is the 10th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . The episode was written by Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz , and directed by Jeannot Szwarc . It centered on three mental patients who mysteriously became sane again after shapeshifters from the parallel universe removed a piece of foreign tissue from each of their brains ; this tissue is later revealed to have been taken from the brain of Walter Bishop years before . The fringe team of Olivia Dunham , Peter Bishop , and Walter investigate and face a new enemy , Thomas Jerome Newton ( guest actor Sebastian Roché ) , whose purpose is to decipher the missing parts of Walter 's brain and find out how to move between universes . 
 The episode features the first scene between Walter and his old colleague William Bell ( played by guest actor Leonard Nimoy ) . At the time , it fulfilled Nimoy 's commitment to the show , though he later returned for the season finale . " Grey Matters " first aired in the United States on December 10 , 2009 on Fox to mostly positive reviews . An estimated 6 @.@ 33 million viewers watched the episode , and it received a 2 @.@ 3 ratings share among those 18 – 49 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In a Boston mental institution , Thomas Jerome Newton ( Sebastian Roché ) performs brain surgery on a patient , Mr Slater , who keeps repeating " Heather " " flowers in her hair " , and a " girl in a red dress " . Newton successfully removes part of his brain , but he and his team are forced to leave before they can seal the man 's head back up . The Fringe team of Olivia ( Anna Torv ) , Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , and Walter ( John Noble ) arrive at the institution and learn that Slater 's paranoid schizophrenia was apparently cured by the operation , and that his brain is still structurally intact . 
 While viewing security footage , Olivia recognizes Newton , the leader of the shapeshifters who was reanimated from a cryogenically frozen head at the end of " Momentum Deferred " . Astrid and Walter research the patient 's physician , Dr. Paris , and learn he set up an indefinite prescription fourteen years ago for Slater as well as two other patients in the same week . Peter and Olivia interview one of these other patients , who constantly thought about the number 28 , but was recently cured of her obsessive compulsive disorder by Newton . She tells them she was originally sent to the hospital by Dr Paris for mild postpartum depression , and that her obsessive compulsive disorder started soon after . Peter and Olivia also hear of a third patient who was mysteriously cured two days ago . Walter realizes that all the patients were given constant doses of organ transplant medication , and that foreign brain tissue was stored in each of their brains . 
 Walter undergoes a CT scan , and the team learn Walter had three pieces of his brain tissue removed from his Hippocampus which is the primary repository for long term memory . The pieces were then apparently stored inside the brains of the cured patients fourteen years ago . Knowing only Walter could comprehend the memories concerning how to open a portal to another reality , the shapeshifters kidnap him . By the time the others find Walter , Newton has already learned what he needs to know and escapes . Olivia manages to stop them , but is forced to choose between seizing Newton and saving Walter , as he has been given a lethal dose of a neurotoxin that will kill him unless Newton gives them the correct directions . Olivia chooses to save Walter 's life , and Newton replies " Now I know how weak you are " . 
 Broyles eases Olivia 's concerns that she made an emotional choice by assuring her that her decision to save Walter was a logical one as Walter is highly valuable to the team . 
 As Walter undergoes a follow @-@ up MRI , he flashes back to a past surgery , where he is being operated on by William Bell ( AKA Dr Paris , played by Leonard Nimoy ) , who removed Walter 's brain fragments and hid them in the patients ' brains to prevent anyone else from gaining the information . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Grey Matters " was written by screenwriters Ashley Edward Miller and Zack Stentz , and was directed by Jeannot Szwarc . In an interview the following year , Miller noted that " Your characters will often assert themselves , and remind you who they really are . In ' Grey Matters ' there 's a moment where pre @-@ madness Walter wakes up in the chair — that beat emerged on the page . We had no idea it was going to be in the script until we were writing the scene . As a writer , you live for that . " 
 " Grey Matters " marked the first episode that featured a shared scene between actors Leonard Nimoy and John Noble , whose characters are old colleagues of each other . At the time , it was Nimoy 's third episode and consequently last commitment as a guest actor on Fringe , and he had expressed his reluctance in interviews to return for further episodes . Nimoy however later agreed to a reappearance in the two @-@ part season finale " Over There " . The visual effect of making Walter and Bell appear younger was produced by Zoic Studios . Fringe 's visual effects supervisor , Jay Worth , explained " The guys at Zoic had to walk a fine line between too <unk> , stretched , morph effects and something that naturalistically looks younger " . During filming for " Brown Betty " , Noble described the episode in an interview , " ' Grey Matters ' was a very important episode for Walter because it helped to explain to some degree his apparent behavior . His eccentricity . His obsessiveness . His forgetfulness . Because we found out that he had certain memory parts of his brain removed . " 
 In a deleted scene set after the end of the episode , Walter talks with the first patient Joseph Slater , who wonders why he was chosen to have a piece of Walter 's brain . Walter responds it was a matter of circumstance , as Slater shared his blood type and had a young resilient brain . Walter also says he himself cannot be cured , as his madness had nothing to do with the missing parts of his brain . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 William Bell 's secret alias was a reference to Leonard Nimoy 's character in the television series Mission : Impossible , whose character was also named Dr. Simon Paris . Thomas Jerome Newton is named after David Bowie 's character in The Man Who Fell to Earth . Dunwich Mental Hospital , where they meet the second mysteriously cured patient is a reference to the fictional town of Dunwich , Massachusetts , created by H.P. Lovecraft . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on December 10 , 2009 , " Grey Matters " was watched by an estimated 6 @.@ 33 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research . The episode earned a 2 @.@ 3 ratings among people 18 – 49 , slightly above the season average of 2 @.@ 2 ; it was down 0 @.@ 2 ratings points from the previous week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode premiered to near universal critical acclaim . Ramsey Isler of IGN gave it 9 @.@ 6 / 10 , and thought it was " one of the most balanced and well @-@ executed episodes of the series , Fringe fans get action , suspense , emotion , and best of all , some revelations ! ... This episode is nearly everything a Fringe fan could have asked for ... Besides the awesomeness with the Bishops , Olivia finally returns to taking an active role in an episode ... But the most important thing is that the overarching Fringe plot finally progressed , and it 's going in a pretty damn good direction " . Jane Boursaw from TV Squad enjoyed the episode because it had a " few reveals and a nice cliffhanger . " She liked the interactions between Walter and Peter , and also praised the scene between Olivia and Newton . Josh Wigler of MTV was pleased that the " mystery of the week " also tied into the ongoing plot , and that answers were provided to certain mysteries , such as why Walter 's behavior and personality is " a little ... off . Pretty interesting stuff . It 's nice to finally have a reason to point at for Walter 's craziness " . 
 Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly thought it " was one of the best Fringes yet for the way it wove its sci @-@ fi with its emotional subplots with such tight , artful braiding " . Television Without Pity rated it an A , while A.V. Club 's Noel Murray gave the episode an A- , explaining " This was , I think , the best Fringe of the season , and I ’ m only docking it a notch because it was less about themes and character than it was about plot . But man , what a plot " . Various critics lauded Noble 's performance . Website blogger io9 listed " Grey Matters " as one of the few " crucial " episodes new viewers must watch to get into the show . In January 2013 , IGN ranked the episode the sixth best of the entire series , explaining that the " story is brilliant , with twists and turns and remarkable acting by both John Noble and Joshua Jackson as they portray a bond that 's closer than anything else up to that point ... This fantastic episode was an early Christmas present for Fringe fans . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Director Jeannot Szwarc submitted " Grey Matters " for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Banksia lemanniana = 
 Banksia lemanniana , commonly known as the yellow lantern banksia or Lemann 's banksia , is a species of woody shrub of the family Proteaceae native to Western Australia . It generally grows as an open shrub or small tree to five metres ( 15 ft ) high with stiff serrated leaves , and unusual hanging inflorescences . Flowering occurs over summer , the greenish buds developing into oval flower spikes before turning grey and developing the characteristic large woody follicles . It occurs within and just east of the Fitzgerald River National Park on the southern coast of the state . Banksia lemanniana is killed by bushfire and regenerates from seed . 
 First described by Swiss botanist Carl Meissner in 1856 , it was named in honour of English botanist Charles Morgan Lemann . It is one of three or four related species all with pendent inflorescences , which is an unusual feature within the genus . No subspecies are recognised . Banksia lemanniana is classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . Unlike many Western Australian banksias , it appears to have some resistance to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi , and is one of the easier Western Australian species to grow in cultivation . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia lemanniana grows as an open shrub or , less commonly , a small tree to 5 m ( 15 ft ) in height , with a spreading habit . The trunk has thin grey bark and can reach a diameter of 15 cm ( 6 in ) . Lower @-@ growing plants that reach 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) in height have been reported from coastal areas of Fitzgerald River National Park . The new growth is finely hairy and predominantly seen in summer , before losing its hair and becoming glabrous ( smooth ) over two years . The stiff leaves are narrowly wedge @-@ shaped or more oval ( cuneate to obovate ) and measure 3 to 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 6 in ) in length by 1 @.@ 2 – 3 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 5 in ) wide . The leaf margins are serrated , with many teeth measuring 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 3 cm each . 
 Flowering typically occurs between October and January . Unlike those of most other banksias , the cylindrical inflorescences hang down from branchlets and measure 5 – 11 cm ( 2 – 4 @.@ 4 in ) in length and 8 – 10 cm ( 3 – 4 in ) in diameter . They are green @-@ yellow in colour and smell of honey , and drip large amounts of nectar . The buds are a rich chocolate brown in colour until the yellow flowers push through . The inflorescences turn grey as they age , and the old flowers remain as up to 20 large woody follicles develop . Oval in shape , wrinkled in texture and covered with fine hair , they can reach 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) long , 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) high , and 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide . 
 The obovate seed is 4 – 4 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 9 in ) long and fairly flattened , and is composed of the wedge @-@ shaped seed body proper , measuring 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long and 1 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide , and a papery wing . One side , termed the outer surface , is dark brown and wrinkled , while the other is black and smooth . Both surfaces sparkle slightly . The seeds are separated by a sturdy dark brown seed separator that is roughly the same shape as the seeds with a depression where the seed body sits adjacent to it in the follicle . Seedlings have cuneate ( wedge @-@ shaped ) cotyledons which measure 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long and 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 – 0 @.@ 7 in ) wide . These are dull green , sometimes with a reddish tinge , and the margin of the wedge may be crenulated ( lined with small teeth ) . The hypocotyl is red and measures 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) high and 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 in ) wide . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first known botanical collection of B. lemanniana was made by James Drummond in early 1847 , during a voyage of botanical exploration through the Stirling Ranges to Cape Riche , in company with George Maxwell . This expedition would result in much of Drummond 's renowned " Fourth Collection " , including the celebrated Hakea victoria . On returning home , Drummond sent a report of his explorations to The Inquirer , which published it on 14 April . In it , Drummond states " On Mount Barren I found ... a remarkable nodding yellow @-@ flowered Banksia , with leaves and a habit so like B. <unk> , that it can only be distinguished by the cones and flowers , which are widely different . " This is now recognised as a reference to B. lemanniana . 
 The name Banksia lemanniana first appeared in print in 1852 , being included in " A List of the Proteaceae Collected in South @-@ Western Australia by Mr James Drummond " , written by Carl Meissner and published in Hooker 's Journal of Botany and Kew Garden Miscellany . Four years later , Meissner published a formal species description in his chapter on the Proteaceae for A. P. de Candolle 's Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis . Neither of Meissner 's publications gives an etymology for the specific epithet , but it is now accepted as honouring the English botanist Charles Morgan Lemann . It has sometimes been misspelt " <unk> " after being mistakenly attributed to the German botanist Johann Lehmann . Common names include yellow lantern banksia and Lemann 's banksia . 
 Meissner placed B. lemanniana in series Quercinae in his 1856 arrangement of the genus on account of its strongly dentate , cuneate to obovate leaves . As they were defined on leaf characters alone , all of Meissner 's series were highly heterogeneous . George Bentham published a thorough revision of Banksia in his landmark publication Flora Australiensis in 1870 . In Bentham 's arrangement , the number of recognised Banksia species was reduced from 60 to 46 . Bentham defined four sections based on leaf , style and pollen @-@ presenter characters . Banksia lemanniana was placed in section Orthostylis . In his 1891 work Revisio Generum Plantarum , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. lemanniana as Sirmuellera lemanniana . The challenge failed , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved . 
 In his 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) , Alex George placed B. lemanniana in B. subg . Banksia because its inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike ; in B. sect . Banksia because of its straight styles . He made it the type species of B. ser . Tetragonae , the members of which are defined by their pendulous inflorescences and tetragonal limbs . He considered it closely related to B. aculeata and B. caleyi , which are smaller , more compact , shrubs with red- or pink @-@ tinged inflorescences . 
 In 1996 , Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published the results of a cladistic analysis of morphological characters of Banksia . They retained George 's subgenera and many of his series , but discarded his sections . George 's B. ser . Tetragonae was found to be monophyletic , and therefore retained ; and their analysis of the relationships within the series supported the placement of B. lemanniana as sister to the pair of species B. aculeata and B. caleyi . 
 B. lemanniana 's placement in Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement may be summarised as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Isostylis ( 3 species ) 
 B. elegans ( incertae sedis ) 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. elderiana 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 The arrangement of Thiele and Ladiges was not accepted by George , and was discarded in his 1999 revision . Under George 's 1999 arrangement , B. aculeata 's placement was as follows : 
 Banksia 
 B. subg . Banksia 
 B. sect . Banksia 
 B. ser . Salicinae ( 11 species , 7 subspecies ) 
 B. ser . Grandes ( 2 species ) 
 B. ser . Banksia ( 8 species ) 
 B. ser . Crocinae ( 4 species ) 
 B. ser . Prostratae ( 6 species , 3 varieties ) 
 B. ser . Cyrtostylis ( 13 species ) 
 B. ser . Tetragonae 
 B. lemanniana 
 B. caleyi 
 B. aculeata 
 Since 1998 , Austin Mast has been publishing results of ongoing cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for the subtribe Banksiinae . His analyses suggest a phylogeny that is rather different from previous taxonomic arrangements , but support the placement of the three species in a clade corresponding closely with B. ser . Tetragonae . 
 Early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete ; in the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. lemanniana is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia lemanniana is found near the southern coast of Western Australia , most of its population protected within Fitzgerald River National Park . Outside the park , it reaches the Ravensthorpe Range to the northeast and the rabbit @-@ proof fence to the east , as well as isolated populations westwards as far as <unk> estuary . The annual rainfall is 500 – 600 mm ( 20 – 24 in ) . It is found on the tops and slopes of hills as well as flatter areas on rocky or lateritic soil , as well as sand , in mallee scrubland or heath . Banksia lemanniana is relatively secure as much of its range lies within a National Park , and it is not a species collected for the cut flower industry . It is hence classified as Not Threatened under the Wildlife Conservation Act of Western Australia . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 A variety of pollinators have been recorded visiting the flower spikes , including New Holland honeyeater ( Phylidonyris novaehollandiae ) , red wattlebird ( Anthochaera carunculata ) , native and European honey bees , wasps and ants . The flower spikes drip nectar onto the ground or lower leaves , suggesting pollination by <unk> mammals , which are attracted to the scent . Being upside down may facilitate this process . 
 Banksia lemanniana is killed by bushfire and regenerates from seed . It is unclear how quickly seedlings take to reach flowering in the wild , but cultivated records suggest around five or six years . If fire occurs too frequently , plants are burned before reaching maturity or before they have produced sufficient seed to ensure regeneration of the population . This may cause a population decline or even local extinction . Too long a time between fires also causes population decline , as more plants die of natural attrition without releasing their seed , resulting in seed wastage . 
 Banksia lemanniana has been shown to have a low to moderate susceptibility to dieback from the soil @-@ borne water mould Phytophthora cinnamomi , unlike many Western Australian banksias . A study on cultivated plants in South Australia inoculated with P. cinnamomi and P. <unk> found B. lemanniana to have an overall low susceptibility overall to both organisms , although 2 @-@ to @-@ 3 @-@ week @-@ old seedlings appeared more vulnerable than 10 @-@ month @-@ old ones . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 One of the easier Western species to grow , Banksia lemanniana has some horticultural potential in its attractive chocolate buds , green @-@ yellow hanging flower spikes and large grey spikes with prominent follicles . It generally grows quite quickly , but nevertheless takes five to six years to flower from seed . It prefers a more alkaline rocky or sandy soil , with a nominal pH range from 6 to 7 @.@ 5 . It favours a sunny position and good drainage , and has been successfully cultivated in more humid climates on Australia 's east coast . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 27 to 43 days to germinate . 
 = Italian battleship Roma ( 1907 ) = 
 Roma was an Italian pre @-@ dreadnought battleship , laid down in 1903 , launched in 1907 and completed in 1908 . She was the third member of the Regina Elena class , which included three other vessels : Regina Elena , Napoli , and Vittorio Emanuele . Roma was armed with a main battery of two 12 in ( 300 mm ) guns and twelve 8 in ( 200 mm ) guns . She was quite fast for the period , with a top speed of nearly 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 Roma saw action in the Italo @-@ Turkish War in 1911 and 1912 ; she took part in the attack on Benghazi , and the amphibious assaults on the islands of Rhodes and the Dodecanese in the Aegean Sea . Roma remained in service during World War I in 1915 – 18 , but saw no action as a result of the cautious policies of both the Italian and Austro @-@ Hungarian navies . She remained in the Italian inventory until she was stricken from the naval register in September 1926 and was subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Roma was 144 @.@ 6 meters ( 474 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 22 @.@ 4 m ( 73 ft ) and a maximum draft of 8 @.@ 58 m ( 28 @.@ 1 ft ) . She displaced 13 @,@ 772 long tons ( 13 @,@ 993 t ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical triple expansion engines rated at 21 @,@ 968 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 382 kW ) . Steam for the engines was provided by twenty @-@ eight coal @-@ fired Babcock & Wilcox boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 21 @.@ 39 knots ( 39 @.@ 61 km / h ; 24 @.@ 62 mph ) and a range of approximately 10 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 000 km ; 12 @,@ 000 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Roma had a crew of 742 – 764 officers and enlisted men . 
 As built , the ship was armed with two 12 in ( 305 mm ) 40 @-@ caliber guns placed in two single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The ship was also equipped with twelve 8 in ( 203 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns in six twin turrets amidships . Close @-@ range defense against torpedo boats was provided by a battery of twenty @-@ four 3 in ( 76 mm ) 40 @-@ cal. guns . She was also equipped with two 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes placed in the hull below the waterline . Roma was protected with Krupp steel manufactured in Terni . The main belt was 9 @.@ 8 in ( 249 mm ) thick , and the deck was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . The conning tower was protected by 10 in ( 254 mm ) of armor plating . The main battery guns had 8 in ( 203 mm ) thick plating , and the 8 @-@ inch gun turrets had 6 in ( 152 mm ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Roma was laid down at the La Spezia shipyard on 20 August 1903 and launched on 21 April 1907 . After fitting @-@ out work , the ship was completed on 17 December 1908 . After her commissioning , Roma was assigned to the active duty squadron , where she remained through 1910 , which included her three sisters and the two Regina Margherita @-@ class battleships . At the time , these six battleships represented Italy 's front @-@ line battle fleet . The active duty squadron was typically in service for seven months of the year for training ; the rest of the year they were placed in reserve . 
 = = = Italo @-@ Turkish War = = = 
 Italy declared war on the Ottoman Empire in order to seize Libya and other Ottoman holdings in the Mediterranean on 29 September 1911 . For the duration of the conflict , Roma served in the 1st Division of the 1st Squadron with her three sister ships , under the command of Vice Admiral Augusto Aubry . On 30 September , Roma , her sister Vittorio Emanuele , and the armored cruiser Pisa conducted a sweep in the Aegean , in the hopes of catching the Turkish training squadron , which was at the time returning from the Levant to Constantinople . Shortly thereafter , Roma , her sister Napoli , and the armored cruisers Pisa and Amalfi conducted a blockade of the port of Tripoli . The ships were relieved on 3 October by the battleships Benedetto Brin and the three vessels of the Re Umberto class . 
 On 18 October , Roma and the rest of the 1st Division escorted a convoy of eight troopships to Benghazi . The Italian fleet bombarded the city the next morning after the Ottoman garrison refused to surrender . During the bombardment , parties from the ships and the infantry from the troopships went ashore . The Italians quickly forced the Ottomans to withdraw into the city by evening . After a short siege , the Ottoman forces withdrew on 29 October , leaving the city to the Italians . By December , Roma and the other ships of the 1st Squadron were dispersed in the ports of Cyrenaica . Roma remained stationed at Benghazi along with her sister Regina Elena , along with the armored cruiser San Marco and the protected cruiser Agordat . While there , the ships assisted in the defense of the recently conquered city from Turkish counter @-@ attacks . In early 1912 , Roma and the bulk of the fleet withdrew to Italy for maintenance necessary after several months of combat operations . Only a small force of cruisers and light craft was left to patrol the North African coast , since the Ottoman fleet remained confined to port . 
 The 1st Division left Taranto on 13 April for a demonstration off the Anatolian coast , along with the battleships of the 3rd Division , which had left from Tobruk . The two squadrons met on 17 April off the island of Stampalia , after which the combined fleet steamed north . The following day , the ships cut submarine telegraph cables between Imbros , Tenedos , Lemnos , Salonica , and the Dardanelles . The ships then steamed to the entrance to the Dardanelles in an attempt to lure out the Ottoman fleet . When the Ottoman coastal fortifications began to take the Italian ships under fire , the Italians returned fire and inflicted serious damage on them . On 19 April , Roma and most of the fleet returned to Italy , leaving only Pisa , Amalfi , and a flotilla of torpedo boats to cruise off the Ottoman coast . 
 On 30 April , the 1st Division again departed from Taranto , bound for the island of Rhodes . Meanwhile , the 3rd Division battleships escorted a convoy of troopships from Tobruk to the island . The Italian heavy ships cruised off the city of Rhodes while the transports landed the expeditionary force 10 miles ( 16 km ) to the south on 4 May ; the soldiers quickly advanced on the city , supported by artillery fire from the Italian fleet . The Turks surrendered the city the following day . Between 8 and 20 May , Roma was involved in the seizure of several islands in the Dodecanese between Crete , Rhodes , and Samos . In June , Roma and the rest of the 1st Division was stationed at Rhodes . Over the next two months , the ships cruised in the Aegean to prevent the Turks from attempting to launch their own amphibious operations to retake the islands Italy had seized in May . The 1st Division returned to Italy in late August for repairs and refitting , and were replaced by the battleships of the 2nd Squadron . The 1st Division left port on 14 October , but was recalled later that day , when the Ottomans had agreed to sign a peace treaty to end the war . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Italy declared neutrality after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but by July 1915 , the Triple Entente had convinced the Italians to enter the war against the Central Powers with promises of territory acquisition in Italia irredenta . The Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy , which had been Italy 's primary rival for decades , was the primary opponent in the conflict . The Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet lay in its harbors directly across the narrow Adriatic Sea . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic . The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . As a result , Roma and her sisters did not see significant action during the war . 
 For the duration of the conflict , Roma and her three sisters were assigned to the 2nd Division . They spent much of the war rotating between the bases at Taranto , Brindisi , and Valona , but did not see combat . On 14 – 15 May 1917 , three light cruisers of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy raided the Otranto Barrage ; in the ensuing Battle of the Strait of Otranto , Roma and her sisters raised steam to assist the Allied warships , but the Italian commander refused to permit them to join the battle for fear of risking their loss in the submarine @-@ infested Adriatic . 
 In November 1918 , Roma participated in the occupation of Constantinople following the surrender of the Ottomans . She and the protected cruiser Agordat joined a fleet of British , French , and Greek warships that entered the Dardanelles and landed troops to occupy the city . The world 's major navies , including Italy , signed the Washington Naval Treaty in early 1922 in an effort to stop naval arms races , which were seen as one of the causes of the Great War . According to the terms of the treaty , Italy could keep Roma and her three sisters , along with the newer dreadnought battleships . Due to the small size and age of the ships the Italians could have kept the ships in service indefinitely . They could not , however , be replaced by new battleships under the normal practice of the Treaty system , which provided for replacements after a ship was 20 years old . Roma was retained for only a few years after the signing of the treaty . On 3 September 1926 , Roma was stricken from the naval register and subsequently broken up for scrap . 
 = Retreat to Move Forward = 
 " Retreat to Move Forward " is the ninth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 45th overall episode of the series . It was written by executive story editor Tami Sagher and directed by Steve Buscemi . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on January 22 , 2009 . Guest stars in this episode include <unk> Agarwal , Cheryl Lynn Bowers , Mark La Mura , Chris Parnell , Lola <unk> , and Elizabeth Rouse . 
 In the episode , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) invites Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to a corporate retreat , following his Bush administration and CEO debacles , for moral support . Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) employs method acting for her Janis Joplin role , which Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) quickly takes advantage of . After Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is diagnosed with diabetes Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) attempts to find a way to dissuade Tracy from eating sugary food . 
 " Retreat to Move Forward " was generally well received among television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) asks Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) to accompany him to the Six <unk> Retreat in Croton @-@ on @-@ Hudson , New York , following his Bush administration and CEO debacles . There , Jack meets with the Six <unk> , six men who each embody a core feature of Six Sigma : teamwork , insight , brutality , male enhancement , hand @-@ shake @-@ fulness and play @-@ hard . They disapprove of Liz 's antics during the team building exercises and demand that Jack distance himself from her if he wants to succeed , which he does . Before his dinner speech , Jack psyches himself up in the men 's room , completely forgetting that he is wearing a microphone and that everyone can hear him . Liz quickly takes the stage to draw attention away from Jack 's embarrassment and finally ends up ripping her blouse open and dancing in front of everyone . She succeeds , and is banned from the retreat forever . 
 Meanwhile , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) employs method acting for her upcoming role as singer Janis Joplin , thus allowing Frank Rossitano ( Judah Friedlander ) to take advantage of her . He tells her to do her research on Joplin on Wikipedia , then quickly edits the page contents with nonsense when Jenna goes off to read it . Jenna , however , believes what she reads and proceeds to imitate all the " facts " on the page to the amusement of everyone . When she finally confronts Frank , they end up having sex and Jenna is affronted when Frank wants to keep it a secret from their co @-@ workers . She reveals their fling in front of the other TGS with Tracy Jordan writers to the dismay of Frank . At hearing this , Katie ( Elizabeth Rouse ) , the show 's hair dresser and Frank 's girlfriend , ruins Jenna 's hair and face making her look like a witch . 
 At the same time , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) tries to help Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) understand how diabetes affects him after Dr. Leo Spaceman ( Chris Parnell ) told Tracy that he is at risk of getting diabetes . Kenneth tells him a story of how a wicked witch will come and take him away if he continues to consume his unhealthy eating habits but Tracy does not believe him . Tracy gets disgusted when Kenneth tries to scare him by dressing as a witch but suddenly Jenna comes running in screaming and looking like a witch complete with a broomstick in hand . This scares both Kenneth and Tracy who fearfully vows to change his eating habits immediately . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Retreat to Move Forward " was written by executive story editor Tami Sagher and directed by Steve Buscemi . This was Sagher 's second writing credit , having written season two episode " Ludachristmas " that aired on December 13 , 2007 . This was Buscemi 's first directed episode . " Retreat to Move Forward " originally aired on January 22 , 2009 , on NBC in the United States as the ninth episode of the show 's third season and the 45th overall episode of the series . 
 Buscemi has appeared on the show as the character Lenny Wosniak , a private investigator who has been hired by Jack Donaghy in the episodes " The Collection " , " The Natural Order " , " Mamma Mia " , and " Season 4 " . Actor Chris Parnell reprised his role as Dr. Leo Spaceman in this episode . This was Parnell 's ninth appearance on the show . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 At the beginning of this 30 Rock episode , Liz tells Jack that she and Jenna used to perform improvisation at corporate retreats . In a flashback , the audience shout out Sling Blade and Oprah as suggestions for Liz and Jenna to do . Liz does the impression of the Sling Blade character , but Jenna believed that Liz was Oprah . Tracy becomes intrigued with the idea of having his foot replaced with a wheel , after Dr. Spaceman informs him that if diabetes is left untreated he could lose a foot , to which he asks Dr. Spaceman " Could I replace it with a wheel like Rosie from The Jetsons ? " Rosie is the humanoid robot maid for the title family , and she rolls about on a set of caster wheels . When the TGS writers learn from Jenna that she will be employing method acting , Frank suggests that she do her research of Janis Joplin on Wikipedia , the free online encyclopedia . When Frank sees Jenna getting ready to eat a cat , he stops her and tells her that ALF , an extraterrestrial , eats cats . After admitting that she hooked up with Frank , Jenna reveals that Dog the Bounty Hunter is the second grossest guy she has ever been with . 
 Later in the episode , to cover @-@ up for Jack , after psyching himself up and completely forgetting that he was wearing a microphone and that everyone could hear him , Liz starts singing the song " Gonna Make You Sweat ( Everybody Dance Now ) " by dance music group C + C Music Factory . " Retreat to Move Forward " references Jack 's time in the Bush administration that occurred in the show 's second season , and Jack 's unsuccessful attempts of becoming CEO of General Electric in the December 4 , 2008 , episode " Reunion " , after Don Geiss ( Rip Torn ) — who woke up from his diabetic coma — informs him he wants to remain as CEO of the company . This was the second time 30 Rock referenced Jenna trying to play singer Janis Joplin in a feature film . This plot first began in the episode , " Señor Macho Solo " , in which Jenna auditions to play the singer in a biographical movie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Retreat to Move Forward " was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households , according to the Nielsen Media Research . This episode earned a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 share in the 18 and 49 demographic , meaning that 3 @.@ 2 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . This was a decrease from the previous episode , " Flu Shot " , which was watched by 6 @.@ 6 million American viewers . 
 Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger felt that " Retreat to Move Forward " was one of the best episodes of an uneven season . Sepinwall , however , felt it " petered out " towards the end , and that the Tracy and Kenneth plot did not work until it met the Jenna and Frank story . He noted that without the addition of a guest star , " this one made good use of virtually the entire cast " . IGN contributor Robert Canning enjoyed Liz and Jack 's relationship in the episode . Canning felt that while the show occasionally hints at a romantic relationship between the two , they should never become linked . In his opinion , the episode demonstrated their non @-@ romantic friendship " perfectly " . Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad liked the episode , but noted " ... it 's the second week in a row where one of the plots was way too over the top for me . " Sassone wrote that he was not thrilled with the Kenneth and Tracy plot , citing that it was " way too silly and loud " . TV Guide 's Matt Mitovich said that " Retreat to Move Forward " was " [ a ] nother very funny , super @-@ huge @-@ guest @-@ star @-@ free episode " . Rick Porter of Zap2it reported that he found himself " more attracted " to the second @-@ tier plots than to the Jack and Liz plot , observing that it " had its moments , but the overall story didn 't hit too many new notes in their relationship . [ ... ] So yeah , some funny bits here and there with the main story ... But we 've seen this kind of dynamic between Liz and Jack before , and so it didn 't have the same comedic force as in the past . " Kevin D. Thompson for The Palm Beach Post praised 30 Rock for doing a perfect job with its three plots in the episode , and said that Jenna 's line , " The academy loves dead singers and the handicapped . And Janis was both ! " , was " [ h ] <unk> @-@ down , the funniest line of the show . " 
 The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin , who had been favorable to Jenna 's story arc of her playing Joplin , was not impressed with her antics in this episode . In regards to the episode itself , Rabin opined , " Tonight 's episode was consistently amusing but 30 Rock engenders such sky @-@ high expectations that being good oftentimes just isn 't good enough . " In conclusion , he gave the episode a B grade rating . " ' Retreat to Move Forward ' had some amusing moments , but it 's a bit unmemorable in retrospect . I 'm still waiting for a true classic 30 Rock episode this season " , said Jeremy Medina for Paste magazine . Nonetheless , Medina preferred this episode over The Office 's " Prince Family Paper " , in which its plot focused on whether actress Hilary Swank was attractive or not . 
 = William Baker ( colonist ) = 
 William Baker ( c . 1761 – 14 September 1836 ) was a New South Wales Marine and member of the First Fleet that founded the European penal colony of New South Wales . 
 Initially an orderly for the colony 's first Governor , Arthur Phillip , Baker was later appointed government storekeeper in Parramatta , and storekeeper and superintendent of convicts in the rural settlement of Hawkesbury . In 1810 he was dismissed from all government posts after being found to have misused his position for personal gain , and relocated to Hobart where he became the inaugural crier for Australia 's oldest colony @-@ wide <unk> , the Supreme Court of Van Diemen 's Land . 
 The Australian fish <unk> <unk> , or " Sergeant Baker " , is named in his honour . 
 = = Early life = = 
 There are no surviving records of Baker 's life prior to enlistment in the New South Wales Marine Corps at the age of 26 . Enlistment requirements mandated that members of the New South Wales Corps were at least five and a half feet tall , with previous satisfactory service in the British Marines and the appearance of being among " the stoutest , fittest and healthiest [ of ] men " . 
 = = = Voyage on First Fleet = = = 
 Baker joined the First Fleet to New South Wales in 1787 as a Marine corporal of the 53rd ( Portsmouth ) Company , embarked aboard the convict transport Charlotte . The Fleet set sail from Portsmouth on 13 May 1787 . Two days later Baker was severely wounded when he accidentally shot himself in the foot , having placed his loaded musket on the deck while preparing for guard duty . Ship 's surgeon John White treated the wound , and reported a significant injury to the right ankle : 
 " The bones , after being a good deal shattered , turned the ( musket ) ball which , taking another direction , had still force enough left to go through a harness cask full of beef at some distance , and after that to kill two geese who were on the other side of it . " 
 Baker was incapacitated for three months , but took pains to advance his recovery through exercise and careful tending of the wound . To the surprise of his shipmates he had recovered sufficiently to resume active duty when the Fleet reached Rio de Janeiro in August 1787 . Surgeon White recorded that Baker had regained " the perfect use of the wounded leg " , which he credited to Baker 's youth and " good habit of body " . 
 = = = Marine Service in New South Wales = = = 
 The Fleet arrived in New South Wales in January 1788 , with the Marines disembarking first at Botany Bay . Six days later they reboarded the ships for the voyage to Port Jackson , where they were reorganised into four companies under the commands of Captains James Campbell and John Shea , and Captain @-@ Lieutenants Watkin Tench and James Meredith . Baker was promoted to sergeant and assigned to Tench 's company alongside fellow sergeants William Perry and Edward Campion . He was further appointed as orderly to the colony 's Governor , Arthur Phillip , an administrative office that relieved him of routine duties such as supervising the landing of convicts or clearing trees and undergrowth for the building of the settlement . 
 Immediately on arrival in Port Jackson Baker also took a common @-@ law wife from among the convicts – 25 @-@ year @-@ old Susannah <unk> , who had been sentenced to seven years transportation for petty larceny . Their only child , Elizabeth , was born on 1 January 1789 . The relationship was not a happy one and Baker refused to accompany his wife and child when they were transferred to the remote colonial outpost of Norfolk Island in March 1790 . Susannah and Elizabeth had no further contact with Baker , even after they returned to Sydney in the 1800s . 
 Baker 's Marine service was uneventful , and his name rarely appears in colonial records for this period . He was an enthusiastic fisherman and may have been the first to catch <unk> <unk> , a common species along the New South Wales coast and described as " growing to more than two feet , coloured red to violet blue with red and yellow tail fin " , and " edible , but not greatly esteemed " . The fish was named in his honour in 1843 . 
 Marine Corps ' terms of enlistment were for three years , with Baker 's service expiring in 1791 . The bulk of the Marine force departed in December of that year aboard HMS Gorgon , leaving sixty men behind under the command of Lieutenant John <unk> to support the newly established New South Wales Corps . Baker also remained in the colony , continuing his duties as orderly to Governor Phillip . He returned to England in December 1792 , in company with Phillip and the remaining Marines as passengers aboard the convict transport Atlantic . 
 = = Civilian life = = 
 On arrival in England , Baker declined re @-@ enlistment into the British Marines and returned to civilian life . Within six months he received an appointment from the Navy Board to act as civilian superintendent of convicts aboard the transport vessel Surprize , which departed for New South Wales in early 1794 . A British loyalist , Baker took an immediate dislike to four of the convicts under his watch , sentenced for political offences and collectively known as Scottish Martyrs . Late in the voyage he advised Surprize 's captain Patrick Campbell that the Martyrs planned to mutiny and seize the vessel . Acting on Baker 's word , Campbell had three of the four confined until Surprize reached Sydney Cove . 
 = = = Farmer and storekeeper = = = 
 On reaching Sydney Baker resigned his Navy position and sought opportunities as a farmer . His interests were assisted by the deregulation of land grants under Governor Phillip 's successor , Francis Grose . In October 1794 he obtained a grant of 40 acres ( 16 @.@ 2 ha ) of farming land near <unk> , which he partly cleared and planted with wheat and maize . To supplement his farming income he petitioned for administrative employment and was appointed storekeeper in Parramatta in January 1795 , supervising distribution and security of military and civilian supplies . On 26 August 1795 , having comfortably established himself as a farmer and government agent , Baker married former convict Elizabeth Lavender . 
 Two months later Governor John Hunter appointed him superintendent of convicts for the Hawkesbury region , a newly established area of farms to the northwest of Baker 's own lands . His reputation was somewhat marred by a 1797 conviction for stealing a boat worth ₤ 16 from a neighbour , Thomas Raby . Baker admitted possession of the vessel but denied it was Raby 's . He was found guilty of theft and fined a proportion of the vessel 's value . 
 In 1798 Baker received a third official appointment , as government storekeeper for the Hawkesbury region in addition to his equivalent duties in Parramatta . Despite his past experience , Baker was quickly found wanting in the management of the stores , specifically those for farmers near the settlement of Windsor . In 1798 the local grain harvest was too large to be <unk> and stored in the Windsor storehouse , so Baker elected to fill that store solely with produce supplied by the region 's three largest landholders . In consequence , smaller farmers at Windsor had no means of selling or storing their grain and were brought close to bankruptcy . Baker was deaf to their complaints , and Governor Hunter was forced to intervene in person to keep the peace . In a letter on 19 April , sent via the New South Wales Corps commander in Hawkesbury , Hunter directed Baker to return half of the harvest he had already stored , and instead fill the storehouse with goods from smaller farms . 
 Regardless of this setback , the following years were personally prosperous for Baker . In early 1800 he received a further official grant of 30 acres ( 12 @.@ 1 ha ) at Mulgrave , and on 20 June he purchased another 30 acres from a dissolute former convict , Charles Williams , who had settled in 1791 but abandoned active farming . Baker 's dealings in this period were not particularly honest ; in 1800 he refused to pay a government debt of £ 86 owed for use of two servants that had worked on his farm since 1798 , and historian Brian Fletcher has suggested he also misappropriated supplies and labour from his own government store . No action was taken against Baker for these offences , and with ready access to resources he was able to swiftly clear and farm his properties . 
 Land grant records in 1801 indicate that Baker had twelve acres of maize and wheat under cultivation with another twelve acres lying fallow , and that he owned one horse , four goats and 22 hogs . His two unpaid servants were recorded as still being present on the farm . In 1800 Baker also bought and began operating a public house , The Royal Oak , selling alcohol to convicts and settlers in Windsor . 
 = = = Dismissal = = = 
 As a publican Baker supported Governor William Bligh 's attempts to regulate liquor imports , and signed a letter to this effect in 1807 . Despite this , he publicly welcomed Bligh 's overthrow in the 1808 Rum Rebellion and congratulated former Marines officer George Johnston for helping seize executive authority on behalf of the New South Wales Corps . In so doing he drew the attention of Bligh 's replacement , Governor Lachlan Macquarie , who commenced an investigation into accusations that Baker had unfairly treated Hawkesbury settlers by appropriating supplies from the government store . The accusations were upheld and in 1810 Baker was dismissed from all his government posts . The Royal Oak , described by a later historian as one of " the worst houses along the river " , was also ordered to be closed . 
 = = = Life in Hobart = = = 
 His business interests having collapsed , Baker abandoned his farm and relocated from New South Wales to the southern settlement of Hobart in Van Diemen 's Land . In 1814 he is recorded as holding the office of government storekeeper in Hobart . A year later , at an approximate age of 54 , he accepted a job as town crier for the newly created Deputy Judge Advocate 's Court , calling witnesses and announcing verdicts on the roadside outside the courthouse . Any remaining business links with New South Wales were severed in 1819 with the sale of Baker 's former farm to a colleague , Samuel Terry , who had recently visited him in Hobart . His wife , Elizabeth Baker , died in April 1824 and was buried in Hobart Cemetery . 
 The Supreme Court of Van Diemen 's Land was established by The Royal Letters Patent of 13 October 1823 and commenced activities on 10 May 1824 , with Baker as its inaugural crier . This would be Baker 's last and longest occupation . In February 1836 he received his first pay rise since becoming crier , being granted an extra £ 20 . A contemporary reference applauded Baker 's respectable appearance as crier but noted that he was " in the habit of sometimes getting tipsy " while performing his tasks . 
 = = Death = = 
 Baker died in Hobart on 14 September 1836 , at the age of 75 . At the time of his death he owned 230 acres of uncultivated land at Argyle and Ulva , Van Diemen 's Land . 
 He is commemorated in the naming of Baker Street in Windsor , New South Wales , adjacent to the former site of The Royal Oak hotel , and in Baker 's Lagoon , a body of water located between the Hawkesbury River and the town of Richmond . 
 = Tuesday 's Child ( Holby City ) = 
 " Tuesday 's Child " is the 38th episode of the seventh series of the British medical drama television series Holby City . The episode was written by Andrew Holden and directed by Simon Meyers , and premiered on BBC One on 5 July 2005 . In " Tuesday 's Child " , registrar Diane Lloyd ( Patricia Potter ) travels to Ghana in an attempt to persuade consultant Ric Griffin ( Hugh Quarshie ) to return to Holby and save Holby City Hospital 's general surgery ward . Ric deals with family issues , whilst trying to secure funding for his brother 's clinic . 
 The episode was filmed entirely on location in Ghana as part of the BBC 's " Africa lives " season , exploring African culture for UK audiences . It was the second episode of Holby City filmed outside the UK , following a 2004 episode set in Paris . The serial continued to film one episode abroad annually until 2008 , when BBC budget cuts curtailed further foreign filming . The Holby City crew spent five weeks in Elmina , using members of the local community in supporting roles . One crew member contracted malaria during filming , and several more were hospitalised . Both Quarshie and Potter expressed their pride at being part of the episode , with Quarshie deeming it his best work for the series . Adrian Edmondson guest @-@ starred as surgeon Abra Durant , his first appearance in Holby City . He proved so popular in the role that he was asked to return twice more in 2005 , and continued to make appearances in the series until December 2008 . 
 The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 27 million viewers . It was the second most @-@ watched programme on BBC One for the week of broadcast , and the fourth most @-@ watched show across all channels . The episode 's premise received some criticism prior to broadcast , however the episode itself was generally well received by critics , and was praised by viewers in a 2006 report on the portrayal of Africa on British television . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Registrar Diane Lloyd flies to Ghana , hoping to persuade consultant Ric Griffin to return to Holby and save Holby City Hospital 's general surgery ward from being subsumed into an expanded cardiothoracic ward . She finds Ric at odds with his brother Kumi ( Danny <unk> ) , who runs a clinic . Ric wants to perform free operations , but Kumi is desperate for money to keep the clinic running . 
 Diane appeals to Ric to return to Holby , for the sake of his pregnant daughter Jess as well as the hospital , but Ric insists that he is needed in Ghana , and tells Diane to go home . She talks to Ric 's mother , Paulina ( Abigail <unk> ) , who reveals that Ric had a strained relationship with his father , and did not attend his funeral after twenty years of estrangement . She also meets Ric 's friend Percy " Abra " Durant ( Adrian Edmondson ) , who pries as to the nature of her relationship with Ric , and flirts with Diane . 
 Ric meets with an old school friend , Kwame <unk> ( Fred Nii <unk> ) , now a successful local businessman . He attempts to persuade him to invest in the clinic , but Kwame , aware of Ric 's family trouble in England , doubts his commitment . Ric is furious with Kumi for telling Kwame about his problems , but Kwame states that he could not deceive him , and that Ric is does not understand Ghanaian honour . Without Kwame 's support , the clinic goes bankrupt and Kumi chains the doors closed . 
 Travelling to the airport for her flight home , Diane and Ric come across a woman in labour , Joanna ( <unk> <unk> <unk> ) , who is also suffering from malaria and having trouble breathing . It is unlikely she will survive a natural childbirth , and the nearest hospital is two hours away . They travel back to Kumi 's clinic , collecting an inebriated Abra along the way . After Abra threatens to force entry , Kumi <unk> the doors and they manage to deliver the baby and save Joanna . 
 As Diane has missed her flight , she suggests to Ric that they visit his father 's grave . At the graveside , Ric tells Diane about his troubled relationship with his father , and confesses that he has feelings for her . They see a woman nearby who Diane recognises , having seen Paulina giving her money the day before . Ric confronts her , and discovers she is Esi Griffin ( Gloria <unk> ) , his father 's last wife and widow . She has a son who is not in school , but will not explain her circumstances and tells Ric to speak to Kumi . 
 Ric confronts his brother about Esi , and Kumi tells him that their father died of AIDS , but the family kept it secret to avoid bringing shame on themselves . Because of her relationship with his father , Esi is also HIV positive . Ric confides in Diane , who attempts to kiss him , but Ric tells her to go home to her husband Owen . She asks him to return with her , but Ric says he must stay in Ghana . Abra takes Diane to Kwame , and she pleads with him on Ric 's behalf . They go to the clinic , where Kwame tells Ric he will provide the required funding , on the condition that Ric stays in Ghana . Ric agrees , and bids Diane goodbye as she returns to Holby . 
 = = Production = = 
 Holby City is regularly filmed at the BBC 's Elstree Studios in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire . In 2004 , an episode was shot on location in Paris , and in March 2005 , it was announced that an upcoming episode would be set in Ghana , as part of the BBC 's " Africa lives " series , a week of programmes exploring African life and culture for UK audiences . The episode was shot entirely on location in Ghana , and was described by the BBC as " chang [ ing ] Ric and Diane 's lives forever . " The crew stayed in Elmina , and spent five weeks in Africa . During filming , one crew member contracted malaria , and three more were hospitalised with dehydration , diarrhoea and heat exhaustion . Until 2008 , Holby City continued to film one episode abroad annually , with a 2006 episode set in Switzerland , a 2007 episode in Dubai , and a 2008 episode in Cape Town . Series producer Diana Kyle stated in November 2008 that due to major BBC budget cuts , the series would not be filming abroad again for the " foreseeable future " . 
 Potter and Quarshie are the only regular Holby City cast members who appear in the episode . Discussing Ric 's motivations in " Tuesday 's Child " , Quarshie explained that his character was born there , and was " always meant to return at some point " , leading to issues with his family . He expanded that in leaving Holby , Ric aimed to escape " the politics and stresses in his own life " , stating : " It 's somewhere he can recharge himself by getting back to uncomplicated medicine . The irony is , when he gets there , he realises there 's no such thing , especially when you 're constantly hustling to get funding for your clinic and struggling to find qualified doctors and nurses . " Like his character , Quarshie is native to Ghana , though moved to the United Kingdom when he was three years old . His background had some influence on the episode 's plot . While the end of the episode sees Ric choose to stay in Ghana , Quarshie remained in Holby City , with his character returning to the series soon thereafter . He explained that : " [ Ric ] has to stay in the country for the integrity of the episode , but for the integrity of the series , he must return . " Quarshie deemed the episode the greatest work he had done for Holby City , and " one of the best episodes written " , expressing his pride for it , and commending the BBC for the season of Africa @-@ related programmes . Potter felt " honoured " to be part of the episode , deeming it a " privilege " to work on . She was concerned about her ability to work in the 120 ° F Ghanaian heat , which she described as " like walking into an oven " , but through the work of the series ' make @-@ up artists , was made to seem temperate on screen . 
 Actor and comedian Adrian Edmondson guest @-@ starred in the episode as surgeon Abra Durant , having been a fan of the show since its 1999 conception . His character proved so popular that Edmondson reprised the role twice in 2005 , and signed a six @-@ month contract in 2006 , with series producer Emma Turner commenting that : " He made a huge impact in the few episodes that he was involved in . " Edmondson returned to the series again in 2007 , then 2008 , making his final appearance in December 2008 , when Abra returned to Ghana with Holby General nurse Kyla Tyson ( Rakie Ayola ) . Edmondson ultimately departed from the series to pursue a full @-@ time music career as part of the folk band The Bad Shepherds . He deemed the role of Abra a " dream " , calling him a " great character " , and characterising him as " a maverick [ that ] can do things the others would not be able to get away with . " 
 Other guest @-@ stars were cast locally . Ghanaian actors Kwame O. Ansah , David <unk> and <unk> <unk> appeared in the episode , and a scene between Ric and Kwame involving a flotilla of boats featured real Elmina fisherman . Following the episode 's completion , the Holby City production team in conjunction with the British High Commission gifted three flat @-@ screen computers and a laser printer to the Elmina OLA Girls Boarding School . Simon Massey of the BBC stated that the people of Elmina had been " extremely supportive " and played a large role during filming , and that the donated equipment was a way of giving something back to the community . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was watched by 7 @.@ 27 million viewers , up 310 @,@ 000 on the previous episode , " Rat Race " , and 230 @,@ 000 higher than the series average of 7 @.@ 04 million viewers . Holby City was the second most @-@ watched programme on BBC One in the week of broadcast , with only the soap opera EastEnders attaining higher ratings . It was also the fourth most @-@ watched show across all channels , behind EastEnders , and ITV1 's Coronation Street and Emmerdale . 
 Prior to the episode 's broadcast , John McKie of the Daily Record commented that in setting special editions of Holby City , Ground Force and Rolf on Art in Africa , BBC One controller Lorraine Heggessey was contradicting her desire to provide an alternative to negative coverage of the continent . The Western Mail criticised the build @-@ up to the episode , writing that Holby City had abandoned its roots as a medical drama , concentrating instead on " wholly unbelievable " relationships between its main characters , with patient @-@ care now incidental to inter @-@ collegiate romances . 
 The episode itself received positive reviews . Television critic Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror called it " mad but brilliant " , and the Sunday Mercury selected the episode as recommended viewing . Sarah Moolla of The People praised the episode for strengthening her " growing belief that Holby is becoming by far the best medical drama on TV " . She called Ric and Diane two of the series ' " strongest and most likeable characters " , commenting that with the addition of nurses Donna Jackson ( Jaye Jacobs ) and Mickie Hendrie ( Kelly Adams ) , it could be turned into a spin @-@ off series . Moolla felt that the episode could have been a " patronising Holby Goes <unk> farce " , like the Paris episode which she found " appalling [ ... ] toe @-@ <unk> bad " , but instead deemed " Tuesday 's Child " a " powerful , haunting and believable episode which you don 't have to be a fan of the series to enjoy . " 
 " Reflecting the Real World " , a 2006 report examining the portrayal of Africa on British television , found that " Tuesday 's Child " was one of the most popular programmes amongst those shown to viewers , alongside a Channel 4 documentary on AIDS and a BBC series following teachers and pupils in Uganda . Neera Dhingra of Voluntary Service Overseas ( VSO ) , one of the organisations which commissioned the report , commented that , " The people who took part in our focus groups were very clear that they liked positive and transformative television , characters that they could relate to - basically good storytelling . " 
 = Gennady Yanayev = 
 Gennady Ivanovich Yanayev ( Russian : <unk> ́ <unk> Ива ́ нович <unk> ́ <unk> ; 26 August 1937 – 24 September 2010 ) was a Soviet politician who served as the first and only Vice President of the Soviet Union . Yanayev 's political career spanned the rules of Khrushchev , Brezhnev , Andropov and Chernenko , and culminated during the Gorbachev years . Yanayev was born in <unk> , Gorky Oblast . After years in local politics , he rose to prominence as Chairman of the All @-@ Union Central Council of Trade Unions , but he also held other lesser posts such as deputy of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries . 
 Due to his chairmanship of the All @-@ Union Central Council of Trade Unions he gained a seat in the 28th Politburo and Secretary of the Central Committee . Later that year , with the help of Mikhail Gorbachev , Yanayev was elected the first , and only , Vice President of the Soviet Union . Having growing doubts about where Gorbachev 's reforms were leading , Yanayev started working with , and eventually formally leading , the Gang of Eight , the group which deposed Gorbachev during the August coup of 1991 . After three days the coup collapsed due to the popularity of Boris Yeltsin , but during its brief grip of power Yanayev was made Acting President of the Soviet Union . He was then arrested for his role in the coup , but in 1994 he was pardoned by the State Duma . He spent the rest of his life working in the Russian tourism administration until his death on 24 September 2010 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Yanayev was born on 26 August 1937 in the town of <unk> , Gorky Oblast during the height of Stalinist repression in the Soviet Union . He graduated from the Gorky Institute of Agriculture in 1959 . After graduation he worked as the head of a mechanised agricultural unit and later as a chief engineer in the Gorky Oblast . He applied and officially became a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) in 1962 . From 1963 to 1968 , he held the positions of second , and subsequently first , secretary of the Gorky Komsomol , and later became Chairman of the Committee of Youth Organisations , which he held for 12 years . From 1980 to 1986 he was Deputy Chairman of the Union of Soviet Societies for Friendship and Cultural Relations with Foreign Countries . He became Secretary for International Affairs of All @-@ Union Central Council of Trade Unions in 1986 and became Deputy Chairman of the trade unions in 1989 . In April 1990 he was elected Chairman of the All @-@ Union Central Council of Trade Unions . As chairman of the trade unions , he was not able to quell the growing labour discontent in the country , but his position granted him a seat in the Politburo of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union ( CPSU ) at the 28th CPSU Congress ( held in 1990 ) , alongside his election as Secretary of the Central Committee . 
 = = Vice President = = 
 On 27 December 1990 , Mikhail Gorbachev proposed Yanayev as Vice President of the Soviet Union . He was Gorbachev 's third choice for the post ; Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze and Kazakh president Nursultan Nazarbayev had turned the offer down . 
 Yanayev had initially been rejected by the Supreme Soviet , but he was finally approved due to Gorbachev 's reluctance to replace him with another candidate . Since Yanayev was known to oppose glasnost and perestroika , Shevardnadze resigned from office to protest against the increasing numbers of conservatives in top political offices . At the beginning of January 1991 , Yanayev headed a committee working on the formation of a new cabinet . Later , he was sent to the Soviet city of <unk> to negotiate with a newly formed independent trade union , making this the first time since 1917 that a Russian government official had negotiated with a trade union . However , after gaining the attention of the Soviet government , the unionists withdrew their plans for a strike . 
 = = = August Coup = = = 
 Shortly after taking office , Yanayev joined a group of more conservative Communist politicians who hoped to persuade Gorbachev to declare a state of emergency , led by KGB chairman Vladimir Kryuchkov . 
 After Gorbachev announced his proposal for a New Union Treaty to form the Union of Sovereign States , as a reorganisation of the Soviet Union into a new confederation , he went on vacation to his dacha in the Crimea . Believing that this new ≈ Union treaty would lead to the disintegration of the USSR , the State Committee of the State of Emergency placed Gorbachev under house arrest on 19 August , one day before the treaty was due to be signed . On that same day the Telegraph Agency of the Soviet Union ( TASS ) issued the coup plotters ' decree , which stated : " Owing to the conditions of his health , Mikhail Gorbachev is no longer capable of carrying on the duties of the President of the USSR . In accordance with article 127 , clause 7 of the USSR constitution , Vice President Gennady Yanayev has assumed the duties of the President of the USSR . " The decree made references to the growing problems facing the country such as ethnic tensions , political confrontations and chaos , which according to the coup leaders threatened the very existence of Soviet life and the territorial integrity of the USSR . Yanayev further claimed that the danger of collapse was imminent , and if the economic situation was not handled quickly , the Soviet Union would collapse . In addition , Yanayev and the rest of the state committee ordered the Cabinet of Ministers to alter the then current five @-@ year plan to relieve the housing shortage . All city @-@ dwellers were given one third of an acre each to combat winter food shortages by growing fruit and vegetables . 
 When asked about Gorbachev , Yanayev replied " Let me say that Mikhail Gorbachev is now on vacation . He is undergoing treatment , himself , in our country . He is very tired after these many years and he will need some time to get better . " At a press conference Yanayev 's hands were shaking rather violently , leading many journalists to focus on Yanayev 's apparent drunkenness instead of Gorbachev 's allegedly bad health . In an interview from 2008 , Yanayev said he regretted making himself acting President , further claiming that he was pressured by the more conservative members to sign the documents which declared his own presidency . He described the events of 1991 as a burden for the rest of his life . Yanayev has also admitted to being drunk when he signed the decree which made him acting President . 
 On 19 August , citizens of Moscow gathered around Russia 's White House and began to erect barricades around it , in which at 16 : 00 Yanayev responded by declaring a state of emergency in Moscow . Yanayev declared at the press conference at 17 : 00 that Gorbachev was " resting " . He said : " Over these years he has become very tired and needs some time to get his health back . " Yanayev said the Emergency Committee was committed to continuing his reforms . However , Yanayev 's weak posture , trembling hands and shaky expressions made his words unconvincing . According to some historians , Yanayev was the most visible and powerful member of the Emergency Committee but was not its mastermind ; Kryuchkov has been described as the " heart and soul of the conspiracy " . Yanayev only agreed to head the Emergency Committee on 20 August . Along with the other coup leaders , such as Valentin Pavlov and Boris <unk> for instance , Yanayev was dismissed as Vice President and later jailed for his " crimes " against the Soviet state . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Three years after the dissolution of the Soviet Union , Yanayev was freed by an amnesty of the Russian State Duma in 1994 . He would eventually become the head of the Department of History and International Relations of the Russian International Academy of Tourism . On 20 September 2010 , he fell ill and was hospitalised at the Central Clinical Hospital in Moscow , where he was diagnosed with lung cancer . He died on 24 September 2010 . 
 The Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Russian Federation ( CPRF ) expressed their condolences to Yanayev 's family . Gennady Zyuganov , the leader of the CPRF , said of him : " Yanayev lived an interesting , complicated and worthy life . " The CPRF officially praised him as " a highly professional specialist [ ... ] a dear and trustworthy comrade " . In another statement made by the CPRF , this time on their official website , they claimed : " If they had acted much more decisively , our unified country would have been preserved . " He was buried at the <unk> Cemetery , in a ceremony attended by several prominent CPRF members . He was survived by his wife and two daughters . 
 = = Decorations and awards = = 
 Order of the Red Banner of Labour , twice 
 Order of the Badge of Honour , twice 
 = Darby Creek ( Pennsylvania ) = 
 Darby Creek ( historically known as Church Creek or the Derby River ) is a tributary of the Delaware River in Chester County , Delaware County , and Philadelphia County , in Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 26 miles ( 42 km ) long . The watershed of the creek has an area of 77 @.@ 2 square miles ( 200 km2 ) . It has twelve named direct tributaries , including Cobbs Creek , Little Darby Creek , Ithan Creek , and Muckinipattis Creek . The creek has a low level of water quality for most of its length . A reach of it is considered to be impaired by habitat modification , siltation , and flow variability stemming from urban runoff and storm sewers . The creek is slightly alkaline . 
 Darby Creek flows through a narrow valley in its upper reaches and a tidal flat in its lower reaches . The creek is in the Piedmont Uplands and Atlantic Coastal Plain physiographic provinces . Major rock formations in the watershed include the Wissahickon Formation . Three small dams historically existed on the creek , but were removed in 2012 . The watershed of the creek is largely developed , with roughly half a million people inhabiting it . Most of the watershed is in Delaware County , but some parts are in Chester County , Philadelphia County , and Montgomery County . The watershed is part of the Lower Delaware drainage basin . 
 Historically , the Lenni Lenape people inhabited the area in the vicinity of Darby Creek . By the 17th century , the Dutch and Swedish had arrived in the area , followed some years later by the English . Numerous mills of various types were eventually build along the creek and several railroads traversed the watershed . In modern times , grants by various organizations have been awarded to improve the creek and its watershed . The Darby Creek Valley Association operates within the watershed . Part of the creek 's length is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery , part is a Trout Stocked Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . Various species of fish , including redbreast sunfish , eels , and trout , inhabit it . Several areas in the vicinity of the creek are listed on the Delaware County Natural Areas Inventory . These include the Darby Creek Mouth Mudflat , the John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge , and the Ithan @-@ Darby Creek Wetlands . A reach of the creek is navigable by canoe . 
 = = Course = = 
 Darby Creek begins in a small valley near US Route 30 in <unk> Township , Chester County . It flows south @-@ southeast for more than a mile before entering <unk> Township and turning east @-@ northeast for several tenths of a mile . The creek then turns southeast for a few miles , passing through Newtown Township , Delaware County and entering Radnor Township , where it receives its first two named tributaries , Thomas Run and Little Darby Creek , from the right and left , respectively . The creek then turns south @-@ southeast for several tenths of a mile before turning southeast for several more miles . In this reach , it receives the tributary Miles Run from the left and the tributary Camp Run from the right . The creek eventually turns east briefly before receiving the tributary Ithan Creek from the left and turning south @-@ southeast for several miles along the border between Marple Township and Haverford Township . In this reach , the creek flows alongside Interstate 476 and crosses it once . As it continues downstream alongside the highway , it crosses Pennsylvania Route 3 and receives the tributary Longford Run from the left . Near Pilgrim Gardens , it turns southeast again and begins to flow along the border between Upper Darby Township and Springfield Township , crossing US Route 1 and receiving the tributaries Colleen Brook and Lewis Run from the left and right , respectively . Further downstream , the creek 's valley becomes much steeper and narrower and it makes several meanders as it passes by Clifton Heights and <unk> before flowing along the border between Aldan and Yeadon . The creek then flows south @-@ southeast for a few miles , leaving its valley and passing Darby , <unk> , Sharon Hill , and Colwyn as it crosses US Route 13 . It then receives the tributary Cobbs Creek from the left . 
 The creek turns south and enters the John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge 4 @.@ 5 miles upstream from its mouth . At this point it passes through the largest freshwater marsh in Pennsylvania before becoming entirely tidal . It turns west @-@ southwest for a few miles , passing by Philadelphia , <unk> , Norwood , Tinicum Township , and Ridley Township and receives the tributary Muckinipattis Creek from the right . Darby Creek winds through a large lagoon 30 ft deep in places that was dredged in the 1960s . The creek then receives Stony Creek , its last named tributary , from the right and turns south for a few tenths of a mile before reaching its confluence with the Delaware River . 
 Darby Creek joins the Delaware River 85 @.@ 28 miles ( 137 @.@ 24 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Tributaries of Darby Creek include Cobbs Creek , Little Darby Creek , Ithan Creek , Muckinipattis Creek , and numerous others . Muckinipattis Creek joins Darby Creek 2 @.@ 50 miles ( 4 @.@ 02 km ) upstream of its mouth and its watershed has an area of 4 @.@ 29 square miles ( 11 @.@ 1 km2 ) . Cobbs Creek joins Darby Creek 6 @.@ 20 miles ( 9 @.@ 98 km ) upstream of its mouth and its watershed has an area of 22 @.@ 3 square miles ( 58 km2 ) . Ithan Creek joins Darby Creek 17 @.@ 90 miles ( 28 @.@ 81 km ) upstream of its mouth and its watershed has an area of 7 @.@ 39 square miles ( 19 @.@ 1 km2 ) . Little Darby Creek joins Darby Creek 20 @.@ 80 miles ( 33 @.@ 47 km ) upstream of its mouth and its watershed has an area of 3 @.@ 61 square miles ( 9 @.@ 3 km2 ) . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 For most of its length , Darby Creek has a low level of water quality . However , in some reaches of the watershed , especially the upper reaches , the streams in the watershed have a medium @-@ low or even medium @-@ high level of water quality . A Superfund site known as the Lower Darby Creek Superfund Site contaminates Darby Creek and impacts the creek 's water quality . The creek is considered to be impaired for its lower 10 @.@ 9 miles ( 17 @.@ 5 km ) . The causes of the impairment are habitat modification , siltation , and flow variability stemming from urban runoff and storm sewers . 
 Two measures of the instantaneous discharge of Darby Creek at Foxcroft in the 2000s were 10 and 17 cubic feet per second . The specific conductance of the creek ranged from 274 to 313 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter . The pH was slightly alkaline , ranging from 7 @.@ 3 to 7 @.@ 8 . The concentration of water hardness in the creek ranged between 100 and 109 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Darby Creek was measured to range from 7 @.@ 4 to 12 @.@ 4 milligrams per liter . The carbon dioxide concentration ranged from 1 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 4 milligrams per liter and the nitrogen concentration range from 2 @.@ 1 to 2 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter . The concentration of organic nitrogen ranged between < 0 @.@ 19 and 0 @.@ 25 milligrams per liter and the concentration of organic carbon ranged from 2 @.@ 1 t to 2 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter . The concentration of ammonia in filtered water was less than or equal to 0 @.@ 02 milligrams per liter in two measurements and the nitrate concentration was half that in two measurements . The orthophosphate concentration in filtered water ranged from < 0 @.@ 031 to 0 @.@ 071 milligrams per liter and the phosphorus concentration in unfiltered water ranged from 0 @.@ 032 to 0 @.@ 045 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of magnesium in Darby Creek ranged from 10 @.@ 7 to 11 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter in filtered water and the concentration of calcium ranged from 22 @.@ 5 to 24 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter . The sodium concentration ranged between 11 @.@ 1 and 13 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter and the potassium concentration ranged between 2 @.@ 15 and 2 @.@ 80 milligrams per liter . The manganese concentration ranges from 10 @.@ 6 to 25 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter and the iron concentration ranges from 18 @.@ 9 to 60 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter . The boron concentration ranges from an estimated 12 to 16 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of fluoride in Darby Creek is less than 0 @.@ 01 milligrams per liter and the chloride concentration ranges from 26 @.@ 2 to 33 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter . The sulfate concentration ranges between 18 @.@ 1 and 19 @.@ 9 milligrams per liter . The silica concentration was twice measured to be 15 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter . 
 = = Geography , geology , and climate = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Darby Creek is 0 feet ( 0 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the creek 's source is between 420 and 440 feet ( 130 and 130 m ) above sea level . The gradient of the creek for its first 5 @.@ 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 9 km ) is 36 @.@ 4 feet ( 11 @.@ 1 m ) per 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . For the next 10 miles ( 16 km ) , the gradient of the creek is 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) per 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) . For the last 8 @.@ 5 miles ( 13 @.@ 7 km ) , the gradient is only a few feet per mile . 
 The valley of Darby Creek is considerably narrower in its upper reaches , but widens out as it approaches the Delaware River . Numerous reaches of the creek have been armored with boulders or riprap . Upstream of the tributary Cobbs Creek , the stream 's channel is sinuous and the creek flows through a narrow valley bordered by low , steep hills . From Cobbs Creek downstream to its mouth , the creek is in a tidal flat . 
 The northern section of Darby Creek is within the Piedmont Uplands physiographic province , while the southern section is part of the Atlantic Coastal Plain province . The Piedmont Uplands section has generally old , hard upland rocks that eroded from the Appalachian Mountains . The rocks from the northern portion of the watershed date to the Precambrian Era and Lower Paleozoic Era . The rocks from the southern portion of the watershed are newer , dating from the Tertiary and Quaternary Periods . Atlantic Coastal Plain rock is generally softer than Piedmont Uplands rock and was deposited in the area about 1 @.@ 6 million years ago through glacial erosion . 
 Several geologic formations can be found within watershed of Darby Creek . The Wissahickon Formation is the most prevalent formation in the watershed . It is derived from derived from sandstones and mudstones and is composed of mica schist . Metamorphic felsic gneiss and mafic gneiss formations are common in the northern parts of the watershed . The Bryn Mawr Formation and the Bridgeton Formation are also present and are unconsolidated deposits of rock that rest on top of the dense crystalline bedrock . Mica slate is present in Marple Township and was manufactured to form " Darby Creek scythe stones " in the 1860s . 
 Darby Creek tends to be a fast stream with some riffles . There is also whitewater in places . The creek is a " radically intermittent storm drain " in its upper reaches and a tidal estuary in its lower reaches . It passes through the only substantial tidal wetlands in Pennsylvania . 
 There used to be three small dams on Darby Creek . Going downstream , their heights were 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) , 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) , and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) . However , they were removed in late 2012 because they were contributing to flooding in the area and blocking fish passage . 
 During several measurements in the 2000s , the water temperature of Darby Creek at Foxcroft ranged from 14 @.@ 4 to 20 @.@ 2 ° C ( 57 @.@ 9 to 68 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The air temperature in the area ranged from 19 @.@ 7 to 24 @.@ 0 ° C ( 67 @.@ 5 to 75 @.@ 2 ° F ) . The barometric pressures range from 759 to 762 mm Hg . The average annual rate of precipitation in the watershed of Darby Creek is between 45 and 50 inches ( 110 and 130 cm ) . 
 = = = Soil = = = 
 Three soil associations exist in the Darby Creek watershed . The Neshaminy @-@ Lehigh @-@ Glenlg soil association is prevalent in the northwest part of the watershed . It consists of silty , well drained , gravelly , and deep soil that rests on gabbro and granodiorite bedrock . The Chester @-@ Glenlg @-@ Manor soil association is prevalent throughout the watershed except in its lower reaches . It consists of silty , channery , and shallow to deep soil that rests on brown schist and gneiss bedrock . The Urban Land @-@ <unk> @-@ Pitts soil association is prevalent in the southern part of the watershed . It consists of silty , sandy , and deep soil that rests on coastal sediments . Roughly 53 % of the land in the Darby Creek watershed is classified as having slightly erodible soil . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Darby Creek has an area of 77 @.@ 2 square miles ( 200 km2 ) . A total of 6 @.@ 5 square miles ( 17 km2 ) are in Chester County , 4 @.@ 2 square miles ( 11 km2 ) are in Montgomery County , 60 square miles ( 160 km2 ) are in Delaware County , and 6 @.@ 5 square miles ( 17 km2 ) are in Philadelphia . Darby Creek ’ s watershed is often referred to as the " Darby @-@ Cobbs watershed " since its largest tributary , Cobbs Creek , drains a total area of 22 @.@ 2 square miles ( 57 km2 ) , or approximately one third of the Darby Creek watershed . The watershed is part of the Lower Delaware drainage basin . Neighboring major watersheds are Crum Creek to the west and the Schuylkill River to the east . The creek serves as the county line between Delaware County and Philadelphia County for a reach of 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . The creek 's mouth is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Bridgeport . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Valley Forge . The creek also passes through the quadrangles of Lansdowne and Norristown . There are 31 municipalities in the watershed , of which 26 are in Delaware County . 
 A large part of the watershed of Darby Creek is on developed land and many suburbs of Philadelphia are in the <unk> . The majority ( 61 % ) of the land use is considered residential , while 11 % is undeveloped and 10 % is open space . Of the remaining land , most of it is considered industrial , commercial , and institutional , with 2 @.@ 45 % classified as paved . Estimates for the population of the watershed range from 484 @,@ 000 to 500 @,@ 000 . In general , the topography of the watershed consists of rolling land that is densely settled . A large undeveloped tract of land owned by the Delaware County Industrial Development Authority is located at the mouth of the creek . 
 The developed nature of the watershed of Darby Creek has caused it to be prone to storm surges during rains . Substantial amounts of nonpoint source pollution flows into the creek during storm events . Additionally , much of the older development in the watershed was built before current environmental regulations were enacted . In 2012 , a Philadelphia Inquirer article stated that Darby Creek " is one of the country 's most flood @-@ prone streams , a significant drain on the National Flood Insurance Program , and a national lesson in what can go wrong along a developed waterway . " A Superfund site known as the Lower Darby Creek Area site is located in the vicinity of the creek . This site consists of two landfills . Major roads in the watershed include Interstate 95 and Interstate 476 . 
 = = History and name = = 
 Darby Creek was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . According to the Geographic Names Information System , variant names include Church Creek and Derby River . 
 = = = Before 1900 = = = 
 The Lenni Lenape tribe was the first Native American tribe to inhabit the area in the vicinity of Darby Creek . They fished , hunted , and used the creek for transportation via canoe . At the time , the area was forested , so they burned clearings in the forest in order to farm and for security purposes . 
 The first Europeans to come to the area in the vicinity of Darby Creek were the Dutch , though they did not establish any permanent settlements . In 1643 , Swedish colonists led by Johan Printz established New Sweden near the confluence of Darby Creek and the Delaware River . The settlement they established served as the seat of government for the Swedes in North America for 12 years . They may have built impoundments in the creek to isolate marsh areas . Dutch settlers conquered the Swedish villages in 1655 . In 1664 , the Dutch surrendered the Darby Creek drainage basin to the English , who began settling the area after William Penn was issued a charter in 1681 . The Darby Creek Ferry House , near the site of Printz 's headquarters , was erected in 1694 . 
 The English settlers were attracted to the Darby Creek watershed due to the proximity to trading routes and productive landscape . In 1777 , British soldiers breached dikes and floodwalls that were constructed on the creek . The Pennsylvania legislature passed an act in 1788 that mandated a maintenance of the dikes and the mowing of plants such as elderberries and <unk> three times a year . Early English colonists utilized Darby Creek as a source of water power . Lumber , grist , and textile mills were established along the banks of the creek . Most of these mills have been demolished , although some of the tenement structures are currently in use as housing . At the end of the 19th century , industrial advances such as engine @-@ driven machinery had made these mills obsolete . 
 = = = After 1900 = = = 
 The advent of railroads in the late 19th century led to further development in the watershed of Darby Creek . Stops along the Pennsylvania Railroad such as Darby , Prospect Park , and Ridley Park increased in population greatly . Concern for the health of the creek led Lansdowne residents to raise funds to preserve a stretch of the creek in 1910 . In the early 1900s , the major industries in the watershed of Darby Creek included agriculture . However , in modern times , agriculture is only done in a few small areas in the watershed 's upper reaches . During this time period , railroads such as the Pennsylvania Railroad , the Philadelphia , Baltimore and Washington Railroad , and the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad crossed the watershed . A gauging station was established on the creek at <unk> in 1911 . 
 Nature ’ s Plan For <unk> - Recreational Lands was published in 1932 and proposed a regional plan that would place Darby and Cobbs Creeks in an interior network of parks . These streams were chosen due to the fact that the flowed through some of the most densely populated areas in Southeastern Pennsylvania and it could serve as buffers through urban areas . During the 1930s there were a number of projects undertaken on Darby Creek by the Army Corps of Engineers . The dikes along the southern end of the creek were repaired by a joint force of the Works Progress Administration , the Pennsylvania legislature , and Delaware County . A series of ditches in the Tinicum marshland were constructed by the Corps in 1935 as a means of mosquito control . The dredged material was deposited throughout the marsh over the next few years . 
 After World War II , residential development continued to expand in the watershed of Darby Creek . The automobile replaced railroads as the dominant form of transportation , and it allowed workers to live farther from their places of employment . As a result , the population of Springfield Township more than doubled between 1950 and 1960 . The Tinicum Wildlife Preserve was established in 1955 after the Gulf Oil Corporation donated a diked impoundment on the creek to the City of Philadelphia . Local resident Jean Diehl started a grassroots campaign to preserve the marsh in 1969 , and Two Studies of Tinicum Marsh was published the following year which demonstrated the ecological importance of the marsh . The <unk> Landfill and the Clearview Landfill operated along the creek between the 1950s and the 1970s before closing in the mid 1970s . The former is on the west bank of the creek and the latter is on the east bank . They supposedly accepted municipal waste , demolition waste , and medical waste . A number of businesses operated at the site of the Clearview Landfill after its closing . 
 On September 16 , 1999 , Hurricane Floyd struck Pennsylvania . Upper Darby Township received seven inches of rainfall , causing massive flooding in Darby Creek . Forty @-@ three homes were deemed uninhabitable in Darby and were purchased by the Borough . They were demolished in 2000 and the open space was converted into John Bartram Memorial Park in honor of the botanist and Darby native . In Springfield Township , Rolling Green Park was expanded when six homes were ravaged by the hurricane and had to be demolished . 
 A number of studies have been carried out on the creek and its watershed . These include the Darby Creek Stream Valley Park Master Plan in 1987 and the Greenway Plan for the Darby Creek Watershed in 2011 . A $ 1047 Pennsylvania Growing Greener grant was given to Delco Anglers and Conservationists for riparian restoration on Darby Creek . Another Growing Greener grant , this one for $ 68 @,@ 225 , was given to Marple Township for a streambank stabilization project on the creek . Additionally , a $ 1000 grant from the Pennsylvania Watershed Restoration Assistance Program was given to Delco Anglers and Conservationists for riparian improvement of the creek and several other creeks . In 1997 , a $ 60 @,@ 000 grant was given to the Darby Creek Valley Association and <unk> Anglers and Conservationists for developing a conservation plan . The grant was provided by the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources . The Darby Creek Valley Association is an organization whose purpose is to preserve and improve the creek 's watershed . It has approximately 100 members . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The main stem of Darby Creek is designed as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery from its source to the Pennsylvania Route 3 bridge . From that point downstream to its mouth , the non @-@ tidal portions of the creek 's main stem are a Trout Stocked Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . Numerous fish species were observed in the creek during a 2009 electrofishing survey by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission . The catch per unit effort per hour rate for smallmouth bass was slightly over 10 and the rate for rock bass was under 10 . The catch per unit effort per hour rate for redbreast sunfish was 123 , the highest of several <unk> streams tested during the survey . Some stocked rainbow trout and brown trout were also captured in the creek . High numbers of American eels were observed in the creek was well . Fish species such as <unk> , silvery minnows , striped bass , and white perch were found at the head @-@ of @-@ tide of the creek . Brown trout naturally reproduce in the creek 's headwaters . 
 The Ithan @-@ Darby Creek Wetlands and the Darby Creek Mouth Mudflat are listed on the Delaware County Natural Areas Inventory . The former is a " notable significance " site while the latter is an " exceptional significance " site , one of only four in Delaware County . The John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge is also in the vicinity of the creek and is an " exceptional significance " site . 
 The Darby Creek Mouth Mudflat , which is a remnant tidal flat at the mouth of Darby Creek in Ridley Township and Tinicum Township , is inhabited by 14 " species of concern " . At the John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge , which is a tidal estuary along the creek , supports various plant and animal species and is a critical migratory habitat for waterfowl . It is also designated as a National Wildlife Refuge . The Ithan @-@ Darby Creek Wetlands contain old fields , wet meadows , and riparian buffers . They are inhabited by one " species of concern " . The population of white @-@ tailed deer in the Darby Creek watershed is large and " ecologically unsustainable " , according to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service . 
 Plant species of concern at the Darby Creek Mouth Mudflat include Amaranthus <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Bidens <unk> , Bidens laevis , Eleocharis obtusa , Eleocharis parvula , <unk> multiflora , <unk> rubellus , <unk> odorata , Sagittaria <unk> , Sagittaria <unk> , <unk> fluviatilis , and Zizania aquatica . Some , such as Eleocharis obtusa , Eleocharis parvula , and <unk> multiflora , have not been seen since 1994 . However , four other species have been seen as recently as 2009 . 
 At the floodplain at the confluence of Ithan Creek and Darby Creek , the main trees species include silver maple , black willow , boxelder , and red maple . In the wetlands at this site , the main tree species include scattered black willow and silver maple . There are also patches of silky dogwood and wild rose , which are surrounded by assorted wetland plants , including herbs , grasses , sedges , and rushes . However , numerous exotic plants also inhabit the site . 
 The watershed of Darby Creek and several other nearby creeks house most of the <unk> in Delaware County . The macroinvertebrate communities of the creek mainly consist of Limestone Agricultural Stream communities . No mussel communities have been described on the creek . In the 2000s , the dry weight of periphyton in the creek was 248 @.@ 2 grams per square meter . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 A total of 18 @.@ 0 miles ( 29 @.@ 0 km ) of Darby Creek is navigable by canoe . The difficulty rating of the creek ranges from A to 2- . Edward Gertler 's book Keystone Canoeing describes the scenery as being " poor to fair " in its upper reach and " poor to " good in its lower reach " . However , it is only canoeable within a single day of heavy rain in from river mile 18 to river mile 7 @.@ 2 . It is canoeable at any time in its lower 7 @.@ 2 miles . 
 A multi @-@ use trail along Darby Creek has been proposed . The trail would run from Garrett Road in Upper Darby Township to Pine Street in the borough of Darby . There are many public parks that line Darby Creek , with some having large recreation areas with athletic fields for baseball , soccer , and football , and others containing woodlands and nature trails . There are a total of eight golf clubs bordering the creek , featuring some of the largest <unk> of undeveloped land in the watershed . The John Heinz National Wildlife Refuge offers many recreational activities such as hiking and canoeing . The Ridley Township marina is located on the lower end of the creek . 
 Darby Creek is a popular site for angling . It is stocked annually by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission , and by a number of local sportsman organizations . The former has been stocking progressively fewer trout every year for some time . 
 = Million Dollar Maybe = 
 " Million Dollar Maybe " is the eleventh episode of the twenty @-@ first season of the animated comedy series The Simpsons . It first aired on Fox in the United States on January 31 , 2010 . In this episode , Homer wins $ 1 million in the lottery . Later fearing that Marge will discover that he missed a wedding reception while buying the winning ticket , Homer uses his windfall to buy the family anonymous gifts . Meanwhile , Lisa uses a Funtendo Zii to make life more interesting for Grampa Simpson and his friends at the retirement home . 
 " Million Dollar Maybe " was written by Bill Odenkirk and directed by Chris Clements . The episode was well received by most television critics , who praised its humor and storyline . Upon its initial airing , the episode attained 5 @.@ 11 million viewers and garnered a 2 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic . " Million Dollar Maybe " featured a guest appearance from Chris Martin of Coldplay , as well as appearances from recurring voice actors and actresses for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Marge are scheduled to do a singing toast at their cousin Valerie 's wedding , causing Marge to become nervous , due to her fear of embarrassment . Homer tells her not to worry , saying that he will make sure they do not mess up . Homer gets a fortune cookie stating that today will be his lucky day , but he does not believe so . However , he starts to believe this occurs when he crashes into a vending machine causing all of the snacks to fall out on him , and finds an Emerson , Lake & Palmer CD in the parking lot ( he sings along to Lucky Man , driving recklessly to the famous synthesizer solo ) . He then goes to the Kwik @-@ E @-@ Mart for a lottery ticket , even though he has to go to the wedding and sing with Marge . After a long wait , Homer gets his lottery ticket , only to find out the wedding has ended . When he takes his eyes off the road for a second , he crashes off the ramp . Homer wakes up in the hospital after the crash , and realizes he won the million dollar lottery . Homer does not want Marge to know he missed the wedding to get a lottery ticket , and has Barney pose as the winner . Not wanting Marge to know he won the money , he drops things his family wants in different places and throws Bart into to get a Frisbee . However , when Homer tries to get money out of the tree he hid it in but gets it stuck , Bart discovers that he won the lottery . Homer decides to tell Marge himself and get it over with . Taking Marge on a hot @-@ air balloon , he reveals he won the lottery , causing Marge to become very glad and not furious about his absence at the wedding ; he tells her he spent it all , leaving them poor as usual . However , Marge does not care , saying at least they have each other . Homer then reveals he spent the last of the money on a giant cherry blossom grove in the shape of Marge 's face with the words " Love of my Life " . They then sing the song they were supposed to sing at the wedding together , off in the sunset . 
 In the sub @-@ plot , Lisa discovers that the senior citizens at Grampa 's nursing home do not have any entertainment , and decides to buy them a digital TV converter . However , while at the store to buy it , she discovers Mr. Burns feeling very happy playing Funtendo Zii Sports . She decides to buy this for the senior citizens , hoping they will feel younger and happier . When playing the Zii , the senior citizens feel very happy and feel younger . This forces the nurses at the home to work extra hard after their workout , prompting them to wash the Zii in the dishwasher ( an old video game joke about consoles being dishwasher safe ) , causing it to break . Lisa becomes angry at the nurses for doing it on purpose , thus showing their disregard for the senior citizens . However , the nurses blow her off . The senior citizens then return to their boring selves , staring at TV static . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Million Dollar Maybe " was written by Bill Odenkirk and directed by Chris Clements . In July 2009 , it was announced that singer Chris Martin of the band Coldplay would guest star as himself in the episode . In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , showrunner Al Jean commented : " When Bart goes to the bathroom , Coldplay has to stop . " 
 The episode featured a new character created by the winner of the " Best . Character . Ever . " contest , in which fans could submit their own ideas for a new , and possibly recurring , Simpsons character . Over 25 @,@ 000 entries were sent in . The winner of the contest was Peggy Black from Orange , Connecticut , who created the character Ricardo Bomba . She described Ricardo as " someone that all the women love and all the men want to be " . Black 's inspiration for the character came from the fact that there were no characters like him on The Simpsons , and she thought Springfield needed " something like a Casanova " . As part of the winning prize , Black was sent to work with the show 's producers in Los Angeles . She worked with the animators to bring the character to life . In an interview with the Associated Press , Black stated she " described the character and they drew him so I could see if that was my vision of him " . She continued , " It 's amazing to see how they captured what I imagined . He 's over the top . " Executive producer Al Jean was one of the judges of the contest , which he described as " a thank you to loyal fans " . Jean also noted that there is a possibility the Ricardo character might appear on the show again although this seems unlikely since the character appears to have been killed in a fiery car crash . 
 This episode contains several references pertaining to music , media , film , and other pop cultural phenomenon . " Million Dollar Maybe " is the second episode in the series to have its title parodical to that of the film Million Dollar Baby , with the first being the seventeenth season episode " Million Dollar Abie " . The Funtendo Zii is fictional console that parodies the Nintendo Wii . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Million Dollar Maybe " was originally broadcast on January 31 , 2010 in the United States as part of the animation television night on Fox . It was succeeded by episodes of The Cleveland Show , Family Guy , and American Dad ! . The episode was viewed by 5 @.@ 11 million viewers , despite simultaneously airing with the 52nd Grammy Awards on CBS , Desperate Housewives on ABC , and Dateline on NBC . It attained a 2 @.@ 4 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings , translating to 3 @.@ 1 million viewers . Although it was the second highest rated program of the night , it was the lowest rated episode in the series ' history up until the season twenty @-@ two episode " The Great <unk> " . Total viewership and ratings for " Million Dollar Maybe " significantly declined from the previous episode , " Once Upon a Time in Springfield " , which received 9 @.@ 084 million viewers and garnered a 6 @.@ 9 rating in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , according to Nielsen ratings . 
 " Million Dollar Maybe " was well received by television critics . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a ' B ' grade , the highest of the night . VanDerWerff was polarized with the plot , opining that it was convoluted and stated , " This was a completely stupid plot , but to the show 's credit , it commented on this when Homer told Marge he won the lottery and she said she 'd much rather have the money than the wedding reception performance he missed . " Similarly , VanDerWerff was split with the subplot of " Million Dollar Maybe " . In regards to the subplot , he wrote , " The Lisa gets the old people a Wii stand @-@ in plot was one of those ones where the Simpsons writers have obviously noticed something in pop culture but have yet to wholly grasp what it is or why it 's important . " Robert Canning of IGN gave the episode an 8 @.@ 1 out of 10 , signifying a " great " rating . Canning felt that the episode was impressive , expressing that it was " a fun and funny episode focused on Homer and his always dysfunctional relationship with his family [ ... ] just what we 've come to love and expect after 20 years . " Jason Hughes of TV Squad gave the episode a more mixed review , praising the episode 's humor , but calling it " random " . Hughes wrote , " A lot about this episode bothered me , and I think The Simpsons has been having a pretty strong season for the most part . " He resumed , " This one just didn 't hold together as strongly as most of the prior ones . " He went on to criticize the character development of Ricardo , opining that it was a " slap to the face to the winner . " He then commented : " Peggy Black created Ricardo Bomba as a new ladies man type of figure , so the writers had him drive into a cliff wall and subsequent fiery explosion right away upon his first appearance . He didn 't even get to finish what was , I guess , going to be his catchphrase . " 
 = Stanford Memorial Church = 
 Stanford Memorial Church ( also referred to informally as <unk> ) is located on the Main Quad at the center of the Stanford University campus in Stanford , California , United States . It was built during the American Renaissance by Jane Stanford as a memorial to her husband Leland . Designed by architect Charles A. Coolidge , a protégé of Henry Hobson Richardson , the church has been called " the University 's architectural crown jewel " . 
 Designs for the church were submitted to Jane Stanford and the university trustees in 1898 , and it was dedicated in 1903 . The building is Romanesque in form and Byzantine in its details , inspired by churches in the region of Venice , especially , Ravenna . Its stained glass windows and extensive mosaics are based on religious paintings the Stanfords admired in Europe . The church has five pipe organs , which allow musicians to produce many styles of organ music . Stanford Memorial Church has withstood two major earthquakes , in 1906 and 1989 , and was extensively renovated after each . 
 Stanford Memorial Church was the earliest and has been " among the most prominent " non @-@ denominational churches on the West Coast of the United States . Since its dedication in 1903 , the church 's goal has been to serve the spiritual needs of the university in a non @-@ sectarian way . The church 's first chaplain , David Charles Gardner , began a tradition of leadership which has guided the development of Stanford University 's spiritual , ethical , and academic relation to religion . The church 's chaplains were instrumental in the founding of Stanford 's religious studies department , moving Stanford from a " secular university " at the middle of the century to " the renaissance of faith and learning at Stanford " in the late 1960s , when the study of religion at the university focused on social and ethical issues like race and the Vietnam War . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church is located at the end of the mile @-@ long axis of Stanford University , visible from a distance ; the main vista begins at the main entrance , continues to Palm Drive , traverses " the Oval " ( a large oval lawn ) , enters the Main Quad ( the core of the university ) , and finally crosses Memorial Court and the Inner Quad courtyard . The church was commissioned by Jane Stanford ( 1828 – 1905 ) as a memorial to her husband , Leland Stanford ( 1824 – 93 ) . The Stanfords had intended that a church should become " the centerpiece of the university complex " . They were deeply religious , and for their day and social standing , " open @-@ minded <unk> " , so they included in the university 's original charter that a church built on campus should be a " nondenominational — if essentially Protestant — house of worship " . They had traveled Europe for many years , visiting churches , museums , and notable buildings and finding inspiration for the architecture of both the university and church . They received their greatest inspiration from the Piazza San Marco in Venice . 
 During one of the Stanfords ' European trips they befriended Maurizio Camerino , an artist with a reputation for producing high @-@ quality mosaics , who was managing the Antonio Salviati studios in Venice . After Leland Stanford 's death in 1893 , legal disputes tied up the Stanford estate and prevented the completion of the university for several years . When the disputes were settled in Jane Stanford 's favor , she was finally able to put into motion her wish for a church . In 1898 , she and the university trustees requested design submissions for the church . Once Stanford Memorial Church was ready for decoration , Jane Stanford visited Camerino , who had taken over the ownership of Salvati and Company in 1890 , and commissioned him to produce mosaics for the church . Stanford spent two months in Venice , working closely with Camerino and selecting the watercolors he created that were eventually developed into the mosaics . The process of finalizing the designs took several months after Stanford returned home to California , as new paintings and modifications were shipped to her by boat . The art contained in the church " greatly occupied " Stanford ; as former chaplain Robert C. Gregg put it , " The structure was to be without flaw " . Stanford was determined that the quality of the church 's workmanship would equal the medieval churches she had admired in Europe . 
 Groundbreaking for the church was held in 1899 . After a delay of almost a year , Stanford Memorial Church was dedicated on January 25 , 1903 , with " impressive ceremonies " . Demonstrating Jane Stanford 's goal of <unk> , Rabbi Jacob Voorsanger of San Francisco 's Congregation Emanu @-@ El read the first Bible lesson . The church 's pastor , Heber Newton , gave the sermon . A second service was held later that day , and D. Charles Gardner , the chaplain , gave the sermon . Stanford Memorial Church 's first christening was held between the two services . 
 Jane Stanford once remarked : " While my whole heart is in the university , my soul is in that church " . She died in 1905 , and so did not live to see the damage caused by the 1906 San Francisco earthquake . Her funeral took place in the church , which was called one of her most important accomplishments and " the truest reflection of her visionary leadership " , in March 1905 . Demonstrating her belief in <unk> , clergy from several religious traditions , including a Rabbi , a Presbyterian minister , a Methodist minister , an Episcopal bishop , and a Baptist minister , officiated at the service . 
 = = = Earthquakes = = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church has suffered two major earthquakes , in 1906 and in 1989 . Although extensively damaged , the church was restored after each . The 1906 quake wrecked much of the church , felled the spire , cracked the walls , and " injured beyond repair " the mosaics and Carrara marble statuary in the chancel . The main cause of the severity of the damage was that the church 's original construction failed to attach the crossing structure to the surrounding masonry and roof structures . The result was that when the church swayed in the earthquake , the crossing structure moved independently from the rest of the building , gouging gaping holes in the roofs over the east and west transepts , the nave , and chancel . The church 's original 12 @-@ sided , 80 @-@ foot spire and its adjoining clock tower above the crossing structure , fell on top of the chancel roof below , destroying the tower dome 's " frescoed Victorian interpretation of God 's eye — complete with tear — surrounded by cherubs and shooting star " . As the roof came down , many of the marble sculptures of the twelve apostles that decorated the altar were also destroyed . The statues , which stood in front of the niches surrounding the altar , were never replaced . 
 The spire was never repaired and the tower was removed and replaced by a simpler structure ; however , the clock was saved and eventually placed in another building on campus , the Stanford Clock Tower . University trustees considered re @-@ building the tower , and even looked at possible designs , but eventually chose not to rebuild it because they could not agree on its design . The crossing structure , the only part of the building to remain relatively stable after the quake , also pushed the roof of the nave forward , causing the church 's front facade to fall into the Inner Quad courtyard as it broke free , which resulted in the destruction of the entire north face of the building ; as Gregg put it , " its wondrous mosaic was blown out and totally destroyed " . The only mosaics not destroyed in the quake were the four angels that decorated the crossing dome 's pendentives . The back of the church , with several hundred feet of arcades , was also completely leveled because it too was not joined to the rest of the building . 
 Repairs of the earthquake damage began in 1908 , despite misgivings from some university administration regarding its cost . The church and the Old Chemistry building were the only two buildings in the university 's Inner Quad that were repaired . The extent of the damage was such that the church had to be completely rebuilt . The entire church , except for its surviving crossing structure and offices , was dismantled stone by stone , which , along with the windows , were labelled and stored . " To assure permanence " in case of further earthquakes , the masonry was anchored to its thick , concrete @-@ reinforced walls . The stones were securely bolted to each other , " making the whole structure practically one massive hollow rock on a great steel foundation skeleton " . The tile floor was replaced with cork . The building 's crossing received a tiled hipped roof and an oculus , which lit the interior of the church , and was added above the renovated dome , which had a frescoed ceiling decorated with bronze designs as opposed to the gold leaf present before the earthquake . The original rose window above the front facade was replaced with one with a simpler arch shape because it was more similar to the style of the rest of the buildings in the Inner Quad . 
 The dedication , which was engraved in large letters below the facade mosaic , was replaced by a smaller dedication plaque placed at the lower left of the facade , a choice the university alumni magazine called " a tremendous improvement " . Camerino 's design of the mosaics that were to fill in the empty space created by the removal of the original dedication , which he offered free of charge , were rejected in favor of a simple version created by John K. Branner ( son of university president John Casper Branner ) in 1914 . Camerino , who did not appraise the damage until 1913 , restored the interior mosaics . He had saved the original drawings in Venice , so he removed and re @-@ fabricated the chancel mosaic , and redesigned the entire exterior mosaic . The Stanford alumni magazine , in early 1917 , after the completion of the interior mosaics , declared the renovation complete , stating that " the church , for almost the first time since it was begun , is finished " . 
 In 1989 the church was damaged again , in the Loma Prieta earthquake . The integrity of the structure remained , but the crossing structure , the only major part of the building that was not damaged in the 1906 earthquake , buckled and caused several stones in the north and west arches to slip as much as 2 inches ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) . The four mosaic angels in the pendentives , which decorated its high rounded walls directly below the church 's dome and served as the setting beds for hundreds of thousands of tesserae , were severely damaged . The angels ' damage caused large chunks of mortar and glass to fall to the floor eighty feet below 80 feet ( 24 m ) , while other sections " were left hanging by the sheer geometry of their arched shape " . An eight @-@ foot mosaic section of an angel 's left wing in the church 's northeast corner fell 70 feet ( 21 m ) to the floor . Several stones from the east arch wall fell onto pews in the balcony , and the organ @-@ loft railing collapsed inward . Although the damage was minor , the church remained closed until 1992 while restoration , as well as protecting the building from future earthquakes , was carried out . A $ 10 million fundraising drive was conducted to pay for repairs . 
 In this restoration the entire crossing was strengthened by bracing it behind the dome and securing it to the superstructure of the building . The roofs , which had not been replaced since 1913 , were rebuilt with plywood diaphragms , 30 @,@ 000 new red clay tiles were installed , and the stones from the decorative arches were reinserted . The wing of the damaged angel was restored ; Stanford University hired William <unk> and Associates to create a new backing system to secure this angel and three other mosaic angels to the base of the dome . The <unk> found a piece of the original mosaic from the vestibule wall , which had a Chi Rho design , in the foundation , and inserted it into the Communion Table in the chancel , linking the current building with the pre @-@ 1906 church . The Victorian chandeliers were repaired and rewired , and the transept balconies , which had been closed for twenty years because they were declared unsafe , were reopened , after the false doors on the south side of each balcony were replaced by emergency exits and connected to existing staircases on the other side of the wall . Stanford Memorial Church was rededicated by chaplain Robert C. Gregg on November 1 , 1992 . 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 According to Stanford professor Van Harvey , Stanford " had the reputation of being a completely secular university " before the 1950s , calling the period a " background of aggressive secularism and the almost complete neglect of the academic study of religion " . In 1946 , <unk> Cuninggim , a visiting chaplain at Stanford Memorial Church , criticized the serious lack of religious and spiritual resources available at Stanford for its students and criticized the university 's lack of academic courses offered in the study of religions . Cuninggim insisted that the university 's administration and trustees were responsible because they had interpreted the non @-@ sectarian clause in Stanford 's charter in " a negative and restrictive fashion rather than as enabling the tolerance and the flourishing of many religious faiths on campus " . 
 Cuninggim also charged that Stanford 's religious policies were inadequate compared to other prominent U.S. universities . Two attempts were made to found a seminary to train pastors and religious leaders at Stanford , in 1921 and in 1940 , but both failed . Harvey speculated that if Stanford had established a seminary like other prestigious universities , its religious studies department and the " ethos " of the entire institution would be different . In 1966 , however , the university 's Board of Trustees got a court order that allowed them to change the non @-@ sectarian clause in Stanford 's charter so that they could expand the university 's religious program , which included permitting sectarian worship services at Stanford Memorial Church . 
 Stanford did not employ a full @-@ time professor in religion until 1951 and did not establish a religious studies department until 1973 , later than most other universities in the U.S. Earlier courses in religion were largely offered by the chaplains of Stanford Memorial Church . David Charles Gardner offered a course in Biblical history and literature beginning in 1907 , and by 1910 , he was teaching New Testament Greek and Bible classes . Gardner 's successor , D. Elton Trueblood , taught classes about the philosophy of religion . In 1941 Trueblood 's efforts to expand the study of religion resulted in the creation of a minor in religion , as well as twenty @-@ one courses offered by him and four faculty members . By 1960 , the chaplains of Stanford Memorial Church no longer had to run the program , which had expanded to allow students the option of majoring in the study of religion . By the mid @-@ 1960s , the religious studies program at Stanford was enjoying " enormous success " . 
 In the 1960s , the study of religion at Stanford focused not on academics , but on social and ethical issues like race and the Vietnam War . Leading this focus was Stanford Memorial Church Dean of the Chapel and Professor of Religion B. Davie Napier , who was " a powerful critic of U.S. policy in Vietnam " . Napier , along with Stanford professors Michael Novak and Robert McAfee Brown , who had previously been faculty members of seminaries , were the subject of a Time Magazine article in 1966 , describing " the renaissance of faith and learning at Stanford " . Students crowded into the church to hear anti @-@ war speeches by them , as well as by " notables " such as Linus Pauling and William Sloan Coffin . Harvey credited Napier for making the church a popular meeting place on campus for undergraduates and for turning it into " Christian theater — the introduction of jazz and other types of experimental worship as well as provocative preaching " . Stanford University was the first major educational institution in the United States that conducted same @-@ sex commitment ceremonies at its chapel . Its first ceremony was held in 1993 , and was officiated by Associate Dean Diana Akiyama . 
 = = = Chaplains = = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church , throughout its history , has been served by chaplains who have been influential amongst the Stanford University student body and community at large . R. Heber Newton , " distinguished writer " and former rector at All Souls Church in New York , was handpicked by Jane Stanford to serve as the church 's first pastor ; he resigned after four months in 1903 " because he disagreed with Mrs. Stanford on some aspects of church management " . According to Stanford biographer Robert W. P. Cutler , " Newton 's tenure had been a disappointment to Mrs. Stanford " . David Charles Gardner , who replaced Newton , served the church from 1902 to his retirement in 1936 . Stanford also handpicked Gardner as Newton 's assistant because she was impressed with his " parish work " in Palo Alto . Gardner went on to teach courses in Biblical history and literature at Stanford . Influential English professor and Stanford historian Edith <unk> called Gardner " a preacher of only indifferent ability " , but considered him " a strength to the whole university " . According to her he was the prime mover behind the creation of the Stanford Home for Convalescent Children , established in 1919 , which eventually became the Lucile Packard Children 's Hospital . 
 D. Elton Trueblood , a lifelong Quaker , was the church 's chaplain from 1936 to 1946 . Trueblood was also a professor of philosophy of religion at Stanford and established the university 's first major in religious studies ; his tenure there provided him with national exposure . He wrote 33 books , including one about Abraham Lincoln . Trueblood and his wife hosted monthly Friends meetings in their home , and met weekly with Orthodox Jewish students in the vestry of Stanford Memorial Church . George J. Hall was the church 's chaplain from 1946 to 1947 , followed by Paul C. Johnson , who served between 1949 and 1950 . Robert M. Minto was chaplain twice , in 1947 @-@ 1948 , and again from 1950 @-@ 1973 . Minto , an associate chaplain at Stanford for two years prior , was a pastor in Scotland and a former British naval chaplain during World War II . 
 Stanford 's next two chaplains , B. Davie Napier ( Dean of the Chapel , 1966 – 72 ) and Robert McAfee Brown ( Acting Dean of the Chapel , 1972 – 73 ) , were among the most politically active chaplains . Napier was an ordained Congregational minister . He was born in China to missionary parents , grew up in the American South , and went to seminary at Yale . He gained fame among Stanford students " for his efforts to relate Scripture to the turbulent political times of the late 1960s " . Napier was a " charismatic biblical scholar ... [ and ] a powerful critic of U.S. policy in Vietnam " . Napier was also a " gifted " preacher and jazz pianist . Brown , the author of 29 books , became " an international leader in civil rights , ecumenical and social justice causes " . He also protested U.S. involvement in Vietnam and taught religion and ethics in relation to contemporary life and literature . 
 Robert Hamerton @-@ Kelly ( 1972 – 86 ) , born in South Africa , was a United Methodist minister . He taught religion , classics , and Greek at Stanford . Thomas Ambrogi was the acting dean in 1986 . He was a former Jesuit priest who was an elder in the First Presbyterian Church in Palo Alto , and referred to himself as " a <unk> Christian with roots in the Catholic tradition " . Robert C. Gregg ( 1987 – 98 ) was born in Texas and ordained as an Episcopal priest . He was also Professor of Religious Studies . Kelly Denton @-@ <unk> ( 1999 – 2000 ) , a Lutheran minister , came to Stanford in 1996 as an associate dean . The Rev. Scotty McLennan ( 2001 @-@ 2014 ) , a Unitarian Universalist minister , was " an activist neighborhood lawyer " in Boston before becoming a university chaplain , first at Tufts University . Garry Trudeau , who was McLennan 's roommate when they were students at Yale University , based his Doonesbury character , the Rev. Scot Sloan , in part on McLennan . He was replaced by a British historian and Anglican priest , the Very Rev. Jane Shaw in September 2014 . 
 = = = = Staff = = = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church is run by the Stanford Office for Religious Life , headed by the Dean for Religious Life . The Very Rev. Prof. Jane Shaw is Dean for Religious Life at Stanford . The dean , along with senior associate dean , Rabbi Patricia Karlin @-@ Neumann , and associate dean , the Rev. Joanne Sanders , oversee educational programs and serve on administrative committees on campus . 
 Jane Shaw is an historian , Anglican priest , and professor in the Religious Studies Department at Stanford . Educated at Oxford University , Harvard University , and the University of California , Berkeley , she came to Stanford in 2014 from being Dean of Grace Cathedral , San Francisco , and from teaching history at Oxford University for sixteen years . 
 Rabbi Karlin @-@ Neumann is Stanford 's first Jewish associate dean of religious life . Before the university hired her in 1996 , the chaplaincy position was called " Dean of Memorial Church " ; in order to accommodate Karlin @-@ Neumann , the position 's name was changed to " Dean of Religious Life at Stanford " . Before coming to Stanford , Karlin @-@ Neumann had been a Hillel director and chaplain at UCLA and Claremont College , a rabbi in Alameda , California , and was active in Reform Judaism . She has taught courses in Jewish feminism , rabbinical ethics , education , and social justice . She refers to her role at Stanford as " Mem Chu and a Jew , too " . 
 Joanne Sanders , an Episcopal priest , has worked at Stanford since 2001 . She has degrees in theology , sports administration and physical education . Her career has focused on the connection between body , mind , and spirit . She serves as liturgical officer for Memorial Church , is responsible for coordinating and facilitating the religious services at the church , and is active in the athletic community on campus . She is also a member of Stanford 's Women 's Community Center . 
 Robert Huw Morgan has been Stanford Memorial Church 's organist since 1999 . He is a lecturer in organ at the Stanford University School of Music . Morgan performs at up to thirty services , mostly weddings , each month at the church . Melissa <unk> is the wedding coordinator at Stanford Memorial Church . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church was built during the American Renaissance period , a time of architectural eclecticism , so elements of styles from different eras are synthesized in its design . The architectural style of Stanford Memorial Church has been referred to as " a stunning example of late Victorian ecclesiastical art and architecture with echoes of Pre @-@ Raphaelitism " . As it stands today , having been altered after earthquake damage , Stanford Memorial Church has the plan and structure of a large Romanesque church while the extensive use of mosaic and the foliate forms of the stone carvings reflect Byzantine styles seen by Jane Stanford on her visits to the churches of Constantinople and St Mark 's Basilica in Venice . 
 Charles A. Coolidge , a protégé of Henry Hobson Richardson , was the church 's architect ; he also developed the massing of Richardson 's Trinity Church in Boston in 1876 . Like Trinity Church , Memorial Church originally had a large central tower with turrets and a twelve @-@ sided spire , but this was lost as a result of the 1906 earthquake . The church 's blueprints were prepared by Clinton E. Day of San Francisco , and Charles E. Hodges was the supervising architect for the project . Jane Stanford hired builder John McGilvray , who was responsible for constructing the St. Francis Hotel , the City Hall complex in San Francisco , and much of Stanford University , for the actual construction of Stanford Memorial Church . 
 Jane Stanford 's taste and knowledge of both contemporary and classical art is evident in several aspects of the plan , appearance , and architecture of the church , which " dazzle the eye yet also produce an atmosphere of quiet contemplation " . On her direction , Coolidge imitated the " glorious color " of the European cathedrals , especially those in Italy . Although the iconography in the church is Christian , Stanford was a " late Victorian progressive " , and chose the art less for its religious themes and more for its " humanitarian ethics " . She requested that the designs include women , " to show the uplifting influence of religion for women " ; there are many women depicted in the 24 mosaics throughout the church . Art historian Judy Oberhausen reports that Stanford used compendium of biblical illustrations like The Story of the Bible by Charles Foster , which contained 300 illustrations and summarized the events and stories she wished to depict in the church 's windows and mosaics . 
 Jane Stanford 's design included inspirational messages placed throughout the church in the form of inscriptions carved into its walls and enclosed in carved frameworks . As Barbara Palmer of the Stanford Report stated , Stanford " had her religious beliefs literally carved into the church 's sandstone walls " . For example , the following quotations can be found in the church 's east transept : 
 Religion is intended as a comfort , a solace , a necessity to the soul 's welfare ; and whichever form of religion furnishes the greatest comfort , the greatest solace , it is the form which should be adopted be its name what it will . 
 The best form of religion is trust in God , and a firm belief in the immortality of the soul , life everlasting . 
 = = = Plan = = = 
 The church is a cruciform structure measuring 190 feet ( 58 m ) long and 150 feet ( 46 m ) wide , which originally included the clock and bell tower with an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) spire . The facade faces the Inner Quad , and is connected to other buildings by arcades which extend laterally . The entry is through a narthex or vestibule extending across the building . The nave has a single aisle on either side , separated by an arcade with a clerestory above it . The crossing is formed by a structure of square plan which once supported the central tower . Over it is a shallow dome supported on pendentives and rising to a skylit oculus . High semicircular Romanesque arches separate the crossing from the nave , transepts and chancel . The chancel and transepts are apsidal . There are deep galleries with concave balustraded fronts in the transepts and an organ gallery above the narthex . The sanctuary , in the chancel , is elevated and approached by steps . 
 = = = Exterior = = = 
 The chief building material of the church is buff sandstone , which came from the Goodrich Quarry ( also called the Greystone Quarry ) in the <unk> area of San Jose , was delivered by train and rough @-@ cut in the university Quad . It is roofed with terracotta tiles of the Italian imbrex and tegula form . The nave , chancel and transepts appear to project from the robust square central structure which is now roofed with tiles and has a small skylight above its center . 
 The ornate facade is divided into two zones with a gable roof of low pitch surmounted by a Celtic cross . In the lower zone , there are three arched entrances ; the central one is slightly larger than the others . The surrounding stonework is intricately carved with stylized flora , twisted @-@ cable moldings , and bosses of sculpted cherubim , a motif which occurs in different media throughout the church . In the spandrels are mosaic depictions of the biblical concepts of love , faith , hope and charity intertwined in a vine representing the " tree of life " . 
 In the upper zone of the facade , surrounded by more elaborate stonework , is a large central window , with groups of three smaller windows on each side . The original central window was a quatrefoil @-@ shaped rose window , but after the 1906 earthquake , it was replaced by a " classical round @-@ head window that more grandly restates the smaller flanking , articulated openings " and that corresponded with the mission @-@ style architecture of the Quad . Beneath the windows are inlaid panels of colored marble . 
 The gable and surrounding surfaces contain the church 's largest mosaic , created by Paoletti , and recreated by him after the 1906 earthquake . Measuring 84 feet ( 26 m ) wide at the base and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) in height , at the time of its completion , it was the largest mosaic in the U.S. It depicts a group of men , women and children , 47 in all , surrounding and " paying close heed " to Christ , the mosaic 's central figure . Paoletti included a landscape with " waving palms and a gleaming sky " behind Christ . 
 After Jane Stanford 's death , the mosaic popularly gained the name " The Sermon on the Mount " , although Stanford University historian Richard <unk> insists that the mosaic does not depict the scene as described in the Gospel of Matthew and has referred to it simply as " an indefinite biblical scene " . In the Stanford University press release about the gift of watercolor cartoons for the church 's mosaics , Paoletti 's design for the facade is described as " Christ Welcoming the Righteous into the Kingdom of God " , based on Matthew 25 : 34 . Paoletti created another unfinished watercolor depicting " The Last Judgment " , as another option for the facade mosaic , but it was evidently rejected by Stanford . 
 = = = Interior = = = 
 Jane Stanford has been described as having a " Victorian aversion to blank space " and so created a church that is " a dimly lit cavern of glowing mosaic surfaces ... and vibrant , stained @-@ glass windows " . The church is richly decorated throughout , its architectural features carved with formalized foliate ornament , and the walls adorned with mosaics in the Byzantine manner . The stained @-@ glass windows were crafted by J. and R. Lamb of New York . The chandeliers , installed in 1915 , are in the Art Nouveau tradition and have gold decorative patterns cast in pot metal . 
 The church is entered through three bronze doors adorned with angels , a recurring motif throughout the church . The doors open up into a narthex or vestibule decorated with mosaics on the walls and stone carvings on the architectural details . There is a variety of styles and motifs reflecting the hands of different craftsmen . The mosaic that adorns the floor depicts the Lamb of God surrounded by the symbols of the four gospel writers : St. Matthew ( the winged angel ) , St. Mark ( the winged lion ) , St. Luke ( the ox ) , and St. John ( the eagle ) . These symbols also appear in other areas of the church . A Celtic cross adorns the central wooden door that leads into the nave , and Latin epigraphs have been engraved above the two side doors . 
 Above the narthex is an organ gallery . The nave is arcaded and has a single aisle on each side with clerestory windows above . The exposed timber ceiling was inspired by Trinity Church and is constructed with tied hammer beams , which can be seen radiating in the chancel . The floor of the church slopes downward towards the crossing . The chancel and transepts are three semi @-@ circular apses . They are separated from the broad central space by large semi @-@ circular arches on stout columns with carved capitals . The transept apses each have a balcony with a concave balustrade . 
 Directly above the crossing is a dome supported on pendentives . Around the base of the dome are decorative gilt bands , the lower depicting a scrolling vine . Jane Stanford intended the dome 's decoration of to be of mosaic tiles showing a variety of symbols , but the church 's builders thought it would make the dome too heavy , so the decorations were painted . On the spandrels of the pendentives are mosaics of four angels measuring 42 feet ( 13 m ) from wing tip to wing tip , rising from clouds . The angels survived the 1906 earthquake , but the angel looking downward was severely damaged during the 1989 earthquake because an 8 @-@ foot section of its left wing fell 70 feet ( 21 m ) . 
 The chancel , according to Hall , contains " artistic work of a kind seldom seen anywhere " . The raised tiled floor of the chancel curves outward into the body of the church , and is approached by seven marble steps . The sanctuary is raised further , and enclosed by a marble altar rail behind which is an altar carved from white Carrara marble by L.M. <unk> . The altar supports a " simple unadorned brass cross that reflects the colors of the mosaics surrounding it . " The cross was made by William van Erp and was dedicated to the memory of Jane Stanford in 1948 . 
 Behind the altar is a mosaic reproduction of Roselli 's " Last Supper " . Around the lower walls of the chancel are twelve niches decorated with golden mosaic tiles . They hold candles , but originally held statues of the twelve apostles , destroyed in 1906 and were never replaced . According to local legend , the cherubim carved in stone above the golden niches and in the pillars ' capitals are illustrations of children living on campus at the time of the church 's construction . To the west side of the chancel stands brass lectern in the form of a reading angel , which Jane Stanford brought from Europe and dedicated to her husband on the anniversary of his birth in 1902 . 
 Three stained glass windows in the apse depict the nativity , crucifixion , and ascension of Christ . The mosaics between them show angels , those on the left carrying a cross , those on the right carrying a crown . On the longer sections of the chancel wall , on either side of the windows , are mosaics depicting a choir of angels . Above them is a tier of mosaics with representations of the prophets and kings of Israel . Other mosaics abound in the transepts , clerestory , and the choir loft at the northern end of the church . A series of mosaics in the upper transepts depict Old Testament figures on the east side and Christian saints on the west side . On Jane Stanford 's direction , they alternate male and female . 
 The arches , balcony rails , and pillars throughout the church have relief carvings created by a team of 10 men who worked for two years from scaffolding . A large double pillar before the entrance of the west transept have inscriptions dedicated to members of the Stanford family . After the 1989 earthquake , a third of the west transept was converted into a small chapel . The altar and chairs in this chapel were designed by Bay Area artist Gail <unk> who decorated the chapel 's altar by using <unk> 's original mosaics , which had been stored since the church 's reconstruction following the 1906 earthquake . 
 = = = = Windows = = = = 
 According to architectural historian Willis L. Hall , the church 's 20 large stained glass windows " are as much a feature of the church as the mosaics " . The windows , designed by Frederick <unk> Lamb ( 1863 – 1928 ) and fabricated by J & R Lamb Studios , his father 's firm in New York City , took three years to complete , and eight months to install at Stanford . Jane Stanford hired Lamb because she felt he was more interested in " the ecclesiastical rather than commercial aspect of the work " . The installation of the windows at Stanford Memorial Church was the largest enterprise of its kind at the time , and the project is considered one of the best examples of Lamb 's work . Stanford chose the life of Christ for the windows ' theme , inspired by the religious paintings by European master painters such as Shields and Doré . Her personal touch is shown in one of the nave windows , which is based on a cartoon by Paoletti and depicts Christ welcoming the soul of a child into Heaven before the eyes of its grieving mother , an allusion to the death of Leland Stanford , Jr . , the Stanfords ' only child and the university 's namesake , who died in 1884 of typhoid shortly before his 16th birthday . 
 Oberhausen , who has studied the source of the mosaics and windows , states that at least four stained glass windows were inspired by the paintings of Pre @-@ Raphaelite artists that were enjoying a resurgence in popularity at the time . These windows are : " Christ in the Temple " in the east transept , based upon a painting by William Holman Hunt ; " The Annunciation " in the east nave , inspired by a work by Frederic Shields ; " The Nativity " in the chancel , based upon a painting by Edward Fellowes @-@ Prynne ; and " The Good Shepherd " in the west transept , inspired by a painting by Sibyl C. Parker , the only female artist represented in the artwork of the church . None of the windows of Stanford Memorial Church required replacement after the 1906 quake , except for " the famous rose window of the original structure " in the organ loft which was replaced by the current large , central arch window . This window , entitled " Lilies of the Field " , is the only window in the church that cannot be viewed from the inside because it is blocked off by the central organ . There is a cross in the center of this window made of " faceted pieces of glass that are inset like gems " , which sparkle when light strikes it . 
 The church 's clerestory contains many smaller windows of individuals from the Bible or Christian history . The windows in the nave above the east arcade depict the following Old Testament figures : Abraham , Hagar and her child Ishmael , Moses , Pharaoh 's Daughter , Joshua , and Deborah . The windows in the east transept depict David , Ruth , Solomon , The Queen of Sheba , Elijah , Esther , Isaiah , Judith , Daniel , and Hannah . In the nave above the west arcade feature saints and virtues : Stephen , Agnes , Peter , Priscilla , John , and Hope . In the west transept are Simeon , Anne , Matthew , Faith , Mark , Charity , Luke , Dorcas , Paul , and Martha . The clerestory above the east and west doors are two windows of angels . Unlike the other windows throughout the church , they do not receive natural light from outside and are artificially illuminated instead . 
 = = = = Mosaics = = = = 
 The mosaic project began in 1900 and took five years to complete . Jane Stanford chose mosaics to decorate her church because of the similar weather in Italy and Northern California , where the moderate climates and rainy seasons in both settings protect the images from erosion and clear the pollution that accumulates on many buildings in large cities . As Hall states , the " mosaics on the facade are always clear and brilliant . " Their " shimmering quality " was created by different tones of green and gold ; the artists that installed the mosaics had over 20 @,@ 000 shades of colors to choose from . The images cost US $ 97 @,@ 000 , and were based upon original watercolors created by artist Antonio Paoletti . Jane Stanford worked closely with Paoletti , planning a combination of Old Testament and New Testament scenes that represented men and women equally . After Stanford approved Paoletti 's designs , full @-@ sized images were created as patterns , and then divided into two @-@ foot @-@ square sections , which were made into glass by other artists . The mosaics were made in Venice , shipped by boat in pieces to New York and then by railroad to California , where they were placed on the church 's walls . 
 The mosaic adorning the church 's chancel is a reproduction of Roselli 's fresco of the Last Supper from the Sistine Chapel in the Vatican . Camerino obtained permission from Pope Leo XIII to reproduce it at Stanford Memorial Church . Unlike other works , which were reproduced frequently , it was the only reproduction of Roselli 's fresco at the time . Artisan Lorenzo <unk> was given the task of supervising the in @-@ studio fabrication and final installation at Stanford . There are 12 mosaics in each transept balcony that are split into two sets of six , creating an arc of six mosaics , ten windows , and six mosaics . Most of the church 's mosaics were made from 1 / 8 @-@ inch tiles ; larger 3 / 4 @-@ inch tiles were used on the higher mosaics , and smaller 1 / 4 @-@ inch tiles were used in " The Last Supper " mosaic . Mosaics are " virtually everywhere " inside the church and have been described as " a perfect complement to Frederick Lamb 's stained @-@ glass windows " . 
 = = = = Organs = = = = 
 Stanford Memorial Church houses five organs , a " situation only a few places in the nation can boast " , since most churches only have one . The presence of multiple and high @-@ quality organs makes Stanford an ideal location for accomplished musicians , and the sanctuary one of California 's best settings for instrumental and choral performance . The church 's organist is Robert Huw Morgan . 
 Stanford Memorial Church 's original organ is still in use . It was built by Murray M. Harris in 1901 and sits in the upstairs galley . In 1915 , an echo division with eight ranks of pipes was added . Damaged in the 1906 earthquake , the organ was rebuilt in 1925 , enlarged in 1933 , and thoroughly restored in 1996 . It features three manuals ( keyboards for the hands ) , 57 stops , and over 3 @,@ 700 pipes . Morgan compares the Murray @-@ Harris organ to a Rolls Royce and its successor , the Fisk @-@ Nanney organ , to a Maserati . 
 The largest organ is the Fisk @-@ Nanney organ , built in 1985 by the C. B. Fisk company and described by Morgan as " a desperately famous instrument " . It is named after its designer , Charles Fisk , and for Herbert Nanney , who was the church 's organist for 39 years . The Fisk @-@ Nanney organ was commissioned in 1973 , when the church received a special endowment . Its completion was delayed for over 25 years due to logistical and financial problems . In order to accommodate the organ 's weight , the choir loft had to be rebuilt and reinforced . 
 The Fisk @-@ Nanney is a four @-@ manual instrument with 73 ranks and almost 4 @,@ 500 pipes composed of various alloys of tin and lead . It uses a " combination of elements from historic East German , North German , and French organs plus dual temperaments " , and is the only organ in the church capable of authentically reproducing nearly all organ music written from the 16th through the 18th centuries . The organ features both French- and German @-@ style reeds and principal choruses . It is equipped with a <unk> division in meantone temperament that offers two split keys per octave ( D @-@ sharp / E @-@ flat and G @-@ sharp / A @-@ flat ) . A lever allows the remaining divisions to alternate between well temperament and meantone temperament , a feature made possible by the inclusion of five extra pipes ( two for each sharp key ) per octave . The organ 's case is made of poplar and the keyboards are fashioned from grenadilla . The naturals and sharps are rosewood capped with bone . 
 Morgan describes the organ as ringing with " ' incredible clarity ' and ' dark color ' " . It is able to " reproduce the sound of Baroque music as authentically as possible " . In 2005 Morgan performed the complete organ works of Dieterich Buxtehude during a series of recitals , eight hours in all , to celebrate the organ 's 20th anniversary . During the 2009 – 2010 season , Morgan commemorated the 25th anniversary of the Fisk @-@ Nanney organ and his 10th year at Stanford in a concert series of the complete organ works of Johann Sebastian Bach , which took 18 hours to complete . 
 The side chapel houses the Katherine Potter @-@ <unk> organ , a one @-@ manual Renaissance @-@ style instrument built by Paul Fritts and modeled after the work of the 17th @-@ century German <unk> <unk> <unk> . Built in 1995 , it " further enhances " the diversity of the church 's musical capacity . It has eight stops , of which three are reeds . The majority of its pipework is made of wood . The organ can be moved easily to different locations in the building with the aid of hidden retractable wheels . 
 The continuo organ built by Martin Pasi of Roy , Washington was acquired in June 2001 . It contains three stops . The case and most of its pipes are made of walnut , and the keys are made of English boxwood and ebony . 
 In 2010 the church received on long @-@ term loan a five @-@ rank Tudor @-@ style organ built by <unk> and <unk> Pipe Organs . It is a recreation based upon the work of Martin <unk> and Dominic Gwynn of Nottinghamshire , England and the finding in 1995 of a few pieces of a Tudor organ . Few English organ survives from the sixteenth century and this is one of only two five @-@ rank Tudor @-@ style organs in the world . 
 = = Services and facilities = = 
 Although the Stanfords were religious and viewed " spiritual and moral values as essential to a young person 's education and future citizenship " , they were not formally committed to any Christian denomination . As a result , Jane Stanford decreed , from the beginning of Stanford Memorial Church 's history , that the church be non @-@ denominational . She believed that adopting this philosophy would " serve the broadest spiritual needs of the university community " . The church 's first chaplain , Charles Gardner , declared on the day of its dedication that the church 's goal was to serve the spiritual needs of the university in a non @-@ sectarian way . The Stanfords ' goal was that moral instruction would occur at the church , as demonstrated in the inscriptions carved into its walls , which was influenced by the late 19th @-@ century liberal Protestantism they embraced . As former Stanford chaplain Robert C. Gregg states , " The Stanfords sought to protect free intellectual inquiry — in classroom , laboratory , and church — from any interference prompted by the caution or dogmatism of religious authorities " . 
 Stanford Memorial Church was the earliest interdenominational church on the west coast of the U.S. and has remained " among the most prominent " . Multi @-@ faith services are held at Stanford Memorial Church , in addition to denominational and non @-@ denominational Christian services . As many as 150 weddings take place in the church each year as well as many memorial services for people affiliated with the university . Members of the university community use it for " quiet , for reflection , and for private devotions " . The church also hosts frequent musical performances from Stanford 's own choirs and orchestra , as well as visiting groups such as the vocal ensemble Chanticleer . Catholic masses are held in the church several times a week . <unk> at the principal Sunday services are donated to local charitable organizations . 
 = SaGa Frontier = 
 SaGa Frontier ( <unk> <unk> , SaGa <unk> ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Square for the PlayStation and released in Japan on July 11 , 1997 . The game was later published by Sony Computer Entertainment ( SCEA ) in North America on March 25 , 1998 . It is the seventh game in the SaGa series and the first to be released on the PlayStation . 
 SaGa Frontier was developed by the then @-@ Square Production Team 2 ( referred to as 2nd Division in the game ) with Akitoshi Kawazu as director and producer , Koichi Ishii as planning chief , Kenji Ito as composer , and Tomomi Kobayashi as illustrator . Square Production Team 2 included Kyoji Koizumi , Miwa Shoda , Kazuko Shibuya , and Minoru Akao among others . The musical score for SaGa Frontier was composed and arranged by Kenji Ito , who provided music for many previous entries in the SaGa franchise . When development began , the game 's title was intended to be Romancing SaGa 4 . The focus shifted from the traditional SaGa style and began to focus on several different character on their own journeys . Nine stories were crafted , but two of them were dropped for being too comedic . 
 The plot of SaGa Frontier takes place in a science fantasy universe called " The Regions " , a group of worlds with varying degrees of culture , unique races , technology , and magic . The game allows the player to follow the exploits of one of seven protagonists , each with his or her own storyline and goal . The game 's " Free Scenario System " offers a large amount of non @-@ linear gameplay , allowing the player to freely travel between many of the Regions , interact with other characters , and take part in turn @-@ based combat . SaGa Frontier enjoyed commercial success , having sold over one million copies . The game was generally well received in Japan and has been re @-@ released under a few best @-@ seller labels , as well as the PlayStation Store . However , it received largely mixed and average reviews in North America , mostly due to its ambitious Free Scenario System . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The basic concept of SaGa Frontier is based on its Free Scenario System , in which one can play as any of seven different protagonists , all of whom exist in the same setting : a solar system known as The Regions , a group of planets , each with its own culture , game @-@ level of technology , and form of magic . The game is considered non @-@ linear , in that from the beginning many of the characters are free to go almost anywhere and interact with almost anyone . Travel through most of the Regions is easy due to inter @-@ regional ships traveling regularly between them . The player controls the protagonist on the field screen , a set of interconnecting pre @-@ rendered backgrounds , and is able to speak with a slew of other characters in order to gather information , recruit party members , and initiate quests . Each character has his or her own storyline and a main quest to fulfill , but there are also several optional quests that any of the characters can participate in . Some of the main characters even encounter each other during their quests . The storyline of each character also changes depending on who is chosen , what is said in conversation , what events have already occurred , and who the protagonist has in his or her party , a concept first introduced in Romancing SaGa 2 . 
 Combat in SaGa Frontier pits players against groups of enemies encountered on the field screen . The battle screen depicts 2D @-@ animated sprites amidst a 3D @-@ rotating background . Battles are turn @-@ based , in which the player chooses his or her actions and allow them , along those of the enemies , to play out . A variety of weapons , special skills , and magic spells are at the player 's disposal . Most skills are learned mid @-@ battle , while many spells are purchased in the game 's shops . If certain conditions are met within the battle , party members on either side can create combination attacks for added damage . Winning battles will increase player character statistics such as hit points ( HP ) , life points ( LP ) , strength , and quickness . Outside of combat , players can equip and <unk> ( or " seal " ) weapons , armor , skills , spells , and items . First introduced in the Game Boy incarnations of the SaGa series , the game contains different races that exist within the Regions : the Humans , the Mystics , the Half @-@ Mystics ( half Human and half Mystic ) , Monsters , and the <unk> ( robots ) . 
 The player is encouraged to complete each of the seven scenarios one after the other . For added incentive , beating a character 's game and saving its completion to the system data adds some bonuses . After beating one character 's game , essentially every character in the following game starts off stronger and with better gear than before , and may depend on how many battles players fought in their previous quest that they saved on the system data . Fulfilling all seven main quests allows the player access to the " 2nd Division " room , in which the player can fight all final bosses and talk to the game 's programmers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the outset , the player can choose any one of seven main characters to play as , each with their own storyline : 
 Asellus , formerly a human girl , was run over by a carriage and given a blood transfusion by the Mystic Lord Orlouge . Chosen as the Charm Lord 's heir , she is despised by human and mystic alike due to her status as the only half @-@ Mystic in existence . She escapes Orlouge 's castle with the help of the Princess White Rose . Asellus and White Rose remain on the run from Orlouge 's many servants , but after White Rose sacrifices herself to save Asellus 's life and freedom , Asellus decides to return and defeat Orlouge , to end the struggle once and for all . Depending on the actions the player does , there are three endings , in which she end live on as a human , half Mystic , or complete Mystic . 
 Blue is a young mage fresh out of magic school . His quest is to collect the " Gift " for as many magics as possible . After that he is destined to fight his twin Rouge who has gained the opposite magics . Whichever brother survives obtains the other 's magic and receives the sacred " Life " magic . It is revealed they were created artificially to produce the only wizard who could master all magical powers , even the conflicting pairs , and the duel is a mere formality to establish the dominant persona . Afterwards , Blue / Rouge descends into Hell to fight the demons who attacked his home . 
 Emelia is a blonde ex @-@ con and secret agent formerly working as a model . Her story began when her fiancé Ren was murdered by a mysterious villain known as the " Joker " . Wrongfully accused of the crime , she was sentenced to imprisonment in Despair , where she met Annie and Liza . With their help , they complete a competition the warden created to receive a full pardon for their crimes . After their escape , Emelia was recruited by the two to join the secret organization Gradius , which was also hunting for the " Joker " . 
 Lute is a carefree bard whose mother kicked him out of the house until Lute found a decent job . He stumbles face @-@ first into a plot involving Trinity general Mondo and resistance leader Captain Hamilton , and the legacy of Lute 's deceased father , who was betrayed and killed by Mondo . 
 Red is a teenage boy whose family is destroyed by the criminal syndicate called Black X. After being rescued from the same fate by the masked superhero named Alkarl , he is granted the identity of the superhero <unk> . After destroying several Black X bases and their main stronghold , Red stands at his father 's grave , and Alkarl appears to take Red 's powers away , making him a normal man again . It turns out that Alkarl was Red 's father 's friend , Hawk , and Red will not be able to live a " normal " life for long . 
 Riki ( Known as Coon in the Japanese release ) is a <unk> , a fox @-@ like creature , and one of the last remaining inhabitants of the mysterious world , Margmel . Determined to save his homeworld , he seeks the Rings of Margmel . In his search , he starts out in Scrap , where he finds the researcher Mei @-@ ling . Riki 's quest takes him around the regions to gather the Rings until he comes face to face with Virgil , a Mystic Lord . Following the battle , Riki returns home to attempt to restore Margmel . 
 <unk> is an ancient <unk> , a model constructed from junk parts , awakened in modern times . Originally part of a combat ship with a secret mission against the RB3 ( Region Buster 3 ) , it lost its memory when it crashed into Junk . With help of Leonard , a human who transferred his memories into a <unk> , and Gen , a master swordsman , it recovers its memory and finishes the job . 
 = = Development = = 
 SaGa Frontier was developed by the then @-@ Square Production Team 2 ( referred to as 2nd Division in the game ) with Akitoshi Kawazu as director and producer , Koichi Ishii as planning chief , Kenji Ito as composer , and Tomomi Kobayashi as illustrator . Square Production Team 2 included Kyoji Koizumi , Miwa Shoda , Kazuko Shibuya , and Minoru Akao among others . The musical score for SaGa Frontier was composed and arranged by Kenji Ito , who provided music for many previous entries in the SaGa franchise . 
 Originally , the title of this game was " Romancing SaGa 4 " during early development . In that stage of development , two more heroes ' quests were also being planned , in addition to the existing seven lead characters . One of them was Fuse , the <unk> agent who may be enlisted as a playable character in the actual release . In his quest , Fuse was supposed to be able to take part in other characters ' scenarios , and the ultimate goal of his quest might be determined by what the player did in the course of gameplay . The " ninth " protagonist was to be the daughter of a <unk> family who is engaging in a controversy as to who of them shall inherit the property of their former patriarch . This scenario seems to be dropped during the early development because of being too comedic . 
 Due to time constraints , some plot points of Asellus story were removed . During those events , Asellus was supposed to visit Dr. Nusakan 's clinic , Bio Research Lab , Lambda Base , and <unk> 's Workshop so that she would find her true identity so that she would decide to live as a human being or as a mystic . These quests were also intended to affect her scenario 's ending . 
 = = Release = = 
 Due to its popularity in Japan , the game has been re @-@ released a number of times at a budget price : in 2000 as part of the Square Millennium Collection , in 2002 as part of the PSone Books best @-@ seller range , and again in 2004 as a part of Square Enix 's Ultimate Hits line . Most recently in 2008 , the game was released on the PlayStation Store in Japan . 
 = = = Soundtracks = = = 
 SaGa Frontier Original Sound Track comprises 75 tracks spanning three compact discs . It was released in Japan on April 21 , 1999 by DigiCube and was later reprinted by Square Enix on February 1 , 2006 . On disc 3 of the soundtrack , there is a hidden track , in the pregap , which can only be heard when rewinding the CD from the beginning ; this was originally supposed to be Riki 's theme . There also are alternate titles for those pieces of music which can be seen in the <unk> in the in @-@ game " 2nd Division " . Itō states that he wanted to create an arranged album for the game as well , although one has yet to be released . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 Two guidebooks for SaGa Frontier have been published in Japan by ASCII : The Essence of SaGa Frontier and The Complete of SaGa Frontier . Another companion book titled SaGa Frontier How To Walk In Regions was published by Kodansha . BradyGames released its own Saga Frontier : Official Strategy Guide in North America in 1998 . When the game was re @-@ issued in Japan in 2000 as part of the Square Millennium Collection , it included a collectible teacup set and a tee @-@ shirt depicting the character Blue . 
 = = Reception = = 
 SaGa Frontier received mostly mixed or average reviews in North America . The game currently holds a 73 % on GameRankings . Although many publications disagreed on positive aspects of the game , much criticism arose from its Free Scenario System . GameSpot called the game a " solid , if not exactly stellar , RPG that 'll certainly keep you busy for a while — or at least until you tire of its occasional lack of focus " . The website found the combat refreshing and many of its pre @-@ rendered visuals to be well @-@ done , but had many negative comments , specifically concerning the game 's nonlinear nature and unfocused scenarios . IGN proclaimed SaGa Frontier to be " the only bruised apple in Square 's current collection of role @-@ playing games " , similarly stating that the game 's Free Scenario System can become confusing and easily cause the player to become lost . However , it labelled the story and sprite @-@ based graphics its strong points . Game Informer notably found that the plot of SaGa Frontier is more of an outline than a descriptive formula as seen in other Square titles such as Final Fantasy VII and Chrono Trigger : the publication also criticized the game 's graphics , but praised its length and gameplay . Staff reviewers at RPGFan and RPGamer agreeably noted the game 's battle system to be its highlight ; both websites mention that discovering combinations attacks to be " fun " and " exciting " . 
 Saga Frontier sold over 1 @.@ 05 million copies in Japan by the end of 1997 , which had not appreciably increased by 2008 . It was the 5th top @-@ selling game in Japan in 1997 and is currently the 15th top @-@ selling PlayStation game for the region . In 2000 , SaGa Frontier was voted the 18th best PlayStation game of all time by the editors of Famitsu magazine . 
 = SMS Elbing = 
 SMS Elbing was a light cruiser ordered by the Imperial Russian navy under the name Admiral Nevelskoy from the Schichau @-@ Werke shipyard in Danzig in 1913 . Following the outbreak of World War I , the ship was confiscated in August 1914 and launched on 21 November 1914 as SMS Elbing . She had one sister ship , Pillau , the lead ship of their class . The ship was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in September 1914 . She was armed with a main battery of eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and had a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 kn ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . 
 Elbing participated in only two major operations during her career . The first , the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft , occurred in April 1916 ; there , she briefly engaged the British Harwich Force . A month later , she took part in the Battle of Jutland , where she scored the first hit of the engagement . She was heavily engaged in the confused fighting on the night of 31 May – 1 June , and shortly after midnight she was accidentally rammed by the battleship Posen , which tore a hole in the ship 's hull . Flooding disabled the ship 's engines and electrical generators , rendering her immobilized and without power . At around 02 : 00 , a German torpedo boat took off most of her crew , and an hour later the remaining men scuttled the ship ; they escaped in the ship 's cutter and were later picked up by a Dutch steamer . 
 = = Design = = 
 Elbing was ordered by the Imperial Russian Navy as Admiral Nevelskoy from the Schichau @-@ Werke shipyard in Danzig . She was laid down in 1913 , requisitioned by the German Navy on 5 August 1914 , and was renamed Elbing . She was launched on 21 November 1914 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 4 September 1915 . The ship was 135 @.@ 3 meters ( 444 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 6 m ( 45 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 98 m ( 19 @.@ 6 ft ) forward . She displaced 5 @,@ 252 t ( 5 @,@ 169 long tons ; 5 @,@ 789 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine steam turbines driving two 3 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 11 ft ) propellers . They were designed to give 30 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by six coal @-@ fired Yarrow water @-@ tube boilers , and four oil @-@ fired Yarrow boilers . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . Elbing carried 620 tonnes ( 610 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 580 tonnes ( 570 long tons ) of oil that gave her a range of approximately 4 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 900 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . Elbing had a standard crew of twenty @-@ one officers and 421 enlisted men , though this was expanded in wartime . 
 The ship was armed with eight 15 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , four were located amidships , two on either side , and two were side by side aft . She also carried four 5 @.@ 2 cm SK L / 55 anti @-@ aircraft guns , though these were replaced with a pair of two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns . She was also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes mounted on the deck . She could also carry 120 mines . The conning tower had 75 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) thick sides , and the deck was covered with up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick armor plate . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Elbing was assigned to the II Scouting Group , which typically operated alongside the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . Her first major operation was the bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft on 24 – 25 April . On the approach to Lowestoft , Elbing and Rostock spotted the Harwich Force , a squadron of three light cruisers and eighteen destroyers , approaching the German formation from the south at 04 : 50 . Rear Admiral Friedrich Boedicker , the German commander , initially ordered his battlecruisers to continue with the bombardment , while Elbing and the other five light cruisers concentrated to engage the Harwich Force . At around 05 : 30 , the British and German light forces clashed , firing mostly at long range . The battlecruisers arrived on the scene at 05 : 47 , prompting the British squadron to retreat at high speed . A light cruiser and destroyer were damaged before Boedicker broke off the engagement after receiving reports of submarines in the area . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 In May 1916 , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , the fleet commander , planned to lure a portion of the British fleet away from its bases and destroy it with the entire High Seas Fleet . Elbing remained in the II Scouting Group , attached to the I Scouting Group , for the operation . The squadron left the Jade roadstead at 02 : 00 on 31 May , bound for the waters of the Skagerrak . The main body of the fleet followed an hour and a half later . At 15 : 00 , lookouts on Elbing spotted the Danish steamer N. J. Fjord ; Elbing detached a pair of torpedo boats to investigate the steamer . Two British cruisers , HMS Galatea and Phaeton , were simultaneously steaming to inspect the steamer , and upon spotting the German torpedo boats , opened fire shortly before 15 : 30 . Elbing turned to support the destroyers , opening fire at 15 : 32 . She quickly scored the first hit of the battle , on Galatea , though the shell failed to explode . The British turned to the north back toward the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , with Elbing still firing at long range . She was joined by Frankfurt and Pillau , but the three cruisers had to cease fire by 16 : 17 , as the British had drawn out of range . About fifteen minutes later , the three cruisers engaged a seaplane launched by the seaplane tender HMS Engadine . They failed to score any hits , but the aircraft was forced off after which its engine broke down and it was forced to land . The three cruisers then returned to their stations ahead of the German battlecruisers . 
 At around 18 : 30 , Elbing and the rest of the II Scouting Group encountered the cruiser HMS Chester ; they opened fire and scored several hits on the ship . As both sides ' cruisers disengaged , Rear Admiral Horace Hood 's three battlecruisers intervened . His flagship HMS Invincible scored a hit on Wiesbaden that exploded in her engine room and disabled the ship . Elbing and Frankfurt each fired a torpedo at the British battlecruisers , though both missed . Elbing was briefly engaged by the battlecruisers at very long range , though she was not hit . At around 20 : 15 , Elbing lost her port engine due to leaks in her boiler condensers . This limited her speed to 20 kn ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) for the next four hours . 
 The II Scouting Group , along with the battlecruisers Seydlitz and Moltke had been ordered to take station ahead of the German line for its night cruising formation . Elbing was still having problems with her boiler condensers , and was unable to keep up the speed necessary to reach the front of the line , and so she fell in with the IV Scouting Group . At 23 : 15 , Elbing and Hamburg spotted the British cruiser Castor and several destroyers . They used the British recognition signal and closed to 1 @,@ 100 yards ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) before turning on their searchlights and opening fire . Castor was hit seven times and set on fire , forcing the British to turn away . As they did , they fired several torpedoes at Elbing and Hamburg . One passed underneath Elbing but failed to explode . While this engagement was still on @-@ going , the 2nd Light Cruiser Squadron arrived and engaged the IV Scouting Group . Elbing was hit once , which destroyed her wireless transmitting station and killed four men and wounded twelve . 
 Shortly after midnight , the German fleet ran into the British rear destroyer screen . Elbing was by this time steaming on the port side of the German line along with Hamburg and Rostock . The dreadnought Westfalen — the first ship in the German line — opened fire first , followed quickly by Elbing , the other two cruisers , and the battleships Nassau and Rheinland . The British destroyers launched a torpedo attack , which forced the three cruisers to turn to starboard to avoid them . This pointed the cruisers directly at the German line . Elbing attempted to steam between Nassau and Posen , but Posen 's captain wasn 't aware of the movement until it was too late to avoid a collision . Posen turned hard to starboard , but still collided with Elbing 's starboard quarter . The cruiser was holed below the waterline , which flooded the starboard engine room first . She initially took on a list of eighteen degrees , which allowed water to spread to the port engine room . With the engines shut down , steam began to condense in the pipes , which disabled the electric generators and caused the ship to lose electrical power . As water spread throughout the ship 's engine compartments , the list was reduced . The ship was completely immobilized , though she was not in danger of sinking . 
 At 02 : 00 , the torpedo boat <unk> came alongside and took off 477 officers and men of Elbing 's crew . Her commander and a small group of officers and men remained on board . They rigged an improvised sail in an attempt to bring the ship closer to shore , but at around 03 : 00 , British destroyers were spotted to the south and the order to scuttle the ship was given . They then lowered the ship 's cutter into the water and set off ; while steaming back to port , they rescued the surgeon from the destroyer HMS Tipperary . At around 07 : 00 , a Dutch trawler met the cutter and took the men to Holland . In the course of the Battle of Jutland , Elbing had fired 230 rounds of 15 cm ammunition and a single torpedo . Four of her crew were killed and twelve more were wounded . 
 = Ralph Basset = 
 Ralph Basset ( sometimes Bassett ; died c . 1127 ) was a medieval English royal justice during the reign of King Henry I of England . He was a native of Normandy , and may have come to Henry 's notice while Henry held land in Normandy prior to becoming king . Basset is first mentioned in documents about 1102 , and from then until his death around 1127 , he was frequently employed as a royal justice . His son Richard Basset also became a royal judge . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Basset was a native of Montreuil @-@ au @-@ <unk> near Domfront in Normandy , and possibly came to the notice of King Henry while Henry was count of Domfort during the reign of Henry 's older brother King William II of England ( 1087 – 1100 ) . Either Basset himself or an earlier person with the same name held lands of Robert d 'Oilly that were recorded in Domesday Book as in Buckinghamshire and Hertfordshire . If the Ralph in Domesday was not the same as the judge , the Domesday Ralph may have been the judge 's father . Other <unk> in the area were also recorded in Domesday , including a Wiliam and a Richard . It is not clear how or if they were related to Ralph . Ralph the judge held lands in Montreuil that in 1150 were considered to be worth two English manors . He held lands in Wallingford and Colston Basset . The lands in Wallingford were worth 16 and a third knight 's fees . 
