 During the second half of the 16th century , Europeans ' interest in the New World revolved around gold and silver and not tobacco . The European lack of interest in tobacco was due to the fact that the Amerindians controlled the tobacco industry ; as long as the Amerindians controlled the supply there was no need for the incorporation in European commercial capitalism . 
 The trading of tobacco was a new commodity and was in high popular demand in the 17th century due to the rise of the plantations . Tobacco began to be used a monetary standard , which is why the term " cash crop " was originated . The first export of tobacco from the then @-@ colonies of the United States ( specifically Virginia ) to London showed fortunes in the English enterprise and by 1627 , the Virginia tobacco was being shipped to London at 500 @,@ 000 pounds a shipment . By 1637 , tobacco had become the colony 's currency and by 1639 Maryland was exporting 100 @,@ 000 pounds of tobacco to London . English success with the production of tobacco caught the attention of many Europeans , specifically those colonized on Martinique and Guadeloupe , French islands . These islands soon became wealthy due to the tobacco production and by 1671 roughly one @-@ third of the acreage devoted to the cash crops grown for the islands were for tobacco . While the cultivation of tobacco thrived , production saw severe depressions in later years due to the profits made from sugar . According to an account of the Barbadian exports 82 percent of the island 's export value was due to sugar and less than one percent was accounted for by tobacco . 
 = = = = Sugar cane = = = = 
 Another commodity that was a prominent source of trade was the production of sugar from the crop sugar cane . The original habitat of sugar was in India , where it was taken and planted in various islands . Once reaching to the people of the Iberian Peninsula , it was further migrated across the Atlantic Ocean . In the 16th century , the first plantations of sugar were started in the New World , marking the last great stage of migration of the cane to the West . Because of the conflict of transporting sugar in its raw form , sugar was not associated with commerce until the act of refining it came into play ; this act became the center for industry . Venice was the center for refining during the Middle Ages , therefore making them the chief traders of sugar . Although , the Spanish and Portuguese held the monopolies of the sugar cane fields in America , they were being supplied by Venice . In the 17th century , England dominated Venice and became the center for refining and cultivating sugar ; this leadership was maintained until the rise of French industry . Sugar throughout the 17th century was still considered a luxury until the latter half of the 17th century when the sugar was being produced in mass quantities making it available to the mass of the English people . This turn of events made the sugar a commodity , because the crop was not being used in only special occasion , but in all daily meals . 
 = = Hostilities , war , and imperialism = = 
 Proto @-@ globalization differed from modern globalization in the practices of expansionism , methods of managing global trade , finances , as well as commercial innovation . With the shift of expansionism by large nations to Western Europe , nations began competing in an effort to achieve world domination . The rise of larger @-@ scale conflicts between these powerful nations over expanding their wealth led to nations taking control over one another ’ s territory and then moving products and the accumulated wealth of these conquered regions back to the sovereign country . Although conflicts occurred throughout the world between 1600 and 1800 , European powers found themselves far more equipped to handle the pressures of war . A quote by Christopher Alan Bayly gives a better interpretation of these advantages by stating , " Europeans became much better at killing people . The savage European ideological wars of the 17th century had created links between war , finance , and commercial innovation which extended all these gains . It gave the Continent a brute advantage in world conflicts which broke out in the 18th century . Western European warfare was peculiarly complicated and expensive , partly because it was amphibious . " These battle @-@ tested nations fought for their own needs , but in reality their success increased European advancement in the global market . Each of the following sections will shed light on the history of several key engagements . Whether a war was religious or commercial , its impact was greatly felt throughout the world . British victories during the Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars led to their dominance in commercial shipping and naval power . The stage was set for future conflicts between Britain and foreign nations , as well as domestic frustration with “ the motherland ” on the North American continent . The French and Indian War , fought between the European powers of France and England , led to a British victory and resulted in continued dominance in maritime enterprise . The American Revolutionary War marked the beginning of the power shift for control over foreign markets . 
 = = = English Civil War = = = 
 The English Civil War was a battle over not only religious and political beliefs , but also economic and social as well . This war was between Parliamentarians and Royalists and took place from 1642 to 1651 , but was broken into several separate engagements . Charles I and his supporters experienced the first two periods of the war , which resulted in King Charles I dissolving Parliament , which would not be called into session again for over ten years . Reasons for this dismissal were because supporters of Long Parliament tried to install two resolutions into English law . One called for consequences against individuals that taxed without the consent of Parliament and labeled them as enemies of England , while the other stated that innovations in religion would result in the same tag . Each of these policies was aimed at Charles I , in that he was inferior leader as well as a supporter of Catholicism . This prompted the Puritan Revolt and eventually led to the trial and execution of Charles I for treason . The final stage of the English Civil War came in 1649 , and lasted until 1651 . This time , King Charles II , the son of Charles I led supporters against Parliament . The Battle of Worcester , which took place in 1651 , marked the end of the English Civil War . Charles II and other royalist forces were defeated by Parliamentarians and their leader Oliver Cromwell . This war began to take England in different directions regarding religious and political beliefs as well as economic and social . Also , the war constitutionally established that no British monarch was permitted to rule without first having been approved by Parliament . 
 = = = Anglo @-@ Dutch War = = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Dutch War was a naval conflict between England and the Dutch Republic from 1652 to 1654 and was over the competition in commercial maritime and was focused mainly in the East Indies . The first Navigation Act , which forbade the import of goods unless they were transported either in English vessels or by vessels from the country of origin . This was a policy aimed against the Dutch , and fighting broke out on May 19 , 1652 with a small skirmish between Dutch and English fleets . The War officially began in July and fighting continued for two years . The Battle of Scheveningen which is also referred to as Texel was the end of serious fighting in the war and took place in July 1653 . The Treaty of Westminster was signed in April 1654 ending the war and obligated the Dutch Republic to respect the Navigation Act as well as compensate England for the war . 
 = = = French and Indian War = = = 
 The French and Indian War was between the nations of Great Britain and France , along with the numerous Native American Nations allied with both . The French and Indian war was the North American theater of the Seven Years ' War being fought in Europe at the time . Growing population in British territory throughout North America forced expansion west ; however , this was met with resistance from the French and their Native American allies . French forces began entering British territory , building numerous forts in preparation to defend the newly acquired land . The beginning of the war favored the French and their Native American allies , who were able to defeat British forces time and again , and it was not until 1756 that the British were able to hold off their opposition . Pittsburgh was a center for fighting during the French and Indian War , namely because of the geographical location at the center where three rivers unite : the Allegheny , the Monongahela and the Ohio . The location of present @-@ day Pittsburgh provided an advantage in naval control . Ownership of this point provided not only naval dominance , but it also expanded economic ventures , enabling shipments to be sent and received with relative ease . French and British forces both claimed ownership to this region ; the French installing Fort Duquesne and the British with Fort Pitt . Fort Pitt was established in 1758 after French forces abandoned and destroyed Fort Duquesne . The French and Indian War came to an end in 1763 , after British forces were able to secure Quebec and Montreal from the French and on February 10 , the Treaty of Paris was signed . The French were forced to surrender their territory in North America , giving England control all the way to the Mississippi River . The effects of this war were heavily felt in the North American British colonies . England imposed many taxes on colonists in order to control the newly acquired territory . These tensions would soon culminate into a war for independence as well as a shift in power for dominance in the economic world . 
 = = = American Revolutionary War = = = 
 The American Revolutionary War was a war between the nation of England and the 13 colonies in the North American continent . This war lasted from 1775 to 1783 and began with the Battle of Bunker Hill , where over 1 @,@ 150 British soldiers were killed or wounded . This equated to almost half of the entire British army that were present at the engagement . American casualties were far less severe , totaling an estimated at 450 killed and wounded . The British , however , were able to take the ground and push the newly formed Continental Army back to the city of Boston , which also soon fell to British forces . Before the Battle of Bunker Hill , the Battles of Lexington and Concord in April , 1775 , saw British troops begin their assault into the American colonies . British troops were searching for colonist supply depots , however , were met by heavy resistance and the British forces were turned around at Concord by outnumbering Minutemen forces . On July 4 , 1776 the Declaration of Independence was signed by the Second Continental Congress and officially declared the colonies of North America to be a sovereign nation , free from England ’ s rule . Also , the Congress permitted funding for a Continental Army , which is the first instance of an American political body handling military affairs . The British were dominating in the beginning of the war , holding off Continental regulars and militia and gaining vast amounts of territory throughout North America . However , the tide began to turn for the colonists in 1777 with their first major victory over British forces at the Battle of Saratoga . Victory for the rest of the war pushed back and forth between the British and colonists , but the alliance with France in 1778 by the American colonists leveled the playing field and aided in the final push for the defeat of the British Army and Navy . In 1781 , American and French forces were able to trap the escaping southern British Army at Yorktown , thus ending the major fighting of the Revolution . The Treaty of Paris was signed in 1783 , and recognized the American colonies as an independent nation . The newly formed United States would undergo numerous transitions to becoming one of the top economic and military powers in the world . 
 = = Treaties and agreements = = 
 Much of the trading during the proto @-@ globalization time period was regulated by Europe . Globalization from an economic standpoint relied on the East India Company . The East India Company was a number of enterprises formed in western Europe in the 17th and 18th centuries , initially created to further trade in the East Indies . The company controlled trading from India to East and Southeast Asia . 
 One of the key contributors to globalization was the Triangular Trade and how it connected the world . The Triangular Trade or Triangle Trade was a system used to connect three areas of the world through trade . Once traded , items and goods were shipped to other parts of the world , making the triangle trade a key to global trade . The Triangle Trade system was run by Europeans , increasing their global power . 
 Europeans would sail to the West African coast and trade African kings manufactured goods ( rifles and ammunition ) for slave . From there slaves would be sent to the West Indies or the east coast of North America to be used for labor . Goods such as cotton , molasses , sugar , tobacco would be sent from these places back to Europe . Europe would also use their goods and trade with Asian countries for tea , cloth and spices . The triangle trade in a sense was an agreement for established trade routes , that led to greater global integration , which ultimately contributed to globalization . 
 Along with the control Europe gained , as far as global trade , came several treaties and laws . In 1773 , the Regulating Act was passed , regulating affairs of the company in India and London . In 1748 , the Treaty of Aix @-@ la @-@ Chapelle ended the War of the Austrian Succession , but failed to settle the commercial struggle between England and France in the West Indies , Africa and India . The treaty was an attempt at regulating trade and market expansion between the two regions , but was ultimately unsuccessful . 
 Globalization at this time was hindered by war , diseases and population growth in certain areas . The Corn Laws were established to regulate imports and exports of grains in England , thus restricting trade and the expansion of globalization . The Corn Crop Laws hindered the market economy and globalization based on tariffs and import restrictions . Eventually , the Ricardian theory of economics became prominent and allowed for improved trade regulations , specifically with Portugal . 
 = = Transition into modern globalization = = 
 According to Sebastian Conrad , proto @-@ globalization is marked with a “ rise of national chauvinism , racism , Social Darwinism , and genocidal thinking ” which came to be with relations to the “ establishment of a world economy ” . Beginning in the 1870s , the global trade cycle started to cement itself so that more nations ' economies depended on one another than in any previous era . Domino effects in this new world trade cycle lead to both worldwide recessions and world economic booms . <unk> describes the late period of proto @-@ globalization as a " thick range of global networks extending throughout the world at high speed and covering all components of society " . By the 1750s , Europe , Africa , Asia , and America 's contact had grown into a stable multilateral interdependency which was echoed in the modern globalization period . 
 = = = Shift in capital = = = 
 Although the North Atlantic World dominated the global system before proto @-@ globalization , a more " <unk> global economy " started taking form around the early 19th century , and capital was becoming highly mobile . By the end of the 19th century , British capital wealth was 17 % overseas , and the level of capital invested overseas nearly doubled by 1913 to 33 % . Germany invested one @-@ fifth of their total domestic savings in 1880 , and , like Britain , increased their wealth tremendously in the early 20th century . The net foreign investment of total domestic savings abroad was 35 % in 1860 , 47 % in 1880 , and 53 % in the years prior to the Great War . Global investments were taking a steady rise throughout societies , and those able to invest thrust more and more of their domestic savings into international investments . 
 The ability to mobilize capital was due to the development of the Industrial Revolution and the beginnings of mechanical production ( most prominent in Great Britain ) . During proto @-@ globalization , " merchant capitalists in many societies quickly became aware of potential markets and new producers and began to link them together in new patterns of world trade . The expansion of the slave production and the exploitation of the Americas put Europeans on the top of the economic network . During the modern globalization period , mass production allowed the development of a stronger , more complex global network of trade . Another element of European success between 1750 and 1850 was the limitation and " relative ' failure ' " of the Afro @-@ Asian Industrial Revolution . The movement into modern globalization was marked with the economic drain of capital into Europe . 
 = = = Shift in culture = = = 
 Like capital , the end of proto @-@ globalization was filled with mobility of individuals . The time of proto @-@ globalization was one filled with “ mutual influence , hybridization , and cross @-@ cultural entanglement ” . Many historians blame this web of national entanglements and agreements as the cause for the intensity and vast involvement during World War I. Between 1750 @-@ 1880 , the expansion of worldwide integration was influenced by the new capacities in production , transportation , and communication . The end of proto @-@ globalization also marked the final phase of " great domestication " . After the 1650s , the process of regular and intensive agrarian exploitation was complete . Human population began to increase almost exponentially with the end of the great pandemics . At the end of the proto @-@ globalization and the cusp of modern globalization , population began to " recover in Central and South America , " where at the beginning of proto @-@ globalization , European @-@ imported illnesses had savagely decreased indigenous populations . The importation of nutritious varieties from Central and South America created a more fertile and resilient population to forge ahead into modern globalization . The greater population pushed individuals in high populated areas to " spill into less populous forested and grazing lands , and bring them under cultivation " . This development lead to an influx in produce production and exported trade . 
 Another development that lead to the shift to modern globalization was the development of a more politicized system . Proto @-@ globalization period marked a steady expansion of larger states from the Indonesian islands to northern <unk> . The settlement of these individuals made it easier for governments to tax , develop an army , labor force , and create a sustainable economy . The development and streamlining of these cultural aspects lead to an increase in peripheral players in the game of globalization . The stable legal institutions developed in the late proto @-@ globalization and early modern globalization period established economic advances , intellectual property rights ( more predominantly in England ) , general geographical stability , and generational societal improvement . 
 The shift in exchange of technological advancements was another reason for modern globalization . In the early 19th century , European civilizations traveled the world to accumulate an " impressive knowledge about languages , religions , customs , and political orders of other countries . By the end of the 19th century , Europe was no longer receiving any significant technological innovations from Asia . 
 = = = Shift in global networks = = = 
 The developed global networks lead to the creation of new networks leading to new production . By 1880 , there was a renewed thrust of European colonial expansion . The shift to modern globalization was slow , overlapping and interacting . Mid @-@ 19th century , <unk> goods were exchanged between continents and markets for widely used commodities developed . Also , labor was becoming globally integrated . Modern globalization came to be as the movement of general expansion of socio @-@ economic networks became more elaborate . An example of this is the development and establishment of free masonry . The " existing trading networks grew , capital and commodity flows intensified . The permanence of long @-@ term interdependencies was unchanged . By the beginning of the modern globalization period , the European colonial expansion retreats into itself . National societies began to regret the economic integration and attempted to limit the effects . Bayly , Hopkins and others stress that proto @-@ globalization 's transformation into modern globalization was a complex process that took place at different times in different regions , and involved the hold @-@ over of older notions of value and rarity which had their origins in the pre @-@ modern period . Thus leading to the age of economic <unk> and world wars which ended after 1945 . 
 = Scary Monsters ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Scary Monsters " is the fourteenth episode of the ninth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired on the Fox network on April 14 , 2002 . It was written by Thomas Schnauz and directed by Dwight H. Little . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology , or overarching fictional history , of The X @-@ Files . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 8 @.@ 2 million viewers in its initial broadcast . It received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Special Agent Leyla Harrison ( Jolie Jenkins ) takes Reyes and Doggett on a drive into the mountains after a woman stabs herself repeatedly and her widowed husband refuses to let anyone see their son . The three soon discover that the boy 's imagination can bring killer bug @-@ like creatures to life . 
 The idea for " Scary Monsters " stemmed from an idea that became the episode 's teaser . Fellow writer Vince Gilligan suggested making Tommy the episode 's villain . Originally , the story featured Doggett and Reyes investigating the case with a new agent . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz suggested to Schnauz that the new FBI agent should be Leyla Harrison , played by Jolie Jenkins , who had first appeared in the Spotnitz @-@ penned eighth season episode " Alone " . The writing staff used Leyla 's character to comment on the state of the show and , most notably , the members of the audience who preferred Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) over Doggett . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In his room in Fairhope , Pennsylvania , Tommy Conlon ( Gavin Fink ) believes he sees a monster reflected in his mirror . He calls for his dad , Jeffrey Conlon ( Scott Paulin ) , who looks under the bed and sees a crawling bug @-@ like creature . He lies to his son and tells him to go back to sleep . Tommy sees the creature again and calls for his dad ; Jeffrey holds the door shut . 
 Meanwhile , Agent Leyla Harrison ( Jolie Jenkins ) tells Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) about a woman who stabbed herself repeatedly . Harrison insists that the case is an X @-@ File and that the woman was killed by monsters that her son Tommy saw . She also believes that the monster killed the family cat , Spanky . Although Scully dismisses Harrison 's claims , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) and Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) decide to investigate . The three arrive in Fairhope , Pennsylvania where Tommy and Jeffrey are living . The agents talk to Tommy and conclude that something is going on . They soon discover that their car will not start . Back at her apartment , Scully is visited by Gabe Rotter ( Brian <unk> ) , a potential suitor of Harrison 's . He presents Scully with the corpse of Spanky . Scully does an ad hoc necropsy and concludes that the cat bit its stomach open to try to get something out . She also discovers a cavity , where it appears something had lived inside the cat . 
 Doggett , Reyes , and Harrison camp out at the Conlon 's house and soon stumble upon the monsters that Tommy sees : insect @-@ like creatures that divide in half if shot by bullets . The local sheriff ( Steve Ryan ) arrives , alerted by Scully , but a scuffle ensues . The sheriff draws a gun , and Doggett punches him , only to have his hand go completely through the man 's chest . Upon investigation , Reyes is unable to find any organs in the man 's body . Tommy soon shows Reyes the pictures he has been drawing . They include the insect creatures , the sheriff with a gun , and Reyes with an insect creature bursting out of her stomach . 
 Suddenly , the sheriff 's body disappears , and Reyes doubles over in pain . Doggett and Harrison pull up her shirt to reveal bulges in her stomach , as if something is trying to get out . Harrison then begins to bleed from her eyes . Doggett is tricked into falling into a blackened abyss , where he is attacked by the insects , but , due to his skepticism , he is able to fight off the illusions . He explains to Jeffrey that all of the creatures are imaginary and are produced by Tommy 's imagination . This includes the bugs , as well as the " sheriff " who had no organs . Jeffrey 's wife and their cat Spanky killed themselves trying to remove the insect creatures , believing they were real . 
 Doggett manages to trick and subdue Tommy — by pretending to set the house on fire — and Tommy is transported to a psychiatric ward , where his imagination is stifled by watching several televisions all at the same time . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Scary Monsters " was written by Thomas Schnauz , who had previously penned the ninth season episode " Lord of the Flies " . The entry was directed by Dwight H. Little , his first and only directing credit for the series . Schnauz later admitted that his inspiration for the episode was " basically panic " . He explained that the writing staff needed to get the script done as quickly as possibly , but Schnauz only had the teaser conceived . When he went to pitch it , he even had a " whole other story that wasn 't working . " Fellow writer Vince Gilligan suggested that <unk> make the child the root of the all of the episode 's problems . However , the writing staff did not want the story to develop into a " kid @-@ in @-@ the @-@ cornfield " territory , according to Gilligan — a reference to a 1961 episode of The Twilight Zone wherein a monster @-@ child can control the world through his mental powers . Eventually , when the writers began to piece the script together , they realized that they needed a villain , and the only character that could play the part would be Tommy . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Schnauz 's original story featured Doggett and Reyes investigating the case with a new agent . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz suggested to Schnauz that the new FBI agent should be Leyla Harrison , played by Jolie Jenkins . Harrison had first appeared in the Spotnitz @-@ penned eighth season episode " Alone " . Jenkins ' character was created and named in memory of a The X @-@ Files internet fan and prolific writer of fan fiction of the same name , who had died of cancer on February 10 , 2001 . Jenkins ' characterization , according to Spotnitz , brought out the " Clint [ Eastwood ] " in Robert Patrick 's character John Doggett and her performance was called " near perfection " by Spotnitz during the audio commentary for " Alone " . Near the end of " Scary Monsters " , Leyla and Gabe Rotter were supposed to walk off @-@ screen , holding hands , which prompted series director Kim Manners to sardonically ask " when did this turn into the fucking Brady Bunch ? " The sequence was subsequently cut . 
 The writing staff used Leyla 's character to comment on the state of the show and , most notably , the members of the audience who preferred Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) over Doggett . Due to Harrison 's extensive knowledge of the X @-@ Files , the episode contains several references to previous episodes . Harrison suggests early on that Doggett and Reyes may be dealing with a person capable of channeling electricity , a reference to the third season entry " D.P.O. " Doggett later suggests that the three of them may be experiencing some sort of hallucination , and cites the events in the sixth season episode " Field Trip " as an example . Furthermore , when Tommy shows Reyes his drawing , he tells her " I made this " , a potential reference to the tagline at the end of every Ten Thirteen Production . 
 During the filming of the episode , The X @-@ Files was canceled by the Fox network , meaning that the show would not return for a tenth season . Robert Patrick explained that series creator Chris Carter watched him film a scene — an act which he had reportedly not done since Patrick had been hired in 2000 — and then informed him of the show 's cancellation . Patrick noted that Fox 's new show 24 was being heavily promoted instead of The X @-@ Files , an act which he felt was like being " abandoned by Fox " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Scary Monsters " originally aired in the United States on the Fox network on April 14 , 2002 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on February 16 , 2003 . The episode 's initial broadcast was viewed by approximately 5 @.@ 4 million households and 8 @.@ 2 million viewers , making it the fifty @-@ seventh most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending January 27 . " Scary Monsters " earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . Jessica Morgan from Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " C – " grade . John Keegan from Critical Myth gave the episode a largely positive review and awarded it an 8 out of 10 . He wrote , " Overall , this was a very enjoyable and balanced episode . It gave us the scares , the humor , and the layered commentary that we had come to expect from the series . With only five episodes to go , it ’ s the perfect time for 1013 to be giving the series a good bit of resolution , even if it ’ s more metaphorical than actual . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five . The two enjoyed Schnauz 's script , calling it " better than most " of season nine 's episodes , and noted that he wrote it with " pace and wit " . They noted , however , that the entry 's self @-@ references " feel like carping [ … ] at the audience who are still left to complain . " Despite this , Shearman and Pearson also positively critiqued several of the episode 's juxtapositions , such as the scene featuring Scully performing an autopsy on a cat while wearing a kitchen apron that says " something smells <unk> " , calling them " the funniest of the season " . M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , called the episode a " solid little entry " , saying that it was a " nice spin on the isolation stories that the series has always done so effectively " . 
 = Music of the Front Mission series = 
 Front Mission is a series of tactical role @-@ playing games produced by Square Enix ( originally Square ) . The music of the series includes the soundtracks to the main series , composed of Front Mission through Front Mission 5 : Scars of the War , as well as the spin @-@ off games , which include Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard , Front Mission Alternative , Front Mission : Online , Front Mission 2089 and its remake Front Mission 2089 : Border of Madness , Front Mission 2089 @-@ II , and Front Mission Evolved . The soundtracks of the series ' installments have been released in album form in Japan , with the exceptions of 2089 , 2089 @-@ II , and Border of Madness , which reuse music from the other installments , and Evolved , which was published in 2010 . The soundtrack to Front Mission was released in 1995 by NTT Publishing , which also published the soundtrack to Front Mission : Gun Hazard in 1996 . DigiCube published soundtrack albums for Front Mission 2 and Alternative in 1997 and 3 in 1999 . Square Enix published the albums for Front Mission 4 in 2004 , and 5 and Online in 2006 . 
 The soundtracks of the series have been warmly reviewed by critics , especially those of the main series and Gun Hazard . The music of Alternative and Online was less well received . The music of the series typically includes a fusion of electronic and orchestral music , though each game and composer in the series has taken the music in different directions . The composers for the series have included Yoko Shimomura , Noriko Matsueda , Koji Hayama , Hayato Matsuo , Hidenori Iwasaki , and Garry Schyman . A box set of music from across the series is currently planned , but has not yet been formally announced or given a release date . 
 = = Main series = = 
 = = = Front Mission = = = 
 Front Mission Original Sound Version is a soundtrack album which contains music from Front Mission , the first game in the series . The tracks were composed by Yoko Shimomura and Noriko Matsueda ; Shimomura penned the action themes while Matsueda handled the calmer tracks . The game was the first soundtrack that Matsueda had composed . Shimomura , a veteran of over a dozen games , was already at the time busy composing the soundtrack for Super Mario RPG but found herself unable to refuse to work on Front Mission after being asked by Sakaguchi to co @-@ compose the music . Shimomura feels that the soundtrack turned out to be very " passionate " due to the two composers ' motivation . The album has been described as containing a mix of techno and smooth jazz . The album was published by NTT Publishing on February 25 , 1995 with the catalog number PSCN @-@ <unk> , and was reprinted on October 1 , 2004 with the catalog number NTCP @-@ <unk> . The album contains 42 tracks and covers a duration of 1 : 08 : 17 . 
 The album was well received by critics such as Daniel Kalabakov of RPGFan , who claimed that it was his favorite Super Nintendo Entertainment System @-@ era Square soundtrack , primarily due to the mixture of techno and jazz . He preferred Shimomura 's techno tracks , but enjoyed the way the two styles mixed together . Kero Hazel of Square Enix Music Online similarly praised the mix of the two styles , though he criticized the sound quality of the album and stated that the album would have been improved by using real instruments rather than synthesized ones . 
 In 2003 , Front Mission was re @-@ released for the PlayStation as Front Mission 1st , and a corresponding promotional sound track album was released as Front Mission 1st Special BGM Selection . The nine @-@ track album contains eight tracks by Shimomura and Matsueda , arranged by Hidenori Iwasaki , and one new track by Iwasaki out of the five he composed for the remake . It was published by Square Enix on October 23 , 2003 with the catalog number <unk> @-@ DA , and has a total length of 18 : 25 . Patrick Gann of RPGFan described the album as a good sampler for the full soundtrack , and claimed that it had slightly better sound quality . He also felt that the new track was a good addition to the rest . Dave of Square Enix Music Online agreed with these praises , though he felt that the large amount of overlap between the promotional disc and the full soundtrack made its purchase not worthwhile . 
 Track list 
 = = = Front Mission 2 = = = 
 The soundtrack of Front Mission 2 , the second game of the main series and the third game released after Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard , was composed by Noriko Matsueda . It was her second solo video game soundtrack , after Bahamut Lagoon , and the fourth soundtrack she had worked on . The music of the game differs from that of its prequel in that it " incorporates an atmospheric , airy sound " , and does not include pieces like Shimomura 's techno tracks from the first game . An album of music from the game , titled Front Mission 2 Original Soundtrack , was released by DigiCube on September 21 , 1997 . The 43 @-@ track , 1 : 15 : 45 @-@ long album has a catalog number of SSCX @-@ <unk> , and a limited edition of the soundtrack was also released . 
 The album was well received by critics . A reviewer from RPGFan termed it an " excellent soundtrack " that kept the feel of the first game . Kero Hazel of Square Enix Music Online felt similarly about the album . They noted that the soundtrack had enough thematic ties to the first game 's music to connect the two games without losing originality , and concluded that it was superior to the already good Front Mission soundtrack . 
 = = = Front Mission 3 = = = 
 The soundtrack of Front Mission 3 , the third game of the main series and the fifth game of the total series , was composed by Koji Hayama and Hayato Matsuo , with one track contributed by Shigeki . Matsuo handled the orchestral pieces , while Hayama worked on the techno ones . The pieces were performed with synthesizers that were designed to sound like higher @-@ quality versions of the types of sounds used in the original Front Mission , rather than sounding more like the actual instruments they represented . Hayama worked for Square as an in @-@ house composer prior to the game , and was the one who invited Matsuo , who was an independent composer , to meet the sound team and work on the game . An album of music from the game , titled Front Mission 3 Original Soundtrack , was released by DigiCube on September 22 , 1999 . The two @-@ disc album has 47 tracks , is 2 : 30 : 00 long , and has a catalog number of SSCX @-@ <unk> . 
 The album was well received by critics such as Kero Hazel of Square Enix Music Online , who noted that the synthesizer effects tied the music back stylistically to that of the original game , and applauded the contributions by both composers . A reviewer from RPGFan agreed , though he was more impressed with Hayama 's pieces than those of Matsuo . 
 Track list 
 = = = Front Mission 4 = = = 
 The soundtrack of Front Mission 4 , the fourth game of the main series and the sixth game overall , was composed by Hidenori Iwasaki , with some tracks contributed by Ryo Yamazaki . The game was Iwasaki 's first as a composer , as he had previously only worked as a synthesizer programmer . The music has been described as very different from the " very abstract and heavy " music of the previous game , and much more similar to the music of the first game with an emphasis on melody as well as light and thematic elements . The soundtrack also incorporates " South American " -style elements , with the use of pan flutes and tribal percussion . The music from the game was bundled with music from the remake of the first , Front Mission 1st , and the album was titled Front Mission 4 plus 1st Original Soundtrack . It was released by Square Enix on May 10 , 2004 . The four @-@ disc album has two discs devoted to each game , and has 97 tracks . It is 3 : 24 : 24 long , and has catalog numbers of SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 4 . 
 The album was well received by Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan . Preferring the Front Mission 4 tracks to the 1st tracks , he complimented the album as " impressive " , especially given that it was the " first work of a promising new composer " . While he did not feel that all of the tracks were of consistent quality , he said that none of them were " bad " and that the more " atmospheric " tracks stood out as particularly noteworthy . Reviewers from Square Enix Music Online had similar praises and criticisms , calling it " not the most diverse or consistent of Front Mission scores " but still " highly worthy " ; they also noted the atmospheric tracks as worthy of note . 
 Track list 
 = = = Front Mission 5 = = = 
 The soundtrack of Front Mission 5 : Scars of the War , the sixth game of the main series and the ninth game overall , was composed by Hidenori Iwasaki and Kenichiro Fukui , with one track each provided by Hayato Matsuo , Yasuhiro Yamanaka and Masayoshi Soken . The music has been described as a mixture of " standard orchestral elements , with an emphasis on brass and <unk> , and electronic elements , such as synthesized percussion and techno @-@ styled beats " . The music differed from that of the previous game in its inclusion of tracks that were solely electronic , rather than a mixture of techno and orchestral . The music from the game was released on an album was titled Front Mission 5 ~ Scars of the War ~ Original Soundtrack . It was released by Square Enix on January 25 , 2006 . The three @-@ disc album has 71 tracks , is 2 : 43 : 07 long , and has catalog numbers of SQEX @-@ <unk> ~ 7 . 
 The album was very well received by reviewers such as Ben Schweitzer , who termed it " everything I could have hoped for " . He felt that the soundtrack represented Iwasaki 's maturation as a composer , especially in regards to the more action @-@ based tracks . He concluded that the soundtrack was " superior " to that of Front Mission 4 , and that it was also quite different from most video game soundtracks in regards to instrumentation and style . Square Enix Music Online also noted the improvement between Front Mission 4 and 5 , and declared that , despite Iwasaki 's skill with atmospheric tracks , that the battle tracks were the best of the album . 
 Track list 
 = = Spinoffs = = 
 = = = Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard = = = 
 Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard was the first spin @-@ off game in the series , and the second game released overall . Its soundtrack was composed by Nobuo Uematsu and Yasunori Mitsuda , with additional tracks provided by Junya Nakano and Masashi Hamauzu . The soundtrack was the second collaboration between Nobuo Uematsu and Yasunori Mitsuda , after Chrono Trigger . According to Uematsu , Mitsuda worked so much on the soundtrack that he eventually had to be hospitalized . The soundtrack has a " mechanical " theme to its music , and incorporates both electronic and traditional instruments . The music from the game was released on an album titled Front Mission Series : Gun Hazard Original Sound Track . It was released by NTT Publishing on February 25 , 1996 . The two @-@ disc album has 60 tracks , is 2 : 30 : 25 long , and has catalog numbers of PSCN @-@ <unk> ~ 5 . 
 Kero Hazel of Square Enix Music Online called the soundtrack album " a thumping example of fine industrial music " and complimented its use of other musical styles to influence that core style . Patrick Gann of RPGFan also praised the album as " downright awesome " and highly recommended it . 
 Track list 
 = = = Front Mission Alternative = = = 
 Front Mission Alternative was the second spin @-@ off game in the series , and the fourth game released overall . Its soundtrack was composed by <unk> Arai . Arai was a " mainstream dance musician " , who had previously composed the soundtrack for Sega Touring Car Championship . For the game , which unlike previous ones in the series was a real @-@ time strategy game , Arai composed a techno soundtrack . The music has been described as " drastically different from the rest of the series " . The soundtrack was released on the Front Mission Alternative album by DigiCube on November 21 , 1997 , and was reprinted by Square Enix on November 22 , 2006 . The album has 16 tracks , is 1 : 12 : 39 long , and has the catalog number of SSCX @-@ 10010 in its first issuance and SQEX @-@ <unk> for its second . The soundtrack album release was preceded by a promotional vinyl release in July 1997 with the catalog number of SSCX @-@ <unk> , containing six tracks from the game . 
 The album was poorly received by Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online , who called it a largely unsuccessful experiment due to its " repetitiveness and inappropriateness " . He felt that several of the tracks went on for far too long without any change , and that the music did not fit the game due to Square not providing feedback to Arai about how the tracks were to be used . Greg Kasavin of GameSpot , in his review of the game , called the soundtrack " a bunch of dizzying techno that doesn 't suit the onscreen grandeur " . 
 = = = Front Mission : Online = = = 
 Front Mission : Online was the third spin @-@ off game in the series , and the eighth game released overall . Its soundtrack was primarily composed of arrangements of music from prior games in the series , though a few original tracks were composed by Hidenori Iwasaki . The arranged music covered every prior game with the exception of Gun Hazard , and was arranged by Iwasaki from the compositions of Iwasaki , Hayato Matsuo , Yoko Shimomura , Noriko Matsueda , Ryo Yamazaki , and <unk> Arai . The music was published as a 35 @-@ track album by Square Enix on September 20 , 2006 . The 1 : 13 : 19 album has a catalog number of SQEX @-@ <unk> . 
 Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online gave the album a poor review , calling it " a mediocre effort " . He found the majority of the arrangements to be lackluster and unimaginative . Ben Schweitzer of RPGFan , however , was less harsh in his review of the album , calling it " a positive look at the entire series " and saying that the majority of it was good , though the original tracks were not particularly strong . 
 = = = Front Mission Evolved = = = 
 Front Mission Evolved was the fourth spin @-@ off game in the series , and the eleventh game released overall . It was composed by Garry Schyman , the first non @-@ Japanese composer for the series or any other major Square Enix series . He was brought onto the project by Double Helix Games , who developed the game for Square Enix . Garry Schyman describes the music as " orchestral and mostly tonal " with a heavy militaristic theme ; almost all of the music is combat or action @-@ themed . The music is more traditionally orchestral than previous Front Mission soundtracks , and was recorded with a live orchestra . As Square Enix intended the game and its music to be a departure from previous games in the series , Schyman purposely did not listen to any of the music from prior games . 
 The soundtrack is not planned to be released as a physical album , though it is also planned to be included in a box release of music from the entire series . A sampler album of music from missions 01 to 05 from the game 's single player campaign was released by Square Enix on the iTunes and Mora music stores on September 30 , 2010 , under the title Front Mission Evolved Original Soundtrack / Mission 01 to 05 . This digital album contains 14 tracks and has a length of 23 : 47 . The final track is a bonus tune done by DJ Kaya , " Military Tune / α ： <unk> " . 
 = = Other games and legacy = = 
 The other games in the series are the cell phone games Front Mission 2089 and Front Mission 2089 @-@ II , and the Nintendo DS remake of 2089 , Front Mission 2089 : Border of Madness . 2089 , 2089 @-@ II , and 2089 : Border of Madness did not include any new music , instead reusing music from prior games in the series . There have not been any album releases of their music . A compilation release of Front Mission music is tentatively planned to include all of the music from the series in one box set . The format of the release has not been decided , nor has the set itself been officially announced . In addition to the soundtrack albums , two songs composed by Shimomura from Front Mission , " Take the Offensive " and " Manifold Irons " , were orchestrated for her Drammatica : The Very Best of Yoko Shimomura album . 
 = F.C. United of Manchester = 
 F.C. United of Manchester is a semi @-@ professional football club based in Moston , Manchester , England . The club competes in the National League North , the sixth tier of the English football league system , and play their home matches at Broadhurst Park . 
 Founded in 2005 by Manchester United supporters opposed to American businessman Malcolm Glazer 's takeover of that club , F.C. United entered the North West Counties Football League Division Two in their inaugural season . They achieved three consecutive promotions in the first three years of their existence and were promoted for a fourth time to compete in the National League North for the 2015 – 16 season . In cup competitions , F.C. United reached the second round of the FA Cup during the 2010 – 11 season and the fourth round of the FA Trophy during the 2014 – 15 season . 
 After sharing multiple stadia across Greater Manchester between 2005 and 2015 , F.C. United opened their own ground , Broadhurst Park in north @-@ east Manchester , in May 2015 . The team has been managed by former professional footballer Karl <unk> since its formation . The club 's regular kit colours are red shirts , white shorts and black socks . Their badge is based on the Manchester coat of arms and features a ship at sea and three stripes for the three rivers that flow through Manchester . 
 F.C. United are the largest fan @-@ owned football club in the United Kingdom and have one of the highest home attendances in English non @-@ league football . The club is democratically run by its members who have equal voting rights and own one share in the club each . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The club was founded in 2005 by disaffected supporters of Manchester United . Although fans had various reasons for dissatisfaction , the catalyst for F.C. United 's formation was the 12 May 2005 takeover of Manchester United by American businessman Malcolm Glazer . Supporters first considered forming a breakaway club in 1998 during an attempted takeover of Manchester United by BSkyB . The creation of F.C. United in the event of a Glazer buyout was first proposed in February 2005 by Manchester United fanzine Red Issue . 
 Public meetings for fans were held on 19 May 2005 at the Central Methodist Hall in Manchester 's Northern Quarter and on 30 May at the Apollo Theatre . Subsequently , a steering group was created to set up the new club . After the name " F.C. United " was rejected by The Football Association for being too generic , all those who had pledged money to the club were asked to vote on a name . On 14 June 2005 , it was announced that " F.C. United of Manchester " had been chosen , beating " A.F.C. Manchester 1878 " , " Manchester Central " and " Newton Heath United " , and F.C. United were officially registered with the Manchester County Football Association on the same day . 
 Karl <unk> was appointed as the club 's manager on 22 June , and the club held trials for players four days later . Around 900 players applied to take part in the trials , of whom 200 were chosen to take part and 17 selected to play for F.C. United . Jonathan Mitten , great @-@ nephew of Manchester United forward Charlie Mitten , was the club 's first signing . 
 F.C. United 's inaugural members ' meeting was held on 5 July 2005 at the Methodist Central Hall ; members voted on the club 's constitution , badge , core principles and elected the 11 @-@ member board . By 6 July , over 4 @,@ 000 people had pledged money to F.C. United and the club had over £ 100 @,@ 000 in the bank . During F.C. United 's formation , the owners of Leigh RMI offered to merge the two clubs , but the parties decided against the idea . F.C. United later arranged to play their first ever game against Leigh RMI on 16 July 2005 ; the match ended 0 – 0 . 
 = = = North West Counties years ( 2005 – 07 ) = = = 
 For the 2005 – 06 season , F.C. United were admitted to the second division of the North West Counties Football League ( NWCFL ) — level ten of the English football league system , nine levels below the Premier League . The club arranged to play its home matches at Bury 's Gigg Lane . F.C. United were ineligible to play in the FA Vase for their first season as the club was formed after the deadline to enter the competition ; they were , however , able to play in the North West Counties League Challenge Cup . 
 F.C. United 's first competitive match was a 5 – 2 away victory over Leek <unk> on 13 August 2005 , and the club made their home debut at Gigg Lane on 20 August against Padiham ; they won 3 – 2 with two goals from Rory Patterson . During their first season , F.C. United consistently broke NWCFL attendance records ; a crowd of 6 @,@ 032 watched the team during their final home league match of the season , against Great Harwood Town , which remains an NWCFL record as of 2016 . Although losing that game 0 – 1 , the team were promoted to Division One . 
 After a successful season in the NWCFL Division One F.C. United were promoted to the Northern Premier League Division One North after beating Ramsbottom United . They secured their second successive league title with a 7 – 1 win over Atherton Laburnum Rovers on 18 April 2007 , and later completed the NWCFL league and cup double when they beat Curzon Ashton 2 – 1 in the NWCFL 's Challenge Cup final . They were eliminated from their first season in an FA competition ( the FA Vase ) after losing 2 – 3 in the last minute of extra @-@ time to Quorn in third round . 
 = = = Northern Premier League years ( 2007 – 15 ) = = = 
 In 2007 – 08 , F.C. United played in the inaugural season of the Northern Premier League ( NPL ) Division One North . They made their debut in the FA Cup that season , but lost 1 – 2 to Fleetwood Town in the first qualifying round . They advanced to the final of the 2007 – 08 NPL President 's Cup , in which they beat Radcliffe Borough 2 – 0 to pick up their fourth trophy in the three years following the club 's formation . The club finished the season second in the league , trailing champions Bradford Park Avenue by one point , and entered the play @-@ offs for the other promotion place . After beating Bamber Bridge 3 – 2 in the semi @-@ finals , F.C. United faced Skelmersdale United in the promotion play @-@ off final , coming back from a goal down to win 4 – 1 and earn their third successive promotion to play in the Northern Premier League Premier Division . 
 In 2008 – 09 , F.C. United made their debut in the FA Trophy , reaching the third qualifying round , and missed out on a play @-@ off place on the last day of the regular season . In the 2009 – 10 season , they finished 13th in the league , their lowest league position in the first five seasons , before progressing to the play @-@ offs in 2010 – 11 . They beat Bradford Park Avenue 2 – 0 in the semi @-@ finals but lost the final 0 – 1 to Colwyn Bay . Earlier that season , F.C. United reached the first round of the FA Cup for the first time , recording victories over Radcliffe Borough , Gainsborough Trinity , Norton & Stockton Ancients and Barrow to play League One side Rochdale . They defeated Rochdale 3 – 2 after a late winner from Mike Norton , and played eventual 2010 – 11 League One champions Brighton & Hove Albion in the second round . After a 1 – 1 away draw at Withdean Stadium , F.C. United lost the replay at Gigg Lane 0 – 4 , in front of their highest home attendance of 6 @,@ 731 . 
 In the 2011 – 12 season , F.C. United reached the first round of the FA Trophy for the first time after knocking out Frickley Athletic , Durham City and Altrincham . In the league , they qualified for the end of season play @-@ offs , despite finishing 6th , due to the demotion of Northwich Victoria for breaching of financial rules . They beat Chorley 2 – 0 in the play @-@ off semi @-@ final to qualify for consecutive play @-@ off finals but lost 0 – 1 to Bradford Park Avenue in the penultimate minute of extra time . 
 F.C. United finished third in the 2012 – 13 season to book a place in the play @-@ offs . They won 3 – 1 against Witton Albion in the semi @-@ final , but lost the final for the third consecutive time with a 1 – 2 defeat to Hednesford Town . The following season , the club finished second in the league but lost in the play @-@ offs in the semi @-@ finals . During the 2014 – 15 campaign , F.C. United reached the fourth round of the FA Trophy and recorded a streak of 21 league games without a loss from December to April , including 16 victories . They secured their promotion to the National League North following a 1 – 0 win against Stourbridge on 21 April 2015 ; after seven years of trying . The club 's top scorer for this championship winning season was Tom Greaves , the same player who scored the winning goal for Bradford Park Avenue against F.C. United in the 2012 play @-@ off final . 
 = = = National League years ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 F.C. United recorded their first victory in the National League North in a 3 – 2 home win over Brackley Town on 22 August 2015 , which was the club 's first competitive win at Broadhurst Park . In October , for the second time in the club 's history , they secured a place in the first round of the FA Cup with a 3 – 1 away win over Sporting Khalsa , but were eliminated from the competition after a 1 – 4 home loss against Chesterfield . In November , the club ended their cup run for the 2015 – 16 season after two successive home defeats to Stalybridge Celtic 3 – 4 in the Manchester Premier Cup and to A.F.C. Telford United 1 – 2 in the FA Trophy . Between September and November 2015 , F.C. United lost seven consecutive league matches ; their worst run ever as of April 2016 . They eventually finished the season in 13th place . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 F.C. United 's club colours are red , white and black — the same colours worn by Manchester United . The shirt bears no sponsorship logo , as it was written into the club 's constitution that the club should not have a shirt sponsor . The club 's first kit was a plain red shirt , white shorts and plain black socks . The club introduced a new home shirt for the 2007 – 08 season with a striped collar and striped ends on the sleeves which lasted until 2009 . This was changed for the 2009 – 11 seasons to a red shirt with a black and white stripe down the left side , manufactured by Admiral Sportswear . For seasons 2011 – 13 the club reverted to a plain red shirt , manufactured by O 'Neills . The club 's second kit , worn when playing away against a team with a predominantly red kit , is a white shirt with a horizontal red and black wave , white shorts and socks . The club has an alternative plain blue kit for playing against a team with a red and white kit . In past seasons white shirts with diagonal black or red stripes and a white shirt with a red trim , black shorts and white socks have all been used as the second kits . 
 The club 's badge is red , white , black and yellow , and incorporates elements from the coat of arms of Manchester City Council ; a ship representing Manchester 's industry and three stripes representing the three rivers that flow through Manchester : the Irk , the Irwell and the Medlock . 
 = = Stadium = = 
 F.C. United play at the 4 @,@ 400 capacity Broadhurst Park , which opened in May 2015 . The ground was built at a cost of £ 6 @.@ 3 million , using £ 2 million from a Community Share Scheme and the remainder from a variety of governmental and charity grants . The ground is surrounded on all sides by covered stands : the St. Mary 's Road End ( east ) , the North Stand , the Lightbowne Road End ( west ) and the Main Stand ( south ) , the latter of which has seating sections . Within the Main Stand is a clubhouse with a bar and catering facilities , club offices , changing rooms , a medical suite and a classroom . The stadium is shared with a local junior team , Moston Juniors F.C. 
 From their foundation in 2005 until 2014 , F.C. United were based at Bury F.C. ' s Gigg Lane stadium . F.C. United 's first proposed stadium was announced in 2010 for Newton Heath , the original home of Manchester United . The development was planned to be located on the site of the Ten Acres Lane sports centre and would have cost £ 3 @.@ 5 million , to be financed by public donations , a Community Shares issue and grant funding . However a year later , in March 2011 , Manchester City Council backed out from funding the stadium . The Broadhurst Park site in Moston , north @-@ east Manchester , was announced in April 2011 . Detailed information about the new facility was released in June 2011 and Manchester City Council approved the planning permission for the site on 27 October 2011 . F.C. United had to overcome some obstacles including funding agreements , contractor and lease negotiations and a legal challenge from local residents which caused a further two @-@ year delay before building commenced in November 2013 . 
 During their time at Bury , fixture clashes meant that F.C. United used a further six stadia for home fixtures : Altrincham 's Moss Lane ; Radcliffe Borough 's Stainton Park ; Hyde United 's Ewen Fields ; Stalybridge Celtic 's Bower Fold ; and Curzon Ashton 's Tameside Stadium . 
 For the 2014 – 15 season , F.C. United ended their groundsharing agreement with Bury after nine seasons in preparation for their move to Broadhurst Park . As the ground was not ready at the start of the season , they used Bower Fold as a temporary home . Delays with Broadhurst Park meant that F.C. United were unable to move in until May 2015 , and following fixture clashes with Stalybridge Celtic the club moved in December 2014 to the Tameside Stadium for the remainder of the season . F.C. United hosted a test event at Broadhurst Park on 16 May 2015 , staging a short match between their first team and an Invitational XI made up of past players . The official opening game was a friendly against Benfica B on 29 May , the anniversary of Manchester United 's victory over Benfica in the 1968 European Cup Final . Benfica won the opening game 1 – 0 in front of a crowd of 4 @,@ 232 . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 F.C. United are owned by 5 @,@ 000 of their members and are the largest supporter @-@ owned football club in the United Kingdom . Each member can vote on how the club is run , including voting for board members , kit designs and season ticket prices . Most F.C. United supporters still support Manchester United and many were previously season ticket holders at Old Trafford . F.C. United fans are known for the large range of songs that they sing at matches , and the atmosphere created by fans has been praised in the media . 
 During their first season ( 2005 – 06 ) , F.C. United had the second @-@ highest average attendance in English non @-@ League football with an average gate of 3 @,@ 059 and were the 87th best supported club across all divisions . Attendances fell in the next two seasons and they were the 92nd best supported club in 2006 – 07 and 100th best supported club by 2007 – 08 . Their average league attendance then levelled out at approximately 2 @,@ 000 per game , before rising to an average of 2 @,@ 155 in 2014 – 15 , the then @-@ seventh highest attendance in non @-@ League football . After moving to Broadhurst Park in May 2015 , the club averaged a gate of 3 @,@ 394 in 2015 – 16 , a season @-@ on @-@ season increase of over 57 % and the fourth highest attendance in non @-@ League football . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 F.C. United operate as a community benefit society . Membership is obtained by paying an annual fee of £ 12 to the club ( £ 3 for children ) but each member receives only one share in the club and is entitled to a single vote at meetings , regardless of the amount donated . The board consists of up to 11 members who are elected by the members of the club . Day @-@ to @-@ day operations of the club are overseen by a general manager ; Andy Walsh , a founding member of F.C. United , was appointed to the position in 2005 . He stepped down from the role at the end of June 2016 . 
 The club 's manifesto includes the following core principles : 
 The Board will be democratically elected by its members ; 
 Decisions taken by the membership will be decided on a one @-@ member , one vote basis ; 
 The club will develop strong links with the local community and strive to be accessible to all , discriminating against none ; 
 The club will endeavour to make admission prices as affordable as possible , to as wide a constituency as possible ; 
 The club will encourage young , local participation — playing and supporting — whenever possible ; 
 The Board will strive wherever possible to avoid outright commercialism ; 
 The club will remain a non @-@ profit organisation . 
 The club accepts sponsorship but does not allow sponsors ' logos to be displayed on the team 's shirts . The club 's main sponsor in its inaugural 2005 – 06 season was the Bhopal Medical Appeal and in the 2006 – 07 season it was the Williams BMW Group . From the 2011 – 12 season onwards , F.C. United have been sponsored by <unk> , a Manchester @-@ based mobile app development company . In October 2014 , F.C. United became the first football club in the United Kingdom to be accredited as a living wage employer by the Living Wage Foundation . 
 = = Criticism = = 
 F.C. United and their founders have been criticised and supported by fans of Manchester United and the media ; some fans view those who chose to leave to follow F.C. United as " traitors " . Manchester United manager Sir Alex Ferguson questioned the loyalty of fans who decided to form the club and the motivation behind the forming of F.C. United in a 2006 book : 
 I 'm sorry about that . It is a bit sad , that part , but I wonder just how big a United supporter they are . They seem to me to be promoting or projecting themselves a wee bit rather than saying , " at the end of the day the club have made a decision , we 'll stick by them . " It 's more about them than us . 
 Former Manchester United forward Eric Cantona has supported the club , describing them as " having a great idea " and expressing hope that F.C. United will " become a great club and win the European Cup in 50 years ' time " . In 2010 , aged 43 , he said that he would be prepared to play for the club . Steve Coppell , Manchester United winger between 1975 and 1983 , joined the club as a co @-@ owner in April 2016 . 
 F.C. United have been criticised by their own members for abandoning their principles , including agreeing to a photo op with a Conservative Party government minister in October 2015 , despite a club policy not to be used for political promotion , and a day after some club members took part in a march against government cuts in Manchester . F.C. United defended the visit as " an essential part " of the development of financial vehicles for football fans , arguing that it will help government representatives to better understand the benefits and challenges of social investment . 
 The club 's programme editor Tony Howard resigned from his position in June 2015 over a one @-@ off price rise of the programme for Broadhurst Park 's opening game against Benfica the previous month ; a Board decision that was described as breaching the club 's founding principle of avoiding outright commercialism . F.C. United have also been criticised for a deficit in democracy , transparency and accountability between their officials and the membership . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 The record for the most appearances for F.C. United is held by Jerome Wright , with 352 as of May 2016 . Rory Patterson is the club 's all @-@ time record goal @-@ scorer with 99 goals in all competitions , which includes 86 in the league and 13 in cup matches . Six other players , Mike Norton , Tom Greaves , Matthew Wolfenden , Jerome Wright , Simon Carden and <unk> Rudd have also scored more than 50 goals for the club . Rudd holds the record for most goals scored in a single season , having scored 45 goals in the 2006 – 07 season . 
 The largest number of points the team accrued is 112 in the 2006 – 07 season , and the highest number of goals scored in a season is 157 , achieved in 42 matches in 2006 – 07 . The club 's best performance in the FA Cup was a second round appearance during the 2010 – 11 season . After a 3 – 2 first round win over Rochdale , F.C. United recorded a 1 – 1 away draw with Brighton & Hove Albion , forcing a home replay which they lost 0 – 4 . The team advanced to the first round of the FA Cup again in 2015 – 16 but lost 1 – 4 at Broadhurst Park to Chesterfield . 
 In the 2006 – 07 season , F.C. United reached the third round of the FA Vase , beating Padiham and Salford City in the first two rounds but lost 2 – 3 at home to Quorn after extra time . In the 2014 – 15 season , they progressed to the fourth round of the FA Trophy , defeating Harrogate Town , Chorley and A.F.C. Fylde in the first three rounds before losing 0 – 1 away to Torquay United . 
 The club 's record league victory was a 10 – 2 win over Castleton Gabriels on 10 December 2005 in the North West Counties Football League Division Two ; Simon Carden scored five of the goals , which is the club record for the highest number of goals scored by a player in a single game . F.C. United achieved eight @-@ goal victory margins on three further occasions , in 8 – 0 wins over Squires Gate , Glossop North End and Nelson , all during the 2006 – 07 season . The club 's heaviest league defeat was 0 – 5 to Harrogate Town on 20 February 2016 in the National League North . 
 F.C. United 's highest home attendances are 6 @,@ 731 against Brighton in the second round of the 2010 – 11 FA Cup on 8 December 2010 and 6 @,@ 023 against Great Harwood Town in the North West Counties Football League Division Two on 22 April 2006 , both at Gigg Lane . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = First team squad = = = 
 As of 13 May 2016 
 Note : Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules . Players may hold more than one non @-@ FIFA nationality . 
 = = = Former players = = = 
 See Category : F.C. United of Manchester players to see a list of notable F.C. United players , past and present . 
 = = = International representation = = = 
 F.C. United have assisted in providing several players for the international football scene ; the club 's all @-@ time record goal @-@ scorer Rory Patterson went on to play and score for Northern Ireland at senior level and forward Matthew Walwyn debuted for Saint Kitts and Nevis in a friendly against Andorra in November 2015 . F.C. United 's youth team were represented in the England Schoolboys squad by Scott Cheetham in 2011 and in 2013 , the club signed Pakistan international defender Amjad Iqbal from Bradford Park Avenue . 
 = = Coaching staff = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 F.C. United have won three league titles and two league cups in their history . 
 Northern Premier League Premier Division 
 Champions 2014 – 15 
 Play @-@ off runners @-@ up 2010 – 11 , 2011 – 12 , 2012 – 13 
 Northern Premier League Division One North 
 Runners @-@ up 2007 – 08 
 Play @-@ off winners 2007 – 08 
 Northern Premier League President 's Cup 
 Winners 2007 – 08 
 North West Counties League Division One 
 Champions 2006 – 07 
 North West Counties League Challenge Cup 
 Winners 2006 – 07 
 North West Counties League Division Two 
 Champions 2005 – 06 
 = = Women 's team = = 
 F.C. United 's women 's team competed for the first time in the 2012 – 13 season . They finished second in the Greater Manchester Women 's Football League behind Manchester City Ladies . They also reached the <unk> League Cup final but lost 0 – 1 to Manchester City Ladies . After finishing runners @-@ up again in 2013 – 14 , the team won a league and cup double in 2015 , gaining promotion to the North West Women 's Regional Football League Division One South . They finished the 2015 – 16 season runners @-@ up , behind <unk> Woolton Ladies . 
 # Shared with Middleton Athletic 
 = Judy ( dog ) = 
 Judy ( 1936 – 17 February 1950 ) was a ship 's dog on board HMS Gnat and HMS Grasshopper stationed on the Yangtze before and during World War II . She proved able to hear incoming aircraft , providing the crew with an early warning . After part of the crew transferred from the Gnat to the Grasshopper in June 1939 the ship was sent to Singapore after the British declaration of war on Germany . There she was on board the ship during the Battle of Singapore , which saw Grasshopper evacuate for the Dutch East Indies . It was sunk en route , and Judy was nearly killed having been trapped by a falling row of lockers . She was rescued when a crewman returned to the stricken vessel looking for supplies . 
 On the deserted island with the surviving crew , Judy managed to find a fresh water source saving them all . They made their way to Singkep in the Dutch East Indies and afterwards to Sumatra aiming to link up with the evacuating British forces . After trekking across 200 miles of jungle for five weeks , during which Judy survived an attack from a crocodile , the crew arrived a day after the final vessel had left and subsequently became prisoners of war of the Japanese . She was eventually smuggled into the Medan camp , where she met Leading <unk> Frank Williams for the first time , who she would go on to spend the rest of her life with . Williams convinced the camp Commandant to register her as an official prisoner of war , with the number ' <unk> Gloergoer , Medan ' . She was the only dog to be registered as a prisoner of war during the Second World War . 
 She moved around several more camps , and survived the sinking of the transport ship SS Van <unk> where in the aftermath she saved several passengers from drowning . Les Searle from the Grasshopper smuggled her once again into the next camp , where she was reunited with Frank Williams . After the end of the war , Judy 's life was put in danger once again . She was about to be put to death by the Japanese guards following a lice outbreak amongst the prisoners . However , Williams hid the dog until the Allied forces arrived . Searle , Williams and others smuggled Judy back to the UK aboard a troopship and she spent the next six months in quarantine after arriving . She was awarded the Dickin Medal by the PDSA , considered to be the animals ' Victoria Cross . Judy died in 1950 in Tanzania from a tumour , after travelling with Williams there to work on a groundnut food scheme . Her Dickin Medal and collar were subsequently put on display at the Imperial War Museum in London as part of ' The Animal 's War ' exhibition . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Judy was a pure @-@ bred liver and white Pointer . She was born in a dog kennel in Shanghai , China , in 1936 . She had escaped as a puppy , and had been kept in a back alley by a shopkeeper until she was six months old . Following an altercation with some sailors from a Japanese Navy gunboat , she was found by a worker from the kennel and returned there . She was originally called <unk> , which was anglicised to become Judy . 
 In the autumn of 1936 , the crew of the Insect class gunboat HMS Gnat voted to get a ship 's mascot . This was due in part to the competitive nature of the gunboats , with HMS Bee , Cicada and Cricket already having mascots of their own . The Captain and the Chief Bosun 's mate , Lt. Cmdr. J. <unk> and Chief Petty Officer Charles Jefferey , purchased Judy from the kennels and presented her to the crew . It was hoped to train her as a gundog , but the men began to treat her like a pet instead , and from her first day Jefferey 's log stated that " our chances of making her a trained gundog are very small . " 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = HMS Gnat = = = 
 Able seaman Jan " <unk> " Cooper was given the job of being the " Keeper of the Ship 's Dog " , who was also the ship 's butcher . She was given an open box and a blanket to sleep on , and was trained to stop her from going into certain areas of the ship , such as those inhabited by the Chinese cooks as they disliked her . In November 1936 , she fell overboard into the Yangtze River and was spotted by Jefferey . The ship was called to a full stop and a power boat deployed to retrieve her . The incident was recorded in the ship 's log as a man overboard exercise . After undergoing trials following a refit , the Gnat met up with the Ladybird , who also had a ship 's dog . However Judy had to be kept away as while he took a fancy to her , she did not care for him . In the early morning after the Ladybird departed , Judy alerted the ship to the presence of river pirates who were about to board the Gnat in the darkness . The attack was easily repelled as the pirates lost the surprise element . Several days later , Judy was taken ashore with a shooting party for the first time but she was unsuccessful as a gundog . Throughout her stay on the Gnat , the crew repeatedly tried to use her as a gundog , each time resulting in a failure . 
 Judy was known for pointing out the approach of hostile Japanese aircraft long before any of the human crew could hear them . This first occurred prior to the outbreak of war , when the aircraft would fly low over the Gnat with Judy barking at them until they had passed . On an outing to Jiujiang , Jefferey took Judy for a walk outside of the city but she ran ahead , pulling him with her . He realised as he looked back that she had been pulling him away from a Leopard . In November 1937 , the Gnat met with the American river gunboat USS Panay . After the Panay held a party for the two ship 's companies , the Gnat crew departed and only realised afterwards that Judy was not with them . They contacted the Panay via signal lamp , but they insisted that they had not seen her . The following morning , the crew heard from a Chinese trader that Judy was on board the Panay after all . In retaliation , a party boarded the American vessel and stole the ship 's bell . Afterwards they contacted the Panay and offered them the bell back in return for Judy . She was returned within the hour . 
 In early 1938 , both Jefferey and Cooper were sent back to Britain as part of the crew rotation . While docked in Hankou , Judy took a liking to another Pointer on board a French gunboat Francis Garnier . The two ship 's companies held an impromptu wedding ceremony for the two dogs . The French Pointer , Paul , remained on the Gnat for three days before returning to his ship . Judy fell pregnant , and gave birth to thirteen puppies . Ten of them survived and were eventually given away to a variety of sources including the Francis Garnier and the American gunboat USS Guam . Judy was involved in an incident in October that year that resulted in the ending of her trips ashore in Hankou . Whilst being walked by two sailors from the Gnat , they were confronted by Japanese soldiers who pointed a loaded rifle at Judy . One of the soldiers was thrown into the Yangtze River . During the following days , several Japanese officers came on board the Gnat and it was decided that it would be better for Judy to stay on the ship . 
 = = = HMS Grasshopper = = = 
 In June 1939 , several Locust class gunboats arrived on the Yangtze to take over operations from the existing Insect class vessels . Part of the crew of the Gnat transferred to HMS Grasshopper , including Judy . Following the British declaration of war on Germany in September that year , several of the river gunboats , Grasshopper included , were redeployed to the British base at Singapore . Judy was initially sea sick , but the crew ensured that she was properly exercised and by the time the ship arrived on station , she had recovered . 
 Initially the stay at Singapore was peaceful , and Judy stayed with a customs official and his family for a week ashore . The ship was rarely deployed until January 1942 when it was deployed with other gunboats to provide covering bombardments along the coast of Malaya for retreating troops , and occasionally to carry out evacuations . The Battle of Singapore took place between 8 – 15 February . By 11 February , Grasshopper and its sister ship Dragonfly were the largest vessels left at Singapore . On 13 February , the vessels were ordered to evacuate personnel and leave Singapore . The ships left at 9pm that evening , and travelled together . 
 The ships headed for Singkep Island in the Dutch East Indies , hoping that the island group it sat in could be used as a hiding place . As they approached , Judy indicated the approach of Japanese aircraft and the anti @-@ aircraft gunners took up their positions in readiness . The Grasshopper was hit with a single bomb before the planes departed . Judy was below decks when the planes returned . The Dragonfly was hit by three bombs and sank quickly . The Grasshopper was hit by a further two bombs , and the order was given to abandon ship as a fire spread close to an ammunition compartment . Boats were lowered and the crew and evacuees were ferried just over a hundred yards to shore whilst the Japanese planes strafed the vessels . It was only when they were ashore that they realised Judy was not with them . 
 The island they arrived on turned out to be uninhabited with little food and no apparent water . After a camp had been set up ashore , Petty Officer George White was sent back to the still floating Grasshopper to scavenge supplies . He boarded the vessel and descended below decks to search for any items that might be of use . Whilst there , he felt Judy in the darkness , trapped under a row of lockers . He constructed a raft out of materials on the Grasshopper and rowed the items , along with Judy , back to the island . The lack of water was becoming an issue , until Judy began to dig at a point on the waterline . It took a couple of minutes , but Judy managed to unearth a fresh @-@ water spring and was credited with saving everyone 's lives . 
 Five days after the Grasshopper was bombed , a <unk> arrived which took the survivors to Singkep . There they left their wounded , and Judy along with the other survivors travelled two days later on a Chinese junk to Sumatra where it was hoped that a British force remained which could take them to Sri Lanka . Upon arrival , they took the vessel up a series of rivers until they narrowed so much that the junk could not pass . They then embarked on a 200 @-@ mile cross @-@ country trek across the island in an attempt to reach Padang . During the journey through the jungle , Judy was attacked by a crocodile and suffered a cut to her shoulder . After a journey of five weeks , they arrived at Padang - but missed the last evacuation ship by a day as the Japanese were due to arrive to take over the city at any moment . After the arrival of the Japanese , the survivors from the Grasshopper along with Judy , were taken into custody as prisoners of war . 
 = = = Prisoner of war = = = 
 = = = = Medan = = = = 
 The crew became prisoners of war , initially held in Padang , but were soon moved onto <unk> . They smuggled Judy on board the transport trucks , hidden under empty rice sacks . After five days they arrived at the Gloergoer prisoner of war camp in Medan . Chief Petty Officer Leonard Williams recorded , " thus began 3 @-@ 4 years of the most horrific labour , torture , starvation and every degradation the Japanese could inflict on us " . Once Judy arrived in the Medan camp , she met Leading Aircraftman Frank Williams , who adopted her and shared his daily handful of rice from August 1942 onwards . In the camp Judy would intervene by distracting the guards when they were administering punishment . She was the only animal to have been officially registered as a prisoner of war during the Second World War , after Frank William 's intervention to protect the dog from the guards , who would often threaten to shoot Judy as the dog growled and barked at them . Williams managed to convince the camp Commandant , who was drunk on sake , to sign the registration papers with the promise of one of Judy 's future puppies . 
 Judy 's official prisoner @-@ of @-@ war name was ' <unk> Gloergoer , Medan ' . During her stay at the camp , she would alert the prisoners to the approach of the Japanese guards and also if other animals such as snakes or scorpions were around . She also made excursions from the camp , looking for food , and would bring back rats and snakes to Williams . Judy had another group of puppies , of which five survived . One of them was given to the camp Commandant as promised and another puppy was smuggled into the women 's camp along with any food that the men could spare . A further puppy was given to the Red Cross in Medan , one more was beaten to death by a drunken guard and the final one remained in the camp after Judy and Williams left . 
 In June 1944 , the men were transferred to Singapore aboard the SS Van <unk> . Dogs were not allowed on board , but Frank Williams managed to teach Judy to lie still and silent inside a rice sack . When he boarded the ship , Judy climbed into a sack and Williams slung it over his shoulder to take on board . For three hours the men were forced to stand on deck in the searing heat , and for the entire time Judy remained still and silent in the bag on <unk> 's back . The conditions on board the ship were cramped with more than 700 prisoners . On 26 June 1944 , the ship was torpedoed . Williams pushed Judy out of a porthole in an attempt to save her life , even though there was a 15 feet ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) drop to the sea . He made his own escape from the ship , not knowing if Judy had survived . Over five hundred of the passengers did not survive . 
 = = = = Return to Sumatra = = = = 
 Frank Williams was recaptured and was sent to a new camp without news of Judy 's survival . However , stories began being told of a dog helping drowning men reach pieces of debris on which to hold , and others recalled how the dog would bring them flotsam to keep them afloat . The dog would also allow men to hold onto her back while swimming them to safety . She had been found in the water by other survivors of the sinking , and once again hidden from the Japanese . Upon arrival at a dock , she was found by Les Searle who tried to smuggle her onto a truck with him . However , she was discovered by a Japanese Captain who threatened to kill her - whose order was countermanded by the newly arrived former Commander of the Medan camp and she was allowed to travel with Searle onto the new camp . 
 Williams was giving up hope of finding Judy when she arrived in his new camp . " I couldn ’ t believe my eyes . As I entered the camp , a scraggy dog hit me square between the shoulders and knocked me over ! I ’ d never been so glad to see the old girl . And I think she felt the same ! " After four weeks at the new camp , they were moved back to Sumatra by paddle steamer . They had been told that it was a " special mission " to pick fruit . Instead they spent a year in Sumatra , with the Japanese using the men to cut through the jungle to lay railway track . Rations were a handful of maggot @-@ ridden tapioca a day , which Frank continued to share with Judy . She also proved useful in conducting trades with the locals , as she would indicate when someone was hiding near to the track . Her barking deliberately alerted the guards to when there was something too large for her to handle in the jungle , such as tigers or elephants . Frank credited Judy with saving his life during his time spent there , " She saved my life in so many ways . The greatest way of all was giving me a reason to live . All I had to do was look at her and into those weary , bloodshot eyes and I would ask myself : What would happen to her if I died ? I had to keep going . Even if it meant waiting for a miracle . " 
 = = Post war and awards = = 
 Once hostilities ceased , the prisoners of war were told to remain until allied troops came to relieve the Japanese guards . But during this point a lice outbreak led to the Japanese condemning Judy to death . Williams hid the dog for two days from the guards until the Allies arrived . 
 Judy was smuggled aboard the troopship Antenor heading to Liverpool . Together with Williams , Searle and two others , Judy managed to avoid the dock police and was delivered into the care of the ship 's cook , who ensured that she was fed on the voyage home . Upon her return to the UK , Judy stayed for six months in quarantine in <unk> , Surrey . Williams and Judy were reunited on 29 April 1946 and headed immediately to London . 
 Williams was given the White Cross of St Giles , and Judy was awarded the Dickin Medal , " the animals ' VC " , in May 1946 by Major Viscount Tarbat MC , chairman of the Returned British POW Association , and was enrolled as the association 's only canine member . Her citation reads : " For magnificent courage and endurance in Japanese prison camps , which helped to maintain morale among her fellow prisoners and also for saving many lives through her intelligence and watchfulness " . The Dickin Medal is often referred to as the animal metaphorical equivalent of the Victoria Cross . 
 She was interviewed by the BBC for their coverage of the London Victory Celebrations of 1946 on 8 June and her barks were broadcast to the nation on the radio as part of the programme In Town Tonight . Frank and Judy spent the year after the war visiting the relatives of PoWs who had not survived ; Frank remarked that Judy always seemed to give a comforting presence . 
 On 10 May 1948 , the pair left to work on a government @-@ funded groundnut food scheme in East Africa . There was some difficulty in getting permission for Judy to travel , and it was feared that she and Williams would be split up . This issue was promoted in the Evening Standard , and after the involvement of William Lever , 2nd Viscount Leverhulme , permission was given for Judy to travel with Williams . She had a third and final litter of puppies during her time in Africa . After two years there , Judy was discovered to have a tumour , and was euthanized at the age of 13 . Frank spent two months building a granite and marble memorial in her memory , which included a plaque that told of her life story . 
 On 27 February 1972 , Judy was remembered in church services across Gosport and Portsmouth , and in 1992 her story was featured in the British children 's TV show Blue Peter . In 2006 her collar and medal went on public display for the first time in the Imperial War Museum , London , as part of " The Animals ' War " exhibition . It was presented to the IWM by Alan Williams , Frank 's son . 
 = Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 10th Earl of Shaftesbury = 
 Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 10th Earl of Shaftesbury Bt ( 22 May 1938 – c . 5 November 2004 ) , styled Lord Ashley between 1947 and 1961 , and Earl of Shaftesbury from 1961 until his death , was a British peer from Wimborne St Giles , Dorset , located in South West England . He was the son of Major Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , Lord Ashley , and Françoise Soulier . 
 Ashley @-@ Cooper was the grandson of Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 9th Earl of Shaftesbury . Ashley @-@ Cooper 's father was the heir apparent to the earldom and its subsidiary titles , but he predeceased his father . His death made his son next in the line of succession . When his grandfather died in 1961 , Ashley @-@ Cooper became the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury , Baron Ashley of Wimborne St Giles and Baron Cooper of Pawlett . 
 The 10th Earl of Shaftesbury was a wealthy landowner of over 9 @,@ 000 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 ha ) in East Dorset , and received honours and awards for his philanthropic and conservationist work , which included planting over a million trees in South West England . He served as president of the Shaftesbury Society , pursuing the same goals of his second great grandfather , the 7th Earl of Shaftesbury , who had founded the organization as Ragged Schools in 1840 . He also served as the vice president of Sir David Attenborough 's British Butterfly Conservation Society . 
 In November 2004 , the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury went missing while in France , prompting an international police investigation . His remains were found at the bottom of a remote ravine in the foothills of the French Alps five months after his death . Investigations revealed that he was murdered by his brother @-@ in @-@ law during an argument regarding a divorce from his wife , Jamila M 'Barek , both of whom were convicted of his murder . 
 = = Education and early years = = 
 Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper was born on 22 May 1938 in Greater London , England . He was named after his father , as was tradition for firstborn sons in the Ashley @-@ Cooper family . His father , Major Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , Lord Ashley , was the firstborn son of the 9th Earl of Shaftesbury . Notable among his ancestors were his seventh great grandfather , the 1st Earl of Shaftesbury and leader of the Whig party in Parliament ; and his second great grandfather , the 7th Earl of Shaftesbury and 19th @-@ century evangelical social reformer , who was honoured with the Shaftesbury Memorial Fountain in London 's Piccadilly Circus . 
 Ashley @-@ Cooper 's mother was the French @-@ born Françoise Soulier , daughter of Georges Soulier of <unk> @-@ en @-@ Caux , France . Major Lord Ashley and Françoise remained married until his death in 1947 . Anthony 's younger sister was Lady Frances Mary Elizabeth Ashley @-@ Cooper ( born 9 April 1940 ) . 
 Ashley @-@ Cooper was educated at Eton and Christ Church , Oxford . As a child , his primary pursuits outside of getting an education , included mountain climbing and skiing . He also expressed a love of music , which continued into adulthood with his service as chairman of the London Philharmonic Orchestra from 1966 to 1980 . On 8 March 1947 , his father died unexpectedly of a heart disease and Ashley @-@ Cooper became heir to the titles held by his grandfather and acquired the courtesy title of Lord Ashley . 
 Lord Ashley 's mother decided to move back to her native France with the children . In August 1947 , she remarried Col François <unk> and the newly formed family settled in Paris . The children spent the next few years shuttling across the English Channel to their boarding schools , Eton for Lord Ashley and Heathfield School in Ascot for his sister , Frances . Holidays were alternately spent in France or with their grandparents at the Manor House in Wimborne St Giles . He was commissioned a second lieutenant in the Royal Armoured Corps , where he did his national service , on 29 June 1957 . On 29 October 1958 , he was placed in the emergency reserve of the 10th Royal Hussars . Lord Ashley was 22 years old when he succeeded his grandfather . 
 The 9th Earl of Shaftesbury , prior to his death , invested and arranged financial matters so that his heirs would avoid death duties . When his grandfather died , the newly titled 10th Earl of Shaftesbury came into a vast fortune of the Shaftesbury estates and other properties , including the family 's 17th @-@ century home and large estate in Dorset , as well as residences in Hove , London , Versailles and the French Riviera . Shaftesbury also inherited a collection of art , antiques , and other valuables worth over £ 3m . By the 1990s , the wealth of the family estate remained well worth millions . 
 = = = St Giles House = = = 
 The Shaftesbury estate in East Dorset is the home base and centre of business of the Ashley @-@ Coopers . In addition to St Giles House , the family owns a large estate , including over 9 @,@ 000 acres ( 3 @,@ 600 ha ) , along with property , land , and <unk> , that establishes them as one of the wealthiest families in the United Kingdom . 
 The <unk> and Ashley @-@ Coopers have made Wimborne St Giles their home since the 15th century . The small village of Wimborne St Giles rests within the family estate itself . The Ashley family arrived in Dorset , originally from Wiltshire , where they owned the manor of Ashley , since the 11th century . The first ancestor to reside in Wimborne St Giles was Robert Ashley ( born c . 1415 ) , fifth great grandfather of Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 1st Earl of Shaftesbury . 
 Built in 1651 , the family seat of St Giles House was unoccupied for many years following the death of the 9th Earl of Shaftesbury , and fell into disrepair apart from one wing used as the estate office . In 2001 it was recorded on the Register of Buildings at Risk , as a Grade I listed building , indicating neglect and decay . Buildings recorded on the Grade I list include those of " exceptional interest , sometimes considered to be internationally important " . Following extensive repairs , in 2012 the house was reoccupied by the 12th Earl of Shaftesbury and his family . 
 = = Conservation and philanthropy = = 
 Shaftesbury received honours and awards for his conservationist work . He planted more than a million trees on his 9 @,@ 000 @-@ acre ( 3 @,@ 600 ha ) estate at Wimborne St Giles , Dorset . His generosity extended to the family 's property in Ulster . In 1992 , he was the joint winner of the Royal Forestry Society 's National Duke of Cornwall Award for Forestry and Conservation , presented by Charles , Prince of Wales . He also served as president of the Hawk and Owl Trust and as vice president of Sir David Attenborough 's British Butterfly Conservation Society . According to Philip Rymer , manager of the Shaftesbury Estates , the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury had also put quite a bit of energy into trying to save an endangered species of bat . 
 Shaftesbury served as president of the Shaftesbury Society , which the 7th Earl of Shaftesbury had founded as Ragged Schools in 1840 . The charity provides free education , as well as food , clothing , lodging and other home missionary services for those too poor to pay . In 2007 , the Shaftesbury Society was merged with John Grooms <unk> , reorganising under the new name of Livability . 
 The benevolence of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury also extended to the ownership and use of Lough Neagh , which is the largest freshwater lake in the British Isles and ranks among the 40 largest lakes of Europe . Five of the six counties of Northern Ireland have shores on the lough ( only County Fermanagh does not ) , and its area is split among them . The lake is the source of 40 percent of Northern Ireland 's drinking water . While this ownership could feasibly increase the financial outlook of the family estate , at Shaftesbury 's insistence , water continues to be extracted from the lough at no charge to either the citizens or civic government of Northern Ireland . 
 = = House of Lords speech = = 
 Although a member of the House of Lords , until the passage of the House of Lords Act in 1999 , the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury rarely attended . His maiden speech was made on 10 November 1999 . At this time , Shaftesbury made an eight @-@ minute presentation in a debate regarding arts and sport , a portion of which is presented below . 
 The Earl of <unk> rose to ask Her Majesty 's Government how they believe the arts and sport relate to the issue of " social exclusion " . 
 7 p.m. The Earl of Shaftesbury 
 My Lords , I apologise to noble Lords for this dramatic last @-@ minute but not opportunistic maiden speech . Although I inherited my title 30 years ago and have attended <unk> , particularly during the early 1970s when we rigorously debated the Industrial Relations Bill and the European Community Bill of Accession , both in Committee and on Report until extremely late at night , my heart has not entirely been in the thrust and cut of politics , unlike my more distinguished ancestors . 
 In fact , building a society the Shaftesbury way is not a matter of imprisoning a presumed evil spirit of mankind . It is a matter of beauty and truth . Both Goethe and Voltaire were influenced by the 3rd Lord Shaftesbury . The former particularly reminded us that we must cultivate our garden . We all know about large prize @-@ winning marrows , but are not succulent baby courgettes more perfect ? Small is beautiful too ... 
 One of the best sermons I have ever been privileged to hear was by the late Bishop of Winchester . Social exclusion ? He said virtually that if one sheep from a flock of 100 goes missing , the good shepherd worries frantically about that single sheep until it is safely found . There are too many sheep , men , women and children , being marginalised . John the Baptist had the answer : why do we not ? I remain concerned in these turbulent times , but thank you for your patience . It has been my privilege to be able to speak in your Lordships ' House . 
 = = Marriages and children = = 
 Shaftesbury was married three times . He expressed his attraction to foreign women . At Eton , he wrote an article for the college magazine in which he described English debutantes as " round @-@ shouldered , unsophisticated <unk> of pink champagne " . His three marriages and scattered relationships with foreign women throughout his life reflected his earlier opinions of English women . 
 = = = Bianca Maria de Paolis = = = 
 Shaftesbury met his Italian @-@ born first wife , Bianca de Paolis , during a skiing holiday . They married in July 1966 . Bianca Maria de Paolis ( born c . 1926 ) , was the daughter of Gino de Paolis , a Roman banker . She had previously been married to the American film producer , Jack Le Vien . Shaftesbury and de Paolis were declared husband and wife at the Westminster Register Office in front of a few friends , with none of his family in attendance . They divorced 10 years later , on grounds of his adultery with an unnamed woman . The couple had no children . 
 The former Countess Shaftesbury , who used the name Contessa Bianca Shaftesbury , released her memoirs in 2008 , entitled , A Life on Fire . She died on 16 March 2013 , in Rome , Italy . The funeral was held on 18 March 2013 at the church of Santa Maria dei <unk> in Piazza del Popolo . 
 = = = Christina Eva Montan = = = 
 In December 1976 , Shaftesbury married the Swedish @-@ born , Christina Eva Montan ( born c . 1940 ) . Styled The Countess of Shaftesbury after their marriage , she was the daughter of Nils Montan , the former Swedish Ambassador to Germany . Lady Shaftesbury was also a divorcée with a son and daughter from her first marriage , the half @-@ siblings of the 11th and 12th Earls of Shaftesbury . Frederic Casella is a television producer and director in Great Britain , while his sister , Cecilia is an attorney living in New York City . Shaftesbury and his second wife had two sons : 
 Anthony Nils Christian Ashley @-@ Cooper , 11th Earl of Shaftesbury ( 24 June 1977 – 15 May 2005 ) , first @-@ born son of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury and his wife . He died of a heart attack in Manhattan , New York while visiting his younger brother , Nicholas and older half @-@ siblings Frederic and Cecilia . 
 Nicholas Edmund Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 12th Earl of Shaftesbury ( born 3 June 1979 ) , a former DJ and house music promoter in New York and Privilege in Ibiza , Spain . A short time following his brother 's death , Nicholas relocated to the family seat at Wimborne St Giles , returned to business school for a couple of years , and assumed the responsibilities of the earldom . He has shown an interest in supporting charitable organisations , primarily those addressing the needs of children with disabilities . In December 2009 , Nicholas suffered serious spinal injuries in a horse riding accident . He crushed his vertebrae in the fall . While he experienced initial paralysis necessitating the use of a wheelchair , physical therapy has helped restore his health to the point where he is able to walk , with limitations . With continued rehabilitation , doctors expect a full recovery . 
 The second marriage of Shaftesbury was more successful than the first , producing two children . The 1999 death of his mother , however , had a profound effect on Shaftesbury , affecting his relationship with his wife and children . Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper , sister of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury stated the following . 
 In August 1999 , our mother had died of cancer in tragic circumstances while we were all enjoying ourselves at my eldest son 's wedding . For my brother , her death was a catastrophe . He adored her . She had been his protector and greatest admirer since the death of our father in 1947 , when Anthony was eight and I was six . When our mother died , it was as though my brother had become an orphan at age 61 . Without her , he felt emotionally bereft . He lost his grip on reality . At one point , he had bought a flat in Versailles , and had entirely recreated two rooms from our late mother 's house . He had used all the furniture , books and knick @-@ <unk> of our childhood in Paris . It was a bit much . 
 — Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper 
 In 2000 , Shaftesbury unexpectedly moved out of the Manor House and divorced his wife . He left his former wife in charge and passed the running of the estate to his 23 @-@ year @-@ old son , Anthony . Christina , Countess of Shaftesbury , and their sons remained in residence in Wimborne St Giles , while the Earl relocated to France , embarking on a string of short @-@ lived and expensive love affairs with younger women distinguished by their exotic looks and equally colorful histories . 
 Shaftesbury had an apartment in Versailles , ( furnished with £ 3m worth of antique art and furniture ) but spent much of his time on the Cote d 'Azur where he enjoyed a social life fueled by drugs and alcohol . His wealth attracted a variety of individuals , willing and ready to take advantage of his generosity . A friend described him as becoming a " philanthropist who specialised in rescuing lap dancers " while his French lawyer , Thierry Bensaude , more diplomatically referred to him as " a philosophical adventurer in society " . 
 In early 2002 , an article in the Daily Telegraph described the 63 @-@ year @-@ old lord , " dressed in leather trousers and open @-@ necked , pink silk shirts , with a gold chain draped around his neck " . Shaftesbury had fallen hard for a 29 @-@ year @-@ old French model named Nathalie Lions . In 2006 , an article in the Guardian wrote of his relationship with Lions , with whom he would be found " frolicking at Bellini 's bar in Kensington , where he liberally wrote cheques and Lions spent them " . He refused to listen to others who warned him that she was taking advantage of him . They toured the party spots of London , Barbados , and the Riviera until a tabloid exposé revealed Lions ' past as a " Penthouse Pet " for Penthouse magazine and Shaftesbury called off the relationship . Rather than return to England , he remained on the French Riviera . 
 = = = Jamila Ben M 'Barek = = = 
 The 10th Earl of Shaftesbury became a familiar figure in some of the nightspots on the French Riviera . He was known for his black leather trousers , pink shirts , and large red and black eyeglasses . He had a habit of flashing his money around as he bought drinks for a wide variety of female companions . At one such establishment on the Riviera , he met Jamila Ben M 'Barek ( born c . 1961 ) , a divorcée and the mother of two children from a previous relationship . She was one of seven children born in Paris to a Tunisian mother and Moroccan father . In 1993 , M 'Barek had posed naked in Playboy , but it did not cause alarm . They were married on 5 November 2002 , at Hilversum in the Netherlands . 
 To the disappointment of his family , he became infatuated with M 'Barek , buying her a flat in Cannes for £ 500 @,@ 000 and transferring other properties into her name after they married . 
 By April 2004 , the couple were separated when Lord Shaftesbury started a new relationship with a young mother of two named Nadia Orche , who has been described as a " club hostess from Cannes " and a " Moroccan prostitute " . The difference in their ages did not bother her . She described him as " an attentive and generous man " . According to Orche , Shaftesbury was planning to marry her after getting a divorce from his third wife . 
 = = Disappearance and murder = = 
 On 3 November 2004 , Shaftesbury arrived in Nice , France , scheduled to meet with his estranged wife . On 4 November , he visited her at her home on Avenue <unk> Koenig . He later checked into the £ 130 @-@ a @-@ night , four @-@ star Noga Hilton on the Cannes seafront . The following day , after checking out of the hotel , Shaftesbury vanished without a trace . From that point forward , the whereabouts of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury were unknown until April of the following year . 
 = = = Friends and family become concerned = = = 
 It was normal for Shaftesbury to occasionally disappear for a few days from time to time , so no one , other than his girlfriend was initially concerned with his disappearance . " Anthony didn ’ t answer his telephone anymore . I was worried , " she says , " I called again . I called England . This wasn ’ t like him . I was sure that something bad had happened . " 
 On 15 November 2004 , Shaftesbury 's Nice @-@ based lawyer , Thierry Bensaude reported him missing , after being contacted by his girlfriend , Orche . The peer divided his time between the Riviera and a home in Hove , East Sussex . He had been due to return home on 10 November . After not hearing from Shaftesbury in a week , they remained concerned when he failed to return to his rented flat in Adelaide Crescent , Hove . Bensaude and Orche both expressed fears for his safety . Shaftesbury had been taking legal action in relation to the theft of some family antiques and artwork . Some friends and acquaintances mentioned that he had complained of money problems , so they surmised that his disappearance may have had something to do with the theft and financial loss . 
 On 18 November , the French police publicly appealed for information leading to Shaftesbury 's whereabouts and on 22 November , they opened a formal criminal inquiry . Anthony Nils , eldest son of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury was regularly in touch with the police following his father 's disappearance , and travelled to Nice to confer with French authorities there . The Rev David <unk> of the Wimborne St Giles parish church said , " Everyone is anxious and concerned — it 's the unknown that is worrying . Lady Shaftesbury [ Christina ] is very concerned . " 
 = = = Theories on Shaftesbury 's whereabouts = = = 
 Family and concerned individuals initially feared that the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury had been kidnapped by Russian or North African gangsters who were plotting to steal his fortune . Thierry Bensaude stated that Shaftesbury is " extremely generous to his friends and may have been taken advantage of " . His wife claimed that she had warned her husband about the company he was keeping . The theory was that some of his more disreputable acquaintances had decided to kidnap the peer and were now engaged in some scheme to force him into signing away part of his inherited wealth . 
 Commander <unk> said , " We took the case very seriously . There were a number of possible explanations for his disappearance . 
 He could have decided to disappear , a suicide , or he could have been the victim of a crime . There were several possibilities and we were exploring all of them . " 
 Within a month of Shaftesbury 's disappearance , Detective Chief Superintendent Graham Cox , head of Sussex Police CID , who had been contacted by Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper , said that they were treating the matter as a murder case . The French police agreed with Cox , due to the lack of ransom demands or signs of fraud . Whether dead or alive , there were still no clues as to the whereabouts of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury . 
 = = = Confession and arrest = = = 
 In February 2005 , his wife Jamila M 'Barek was admitted to a psychiatric hospital , where she had an emotional breakdown and began confessing to her involvement in her husband 's death . When interviewed by police , she claimed that Shaftesbury had been beaten to death by her brother during a fight at her flat in Cannes . 
 Shaftesbury and his third wife had separated in April 2004 and divorce proceedings had been set in motion . By that time , he had given her a windmill in the Gers region of southwestern France , the € 700 @,@ 000 duplex in a villa in Cannes , which included staff , a 4x4 car , and a monthly allowance , ranging between € 7 @,@ 500 and € 10 @,@ 000 . Shaftesbury wanted to end this arrangement and the marriage , so that he could marry his new girlfriend . While Shaftesbury was discussing his desire with his wife , a fight broke out between him and his wife 's brother , Mohammed M 'Barek . Lord Shaftesbury died during the fight , when Mohammed strangled him , breaking his neck . 
 According to Jamila M 'Barek , her brother placed her husband 's body in the boot of his BMW and dumped it in an unknown place . She was arrested on 25 February 2005 and her brother was arrested by German police the following day at his home in Munich . He was later extradited to France , continuing to deny his involvement and knowledge of the location of Lord Shaftesbury 's body . 
 On 7 April 2005 , a body in an advanced state of decomposition was discovered by the French authorities in a valley at <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Mer , Alpes @-@ Maritimes on the outskirts of Cannes . The police were led to the area by examining the last @-@ known signal from Lord Shaftesbury 's cellphone records . After a two @-@ day search , they found a decomposed body that had been partly eaten by animals , hidden in the undergrowth next to the riverbed . A French police spokesman announced , " As far as we are concerned , there is absolutely no doubt it is him . " This belief was confirmed through DNA testing on 18 April 2005 . 
 In June 2006 , pre @-@ trial proceedings began in Grasse , before the investigating Magistrate , Catherine Bonnici . The proceedings were part of the French investigative process that is used to determine whether prosecutors have enough evidence to send a case to trial . During the first week of June , the court travelled to the site where the peer 's body was found . Mohamed M 'Barek was transported in leg chains for the one @-@ day reenactment . Once they arrived , M 'Barek demonstrated that he had enough strength to have acted alone . He managed to lift a 182 lb ( 83 kg ) . dummy — the same weight as Shaftesbury 's body — out of the boot of a car and dump it down a ravine . 
 Jamila M 'Barek told the court that she was not with her brother when he disposed of the body , and in fact , she stated that she had never been to the site . She claimed that she had no role in the killing other than helping her brother , under duress , load the body into his car . She told investigators , " I did not want him to die . I just wanted my brother to intimidate him so that he would continue to pay me my allowance . But he didn 't want to have anything to do with it , so a violent quarrel broke out . I left the room because I could not stand to see what was happening " . 
 = = = Trial at the Palais de Justice = = = 
 On 22 May 2007 , the trial of Jamila M 'Barek and Mohamed M 'Barek opened at the Palais de Justice in Nice , two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years after the death of the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury . The presiding judge of the jury trial was Nicole <unk> , with Jean @-@ Louis Moreau serving as the state prosecutor . Shaftesbury 's widow was represented by attorney Franck De Vita , while her brother was represented by Melanie <unk> . The Ashley @-@ Cooper family was represented by attorney Philippe <unk> . A forensic examination of the skeletal remains revealed injuries including a broken ankle , and a double fracture to the larynx which indicated strangulation as the cause of death . At times , both Mme M 'Barek and her brother admitted their involvement in the death of Lord Shaftesbury and the French authorities decided to charge both her and her brother with the crime of premeditated murder . 
 = = = = Magistrate 's investigative report = = = = 
 The trial began with a presentation of the investigative report , which was read to the court by Jean @-@ Louis Moreau , the state prosecutor . The report described Shaftesbury 's widow as " an escort girl who loved the high life " who " chose the life of a kept woman , with multiple affairs with men she chose for their bank accounts and their assets " . Having struck gold when she married the 10th Earl of Shaftesbury , she then faced " looming financial disaster " in the event of a divorce and set out " consciously and without constraint , to accomplish his assassination " . 
 Testimony was presented that in October 2002 , Mme M 'Barek had convinced the peer that she was pregnant with his child , and as a result , Shaftesbury married her on 5 November 2002 . Shaftesbury made out a new will leaving his new wife properties in Ireland and France . Two years later , with no child forthcoming , he began looking elsewhere for affection . When Shaftesbury initiated divorce proceedings , his wife feared losing her valuable inheritance and began to take steps to secure her financial future . 
 Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper testified . " When my brother said he would divorce her , she would not accept " . She stated that before the separation , Shaftesbury was convinced by his wife to sell the Versailles flat . Testimony continued , regarding the disappearance of antique furniture and family artifacts . 
 [ Jamila ] and Mohammed arranged to empty the flat and when my brother asked where his mother 's furniture had gone to , she said it was on a boat to Tunisia where it was going to be sold . My brother was distraught . This was cruel emotional blackmail . In fact , the furniture was in storage in Cannes , but my brother never knew that . I have just managed to get hold of the key . 
 — Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper 
 = = = = Defence statements = = = = 
 Mme M 'Barek discounted the investigative report and stated that her marriage to Shaftesbury " was a curse " , describing her husband as " a loner " who " had no friends " which is why " he drank a lot " . She portrayed him as a " violent , sex @-@ crazed alcoholic , hooked on cocaine " . While she freely admitted that her brother had indeed killed her husband , she testified that it was all an accident . 
 There was blood on the floor . I did not know if it was my brother or my husband 's blood . My brother could not believe my husband was dead . 
 — Jamila M 'Barek 
 She further admitted that after her husband was dead , she helped her brother load his body into the boot of his black BMW . She prefaced this admission with additional claims . 
 He forced me to put the body in the boot of the car . He forced me to follow him as I thought we were going to a hospital . Then he asked me to go away . 
 — Jamila M 'Barek 
 Her brother Mohammed M 'Barek presented a similar defence . 
 I am innocent , my sister is innocent . It was an accident . 
 — Mohammed M 'Barek 
 According to Monsieur M 'Barek 's account of events , he had been drinking heavily and smoking cannabis when he was confronted with the " excited and aggressive " 10th Earl of Shaftesbury . A fight then broke out during which he " accidentally " strangled his brother @-@ in @-@ law while attempting to restrain him . Although M 'Barek was rather hazy on the details , he testified , " I don 't know how it happened . It happened in a minute " . He further stated that he had done everything he could to save the Earl , including mouth @-@ to @-@ mouth resuscitation and heart massage , but it " was too late . He had left us " . 
 Mohammed M 'Barek expressed frustration with the French authorities that had kept him " in prison for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years for nothing " . He thought it was an outrage that the French regarded the dumping of an inconveniently dead body in a ravine as a crime . He even went so far as to appeal to the new French president Nicolas Sarkozy for justice . On the third day of the trial , the courtroom descended into chaos as Monsieur M 'Barek burst into tears then jumped to his feet pointing at Shaftesbury 's family . He attempted to blame the Ashley @-@ Cooper family for the peer 's death , claiming that they were the guilty ones . " You 're the guilty ones , you the rich , who want to take his inheritance ! " he shouted as police wrestled with him in the dock . After refusing requests from his lawyer and the judge to sit down and be quiet , M 'Barek was taken down to the cells and the hearing temporarily adjourned . 
 The French authorities suspected that there was a conspiracy to murder Shaftesbury , when they discovered that Mme M 'Barek transferred € 150 @,@ 000 into her brother 's bank account the week following her husband 's disappearance . The prosecution viewed this as payment for services rendered , although Mme M 'Barek testified that she had given her brother the money in order for him to buy a house for their ailing mother . 
 In her defence , Mme M 'Barek denied any financial motive in wishing her husband dead and claimed that she had no need of his fortune , stating that she had " always been prosperous " . She testified that the source of her prosperity was the generosity of wealthy individuals who were prepared to pay for her company . She named three prominent celebrities as her former clients . All three individuals denied ever meeting Jamila M 'Barek and declined to attend court to comment on her allegations or serve as character witnesses . 
 Mme M 'Barek further stated that the arguments she had with her husband had nothing to do with money , but rather arose as a result of Lord Shaftesbury 's excessive sexual demands brought on by his seemingly endless injections of testosterone . 
 = = = = Conviction and sentencing = = = = 
 The strongest piece of evidence presented by the prosecution were details revealed in a secretly recorded telephone conversation between the defendant and her sister , Naima , in which <unk> M 'Barek discussed £ 100 @,@ 000 ( € 150 @,@ 000 ) blood money paid to her brother . She additionally recounted precisely how she was going to blame her brother for her husband 's death . 
 The wiretap also uncovered the truth about Mme M 'Barek 's visit to the remote spot where her husband 's body was found . This was supported when downloaded records from the GPS tracking device in her cellphone provided details that she ( or at least her cellphone ) had been there two days prior to Shaftesbury 's death . 
 On 25 May 2007 , after deliberating for two hours , the jury returned guilty verdicts against both brother and sister . Mme M 'Barek and her brother were each sentenced to 25 years in prison . Under French law , they each have an automatic right to appeal their conviction , which results in a retrial of the case . 
 After the trial , Mohammed M 'Barek was admitted to a psychiatric ward . His initial plans to appeal have been dropped . On appeal by his sister , the court was informed that he was in an " incoherent and mostly delirious state " and would be unable to testify on either his behalf or on the behalf of his sister . 
 On 4 February 2009 , Mme M 'Barek appeared in a court in southern France to appeal her conviction . After the jury deliberated for four hours , her sentence was reduced from 25 to 20 years at a court of appeal in Aix @-@ en @-@ Provence . 
 With all appeals exhausted , the late peer 's son , Nicholas Ashley @-@ Cooper , 12th Earl of Shaftesbury , expressed his relief at the verdict and said he could now get on with his life after closing a " very painful chapter " . 
 = = Styles of address = = 
 1938 @-@ 1947 : The Honourable Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper 
 1947 @-@ 1961 : Lord Ashley 
 1961 @-@ 2004 : The Right Honourable The Earl of Shaftesbury 
 = = Funeral and burial = = 
 On 30 September 2005 , funeral services were held for Anthony Ashley @-@ Cooper , 10th Earl of Shaftesbury . Hundreds of mourners were in attendance , held at the parish church in Wimborne St Giles . Those in attendance included Shaftesbury 's second wife , Christina , Countess of Shaftesbury ; his son , Nicholas Ashley @-@ Cooper ; and his sister , Lady Frances Ashley @-@ Cooper . 
 Charles Palmer @-@ Tomkinson read from Khalil Gibran 's The Prophet , while Shaftesbury 's sister read from For These Once Mine , by George Santayana . " The Prayer of St Francis of Assisi " was read by Shaftesbury 's son , Nicholas , who inherited the title of 12th Earl of Shaftesbury in 2005 . 
 After the 45 @-@ minute service , Shaftesbury 's ashes were taken to the church and placed in the family crypt in Wimborne St Giles . He was buried next to his eldest son , Anthony Nils Christian Ashley @-@ Cooper , 11th Earl of Shaftesbury , who died on 15 May 2005 , six months after his father . Reverend David <unk> , parish priest said after the ceremony , " It was a very inspiring occasion . They have had a very difficult time and have borne it with great dignity and fortitude " . 
 = Edward Elgar = 
 Sir Edward William Elgar , 1st Baronet OM GCVO ( 2 June 1857 – 23 February 1934 ) was an English composer , many of whose works have entered the British and international classical concert repertoire . Among his best @-@ known compositions are orchestral works including the Enigma Variations , the Pomp and Circumstance Marches , concertos for violin and cello , and two symphonies . He also composed choral works , including The Dream of Gerontius , chamber music and songs . He was appointed Master of the King 's Musick in 1924 . 
 Although Elgar is often regarded as a typically English composer , most of his musical influences were not from England but from continental Europe . He felt himself to be an outsider , not only musically , but socially . In musical circles dominated by academics , he was a self @-@ taught composer ; in Protestant Britain , his Roman Catholicism was regarded with suspicion in some quarters ; and in the class @-@ conscious society of Victorian and Edwardian Britain , he was acutely sensitive about his humble origins even after he achieved recognition . He nevertheless married the daughter of a senior British army officer . She inspired him both musically and socially , but he struggled to achieve success until his forties , when after a series of moderately successful works his Enigma Variations ( 1899 ) became immediately popular in Britain and overseas . He followed the Variations with a choral work , The Dream of Gerontius ( 1900 ) , based on a Roman Catholic text that caused some disquiet in the Anglican establishment in Britain , but it became , and has remained , a core repertory work in Britain and elsewhere . His later full @-@ length religious choral works were well received but have not entered the regular repertory . 
 In his fifties , Elgar composed a symphony and a violin concerto that were immensely successful . His second symphony and his cello concerto did not gain immediate public popularity and took many years to achieve a regular place in the concert repertory of British orchestras . Elgar 's music came , in his later years , to be seen as appealing chiefly to British audiences . His stock remained low for a generation after his death . It began to revive significantly in the 1960s , helped by new recordings of his works . Some of his works have , in recent years , been taken up again internationally , but the music continues to be played more in Britain than elsewhere . 
 Elgar has been described as the first composer to take the gramophone seriously . Between 1914 and 1925 , he conducted a series of acoustic recordings of his works . The introduction of the microphone in 1925 made far more accurate sound reproduction possible , and Elgar made new recordings of most of his major orchestral works and excerpts from The Dream of Gerontius . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Edward Elgar was born in the small village of Lower Broadheath , outside Worcester , England . His father , William Henry Elgar ( 1821 – 1906 ) , was raised in Dover and had been apprenticed to a London music publisher . In 1841 William moved to Worcester , where he worked as a piano tuner and set up a shop selling sheet music and musical instruments . In 1848 he married Ann Greening ( 1822 – 1902 ) , daughter of a farm worker . Edward was the fourth of their seven children . Ann Elgar had converted to Roman Catholicism shortly before Edward 's birth , and he was baptised and brought up as a Roman Catholic , to the disapproval of his father . William Elgar was a violinist of professional standard and held the post of organist of St. George 's Roman Catholic Church , Worcester , from 1846 to 1885 . At his instigation , masses by Cherubini and Hummel were first heard at the Three Choirs Festival by the orchestra in which he played the violin . All the Elgar children received a musical upbringing . By the age of eight , Elgar was taking piano and violin lessons , and his father , who tuned the pianos at many grand houses in Worcestershire , would sometimes take him along , giving him the chance to display his skill to important local figures . 
 Elgar 's mother was interested in the arts and encouraged his musical development . He inherited from her a discerning taste for literature and a passionate love of the countryside . His friend and biographer W. H. " Billy " Reed wrote that Elgar 's early surroundings had an influence that " permeated all his work and gave to his whole life that subtle but none the less true and sturdy English quality " . He began composing at an early age ; for a play written and acted by the Elgar children when he was about ten , he wrote music that forty years later he rearranged with only minor changes and orchestrated as the suites titled The Wand of Youth . 
 Until he was fifteen , Elgar received a general education at Littleton ( now Lyttleton ) House school , near Worcester . However , his only formal musical training beyond piano and violin lessons from local teachers consisted of more advanced violin studies with Adolf Pollitzer , during brief visits to London in 1877 – 78 . Elgar said , " my first music was learnt in the Cathedral ... from books borrowed from the music library , when I was eight , nine or ten . " He worked through manuals of instruction on organ playing and read every book he could find on the theory of music . He later said that he had been most helped by Hubert Parry 's articles in the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians . Elgar began to learn German , in the hope of going to the Leipzig Conservatory for further musical studies , but his father could not afford to send him . Years later , a profile in The Musical Times considered that his failure to get to Leipzig was fortunate for Elgar 's musical development : " Thus the budding composer escaped the dogmatism of the schools . " However , it was a disappointment to Elgar that on leaving school in 1872 he went not to Leipzig but to the office of a local solicitor as a clerk . He did not find an office career congenial , and for fulfilment he turned not only to music but to literature , becoming a voracious reader . Around this time , he made his first public appearances as a violinist and organist . 
 After a few months , Elgar left the solicitor to embark on a musical career , giving piano and violin lessons and working occasionally in his father 's shop . He was an active member of the Worcester Glee Club , along with his father , and he accompanied singers , played the violin , composed and arranged works , and conducted for the first time . Pollitzer believed that , as a violinist , Elgar had the potential to be one of the leading soloists in the country , but Elgar himself , having heard leading virtuosi at London concerts , felt his own violin playing lacked a full enough tone , and he abandoned his ambitions to be a soloist . At twenty @-@ two he took up the post of conductor of the attendants ' band at the Worcester and County Lunatic Asylum in Powick , three miles ( five km ) from Worcester . The band consisted of : piccolo , flute , clarinet , two cornets , euphonium , three or four first and a similar number of second violins , occasional viola , cello , double bass and piano . Elgar coached the players and wrote and arranged their music , including quadrilles and polkas , for the unusual combination of instruments . The Musical Times wrote , " This practical experience proved to be of the greatest value to the young musician . ... He acquired a practical knowledge of the capabilities of these different instruments . ... He thereby got to know intimately the tone colour , the ins and outs of these and many other instruments . " He held the post for five years , from 1879 , travelling to Powick once a week . Another post he held in his early days was professor of the violin at the Worcester College for the Blind Sons of Gentlemen . 
 Although rather solitary and introspective by nature , Elgar thrived in Worcester 's musical circles . He played in the violins at the Worcester and Birmingham Festivals , and one great experience was to play Dvořák 's Symphony No. 6 and Stabat Mater under the composer 's baton . Elgar regularly played the bassoon in a wind quintet , alongside his brother Frank , an oboist ( and conductor who ran his own wind band ) . Elgar arranged numerous pieces by Mozart , Beethoven , Haydn , and others for the quintet , honing his arranging and compositional skills . 
 In his first trips abroad , Elgar visited Paris in 1880 and Leipzig in 1882 . He heard Saint @-@ Saëns play the organ at the Madeleine and attended concerts by first @-@ rate orchestras . In 1882 he wrote , " I got pretty well dosed with Schumann ( my ideal ! ) , Brahms , Rubinstein & Wagner , so had no cause to complain . " In Leipzig he visited a friend , Helen Weaver , who was a student at the Conservatoire . They became engaged in the summer of 1883 , but for unknown reasons the engagement was broken off the next year . Elgar was greatly distressed , and some of his later cryptic dedications of romantic music may have alluded to Helen and his feelings for her . Throughout his life , Elgar was often inspired by close women friends ; Helen Weaver was succeeded by Mary Lygon , Dora Penny , Julia Worthington , Alice Stuart Wortley and finally Vera <unk> , who enlivened his old age . 
 In 1883 , while a regular member of the orchestra for W. C. Stockley 's winter concert seasons in Birmingham , Elgar took part in a performance of one of his first works for full orchestra , the Sérénade <unk> . Stockley had invited him to conduct the piece , but , as Stockley later recalled , " he declined , and , further , insisted upon playing in his place in the orchestra . The consequence was that he had to appear , fiddle in hand , to acknowledge the genuine and hearty applause of the audience . " He often went to London in an attempt to get his works published , but this period in his life found him frequently despondent and low on money . He wrote to a friend in April 1884 , " My prospects are about as hopeless as ever ... I am not wanting in energy I think , so sometimes I conclude that ' tis want of ability . ... I have no money – not a cent . " 
 = = = Marriage = = = 
 When Elgar was twenty @-@ nine , he took on a new pupil , Caroline Alice Roberts , daughter of the late Major @-@ General Sir Henry Roberts , and a published author of verse and prose fiction . Eight years older than Elgar , Alice became his wife three years later . Elgar 's biographer Michael Kennedy writes , " Alice 's family was horrified by her intention to marry an unknown musician who worked in a shop and was a Roman Catholic . She was disinherited . " They were married on 8 May 1889 , at Brompton Oratory . From then until her death she acted as his business manager and social secretary , dealt with his mood swings and was a perceptive musical critic . She did her best to gain him the attention of influential society , though with limited success . In time he would learn to accept the honours given him , realising that they mattered more to her and her social class and recognising what she had given up to further his career . In her diary she wrote , " The care of a genius is enough of a life work for any woman . " As an engagement present , Elgar dedicated his short violin and piano piece Salut d 'Amour to her . With Alice 's encouragement , the <unk> moved to London to be closer to the centre of British musical life , and Elgar started devoting his time to composition . Their only child , Carice Irene , was born at their home in West Kensington on 14 August 1890 . Her name , revealed in Elgar 's dedication of Salut d 'Amour , was a contraction of her mother 's names Caroline and Alice . 
 Elgar took full advantage of the opportunity to hear unfamiliar music . In the days before miniature scores and recordings were available , it was not easy for young composers to get to know new music . Elgar took every chance to do so at the Crystal Palace concerts . He and Alice attended day after day , hearing music by a wide range of composers . Among these were masters of orchestration from whom he learned much , such as Berlioz and Richard Wagner . His own compositions , however , made little impact on London 's musical scene . August <unk> conducted Elgar 's orchestral version of Salut d 'amour and the Suite in D at the Crystal Palace , and two publishers accepted some of Elgar 's violin pieces , organ voluntaries , and partsongs . Some tantalising opportunities seemed to be within reach but vanished unexpectedly . For example , an offer from the Royal Opera House , Covent Garden , to run through some of his works was withdrawn at the last second when Sir Arthur Sullivan arrived unannounced to rehearse some of his own music . Sullivan was horrified when Elgar later told him what had happened . Elgar 's only important commission while in London came from his home city : the Worcester Festival Committee invited him to compose a short orchestral work for the 1890 Three Choirs Festival . The result is described by Diana McVeagh in the Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , as " his first major work , the assured and uninhibited Froissart . " Elgar conducted the first performance in Worcester in September 1890 . For lack of other work , he was obliged to leave London in 1891 and return with his wife and child to Worcestershire , where he could earn a living conducting local musical ensembles and teaching . They settled in Alice 's former home town , Great Malvern . 
 = = = Growing reputation = = = 
 During the 1890s , Elgar gradually built up a reputation as a composer , chiefly of works for the great choral festivals of the English Midlands . The Black Knight ( 1892 ) and King Olaf ( 1896 ) , both inspired by Longfellow , The Light of Life ( 1896 ) and Caractacus ( 1898 ) were all modestly successful , and he obtained a long @-@ standing publisher in Novello and Co . Other works of this decade included the Serenade for Strings ( 1892 ) and Three Bavarian Dances ( 1897 ) . Elgar was of enough consequence locally to recommend the young composer Samuel Coleridge @-@ Taylor to the Three Choirs Festival for a concert piece , which helped establish the younger man 's career . Elgar was catching the attention of prominent critics , but their reviews were polite rather than enthusiastic . Although he was in demand as a festival composer , he was only just getting by financially and felt unappreciated . In 1898 , he said he was " very sick at heart over music " and hoped to find a way to succeed with a larger work . His friend August Jaeger tried to lift his spirits : " A day 's attack of the blues ... will not drive away your desire , your necessity , which is to exercise those creative faculties which a kind providence has given you . Your time of universal recognition will come . " 
 In 1899 , that prediction suddenly came true . At the age of forty @-@ two , Elgar produced the Enigma Variations , which were premiered in London under the baton of the eminent German conductor Hans Richter . In Elgar 's own words , " I have sketched a set of Variations on an original theme . The Variations have amused me because I 've labelled them with the nicknames of my particular friends ... that is to say I 've written the variations each one to represent the mood of the ' party ' ( the person ) ... and have written what I think they would have written – if they were asses enough to compose " . He dedicated the work " To my friends pictured within " . Probably the best known variation is " Nimrod " , depicting Jaeger . Purely musical considerations led Elgar to omit variations depicting Arthur Sullivan and Hubert Parry , whose styles he tried but failed to incorporate in the variations . The large @-@ scale work was received with general acclaim for its originality , charm and craftsmanship , and it established Elgar as the pre @-@ eminent British composer of his generation . 
 The work is formally titled Variations on an Original Theme ; the word " Enigma " appears over the first six bars of music , which led to the familiar version of the title . The enigma is that , although there are fourteen variations on the " original theme " , there is another overarching theme , never identified by Elgar , which he said " runs through and over the whole set " but is never heard . Later commentators have observed that although Elgar is today regarded as a characteristically English composer , his orchestral music and this work in particular share much with the Central European tradition typified at the time by the work of Richard Strauss . The Enigma Variations were well received in Germany and Italy , and remain to the present day a worldwide concert staple . 
 = = = National and international fame = = = 
 Elgar 's biographer Basil Maine commented , " When Sir Arthur Sullivan died in 1900 it became apparent to many that Elgar , although a composer of another build , was his true successor as first musician of the land . " Elgar 's next major work was eagerly awaited . For the Birmingham Triennial Music Festival of 1900 , he set Cardinal John Henry Newman 's poem The Dream of Gerontius for soloists , chorus and orchestra . Richter conducted the premiere , which was marred by a poorly prepared chorus , which sang badly . Critics recognised the mastery of the piece despite the defects in performance . It was performed in Düsseldorf , Germany , in 1901 and again in 1902 , conducted by Julius <unk> , who also conducted the European premiere of the Enigma Variations in 1901 . The German press was enthusiastic . The Cologne Gazette said , " In both parts we meet with beauties of imperishable value . ... Elgar stands on the shoulders of Berlioz , Wagner , and Liszt , from whose influences he has freed himself until he has become an important individuality . He is one of the leaders of musical art of modern times . " The Düsseldorfer Volksblatt wrote , " A memorable and epoch @-@ making first performance ! Since the days of Liszt nothing has been produced in the way of oratorio ... which reaches the greatness and importance of this sacred cantata . " Richard Strauss , then widely viewed as the leading composer of his day , was so impressed that in Elgar 's presence he proposed a toast to the success of " the first English progressive musician , Meister Elgar . " Performances in Vienna , Paris and New York followed , and The Dream of Gerontius soon became equally admired in Britain . According to Kennedy , " It is unquestionably the greatest British work in the oratorio form ... [ it ] opened a new chapter in the English choral tradition and liberated it from its Handelian preoccupation . " Elgar , as a Roman Catholic , was much moved by Newman 's poem about the death and redemption of a sinner , but some influential members of the Anglican establishment disagreed . His colleague , Charles Villiers Stanford complained that the work " stinks of incense " . The Dean of Gloucester banned Gerontius from his cathedral in 1901 , and at Worcester the following year , the Dean insisted on <unk> before allowing a performance . 
 Elgar is probably best known for the first of the five Pomp and Circumstance Marches , which were composed between 1901 and 1930 . It is familiar to millions of television viewers all over the world every year who watch the Last Night of the Proms , where it is traditionally performed . When the theme of the slower middle section ( technically called the " trio " ) of the first march came into his head , he told his friend Dora Penny , " I 've got a tune that will knock ' em – will knock ' em flat " . When the first march was played in 1901 at a London Promenade Concert , it was conducted by Henry J. Wood , who later wrote that the audience " rose and yelled ... the one and only time in the history of the Promenade concerts that an orchestral item was accorded a double encore . " To mark the coronation of Edward VII , Elgar was commissioned to set A. C. Benson 's Coronation Ode for a gala concert at the Royal Opera House in June 1901 . The approval of the king was confirmed , and Elgar began work . The contralto Clara Butt had persuaded him that the trio of the first Pomp and Circumstance march could have words fitted to it , and Elgar invited Benson to do so . Elgar incorporated the new vocal version into the Ode . The publishers of the score recognised the potential of the vocal piece , " Land of Hope and Glory " , and asked Benson and Elgar to make a further revision for publication as a separate song . It was immensely popular and is now considered an unofficial British national anthem . In the United States , the trio , known simply as " Pomp and Circumstance " or " The Graduation March " , has been adopted since 1905 for virtually all high school and university graduations . 
 In March 1904 a three @-@ day festival of Elgar 's works was presented at Covent Garden , an honour never before given to any English composer . The Times commented , " Four or five years ago if any one had predicted that the Opera @-@ house would be full from floor to ceiling for the performance of an oratorio by an English composer he would probably have been supposed to be out of his mind . " The king and queen attended the first concert , at which Richter conducted The Dream of Gerontius , and returned the next evening for the second , the London premiere of The Apostles ( first heard the previous year at the Birmingham Festival ) . The final concert of the festival , conducted by Elgar , was primarily orchestral , apart for an excerpt from Caractacus and the complete Sea Pictures ( sung by Clara Butt ) . The orchestral items were Froissart , the Enigma Variations , Cockaigne , the first two ( at that time the only two ) Pomp and Circumstance marches , and the premiere of a new orchestral work , In the South ( Alassio ) , inspired by a holiday in Italy . 
 Elgar was knighted at Buckingham Palace on 5 July 1904 . The following month , he and his family moved to <unk> Gwyn , a large house on the outskirts of Hereford , overlooking the River Wye , where they lived until 1911 . Between 1902 and 1914 , Elgar was , in Kennedy 's words , at the zenith of popularity . He made four visits to the U.S. , including one conducting tour , and earned considerable fees from the performance of his music . Between 1905 and 1908 , he held the post of Peyton Professor of Music at the University of Birmingham . He had accepted the post reluctantly , feeling that a composer should not head a school of music . He was not at ease in the role , and his lectures caused controversy , with his attacks on the critics and on English music in general : " Vulgarity in the course of time may be refined . Vulgarity often goes with inventiveness ... but the commonplace mind can never be anything but commonplace . An Englishman will take you into a large room , beautifully proportioned , and will point out to you that it is white – all over white – and somebody will say , ' What exquisite taste ' . You know in your own mind , in your own soul , that it is not taste at all , that it is the want of taste , that is mere evasion . English music is white , and evades everything . " He regretted the controversy and was glad to hand on the post to his friend Granville Bantock in 1908 . His new life as a celebrity was a mixed blessing to the highly strung Elgar , as it interrupted his privacy , and he often was in ill @-@ health . He complained to Jaeger in 1903 , " My life is one continual giving up of little things which I love . " Both W. S. Gilbert and Thomas Hardy sought to collaborate with Elgar in this decade . Elgar refused , but would have collaborated with George Bernard Shaw had Shaw been willing . 
 Elgar 's principal composition in 1905 was the Introduction and Allegro for Strings , dedicated to Samuel Sanford , professor at Yale University . Elgar visited America in that year to conduct his music and to accept a doctorate from Yale . His next large @-@ scale work was the sequel to The Apostles – the oratorio The Kingdom ( 1906 ) . It was well received but did not catch the public imagination as The Dream of Gerontius had done and continued to do . Among keen <unk> , however , The Kingdom was sometimes preferred to the earlier work : Elgar 's friend Frank Schuster told the young Adrian Boult : " compared with The Kingdom , Gerontius is the work of a raw amateur . " As Elgar approached his fiftieth birthday , he began work on his first symphony , a project that had been in his mind in various forms for nearly ten years . His First Symphony ( 1908 ) was a national and international triumph . Within weeks of the premiere it was performed in New York under Walter Damrosch , Vienna under Ferdinand <unk> , St. Petersburg under Alexander <unk> , and Leipzig under Arthur Nikisch . There were performances in Rome , Chicago , Boston , Toronto and fifteen British towns and cities . In just over a year , it received a hundred performances in Britain , America and continental Europe . 
 The Violin Concerto ( 1910 ) was commissioned by Fritz Kreisler , one of the leading international violinists of the time . Elgar wrote it during the summer of 1910 , with occasional help from W. H. Reed , the leader of the London Symphony Orchestra , who helped the composer with advice on technical points . Elgar and Reed formed a firm friendship , which lasted for the rest of Elgar 's life . Reed 's biography , Elgar As I Knew Him ( 1936 ) , records many details of Elgar 's methods of composition . The work was presented by the Royal Philharmonic Society , with Kreisler and the London Symphony Orchestra , conducted by the composer . Reed recalled , " the Concerto proved to be a complete triumph , the concert a brilliant and unforgettable occasion . " So great was the impact of the concerto that Kreisler 's rival Eugène Ysaÿe spent much time with Elgar going through the work . There was great disappointment when contractual difficulties prevented Ysaÿe from playing it in London . 
 The Violin Concerto was Elgar 's last popular triumph . The following year he presented his Second Symphony in London , but was disappointed at its reception . Unlike the First Symphony , it ends not in a blaze of orchestral splendour but quietly and contemplatively . Reed , who played at the premiere , later wrote that Elgar was recalled to the platform several times to acknowledge the applause , " but missed that unmistakable note perceived when an audience , even an English audience , is thoroughly roused or worked up , as it was after the Violin Concerto or the First Symphony . " Elgar asked Reed , " What is the matter with them , Billy ? They sit there like a lot of stuffed pigs . " The work was , by normal standards , a success , with twenty @-@ seven performances within three years of its premiere , but it did not achieve the international furore of the First Symphony . 
 = = = Last major works = = = 
 In June 1911 , as part of the celebrations surrounding the coronation of King George V , Elgar was appointed to the Order of Merit , an honour limited to twenty @-@ four holders at any time . The following year , the <unk> moved back to London , to a large house in <unk> Gardens , Hampstead , designed by Norman Shaw . There Elgar composed his last two large @-@ scale works of the pre @-@ war era , the choral ode , The Music Makers ( for the Birmingham Festival , 1912 ) and the symphonic study Falstaff ( for the Leeds Festival , 1913 ) . Both were received politely but without enthusiasm . Even the dedicatee of Falstaff , the conductor Landon Ronald , confessed privately that he could not " make head or tail of the piece , " while the musical scholar Percy Scholes wrote of Falstaff that it was a " great work " but , " so far as public appreciation goes , a comparative failure . " 
 When World War I broke out , Elgar was horrified at the prospect of the carnage , but his patriotic feelings were nonetheless aroused . He composed " A Song for Soldiers " , which he later withdrew . He signed up as a special constable in the local police and later joined the Hampstead Volunteer Reserve of the army . He composed patriotic works , Carillon , a recitation for speaker and orchestra in honour of Belgium , and Polonia , an orchestral piece in honour of Poland . Land of Hope and Glory , already popular , became still more so , and Elgar wished in vain to have new , less nationalistic , words sung to the tune . 
 Elgar 's other compositions during the war included incidental music for a children 's play , The Starlight Express ( 1915 ) ; a ballet , The Sanguine Fan ( 1917 ) ; and The Spirit of England ( 1915 – 17 , to poems by Laurence Binyon ) , three choral settings very different in character from the romantic patriotism of his earlier years . His last large @-@ scale composition of the war years was The Fringes of the Fleet , settings of verses by Rudyard Kipling , performed with great popular success around the country , until Kipling for unexplained reasons objected to their performance in theatres . Elgar conducted a recording of the work for the Gramophone Company . 
 Towards the end of the war , Elgar was in poor health . His wife thought it best for him to move to the countryside , and she rented ' <unk> ' , a house near Fittleworth in Sussex , from the painter Rex <unk> Cole . There Elgar recovered his strength and , in 1918 and 1919 , he produced four large @-@ scale works . The first three of these were chamber pieces : the Violin Sonata in E minor , the Piano Quintet in A minor , and the String Quartet in E minor . On hearing the work in progress , Alice Elgar wrote in her diary , " E. writing wonderful new music " . All three works were well received . The Times wrote , " Elgar 's sonata contains much that we have heard before in other forms , but as we do not at all want him to change and be somebody else , that is as it should be . " The quartet and quintet were premiered at the Wigmore Hall on 21 May 1919 . The Manchester Guardian wrote , " This quartet , with its tremendous climaxes , curious refinements of dance @-@ rhythms , and its perfect symmetry , and the quintet , more lyrical and passionate , are as perfect examples of chamber music as the great oratorios were of their type . " 
 By contrast , the remaining work , the Cello Concerto in E minor , had a disastrous premiere , at the opening concert of the London Symphony Orchestra 's 1919 – 20 season in October 1919 . Apart from the Elgar work , which the composer conducted , the rest of the programme was conducted by Albert Coates , who overran his rehearsal time at the expense of Elgar 's . Lady Elgar wrote , " that brutal selfish ill @-@ mannered bounder ... that brute Coates went on rehearsing . " The critic of The Observer , Ernest Newman , wrote , " There have been rumours about during the week of inadequate rehearsal . Whatever the explanation , the sad fact remains that never , in all probability , has so great an orchestra made so lamentable an exhibition of itself . ... The work itself is lovely stuff , very simple – that pregnant simplicity that has come upon Elgar 's music in the last couple of years – but with a profound wisdom and beauty underlying its simplicity . " Elgar attached no blame to his soloist , Felix Salmond , who played for him again later . In contrast with the First Symphony and its hundred performances in just over a year , the Cello Concerto did not have a second performance in London for more than a year . 
 = = = Last years = = = 
 Although in the 1920s Elgar 's music was no longer in fashion , his admirers continued to present his works when possible . Reed singles out a performance of the Second Symphony in March 1920 conducted by " a young man almost unknown to the public " , Adrian Boult , for bringing " the grandeur and nobility of the work " to a wider public . Also in 1920 , Landon Ronald presented an all @-@ Elgar concert at the Queen 's Hall . Alice Elgar wrote with enthusiasm about the reception of the symphony , but this was one of the last times she heard Elgar 's music played in public . After a short illness , she died of lung cancer on 7 April 1920 , at the age of seventy @-@ two . 
 Elgar was devastated by the loss of his wife . With no public demand for new works , and deprived of Alice 's constant support and inspiration , he allowed himself to be deflected from composition . His daughter later wrote that Elgar inherited from his father a reluctance to " settle down to work on hand but could cheerfully spend hours over some perfectly unnecessary and entirely <unk> undertaking " , a trait that became stronger after Alice 's death . For much of the rest of his life , Elgar indulged himself in his several hobbies . Throughout his life he was a keen amateur chemist , sometimes using a laboratory in his back garden . He even patented the " Elgar <unk> Hydrogen Apparatus " in 1908 . He enjoyed football , supporting Wolverhampton Wanderers F.C. , for whom he composed an anthem , " He <unk> the Leather for Goal " , and in his later years he frequently attended <unk> . His protégés , the conductor Malcolm Sargent and violinist Yehudi Menuhin , both recalled rehearsals with Elgar at which he swiftly satisfied himself that all was well and then went off to the races . In his younger days , Elgar had been an enthusiastic cyclist , buying Royal Sunbeam bicycles for himself and his wife in 1903 ( he named his " Mr. Phoebus " ) . As an elderly widower , he enjoyed being driven about the countryside by his chauffeur . In November and December 1923 , he took a voyage to Brazil , journeying up the Amazon to Manaus , where he was impressed by its opera house , the Teatro Amazonas . Almost nothing is recorded about Elgar 's activities or the events that he encountered during the trip , which gave the novelist James Hamilton @-@ Paterson considerable latitude when writing Gerontius , a fictional account of the journey . 
 After Alice 's death , Elgar sold the Hampstead house , and after living for a short time in a flat in St James 's in the heart of London , he moved back to Worcestershire , to the village of Kempsey , where he lived from 1923 to 1927 . He did not wholly abandon composition in these years . He made large @-@ scale symphonic arrangements of works by Bach and Handel and wrote his Empire March and eight songs Pageant of Empire for the 1924 British Empire Exhibition . Shortly after these were published , he was appointed Master of the King 's Musick on 13 May 1924 , following the death of Sir Walter Parratt . 
 From 1926 onwards , Elgar made a series of recordings of his own works . Described by the music writer Robert Philip as " the first composer to take the gramophone seriously " , he had already recorded much of his music by the early acoustic @-@ recording process for His Master 's Voice ( HMV ) from 1914 onwards , but the introduction of electrical microphones in 1925 transformed the gramophone from a novelty into a realistic medium for reproducing orchestral and choral music . Elgar was the first composer to take full advantage of this technological advance . Fred Gaisberg of HMV , who produced Elgar 's recordings , set up a series of sessions to capture on disc the composer 's interpretations of his major orchestral works , including the Enigma Variations , Falstaff , the first and second symphonies , and the cello and violin concertos . For most of these , the orchestra was the LSO , but the Variations were played by the Royal Albert Hall Orchestra . Later in the series of recordings , Elgar also conducted two newly founded orchestras , Boult 's BBC Symphony Orchestra and Sir Thomas Beecham 's London Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 Elgar 's recordings were released on 78 @-@ rpm discs by both HMV and RCA Victor . After World War II , the 1932 recording of the Violin Concerto with the teenage Menuhin as soloist remained available on 78 and later on LP , but the other recordings were out of the catalogues for some years . When they were reissued by EMI on LP in the 1970s , they caused surprise to many by their fast tempi , in contrast to the slower speeds adopted by many conductors in the years since Elgar 's death . The recordings were reissued on CD in the 1990s . 
 In November 1931 , Elgar was filmed by Pathé for a newsreel depicting a recording session of Pomp and Circumstance March No. 1 at the opening of EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in London . It is believed to be the only surviving sound film of Elgar , who makes a brief remark before conducting the London Symphony Orchestra , asking the musicians to " play this tune as though you 've never heard it before . " A memorial plaque to Elgar at Abbey Road was unveiled on 24 June 1993 . 
 A late piece of Elgar 's , the Nursery Suite , was an early example of a studio premiere : its first performance was in the Abbey Road studios . For this work , dedicated to the wife and daughters of the Duke of York , Elgar once again drew on his youthful sketch @-@ books . 
 In his final years , Elgar experienced a musical revival . The BBC organised a festival of his works to celebrate his seventy @-@ fifth birthday , in 1932 . He flew to Paris in 1933 to conduct the Violin Concerto for Menuhin . While in France , he visited his fellow composer Frederick Delius at his house at Grez @-@ sur @-@ Loing . He was sought out by younger musicians such as Adrian Boult , Malcolm Sargent and John Barbirolli , who championed his music when it was out of fashion . He began work on an opera , The Spanish Lady , and accepted a commission from the BBC to compose a Third Symphony . His final illness , however , prevented their completion . He fretted about the unfinished works . He asked Reed to ensure that nobody would " tinker " with the sketches and attempt a completion of the symphony , but at other times he said , " If I can 't complete the Third Symphony , somebody will complete it – or write a better one . " After Elgar 's death , Percy M. Young , in cooperation with the BBC and Elgar 's daughter Carice , produced a version of The Spanish Lady , which was issued on CD . The Third Symphony sketches were elaborated by the composer Anthony Payne into a complete score in 1998 . 
 <unk> colorectal cancer was discovered during an operation on 8 October 1933 . He told his consulting doctor , Arthur Thomson , that he had no faith in an afterlife : " I believe there is nothing but complete oblivion . " Elgar died on 23 February 1934 at the age of seventy @-@ six and was buried next to his wife at St. <unk> 's Roman Catholic Church in Little Malvern . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Influences , antecedents and early works = = = 
 Elgar was contemptuous of folk music and had little interest in or respect for the early English composers , calling William Byrd and his contemporaries " museum pieces " . Of later English composers , he regarded Purcell as the greatest , and he said that he had learned much of his own technique from studying Hubert Parry 's writings . The continental composers who most influenced Elgar were Handel , Dvořák and , to some degree , Brahms . In Elgar 's chromaticism , the influence of Wagner is apparent , but Elgar 's individual style of orchestration owes much to the clarity of nineteenth @-@ century French composers , Berlioz , Massenet , Saint @-@ Saëns and , particularly , Delibes , whose music Elgar played and conducted at Worcester and greatly admired . 
 Elgar began composing when still a child , and all his life he drew on his early sketchbooks for themes and inspiration . The habit of assembling his compositions , even large @-@ scale ones , from scraps of themes jotted down randomly remained throughout his life . His early adult works included violin and piano pieces , music for the wind quintet in which he and his brother played between 1878 – 81 , and music of many types for the Powick Asylum band . Diana McVeagh in Grove 's Dictionary finds many embryonic Elgarian touches in these pieces , but few of them are regularly played , except Salut d 'Amour and ( as arranged decades later into The Wand of Youth Suites ) some of the childhood sketches . Elgar 's sole work of note during his first spell in London in 1889 – 91 , the overture Froissart , was a romantic @-@ bravura piece , influenced by Mendelssohn and Wagner , but also showing further Elgarian characteristics . Orchestral works composed during the subsequent years in Worcestershire include the Serenade for Strings and Three Bavarian Dances . In this period and later , Elgar wrote songs and partsongs . W. H. Reed expressed reservations about these pieces , but praised the <unk> The Snow , for female voices , and Sea Pictures , a cycle of five songs for contralto and orchestra which remains in the repertory . 
 Elgar 's principal large @-@ scale early works were for chorus and orchestra for the Three Choirs and other festivals . These were The Black Knight , King Olaf , The Light of Life , The Banner of St George and Caractacus . He also wrote a Te Deum and Benedictus for the Hereford Festival . Of these , McVeagh comments favourably on his lavish orchestration and innovative use of leitmotifs , but less favourably on the qualities of his chosen texts and the patchiness of his inspiration . McVeagh makes the point that , because these works of the 1890s were for many years little known ( and performances remain rare ) , the mastery of his first great success , the Enigma Variations , appeared to be a sudden transformation from mediocrity to genius , but in fact his orchestral skills had been building up throughout the decade . 
 = = = Peak creative years = = = 
 Elgar 's best @-@ known works were composed within the twenty @-@ one years between 1899 and 1920 . Most of them are orchestral . Reed wrote , " Elgar 's genius rose to its greatest height in his orchestral works " and quoted the composer as saying that , even in his oratorios , the orchestral part is the most important . The Enigma Variations made Elgar 's name nationally . The variation form was ideal for him at this stage of his career , when his comprehensive mastery of orchestration was still in contrast to his tendency to write his melodies in short , sometimes rigid , phrases . His next orchestral works , Cockaigne ( In London Town ) , a concert @-@ overture ( 1900 – 1901 ) , the first two Pomp and Circumstance marches ( 1901 ) , and the gentle Dream Children ( 1902 ) , are all short : the longest of them , Cockaigne , lasting less than fifteen minutes . In the South ( Alassio ) ( 1903 – 1904 ) , although designated by Elgar as a concert @-@ overture , is , according to Kennedy , really a tone poem and the longest continuous piece of purely orchestral writing Elgar had essayed . He wrote it after setting aside an early attempt to compose a symphony . The work reveals his continuing progress in writing sustained themes and orchestral lines , although some critics , including Kennedy , find that in the middle part " Elgar 's inspiration burns at less than its brightest . " In 1905 Elgar completed the Introduction and Allegro for Strings . This work is based , unlike much of Elgar 's earlier writing , not on a profusion of themes but on only three . Kennedy called it a " masterly composition , equalled among English works for strings only by Vaughan Williams 's Tallis Fantasia . " Nevertheless , at less than a quarter of an hour , it was not by contemporary standards a lengthy composition . Gustav Mahler 's Seventh Symphony , composed at the same time , runs for well over an hour . 
 During the next four years , however , Elgar composed three major concert pieces , which , though shorter than comparable works by some of his European contemporaries , are among the most substantial such works by an English composer . These were his First Symphony , Violin Concerto , and Second Symphony , which all play for between forty @-@ five minutes and an hour . McVeagh says of the symphonies that they " rank high not only in Elgar 's output but in English musical history . Both are long and powerful , without published programmes , only hints and quotations to indicate some inward drama from which they derive their vitality and eloquence . Both are based on classical form but differ from it to the extent that ... they were considered <unk> and slackly constructed by some critics . Certainly the invention in them is copious ; each symphony would need several dozen music examples to chart its progress . " 
 Elgar 's Violin Concerto and Cello Concerto , in the view of Kennedy , " rank not only among his finest works , but among the greatest of their kind " . They are , however , very different from each other . The Violin Concerto , composed in 1909 as Elgar reached the height of his popularity , and written for the instrument dearest to his heart , is lyrical throughout and <unk> and brilliant by turns . The Cello Concerto , composed a decade later , immediately after World War I , seems , in Kennedy 's words , " to belong to another age , another world ... the simplest of all Elgar 's major works ... also the least grandiloquent . " Between the two concertos came Elgar 's symphonic study Falstaff , which has divided opinion even among Elgar 's strongest admirers . Donald Tovey viewed it as " one of the immeasurably great things in music " , with power " identical with Shakespeare 's " , while Kennedy criticises the work for " too frequent reliance on sequences " and an over @-@ idealised depiction of the female characters . Reed thought that the principal themes show less distinction than some of Elgar 's earlier works . Elgar himself thought Falstaff the highest point of his purely orchestral work . 
 The major works for voices and orchestra of the twenty @-@ one years of Elgar 's middle period are three large @-@ scale works for soloists , chorus and orchestra : The Dream of Gerontius ( 1900 ) , and the oratorios The Apostles ( 1903 ) and The Kingdom ( 1906 ) ; and two shorter odes , the Coronation Ode ( 1902 ) and The Music Makers ( 1912 ) . The first of the odes , as a pièce d <unk> , has rarely been revived after its initial success , with the culminating " Land of Hope and Glory " . The second is , for Elgar , unusual in that it contains several quotations from his earlier works , as Richard Strauss quoted himself in Ein Heldenleben . The choral works were all successful , although the first , Gerontius , was and remains the best @-@ loved and most performed . On the manuscript Elgar wrote , quoting John Ruskin , " This is the best of me ; for the rest , I ate , and drank , and slept , loved and hated , like another . My life was as the vapour , and is not ; but this I saw , and knew ; this , if anything of mine , is worth your memory . " All three of the large @-@ scale works follow the traditional model with sections for soloists , chorus and both together . Elgar 's distinctive orchestration , as well as his melodic inspiration , lifts them to a higher level than most of their British predecessors . 
 Elgar 's other works of his middle period include incidental music for Grania and <unk> , a play by George Moore and W. B. Yeats ( 1901 ) , and for The Starlight Express , a play based on a story by Algernon Blackwood ( 1916 ) . Of the former , Yeats called Elgar 's music " wonderful in its heroic melancholy " . Elgar also wrote a number of songs during his peak period , of which Reed observes , " it cannot be said that he enriched the vocal repertory to the same extent as he did that of the orchestra . " 
 = = = Final years and posthumous completions = = = 
 After the Cello Concerto , Elgar completed no more large @-@ scale works . He made arrangements of works by Bach , Handel and Chopin , in distinctively Elgarian orchestration , and once again turned his youthful notebooks to use for the Nursery Suite ( 1931 ) . His other compositions of this period have not held a place in the regular repertory . For most of the rest of the twentieth century , it was generally agreed that Elgar 's creative impulse ceased after his wife 's death . Anthony Payne 's elaboration of the sketches for Elgar 's Third Symphony led to a reconsideration of this supposition . Elgar left the opening of the symphony complete in full score , and those pages , along with others , show Elgar 's orchestration changed markedly from the richness of his pre @-@ war work . The Gramophone described the opening of the new work as something " thrilling ... <unk> gaunt " . Payne also subsequently produced a performing version of the sketches for a sixth Pomp and Circumstance March , premiered at the Proms in August 2006 . Elgar 's sketches for a piano concerto dating from 1913 were elaborated by the composer Robert Walker and first performed in August 1997 by the pianist David Owen Norris . The realisation has since been extensively revised . 
 = = = Reputation = = = 
 Views of Elgar 's stature have varied in the decades since his music came to prominence at the beginning of the twentieth century . Richard Strauss , as noted , hailed Elgar as a progressive composer ; even the hostile reviewer in The Observer , unimpressed by the thematic material of the First Symphony in 1908 , called the orchestration " magnificently modern " . Hans Richter rated Elgar as " the greatest modern composer " in any country , and Richter 's colleague Arthur Nikisch considered the First Symphony " a masterpiece of the first order " to be " justly ranked with the great symphonic models – Beethoven and Brahms . " By contrast , the critic W. J. Turner , in the mid @-@ twentieth century , wrote of Elgar 's " Salvation Army symphonies , " and Herbert von Karajan called the Enigma Variations " second @-@ hand Brahms " . Elgar 's immense popularity was not long @-@ lived . After the success of his First Symphony and Violin Concerto , his Second Symphony and Cello Concerto were politely received but without the earlier wild enthusiasm . His music was identified in the public mind with the Edwardian era , and after the First World War he no longer seemed a progressive or modern composer . In the early 1920s , even the First Symphony had only one London performance in more than three years . Henry Wood and younger conductors such as Boult , Sargent and Barbirolli championed Elgar 's music , but in the recording catalogues and the concert programmes of the middle of the century his works were not well represented . 
 In 1924 , the music scholar Edward J. Dent wrote an article for a German music journal in which he identified four features of Elgar 's style that gave offence to a section of English opinion ( namely , Dent indicated , the academic and snobbish section ) : " too emotional " , " not quite free from vulgarity " , " pompous " , and " too deliberately noble in expression " . This article was reprinted in 1930 and caused controversy . In the later years of the century there was , in Britain at least , a revival of interest in Elgar 's music . The features that had offended austere taste in the inter @-@ war years were seen from a different perspective . In 1955 , the reference book The Record Guide wrote of the Edwardian background during the height of Elgar 's career : 
 <unk> self @-@ confidence , emotional vulgarity , material extravagance , a ruthless philistinism expressed in tasteless architecture and every kind of expensive yet hideous accessory : such features of a late phase of Imperial England are faithfully reflected in Elgar 's larger works and are apt to prove indigestible today . But if it is difficult to overlook the bombastic , the sentimental , and the trivial elements in his music , the effort to do so should nevertheless be made , for the sake of the many inspired pages , the power and eloquence and lofty pathos , of Elgar 's best work . ... Anyone who doubts the fact of Elgar 's genius should take the first opportunity of hearing The Dream of Gerontius , which remains his masterpiece , as it is his largest and perhaps most deeply felt work ; the symphonic study , Falstaff ; the Introduction and Allegro for Strings ; the Enigma Variations ; and the Violoncello Concerto . 
 By the 1960s , a less severe view was being taken of the Edwardian era . In 1966 the critic Frank Howes wrote that Elgar reflected the last blaze of opulence , expansiveness and full @-@ blooded life , before World War I swept so much away . In Howes 's view , there was a touch of vulgarity in both the era and Elgar 's music , but " a composer is entitled to be judged by posterity for his best work . ... Elgar is historically important for giving to English music a sense of the orchestra , for expressing what it felt like to be alive in the Edwardian age , for conferring on the world at least four unqualified masterpieces , and for thereby restoring England to the comity of musical nations . " 
 In 1967 the critic and analyst David Cox considered the question of the supposed Englishness of Elgar 's music . Cox noted that Elgar disliked folk @-@ songs and never used them in his works , opting for an idiom that was essentially German , leavened by a lightness derived from French composers including Berlioz and Gounod . How then , asked Cox , could Elgar be " the most English of composers " ? Cox found the answer in Elgar 's own personality , which " could use the alien idioms in such a way as to make of them a vital form of expression that was his and his alone . And the personality that comes through in the music is English . " This point about Elgar 's transmuting his influences had been touched on before . In 1930 The Times wrote , " When Elgar 's first symphony came out , someone attempted to prove that its main tune on which all depends was like the Grail theme in Parsifal . ... but the attempt fell flat because everyone else , including those who disliked the tune , had instantly recognized it as typically ' Elgarian ' , while the Grail theme is as typically Wagnerian . " As for Elgar 's " Englishness " , his fellow @-@ composers recognised it : Richard Strauss and Stravinsky made particular reference to it , and Sibelius called him , " the personification of the true English character in music ... a noble personality and a born aristocrat " . 
 Among Elgar 's admirers there is disagreement about which of his works are to be regarded as masterpieces . The Enigma Variations are generally counted among them . The Dream of Gerontius has also been given high praise by <unk> , and the Cello Concerto is similarly rated . Many rate the Violin Concerto equally highly , but some do not . Sackville @-@ West omitted it from the list of Elgar masterpieces in The Record Guide , and in a long analytical article in The Musical Quarterly , Daniel Gregory Mason criticised the first movement of the concerto for a " kind of sing @-@ <unk> ... as fatal to noble rhythm in music as it is in poetry . " Falstaff also divides opinion . It has never been a great popular favourite , and Kennedy and Reed identify shortcomings in it . In a Musical Times 1957 centenary symposium on Elgar led by Vaughan Williams , by contrast , several contributors share Eric Blom 's view that Falstaff is the greatest of all Elgar 's works . 
 The two symphonies divide opinion even more sharply . Mason rates the Second poorly for its " over @-@ obvious rhythmic scheme " , but calls the First " Elgar 's masterpiece . ... It is hard to see how any candid student can deny the greatness of this symphony . " However , in the 1957 centenary symposium , several leading admirers of Elgar express reservations about one or both symphonies . In the same year , Roger Fiske wrote in The Gramophone , " For some reason few people seem to like the two Elgar symphonies equally ; each has its champions and often they are more than a little bored by the rival work . " The critic John Warrack wrote , " There are no sadder pages in symphonic literature than the close of the First Symphony 's Adagio , as horn and trombones twice softly intone a phrase of utter grief " , whereas to Michael Kennedy , the movement is notable for its lack of anguished yearning and angst and is marked instead by a " benevolent tranquillity . " 
 Despite the fluctuating critical assessment of the various works over the years , Elgar 's major works taken as a whole have in the twenty @-@ first century recovered strongly from their neglect in the 1950s . The Record Guide in 1955 could list only one currently available recording of the First Symphony , none of the Second , one of the Violin Concerto , two of the Cello Concerto , two of the Enigma Variations , one of Falstaff , and none of The Dream of Gerontius . Since then there have been multiple recordings of all the major works . More than thirty recordings have been made of the First Symphony since 1955 , for example , and more than a dozen of The Dream of Gerontius . Similarly , in the concert hall , Elgar 's works , after a period of neglect , are once again frequently programmed . The Elgar Society 's website , in its diary of forthcoming performances , lists performances of Elgar 's works by orchestras , soloists and conductors across Europe , North America and Australia . 
 = = Honours , awards and commemorations = = 
 Elgar was knighted in 1904 , and in 1911 he was appointed a member of the Order of Merit . In 1920 he received the Cross of Commander of the Belgian Order of the Crown ; in 1924 he was made Master of the King 's Musick ; the following year he received the Gold Medal of the Royal Philharmonic Society ; and in 1928 he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Royal Victorian Order ( KCVO ) . Between 1900 and 1931 , Elgar received honorary degrees from the Universities of Cambridge , Durham , Leeds , Oxford , Yale ( USA ) , Aberdeen , Western Pennsylvania ( USA ) , Birmingham and London . Foreign academies of which he was made a member were Regia Accademia di Santa Cecilia , Rome ; Accademia del Reale Istituto Musicale , Florence ; Académie des Beaux Arts , Paris ; Institut de France ; and the American Academy . In 1931 he was created a Baronet , of Broadheath in the County of Worcester . In 1933 he was promoted within the Royal Victorian Order to Knight Grand Cross ( GCVO ) . In Kennedy 's words , he " shamelessly touted " for a peerage , but in vain . In Who 's Who , post World War I , he claimed to have been awarded " several Imperial Russian and German decorations ( lapsed ) " . 
 The house in Lower Broadheath where Elgar was born is now the Elgar Birthplace Museum , devoted to his life and work . Elgar 's daughter , Carice , helped to found the museum in 1936 and bequeathed to it much of her collection of Elgar 's letters and documents on her death in 1970 . Carice left Elgar manuscripts to musical colleges : The Black Knight to Trinity College of Music ; King Olaf to the Royal Academy of Music ; The Music Makers to Birmingham University ; the Cello Concerto to the Royal College of Music ; The Kingdom to the Bodleian Library ; and other manuscripts to the British Museum . The Elgar Society dedicated to the composer and his works was formed in 1951 . The University of Birmingham 's Special Collections contain an archive of letters written by Elgar . 
 Elgar 's statue at the end of Worcester High Street stands facing the cathedral , only yards from where his father 's shop once stood . Another statue of the composer by Rose Garrard is at the top of Church Street in Malvern , overlooking the town and giving visitors an opportunity to stand next to the composer in the shadow of the Hills that he so often regarded . In September 2005 , a third statue sculpted by Jemma Pearson was unveiled near Hereford Cathedral in honour of his many musical and other associations with the city . It depicts Elgar with his bicycle . From 1999 until early 2007 , new Bank of England twenty pound notes featured a portrait of Elgar . The change to remove his image generated controversy , particularly because 2007 was the 150th anniversary of Elgar 's birth . From 2007 the Elgar notes were phased out , ceasing to be legal tender on 30 June 2010 . 
 There are around 65 roads in the UK named after Elgar , including six in the counties of Herefordshire and Worcestershire . Elgar had three locomotives named in his honour . 
 Elgar 's life and music have inspired works of literature including the novel Gerontius and several plays . Elgar 's Rondo , a 1993 stage play by David Pownall depicts the dead Jaeger offering ghostly advice on Elgar 's musical development . Pownall also wrote a radio play , Elgar 's Third ( 1994 ) ; another Elgar @-@ themed radio play is Alick Rowe 's The <unk> Variation ( 2003 ) . David Rudkin 's BBC television " Play for Today " Penda 's Fen ( 1974 ) deals with themes including sex and adolescence , spying , and snobbery , with Elgar 's music , chiefly The Dream of Gerontius , as its background . In one scene , a ghostly Elgar whispers the secret of the " Enigma " tune to the youthful central character , with an injunction not to reveal it . Elgar on the Journey to Hanley , a novel by Keith <unk> ( 1979 ) , tells of the composer 's attachment to Dora Penny , later Mrs Powell , ( depicted as " <unk> " in the Enigma Variations ) , and covers the fifteen years from their first meeting in the mid @-@ 1890s to the genesis of the Violin Concerto when , in the novel , Dora has been supplanted in Elgar 's affections by Alice Stuart @-@ Wortley . 
 Perhaps the best @-@ known work depicting Elgar is Ken Russell 's 1962 BBC television film Elgar , made when the composer was still largely out of fashion . This hour @-@ long film contradicted the view of Elgar as a jingoistic and bombastic composer , and evoked the more pastoral and melancholy side of his character and music . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 The following have been selected as representative of Elgar 's works , based on quality , significance and popularity . 
 = = = Orchestral = = = 
 Froissart , concert overture , Op. 19 ( 1890 ) 
 Serenade for Strings , Op. 20 ( 1888 – 1892 ) 
 Variations on an Original Theme ( Enigma ) , Op. 36 ( 1899 ) 
 includes Variation 9 Nimrod 
 Cockaigne ( In London Town ) , concert overture , Op. 40 ( 1900 – 1901 ) 
 Pomp and Circumstance , five marches , all Op. 39 ( 1901 – 1930 ) 
 March No. 1 in D ( 1901 ) ( The trio contains the tune known as Land of Hope and Glory ) 
 In the South ( Alassio ) , concert overture , Op. 50 ( 1903 – 1904 ) 
 Introduction and Allegro for strings ( quartet and orchestra ) , Op. 47 ( 1904 – 05 ) 
 The Wand of Youth , suites Nos. 1 and 2 , Opp . 1a / b ( 1867 – 71 , rev. 1907 / 8 ) 
 Symphony No. 1 in A @-@ flat , Op. 55 ( 1907 – 1908 ) 
 Violin Concerto in B minor , Op. 61 ( 1909 – 1910 ) 
 Romance for bassoon and orchestra , Op. 62 ( 1910 ) 
 Symphony No. 2 in E @-@ flat , Op. 63 ( 1909 – 1911 ) 
 Falstaff , symphonic study , Op. 68 ( 1913 ) 
 Cello Concerto in E minor , Op. 85 ( 1918 – 1919 ) 
 The Severn Suite , Op. 87 ( 1930 ) ( for brass band , trans. for orchestra 1932 ) 
 = = = Cantatas and oratorios = = = 
 The Black Knight , symphony / cantata for chorus and orchestra , Op. 25 ( 1889 – 1892 ) 
 The Light of Life ( Lux Christi ) , oratorio for soprano , alto , tenor and bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 29 ( 1896 ) 
 Scenes From The Saga Of King Olaf , cantata for soprano , tenor and bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 30 ( 1896 ) 
 Caractacus , cantata for soprano , tenor , baritone and bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 35 ( 1897 – 1898 ) 
 The Dream of Gerontius , for mezzo @-@ soprano , tenor and bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 38 ( 1899 – 1900 ) 
 The Apostles , oratorio for soprano , contralto , tenor and three bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 49 ( 1902 – 1903 ) 
 The Kingdom , oratorio for soprano , contralto , tenor and bass soloists , chorus and orchestra , Op. 51 ( 1901 – 1906 ) 
 The Music Makers , ode for contralto or mezzo @-@ soprano soloist , chorus and orchestra , Op. 69 ( 1912 ) 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 " The Wind at Dawn " , poem by C. Alice Roberts ( 1888 ) 
 Sea Pictures , ( Sea Pictures : A Cycle of Five Songs for <unk> ) , Op. 37 . ( 1897 – 1899 ) 
 " Land of Hope and Glory " , words by Arthur Christopher Benson ( 1902 ) 
 Seven Lieder of Edward Elgar ( 1907 ) 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 " O Happy Eyes " , SATB unacc . , words by C. Alice Elgar , Op. 18 No.1 ( 1890 ) 
 " My Love <unk> in a Northern Land " , SATB unacc . , words by Andrew Lang , dedicated to Rev. J. Hampton ( 1890 ) 
 " The Snow " , SSA acc . 2 violins and piano , words by C. Alice Elgar , dedicated to Mrs. E. B. Fitton , Op. 26 No.1 ( 1894 ) ( also with orchestral accompaniment , 1903 , and various other combinations of voices SATB etc . ) 
 " Go , Song of Mine " , SSAATB unacc . , words by Cavalcanti , tr . D. G. Rossetti , dedicated to Alfred H. Littleton , Op. 57 ( 1909 ) 
 " The Shower " and " The Fountain " , SATB unacc . , words by Henry Vaughan , Op. 71 <unk> and 2 ( 1914 ) 
 = = = Church music = = = 
 Three motets : " Ave verum corpus " , " Ave Maria " and " Ave Maris Stella " , Op. 2 ( 1887 ) 
 Te Deum and Benedictus , Op. 34 ( 1897 ) 
 = = = Chamber music = = = 
 Romance , violin and piano , Op. 1 ( 1878 ) 
 Salut d 'Amour ( <unk> ) , violin and piano , Op. 12 ( 1888 ) 
 Chanson de Nuit and Chanson de Matin , violin and piano , Op. 15 Nos. 1 and 2 ( 1897 / 1899 ) . 
 Violin Sonata in E minor , Op. 82 ( 1918 ) 
 String Quartet in E minor , Op. 83 ( 1918 ) 
 Piano Quintet in A minor , Op. 84 ( 1918 – 1919 ) 
 = = = Keyboard = = = 
 Organ Sonata in G , Op. 28 
 Concert Allegro , piano , Op. 46 ( 1901 ; unpublished ) 
 = = = Arrangements = = = 
 J. S. Bach , Fantasia and Fugue in C minor , BWV 537 , <unk> for orchestra , Op. 86 ( 1921 – 1922 ) 
 Handel , Overture in D minor ( Overture to Chandos Anthem " In the Lord put I my Trust " , <unk> ) , <unk> for orchestra ( 1923 ) 
 = Anbe Sivam = 
 Anbe Sivam ( English : Love Is God ) is a 2003 Indian Tamil @-@ language comedy @-@ drama film directed and co @-@ produced by Sundar C. The film 's story and screenplay were written by Kamal Haasan , and the dialogues were provided by Madhan . Anbe Sivam features Haasan , R. Madhavan and Kiran Rathod in the lead roles , with Nassar , Santhana Bharathi , Seema and Uma Riyaz Khan playing supporting characters . 
 Inspired by the 1987 road film Planes , Trains and Automobiles , the film tells the story of an unexpected journey from Bhubaneswar to Chennai undertaken by two men of contrasting personalities , Nallasivam ( Haasan ) and Anbarasu ( Madhavan ) . The musical score was composed by Vidyasagar . Arthur A. Wilson and M. <unk> undertook responsibility for cinematography and art direction , respectively . 
 Produced on a budget of ₹ 120 million , Anbe Sivam takes on several themes , including communism , atheism , and altruism , and depicts Haasan 's views as a humanist . The film was screened as part of the Indian Panorama section of the International Film Festival of India in 2003 . At the 51st Filmfare Awards South , it received a Special Jury Award and received nominations in the Best Film and Best Actor ( Haasan ) categories . Madhavan was awarded Best Actor at the 2003 Tamil Nadu State Film Awards . The film was released on 15 January 2003 to positive reviews from critics , but it underperformed at the box office . However , it is now regarded as a classic and a cult film in Tamil cinema . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two men waiting for a flight to Chennai at the Biju Patnaik International Airport in Bhubaneswar engage in conversation . One is an advertisement filmmaker , Anbarasu ( R. Madhavan ) , who prefers the abbreviated name " A. Aras " , and the other is a scarred , deformed but witty socialist , Nallasivam , alias " Nalla " ( Kamal Haasan ) . When the flight is cancelled due to heavy rain , Aras suspects Nalla is a terrorist and informs the authorities , only to discover that he was mistaken . When the entire city becomes flooded , the two men find themselves forced to share a room for the night . Both need to return to Chennai : Aras to be present at his wedding , and Nalla so he can deliver a ₹ 300 @,@ 000 cheque , recently awarded to him after he won a court case , to a group of union workers . After a traumatic night , and no hope for a flight , the two men take a bus to board the Coromandel Express train . Aras ' bag gets stolen on the way leaving him with only his credit card , which no @-@ one accepts . Using his presence of mind , Nalla repeatedly bails Aras out of trouble while Aras tries escaping from him at every juncture , only to end up with him again . While waiting for the train at the <unk> railway station , Nalla begins to tell Aras his story . 
 A few years earlier , a healthy Nalla took part in various street theatre performances protesting against multinational corporation @-@ driven industrialisation , that resulted in the marginalisation of the labour force . He was at odds with Kandasamy Padayatchi ( Nassar ) , a manipulative factory owner who refused to give his workers a raise . Nalla satirically imitated Padayatchi in many of his shows . However , in an unexpected turn of events , Nalla and Padayatchi 's daughter Balasaraswathi , called Bala ( Kiran Rathod ) , fell in love with each other . Realising their chances of getting together would be slim if Padayatchi knew about their relationship , Nalla and Bala decided to elope to Kerala . Nalla boarded a bus bound for Kerala , and on his way to meet Bala , the bus crashed on a hillside leaving him scarred , disfigured , and partially paralysed for life . After recovering from his wounds , he visited Bala only to be informed by Padayatchi that his daughter was already married and has settled abroad . Padayatchi had earlier lied to Bala that Nalla died in the accident . It was also at this time that Nalla became a firm believer in kindness and love . Despite suffering from an inferiority complex due to his scarred and deformed body , Nalla performs community service and social work with renewed fervour while continuing to fight for union causes . 
 Upon their arrival at Chennai , Aras delivers Nalla 's cheque to the union workers . He invites Nalla to his wedding , where , to his utter astonishment , Nalla sees that Aras 's bride is Bala . Padayatchi spots Nalla and asks him what he is doing there , to which Nalla replies that he was invited by Aras to the wedding . Nalla then persuades Padayatchi to sign the papers which will help the workers obtain a raise . To prevent disruption at the wedding and avoid damaging his reputation , Padayatchi yields to Nalla 's demands . After signing the papers , Padayatchi instructs his assistant ( Santhana Bharathi ) to eliminate Nalla . Padayatchi 's assistant , however , has a change of heart as he is about to kill Nalla . Padayatchi 's assistant believes that the wrongful deeds he committed for Padayatchi resulted in the death of the assistant 's daughter . Padayatchi 's assistant requests Nalla to leave the city and stay as far away from Padayatchi as possible ; Nalla assents and walks away . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Kamal Haasan as Nallasivam alias Nalla 
 R. Madhavan as Anbarasu alias A. Aras 
 Kiran Rathod as Balasaraswathi 
 Nassar as Kandasamy Padayatchi 
 Santhana Bharathi as Kandasamy 's assistant 
 Seema as Balasaraswathi 's mother 
 <unk> Sethu as <unk> 
 Uma Riyaz Khan as <unk> 
 Sujatha Narayanan as a tea shop owner who helps Nallasivam . 
 Balu Anand as the train ticket checker for the Coromandel Express 
 R. S. Sivaji as a railway guard 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After completing a draft of the film 's script in early 2002 , Kamal Haasan approached the Malayalam filmmaker Priyadarshan to direct the film . The two men were keen to work together since the late 1990s , and upon reading the script , Priyadarshan believed that it had the potential to be an " emotional love story " . The film 's title was derived from the Shaivite saint <unk> 's poem <unk> . 
 In June 2002 , Priyadarshan opted out of the project . Regarding the director 's exit , Haasan said Priyadarshan wanted to collaborate with the director on a bigger project than Anbe Sivam . He was replaced by Sundar C. , who agreed to produce the film as well . Anbe Sivam was co @-@ produced and distributed by Swaminathan , K. Muralitharan and G. Venugopal under the production banner of Lakshmi Movie Makers . In a 2008 interview with The Times of India , Sundar C. stated that Anbe Sivam " changed [ him ] personally and professionally " , making him a more confident person and changing his outlook towards life . 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 R. Madhavan was selected to play the film 's second lead in January 2002 . According to Kiran Rathod , she received a phone call from Haasan 's office informing her that she was offered the role of Balasaraswathi , which she accepted . Rathod 's voice in the film was dubbed by the singer Anuradha Sriram . Uma Riyaz Khan played the role of Haasan 's friend and professional colleague , <unk> . In an interview with Deccan Chronicle in 2013 , Uma Riyaz Khan described her role in the film as " her magnum opus " . 
 [ Haasan ] came over to me and said , ' Madhavan , I have seen some of your work and they were good . ' [ ... ] Then he continued , ' I have something for you . We should catch up ! ' [ ... ] that was how Anbe Sivam happened . 
 The actors Nassar and Santhana Bharathi played the roles of Kandasamy <unk> and his assistant , respectively , while cartoonist Madhan featured in a cameo appearance as himself in addition to writing the film 's dialogues . In an interview with S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu in 2006 , Bharathi considered both Anbe Sivam and Michael Madana Kama Rajan ( 1990 ) to be the most favourite roles of his career . Arthur A. Wilson , M. <unk> and P. Sai Suresh handled the film 's cinematography , art direction and editing , respectively . Brinda , Chinni Prakash and Dinesh Kumar were in charge of the choreography while the stunt sequences were co @-@ ordinated by Vikram Dharma . Muthulakshmi <unk> , Bharathi 's sister @-@ in @-@ law , worked as an assistant editor in the film . 
 The make @-@ up for Haasan 's scars was designed by Michael Westmore and Anil <unk> . The make @-@ up process was completed in Los Angeles in April 2002 after Haasan filmed the song sequences for <unk> ( 2002 ) . When Haasan was en @-@ route to Los Angeles from Toronto , he was detained by the authorities at the Toronto Pearson International Airport , who suspected him of being a terrorist because of his surname , which he described as sounding " very Islamic " . Haasan was left stranded at the airport until the authorities from the American Embassy at Toronto intervened and resolved the issue . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography for Anbe Sivam commenced in July 2002 . The first scene featuring the lead actors was shot at Pollachi Junction railway station . Haasan and Madhavan interacted closely during the initial stages of the shoot to ensure that the on @-@ screen chemistry between the pair was apparent . 
 Anbe Sivam was shot on a restricted budget of ₹ 120 million , with the train and bus disaster sequences involving the use of settings and CGI . According to R. Madhavan , the team also shot in relatively empty locations . The flood scenes set in Odisha were re @-@ created with outdoor sets consisting of city roads submerged under water erected in the Odisha @-@ Andhra Pradesh border . Filming also took place in Chennai , Visakhapatnam and on the Tamil Nadu @-@ Karnataka border . Post @-@ filming , Haasan revealed to film critic and journalist Subhash K. Jha that he was impressed with Madhavan 's enthusiasm and performance during the making of the film , subsequently signing him to appear in his production venture , Nala Damayanthi ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 Anbe Sivam follows the events of a journey from Bhubaneswar to Chennai undertaken by two men of contrasting personalities , Nallasivam ( Haasan ) , a physically challenged and witty socialist , and Anbarasu ( Madhavan ) , an arrogant advertising filmmaker who supports capitalism and globalisation . Due to unforeseen circumstances , the two are forced to undertake the journey together . During the journey , a series of themes pertaining to communism , compassion , globalisation , atheism , and altruism are addressed ; the film also shows Haasan 's views as a humanist . According to Kalyanaraman M of The Times of India , Anbe Sivam proposes that when faced with death , a man may make a morally superior choice . By making that choice in the form of humanism against capitalism and globalisation , Haasan indicates that man 's transformation into God occurs through the belief that " Siva is love " . 
 According to Haasan , the characterisation of Nallasivam was inspired by the life of Communist playwright , actor , director , lyricist and theorist Safdar Hashmi , who was chiefly associated with his work with street theatre in India . Hashmi died on 2 January 1989 after being attacked by members of the Indian National Congress while staging a play , Halla Bol . S. Anand of Outlook magazine notes that Haasan 's views on humanism in the film were also inspired by those of Charlie Chaplin . M. Kalyanaraman and Abdullah <unk> of The Times of India opined that Nallasivam was " akin to " street theatre artist Pralayan . 
 The film critic Baradwaj Rangan , in his review of another Haasan film , <unk> ( 2013 ) , found the ethnicity of the characters in the film to be a continuation of Haasan 's inclusion of non @-@ Tamil characters in his films . Rangan considered this to be Haasan 's acknowledgement of the " interconnectedness of the nation " and " the world beyond India " . He pointed out in his article that Haasan had experimented with the concept before by including the usage of Bengali language and meeting Bengalis in Mahanadi ( 1994 ) , a Telugu @-@ speaking love interest in <unk> ( 1994 ) , marrying a Bengali woman in Hey Ram ( 2000 ) , conducting investigations with an American associate in <unk> <unk> ( 2006 ) , and marriage to a Frenchwoman in Manmadan Ambu ( 2010 ) . Rangan notes that in Anbe Sivam , the inclusion of and interaction with the Odia people was another example of including non @-@ Tamil characters in his films . Rangan also compared Haasan 's fight sequence with the use of an umbrella to the way he used a book and stool in <unk> Thambi <unk> ( 1983 ) . 
 The basic plot of Anbe Sivam bears resemblance to the 1987 road film , Planes , Trains and Automobiles directed by John Hughes , which starred Steve Martin and John Candy in the lead roles . Haasan and Madhavan reprise the roles played by Candy and Martin in that film , respectively . The portrait painted by Nallasivam on the walls of Kandasamy Padayatchi 's house is inspired by the Mexican painter Diego Rivera 's fresco , Man at the Crossroads . The painting shows Nallasivam posing as Padayatchi 's deity Lord Shiva , the number 910 indicating the salary Padayatchi pays to his factory 's workers , and the communism symbol . Srinivasa Ramanujam , writing for The Times of India in 2008 , noted that the religious undertone in the film was similar to that of Rajinikanth 's Baba ( 2002 ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack album and background score for Anbe Sivam were composed by Vidyasagar , and the lyrics for the songs were written by Vairamuthu and P. Vijay . After composing the tune for the title song , Vidyasagar explained the situation of the song to Haasan , who wanted the song to be sung in such a way that the protagonist is singing according to the situation he finds himself in . Vidyasagar suggested that Haasan should sing the song himself to achieve the desired result , which Haasan accepted . The song " <unk> <unk> " was not included in the film . The song " Poovaasam " is based on the Shuddh Sarang raga . The male portions for the reprise of " Poovaasam " were sung by Sriram Parthasarathy , while the original version was sung by Vijay Prakash . Sadhana Sargam sang her portion of both versions of the song . 
 Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu wrote , " Vidyasagar is scaling great heights as a composer . The theme song and the melodious " Pon <unk> " [ sic ] are pointers . Vairamuthu 's lyrics deserve special mention here . " Singer Charulatha Mani , in her column for The Hindu , " A Raga 's Journey " , noted , " Poovaasam " possessed " a charm that is born out of classicism incorporated in a populist piece " . <unk> of Rediff.com found the songs to be " at best , okay " . M. Suganth of The Times of India , in his review for the music album , " Lovers Special – Vol . 2 @-@ 4 " , included " Poovaasam " among the " Hot Picks " of the album . 
 = = Release = = 
 According to S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu , the producers were so confident that Anbe Sivam would be a strong competitor at the 50th National Film Awards that they had the film reviewed by the Central Board of Film Certification , which cleared it with a " U " certificate , before the end of 2002 so that they could enter the film into the 2002 awards list . The film 's release coincided with the Thai Pongal festival and opened alongside five other films , including Vikram 's Dhool , <unk> 's <unk> Thangam , and the Vijay starrer <unk> . 
 Anbe Sivam was screened as a part of the Indian Panorama section of the International Film Festival of India in 2003 . As a tribute to Safdar Hashmi , a special preview of the film was organised by Haasan in association with Safdar Hashmi Memorial Trust ( <unk> ) on 9 January 2003 at Siri Fort Auditorium . The film was dubbed into Telugu as <unk> Sivam and released on 28 February 2003 . It was dubbed into Hindi as Shivam two years later in 2005 . After the release of the original Tamil version , the dubbing rights for the Hindi version were sold at a low price , much to the irritation of the lead actors as they were not able to dub for themselves in Hindi . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 A reviewer for the Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan expressed appreciation for the film , mentioning that it deserved respect for the subject it had chosen and that the film was " like an oxygen cylinder to Tamil cinema " . Baradwaj Rangan described the film as " Kamal 's latest solo attempt to bend , twist , shape @-@ shift Tamil cinema into forms never @-@ before seen . " Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu believed that " well @-@ defined characters , a strong storyline and intelligent screenplay " were the film 's " vital ingredients " . She further noted Haasan 's treatment of the story , and that his " diligence that has gone into the chiselling of the story and screenplay is only too evident " , while calling the film " a laudable effort " . 
 P. <unk> of Business Line praised Haasan 's performance and facial expressions and concluded his review by stating , " This man has intrigued me and will always . " In his review of the film 's DVD , M. Suganth , writing for The Times of India , called it " one of the finest movies of the decade " and praised the story , screenplay and dialogues before concluding his review by terming the film as " a modern classic " . 
 Reviewing the Telugu version , <unk> Sivam , Jeevi of <unk> said that " this art @-@ kind @-@ of film does entertain the people who love Kamal Hassan flicks " while concluding that it " would remain as one of the good films made in the recent times " . Another critic from The Hindu , <unk> Srihari , appreciated the pair of Haasan and Madhavan , noting that the duo " make a fine combination of pals each with different mental make up , but goodness overflowing . " A reviewer from Sify , in comparison , labelled the film as " average " , stating that it was " another predictable and corny film which is neither a comedy caper nor a class act . " Similarly , <unk> of Rediff.com praised the performances of the lead cast but wrote the film " tries to do too many things , and ends up failing at most , if not all , of them . " 
 Additionally , the film has been criticised for carrying much anti @-@ Hindu bias with a pro @-@ Christian tilt . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 During the first week of its theatrical run , an analysis by Sudhish Kamath of The Hindu showed the film to have grossed ₹ 13 @.@ 1 million in Chennai alone . Despite this , the film underperformed at the box office and incurred heavy losses for Lakshmi Movie Makers , effectively stopping them from investing in other ventures for the year 2003 . An estimate by D. Govardan of The Economic Times places the losses at ₹ 65 million , while Arun Ram of India Today states the losses incurred to be ₹ 50 million . Srinivasa Ramanujam of The Times of India compared the film 's failure at the box office to that of Baba . Both K. Muralitharan and Haasan defended the film 's failure by blaming video piracy , with the latter stating that " lots of people saw it , but they didn 't pay " . Sundar C. revealed that due to the failure of Anbe Sivam , he did not have any chance to direct further films , his bank accounts were blocked , and he remained unpaid for his work . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following its release , Anbe Sivam has attained cult status in Tamil cinema and receives re @-@ runs on television channels . Baradwaj Rangan wrote that Anbe Sivam was " leagues ahead of the average Tamil – why , even Indian – film " , though he felt that " the masses were unwilling to accept the experimental nature of the film " , while talking about the film 's box office failure . During his acceptance speech after winning the Vijay Award for Best Director in 2010 for Naan <unk> ( 2009 ) , director Bala revealed that a scene in Anbe Sivam where Kamal Haasan says to Madhavan , " when we love others unconditionally without any expectation , we become Gods " , inspired him to make his film . Bala also made a reference to Anbe Sivam in his 2003 film , Pithamagan , in a scene where Suriya 's character goes for a screening of the film with his friends . 
 In 2008 S. R. Ashok Kumar of The Hindu listed Anbe Sivam among the " top five directorial ventures of Sundar C. " In 2013 Haricharan Pudipeddi of the Indo @-@ Asian News Service agency , included Anbe Sivam in his list of " Kamal 's most underrated films " . He believed the reason for the film 's commercial failure was that audiences misunderstood the " sarcastic undertones associated with atheism " . On Haasan 's birthday , 7 November 2015 , Latha Srinivasan of Daily News and Analysis considered Anbe Sivam to be one of the " films you must watch to grasp the breadth of Kamal Haasan 's repertoire " . The character of Nallasivam was ranked fourth in The Times of India 's list of " Kamal Haasan 's top 10 mind @-@ blowing avatars " . 
 In Vasool Raja MBBS ( 2004 ) , Vasool Raja ( Kamal Haasan ) , while attending a class says " Anbe <unk> " , to which one of his classmates gently asks him , " isn 't it Anbe Sivam ? " . The street theatre sequence featuring Haasan 's character , Nallasivam , and his friends performing to make people aware of the atrocities committed by Nassar 's character , <unk> Padayatchi , was re @-@ created in Tiruchirappalli in 2008 by Pralayan and his troupe from " Chennai Kalai <unk> " under the title <unk> <unk> . In contrast , Pralayan 's play explored gender inequality and domestic violence instead of unemployment . Kannada actor Vishnuvardhan noted in 2010 that fellow actor Sudeep 's film Just <unk> <unk> ( 2010 ) bears resemblance to Anbe Sivam . Hari Narayan , writing for The Hindu in 2014 , mentions in his article on the Indian rationalist and author Narendra <unk> that Umesh Shukla 's OMG – Oh My God ! ( 2012 ) was " a toned down version of Anbe Sivam where rationality propels humans to find God in themselves , with flaws , which extols the virtue of becoming as much as that of being " . In 2015 <unk> of The Hindu in Tamil , mentions in his review of Orange <unk> ( 2015 ) that the film 's plot " might remind viewers of Anbe Sivam " . 
 = Constantine Diogenes = 
 Constantine Diogenes ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ; died 1032 ) was a prominent Byzantine general of the early 11th century , active in the Balkans . He served with distinction in the final stages of the Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria under Emperor Basil II , and occupied high commands in the Balkans until his arrest in 1029 , as the result of his participation in a conspiracy against Emperor Romanos III Argyros . Imprisoned and forced to enter a monastery , he committed suicide in 1032 during an inquest on a further conspiracy . He was the father of Emperor Romanos IV Diogenes . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Constantine Diogenes is the first notable member of the noble Cappadocian Diogenes family , which played an important role in 11th @-@ century Byzantium . Diogenes began his career as a commander of one of the western tagmata during the reign of Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) , in the latter 's campaigns against Bulgaria . In 1014 , he participated in the decisive Byzantine victory at the Battle of Kleidion ( July 29 ) , and he subsequently succeeded Theophylact Botaneiates as commander ( doux ) of Thessalonica with the rank of patrikios , making him the second @-@ most senior general of the Empire in the Balkans after David Arianites . Following the death of Tsar Samuel of Bulgaria in October , Diogenes and Nikephoros Xiphias were dispatched to the region of Moglena as the vanguard of the emperor and the main army . During this campaign , Diogenes constructed the fortress of <unk> , as attested in a founder 's inscription . 
 The conquest of Moglena was completed in 1015 or 1016 . In 1017 , Diogenes and David Arianites led troops to plunder the fertile plain of Pelagonia , where they captured many prisoners and livestock . Soon after , Basil II placed Diogenes in charge of the tagmata of the Scholai of the West and of Thessalonica , and tasked him with pursuing Tsar Ivan Vladislav . The Bulgarian ruler set up an ambush for his pursuers , but Basil was informed in time , and led the rest of his troops to Diogenes ' aid , scattering the Bulgarians . 
 After Ivan Vladislav 's death in February 1018 , Diogenes was charged with mopping up the last remaining centres of Bulgarian resistance . He took Sirmium and was named its commander ( archon ) ; his authority extended over the vassal Serbian statelets of Raška . His title was possibly that of " strategos of Serbia " ( Greek : <unk> <unk> ) , which is attested in a seal attributed to him . Diogenes was ordered by Basil II to subdue Sermon , the ruler of Sirmium , to consolidate Byzantine control of the northern Balkans . Consequently , Diogenes invited Sermon to a meeting at the estuary of the river Sava in the Danube , where each would only be accompanied by three attendants . Diogenes had hidden his sword in the folds of his clothes , and struck Sermon down . He then marched his army into Sirmium , taking possession of the town . Sermon 's wife was sent as a captive to Constantinople . 
 Around 1022 or 1025 , Diogenes succeeded Arianites as overall Byzantine commander ( strategos autokrator ) of conquered Bulgaria . In this capacity , he repelled a large Pecheneg invasion in 1027 . The same year , he was withdrawn south to Thessalonica but retained , at least nominally , his role as overall commander , as attested by another seal naming him " anthypatos , patrikios and doux of Thessalonica , Bulgaria and Serbia " . 
 Diogenes had been married to an anonymous daughter of Basil Argyros , brother of Emperor Romanos III Argyros ( r . 1028 – 1034 ) , but in 1029 he was accused , along with other prominent Balkan generals such as Eustathios Daphnomeles , of conspiring against the emperor with the <unk> princess Theodora . He was transferred east as strategos of the Thracesian Theme but , as soon as his complicity in the affair was confirmed , was recalled to Constantinople . There he was imprisoned , beaten and publicly paraded in the Mese along with the other conspirators , and later tonsured and forced to enter the Stoudios Monastery . Theodora herself was placed in a convent , but she apparently continued to conspire with Diogenes , who planned to take advantage of Romanos 's absence on campaign in the East in 1032 to escape to the Balkans . The plot was leaked to Romanos by Theophanes , metropolitan of Thessalonica , and the conspirators were arrested . Diogenes was brought to the Palace of Blachernae for interrogation by John the Orphanotrophos , but he committed suicide , throwing himself off a wall , rather than confess under torture and implicate his fellow conspirators . 
 Constantine 's son Romanos Diogenes became a successful general and eventually rose to become emperor in 1068 – 71 . 
 = Operation Una = 
 Operation Una ( Croatian : Operacija Una ) was a military offensive conducted by the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) against the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) in western Bosnia and Herzegovina on 18 – 19 September 1995 , during the Bosnian War . The operation entailed a crossing of the Una and Sava rivers to establish bridgeheads at Novi Grad , Bosanska Dubica , Bosanska Kostajnica and opposite Jasenovac to allow for a subsequent advance towards Prijedor and Banja Luka . 
 The operation was planned in a matter of hours following a meeting between Croatian President Franjo Tuđman and U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke , during which Holbrooke urged Tuđman to seize Prijedor and threaten to capture Banja Luka from the VRS , short of actually seizing the city , as he believed such a development would force Bosnian Serb leaders to the negotiating table . Inadequate planning and preparation , combined with flawed military intelligence on the defending force and disregard for the high water level of the Una and Sava rivers , led to a high number of casualties and little success . The offensive was called off one day after it was launched and the bridgeheads were evacuated . The HV ultimately blamed Major General Vinko Vrbanac for its failure . Vrbanac had authorized the offensive instead of deferring to the Chief of the General Staff General Zvonimir Červenko . 
 Operation Una was the only unsuccessful operation by the HV from a series of offensives which had commenced in November 1994 . It was controversial in the Croatian media , but was generally brushed aside as an aberration from a series of successes . In 2006 , Croatian authorities launched an investigation into alleged war crimes committed by HV soldiers during the operation , in which 40 Serb civilians were killed . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) withdrew from Croatia following the acceptance and start of implementation of the Vance plan , its 55 @,@ 000 officers and soldiers born in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transferred to a new Bosnian Serb army , which was later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) . This re @-@ organisation followed the declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the referendum on the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina that took place between 29 February and 1 March 1992 . This declaration would later be cited by the Bosnian Serbs as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs began fortifying the capital , Sarajevo , and other areas on 1 March 1992 . On the following day , the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , Bosnian Serb forces bombarded Bosanski Brod with artillery , resulting in a cross @-@ border operation by the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) 108th Brigade . On 4 April 1992 , JNA artillery began shelling Sarajevo . There were other examples of the JNA directly supported the VRS , such as during the capture of Zvornik in early April 1992 , when the JNA provided artillery support from Serbia , firing across the Drina River . At the same time , the JNA attempted to defuse the situation and arrange negotiations elsewhere in the country . 
 The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina faced the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively , as well as the HV , which occasionally supported HVO operations . In late April , the VRS was able to deploy 200 @,@ 000 troops , hundreds of tanks , armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and artillery pieces . The HVO and the Croatian Defence Forces ( Hrvatske obrambene snage – HOS ) could field approximately 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and a handful of heavy weapons , while the ARBiH was largely unprepared with nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops , small arms for less than a half of their number and virtually no heavy weapons . Arming of the various forces was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo introduced in September 1991 . By mid @-@ May 1992 , when those JNA units which had not been transferred to the VRS withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the newly declared Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the VRS controlled approximately 60 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The extent of the control was extended to about 70 percent of the country by the end of the year . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By 1995 , the ARBiH and the HVO had developed into better @-@ organised forces employing comparably large numbers of artillery pieces and good defensive fortifications . The VRS was not capable of penetrating their defences even where its forces employed sound military tactics , for instance in the Battle of Orašje in May and June 1995 . After recapture of the bulk of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( the Croatian Serb @-@ controlled areas of Croatia ) in Operation Storm in August 1995 , the HV shifted its focus to western Bosnia and Herzegovina . The shift was motivated by a desire to create a security zone along the Croatian border , establish Croatia as a regional power and gain favours with the West by forcing an end to the Bosnian War . The government of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the move as it contributed to their goal of gaining control over western Bosnia and the city of Banja Luka — the largest city in the Bosnian Serb @-@ held territory . 
 While NATO launched Operation Deliberate Force — a series of airstrikes that generally targeted the VRS around Sarajevo , western Bosnia remained relatively calm following Operation Storm , with the exception of probing attacks launched by the VRS , HVO or ARBiH near Bihać , Drvar and Glamoč . At the time the HV , HVO and ARBiH were planning a joint offensive in the region . The HV and HVO component of the offensive , codenamed Operation Maestral 2 , was launched on 8 September with the aim of capturing the towns of Jajce , Šipovo and Drvar . On 13 September , as NATO airstrikes ceased , and the HV and HVO neared the completion of their objectives , the ARBiH 5th Corps launched Operation Sana , pushing the VRS southeast from Bihać by up to 70 kilometres ( 43 miles ) and widening the <unk> held by the ARBiH north towards Novi Grad . 
 On 17 September , U.S. diplomat Richard Holbrooke and U.S. Ambassador to Croatia Peter W. Galbraith met with Croatian President Franjo Tuđman in Zagreb . Holbrooke was directed by the United States to urge Tuđman to stop offensive operations by the HV in western Bosnia and Herzegovina . However , Holbrooke and Galbraith thought the instructions unwise and saw the opportunity to defeat the VRS and establish a new military balance in the country . Holbrooke also considered that the changing situation on the ground allowed him and Galbraith to ignore the instructions . Holbrooke urged Tuđman to capture Sanski Most , Novi Grad and Prijedor from the VRS , and to do so quickly , but asked him to stop short of capturing Banja Luka . Holbrooke and Galbraith considered it would be advantageous for them and that justice would be served if the VRS lost Banja Luka , but decided against encouraging it , fearing there would be another 200 @,@ 000 refugees from the city or that Croatia would not be willing to relinquish control of Banja Luka later on . They were also hoping that more moderate Bosnian Serb leadership might be found in the city , as it was the most urban Bosnian Serb area . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 Based on the outcome of the Holbrooke – Tuđman meeting and the assessment of the HV General Staff that the VRS 2nd Corps was completely destroyed , a decision was made to deploy the HV to the area with virtually no preparation and planning . The assessment of the HV General Staff was based on ARBiH gains in western Bosnia and Herzegovina over the previous four days . The order to attack was drawn up on 17 September and signed by Major General Vinko Vrbanac on behalf of the Chief of the General Staff , General Zvonimir Červenko . The attack , codenamed Operation Una , was to commence with crossings of the Una River at Novi Grad and Bosanska Dubica , and the Sava River at Jasenovac , followed by the seizing of Mount <unk> to allow for further advances towards Prijedor . The operation was intended to be coordinated with the ARBiH 5th Corps , which would continue its rapid advance towards Prijedor and Novi Grad . 
 The orders only gave the HV approximately 10 hours to prepare , so only those HV elements already deployed in the vicinity of the planned bridgeheads were committed to the attack — drawn from the Zagreb Corps along the Una and the Bjelovar Corps along the Sava . The Una crossings were considered the primary objectives , and were assigned to elements of the 1st Guards and 2nd Guards brigades supported by the 17th Home Guard Regiment . The two guards brigades combined had 1 @,@ 500 troops , with a further 1 @,@ 500 reserve infantry of the Home Guard , available for the crossing of the Una . The Bjelovar Corps had approximately 2 @,@ 500 Home Guard reserve infantry at its disposal , distributed in three battlegroups ( consisting of elements of the 52nd , 121st and 125th Home Guard regiments ) and about 900 support troops , including a battalion of 155 @-@ millimetre ( 6 @.@ 1 in ) guns from the 16th Artillery @-@ Rocket Brigade , and elements of the 18th Artillery Battalion ( a platoon each of 155 @-@ millimetre howitzers and 130 @-@ millimetre ( 5 @.@ 1 in ) guns ) . The Bjelovar Corps force was commanded by Major General Luka Džanko , while the Zagreb Corps units committed to the operation were led by Major General Marijan <unk> . 
 The VRS had three garrison battalions in the area , generally manned by over @-@ aged reservists . Two of them , those belonging to the 1st Novigrad Infantry Brigade and the 11th Dubica Infantry Brigade , were deployed along the Una River and faced the Zagreb Corps . The remaining one , part of the 1st Gradiška Light Infantry Brigade , was deployed along the Sava River opposite the HV Bjelovar Corps . The VRS defenders , under the overall control of the 1st Krajina Corps commanded by Lieutenant Colonel General Momir Talić , were deployed in prepared fortifications protected by minefields and strong artillery fire support . The HV estimated that the VRS units deployed along the Sava River were supported by a company of tanks and one battery each of 130 @-@ millimetre guns , 155 @-@ millimetre howitzers and 76 @-@ millimetre ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) antitank guns . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = 18 September = = = 
 The crossings were hampered by the high level of the rivers , flooding of foreshores , strong currents and floating debris , as well as a shortage of boats and other means of river crossing . The equipment provided by the 33rd Engineer Battalion , including two tugboats and an amphibious vehicle , was late in arriving and did not reach the combat zone until noon on 18 September . All along the 100 @-@ kilometre ( 62 mi ) course of the Una and Sava rivers where the offensive was to take place , the HV began artillery bombardment at noon , and crossings followed after 15 : 00 hours . The 125th Home Guard Regiment battlegroup attempted a crossing near the village of <unk> , but failed after encountering strong small arms and mortar fire . The 52nd Home Guard Regiment battlegroup 's attempt to cross the Sava downstream of Jasenovac likewise failed , deterred by strong mortar fire . The Zagreb Corps units managed to establish small bridgeheads in their designated landing zones in Novi Grad , Bosanska Kostajnica and Bosanska Dubica , but were pinned down by artillery and machine gun fire . As the HV had suffered 27 dead in the first few hours of combat , Vrbanac was sent to inspect the situation and he was appalled by the poor organization of the assault . During the night of 18 / 19 September , VRS artillery continued to shell HV positions along the rivers , but also fired on the towns of Novska , Kutina , Nova Gradiška , and Dvor . 
 The ARBiH drive towards Sanski Most and Novi Grad , where one of the bridgeheads had been established by the HV , came to a halt on 18 – 19 September , as the ARBiH encountered 14 @,@ 000 previously undetected VRS troops in the area , supported by 2 @,@ 000 troops that had arrived from Serbia . 
 = = = 19 September = = = 
 Even though Vrbanac ordered a halt to the operation shortly after midnight on 18 / 19 September , the Bjelovar Corps failed to cancel new crossing attempts it had ordered for 6 : 00 the following morning . The attacks went ahead , albeit at 10 : 30 , with the 52nd and the 125th Home Guard regiments ' battlegroups trying to cross the Sava River at different locations . Despite strengthening river currents and continued VRS artillery fire , small reconnaissance elements managed to cross the river , only to be forced back an hour later . 
 At 12 : 50 , a force comprising elements of the 121st and 125th Home Guard regiments and the 265th Reconnaissance @-@ Sabotage Company managed to cross the Sava River at the confluence of the Sava and Una . The crossing force of 80 soldiers , encountered a minefield , VRS artillery fire and small arms fire from bunkers near the river bank . Extraction of the force began after 14 : 00 , leading to an exchange of heavy artillery fire between the VRS on one bank and the 121st and the 125th Home Guard regiments ' battlegroups on the other . The withdrawal required several river crossings using the available boats , and resulted in further losses . The situation was further complicated for the HV but a number of incidents and factors . These included a tugboat towing a damaged amphibious vehicle which caught fire because of faulty wiring , insufficient fire support from river gunboats , and boat crews provided by the 34th Engineer Battalion who refused to cross the river against VRS fire and had to be replaced by conscripts of the 33rd Engineer Battalion . Despite HV use of unmanned aerial vehicles to locate the VRS guns as targets for counter @-@ battery fire , the artillery exchange continued late into the night of 19 / 20 September . 
 The 52nd Home Guard Regiment battlegroup crossed the Sava River again at 14 : 30 to support the extraction of the bridgehead established by the elements of the 121st and the 125th Home Guard regiments . That crossing involved 91 soldiers who advanced about 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 feet ) and destroyed several VRS defensive positions before withdrawing at 16 : 30 . 
 On 19 September , the Zagreb Corps tried to reinforce the HV bridgeheads across the Una River , only to suffer further casualties . The Bjelovar Corps also committed the 121st Home Guard Regiment battlegroup to Jasenovac as a reinforcement to breach VRS defences . During the day , the Bjelovar Corps was approached by Irfan <unk> , the commanding officer of the <unk> ARBiH Brigade based in Velika Kladuša , requesting permission to deploy his troops to support the Bjelovar Corps attack . Džanko referred the request to Červenko . By the end of the day , Červenko had met with Tuđman to protest against the disorganised manner in which the operation had been launched , and the fact that he was not informed of it in advance . On the same day , the HV General Staff called the operation off . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the war , General Janko Bobetko estimated HV losses at more than 70 killed and 250 wounded . According to official records , 49 HV soldiers were killed during the operation . Of the casualties , the Bjelovar Corps accounted for five dead and 26 wounded . According to Bosnian Serb sources , the VRS sustained 44 killed , 53 wounded and three captured . In addition , six Bosnian Serb police officers were killed and nine were wounded . Bosnian Serb sources hold that Serb civilian casualties were 54 killed , 39 wounded and 6 captured in the two days of the offensive . Two Danish peacekeepers , deployed with the United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia ( UNCRO ) , were killed in the VRS shelling of Dvor . In 2006 , Croatian authorities began investigating allegations of war crimes committed during the operation , specifically the killing of 40 civilians in the Bosanska Dubica area by troops of the 1st Battalion of the 2nd Guards Brigade . 
 On 20 September 1995 , Červenko submitted his report on Operation Una to Tuđman , divorcing responsibility from himself , and blaming Vrbanac and Defence Minister Gojko Šušak . The blame was subsequently placed on Vrbanac alone , ultimately ending his military career . <unk> , who was expected to succeed Červenko as the Chief of the General Staff , was passed over in favour of General Pavao <unk> when Červenko retired in 1996 . 
 The offensive was the only unsuccessful operation undertaken by the HV since Operation Winter ' 94 in November 1994 , and was brushed aside in Croatia as an aberration . It still remained a subject of controversy in the Croatian media . According to Croatian historian Davor Marijan , the operation was primarily politically motivated and hastily launched in response to Holbrooke 's remarks of 17 September . Nonetheless , Marijan claims that the attack was based on incorrect intelligence , leading to an underestimation of the VRS defenses by the HV . In addition , the HV overestimated its own capacity to execute a difficult operation , and neglected the condition of the rivers that they intended to cross . The HV never attempted to repeat the crossing , instead choosing to threaten Banja Luka from a different direction in early October in Operation Southern Move . 
 = Taj Mahal = 
 The Taj Mahal ( / <unk> <unk> / , more often / <unk> / ; Persian for Crown of Palaces ) is an ivory @-@ white marble mausoleum on the south bank of the Yamuna river in the Indian city of Agra . It was commissioned in 1632 by the Mughal emperor , Shah Jahan ( reigned 1628 – 1658 ) , to house the tomb of his favorite wife , Mumtaz Mahal . The tomb is the centrepiece of a 42 @-@ acre complex , which includes a mosque and a guest house , and is set in formal gardens bounded on three sides by a crenellated wall . 
 Construction of the mausoleum was essentially completed in 1643 but work continued on other phases of the project for another 10 years . The Taj Mahal complex is believed to have been completed in its entirety in 1653 at a cost estimated at the time to be around 32 million rupees , which in 2015 would be approximately 52 @.@ 8 billion rupees ( US $ 827 million ) . The construction project employed some 20 @,@ 000 artisans under the guidance of a board of architects led by the court architect to the emperor , Ustad Ahmad <unk> . 
 The Taj Mahal was designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1983 for being " the jewel of Muslim art in India and one of the universally admired masterpieces of the world 's heritage " . Described by Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore as " the tear @-@ drop on the cheek of time " , it is regarded by many as the best example of Mughal architecture and a symbol of India 's rich history . The Taj Mahal attracts 7 – 8 million visitors a year . In 2007 , it was declared a winner of the New7Wonders of the World ( 2000 – 2007 ) initiative . 
 = = Inspiration = = 
 The Taj Mahal was commissioned by Shah Jahan in 1631 , to be built in the memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal , a Persian princess who died giving birth to their 14th child , <unk> Begum . Construction of the Taj Mahal began in 1632 . The imperial court documenting Shah Jahan 's grief after the death of Mumtaz Mahal illustrate the love story held as the inspiration for Taj Mahal . The principal mausoleum was completed in 1643 and the surrounding buildings and garden were finished about five years later . 
 = = Architecture and design = = 
 The Taj Mahal incorporates and expands on design traditions of Persian and earlier Mughal architecture . Specific inspiration came from successful Timurid and Mughal buildings including ; the Gur @-@ e Amir ( the tomb of Timur , progenitor of the Mughal dynasty , in Samarkand ) , Humayun 's Tomb , <unk> @-@ Ud @-@ Daulah 's Tomb ( sometimes called the Baby Taj ) , and Shah Jahan 's own Jama Masjid in Delhi . While earlier Mughal buildings were primarily constructed of red sandstone , Shah Jahan promoted the use of white marble inlaid with semi @-@ precious stones . Buildings under his patronage reached new levels of refinement . 
 = = = Tomb = = = 
 The tomb is the central focus of the entire complex of the Taj Mahal . It is a large , white marble structure standing on a square plinth and consists of a symmetrical building with an iwan ( an arch @-@ shaped doorway ) topped by a large dome and finial . Like most Mughal tombs , the basic elements are Persian in origin . 
 The base structure is a large multi @-@ chambered cube with chamfered corners forming an unequal eight @-@ sided structure that is approximately 55 metres ( 180 ft ) on each of the four long sides . Each side of the iwan is framed with a huge pishtaq or vaulted archway with two similarly shaped arched balconies stacked on either side . This motif of stacked <unk> is replicated on the chamfered corner areas , making the design completely symmetrical on all sides of the building . Four minarets frame the tomb , one at each corner of the plinth facing the chamfered corners . The main chamber houses the false sarcophagi of Mumtaz Mahal and Shah Jahan ; the actual graves are at a lower level . 
 The most spectacular feature is the marble dome that surmounts the tomb . The dome is nearly 35 metres ( 115 ft ) high which is close in measurement to the length of the base , and accentuated by the cylindrical " drum " it sits on which is approximately 7 metres ( 23 ft ) high . Because of its shape , the dome is often called an onion dome or <unk> ( guava dome ) . The top is decorated with a lotus design which also serves to accentuate its height . The shape of the dome is emphasized by four smaller domed chattris ( kiosks ) placed at its corners , which replicate the onion shape of the main dome . The dome is slightly asymmetrical . Their columned bases open through the roof of the tomb and provide light to the interior . Tall decorative spires ( <unk> ) extend from edges of base walls , and provide visual emphasis to the height of the dome . The lotus motif is repeated on both the chattris and <unk> . The dome and chattris are topped by a gilded finial which mixes traditional Persian and Hindustani decorative elements . 
 The main finial was originally made of gold but was replaced by a copy made of gilded bronze in the early 19th century . This feature provides a clear example of integration of traditional Persian and Hindu decorative elements . The finial is topped by a moon , a typical Islamic motif whose horns point heavenward . 
 The minarets , which are each more than 40 metres ( 130 ft ) tall , display the designer 's penchant for symmetry . They were designed as working minarets — a traditional element of mosques , used by the muezzin to call the Islamic faithful to prayer . Each minaret is effectively divided into three equal parts by two working balconies that ring the tower . At the top of the tower is a final balcony surmounted by a <unk> that mirrors the design of those on the tomb . The chattris all share the same decorative elements of a lotus design topped by a gilded finial . The minarets were constructed slightly outside of the plinth so that in the event of collapse , a typical occurrence with many tall constructions of the period , the material from the towers would tend to fall away from the tomb . 
 = = = Exterior decorations = = = 
 The exterior decorations of the Taj Mahal are among the finest in Mughal architecture . As the surface area changes , the decorations are refined proportionally . The decorative elements were created by applying paint , stucco , stone inlays or carvings . In line with the Islamic prohibition against the use of anthropomorphic forms , the decorative elements can be grouped into either calligraphy , abstract forms or vegetative motifs . Throughout the complex are passages from the Qur 'an that comprise some of the decorative elements . Recent scholarship suggests that the passages were chosen by Amanat Khan . 
 The calligraphy on the Great Gate reads " O Soul , thou art at rest . Return to the Lord at peace with Him , and He at peace with you . " The calligraphy was created in 1609 by a calligrapher named Abdul Haq . Shah Jahan conferred the title of " Amanat Khan " upon him as a reward for his " dazzling virtuosity " . Near the lines from the Qur 'an at the base of the interior dome is the inscription , " Written by the insignificant being , Amanat Khan Shirazi . " Much of the calligraphy is composed of florid <unk> script made of jasper or black marble inlaid in white marble panels . Higher panels are written in slightly larger script to reduce the skewing effect when viewed from below . The calligraphy found on the marble cenotaphs in the tomb is particularly detailed and delicate . 
 Abstract forms are used throughout , especially in the plinth , minarets , gateway , mosque , jawab and , to a lesser extent , on the surfaces of the tomb . The domes and vaults of the sandstone buildings are worked with tracery of incised painting to create elaborate geometric forms . <unk> inlays define the space between many of the adjoining elements . White inlays are used in sandstone buildings , and dark or black inlays on the white marbles . <unk> areas of the marble buildings have been stained or painted in a contrasting color which creates a complex array of geometric patterns . Floors and walkways use contrasting tiles or blocks in tessellation patterns . 
 On the lower walls of the tomb are white marble dados sculpted with realistic bas relief depictions of flowers and vines . The marble has been polished to emphasise the exquisite detailing of the carvings . The dado frames and archway spandrels have been decorated with pietra dura inlays of highly stylised , almost geometric vines , flowers and fruits . The inlay stones are of yellow marble , jasper and jade , polished and levelled to the surface of the walls . 
 = = = = Interior decoration = = = = 
 The interior chamber of the Taj Mahal reaches far beyond traditional decorative elements . The inlay work is not pietra dura , but a lapidary of precious and semiprecious gemstones . The inner chamber is an octagon with the design allowing for entry from each face , although only the door facing the garden to the south is used . The interior walls are about 25 metres ( 82 ft ) high and are topped by a " false " interior dome decorated with a sun motif . Eight pishtaq arches define the space at ground level and , as with the exterior , each lower pishtaq is crowned by a second pishtaq about midway up the wall . The four central upper arches form balconies or viewing areas , and each balcony 's exterior window has an intricate screen or jali cut from marble . In addition to the light from the balcony screens , light enters through roof openings covered by chattris at the corners . The octagonal marble screen or jali bordering the cenotaphs is made from eight marble panels carved through with intricate pierce work . The remaining surfaces are inlaid in delicate detail with semi @-@ precious stones forming twining vines , fruits and flowers . Each chamber wall is highly decorated with dado bas @-@ relief , intricate lapidary inlay and refined calligraphy panels which reflect , in miniature detail , the design elements seen throughout the exterior of the complex . 
 Muslim tradition forbids elaborate decoration of graves . Hence , the bodies of Mumtaz and Shah Jahan were put in a relatively plain crypt beneath the inner chamber with their faces turned right , towards Mecca . Mumtaz Mahal 's cenotaph is placed at the precise centre of the inner chamber on a rectangular marble base of 1 @.@ 5 by 2 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in by 8 ft 2 in ) . Both the base and casket are elaborately inlaid with precious and semiprecious gems . <unk> inscriptions on the casket identify and praise Mumtaz . On the lid of the casket is a raised rectangular lozenge meant to suggest a writing tablet . Shah Jahan 's cenotaph is beside Mumtaz 's to the western side , and is the only visible asymmetric element in the entire complex . His cenotaph is bigger than his wife 's , but reflects the same elements : a larger casket on a slightly taller base precisely decorated with lapidary and calligraphy that identifies him . On the lid of the casket is a traditional sculpture of a small pen box . 
 The pen box and writing tablet are traditional Mughal funerary icons decorating the caskets of men and women respectively . The Ninety Nine Names of God are calligraphic inscriptions on the sides of the actual tomb of Mumtaz Mahal . Other inscriptions inside the crypt include , " O Noble , O Magnificent , O Majestic , O Unique , O Eternal , O Glorious ... " . The tomb of Shah Jahan bears a calligraphic inscription that reads ; " He travelled from this world to the banquet @-@ hall of Eternity on the night of the twenty @-@ sixth of the month of Rajab , in the year 1076 Hijri . " 
 = = = Garden = = = 
 The complex is set around a large 300 @-@ metre ( 980 ft ) square charbagh or Mughal garden . The garden uses raised pathways that divide each of the four quarters of the garden into 16 sunken parterres or flowerbeds . Halfway between the tomb and gateway in the center of the garden is a raised marble water tank with a reflecting pool positioned on a north @-@ south axis to reflect the image of the mausoleum . The raised marble water tank is called al <unk> al @-@ Kawthar in reference to the " Tank of Abundance " promised to Muhammad . 
 Elsewhere , the garden is laid out with avenues of trees and fountains . The charbagh garden , a design inspired by Persian gardens , was introduced to India by Babur , the first Mughal emperor . It symbolises the four flowing rivers of Jannah ( Paradise ) and reflects the Paradise garden derived from the Persian <unk> , meaning ' walled garden ' . In mystic Islamic texts of the Mughal period , Paradise is described as an ideal garden of abundance with four rivers flowing from a central spring or mountain , separating the garden into north , west , south and east . 
 Most Mughal <unk> are rectangular with a tomb or pavilion in the center . The Taj Mahal garden is unusual in that the main element , the tomb , is located at the end of the garden . With the discovery of <unk> Bagh or " Moonlight Garden " on the other side of the Yamuna , the interpretation of the Archaeological Survey of India is that the Yamuna river itself was incorporated into the garden 's design and was meant to be seen as one of the rivers of Paradise . Similarities in layout and architectural features with the Shalimar Gardens suggests both gardens may have been designed by the same architect , Ali Mardan . Early accounts of the garden describe its profusion of vegetation , including abundant roses , daffodils , and fruit trees . As the Mughal Empire declined , the Taj Mahal and its gardens also declined . By the end of the 19th century , the British Empire controlled more than three @-@ fifths of India , and assumed management of the Taj Mahal . They changed the landscaping to their liking which more closely resembled the formal lawns of London . 
 = = = Outlying buildings = = = 
 The Taj Mahal complex is bordered on three sides by crenellated red sandstone walls ; the side facing the river is open . Outside the walls are several additional mausoleums , including those of Shah Jahan 's other wives , and a larger tomb for Mumtaz 's favourite servant . 
 The main gateway ( <unk> ) is a monumental structure built primarily of marble , and reminiscent of the Mughal architecture of earlier emperors . Its archways mirror the shape of the tomb 's archways , and its pishtaq arches incorporate the calligraphy that decorates the tomb . The vaulted ceilings and walls have elaborate geometric designs like those found in the other sandstone buildings in the complex . 
 At the far end of the complex are two grand red sandstone buildings that mirror each other , and face the sides of the tomb . The backs of the buildings parallel the western and eastern walls . The western building is a mosque and the other is the jawab ( answer ) , thought to have been constructed for architectural balance although it may have been used as a guesthouse . Distinctions between the two buildings include the jawab 's lack of a mihrab ( a niche in a mosque 's wall facing Mecca ) , and its floors of geometric design whereas the floor of the mosque is laid with outlines of 569 prayer rugs in black marble . The mosque 's basic design of a long hall surmounted by three domes is similar to others built by Shah Jahan , particularly the Masjid @-@ i <unk> @-@ <unk> , or Jama Masjid , Delhi . The Mughal mosques of this period divide the sanctuary hall into three areas comprising a main sanctuary and slightly smaller sanctuaries on either side . At the Taj Mahal , each sanctuary opens onto an expansive vaulting dome . The outlying buildings were completed in 1643 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The Taj Mahal is built on a parcel of land to the south of the walled city of Agra . Shah Jahan presented Maharajah Jai Singh with a large palace in the center of Agra in exchange for the land . An area of roughly three acres was excavated , filled with dirt to reduce seepage , and leveled at 50 metres ( 160 ft ) above riverbank . In the tomb area , wells were dug and filled with stone and rubble to form the footings of the tomb . Instead of lashed bamboo , workmen constructed a colossal brick scaffold that mirrored the tomb . The scaffold was so enormous that foremen estimated it would take years to dismantle . 
 The Taj Mahal was constructed using materials from all over India and Asia . It is believed over 1 @,@ 000 elephants were used to transport building materials . The translucent white marble was brought from <unk> , Rajasthan , the jasper from Punjab , jade and crystal from China . The turquoise was from Tibet and the Lapis lazuli from Afghanistan , while the sapphire came from Sri Lanka and the carnelian from Arabia . In all , twenty @-@ eight types of precious and semi @-@ precious stones were inlaid into the white marble . 
 According to the legend , Shah Jahan decreed that anyone could keep the bricks taken from the scaffold , and thus it was dismantled by peasants overnight . A fifteen kilometer ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) tamped @-@ earth ramp was built to transport marble and materials to the construction site and teams of twenty or thirty oxen pulled the blocks on specially constructed wagons . An elaborate post @-@ and @-@ beam pulley system was used to raise the blocks into desired position . Water was drawn from the river by a series of <unk> , an animal @-@ powered rope and bucket mechanism , into a large storage tank and raised to a large distribution tank . It was passed into three subsidiary tanks , from which it was piped to the complex . 
 The plinth and tomb took roughly 12 years to complete . The remaining parts of the complex took an additional 10 years and were completed in order of minarets , mosque and jawab , and gateway . Since the complex was built in stages , discrepancies exist in completion dates due to differing opinions on " completion " . Construction of the mausoleum itself was essentially completed by 1643 while work continued on the outlying buildings . Estimates of the cost of construction vary due to difficulties in estimating costs across time . The total cost has been estimated to be about 32 million Indian rupees , which is around 52 @.@ 8 billion Indian rupees ( $ 827 million US ) based on 2015 values . 
 = = Later days = = 
 Abdul Hamid <unk> in his book <unk> refers to Taj Mahal as <unk> @-@ i <unk> , meaning the <unk> or illustrious tomb . Soon after the Taj Mahal 's completion , Shah Jahan was deposed by his son Aurangzeb and put under house arrest at nearby Agra Fort . Upon Shah Jahan 's death , Aurangzeb buried him in the mausoleum next to his wife . In the 18th century , the Jat rulers of Bharatpur invaded Agra and attacked the Taj Mahal , the two chandeliers , one of agate and another of silver , which were hung over the main cenotaph , were taken away by them , along with the gold and silver screen . <unk> , a Mughal historian , said the gold shield which covered the 15 @-@ foot high finial at the top of the main dome was also removed during the Jat despoliation . 
 By the late 19th century , parts of the buildings had fallen into disrepair . During the time of the Indian rebellion of 1857 , the Taj Mahal was defaced by British soldiers and government officials , who chiselled out precious stones and lapis lazuli from its walls . At the end of the 19th century , British viceroy Lord Curzon ordered a sweeping restoration project , which was completed in 1908 . He also commissioned the large lamp in the interior chamber , modelled after one in a Cairo mosque . During this time the garden was remodelled with British @-@ style lawns that are still in place today . 
 = = Threats = = 
 In 1942 , the government erected a scaffolding to disguise the building in anticipation of air attacks by the Japanese Air Force . During the India @-@ Pakistan wars of 1965 and 1971 , scaffoldings were again erected to mislead bomber pilots . 
 More recent threats have come from environmental pollution on the banks of Yamuna River including acid rain due to the Mathura Oil Refinery , which was opposed by Supreme Court of India directives . The pollution has been turning the Taj Mahal yellow . To help control the pollution , the Indian government has set up the Taj Trapezium Zone ( TTZ ) , a 10 @,@ 400 @-@ square @-@ kilometre ( 4 @,@ 000 sq mi ) area around the monument where strict emissions standards are in place . 
 Concerns for the tomb 's structural integrity have recently been raised because of a decline in the groundwater level in the Yamuna river basin which is falling at a rate of around 5 feet a year . In 2010 , cracks appeared in parts of the tomb , and the minarets which surround the monument were showing signs of tilting , as the wooden foundation of the tomb may be rotting due to lack of water . Although it has been pointed out by politicians , that the minarets are designed to tilt slightly outwards , to prevent them crashing on top of the tomb in the event of an earthquake . In 2011 , it was reported that some predictions indicated that the tomb could collapse within 5 years . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The Taj Mahal attracts a large number of tourists . UNESCO documented more than 2 million visitors in 2001 , which had increased to about 7 – 8 million in 2014 . A two @-@ tier pricing system is in place , with a significantly lower entrance fee for Indian citizens and a more expensive one for foreigners . Most tourists visit in the cooler months of October , November and February . Polluting traffic is not allowed near the complex and tourists must either walk from parking lots or catch an electric bus . The <unk> ( northern courtyards ) are currently being restored for use as a new visitor center . 
 The small town to the south of the Taj , known as Taj <unk> or <unk> , was originally constructed with caravanserais , bazaars and markets to serve the needs of visitors and workmen . Lists of recommended travel destinations often feature the Taj Mahal , which also appears in several listings of seven wonders of the modern world , including the recently announced New Seven Wonders of the World , a recent poll with 100 million votes . 
 The grounds are open from 06 : 00 to 19 : 00 weekdays , except for Friday when the complex is open for prayers at the mosque between 12 : 00 and 14 : 00 . The complex is open for night viewing on the day of the full moon and two days before and after , excluding Fridays and the month of Ramadan . For security reasons only five items — water in transparent bottles , small video cameras , still cameras , mobile phones and small ladies ' purses — are allowed inside the Taj Mahal . 
 = = Myths = = 
 Ever since its construction , the building has been the source of an admiration transcending culture and geography , and so personal and emotional responses have consistently eclipsed scholastic appraisals of the monument . A longstanding myth holds that Shah Jahan planned a mausoleum to be built in black marble as a Black Taj Mahal across the Yamuna river . The idea originates from fanciful writings of Jean @-@ Baptiste Tavernier , a European traveller who visited Agra in 1665 . It was suggested that Shah Jahan was overthrown by his son Aurangzeb before it could be built . Ruins of blackened marble across the river in Moonlight Garden , <unk> Bagh , seemed to support this legend . However , excavations carried out in the 1990s found that they were discolored white stones that had turned black . A more credible theory for the origins of the black mausoleum was demonstrated in 2006 by archaeologists who reconstructed part of the pool in the Moonlight Garden . A dark reflection of the white mausoleum could clearly be seen , befitting Shah Jahan 's obsession with symmetry and the positioning of the pool itself . 
 No evidence exists for claims that describe , often in horrific detail , the deaths , <unk> and mutilations which Shah Jahan supposedly inflicted on various architects and craftsmen associated with the tomb . Some stories claim that those involved in construction signed contracts committing themselves to have no part in any similar design . Similar claims are made for many famous buildings . No evidence exists for claims that Lord William Bentinck , governor @-@ general of India in the 1830s , supposedly planned to demolish the Taj Mahal and auction off the marble . Bentinck 's biographer John Rosselli says that the story arose from Bentinck 's fund @-@ raising sale of discarded marble from Agra Fort . 
 Another myth suggests that beating the silhouette of the finial will cause water to come forth . To this day , officials find broken bangles surrounding the silhouette . 
 In 2000 , India 's Supreme Court dismissed P. N. Oak 's petition to declare that a Hindu king built the Taj Mahal . In 2005 a similar petition was dismissed by the Allahabad High Court . This case was brought by Amar Nath Mishra , a social worker and preacher who says that the Taj Mahal was built by the Hindu King Parmar Dev in 1196 . 
 = = Views of the Taj Mahal = = 
 = Smallville ( season 1 ) = 
 Season one of Smallville , an American television series developed by Alfred Gough and Miles Millar , began airing on October 16 , 2001 , on The WB television network . The series recounts the early adventures of Kryptonian Clark Kent as he adjusts to his developing superpowers in the fictional town of Smallville , Kansas , during the years before he becomes Superman . The first season comprises 21 episodes and concluded its initial airing on May 21 , 2002 . Regular cast members during season one include Tom Welling , Michael Rosenbaum , Kristin Kreuk , Annette O 'Toole , John Schneider , Sam Jones III , Allison Mack , and Eric Johnson . 
 The season 's stories focus on Martha and Jonathan Kent 's ( O 'Toole and Schneider ) attempts to help their adopted son Clark ( Welling ) cope with his alien origin and control his developing superhuman abilities . Clark must deal with the meteor @-@ infected individuals that begin appearing in Smallville , his love for Lana Lang ( Kreuk ) , and not being able to tell his two best friends , Pete Ross ( Jones III ) and Chloe Sullivan ( Mack ) , about his abilities or his origins . Clark also befriends Lex Luthor ( Rosenbaum ) after saving Lex 's life . The season also follows Lex , as he tries to assert his independence from his father , Lionel Luthor ( John Glover ) . 
 The episodes were filmed primarily in Vancouver and post @-@ production work took place in Los Angeles . Gough and Millar assisted the writing staff with week @-@ to @-@ week story development . " Villain of the week " storylines were predominant during the first season ; physical effects , make @-@ up effects , and computer generated imagery became important components as well . Limited filming schedules sometimes forced guest actors to perform physical stunts , and the series regulars were more than willing to do stunt work . Episode budgets ultimately became strictly regulated , as the show frequently ran over budget during the first half of the season . The pilot broke The WB 's viewership record for a debut series , and was nominated for various awards . Although the villain of the week storylines became a concern for producers , critical reception was generally favorable , and the series was noted as having a promising start . The first season was released on DVD on September 23 , 2003 , and included various special features that focused on individual episodes and the series as a whole . It has also been released on home media in regions 2 and 4 in the international markets . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Ground rules for story development were established at the outset . Part of the marketing pitch , " no flights , no tights " dictated that Clark would not wear the Superman costume , nor would he fly . After initial discussion of possible storylines , a second rule decreed that Clark could never directly kill anyone . This created a dilemma since Clark must be able to defeat the " bad guys " from week to week . A solution developed in later episodes with the introduction of the Belle Reve sanitarium ( Belle Reve is a Federal prison for <unk> and other supervillains in the comics ) . 
 After setting the ground rules , Gough and Millar conceived ideas that facilitated week @-@ to @-@ week story development . For example , kryptonite 's role was expanded to include enhancement of the sins of the antagonist : instead of creating physical monsters , exposure to kryptonite would amplify their personal demons . This was not treated as literally in the pilot and " Metamorphosis " as it was in later episodes . In " Cool " , it was " the ' cool ' kid literally [ becoming ] cool , needing human body heat to stay alive " . After several episodes , the writers developed a story that would help establish the show as more than a " villain of the week " series . The ninth episode ( " Rogue " ) , which took longer than usual to develop due to its divergence from the standard formula , became their first " true crime story " and demonstrated that Smallville could include more than kryptonite @-@ powered villains . 
 " What if " episodes were another Millar @-@ Gough concept used to generate first season storylines . These episodes posed underlying questions about Clark . Episodes would evolve from basic questions , including : " what if someone had a crush on Lana , and acted on that obsession " ; " what if someone found out Clark 's secret " ; " what if someone else had Clark 's powers ? " These three questions developed into the episodes " Metamorphosis " , " Rogue " , and " Leech " , respectively . " Stray " , episode 16 , answered the question , " what if Clark had been adopted by the wrong parents and his powers were exploited ? " " X @-@ Ray " director Mark Verheiden and the rest of the crew realized divergent , unrelated storylines were not the best way to create episodes for Smallville . Verheiden believes " X @-@ Ray " was the first episode that managed to bring all the side @-@ stories together so that they affected characters other than Clark and Lana . 
 " Hourglass " was one of the stories included in Millar and Gough 's initial pitch to the network ( at the time it was referred to as " Cassandra " ) . " Hourglass " was the first episode to present two , distinct stories : the vengeful serial killer and the second sighted Cassandra . Two significant storylines in the same episode forced the writers to spend more time developing the episode . Cassandra 's " visceral vision " ( as it was referred to in the script ) of Lex 's future was developed into color storyboards to better illustrate to the filmmakers the " blood rain " described in the text . 
 When the filmmakers were dissatisfied with the initial drafts of episodes , specifically with the evolution of characters , they would rewrite events , or add scenes to re @-@ establish the original vision . The character of Earl Jenkins ( Tony Todd ) , intended to be a sympathetic villain , came across as " completely unlikable " in the original draft of " Jitters " . The character suffers from over @-@ exposure to kryptonite , causing massive seizures ; if Jenkins happened to grab someone , they could be shaken to death . Originally , the character is first seen banging on the door of LuthorCorp and killing a security guard during one of his seizures . To present a more favorable aspect to the audience , a scene in which Earl visits his infant child was added to show that he was not a " raving maniac " . Similar rewrites occurred with the characters Ryan James ( Ryan Kelley ) in " Stray " and Tyler Randall ( Reynaldo Rosales ) in " Reaper " . In the original draft of " Stray " , Ryan developed his telepathic abilities from exposure to kryptonite . ; to emphasize the show was not always about kryptonite @-@ infected villains , the story was revised so that Ryan had his ability from birth . The network also expressed dissatisfaction with Ryan as a murderer , so the character was rewritten to be the " nice kid " . The character of Tyler Randall shared Earl Jenkins 's issue : he was not sympathetic enough in the filmmakers ' eyes ; intended to be an escaped prisoner , he was rewritten to be " the world 's deadliest nice guy " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Production was set up in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , because the creators were looking for a " Middle America landscape " , and Vancouver was a good substitute for Kansas . David Nutter , the director of the pilot , was given 16 days for main unit filming , twice that of the normal timeframe . Despite the extended schedule , it was still a short amount of time , and he shot the pilot primarily from storyboards created by Adrien Van <unk> . 
 Millar developed most of the look for Smallville with the idea that Smallville should be the epitome of " Smalltown , USA " . Millar 's design required existing buildings to be painted , built , and remodeled . The Kent farm is the home of the <unk> family , and their barn was used for the pilot before a new barn was built . The new barn was one of the major additions to the sets of the episode " Metamorphosis " . Production designer Doug Higgins and his crew built a fully functioning , three @-@ story barn for the Kent farm on a converted soundstage in Burnaby . For the pilot , the crew built only a loft , with a set of stairs leading up to it , inside the existing barn on the Andalinis ' property . To resemble the Andalinis ' barn as closely as possible , Higgins had his crew locate 100 @-@ year @-@ old wood to match the look of the Andalinis ' barn . The episode " Hourglass " called for several scenes to take place at the White House . Instead of building their own set , the Smallville producers called John Wells , producer of the political drama television series The West Wing , and obtained permission to use the West Wing set to film the vision of Lex 's future . 
 When the Smallville crew was not filming on one of the constructed sets , or on a sound stage , they were shooting on location at the surrounding Vancouver sites . During the filming of " Metamorphosis " , Vancouver was holding a farmers ' market , which proved beneficial to the Smallville crew , as " Metamorphosis " called for a similar event to take place in the episode . The market was on the verge of ending , so the filmmakers shot what wide @-@ angle scenes they could at the time , and filmed a close up conversation between Whitney and Clark at the <unk> 's farm , weeks after the initial market shooting . Other filming locations include Vancouver 's Pacific National Exhibition and Burnaby 's <unk> Stadium . The Pacific National Exhibit provided a storage silo for a scene in " Hourglass " , which involved Harry <unk> ( Eric Christian Olsen ) attacking Martha Kent ( O 'Toole ) in the Kents ' corn silo . " Hothead " director Greg Beeman , who had previously worked with Gough and Millar on The Strip and Martial Law , used <unk> Stadium , as a substitution for Smallville High Stadium , for the opening football scene that took place at night . 
 When filming fell behind schedule , another director came in to assist the main unit director in finishing the episode . Greg Beeman assisted director Chris Long for the two " visceral visions of the future " that appeared in the episode " Hourglass " . " Jitters " was an episode with so many changes that its initial scheduling as the second episode of the season was pushed back to the eighth spot . By the time filming for " Jitters " was completed , three directors had worked on the project : Greg Beeman , Phil Sgriccia , and Michael Watkins ; however , Watkins was given sole directing credit for the episode . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 A big part of the Smallville series relies on the effects it delivers , whether digital , physical , or special make @-@ up effects . The effects shots , part of the post @-@ production work , are developed and added in Los Angeles . David Nutter hired Thomas Special Effects to create digital cornfields for the pilot episode . After attempting to grow ten thousand stalks of corn in a greenhouse , which only grew two feet tall , Nutter was forced to rely primarily on digital corn . Faux corn was also flown in from Arizona . CGI supervisor Bill Millar created digital butterflies for a scene in Lana 's bedroom , and all the insects Greg Arkin ( Chad Donella ) collected in the episode " Metamorphosis " . Greg 's insects had to be created digitally , because a green hue was needed to illustrate the kryptonite radiation in the insects . After the opening credits , the first person view of someone , later revealed to be Clark , flying through Lana 's open window and into her bedroom was created digitally . The effect was accomplished with stock footage , a sound stage and computer generated imagery . Stock footage shot from a helicopter , as it flew over several farms during the day , was used for the first person point of view . It was altered from day to night , and a CGI house was created in an empty field . Lana 's bedroom as built on a soundstage , and CGI was used to create the illusion of someone traveling through her open window and stopping above her bed . 
 It was decided the effects of kryptonite poisoning on Clark , " Clark time " , and the appearance of kryptonite when in the proximity of Clark would need to be illustrated in a way the audience could understand if they were not familiar with the character . Gough and Millar , after doing some research , learned the female audience was not aware of what was happening when Clark was exposed to kryptonite . Beginning with " Metamorphosis " , whenever Clark was exposed to kryptonite , his veins would rise up and develop a green hue to illustrate the effect it was having . Close @-@ up shots of Clark 's hand were used for these scenes , and it was all created with digital animation . Gough and Millar developed the idea that kryptonite would only glow when it was around Clark , as it was meant to demonstrate the draining of his powers . " Clark time " , the same idea behind bullet time , was created because previous incarnations had not explained the idea of what the world appears like to Clark when he is using his powers . The first instance of " Clark time " was used in the " Metamorphosis " scene where Greg Arkin attacks Clark and Jonathan in their barn . Jonathan is pushed over a banister and falls in the direction of some dangerous farm equipment . The effect involved slowing time down for everything except Clark , who would be moving at normal pace . When tackling Clark 's emerging power of X @-@ ray vision , Gough and Millar wanted to be able to see skeletons and bones , as opposed to previous incarnations that treated the ability like " see @-@ through " vision . The recent advances in computer imagery helped them complete that task . 
 The digital effects costs for each episode could stretch the budget thin . In " Shimmer " , Bill Millar , special effects supervisor , planned to create an artificial sunset for the closing scene involving Clark and Lana . The effects shot was supposed to last only a couple of seconds . James Marshall , the second unit director for the episode , decided to shoot the entire scene over the shoulders of Clark and Lana , looking at the sunset . The scene called for two greenscreen shots , but when Marshall was finished he had created seventeen greenscreen shots . The seventeen shots , which produced the artificial sunset , cost $ 50 @,@ 000 to produce . By comparison , the entire effects budget costs between $ 65 @,@ 000 and $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 Over @-@ spending of that nature became a regular occurrence on the Smallville set . The regularity of over @-@ spending came to an end with " Kinetic " , as the studio decided to be stricter . With the budget on a stiffer guideline , the filmmakers were forced to cut scenes from " Kinetic " , an episode that was caught in the push for more budget @-@ friendly scripts . One of the scenes that was cut involved one of the thieves phasing through a safe wall , and acting as a portal for the merchandise to be passed through . When digital effects were not an option , Mike Walls , the physical effects supervisor who began his Smallville career with " Leech " , still tried to provide big effects . For instance , Walls used 75 cars for the final action scene of " Kinetic " , which were cabled off to protect the actors . Stunt coordinator Lauro Chartrand attempts to make sure the actors are used as much as possible when performing fight scenes , unless the scenes are particularly dangerous . The fast shooting schedule forces Chartrand to rely on guest stars who can perform their own stunts , because of the limited time to find a " good double " for the actor . 
 Physical effects were not an issue for the series regulars . Allison Mack performed her own stunts for the scene in " Hothead " where her character 's office is set on fire , and again in " Kinetic " , when she was cabled off and dangled 50 ft ( 15 m ) above the ground . For " Nicodemus " , the stunt coordinator received twice the help . Kristin Kreuk was expected to go to the tenth rung of a water tower , in a scene which involved her character climbing to the top and falling off . As filming progressed , Kreuk climbed to the top , so the crew cabled her off and dropped her 40 ft ( 12 m ) to the bottom . John Schneider 's experience from The Dukes of Hazzard led to him performing the stunt driving for his character . The scene required Schneider to slide his truck around a corner , while yelling at some pedestrians on the sidewalk . The previous scene had established the driver side window as closed , so Schneider improvised and opened the driver 's door as he slid 90 ° around a corner . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The series ' pilot broke The WB 's record for highest @-@ rated debut with 8 @.@ 4 million viewers . After airing the first two episodes , which averaged 7 @.@ 8 million viewers , the WB placed an order for a full season of 21 episodes . The first season averaged 5 @.@ 9 million viewers weekly , placing # 115 in the Nielsen ratings alongside Futurama , The Ellen Show , and Star Trek : Enterprise . The pilot and " Tempest " were selected in The Futon Critic 's 50 best episodes of 2001 and 2002 , respectively . The pilot placed 31st , while " Tempest " placed 15th . 
 The season received mostly favorable reviews . IGN 's Jeremy Conrad , who was initially against the idea of " reimagining " the Superman mythology , gave the first season a 7 / 10 rating . After reviewing the entire season , Conrad stated the first season of Smallville was " a solid start to what will be a great Superman TV series " . Entertainment Weekly 's Bruce Fretts believes the series might appear " corny " on the surface , but actually shows " subversively witty spin on the comic @-@ book myths " . Clint Morris , founder of <unk> , stated the series was " still finding its feet in season one " ; although , he commended the acting , citing specifically Michael Rosenbaum 's " uncontrollably likeable Lex Luthor " . The Free @-@ Lance Star 's Rob Hedelt commended the casting as well , comparing Welling 's portrayal of a teenage Clark Kent to that of Christopher Reeve 's portrayal in the films . Hedelt considered John Schneider and Annette O 'Toole to be ideal picks for Jonathan and Martha Kent , but felt Allison Mack and Sam Jones III , important characters , were the weakest part of the ensemble . Judge Byun , of DVD Verdict , felt having Clark Kent and Lex Luthor start their relationship as best friends was a " brilliant concept " that moved the show past a " Dawson 's Creek with super powers " tone the premise of the show suggested . Byun believes the first season had " solid writing and excellent performances " , but is weakened by the freak of the week storylines that plagued the early episodes of the season ; the season works best when the episodes focus on character development and not super powers . 
 Other critics were less enthusiastic about the season . Peter Bowes of BBC News felt the season was simply a " soap opera " with " pretty young people " . Bowes believes the season suffered from the " sentimental boy @-@ girl storyline " , but that die @-@ hard Superman fans would still be taken in by this incarnation of the character 's early years . A common criticism for the first season was the use of " villain of the week " storylines . By the time the first seven episodes aired , at least one journalist had had enough of the villain of the week format . Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette 's Rob Owen stated the series works best with its " character interaction and a nice performance by John Schneider as Pa Kent " , but that the show needs more than the " ' monster of the week ' stories seen so far " . Jordan Levin , president of The WB 's Entertainment division , recognized the concerns that the show had become a villain of the week series . Levin announced that season two would see more " smaller mini @-@ arcs over three to four episodes , to get away from some of the formulaic storytelling structure " the series has fallen into . 
 = = Awards = = 
 By 2003 , the first season had been nominated for and won various awards . It won an Emmy Award for " Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series " , and the pilot episode was nominated for " Outstanding Visual Effects for a Series " . The pilot was recognized by other award organizations , receiving a Leo Award for " Best Visual Effects " in 2002 . Peter Wunstorf was recognized for his work on the pilot with a nomination by the American Society of Cinematographers . Casting directors Deedee Bradley , Coreen Mayrs , and Barbara Miller were nominated for an Artios Award for their work on the pilot . Chris McGeary was nominated for Golden Reel 's " Best Sound Editing in Television " award for his music editing on the pilot . The season one finale , " Tempest " , was nominated for Golden Reel 's " Best Sound Editing in Television Episodic " in 2003 . In 2002 , The American Society of Composers , Authors , and Publishers honored the band Remy Zero ( which provided the opening theme song for Smallville ) and composer Mark Snow for their contributions to the show ; the award recognized the composers of the theme or underscore of the highest rated television series during January 1 – December 31 , 2001 . 
 Several members of the regular cast were nominated for awards . In 2001 , Rosenbaum , Kreuk , and Welling were nominated for Saturn Awards for Best Supporting Actor in a Television Series , Best Actress , and Best Actor , respectively . Rosenbaum and Kreuk received additional nominations for male and female Cinescape Genre Face of the Future awards , and the entire season was nominated for Best Network Television Series . Rosenbaum was the only one to win an award ( Best Supporting Actor ) . Tom Welling won the Teen Choice Award for Choice Breakout TV Star — Male in 2002 . Smallville 's first season placed sixth on the Parents Television Council 's list of the " best shows for families " . 
 = = Home media release = = 
 The complete first season of Smallville was released on September 23 , 2003 in North America . Additional released in region 2 and region 4 took place on October 13 , 2003 and December 3 , 2003 , respectively . The DVD box set included various special features , including episode commentary , an interactive tour of Smallville , and storyboards from select episodes . 
 = Gabby Hartnett = 
 Charles Leo " Gabby " Hartnett ( December 20 , 1900 – December 20 , 1972 ) was an American professional baseball player and manager . He played almost his entire career in Major League Baseball as a catcher for the Chicago Cubs from 1922 to 1940 . He spent the final season of his career as a player @-@ coach for the New York Giants in 1941 . After his playing career , he continued his involvement in baseball as a coach and as a minor league manager . 
 Hartnett was an all @-@ around player , performing well both offensively and defensively . Known for his strong and accurate throwing arm , he routinely led the National League 's catchers in caught stealing percentage and was the first major league catcher to hit more than 20 home runs in a season . During the course of his career , he took part of some of the most memorable events in Major League Baseball history including ; Babe Ruth 's Called Shot during the 1932 World Series , Carl Hubbell 's strike out performance in the 1934 All @-@ Star Game and Dizzy Dean 's career @-@ altering injury during the 1937 All @-@ Star Game . But the greatest moment of Hartnett 's career came with one week left in the 1938 season , when he hit a game @-@ winning home run in the bottom of the ninth inning to put the Cubs into first place . The event , which occurred as darkness descended onto Wrigley Field , became immortalized as the Homer in the Gloamin ' . 
 Until the career of Johnny Bench , Hartnett was considered the greatest catcher in the history of the National League . A six @-@ time All @-@ Star , he appeared in four World Series during his playing career . At the time of his retirement , Hartnett held the career records for catchers in home runs , runs batted in , hits , doubles and in most games played as a catcher . Hartnett was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1955 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Hartnett was born in Woonsocket , Rhode Island as the oldest of 14 children . He began his professional baseball career at the age of 20 with the Worcester Boosters of the Eastern League in 1921 . New York Giants manager John McGraw sent scout Jesse Burkett to appraise Hartnett 's talent as a player . Burkett reported back to McGraw that Hartnett 's hands were too small for a major league catcher . The Giants ' loss would prove to be the Chicago Cubs ' gain . 
 = = = Professional career = = = 
 Hartnett joined the Cubs in 1922 , serving as a backup catcher to Bob O 'Farrell . He was given his ironic nickname of " Gabby " as a rookie due to his shy , <unk> nature . On July 22 , O 'Farrell suffered a fractured skull during a game against the Boston Braves and Hartnett took over as the Cubs starting catcher , posting a .299 batting average along with 16 home runs and 67 runs batted in . After the retirement of catcher Bill Killefer , Hartnett became the favorite catcher of Baseball Hall of Fame pitcher Grover Cleveland Alexander and caught Alexander 's 300th career win on September 20 , 1924 . Hartnett played well enough during O 'Farrell 's absence that the Cubs decided to keep him as their starting catcher , trading O 'Farrell to the St. Louis Cardinals in May 1925 . 
 = = = Rise to stardom = = = 
 Hartnett hit 24 home runs in 1925 , breaking the single @-@ season home run record for catchers set by Jack Clements in 1893 . He finished second overall in the National League behind the 39 home runs hit by Rogers Hornsby . Although he led National League catchers in errors , he also led in range factor and in putouts , while his strong throwing arm helped him lead the league in assists and caught stealing percentage . Leo Durocher , who played against Hartnett and was a National League manager during Johnny Bench 's career , stated that the two catchers had similarly strong throwing arms . During the major league baseball winter meetings in December 1925 , it was rumored that Hartnett might be traded to the New York Giants for catcher Frank Snyder and outfielder Irish Meusel ; however , Cubs president Bill Veeck , Sr. , squelched the rumors saying that Hartnett would not be traded for anybody . 
 The young catcher had a disappointing year in 1926 as his batting average dropped to .275 with only 41 runs batted in . His offensive statistics rebounded in 1927 , producing a .294 batting average with 10 home runs and 80 runs batted in . Although he led the league 's catchers in putouts , assists and in baserunners caught stealing , his inexperience showed as he also led the league in errors and in passed balls . He finished tenth in the balloting for the 1927 National League Most Valuable Player Award . 
 = = = Career prime = = = 
 In 1928 , Hartnett would hit above .300 for the first time , posting a .302 batting average with 14 home runs . He also surpassed Jack Clements ' major league record of 72 career home runs by a catcher . Hartnett also led National League catchers in assists , caught stealing percentage and in fielding percentage . As he matured as a player , he became more disciplined on the field and committed fewer errors . He threw the baseball around the infield in a fearless manner , throwing out baserunners with a high degree of accuracy . Between 1928 and 1938 , Hartnett would lead the league 's catchers in fielding percentage seven times . 
 In 1929 , a mysterious arm ailment limited him to one game behind the plate and 24 games as a pinch hitter as the Cubs won the National League pennant . Hartnett struck out in all three of his at bats in the 1929 World Series against the Philadelphia Athletics . He rebounded with his best season in 1930 , hitting for a .339 batting average with career highs of 122 runs batted in , a <unk> slugging percentage and 37 home runs , breaking his own single @-@ season home run record for catchers . He led all National League catchers in putouts , assists , fielding percentage and in baserunners caught stealing . His single @-@ season home run record for catchers would stand for 23 years , until Roy Campanella hit 40 home runs in 1953 . 
 During an exhibition game against the Chicago White Sox on September 9 , 1931 Chicago Cubs <unk> , Hartnett was photographed while signing an autograph for gangster Al Capone . After the photograph was published in newspapers across the United States , Hartnett received a telegram from Baseball Commissioner Kenesaw Mountain Landis instructing him not to have his photograph taken with Capone in the future . Hartnett replied with a telegram to the Commissioner whimsically stating , " OK , but if you don 't want me to have my picture taken with Al Capone , you tell him . " 
 In 1932 , Hartnett guided the Cubs ' pitching staff to the lowest team earned run average in the league , as the Cubs clinched the National League pennant by 4 games over the Pittsburgh Pirates . Hartnett was the Cubs ' catcher on October 1 , in Game 3 of the 1932 World Series against the New York Yankees when Babe Ruth hit his debated " called shot . " Although he hit for a .313 batting average with 1 home run , the Yankees went on to win the series in a four @-@ game sweep . 
 In 1933 , Hartnett was selected to be a reserve catcher for the National League team in the inaugural Major League Baseball All @-@ Star Game held on July 6 , 1933 . It would mark the first of six consecutive All @-@ Star game selections for Hartnett . At the mid @-@ season point of the 1934 season , Hartnett was hitting for a .336 batting average with 13 home runs to earn the starting catcher 's role for the National League team in the 1934 All @-@ Star Game . Hartnett was calling the pitches for Carl Hubbell in the 1934 All @-@ Star Game when the Giants pitcher set a record by striking out future Hall of Fame members Babe Ruth , Lou Gehrig , Jimmie Foxx , Al Simmons , and Joe Cronin in succession . He ended the 1934 season with another strong offensive performance , hitting for a .299 batting average with 22 home runs and 90 runs batted in . He dominated the defensive statistics , leading the league 's catchers in assists , putouts , baserunners caught stealing , caught stealing percentage , range factor and in fielding percentage . 
 Hartnett had another impressive season in 1935 when he produced a .344 batting average , third @-@ highest in the league and led the league 's catchers in assists , double plays , and fielding percentage . He also led the Cubs pitching staff to the lowest earned run average in the league as they won the National League pennant by 4 games over the St. Louis Cardinals . For his performance , Hartnett was named the recipient of the 1935 National League Most Valuable Player Award . The Cubs would eventually lose to the Detroit Tigers led by Mickey Cochrane in the 1935 World Series . 
 The Cubs fell to third place in 1936 , as Hartnett had a sub @-@ standard year for him , hitting only 7 home runs with 64 runs batted in , although he still hit above .300 with a .307 average , and earned his fourth consecutive All @-@ Star selection . Defensively , he led the league 's catchers in fielding percentage , and his pitch @-@ calling skills helped the Cubs pitching staff lead the league with 18 shutouts . In the 1937 All @-@ Star Game , pitcher Dizzy Dean kept shaking off Hartnett 's signs for a curve ball resulting in a hit by Joe DiMaggio , a home run by Lou Gehrig and finally , a line drive off the bat of Earl Averill that struck Dean on his toe . Dean had been one of the preeminent pitchers in the National League until the injury to his toe eventually led to the end of his baseball playing career . Hartnett ended the 1937 season with a career @-@ high .354 batting average and finished second to Joe Medwick in voting for the National League Most Valuable Player Award . His .354 batting average in 1937 was the highest batting average by a major league catcher for 60 years until 1997 , when Mike Piazza posted a .362 average . 
 = = = Homer in the Gloamin ' = = = 
 On July 20 , 1938 , Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley named the 37 @-@ year @-@ old Hartnett as the team 's player @-@ manager , replacing Charlie Grimm . When Hartnett took over as manager , the Cubs had been in third place , six games behind the first place Pittsburgh Pirates led by Pie Traynor . By September 27 , with one week left in the season , the Cubs had battled back to within a game and a half game of the Pirates in the National League standings as the two teams met for a crucial three @-@ game series . The Cubs won the first game of the series with a 2 to 1 victory by Cubs pitcher Dizzy Dean , cutting the Pirates ' lead to a half game and setting the stage for one of baseball 's most memorable moments . 
 On September 28 , 1938 , the two teams met for the second game of the series , where Hartnett experienced the highlight of his career . With darkness descending on the lightless Wrigley Field and the score tied at 5 runs apiece , the umpires ruled that the ninth inning would be the last to be played . The entire game would have to be replayed the following day if the score remained tied . Hartnett came to bat with two out in the bottom of the ninth inning . With a count of 0 balls and 2 strikes , Hartnett connected on a Mace Brown pitch , launching the ball into the darkness , before it eventually landed in the left @-@ center field bleachers . The stadium erupted into pandemonium as players and fans stormed the field to escort Hartnett around the bases . Hartnett 's walk @-@ off home run became immortalized as the Homer in the Gloamin ' . 
 The Cubs were now in first place , culminating an impressive 19 @-@ 3 @-@ 1 record in September , and the pennant would be clinched three days later . Hartnett once again led the Cubs pitching staff to the lowest earned run average in the league and led National League catchers with a <unk> fielding percentage . However , the Cubs were swept in the 1938 World Series by the New York Yankees , their fourth Series loss in ten years . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Hartnett felt the strain of managing a team during the 1939 season as he faced player discontent over the pampering of Dizzy Dean while pitcher Larry French went over his head to complain to owner Philip Wrigley about his lack of pitching assignments . French felt he was being punished for requesting to have Gus Mancuso as his catcher . In addition , Hartnett was forced to catch more games due to the lack of hitting from the other Cubs catchers . On August 28 , 1939 , he broke Ray Schalk 's Major League record of 1 @,@ 727 career games as a catcher . His record for longevity was surpassed by Al López during the 1945 season . 
 After two disappointing seasons , Hartnett was dismissed by the Cubs on November 13 , 1940 , after 19 years with the club . On December 3 , he signed a contract with the New York Giants to be a player @-@ coach . Hartnett hit for a .300 average in 64 games as a backup catcher to Harry Danning in the 1941 season . He played his final game on September 24 , 1941 , retiring as a player at the age of 40 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 In a 20 @-@ year major league career , Hartnett played in 1 @,@ 990 games , accumulating 1 @,@ 912 hits in 6 @,@ 432 at bats for a .297 career batting average along with a .489 slugging percentage , 236 home runs , 1 @,@ 179 runs batted in and an on @-@ base percentage of .370 . He retired with a <unk> career fielding percentage . Hartnett caught 100 or more games for a league record 12 times , including a record eight seasons in a row . He led the National League in putouts four times and in assists and fielding percentage six times . He led the league seven times in double plays and set a National league record with 163 career double plays . Hartnett set a since @-@ broken major league record for catchers of 452 consecutive chances without committing an error . 
 At the time of his retirement , Hartnett 's 236 home runs , 1 @,@ 179 runs batted in , 1 @,@ 912 hits , and 396 doubles were all records for catchers . Bill Dickey surpassed his records for most runs batted in and hits in 1943 , while his career home run record for catchers was broken by Yogi Berra in 1956 . His career mark for doubles stood until 1983 when it was broken by Ted Simmons . Hartnett also finished among the National League 's top ten in slugging percentage seven times in his career . A six @-@ time All @-@ Star , he was the recipient of one Most Valuable Player Award and played on four pennant @-@ winning teams . Hartnett 's .370 career on @-@ base percentage was higher than the .342 posted by Johnny Bench and the .348 posted by Yogi Berra . His 55 @.@ 74 % career caught stealing percentage ranks second only to Roy Campanella among major league catchers . Hartnett 's bat and catcher 's mask were the first artifacts sent to the newly constructed Baseball Hall of Fame in 1938 . In his book , The Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , baseball historian Bill James ranked Hartnett 9th all @-@ time among major league catchers . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career and retirement = = 
 Afterwards , he managed in the minor leagues for five seasons , retiring to Lincolnwood , Illinois in 1946 . On January 26 , 1955 , Hartnett was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame along with Joe DiMaggio , Ted Lyons and <unk> Vance . In 1981 , Lawrence Ritter and Donald Honig included Hartnett in their book The 100 Greatest Baseball Players of All Time . In 1999 , he was named as a finalist to the Major League Baseball All @-@ Century Team . 
 In his last job in the majors Hartnett worked as a coach and scout for the Kansas City Athletics for two years in the mid @-@ 1960s . Hartnett died of cirrhosis in Park Ridge , Illinois on his 72nd birthday in 1972 , and is interred in All Saints Cemetery in Des Plaines , Illinois . 
 = Lågskär = 
 Lågskär ( Swedish for " low skerry " ) is a small island within the Åland Islands archipelago of Finland . It belongs to the municipality of <unk> . It is situated about 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) south of Mariehamn in the Baltic 's Sea of Åland . The main island of Lågskär measures 61 hectares ( 150 acres ) in area . Rock stacks , sea cliffs and rocky shores are found along the coastline of the island . As a breeding ground for waterfowl , Lågskär has the status of an Important Bird Area ( IBA ) and is frequented by ornithologists who use the Lågskär Lighthouse buildings during their stay . 
 Several ferry routes pass within a few kilometres of Lågskär , including the <unk> to <unk> ferry , the Stockholm to Tallinn ferry , the Mariehamn to Helsinki ferry , and the Mariehamn to Åbo ferry . In the past , several vessels have sunk off the coast . 
 = = History = = 
 The earliest habitation on the island was linked to a cairn and a wooden beacon that existed on the island during the 1600s and 1700s . In the 1840s , when the first lighthouse was constructed to replace the beacon , there were 20 @-@ 30 inhabitants comprising the families of the lighthouse keepers . In addition to rearing livestock , fishing , and hunting wildlife , the families ran a school for their children ; a lighthouse society functioned at the time . The wooden lighthouse was remodeled into a stone structure which was destroyed during World War I. The existing lighthouse , built in 1920 , introduced a rotating gas lighting device , noted as the first of its kind in the world . After the lighthouse was automated in 1961 , the lighthouse keepers vacated the island . It is uninhabited since . 
 On 11 April 1918 , the German Nassau @-@ class battleship SMS Rheinland ran aground in heavy fog during World War I. In 1934 or 1935 , the German vessel Frida sprang a leak and sank off Lågskär , but the crew survived . On the evening of 21 October 1942 , Finnish submarine <unk> torpedoed and sank the Soviet S @-@ class submarine S @-@ 7 near Lågskär . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The island comprises a mix of greenery and rocky areas , with the thickest vegetation towards the centre . Rock stacks , sea cliffs and rocky shores are found along the coastline . There is a small sandy beach at the north west side . Near the island , particularly to the south , there are rocky islets and rocks , including <unk> Grund , <unk> and <unk> . To the east are <unk> and Norra <unk> . 
 Wetlands International has identified the island as a wetland . The Middle Åland Sill , one of three sills in the two basins of the Åland Sea , measuring 70 metres ( 230 ft ) width , is situated between <unk> and Lågskär and separates the two basins of the Åland Islands . 
 = = Nature and wildlife = = 
 The <unk> @-@ Lågskär area , measuring 6 @,@ 097 hectares ( 15 @,@ 070 acres ) in size , is part of a Ramsar Site , while the <unk> @-@ Lågskär islands area , measuring 2 @,@ 879 hectares ( 7 @,@ 110 acres ) in size , is recognized as an Important Bird Area ( IBA ) since 2000 . A Birds Directive designation for 1 @,@ 079 hectares ( 2 @,@ 670 acres ) overlaps the IBA site . 
 Lågskär is occasionally visited by ornithologists for birdwatching , and to operate a bird ringing station which was established in 1964 . They use the abandoned buildings during their stay . The island has been identified by Alula , the Finnish birding magazine , as “ one of the most important breeding bird islands of the Finnish Baltic Sea ” . On the island are Steller 's eider ( <unk> <unk> ) , the key bird species , and razorbill ( Alca torda ) . Other breeding species recorded are : Mute swan ( Cygnus olor ) , greylag goose ( Anser anser ) , tufted duck ( Aythya fuligula ) , gadwall ( Anas strepera ) , black guillemot ( <unk> <unk> ) , razorbill ( Alca torda ) , guillemot ( Uria aalge ) , water rail ( Rallus aquaticus ) , colonies of gulls ( Larus spp . ) , terns ( Sterna spp . ) and the white @-@ tailed eagle ( Haliaeetus albicilla ) . 
 Despite harsh conditions , the vegetation on the island is fairly diverse . Following the island 's grazing ban , vegetation has become very thick and has resulted in it becoming a breeding ground for waterfowl . There is large reed bed in the small lagoon area . 
 Fish species reported in the late 19th century in a small rock pool of 9 by 4 metres ( 30 ft × 13 ft ) in size continue to flourish . Carassius <unk> of lengths varying between 8 @.@ 7 – 11 @.@ 7 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 4 – 4 @.@ 6 in ) is found along the coastline , and in a 1993 study , some 18 species of macroalgae were recorded at depths varying between 4 – 7 metres ( 13 – 23 ft ) . The species reported include <unk> littoralis , <unk> <unk> , Fucus vesiculosus , and <unk> <unk> , followed by a lesser number of <unk> arctica , Cladophora rupestris , <unk> tortilis and <unk> <unk> than in a previous 1950s study . 
